1048 99836219 477
¶ A Letter sent by I. B. Gentleman vnto his very frende May∣stet R. C. Esquire, vvherin is conteined a large discourse of the peopling & in∣habiting the Cuntrie called the Ardes, and other adiacent in the North of Ire∣land, and taken in hand by Sir Thomas Smith one of the Queenes Maiesties priuie Counsel, and Thomas Smith Es∣quire, his Sonne.
SUche doubtes and excepti∣ons frende K. C. as I haue heard alleged & put for the to vnhable that enterprise of peopling & replenishing with the Englishe Nation the North of Ireland, whiche with the as∣sistance of Sir Thomas Smith one of her Maiesties Counsell, Mayster Thomas Smith his Sonne hath vndertook to bring to passe, maketh mée that I can not holde from you my so singuler fréende those ar∣guments wherewith through conference had with him vpon his sayde attempt by reason of our greate familiaritie hée hath fully persuaded and satisfied mée. Chéefly bycause I woulde confirme you in that whiche he hathe a little broke vnto you, and partly bicause I would not haue you wauer in your promise, thorow the vaine allegations of some, which eyther are ig∣norant altogither of his purpose or whose vnderstanding can not stretche to a mat∣ter of so greate aduice, or of suche who are of base and cowardly courages in the exe∣cutions of matters of great importance: or els of enuious disposition, partely also
bicause I would not haue his moste com∣mendable enterprise in his absence defa∣ced for the greate affection I beare him, whom I know most sufficient to answer euery point, article, and obiection, can bée layd ageinst him in this behalf, although I haue nothing but that whiche through muche conference I haue drawen from him. And firste by the way holde this for a maxime, that there hath bene at no time any notable attempt taken in hand with∣out enuy, doubt, and defaring. The reasō is, that bicause they are actions appertey∣ning to the increase or furtheraunce of a whole gouernement, they are also muche noted, wherein euery man will haue his verdit. Some as is aforesayd not know∣ing halfe, wil answere at the first as they are affectionate to the partie or countrie. Others that haue bet their braines a lit∣tle to vnderstand y• whiche their conceit wil not stretche vnto, take it vnpossible. The third that ground the lengthning of their lines terme by home dwelling, and their cuntrie seruice performed, if as a ci∣pher in Agrā they fil ye roume of a man, & proserue their own, althogh many times
they conceiue the likelyhode, and cōmend the thing, yet they neuer are inwardlye resolued of their doubtes superstitiously afrayd to enter into any vnvsual dooings, but the last gréeued to sée honest woorkes attempted, & likely to be brought to passe (while they line idle) to hide their neg∣lygence, enuiouflye slaunder and deface all good purposes. Suche is the nature of man, but I wil now to the matter. Ireland is a large Cuntrie, commended wonderfully for the fertilenesse and com∣modious site therof, wherin the Kings of England haue had footing and continuall gouenement these foure hundred yéeres and more But so as the barbarous Nati∣on at no time fully subdued, through their often rebellion, haue bene rather an anoy and charge to this Kealme of England, than otherwise, whiche some men haue imputed to the impossibilitie therof, or to the euil gouernment of Deputies, which eyther haue bene neglygent or corrupt. But Maister Smith to see and knowe the truthe, trauayled thither in the companie of Sir V Villiam Fitzwilliams now Lord Justice there, minding after serche  of made (for now beganne the desire of this
attempt to root in his hart) to declare his opinion, if hée thought it myght be accep∣ted, and hath founde that the decay of the gouernment there hath not chaunced bi∣cause that the planting at the firste of the Englishe Nation (so muche as it was) was not for the time substancially done, nor by the negligence and corruptnesse of the gouernours there, wherof within our remembraunce hath bene a successiue or∣der of noble, iust, wise, and sufficient per∣sons. But hathe growne by the necessitie whiche hath constrayned the gouernours to giue protections & pardons vnto moste heynous rebels and outlawes, after they haue spoyled, murthred, & made hauocke of the good Subiects, for lack of sufficient forces where with to attache and execute the sayde malefactours, by reason of the spare supplye at all times made to thē by the Prince, who at the firste inhabyting thereof mynding more the kyngdome of Fraunce and thinking all to little for that purposed Conquest, neglected Ireland as a matter of smal importance, then worst looked to, when England it selfe was a prise or rewarde to them that best could besturre thēselues of the houses of Yorke
and Lancaster. And if you wil marke the Stories, you shal finde great reasons that haue moued the Prince too hée spare of charges in that cuntrie, and a consequence of decay in that gouernment. About the time of the first entrie of the Englishe in Ireland made that they begā to settle, arose y• Barons warres in Eng∣land, that weakened and decayed all at home. Fraunce was chargeable too bée mainteyned with many garrisos, a great waster bothe of men & money, yet a thing whereto the Princes were more bent thā to Ireland: so that we may easly perceiue and iudge, that the Jrishe whiche yet re∣mayned vnsubdued, taking aduantage of the time, whiles the chéef that had autho∣ritie there, were called ouer to vpholde their factions here, possessed againe their land, and expelled the new inhabitants: found without hed and scarce yet wel set∣led, whiche could not be recouered againe so soone, bicause suche as were come ouer after they had wasted themselues in Ci∣uile warres, and had in the meane time lost their landes in Ireland, lost also their credite with such as at the first aduentu∣red vnder them, by reason they had forsa∣ken
and lefte them open to the spoile, nor the Princes being eaten out also with ci∣uile discord & with the charges of France, vnto which they were more addicted, had the treasure to spare for the reformation therof. Only king Ruhard the second in hys owne person attemptyng the same, was ouertaken with Eiuile discension & deposed, whiche hath euer since discoura∣ged his Successours personally to attēpt the like. Thus home warres still increa∣sing, with the Armies in Fraunce, (a de∣uouring graue of this Nation) and lastly the losse therof, so weakned and impoue∣risshed the Crown of England, that both people and money wanted therein, much good land lying waste for lacke of inhabi∣taunts, that it was more time to recouer by rest that which was wanting at home than to send abrode that could not be spa∣red. And the Princes contented thēselues if they myght onely preserue a footyng or entrye into Ireland wyth some small charge, wherby the gouernours were cō∣streyned for wante of supply by protecti∣ons and pardons to appease euery rebel∣lion, which otherwise to represse and pu∣nish they were not sufficiently furnished.
This perceiued of the Irishe, made them that vppon euery light occasion they will flie out, and satisfied with bloud and bur∣ning, will not without protection & par∣don be brought in. The Englishe race o∣uerrumie and daily spoiled, seeing no pu∣nishment of maletactors did buy their owne peace, alied and fostred themselues with the Irishe, and the race so nourished in the bosonie of the Irishe, perceiuing their immunitie from lawe and punish∣mente degenerated: choosing rather to maintain themselues in the Irish mans beastly libertie, thā to submit themselues and to liue there alone, and not the Irish in the godly awe of the lawes of Eng∣land. This degenerating and daily decay of the English manners by little and lit∣tle in the countrey, discorageth those that haue not perfectly wayed all that is a∣foresaid, to attempt any new enterprise. The Prince seeing no manne forwarde therin, is weryed with the continuaunce of the yerely great charge which hir ma∣iestie liberall aboue hir predecessoures hath borne more willingly, and to this, the first entring of the English, their first inhabiting, the order and manner therof,
is almost worne out of memorie and for∣gotten, their decay and wasting daily to be seene. All these things when my frend being then in Ireland, had informed him selfe of, by diligent inquifition, he fell to consi∣der what way were fittest for oure time to reforme the same, and if it were refor∣med, I meane the whole countrey reple∣nished with Englishe men, what profite that coulde be to the estate of Englande, hath sithens his returne tolde me diuers times, that he thought Irelande once in∣habited with Englishe men, and polliced with Englishe lawes, would be as great commoditie to the Prince as the realme of England, the yerely rent and charges saued that is now laide out to maintaine a garrison therein, for there cannot be (sayeth he) a more fertile soile thorowe out the world for that climate than it is, a more pleasant, healthful, ful of springs, riuers, great fresh lakes, fishe, and foule, and of moste commodious herbers. Eng∣land giueth nothing saue fine woolle, that will not be had also moste abundantly there, it lacketh only inhabitants, manu∣rance, and pollicie.
As for the meanes how to subdue and replenishe the same (sayth he) they were easie to be deuised, if the Quéenes maie∣stie wold once take it vpō hir, with army maintained at hir charges: but sith hir highnesse is not bent thereto, what other meanes is to be folowed, he hath héereto∣fore in his first offer to the Quéenes ma∣iesties Counsell declared: which is that which he nowe foloweth, and so many that haue not in them selues the will or grace to do so well, do impugne, which I wil héere defende and persuade you in as a thing moste reasonable, faisable, and commendable. He hathe taken in hande withoute hir Maiesties pay to win and replenish with Englishe inhabitantes the countrey cal∣led the Ardes in the Northe of Irelande, and some partes thereto adioyning: s there any think you, that heare only thus much of the enterprise, and will not com∣mend the manifest good disposition of his towardes his countrey and his Princes seruice. Yes, and if he finde meanes to bring it to passe withoute the Quéenes pay, his inuention is the more to he com∣mended. But vpon this doe they grounde
all their argumentes, that either are not capable of the meanes, or else had rather speake againste it, than learne the likeli∣hoode. What (say they) it is not possible to win or inhabite any parte of Irelande, without the Quéenes pay, hir forces and expences. And yet the first entry with the Englishe men made into Irelande, was in Henrie the secondes time, with his li∣cence, by Strangbovve Earle of Chepstow at his owne charges, and the charges of his adherentes, at what time the Coun∣trey was replenished with inhabitants, & deuided only into fiue kingdomes: who with a smal number entred into ye same, & subdued y• kingdō which is nowe called Lemster, which he possessed and held qui∣etly, plantyng it with Englyshe inhaby∣tants, and placing Englishe Lawes, vn∣til the King enuying his procéedings, and fearing to haue so great a Subiect, enfor∣ced him to surrender his right, whiche hée did. And this was the first foting of Eng∣lishe men in that Land, not by the Kings power, without which as I haue sayd, di∣uers hold an opinion, no good can be ther done. Some I say, that haue bene Capi∣taines
there, wil persuade you in y• same, whom if you will aske what good seruice they haue done, wil answer you, with xl. footmen to haue kept a Castle, and reaped the commoditie of the Lande adiacent in the middes of the enemies territory, yea and with a hundred footemen and a fewe Horse, to haue kepte whole Cuntries of the Irishe in awe and obeysance, and yet auerre, that without the Princes pay, it is not possible to inhabite in any Cūtrie there: as though there were more vertue in a quantitie of the Princes money, thā in so muche of other mennes, or that the like to their déeds, haue not bene done in Ireland before them, and dayly since, that it were a greater matter for too bring too passe now, in that which is least Irishe, & deuided into an hundred factions, and ha∣uing not the meanes to holde themselues together ten dayes if they should assem∣ble, than it was in Strangbowes tyme, when the whole was deuyded intoo fiue partes onely, in the prime of their forces and gouernmēt. But how friuolous their sayings bene, you may by this easely cō∣iecture. Muche more then that whiche Strang∣bowe
wonne, remayneth not at this day ciuile in Ireland, but many parcels haue bene wonne by the English men therin, without the Kings forces, whiche eyther by the occasions afore rehersed wer lost, or els for lack of inward pollicy degene∣rated, as great Cuntries in Munster, by the Gerardines and Butlers. In Connalt, by the Burges. In Meth, by Nogent, in Vlster sometimes by Lacy Earle of Lin∣colne, after him by Mortimer, yea a great part of the Arde was and is possessed by the Sauages, in whose offspring which at this time holde it, saue the name remay∣neth nothing English, with diuers other parcelles which for shortnesse sake, I let passe. But the cause why they loste it a∣gaine or els degenerated, is declared be∣fore. Let thus many exāples suffize to shew that the enterpryse is possyble, and hath often bene done. If they wil not, yet let reason serue, that if a hundred or two of footmen, and fiftie or a hundred Horse ha∣uing the Quéenes pay to mainteine, can keepe and defend the Arde, then so many horsemen and footmen aswel payed and mainteyned, can also and as sufficientlye
stéepe and defend the Arde, and thus by proportion, a greater number a greater Cuntrie, except there be other mistery in the Quéenes pay than I can hear or per∣ceine, where many times foure score and ten, and those not alwayes cōplete make a good hundred. Wel (wil you say) I graunt that thrée hundred are sufficient to defend the Arde. But when euery man is retired, to dwel vpō his own, then wil the enemy (which wayteth hys tyme on euery side) in the winter nights, spoyle this time one, & the next time another, so that you shal neuer haue rest nor profite of the soyle, nor liue wtout feare, as it happeneth many times vppon the frontier of the Englyshe pale, for all the Quéenes Maiesties garryson. To this as néere as I can, I wil repeate his words, who at the time I alledged it to him smiled and sayed, I haue not yet forgotte all mine Accidence by this text. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cau∣tum, which was wont to make mée take héede, to doo that in schoole, for whiche I saw another beaten, I stand as it were in a thrée want way, wherof one parte lea∣deth right, and I haue séene two take se∣uerall
wayes, & bothe lose their labours bicause they were out of the right way. What letteth nowe, that I perfectly in∣structed and warned by other mennes er∣rors, should not boldly proceede the third way and not go awry? Moste of those that haue taken in hand before this, to winne and inhabite in Ire∣land, haue after the place once possessed, deuided themselues eche to dwell vppon his own land, & to fortesie him selfe ther∣on, trusting with his owne strength, if a∣ny inuasion were made to preserue him selfe therein. But this made not the ene∣mie afrayed, who lay continually vnder his Nose, and all alongst vppon the bor∣der watching the time to serue his turne, sometime stealing and praying the Cat∣tel, other times laying wait to intrap and murther the Maister himselfe, sometime setting Fire on his Keekes or Townes, whereby they that lay next the Frontier were forced eyther to for sake their owne, or els compound & foster with the Irish. So they degenerated as is aforesayd, and in time all was frustrate. Yet the Coun∣trie of Ophally vsing that order, lyeth at this day so safe, that they put for the their
Cattel in the night with out fear of stea∣ling, but I iudge that brought to passe ra∣ther by Cowleys singuler good gouerne∣ment, otherwise than by that only order, for the inhabitaunce of the Countrie of Less which was deuided in the same or∣der, are not altogether so assured. Others whom the Quéenes forces doo defende, when the enemies growe strong vpon them and begin to spoyle thē, haue of the garrisō sent vown to defend them, so flyeth the enemie to trouble an other quarter, or els for beares for the time, till the garrison bée called away to a place of more need, or that the husbandmen eaten out with cesse, when he is wery, by peti∣tion hath obteyned too bée cased of them, who be no sooner gone, but the enemie re∣turneth to wast him ageine. Thus euery way goeth it backwards with them. The thirde way is that wée must take, firste to chuse a place so néere as wée can that is naturallye strong, When after it is wonne not too suffer the Souldiour too be dispersed, wel to let the owner repaire to his portion, but so as a souldiour in his stéede be alwayes on the frontier, least of all to truste to be dayly defended by the
Quéenes garrison for diuers inconueni∣ences. And héerein sith wee haue leasure inough, I will open to you some what of my designe, and the reasons haue persua∣ded me therto. The Arde which is my demaund, and the néerest parte of all Ireland to Lanca∣shere, and the Caste parte of England, I take to be a péece of ground as easie to be wonne, inhabited, safely kepte and defen∣ded, as any platte within the Kealme of Ireland, being a reache of land (as it were of purpose bayed out from the mayne in∣to the Sea, to wall in so muche of it as woulde make so faire and commodious a lake and herber as the hauen of Strang∣ford is) fasshioned like an Arme bente in the Elbowe, annexed no where to the mayne but at the one ende as the Arme to the shoulder. The bredth of whiche en∣trie is aboute fiue Miles, as by the platte héere vnto annexed may be more plainlye seene. That straight once kept and defen∣ded, all the reste of the Countrie muste of necessitie become quiet and safe, and thus shall it be defended. Upon the sayed entrie shall be raysed strengths where all the souldiors which
are mainteyned by the Cuntrie, shall lie in garrison for diuers good consideratiōs, keping there continuall scoute watche, & warde so narowly, that one single person vndiscried shal not be able to enter or flée out of the Countrie. By this meanes the Cuntrie is not onely safely preserued, the border aswel as the middest, but the Irish wil alway kéepe them selues aloose, for feare of Scarbrough warning, if they should harbour thēselues any thing néere a garrison that lyeth ready to take euery aduauntage vpon them. And to the ende the Souldiours should be the more bigi∣lant, I am minded to lay all the very frō∣tier Lande denided by proportion, to the strengths where the garrisons lie, so that euery Souldiour shal put in his share to∣wards the sowing and manuring therof, and receiue his parte of the Corne and o∣ther profite that is too bée gathered there∣on, whiche shall come to him besides his maintenance from the Cuntrie. This for his owne gaine sake which lyeth in most daunger of all, will make him haue bet∣ter eye to his charge, and be the more iea∣lous of the enemie, As for hauyng the Quéenes ayde and
garrison, I haue good hope it shal not néed for sith y• euery Souldiour is made May∣ster and owner of his land, to him and to his heires for euer, will he not think you looke as well and as carefully to that, as hee would if hée had sixe pence sterling a day of the Quéenes Maiestie, whereof he should be sure not past for a yeer or there about, and then to go whither he would. Now if he keepe and desende this, hée is a Gentleman, a man of liuelyhode & of en∣heritaunce, and who hath and shall haue, his ground ploughed and eared for him without his paines, for that we haue pro∣uided for, if hee lose it, he loseth his owne inheritaunce, and hindreth his posteritie. And if by his owne charges and costes he doo obteine it, and bring it to ciuilitie and good obedience to his Prince, how muche more auour, grace, and renown dooth hée delerue at hir Maiesties hand, & as with∣out her highnes charge, this he shal do, so as reason is, he hath it the better cheape, the larger estate in it, and the lesse incū∣bered. What difference I pray you is there in the end betwéene the charges without the Queenes ayde, to go to win the sayde
Countrey, and inhabite it, or else to goe dwell, being sette in by the Prince, in a countrey which hir maiestie huth wonne and lefte vnto the inhabiters to defende, nothing but the charges of the first win∣ning which is one yeares charge or two, for which charges to haue in recompence a larger estate, and to paie an easier rent, In faithe I iudge you nowe sufficiently informed, and that you do take this a bet∣ter, more reasonable, and surer way, thā to couet héerein at the firste getting the Princes aide, which if you shal haue done it were reason we should both pay bigger rente, & haue worse estates, as they haue alreadie in other places of Irelande, on that sorte lately wonne. Nowe you sée I haue not only answe∣red you to your questiō, and resolued you of your dout, but haue opened to you a se∣crete of mine enterprise, which maketh many that know not so much, condemne me for taking it in hande. There resteth yet master Smith said I one poynt to be alleaged héerein which is this, that there are not many can beare this first charge, and be willing to doe it also. With that he paused a while, and
there replied again as foloweth. If there be any thing that may hinder in dede this enterprise, or make it vaine, it is that, that you haue nowe spoken of, namely good councel slowly folowed: but you shal heare what likelihoodes and hope I haue to the contrarie. I am sure you are persuaded, that all enterprises are very much either furthe∣red or hindered by ye times in which they are taken in hand. For if Amintas, grand∣father to the great Alexander, (the estate of the Macedonians being then small and weake) had taken in hande the ouer∣throwing of the Persian Empire, he had neuer done it: nor Philip which prepared the Macedonians to such an enterprise, whome by sundry conquestes vppon his neighbors, he had fleshed to the warre, and by continual exercise had made them almost perfect souldiours, for now desired they nothing but worke, and the spoile of some riche kingdome. Which when A∣lexander perceiued, he toke the aduaun∣tage of the time, and had good successe: so you may sée the time and inclination of the Macedonians, was in déede of more effect to bring the enterprise to passe, than
Alexanders onely disposition coulde haue bene, who was but a yong man, and not much experienced at that time. More examples I will not vse, but de∣clare vnto you that my greatest hope is in the time wherein I am, which I consi∣der on this sorte. England was neuer that can be heard of, fuller of people than it is at this day, and the dissolution of Abbayes hath done two things of importance heerin: It hath doubled the number of gentlemen and mariages, whereby commeth daily more increase of people: and suche yonger bro∣thers as were wonte to be thruste into Abbayes, there to liue (an idle life) sith that is taken from them, must nowe séeke some other place to liue in. By thys meanes there are many lacke abode, and fewe dwellings emptie. With that our lawe which giueth all to the elder brother, furthereth much my purpose. And the excessiue expence bothe in diet and apparell, maketh that men which haue but small portions, can not maintaine them selues in the emulation of this world, with like countenance as the grounded riche can do: thus stand we
at home. Then went I to examine the estate of Countreis abrode, and found, that all the Countreis adiacent round aboute, were as wel peopled or better than we be, or else more barren, so that except we might master and expel the inhabitants, it wold not auaile. But therfore, or for any other cause, to fall in variance with Fraunce or Spaine, were but as the rubbing of one boughe against an other with the winde, where bothe fret, neither increaseth. Scot∣land besides that is barren, is ruled by a frend king, and peopled sufficiently. fre∣land is the Quéenes inheritaunce, many countreis there, as that which I demaūd, giuen to hir by acte of Parliament of the same realme, others hirs by dissents, the which lye almoste desolate: To inha∣bite & reforme so barbarous a nation as that is, and to bring them to the knowe∣ledge and lawe, were bothe a godly and commendable déede, and a sufficiēt worke for our age. All these things happening togither in my time, when I had cōsidered, I iudged surely, that God did make apte and pre∣pare this nation for such a purpose. There
resteth only to persuade the multitude al∣readie destined therto, with will and de∣sire to take the matter in hande. Let vs therefore vse the persuasions which Moses vsed to Israel, they will serue fitly in this place, & tell them that they shall goe to possesse a lande that flo∣weth with milke and hony, a fertile soile truly if there be any in Europe, whether it be manured to corne, or left to grasse, There is Timber, stone, plaister, & state commodious for building euery where aboundant, a countrey full of springs, ri∣uers and lakes bothe small and greate, full of excellent fishe and foule, no parte of the countrey distant aboue, viij. miles from a moste plentifull sea, or land wa∣ter able to beare lode. You say wel, (sayd I then.) But men are more moued by peculiar gaine: than of respecte they haue to common profite. Mary answereth he: they shal haue their peculiar portions in that frutefull soile, being but as a vootie to be deuided a∣mongs them. And this shall be the quantitie which a foote man shall haue, videlicet, a plowe lande, which containeth a C. and. xx. A∣cres
Jrishe, but you will vnderstande it better by English measure. A plowland shall containe. CC. &. lv. acres of earable grounde. Then can there not lie in any country almost, (especially so full of bot∣tomes as that soile is) so muche earable lande together, but there will lie also en∣termingled therewith sloppes, slips, and bottomes fitte for pasture and meading, and commodious to be annexed to the same plowlande, so that the whole may amount to. CCC. acres at the leaste. I pray you tell me, if you had so much good grounde in Essex, would you not take it for a pretie farme, and yet a horsse man shall haue double, videlicet, sixe. C. Acres of ground one with an other at the least, wherof there is. v. CCCCCx. acres ear∣able, the rest medow & pasture, I beléeue you would call that in Essex a good ma∣nor, and yet these are the least deuisions, I purpose to make, sauing a ploweland or two in euery parish that I thinke good to deuide to laborers and artificers, but I am not of the manner thereof yet fully resolued. This is good sayde I, if a man mighte haue it as easely rented. Judge you I
pray you saith he. They shall pay for eue∣ry Acre of eareable lande one penie star∣ling, as for the pasture and medowe, they shal haue it as reasonable as the eareable in some places better cheape, according to the goodnesse of the ground. But this is the greatest rent: I must haue vpon eue∣ry such plowland one able English foote∣man, or vppon his two plowlandes, one horsse man, maintained to be ready at all times for the defence of the whole coūtry, abiding eyther vpon the same plowland, or else vppon the frontier, which may be peraduēture. x. or. xy. miles distant at the vttermosts, moste commonly nearer. I intend not that this lying in the fron∣tier shall be continuall, but one shall re∣lieue an other by quarters, some in gar∣rison, and some resting them selues at home in the Country, & it may be, (which I hope in my time to sée) all Irelande re∣formed, and no neede of garrison in al the countrey, when y• seruice shall cease also. This portion sayde I, that you speake of, me thinke if it be in fée, so easily rented should make your enterprise a fit matche for yonger brothers, such as haue but an∣nuities, stipendes, and deade stockes to
liue on. For by this meanes should they be proutded of an house, and pretie lande belonging vnto it, sufficiente to yeelde wherewith to make a friend drinke, and many such farmes make a man rich. But I feare me it can be onely profitable to suche as dwell vppon the same, as it is in some places of England, where the Gen∣tlemen haue vpon their wide Lordships, great prouision of corne and cattel, wher∣in most of their rent is payde, but that is so cheape there, that a greate deale to be solde, yeldeth but a little money, wherby they may giue meat and drinke to a num∣ber, but paye wages to a fewe, so that he that should not dwell there him selfe, after the souldioure were founde, and the rente paide, shoulde either haue little or nothing for his owne share: bisides if the owner him selfe be not there, to manure or to sée the same manured, howe shoulde he gather profite thereof? or who woulde farme it for him, or yéelde him rente for his lande? This is a doubte in deede that wil make many stay I tel you, who wold otherwyse aduenture. Nay in good soothe is it not (sayd he) as you shall héereafter perceiue.
So soone us wée shall ariue in Ireland and haue proclaymed, that all such at the Irishe as will  , and manure the ground vnder vs shalbe welcome, de∣fended from the enemie, & haue no coine, liuerie nor cease layed vppon them, but whatsoeuer bargain they make, that iust∣ly performed. There is no doubt but ther will great numbers of the Husbandmen which they call Churles, came and offer to liue vnder vs, & to ferme our grounds: both such as are of the Cuntry birth, and others, bothe out of the wilde Irishe and the Englyshe pale. For the Churle of I∣reland is a very simple & royleseme man, desiring nothing but that he may not bée eaten out with ceasse, Coyne, nor liuerie. Coyne and liuerie is this. There will come a Kerne or Galliglas whiche be the Irishe Souldiours, to lie in the Churles house, whiles he is there bée wil be mai∣ster of the house, hée will not onely haue meate, but money also allowed him, and at his departure the beste things he shall see in the Churles house, be it  cloth, a shirte, Mantel, or such like. Thes is the Churle eaten vp, so that it Dearth fall in the Cuntry where he dwelleth, he should
be the first starued, not béeing Maister of his owne. From which exactions that he might be frée, there is no part of the Cun∣trie but he would séeke to, and geue for Lande wonderfull rents, paying them in suche cōmoditie as the ground will yéeld, be it Corne, Butter, or Cattel. You may haue Farmers out of the Ile of Man, and other poore men out of England, so they may be ayded at the firste with some stock of Corne and Cattel. It is but a lit∣tle care at the begynning after the lande is deuided, I for my part wil indeuer my self to persuade the one freendly to depart his commoditie with an other: but I feare the swéetnesse whiche the owners shall find in the Irish Churle, giuing excessiue∣ly, wil hinder the Countrie muche in the peopling of it with the Englishe Nation, makyng men neglygent to prouide Eng∣lishe Farmours, but thereof there is one prouiso in our instructions from her Ma∣iesties Counsel. Now wil I tel you what rent the ow∣ner may reap of his Land, videlicet, Mo∣ny, Corne, Butter, Parne, Cattel, & such like, my counsell shalbe that euery man, sith their land is deliuered, suche as is er∣rable,
should continue the same vnder til∣lage, and receiue his rent in Corn, which tilling of their Land that it be so done, is also prouided for in the sayd instructions, bicause it settleth the occupier, and what with tending his fallowe, reaptyde, séede time, & thrashing, it bindeth alwayes the occupier to the Lande, and is a continuall occupation of a great number of persons, a helper and a mainteyner of Ciuilitie in my opinion. As for the rent, I wuld haue one rate therof thorow all the Cuntry, of euery plowland a like. I think two pecks Irishe doo conteine foure Englishe Bus∣shels, of an Irish Acre, which is two En∣glish Acres and a half quarter, were rea∣sonable betwéene the Lord and Tenant, so that the Tenant should pay onely that rente for the errable grounde, hauing the Medowe and Pasture into the bargaine for maintenaunce of his Teame. Of this rent by my counsell the one parte should beare Wheate, and the other parte Otes and Barly. By which meanes one plow∣lande may yéelde yéerely to the owners thirtie quarters of Wheare, and asmuche Otes and Barlie, towards the finding of his Souldiour, and payment of his rent.
As for the victualing of his sootman soul∣diour, I parpose to vndertake for v. quar∣ters of Wheat and fiue quarters of Bar∣ley, sufficiently to finde euery suche foote∣man, and for ten quarters of Wheat and ten of Barley & Otes, to find euery horse man and his horse in continual garrison, for one whole yeere. The footemans wa∣ges and the rente wil be disdischarged for ten quarters more, the horsemans wages and rent for twentie. Peraduenture you wil say I allowe with the most, and that lesse will serue, yet hath the owner of one plowland forty quarters of Corne de cla∣ro at the yéers end, and the owner of two plowland foure score. But what shal he do with that Corne, will you say, Mary sell it, for ordinaryly Corne beareth the same price there that it beareth in England, & saue of very late yeeres, it hath bene accustomed too bee al∣wayes déerer. And yet there is another way more aduantageous, than the sale of Corne in Ireland, that wil be acloyd ther∣with, if at the beginning before our parte bée thorowly peopled, wée fall to turning all the Lande as afore is sayd to Tilling, not béeing able to spende it, therefore is it
necessary, and I am fully persuaded, that the Quéenes Maiestie furthering the in∣habiting & ciuilitie of the North (whiche encreaseth more by kéeping men occupy∣ed in Tyllage, than by idle followyng of heards, as the Tartarians, Arabians, and Irishe men doo) will giue ful libertie for the transportation of Corne out of y• sayd Cuntries into England, Fraunce, Spaine or other place, whereas the Market shall serue best, and therupon will lay a reaso∣nable Custome. For this cause shal there be one Hauen with common Oranyers made vpon the Key, sufficient for the re∣ceipt of the Corne of the Cuntry, and one Porte Town builded, so soon as we may begin to be any thing settled. More of the order heerin I wil tell you another time, but comforte your selfe with this in the meane tyme, that Corne in Spaine is al∣wayes good marchandize, and bringeth a∣way ready money. The cut betwéene the Cuntries, short, streight, & not fiue dayes iorney. How say you now, haue I not set forth to you another Eutopia? but I looked when you would bid me stay and declare first how to get it before al these be done∣sith you will not aske mée, of mine owne
proper motion I wil tel you. If these declarations of mine in so fit a time and Countrie, where God hath pre∣pared the Nation to such enterprise, may allure any nūber to take it in hand, were they but sixe or seauen hundred, which I take to be but a small number to be got in all this Realme. What should let that in a cuntrie almost desolate (except but of suche of y• Englysh race as wil bée glad of this enterprize) wée might not inhabite & dwel in safetie? It may be sayd that at the first, the Irishe wil assemble and put vs backe. Alas sixe thousande of thē dare not set vppon seauen hundred Englishe men, hauing the aduauntage of a trench, scarce in the plaines. But if wée will kéepe our selues close for a while, they must of ne∣cessitie for lacke of victuall disperse them selues, and giue vs libertie with the ad∣uantage ouer them to breake forth & pro∣ceede with our enterprize, & who is there now of the Lords in the North can make two thousand men. Onell though he ioy∣ned with him all the Lords of the Easte side of Ulster, and the Scottes is not able to make three thousand fighting men. As for Odennel, Mon Guyer, O Rayly, & the
Barons sonnes, whiche be the greatest of the North, I take it certein, that they wil not hazard their Cuntries with any new Rebellion, but had rather liue contented with peace, sauouring and finding ayd at the Englyshe mens handes, as they haue bene accustomed to do. And yet I hope wel of the rest, bicause I wil not (so neer as I can) doo them any iniury. If you will haue examples of defēding Countries with fewer men, take Lease & Ophally, the Cuntrie of  our nexte neighbour, somtime kept by Bruton with a hundred horse, the Kerry by Sir VVar∣ham Sentleger, till his comming a waye, with lesse than a hundred Horse, and the Arde it selfe where Goodrich Capteine Barrowes Liuetenant, with fourtéen men kept and defended the Castle called Cas∣tle Reau, in the entrie thereof, and went dayly one quarter of a Mile for in fetche his water, against fiue hundred that lay dayly vpon him, with many others. But if you will haue example of winning if, & the valure of our Nation in comparison of them, sée the ouerthrowe giuen to the Butlers, wt lesse than thrée hundred horse, in the last generall rebellion, the appea∣sing
and winning ageine as it were of all Munster, at that time rebelled, by Sir Humfry Gilbart, with lesse than v. hun∣dred English men. The ouerthrowe of a thousand Skottes in Connaught the lafte yéer by Captain Colyer and his foot band. The ouerthrowe giuen vnto Shan Oneil with thrée thousand Irishe by Capitaine Randall and thrée hundred English men onely. The driuing of Shan Oneil out of Dundak after hée had taken it, when hée was in his greatest forces, by two bands of Englishe men: with infinite other ex∣amples, as the taking of thirtie of their Castels in one day by two Englishe foot∣bands. Wherefore sith their Castels can not preserue them, nor themselues in the fight preuaile, vppon the plaine nor other where, all men may easely iudge that the winning or defending of any Cuntrie is easie inough in Ireland, if therefore there be anye competent number of Englyshe Souldyers together. And I will in these comfort you somewhat, that the Arde & the Cuntrie adiacent is a plaine Cuntrie, wherin are very few Castels to be won, if it should chaunce the Irishe would de∣fende them, I thinke not aboue foure if
there bée so manye. What resteth nowe sith I haue proouee by examples that it is faisable, and that without danger almost, excepte we shoulde more dispaire of oure selues, thā smaller companies haue héere∣tofore done, sithe I haue shewed you by reason that it is profitable, but that I knit vp our talke, bicause it is late, with vecla∣ring vnto you with howe small charge it may be taken in hande, and howe that it may be rather a sauing to some, than ex∣spence. There be many that not considering what facillitie it is by good order and wil∣ling menes to bring great things to passe, but wondring rather at the greatnesse of the summe, which must furnish so ma∣ny soldioures, cary them ouer, and main∣taine them there for a yeare or there a∣boutes (that must of necessitie be supplied from Englande) are of the opinion, that it can not be done without the Princes pay. But I will informe you an easie way, to bring this without hir maiesties expences to passe. All that lande of the Arde, and other places which hir maiestie hath giuen vn∣to my father and me, we are purposed to
deuide vnto suche as shall be contented either to accompanie me, or be at the charges of a souldioure, be he foote man or horsse mā, in this iourney, reseruing some small thing of a plowe land to our selues, as a chéefe rent, contenting our selues ra∣ther to be accompted the motioners and ring leaders of so many Englishe fami∣lies, to be planted for euer in the Ardes. &c. than forcing of any gain. Which while some in the like matches haue groped to narowly after, they haue marde ye whole enterprise. Mary he that wil looke to haue tho saide landes at the rentes and rates, which I haue alreadie tolde you, must be at the charges of finding him self, or some other in his roume, for the winning and defence of the countrey, first to come fur∣nished of all things necessarie be he foote∣man or horsse man. Thus when all my companie shall come furnished, with ar∣mor and weapon as souldioures ought to be, what is there then lacking to this voyage? Mary shipping for trāsportation: when we are there, corne and other vi∣ctuall for the first yeare, ships and boates to fishe for our better victualing, corne to put in the ground against the next yeare,
plowes and all things necessary thereto. For I minde to haue that done also of common charges, that if it be possible we may haue no more, or else very little le∣uying of many for the next yeres victailes but that the common stocke may serue, this I assure you am I purposed to doe, and to play the good husbande with the companies stocke, that it may reache far, and yet are there many moe things to be prouided, as powder, some furniture of Armor in store, Iron péeces, and of all munition be longing to the warres, you and yet more, as all manner of thinges be∣lōging to building and fortification, with the Carpenters, Masons, Smithes. &c. who will loke for wages. Item that be∣long to the bandes, as Crokes, Bakers, Surgeons. &c, that will also loke for wa∣ges. And bicause all these prouisiōs might be orderly done, and nothing in time of néede be to seeke, I haue taken it in hande therfore to  of euery man, according to the rate of lande he looketh for, videlicet ten pounde of one foote man, and twentie pounde of a horsse man, so to sée all neces∣saries abundantly prouided. If lesse wold suffise, I would take lesse, for I meane at
the yeares ende, that the Treasorer shall yelde accompte, and what is not spente, shal serue the seconde yeare, and the lesse leuied of the companie towardes the prouision of the sayde necessaries. After which time there is no manner dont but the Countrey will yeld to serue our turne sufficiently, withoute any more leuying, and as for them that wil deliuer corne, or any other thing necessary to the rate of the saide summes, it shall be accepted in lieu of money. And this is the charge and aduenture of a foote man, videlicet, tenne pounde for his victaile, sixe pounde thir∣tene shillings and foure pence, the rest of his furniture for one whole yere, and for that money will I vndertake to finde a footeman, arme him, giue him his liuerie, paie him three pounde sixe shillings and eight pence wages, and victaile him one yeare, to serue in roume of him that ney∣ther goeth him selfe, nor sendeth an other furnished. Nowe lette vs gather and make one summe of al the collection of one yeare, & sée whether it may be iudged sufficient or not, of seuen hundred, graunte thrée hun∣dred horse men, which pay twentie pound
a péece, that is sixe thousand pounde. And foure hundreth  after ten pound a peece, whiche amounteth to foure thou∣sand pound, the whole x. thousand pound. Looke you nowe, euery man putting in a share, that is not muche, what a summe ryseth it to? which I hope with good vsing wil not onely be sufficient to victuall the seauen hundred souldieurs, but all other Artificers and Labourers, and to pay thē their wages, with all other store of Mu∣nition, shipping, and necessaryes for one whole yeer at the least. Two yéeres char∣ges is the vttermoste can passe without game, wherfore let vs compare the char∣ges and yeerely profite (to bée looked for) togither, and see what euill bargaine this can be.
Two yéeres charges of a footeman is, thrée and thirtie pound sixe shillings and eight pence, for as for rente there is none to be payed till the fourth yéere, the com∣moditie to be looked for, is fortie quarters of graine at the least de claro per annum. But the horsemane gaine and charge is double, & this is the worst bargaine. For he that goeth in his owne person as yon∣ger brothers and such like, do rather saue than lose, for with lesse expēces if he haue no Horse in England, can he not liue for his dyet, than ten pound: if he bée a horse∣man, his Horse and hee vnder twentie pound, yet liue he must whither he spend the time in England or Ireland, and this I am sure of, that whatsoeuer hée maye saue of his dyet in a yéer héere in England by lying in his fréends house, he shal spēd in apparaile: for that Cuntrie of Ireland requireth rather lasting & warm clothes than gorgeous and déere garmentes. Be∣sides this, in consideration of leading his life in Ireland, hée is too enioy a good and commodious péece of Land, yéelding thrée score quarters of graine yéerely towards his maintenaunce, beeing a footeman, or a hundred and twentie if he be a horsman, and so by proportion. Shall I tel you my conscience héerin? I can not see how Fa∣thers that haue many Sonnes, or landed men that haue many yonger brothers cā do better for their punées, than to prefer them, and set them forthe in this Jorney with me, who séeke to persuade nothing but that I wil go in person to execute, not a whit the more fearful, because I am the onely sonne of Sir Thomas Smith. And
nowe that I haue resolued you of your doubte as I hope, and performed my pro∣mise in the ende, I will leaue you for this time. Thus muche Mayster R. C. was our conference at that time, which so néere as I could remember I haue repeated word by worde, but to diuers other obiections, his answers which I haue learned at sū∣dry méetings, wil I now declare. Many say, that they shal go into a place where they shall want meate, housing, & all things necessarye, for that no Prince yet hath bene able to victuall his Army ther, sufficiently in their iorneys, besides that the Souldiour is alwayes constray∣ned, to march thorow the Bogges and ri∣uers, and in the nighte to lodge vppon the Grasse without meat and Fire. This in déede is great miserie, but they that threa¦ten this in his iorney, are altogither ig∣norant of his procedings, nor consider not the difference, that is betweene the De∣puties iorneyes, (who séeketh still to ap∣prehend the Rebelles bodies, following them thorowe Bogge, thorowe plaine &
wood, hoping with perseuerance and long iorneyes to wery them, and bring them in) and his enterprise, who desireth the Land onely, not any reuenge vpon the J∣rish, and who purposeth not to spend him selfe with long iorneyes, but to proceede slowely, inhabite, builde, and fortifie him selfe as he goeth, contenting himselfe too obtein his portion of Land wel defended in safetie, & not coneting otherwise with losse and discourmoditie of his menne, too séeke to anoy the Jrishe as afore is sayd, procéeding on this sorte. He dothe minde at his first landing, to fortifie him selfe vppon the sea shore, and the frontier of his countrey, and builde there his store house and houses of proui∣sion, which he will carefully and spéedely sée broughte thither, to be readie before it be wanting, a place for Artificers to lie safely in, and in the meane time that it is building and raising, to lodge all his men in campe, vnder canuas tents and hales, wherein he hathe promised to take order with his associates, that will peraduen∣ture be one thrée monethes worke. Then after the store house and key of his coun∣trey built, and left sufficiently garded, he
will remoue. v. vi. more or lesse miles, as the countrey shall some, and there erecte vppon the liste an other fortresse, able in receiue and nowe a sufficience crewe of souldiours, to be ready always in defence of the frontier, incamping and lodging his men there as before, tel that forte also be done and furnished Thus will he pro∣céede in his iourney all the Sommer, till the entrie of his countrey be sufficiently fortified. Towards the winter , de∣uiding his soldioures into the said streng∣thes, there to lie in garrison vpon the en∣nimie, for the more safetie of the countrie, as at the beginning I haue alreadie solde you. What miserie (I pray you nowe) can this bring the soldiour in? what scant and scarcitie of victaile shall they be at any time constrained to, by reason it can not be brought to them? if otherwise it be wā∣ting which I am sure shal not be, it is by his faulte and slacknesse, not by the discō∣moditie of the cariage▪ or howe euill néede the souldiour be lodged. This his procee∣dings are others than hathe bene heereto∣fore vsed, and other mennes errors haue taughte him to take this order, to marke
and consider them well is the onely way to perfectnesse (sayth he) and nothing hath bene so well done, but if it were to doe a∣gaine might be better done: for time is it that in the moste aduised gouernementes discouereth faults, which while we patch and mende by little and little, the first or∣der is altred, and become an other thing, the very vanitie of the world. And as for the present necessitie & lack of many commodities of the Countrey which are in Englande euery where, if you marke that hath bene heeretofore said in describing it, you can not say but the only default thereof is the vnciuilitie of the inhabitants, and lacke of good orders. Which assoone as he shal haue amended, by bringing this his attempt to good ende, and that it may be replenished with buil∣dings, ciuill inhabitantes, and traffique with lawe, iustice, and good order, what shal let, that it be not also as pleasant and profitable, as any parte of England, espe∣cially when it shall be furnished with a companie of Gentlemen, and others that wil line frendly in felowship togither, re∣ioysing in the frute & commoditie of their former trauaile, which (throughe noble
courage,) for estimatiō sake, and the loue of their owne countrey the first enterpri∣sed, deseruing if I may speake it, that am resolued one of the same companie, to be crowned with garlandes of honoure and euerlasting fame. But what doe I di∣gresse? Is there any moe doubts yet trow yée? yes, this. There be some that like well inough of this takyng the Arde in hand, bicause it is both defensible with a few men, and those free holders that yet remaine there∣in, béeing of Englishe race, haue all∣wayes defended them selues from pray∣ing by the rishe, but more they say, hee shall neuer bée able too compasse nor de∣fende, to whom I wil repeate this shorte answere. He that hathe but a little Cuntrie can mainteine therewith but a few men, and is constreyned gladly to accept suche con∣ditions of peace as hée can get at the ene∣mies hands, but he that hath a large coun∣trey, may maintaine a greate number of men, and at pleasure commaūd whether to make peace or warre with his enimie. As for master Sth he will procéede and holde so muche onely as his forces will
stretche vnto, for the olde Prouerbe sake that sayeth: He that too muche gripeth, fastneth on little. Be of good courage therefore, & resolue your selfe to be a partaker with him in person. The enterprise is commendable, and not only to the encrease of his nation and honor of his countrey, but very profi∣table to them that are doers therein, if it be brought to good passe, which is assured, if reason may serue, or the like at any time (as before hath often bene séene) hath taken effecte, and the aduenture is small, not to the tenthe parte of the gaine. He is prouided alreadie I know, of singulare good Captaines, and the promisse of an hundred Gentlemen alredy at the leaste, hauing not yet opened the matter but to his frends. As for him selfe you shal finde him vigilant and carefull, coueting more the well dooing heereof, and the safetie of his companie, than the glory of victorie in any rash attempt, more desiring to please and profit euery man, than loking for ce∣remonious curtesie and reuerence. Lo conclude, I knowe him to be suche as dis∣daineth no man, or that séeketh to féede the world with fine language, faire spea∣ches
and promise, but a man that is open plaine, more affable than he seemeth, such a one infaith, towardes whom your loue and liking wil increase stil, with acquain¦tance and familiaritie, to be then moste, when you shall knowe him best. I speake this by experience and long proofe that I haue had of him. Graunt it (wil you say) that hée for his part be suche an one, but all those whom he shall haue assembled out of euery part of this Realme, shall not bée of so good a Nature, as peraduenture hee is of, some be disdainful, proud, and insolent, some couetous, and other of quarellous disposi∣tion, a few of these are inough to disturbe the whole companie. Quarels beginne of small trifles, and by partes taking, come in the ende to greate matters. Besides in the particion, one wil be angry bicause he was not preferred to that commodyous seat or this good dwelling, and bicause hee hath not so muche Land as an other, but of this hope I also to satisfie you. For ma∣ster Smith mindeth first to giue vnto eue∣ry man so much at the least as he promi∣seth by y• order he purposeth to giue out, and for whiche the Souldiour was wil∣ling
to aduenture his parte, then can hée not  faulte with the quantitie. Not∣withstanding to him that desereth well in this iorney, he will  am sure be more liberall, for I knowe hee giueth willing∣ly. The place where their  shall lie must fall to thē by lot, as it shall be their chaunce firste or last to be serued, from a place appointed to beginne at before the lotes so drawne, so can he not mistake of his chaunce, nor bee angry for the place which fell not to him by any mannes ap∣pointing. And to take aray al occasion of Quarels, Mutineries, or other disorder, that might otherwise ensue, he hath pro∣mised to cause one book of orders or Dis∣cipline to be drawen, by the aduise of the best Capitaines, and shall be reade vnto the whole companie. Whiche after it is allowed & agreed to by them, shalbe kept safely as the Statutes of this iorney, and according to the letter of that Booke, shall all misdemeanours of the Campe be pu∣nished. For euery person abyding in the same shalbe solemnly sworne, to obserue euery Article and ordinaunce conteyned therin, and to his power assist and ayd to see them duely punished, that shall offend
contrarye too the Tenor of the foresayne Booke. Aduenture therfore boldely with him, as for your portion of Lande, I knows that his Father and he are bounde to her Maiestie by a Couenant, in her highnes graunt expressed, in no lesse bonde than in the forfeyture of the whole, that they shall distrybute to all ayders heerein ac∣cording to the rate before mentioned. Besides I knowe he is liberall & will deale franckly with his frende, or any o∣ther whom he shall haue a good lyking to. And the iquer or , eyther with his Fathers hand or his, or with the hands of any Treasurer appoynted hys Deputie therein, testifying the quantitie of the aduēture, shalbe sufficiēt to charge them in this behalfe Your assurāre shal∣be made by déede, signed, aled, an deli∣uered so soone as possibly it can be dispat∣ched, after the sayd Land shalbe assigned by lot and layde out. And if it so chaunce that any die in this voyage, before the partition de made, his part shal notwith∣standyng bee reserued and performed too his next heire or any of his kinred (that shall haue presently woorde sent to him
thereof) if within thrée monthes after the saide woorde giuen, they either personal∣ly repaire or sende their deputies thither to receiue the same. To the ende no mannes aduenture and hope so willing∣ly taken in hand through his owne mis∣chaunce shuld be lost from his posteritie, nor vntimely deathe be preiudiciall to his deserued inheritance. Héer wil I end, hoping that I haue ful∣ly satisfyed you of all doubtes, that might haue dissuaded you heerin. And this is the effect of all, that I haue with thus many Argumentes gone about to persuade you, that you shuld employ two or thrée yéeres of your youth, in that most honorable ser∣iuce that can bée in our times done for England, therfore to receiue thanks, es∣timation, and a profitable inheritāce, be∣sides the contentation of minde in your possibilitie, to be the patron & first foun∣der of a familie in that cuntrie, which in time to come wt Gods fauor, may spring vp to great authoritie. Fare you wel. Sith the wryting héereof he hath sent me worde as to a freende, partaker of his ioy, that his booke is by the Quéenes Ma∣iestie
fauourably signed, and already vn∣der the great Seale. And that hee myn∣deth to procéede to the gathering of men, leuying of money, and making his proui∣sion necessarye for this iorney with all speede. And therewithall hath sente mee a Coppie of the order, or rather offer, to be giuen forthe for the dispatching heereof, whiche is this that I send you, héerewith nothing differing I warrante you, from that I hadde wrote to you before in this discourse.
The offer and or∣der giuen forthe by Sir Thomas Smyth Knighte, and Thomas Smyth his sonne, vnto suche as he willing to accompanie the sayd Thomas Smyth the sonne, in his voyage for the inhabiting some partes of the North of Irelande. THe Queenes Maie∣sties graunt made to sir Thomas Smith Knighte, & Thomas Smyth his sonne in Ireland, is all that is hir Maie∣sties by enheritāce, or other right in the country called the ARDES, and part of other countreys adia∣cent
in the Erledom of VLSTER▪ is that they eā possesse and trpie∣nishe them with Englishe men. The which thing that it mighte the more surely be done, the saide sir Thomas & Thomas his sonne haue bounden themselues to hir highnesse to distribute all the said land within the saide Countreys, which they shalbe able to obtaine and possesse, to suche as shall take paines to helpe thē to possesse the same, to haue and holde to them and to their heires for euer. That is to say, to eche mā who wil serue as a soldier on foote, one Plowland containing a hundreth and twentie acres Irishe of eata∣ble lande, for which the saide sir Thomas and Thomas, must pay to the Quenes maiesty two pence Irish for an Irish acre, after four and twentie foote to the pole. In
consideration of which rent bi thē to be paide vnto her Maiestie, the Souldier shall paye for the saide plowlande vnto Syr Thomas Smyth and Thomas, and their heires, one penie sterling for eue∣ry Englishe acre of the said plow∣land, after the measure of sixtene foote and an halfe to the pole, and no more. The first paiment to be∣gin foure yeres hence, videlicet. 1576. To eche man who will serue on horsebacke two plowlāds, videlicet two hundreth and fortie acres I∣rishe, which is at the leaste fiue hūdreth acres and more English, paying for euery acre English as the footeman dothe. And the earable lande being de∣uided, eche foote man and horse∣man shall haue also allotted vnto him pasture, medowe, and suche
like necessary, as the Cuntry wil serue, as reasonably as they haue arable grounde, so that they may therwith be contented. The charges that is required of a footeman at his firste settyng forth, if he be furnished of suffici∣ent Armour, for a Pike, Halberd or Caliuer, with a conuenient Li∣uery Cloke of red colour, or Car∣nation with black facing, is tenne poundes for his vitayling for one whole yeere after his arriual and his transportation: after whiche yeere, there is hope to finde proui∣syō inough in the Cuntrie, which they shall obteine with good gui∣dance. The charges of a Horsemā wel horsed & armed for a light horse∣man wyth a Staffe and a case of Dagges, is twentie poundes for
vittayle of him and his Horse for one whole yeere, and for his trā∣sportation. His liuery had neede be of the colour aforesayd, and of the fashyon of the ryding Dutche Clokes now vsed. And to auoyde the Flixe & suche dangerous diseases as doth ma∣ny times chaunce to Souldiours by reason of lying vpon the groūd and vncouered, and lykewyse to Horses for lacke of Hales. If any Souldiour footman wil giue be∣fore hand ten Shillings, and the Horseman twentye Shyllyngs, they shalbe lodged vnder Cāuas, and vppon Beddes, vntill houses may be prouided. And if any will beare the char∣ges of a Souldyour, that cannot go himselfe, nor sende another in his roume, he shall haue his part
of Land alotted to him as wel as though he went himself: but then for a footman he must pay in rea∣dy money .xvj. pound .xiij. s .iiij. d. This is one parte. And if any wil haue two parts or more, then ac∣cording to this rate to paye the money. The Coronell to finde the sayd footman or men in al points for the first yere according as the money is receiued. And to the intente that no man willing to aduenture in this most honorable and profitable voyage may doubt hereof, if it please him to resort into Pauls churchyard to the signe of the Sun, there he shall see bothe the Letters Pa∣tents and the Indentures of Co∣uenauntes betwixt the Queenes Maiestie and the sayd Sir Tho∣mas Smith & Thomas Smith, and pay suche money as he is dis∣posed
to aduenture, and receyue hys assuraunce from Thomas Smith the Sonne, who taketh the aduenture and voyage vppon him to go in person, or if the sayde Thomas bee not there, one of the receyuers of this voyage remay∣ning there, shall do herein as ap∣perteyneth, whom he hath made his Deputie in this behalfe. Note that all suche kindes of prouision as bee necessary in this iourney, the Treasourer may re∣ceiue in liue of money, accordyng as he shal haue neede of such pro∣uision, be already furnished there wyth, and accordyng to the place where the sayd prouision shal lie, for the commodious transportati∣on therof. ¶ God saue the Queene.
VVe request all our partakers to make so speedie payment of their aduentures, as possible they may, that nothing be wā∣ting at the tyme of our foorthe settyng, whiche they shall learne of the Tresurer, or Receyuer, where they pay the money, with the place & day of our general mee∣ting and imbarking. ¶ Imprinted at London by Henry Binneman for Anthon son, dwelling in Paules Church∣yard at the signe of the Sunne.
