12053 99839080 3476
THE MARQUESSE OF HUNTLEY HIS REPLY TO CERTAINE NOBLEMEN, GENTLEMEN, AND MINISTERS, COVENANTERS OF SCOTLAND: Sent from their Associates, to signifie unto him, that it behoved him either to assist their Designes, or be carried to prison in the Castle of Edinburgh: The 20. of April, 1639. Now published, because of a false Copie thereof lately printed without Authoritie, or his owne Consent. LONDON, Printed by Robert Young, His MAJESTIES Printer for Scotland. 1640.
The Marquesse of Huntley's Re∣ply to certaine Noblemen, &c. TO be your Prisoner, is by much the lesse dis∣pleasing to mee, that my accusation is for nothing else but Loyaltie; and that I have been brought into this estate by such unfaire meanes, as can never be made to appeare honourable in those who used them. Whereas you offer Libertie, upon condition of my entring into your Co∣venant,
I am not so bad a Merchant as to buy it with the losse of my Consci∣ence, Fidelity and Honour, which in so doing I should make account to be wholly perisht. I have already given my Faith to my Prince, upon whose Head this Crowne by all Law of Nature and Nations is justly fallen, and will not falsifie that Faith by joyning with any in a pretence of Religion, which my owne Judgement cannot excuse from Rebellion: for it is well knowne, that in the Primitive Church no Armes were held lawfull, being lifted by Sub∣jects against their Lawfull Prince, though the whole frame of Christiani∣tie was then in question. Whereas you would incourage mee
to be a partaker with you by your hopes of supply from France, and other for∣raigne Nations, together with your so good intelligence in England, as that no danger will come from thence; Let mee tell you, That in my opinion the reasons are but vain, the French being now more strictly tyed then before to uphold the Authority of our Sacred Soveraign, by a new cimented League of Marriage, whereby their interest in his Majesties Progenie will over∣ballance you, though your Cause were better. Other Forrainers are meerely unable by their owne distractions, and the English have beene ever strong enough for us, when onely their owne King, and not ours too, did leade them. For my owne part, I am in your
power, and resolv'd not to leave that foule Title of Traitour as an Inheri∣tance upon my posterity. You may take my Head from my shoulders, but not my Heart from my Soveraigne. FINIS.
