13051.3 33150994 28854
A HELPE TO MEMORY AND DISCOVRSE: WITH TABLE-TALKE, as Musicke to a Banquet of WINE. Being a Compendium of witty, and vsefull Propositions, Problemes, and Sentences, Extracted from the larger Volumes of Physicians, Philosophers, Orators and Poets: Distilled in their assiduous and lear∣ned Obseruations: And which for Method, Manner, and Referent Handling, may be fitly tearmed, A Second MISSELANY; Or, Helpe to Discourse. LONDON: Printed by T. B. for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Temple, neere the Church. 1630.
Ad Lectorem. AS Bastard once the Epigramist said, As euery skill is nothing when 'tis showne: So were his labors slighted when th'were knowne. Foure lines (saith he) which tug'd me houres twaine, My Reader swallows vp and takes no paine. Of Books and Pamphlets I commerse with many, Before I drew a good conceit from any. A hundred Ballads had not so much wit, To yeeld one platforme for to build on it:
And yet my Printer thinkes that hee shall leese, That buyes my Epigrams at pence a piece. Yet a wise looker on, that viewes a ground, Set with rich grafts and plants but rarely found, From seueral nurseries brought in and set, Must thinke some paines was taken such to get. And if a Gardner much waste woods passe by, Before one wholesome fruit makes glad his eye; Why should he think that such a plot doth sute But he should reape the haruest of his fruit? Though Bastards Printer seem'd to be so nice, Matter & Lines are good, must beare me price.
To the Reader. OF all th'internall faculties of man, None nobler then the memory: for when Our youthfull industry with labour tooke, Hath suck't Schooles dry, and made it selfe a booke, This trusty Treasourer that turnes the key, Must lock't in memories chest, or 'twill away; For man is truly said to know no more, Then what he can remember of his store, And vouch at need, I'de haue a man to be A Minshaw, or Gesuers History, To know all names, and natures, and to read▪ A lecture to each question doth proceed.
In praise of the Worke, and the Author. HE that doth read, & fain would vnderstād Shall find instruction here at the first hand. Welcome his willingnesse: lead him along To the choice Arbos, where a fragrant throng Of sauors delicate seemes to inuite him, And mutually agree, all to delight him. This book's the Garden, and since thou art in, Walke through each Arbor, whilst alone vnseen, Then contemplate the beauties that be there Planted, to fill thy pleasure euery where: Lt then thy memory striue to regaine, These preparatiues and cordials for the braine, Since by it plausible discourses is cherished, Which else by ignorance and fate had perished. Glad then the Author, since his willing hand, Twixt thee and ignomy, is content to stand: And let him prayses haue; for thankefull spirits Giue solace to the man that truely merits. W. Lort.
DIRECTIONS for DISCOVSE. IN your discourse vse not many circum∣stances before you come to the matter, for that begets a wea∣rinesse in the Audi∣tors: and yet for es∣chuing of bluntnesse, vse some preamble thereunto; for that per∣swades attention, and conceit of some me∣thodicall consequence. Of all the excellent attributes and faculties of man, in none doth he differ more from a beast, then in his Ratione & Oratione, in his Reason and Dis∣course: In the excellency and perfection whereof, like the penne of a ready Writer, is the tongue of a perfect speaker, which in the wise management and excellency of that quality, in the prosecution of his rela∣tion
and story, possesseth with a silent ∣derment and admiration, the eares and ∣fes of those within the compasse of his c∣ning: for as the Poet could say, Dic mihi musa virum— Qui mores hominum multorum vidit & vrbes, So I say, Giue me the man for Discourse, that hath seene the manners and situations of Cities and men; which hath scene, and is obseruable in the passages and occurren∣ces of the world, the creatures thereof, and the casualties therein: for that drawes vp to the are of life and fresh view, what hath past, and is buried in the graue of obliuion. For without discourse and the preciousnes thereof, how should fore-passed actions which to that end are sometimes done, bee Presidents, Examples, or fore-warnings, both to present and future times, and which though done, and to vs knowne, yet in a dead vnderstāding appeare to the sense like Landskip to the Eye, till some perfect mu∣sician with the excellency of this instru∣ment present them to the Eare, in more fresher colours and life. Oh the tedious houres that haue beene posted away with this inchanting Syren! This it is that pre∣sents
education, Gentility, vnderstanding, memory: this it is like musicke to a ban∣quet of wine, luls the sence in the swee∣test and highest fulnesse and melody of con∣tent: it hath beene a porter to admit many a poore outside for his preicous inside, To silken laced and perfumed hindes, That had rich bodies, but poore wretched minds. And though in the crosse carriage and mis∣imployment, it hath subdued many a rich chastity of it selfe, which though it make not for the good, yet it argues for the pow∣er: But where Lady Pecunia and she ioyne hand to hand in conspiracy, they make ha∣uocke and deuastation of all in the way. I luls asleep heauy senses after large suppers, and takes captiue many a faire Lady, that if the first and second bait take them not, they are not mist with the third. Trauellers and Historiographers goe a fishing with no o∣ther bait: In a word, communication and conference betweene man and man, is the life of liuing: but Discourse the life of that life. Q. Since Discourse is so excellent, preci∣ous and profitable, and yet so few can or∣derly mannage it, wherein consisteth the greatest helpe thereunto.
A. In Relation and Memory: for as with∣out knowledge our memory hath no su∣iect to worke vpon, euen so without m∣mory, our knowledge is alwayes in the A∣tumne, withering, and decay; the brittle and slippery footing whereof (as testifieth each mans experience) forgets much more then it can containe. For as once one learned in the Lawes, told his fellow Aduocate at the barre, entring into some wrangling comparisons, that he had forgot more law then euer the other learned; to which I ea∣sily assent, because I know all memory to be Infida & labilis, vntrusty to keepe, and trusty onely to deceiue; and which was peraduenture more then he himselfe at that time was master of, that being onely ours that we remember: for euery man may say of the much seed that hath fallen into his ground, little haruest hath beene gathe∣red into his barne; not vnlike the fruit which the sower in the Gospell receiued from his seed, of which whilst he cast it foorth, some fel into the highway, a ground vnfit to receiue it in, like the vncapable memory of the old man, by reason of his too much drinesse, of the yong man; by rea∣son of his too much moisture: And though
it fall as some of his sd fell into good ground, that of it selfe had that reasonable fruitfulnesse, in regard of some proporti∣onable mixture of heat and moisture, that it might haue yeelded an increase sutable thereunto; yet then the cares and troubles of the world, doe either exhaust and drinke it dry, or like the seed which fell among thorns, choke it vp, that it can take no root or impression. Qu. But if the memoy be so precious, that the waste of the tongue spends vpon the storehouse there▪ so vsefull, so delight∣full, that to it we walke as to some Castle or Tower of Antiquity, to view the Records and Registers of forepassed ages and acci∣dents, there hung vp as monuments to our view; without which, whatsoeuer hath beene done, had beene as soone forgotten as done, without further vse or conse∣quence, but that there we finde it registred by the finger of Gods prouidence and pow∣er, and committed to this great Custos Re∣cordorum: where of euery man is a keeper, that somethings detaines in such capitall letters, that many yeeres obscure nor de∣face not: and yet other things againe so slightly and negligently apprehends, that
in a short period of time they are wiped out as with a spunge; yea, euen such as w grieue to forgoe, and thereupon it growe that the question is, By what meanes  ordering, this precious Virgin (secretary of the soule) may be kept vncorrupted, euer flourishing, in her best and middle youth and ripest apprehension. An. Though I am not ignorant of the precious vertue of this most excelēt hand∣maid of the soule, that lodgeth in the hin∣dermost closet and chamber of the Braine, the volume & contents wherof she so often ouerturnes with delight: yet am I not so skilfull to propose any rules whereunto she may be wedded to become more fruitfull, though I know there are that haue layd downe such: but that any were euer much bettered thereby, hath not come vnto my knowledge, more then by doubtfull Rela∣tion. In Authours I haue read of some men of wonderfull memories, as of Seneca, that he could recite 2000. names. Of others againe so weake, that they haue forgotten to read, nay, their owne names; and all these out of the strength or weaknesse of their naturall memory: For how should it be that a weake memory by
nature, should become much bettered by Art, when it must recount or set downe by so many Ideas, or Imaginations formed in the minde; by certaine places, colours, or letters the circumstances whereof require a reasonable strength that way, without which there is no possibility of working. For in this artificial memory distinguished by places as it were paper leaues, the Ideas or Images, letters, the disposition of the Images in their places, the method for the reading, all which are a charge to the me∣mory; yet the Authours in this Art say, this is done more by the vnderstanding then the memory: The helpes whereof by this Art memoratiue, they would proue to be as effectuall, by these conceiued fictions in the eye of the mind, as those we remem∣ber by the visible eye of the body: for exā∣ple whereof, say they, concerning the latter we read in the holy Scriptures of 12. Stones that were erected in the riuer Iordan in me∣mory of the wonderfull transpassage of the Israelites, Ios. 24.27. Likewise the Sacra∣ments ordained of God (say they) are as vi∣sible Ideaes to remember inuisible things, to which we easily assent: or as by the ty∣ing of the finger with a thread, wee are
sometimes remembred, what that cannot tell vs, but points vs to, as an adiunct to ou memory. So in like manner are these places, and deaes, mementoes, and helpes for the ey of the minde, as significant as the other for the body. The Art whereof by reason of some dif∣ficulty therein, I leaue to the practisers, and those that will further wade therein, whilst I onely relying vpon a naturall Me∣mory, and the strength thereof infused by God, am carefull, not disparaging any other either Helpe or Art, both to preserue it in my selfe, and to commend to others, such preseruatiues and helpes, as are drawn from the workes of the learned in this kind.
Directions for the preser∣uation of the naturall Memory, con∣sisting first in auoyding of things hurtfull: Secondly, in imbracing such things as are helpfull. THe Memory, whose Eyes are seated in the backe part of the Braine, hath no obiect till something bee effected: shee lookes not forward at things to come, but recordeth euents already succeeded; the edge wherof, like the finest razor, is quick∣ly turned or blunted: wherefore among many things that are required to preserue it in a perfect temperature, these especially ensuing, are respected as principall furthe∣rers or decayers thereof. And first of the offensiue part.
Things hurtfull for the Memory to be anoyded. First, wee are to obserue, that all co∣rupt ayres, noysome vapours and sent are offensiue thereunto, and therefore o chiefest respect ought to bee, that the Ayre wherein we breathe, be not thicke, foggy, and vnwholesome, annoyed with stinking marishes, standing ditches, and lakes, &c. Secondly, that we walke not forth in foggy or mystie Euenings or Mornings, before or after the Sunne be downe or vp. Thirdly, that we abstaine from all crude and grosse Flesh, vnripe fruits, greene herbes, and all other things, cold by nature or vaporous, which send vp grosse humore into the braine. Fourthly, that wee auoid all fuming drinks, strong Wine, and Ale, or any broths made of vnwholesome water. Fiftly, from Beanes, Pease, Garlicke and Onions, which especially cause Head-ache, hurt the Eyes and the Sinews, and by weak∣ning the senses, cause dreames and phan∣tasies. Sixtly, Likewise from such things as are
flow of digestion, as Cheese, Nuts, Wall∣nuts, and meates of diuers sorts at one meale. Also we are to auoid (as dangerous ther∣into) immoderate sleepe, too much Vene∣ry, especially when the stomacke is full, or the body drie: at change of the moone, or where sleepe may not follow. But from it altogether should young men abstaine, as likewise old men, and wo∣men with childe. All cold in the hindermost part of the Head, Necke, Stomacke, and Belly, is offen∣siue. Likewise immoderate labour, which dryes vp the strength and duls the Spirits, especially in moyst and windy places. Much care, feare, griefe, and all violent passions of the minde: too much Reading and Study, Night-watching, long-hayre, washing the head in cold water, with the distraction of the mind into diuers studies, all offensiue and hurtfull. Things good to preserue and restore the Memory, Are for the most part the vse of these precedent contraries, aa all meates that
yeeld good iuyce or nourishment to  body: more especially the braine of  Partridge, the Sparrow, Hare, Conny▪  Henne, the last whereof is the first and  in reckoning. For, some Physicians write, that  braine of the Hen, addes to the very sustance of the Braine: of whom it is thus Written: The Henne of all fowles is accounted best: In two things farre excelling all the rest. For first, for those that want or Braine or wit: The Hennes braine doth augment both that and it. And in her body she the egge doth breed, The yolke whereof turnes to much blood and seed. Likewise the vapour and decoction of these Herbes infused into the eare through some Tunnell, much comforteth the brain, that is to say, of Nigella Romana, the flow∣ers of Rosemary, and Cardnus Benedictus: and these not onely comfort the braine▪ but also sharpen the wit, exhilarate the mind, and procure healthfull sleepe. The wash∣ing of the feet in warme water once a moneth, and throughly boyled, wherein
hath beene decocted Camomill, the leaues of Lawrell, and the like. After meat abstaine one houre from all mmoderate labour, either of minde or bo∣dy; as after supper some reasonable time from sleepe; for to fleepe vpon a full sto∣macke, much dulleth the braine, as it indan∣gereth the body, which some say is there∣by exposed to as much as to serue in the face of an enemy. When thou goest to thy bed, shut the windowes of thy chamber, to exclude the winde, and draw close the curtaines to shut out the Moone-light, which is very offen∣siue and hurtfull to the braine, especially of those that sleepe, much more then of those that wake. Afterwards in thy lying downe, first turne thee vpon thy right side, when thou awakest again, vpon thy left side, that thy blood and digestion may the better re∣plenish thy body; euer practising the me∣mory to record and repeat things receiued in the Euening, the Morning following: for by want of practice, the retentiue facul∣ty becomes dull and forgetfull, as the Verse to this purpose seemes to insinuate; Saepe recordari medicamen fortius omni.
Solus et artificem qui facit, vsus erit. Englished. Tis vse & practice that becomes each For that makes perfect, what neglect  kill. Neither desire superficially to read man things, but rather well to vnderstand those few that thou doest; for euen as it little a∣uaileth the stomack to haue receiued much meate, except it bee thence disgested into nutriment to the body, so doth such reading bring as little profit to the minde. Signes to iudge of the Debility, and Constitu∣tion of euery Braine, with some aduice for re∣medy of the ill disposition thereof. THe Debility of each weake memory ari∣seth out of one of these foure causes: that is to say, either out of the too much heat of the braine, or too much cold, or too much moisture, or too much drinesse; for too much heat dries vp the Spirits, too much cold hinders their operation and motion in the cauerne of the brain, too much driness the reception of formes, and too muc moisture drownes them vp; the signes whereof are thus perceiued.
1. If the braine be ouer-hot, you shall perceiue an extraordinary heat in the head by the touching of it, and the parts about the head wil be hot and red, as likewise the eyes very nimble in turning, the hayres quickly growing and fast increasing. 2. But if ouer-cold, the head expresseth it by his coldnesse, in the face scarce ap∣peares any rednesse, the turning of the eyes are slow and weake, the pulse and breathing very deliberate, the hayres long a growing, the head neuer offended with any hot cause: such are for the most part sleepy, fearefull, slothfull, slow to anger, and dull of memo∣ry, cold in their desire to women, and weak of sense. 3. Those of a moyst braine, are for the most part hairy, and such as are neuer trou∣bled with baldnesse: they smell slowly, but sleepe soundly, and are seldome troubled with dreames. 4. But if the braine be ouer-dry, there the apprehension is but slow to conceiue, yet strong to retaine what it hath receiued: those of this disposition haue their haires hard and curled, the eyes hollow, and be∣come quickly bald▪ The state and disposition of the brain be∣ing
thus knowne, it remains then, that ry man be obseruant and temperate  diet, to take or forbeare such things, as  be either good or hurtfull vnto it:  the braine be ouer-hot, those things are  be obserued, and accustomed, that dimin and allay the heat thereof, as the other to be forborne that increase it. If ouer-cold, then are we to abstaine from all cold meates, and betake to their contraries such as increase heate, and so moderating the extremity thereof, it may be reduced by this meanes, to a perfect perfection, and so of the rest. And thus much shall suffice to haue spken of the foure Constitutions or qualit of the Braine, the direction whereof is cpious, in the workes of many learned Athors, which here I pursue not, because purpose breuity, but betake my selfe to futher matter of Discourse, History, and ty propositions, furniture and talke for  triall of Wits and Braines. Of Memories true vse. HE that remembers what he should forget, Hath taken Memory from her seat, and set
three degrees below her. e that forgets what he remember should, equall ballance in account doth hold th him, that doth not know her. e that remembers what he knowes is fit, And to obliuion doth the rest commit: That man hath learned all the rules of it, And may proceed to practise— Of the excellency of Memory. MEmory, it is that keepes aliue all the old Ages of the World, and Actions of men, from Adam to him that dyed ye∣sterday: all which were else raked vp the embers of obliuion; but that Mem takes them vp, Discourse layes them open nd keepes them aliue. Were it not for  excellent Sense; how should the iust be e∣warded, whose Memory shall bee blessed▪ when as the memoriall of the wicked shall ot? We see Memory to be a Record, let vs then put nothing on this file, but what is worthy a lasting durance: for it is a perpe∣tuall Register; deface it not then, blot it not, choake it not by any distemper, but cherrish and refresh it by these or better duices in this kinde, when thou meetest
with them; she cannot want food:  the world is her dyet, and in these Dises thou shalt finde Sentences and  Conclusions, some whereof will be  worthy to be hung vp in this Store-ho and so I leaue thee to gather what thou ∣dest worthy, and to lay vp what thou ∣therest. Propositions follow. Qu. VVHat is the chiefe vertue and b¦nefit of the Memory? A. Recordare Beneficia. Iudicia, Exempla. Nouissima, Englished, To remember 1. Benefits long, to re∣quire them. 2. Iudgements, to auo them. 3. Examples, to bee forewarned by them. 4. The 4 last things, that we neuer dow amisse by thinking on them. And withall as we must remember bene∣fits long, so we must forget iniuries quick∣ly,
so that Memory, and this forgetfulnesse will be equiualent in goodnesse. Q. What doe we account the best staeyes and helpes to Memory? A. Writing; for that hath conueyed and carried along, one Ages actions to an∣other; hath inriched one age with anothers knowledge; by that we doe conferre with the deceased, and call the dead to liuing conferences: From Saint Austen and other those Fathers and Lights of the Church, how are our studies diuinely inlightned, whose continuall vigilancy and labour hath discouered vnto vs the bottome of those deepes, where the Elephant might bee drowned, at the end of whose labors we set to our meditations, and goe forward to our much ease and comfort, as is most decent; as one writes, That she that's neerest to the King of Kings, Should be most search't of any thing of things. By these and such like helps haue our mo∣derne Diuines the veyle of miseries drawn from before the face of Diuinity, and shee her selfe set more resplendent before them. From Esculapius, Hippocrates, and Galen, Fathers of Physicke, (which though Hea∣thens) did acknowledge a Deity in the won∣derfull
composure of mans body; but fro them haue not our moderne Physicians le into the quicker and more certaine knowledge: and as other ages to come shall b bettered by ours, so haue these beene bette∣red by others, as the latter age hath euer beene the Scholler of the former; hereto∣fore a wry necke, or the stone, went to the graue with him that had it: now Art hath found out common repaires for either, so that although Memory be Infida & labilis, hauing but slippery footing in the minde; yet, by this meanes we find where she hath and may rest her foot. Q. Who haue the best naturall Memories? A. They that exercise them most, and abuse them least: and therefore I haue knowne diuers vnlettered persons trusting onely to strength of Memory, could record and retaine much more then the Scholler or Penman that committeth all to Record. And now of late yeeres was there a wo∣man, one Mistresse Iostlin of Cambridge∣shire, who for excellency of memory de∣serues here to be remembred, who by vse and moderate preseruation thereof, was so strong and quicke, that vpon the first re∣hearsall he was able to repeat 40. lines La∣tine
or English, and to carry a whole Ser∣mon from Church, and after set it downe almost verbatim in her chamber. She wrote a Legacy to her child before it was borne, and prophesied of her owne death, and died accordingly at the time. Q. Whence comes it that some Memories are as dull as lead, or as a deepe Gulfe that swal∣lowes all, and retaines nothing? or like some quicke Prodigall, that layes vp nothing for time to come? A. Late Suppers, the too much vse of Tobacco, meates that ingender grosse hu∣mors, too much woman, too much surfet∣ting and costly fulnesse; all bad for Memo∣ry, ill for the purse, and worse for the health: for the rich Prodigall or wealthy vnthrift is like a powder-master, that hath prouision against an enemy, but is in dan∣ger of being blowne vp himselfe. And therefore here let vs a little stay and ballase our selues with these or such like considerations. With little, Nature is content▪ whilst hers we doe bide: And at our death, a little graue doth couer all our pride.
Imperious Caesar dead and turn'd to clay. Is now but night, that once had so much day▪ Why sell we then our selues so cheape, To buy repentance deere? To hang proud robes vpon our backe, To out Diues in good cheere? Why should the Worme exceed the Sheepe, Whose fleece doth cheaper warme, And better then the Silke-wormes twist Gainst winde and weather arme? In which the rich man findes lesse ease, With Gout and paines opprest, Within his softest downy bed, Or in his wealthiest chest, Then doth the poore man in his wants Whose health doth far exceed, Although his sinewes first must stretch, Before his belly feed: Whose leg a cushion must attend For that's the rich mans dance: His wealth but buyes the Doctors skill, And hyres the Surgeons tance. To which purpose it is as one writes, That Fortune neuer comes with both hands full; either she sends a stomacke, and no food; such are the poore in health; or else plenty of food, and no stomacke: such are the rich.
And therefore saith the Wiseman, Spare dyet is my food, My clothes more fit then fine, I know I feed and cloath a foe, That pampred would repine. Enough I reckon wealth, Content my meanest lot, That lies too low for base contempt Too high for Enuies shot. Q. What is the most precious thing in the World, yet the most brittle and vncertaine? A. The life of man, which although it hath but one comming into the world, hath a thousand wayes to goe out, the frailty whereof considered, should be like a Prea∣cher, euer to admonish vs of our end, cry∣ing vnto vs sinfull creatures, as the Saylers cryed to Ionas in the storme▪ Arise, O sleeper, O arise and see, There's not a twiny thred 'twixt death and thee. To which purpose is here annexed a sto∣ry of one, who trauelling by the way side (which is the wildernesse of this world) fel into a well, in the fall he catcht hold of cer∣taine twigges that grew on the side there∣of, by which he staid himselfe; at the bot∣tome
thereof, looking downe, were craw∣ling Serpents, Toades, and other noysome creatures, which came in vpon the lapse or fall of man, rather then in the first creati∣on; for then God pronounced of all things that they were good, and the most sauage creatures rebelled not against man: but now hereupon so changed in this change, as ob∣serues du Bartas. There's not the smallest Fly, but she dares bring Her little wrath against her quondam King. Now whilst hee staid himselfe by this weake support, came two little beasts, a blacke and a white, and did gnaw the twigs vpon which he hung, to his greater terror. Now the morall hereof is; The man that fell into the well, is euery man, which so soone as he comes from the wombe, is tra∣uelling towards his tombe, through the dangers of this world: the well that he fell into, is the Graue, that lyes open for all men; the two twigges that he catcht hold of, the brittle thread of humane life; the blacke and white beasts, Day and Night, which in some small continuance weare in sunder this thread. Q. Wherein consists the naturall life of man?
A. Of Heat and Moysture, which as the one is daily decayed, and the other dri∣ed vp by the operation of that Limbecke of mans body, are againe replenished by meates and drinkes, and so vpheld by this parget and plastering. Q. But may not then this life of man thus continually supplied, be continually maintained in health, sicknesse and old age kept by, and kept backe for euer? A. No, in despight of all preuention, Age shall waste the one, and sicknesse dry vp the other, and so resolue them into their first matter. For when our sand is runn, and houres are spent, Death comes; no Herb nor Doctor can preuent. For further illustration hereof, Fryer Ba∣con, a man of infinite Learning, Study, and Capacity in his time, amongst many his strange and impossible indeauours, publish∣ed a booke De Retardanda snectute, or the keeping backe of old age, the which whilst he himselfe was ouer-curious in obseruing, and studying this Art of health, grew old in the Act, and himself was ouertaken with age. Let then the Ayre, the chiefe preser∣uer thereof, blow from his healthiest cor∣ner,
and from thence brush ouer Rockes, and Hills, and Fields, and Fountaines, and breathe into the nostrils of the healthiest man liuing; nay, Though he haue suckt the Indian mindes, That haue kst ten thousand leaues Of Synamon tres, their barkes, their Rindes: All which of sweetnesse them bereaues. Yet all this Ayre, so sweet, so fayre, For euer cannot health repaire. So by this we finde, it cannot be preuen∣ted of his purpose, though it may be some∣thing tardied in his speed: so that hee may hang vp his Motto, as that daring Artist did: Cedo nulli, nec domi, nec foras: I yeeld to none neither at home nor a∣broad. Q. Whether is man, that is said to be made after the Image of God, according to his corpo∣rall substance, like vnto him, or doth in any wise represent the Diuine Maiesty? A. The Image of God is in the soule of man, and the admirable faculties thereof, and in nothing doth the body resemble it more, then that it is the representation or glasse of the Soule, that immediate stampe
of the Image of God, erectus ad coelum, of an eleuated stature, that his thoughts might ascend where their obiect is, and not rob∣ble below on the earth. Q. Whether is the woman made to the Image of God, or not? A. There be some that auerre, the wo∣man is made onely to the image & glory of man, but these doth the Text confute: for when it was said, Let vs make man after our owne Image, hee made them both male and female; and man is said to resemble the I∣mage of God, as hee is an intellectuall and reasonable creature. So likewise the wo∣man, being both indued with an immortall soule, and supernaturall gifts of grace and glory, man being made little lower then the Angels. Q. How many, according to some Writers, are the degrees or Hierarchy of Angels? A. Nine, which say there is a mystical resemblance of the holy Trinity, there be∣ing in 9 thrice 3. and in euery 3. thrice one, so that there are 3 superiours, 3 inferiours, and three middle degrees. The superiours, are Seraphins, Cherubins, and Thrones: The middle, are Dominions, Principalities, and Powers: and the inferior, Vertues Arch∣angels and Angels.
The most vsuall Names and Appella∣tions of the Sonne of God through the Scriptures. SPs, via, vita, salus, ratio, sapientia, Lumen, Iudex, Porta, Gigas, Rex, Gemma, Propheta, Socerdes, Messiah, Zebaoth, Rabbi, Sponsus, Mediator, Virga, Columna, Manus, Petra, Filius, Emanuélque, Vinea, Pastor, Ois, Pax, Radix, Vitis, Oliua, ons, Paries, Agnus, Vitulus, Leo, propitiator, Verbm, Homo, Rete, Lapis, Domu, & sic omnia Christus. Englished, THe Hope, the Way, the Life, Health, Reason, Wisedome, Light, The Iudge, the Gate, that's past with strife, A Gyant, King of might, A Gemme, a Priest, a Prophet hie, Messias; Zeboath, nam'd Rabbi, from her whose eyes ne'r dry,
Whose Heart all these inflam'd. The Mediator, Bridegroome deckt, The Rod, the Doue, the Hand, The Rocke, the Sun, whoe beames reflect, Ore-spreading Sea and Land. The Vine, the Shepheard, Sheepe, The Oliue, Peace, the Root, The Lambe, the wall, that ot doth keepe The Darts that Saan shoote. The Fount that doth refresh all dry, The Truth, the Lyon strong, The Calfe that fatted was to die For him that had gone wrong. Emanuel, the Man, the Word, A Net, a House, a Stone, A mercifull and louing Lord, And Christ that's all in one. Q. Whether are men of short and little sta∣tures, or those of the more ample and spacious, commonly the wisest or the longest liued? A. Those of the lesser volume, by rea∣son that in them the soule and faculties therof are more neere & nimbly compact, and with greater vigor and dexterity im∣part their functions ouer all the body; and therfore Homer Prince of Poets, for whom seuen Cities stroe for his birth-righ,
(whose proper name was Melesegenes, but called Homer for his blindnesse) doth de∣scribe Vlisses to be short and wise, and A∣iax long and a foole. In Aiax and Vlisses what Art Of Physiognomy might one behold? The face of either cypher eithers heart, Their face, their manners, most expresly tod: In Aiax eyes blunt rage and rigor rold, But the midglance that sly Vlisses lent, Shew'd deep regard, in smyling merriment. Q. Of all morall vertues, which is reputed the most beautifull? A. Humility, for she both shunnes ho∣nour and yet is the way to it, preuailing of∣ten with meeknesse, when the haughty and proud are put by: for example, two Goates met vpon a narrow bridge, vnder which glided a deepe and violent streame, get backe they could not, the planke was so nar∣row for the turning, and forward they could not, without hazarding their liues, stand still they might, but that was but a prolonging of their misery: that they might therefore both passe by in safety, the one
lies down, whilst the other goes ouer him, and so by this quiet passage they both se∣cure their liues, and preuent their further danger. The want of this yeelding, is for the most part, the beginning of all contro∣uersie and trouble; for when Iron meets Iron, they meet with violence, but let wooll meet Iron, there is a gentle yeelding and end: according to this, the Poet wittily obsrues: The meeke and gentle Lambe with small adoo, Suckes his owne Dam, we see, and others too. In Courts men longest liue and kepe ter ranks By taking iniuries, and giuing thankes. Seneca faith, The meeke and the Wise∣man, in good turnes lous not to owe more then he must, in euill to owe and not to pay. Q. Which is thought to be that Wildernesse through which the Children of Israel wandred 40. yeeres, where their food was so miraculously sent downe from heauen, and their cloathes pre∣serued from not wearing out? A. The Desart of Arabia, from whom is brought the excellentest Mummia. Q. Where of is it made, and whereto doth it serue?
A. It is a thing like pitch, some say it is made of mans flesh boyld in pitch, others, that it is taken out of old tombes, being a corrupted humour, that droppeth from embalmed bodies: or those there buried in the hotter sands, it is the principall of poysons, which Physicke in some kindes maketh vse of. Q. Since we haue a little entred to speake of the Hebrewes, whose deriuation Haebraei qua∣si Abrahaei I purpose to relate a little further, for the better vnderstanding of their names in Scriptures, the quantities of some of their mea∣sures, and first of the Gomer, what may that sig∣nifie? A. The Gomer was the name of a mea∣sure containing more then a Gallon, the Is∣raelites in the Wildernesse receiued euery day this measure full for a dayes allowance. Q. What the Cab? A. A measure of 3. wine quarts. For the rest of the Hebrew measures they are further related in the first part of the Helpe to Discourse. Q. The Manna that they receiued, what was it in the similitude and likenesse? A. It was like a dew that fell euery Eue∣ning, and white like the Coriander seed.
Q. Who was the chiefe deliuerer of the Chil∣dren of Israel from the oppression of Pharaoh? A. Moses, by the hand of God miracu∣lously preserued by Pharaohs daughter, by her there found in the Bulrushes cast forth to be drowned; where note, that all the Kings of Egypt were called Pharaohs, as al the Emperours of Rome, Caesars: For it is said, there arose another Pharaoh that knew not Iosph; Of which great Prophet thus further illustrated by the Poet: Loe here an obiect vtterly forlorne, Left to destruction as a violent prey, Whom man might iudge accursed to bee borne: To darke obliuion moulded vp in clay, That man of might in after-times should be The bounds of fraile mortality that brake, Which that Almighty gloriously should see, When he in thunder on Mount Sinai spake. There was one that came vpon a time to a great Counsellor of this Kingdome to craue his direction, what good morall or politicall booke he would commend to his reading, seeing the world was ful of books,
and there was no end of making many bookes that were made to no end, and that much reading was a wearinesse to the flesh, and bad for the eye-sight, and too little a∣ding a friend to ignoance, worse for the insight: and what was his answer? Quoth he, Reade the World, reade men, record remarkeable euents, set them as a patterne before thee for thy owne instru∣ction, reade ouer thy owne actions, see where thou hast trayned worthily, where thou hast digrest wickedly, and thou shalt obserue, as one writes: That by bad courses may be vnderstood That their euents haue nuer falne out good. With which opinion this Authour seemes to accord. For many books I care not, and my store Might now suffice mee, though I had no more Then Gods two Testaments & therwithal, That mighty volume which the world men call: For these well look't on, well in mind preseru'd The presentages passages obseru'd My priuate actions seriously ore view'd,
My thoughts recal'd, and what of them in∣su'd, Are bookes that better far instruct me can▪ Then all the other paper-workes of man. If thou wilt reade History, lay thine eye to the French Story, goe thorow that volume of Kings from Pharamond the first, to the last: there see how the good and vertuous haue flourished; how the euill and tyran∣nous haue ruined and decayed. Likewise to the Dutch, to the Spanish, and there see the various occurrences and changes of times and men; the wheele of fortune some∣time deiecting one, and as suddenly exalting another. Reade the Turkish History, and there thou shalt find obseruable matter; a∣mongst many other things thou shalt there finde Baiazet the scourge of Princes, him∣selfe captiued in Tamberlaynes Iron cage. The Scottish, from Donaldus the first, to the last of that line, to this present. Then suruey the English Speed, Hollinshead and others, and in these and all the rest, thou shalt finde rewards and punishments of ver∣tuous and vicious Princes, as inherent to them as their Blood and Crownes, and ma∣ny their wicked Actions repayd by way of
retribution and retaliation: to example in two or three presidents of our owne  home: Henry the First, by cruelty disinherited his elder brother, Robert Duke of Norman∣dy, and put forth his eyes; and this, to make hiw owne children the more secure heyres of the Kingdome: But see what happened hereupon; His owne being at that time in France, and to come ouer to keepe their Christmas here in England with their Fa∣ther, put forth to Sea, and were all drow∣ned in their comming ouer. The manner▪ thus, the Saylors and Ship-men through excesse of wine, which was plenteous at their parting, were al drunke, so that the Master could not well guide the Sterne, nor the Mariners the Ship, but it rode at ran∣dome; which the Ladies (being launced out into the maine) perceiuing, fell a weeping, praying, and lamenting: in this state the Ship for a long time continuing in a doubt∣full perplexity, betwixt hope and despaire, when at last in some hope of safegard and in view of land, the Ship vpon a sudden split in two pieces against a rocke; vpon this was a grieuous skrieke, till the water had quickly silenced it. Now whilst euery
one sought to get vpon something to de∣fraud the gaping billowes of their prey, if it were possible, the Prince had taken the Cockboat, where being in some likelihood of safety himselfe, aduenturing to saue his Sister, who had hitherto maintained her life by grappling to a planck, recouered her into his boat; into which, the rest so vio∣lently thronged after one another, euery one willing to reprieue a life, so ouer-loaded the little Vessell, that with the weight and number, the boat sunke, and all perished, ex∣cept one Butcher, that swomme to shore to tell the heauy tydings. So likewise the Conquerour, his Father, who, to erect New Forrest in Hampshire, pulled downe 6. Churches, all the Towns, Villages, and houses farre and neere, and brought all within 36 miles compasse, to a Wildernesse for wild beastes; in which af∣terwards his 3. sons were slain, as you may read more at large in the first part of the Helpe to Discourse. By Hastings aduice, the Earle Riuers and Gray, with others, were without triall of Law, or offence giuen, executed at Pomfret, and in the same day, neere about the same houre▪ in the same lawlesse manner, Hastings
himsee was beheaded in the Tower of London: a greater iudgement then this of Hastings you shall not find in any story. And thus much for a taste of some few. Exam∣ples are copious in this kind, and for mu∣bility, Chronicle this in thy brest, that there is no stability vnder the Sun, King∣domes alter and change; The Easterne, the Grecian, the Roman, the Turkish Empire succeeding one another into a continuall succession of change, and so of all things vn∣der the Sunne. He that had eene Ilius Caesar goe into the Senate  his royal state, and his poniarded body and loody robe, Seianus in the Morning▪ and his com∣plexion at Euening, of which one thus writes of him magnifying himselfe: Swell, swell, my ioyes, and faint not to de∣clare Your selues as ample, as your causes are▪ I did not liue till now, this my first houre, Wherein I see, my thoughts matcht by my power, But this, and touch my wishes great and hye, The World knowes only two, that's Rome and I.
My Roofe receiues me not, tis Ayre I tread, And at each step, I feele m'aduanced head. Knocke out a Starre in Heauen— It were infinite to instance in this kinde these downefalls of greatnesse, Philotas, Bel∣lizarius and others. Richard the Second, a man of misery, as Richard the Third, a man of cruelty, the first whereof, of a King became a captiue, deliuering vp his Royalty with his owne hands into his enemies; whose ominous Raigne was pointed at from Heauen, at his landing with his young Queene Anne of Beme from France, where at his first setting foot vpon his owne shore, arose such a Tempest, that it dasht in pieces and draue the Shippes all out of the har∣bour, and withall two Ship-wrights hew∣ing of a Mast, at euery stroke dropped blood out of the tree: an ominous portent, and af∣ter fearefully succeeding: First, losing his Crowne, and after, his life at Pomrt Castle, slaine by Sir Pierce of Exon and 8. men more that he brought with him, whereof King Richard slew foure of them. Richard the Third, first affrighted by dreames, and after slaine in Bosworth Field, where by
force and number beaten from his hor he bit the ground with his teeth, and to it with his hands; and in contempt of death and man, died as if he would haue carried his kingdome with him; and so much for example in this kinde. Q. Which are the most dangerous yeeres r∣puted in a mans whole life? A. Euery seuenth yeere of a mans life is noted to be dangerous: some hold the ninth yeere very dangerous, and by this account the 18.27, &c. but the most dangerous yeere of all is 63, for that both accounts doe meet in this number; namely, 9. times 7. and 7. times 9. either of which numbers make 63. the most dangerous yeere of all. Certaine Diuine Precepts or Aduertisements that a Wise-man first obserued himselfe, and after left them to his Sonne and Friends. 1. If a weaker man then thy selfe doth wrong thee, spare him; if a stronger, then spare thy selfe. 2. Gods hand is heauiest on the Consci∣ence, when it is lightest on the carkasse, if lie suffer it to surfet on pleasure till death.
3. The Vsurer and the Broker may bee ompared to two milstones that grind the oore to powder: come not therefore vnder heir Sayles. 4. Obserue how Pharaohs dreame is ve∣rified amongst vs in these dayes, that the eane Kine eate vp the fat; for Gods leane blessings, which are riches and pleasures, blessings of his left hand, eate vp the fat, which are Grace and Religion, blessings of his right. 5. Good Lawes without execution, stand like the picture of St. George, with his hand alwayes vp, but neuer striking. 6. Pleasures doe not alwayes follow a man liuing, but euer leaue him dying. 7. A vertuous man is famous on the earth, glorious in the graue, immortall in heauen. 8. Christ calleth the godly, Kinsmen, be they neuer so poore, but the rich scorn them be they neuer so honest: so proud is the ser∣uant aboue his Master. 9. It is miserable for a bold sinner to meet with a cold Preacher. 10. Two things out of euery Sermon are to be noted: first, that which thou didst not know: Secondly, that which speaketh
to thy conscience: for by the one thou shal increase knowledge, by the other lessen thy vices. 11. The Vsurers money to a man in time of necessity, is like cold water to a hot Ague in time of extremity. 12. He that drinkes on follies cup, shall haue small cause to licke his lippes after it. 13. Feare doth not more multiply euils, then Faith diminish them. 14. It is good so to diet the body, that the soule may be fatned. 15. One sin openeth the dore for many vertues to flye out. 16. A man would haue Teachers doe as they teach: so God would haue hearers doe as they heare; for else the hearers shall be no more saued by hearing, then the Preach∣ers by preaching. 17. Lending was ordained to be a staffe or support to the borrower; now Vsury hath turned this staffe into a Serpent. 18. The man that hath a quiet consci∣ence, is like to him that hath a good wife, he is alwayes sure of peace at home. 19. In Prayer be not like the Pharise in popular ostentation, but pray in secret: for he prayes with a witnesse, that so prayes with out a Witnesse.
Precepts or Aduices concerning Marriage. 1 Woo not by Embassadours. 2 Make not thy friend too familiar with thy wife. 3 Conceiue not an idle Ielousie, being a Fyre once kindled not easily put out. 4 Affect him not that would ill pos∣sesse thee. 5 Blaze not her beauty with thy owne tongue. 6 If thy estate be weake and poore, mar∣ry farre off and quickly, if otherwise firme and rich, at home, and with deliberation. 7 Be aduised before thou conclude, for though thy errour may teach thee wit, tis vncertaine whether euer thou shalt againe haue occasion to practise it; for marriage is like a stratagem in warre, wherein a man can erre but once. 8 Marry not for Gentility without her support, because it can buy nothing in the market without money. 9 Make thy choyce rather of a vers then a learned wife.
Esteeme rather what shee is, of herselfe, then what shee should bee by inhe∣ritance. 11 In tactam quaeris Intactam esto: Be that example to thy wife, that thou wouldest haue her to imitate; for he that strikes with the point, may be content to be beaten with the pommell. 12 Shee whose youth hath pleased thee, despise not her age. 13 That thou mayst be beloued, bee a∣miable. 14 Sayle not in this Sea without a com∣passe, for a wicked woman brings a man sooner to repentance then suretiship. 15 Tis the greater dispraise to children, to be like to wicked Parents. 16 Tis more torment to be iealous of a mans wife, then resolued of her dishonesty; and more misery, that a man may be assu∣red of her vice that way, but cannot bee of her vertue. 17 True Chastity doth not onely consist in keeping the body from vncleanenesse, but in keeping the minde from sinne; and she may be more a maid, that hath been m∣uisht against her will, then shee that hath but onely wished amisse.
A Wise-man was wont to say, that by marriage foure Ioyes most vndoubtedly accrew vnto the husband. 1 A wife. 2 Alli∣ance and friends. 3 Patrimony. 4 Children, all strong walls and Bullwarkes to fence a man. But now see (saith another) which of these are firme, and which fleeting: 1. for the wife no man will deny, but that shee stickes firmely till death. 2. For friends they depend vpon fortune; for who neuer lackes, shall neuer want a friend. And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. Lastly, by death many times friends are cut off for portion, without wary gouernment, charge increasing, that quickly decreaseth. Then see the Anker, that remaines alone, The Wife and Children, Friends and Portion none. The Louers complaint written by a Gentleman of quality. He is starke mad who-euer sayes That he hath beene in loue an houre,
Not for that loue so soone decayes, But that it can ten in lesse space deuource. Who will beleeue, if I sweare That I haue had the Plague a yeere? Who would not laugh at me, if I should say I saw a flash of Powder burne a day? O what a trifle is a Heart, If once into loues hands it come, Al other griefs allow a part to other griefs, And aske themselues but some. They come to vs, but vs loue drawes, He swallowes vs, and neuer chawes. By him, as by chaine shot whole rankes doe die, He is the Tyrant-Pike, our hearts the Fry. His Abiuration. Hence all the fond delights, As short as are the nights Wherein loue spends his folly: Ther's naught in this world sweet, If men were wise to see't, But melancholy: Hence Welcome folded armes and fixed eyes, A sight that piercing mortifies, A looke that fastned to the ground A tongue chain'd vp, without a sound. Fountaine heads, and pathlesse groues,
Places which pale passion loues, Moone-light walkes when all the fowles Are warmely hous'd saue Bats and Owles. A Panting Bell, a midnight grone, These are the sounds to feed vpon: Then stretch our bones in some close gloo∣my vally, There's nothing dainty sweet, saue melan∣choly. The Husbands complaint. I tooke a wife, I lou'd her deare, Her loue to me was due, Yet she was false, O who would thinke A wife should proue vntrue? Thus you poore birds that hony make From many a seuerall flower, Not make it for your selues, but them That you and it deuoure. The vnbounded louer. My choyce of women I enioy Of them what I desire, My children eat not yet my bread, Nor warme them by my fire.
So you poore birds, that make your nests, In right they are your due, For others, yet you hatch your young, They'r not enioy'd by you. Q. Which was the most deadly meeting that euer was? A. Eue and the Serpents meeting wrought our sinne, Would th'one had deafe, or th'other dumbe had bin: Or as another, Eue and the Serpents meeting wrought our woe, Would they had neuer met, or parlied so. So great a losse vpon mankind did fall, One woman at one blow then kild vs all; And singly one by one they kill vs still, Partly against, and partly with our will. Our eyes thus dim'd, our vnderstanding blinde, Wee kill our selues, to propagate our kind. Q. Of how many genders doe women con∣sist of? A. Of three Genders: all of the Foemi∣nine, many of the Doubtfull, for as the say∣ing is,
Long absence from a wife, though chaste, if faire, Doth fil a iealous husbands head with care. — And some there are of the Com∣mon: and those are the common subiects of misery to themselues, and ruine to other, and ioyne with sicknesse, to out-shuffle health. Q. Which is the fittest season for marriage? A. Marry in thy youth; for it is in marri∣age, as it is in gathering of flowers, where for the most part we delight in the bud, and leaue the full blowne to seed: Yet a learned man in this kingdome was wont to say, Wiues are young mens Mistrisses, Compa∣nions for middle age, and olde mens Nur∣ses: so that a man may haue a quarrell to marry when hee will. Old Haywood was wont to say, He that marries a widdow, is like to him that buyes a Sute in Long-lane, where he shall hardly finde any, but they are turned, or drest, or old, or rotten, or bad linings; like to a cunning widdowes dissembling chests: hee further thus de∣scribes a woman, Aut amat, aut odit mulier, nil tertium. Q. What is the greatest comfort or addition of happinesse in this world?
A. A sure friend, and yet in that this is the misery, that he cannot know him to be his friend without being in misery; and as it is vulgarly said, He is happy that findes a true friend in aduersity, but he is happier that findes not aduersity wherein to try a true friend: As saith another, It is good to haue friends, but naught to need them: which is agreeable to that which the Phy∣sician wrote at the end of his Rules. Now you our Physicke lines, that friendly read, God grant that Physicke you may neuer need▪ To which another added: Who takes his diet by the Doctors skill, Shall eat no meat that's good, drinke drinke b's ill. Q. Whether it is better to dream vpon dreams that are good or bad? A. Whilst we breathe waking, we liue all in one common world, but at night in our dreames, we goe euery one into a seue∣rall Region, and in these my visitations I desire rather my dreames should bee bad then good; for if my dreames bee good, I grieue whē I wake that they were dreams, but if euill, I reioyce that they were not
truths but dreames. To this purpose, a poore man that had dreamed the night be∣fore, that he was as rich as Croesu, and that he had abundance of gold and treasure, met a great Lord the next day following and be∣sought him for something, saying, If his dreame that he dreamed last night had been true, he had not needed to aske a reward; for I dreamed that I was a King. This Lord replied vnto him, It had beene good for thee if thou haddest neuer waked, for it is better to be a King in a dreame, then a beg∣ger awake. A great Lord of great stomacke, sharpely in the fury thereof that sought to giue satis∣faction to his belly and lose no time, so ea∣gerly slasht in the cutting vp of a Capon, that he cut off a pif his finger; where∣upon it was repohat this gluttonous Lord had at one bft his finger and his stomacke. No worse ewes, quoth the hea∣rers, but if a poore man finde it, and so che∣rish it, it will vndoe him. Q. Whether is it of a certaine or not, that is vulgarly reported, that when we are talked of abroad by friends or others, our eares tingle and glow, and whether may this be thought the rea∣son thereof?
A. Nothing lesse, there is in man or wo∣man a certaine flushing of blood and heat, which naturally runnes thorow the body, and is sometimes more inward, and some∣times more outward, as the body doth need; which falling into the Cheekes or Eares of a sudden by the motion of the bo∣dy, and her naturall heat, doth extraordina∣rily warm those parts, which some, though vnwisely doe attribute to this first cause. Q. What is that onely which hath an audi∣ble voyce, but not a visible body, and what the contrary, which presents the shape of a body, but without any sound of voyce? A. Eccho, and the Looking-glasse. Instruction for Belefe and Action. Twice 6 beleeue, buein doe not rest: Ten things performe oue all things the best. Thy wants and duties howsoere they rise, In 7. petitions thou maist all comprise. To these adde loue, and so thou maist ascēd Higher then Faith, or Hope, that here doe end. Q. There are foure things doe what they
list, and are vnreproud: and what are they? A. The winde bloweth where it lists, a woman talkes and does what shee list, a traueller lyes what wonders he lists, and a Wise-man, of all belieues what he lists. Q. Whether is it of a truth or not that is v∣gularly, or are they Popish Fables, that mn Spirits walke after their deaths, for treasure , for murders committed, or the like? A. They are not truths: for after death (as Diuinity will tell vs) the soule goes ei∣ther to ioy or paine, from whence there is no recession; as Abraham told Dies, and as that Diuine Poet wrote to that purpose, and if any such appearance there be, the Di∣uell doth assume the shape. For doubtles such a Soul as vp doth mourn, And doth appeare before her Makers face, Holds this vild world in such a base accoūt, That shee lookes downe, and scornes this, wretched place. But such as are detruded downe to Hell, Either for shame, they still themselues re∣tyre, Or ty'd in Chaines, they in close prison dwell, And cannot come, although they much de∣sire.
To this purpose is heere annexed a sto of a Diuine and a Lawyer, that meeting at dinner, the Lawyer, to helpe Discourse, pro∣posed this question to the Diuine: When Lazarus had laine foure dayes in the grae, and after was raysed vp againe, where was his soule in the meane time? The Diuine not answering his question, proposed vnto him another; which was, If Lazarus and his heyres should haue fallen at strife about his Lands, the Quaere was, Whose ought they to haue been? This was according to the question in Virgils Eglogues, Di qui∣bus in terris. One difficulty choked by pro∣posing another, and yet, For further confirmation thereof, saith Lemnius, A Scholler trauelling with his fa∣mily, came into a Towne to aske lodging, and finding none, It was told him there was a faire house that stood empty, that he might either lodge, or dwell in gratis; but the inconuenience was, it was haunted with Sprites, and euery night in it was heard a great iumbling, and rattling of chaines: he nothing affrighted hereat, desired to haue it: which was accordingly granted. At bed∣time hauing disposed his family to rest, hee himselfe sate vp in a chamber reading: about
midnight (the time that Church-yards yawne, and Spirits take their progresse) he heard a noyse at bottome of the staires, and presently it came vp: he nothing daunted, ate still reading, till at last it appeared on the top of the stayres in the similitude of Askeliton, or Anatomy, wrapped about with chaines of Iron: which comming vp, bec∣kened with his finger, and so went downe the stayres to haue him follow him: which he did; and first hee led him thorow an outward roome, then thorow a yard, and thence into a garden where he left him; in which place he pulled vp some grasse and left it for a marke; and in the next day dig∣ged vp that place, where was found a man buried, that had beene there strangled, which man being taken vp and buried with due Rites, the house was euer quiet after. But this doe I take rather to be an ancient fiction then a certaine truth. A certaine Mountebancke hauing long cheated with his drugges and playsters, and hauing profited little, left his old profession and turned Priest; and patching together diuers remnants of old Sermons and Ho∣milies, so vnfitly applied, that his want of Schollership was soone discouered, and hee
of his Ministery as soone discarded:  dismission from thence hee made this p∣testation; Now shall this businesse you  done, cost many a good mans life: The Pa∣rishioners thus threatned, accuse him be∣fore a Iustice; The Iustice demanded what he meant to doe: (Why quoth he) I meane to fal to my old trade of Paracelsus, and that I am sure will cost some deare. Q. Whether doth a dead body in a Shippe cause the Ship to sayle slower, and if it doe, what is thought to be the reason thereof? A. The Shippe is as vnsensible of the liuing, as of the dead, and as the liuing makes it to goe the faster, so the dead makes it not goe the slower, for the dead are no Rhemorahs to alter the course of her pas∣sage, though some there be that thinke so, and that by a kinde of mournfull sympathy. A Philosopher seeing a yong man proud∣ly decked out like a Shippe vnder saile, said; I could wish I were such a one as that fond man thinkes himselfe, but my ene∣mies such as hee is. Seeing likewise the world full of contention, wished he might liue to see men striue for loue, and not loue to striue. Q. What is the Epitome or summe, the
uare, and measure of a Christian mans duty, hich euen Nature teacheth, and God approues. A. To doe to others, as wee would bee one vnto our selues, a most vpright iustice, nd the fulfilling of the Law and the Pro∣phets. Q. What is the Epitome or summe of all Philosophy? A. It is collected out of the infinite vo∣lumes of Philosophers, that those precepts that pertaine to humane felicity, are com∣prised onely in these two words, sustinendo, & abstinendo, or in ferendo, & sperando, In sustaining, and abstaining, in induring, and hoping, in bearing aduersities patiently, and abstaining from pleasures warily; hope still supporting vs to the Hauen of happinesse, that we be not too much cast downe by the one, nor corrupted by the other. Q. What is that, which they that haue no∣thing else for the most part are not without? A. Hope. Q. What is the most beautifull thing of all others? A. Thal. Mil. answered, The World, the admirable worke of God, and nothing more beautifull, himselfe onely excepted, wherein we haue the greene Carpet of the
earth vnder our feet, the goodly Canop heauen ouer our heads fretted with gold Starres, the way Curtaines of the Ayre beside vs, all the creatures to serue and de∣light vs, and all to set forth the praise of the Creator; of which both from the Greekes and Latines it receiues the name. Clemen Alexandrinus saith, The Creation of the World, is the Scripture of God, whose 3. leaues are the Heauens, the Earth, and the Sea, being as many letters therein, as there are creatures in heauen and earth: For the heauens declare the glory of God, and the earth sheweth his handy-worke. Q. By what Element most hath it pleased God to expresse to the world his Iustice and his mercy? A. By Water, when for the sinnes of his people hee therewith drowned the World: But his mercy thereby in the in∣stitution of Baptisme by water, and in that hee would haue the holy Spirit by which wee are Regenerate, called by the name of Water. Q. What shippe of all other was the most an∣cient, the most spacious, the most holy, and the most rich that euer was or will be? A. The Arke of Noe, in which all the
en, wealth and creatures that escaped the ood, were preserued; and this is noted to a type of the Church, for as without the rke was no safety, so without the Church  no saluation. Q. Who was he that of a dumbe Father, came  the most excellent Orator in the world? A. S. Iohn Baptist, of whom Christ him∣selfe affirmes no greater to haue risen a∣mong the sonnes of women; vpon whom nd the disparity betweene Christ and him, is thus obserued, That at his Natiuity the dayes begin to shorten, as at Christs Nati∣uity to increase and lengthen: so likewise in their deaths, when the body of Christ was exalted, and stretched out vpon the Crosse, the body of S. Iohn was shortned by the head, according to his owne testimo∣ny, It behoues Christ to increase, and mee to be diminished. Q. Of the children of Iob and their number, is a question I wil now propound: When Iob had all his goods restored him double, yet had hee by generation but seuen sonnes, and three daughters, as many as he had before: how then did he re∣ceiue all things doubled? A. Concerning his goods▪ and cattell: first I will instance for his 7000. sheepe, he
had 14000. for his 3000. Camells 6000 and so of the rest. And concerning his children; true it is, he receiued but his for∣mer number: yet it is conceiued that the number of them was likewise doubled, be∣cause these his 10. former remained yet with God; therefore it may be said he had 20. For as Saint Hierome saies, Quicquid re∣uertitur ad dominm, in familiae numero compu∣tatur. Whosoeuer they are that are retur∣ned to the Lord, are reckoned in the num∣ber of the family: wherefore if he had re∣ceiued them doubled vpon earth, he should haue had them trebled: And in this lyes a mystery of the Resurrection. Q. Who, and how many were those, that had their names foretold before they were borne? A. Sixe, Ismael, Isack, Iosias, Cyrus, Saint Iohn Baptist, and Christ our Sauiour for e∣uer blessed. Q. What number is it that our Romanists so much dignifie aboue any other? A. The fift, which they affirme to bee a number of great efficacy and power, and much honoured by God: fot by fiue words say they he would bee incarnate, a Virgin should become a Mother, and hee himselfe God and man; Fiat mihi secundum verbu
uum, Be it vnto mee according to thy word: by fiue words he would haue his bo∣dy consecrate in the Eucharist, Hoc enim est Corpus meum, This is my Body. Lastly, by fiue words he absolued the Publican, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori, God be mercifull vnto me a sinner: and so with other num∣bers they fable and trifle, which we passe o∣uer with many other of their errors. Q. Much disputation and controuersie hath risen amongst the Philosophers, about Theseus shippe; but what may wee resolue thereon, and wherein doth it resemble the nw present Romish religion? A. This was the shippe in which Theseus sayled into Creet, when hee passed the La∣byrinth, and slue the Minotaure; which shippe being long time after kept for a mo∣nument, was so supplied and preserued by pieces, that the question grew, whether it were any part of Theseus shippe, or not; and it was afterwards resolued that it was rather a new shippe all of pieces, then any part of the old: much like vnto the modern Religion of Rome, that hath beene so pie∣ced from time to time by tradition and no∣uelty, that it now scarce retaines any thing of the ancient verity.
Q. Luther committed two great sinnes, say some, and what were they? A. Hee tooke from the Pope his treble Crowne, and from the Monks their fat bel∣ly-cheare. Q. What was hee the most wretched and poorest of all creatures, that offered to the most rich and mighty in the world, what hee neither had to giue, nor was able to performe? A. Satan, when hee offered Christ the kingdomes of the world, and to fall downe and worship him. Q. What riches are those that cannot bee wasted? A. Good turnes, for those in bestowing are not wasted, but increase: if thou bestow them, thou art the richer, if thou keep thē, thou art the poorer, if thou scatter them, thou doest not lose, if thou keepe them, they lose thee. Q. Wherefore did not God make all alike rich? A. Because in his secret Counsell and wisedome he saw it not fit, in which wee must rest our selues content in this wise di∣stribution of his owne: For as one saith, the poore and the rich are two contraries, but either necessary vnto the othsr: for if all
ere rich, who would labour? if all were ore, where were reliefe or helpe? There∣re God made the poore for the rich, and e rich for the poore, and either for each ther: and it had beene a controuersie a∣ong some, whether of the estates is the more happy: most are of opinion that in pouerty is the lesse euil, the more freedome: for compare the rich man and the poore to∣gether: the poore man laughes oftner and more heartily, without any deepe care: if it appeare, it doth no more, but so passeth ouer like a cloud; but the rich mans mirth is fained, but his griefes are not, but indeed deepe rooted, and of long continuance: and what doth it profit a foole to haue riches, when they cannot buy wisedome? the sicke man, when they cannot buy wealth? Q. Whether is Art or Wealth more precious? A. Res valet, ars praestat, si res perie, ars mihi restat. Ars manet, ars durat, fortuna recedere curat. English. Riches are good, but Art commands that drosse: And stickes to life, not subiect to that losse.
Q. Whether hath Law, or Phisick the highest place, or precedency? A. This in times past was a question disputed in Greece, touching the profes∣sors in those parts, where the Physicians thus argued for superiority, that since there are three chiefe goods pertaining to man his welfare and support, ouer which, euery one hath a Regent and Gardian assigned; which are the goods of the minde, the goods of the body, and the goods of for∣tune: The first whereof, was the care of the Diuine the, highest officer, for the wor∣thiest Mistris. The second of the Physician, because the body is more worth then raimēt, or goods; and the last of the Lawyer: Hereupon Phi∣sicke challenged the second place and prece∣dency before Law: The Lawyer I know not what arguments hee vsed; but after a long controuersie it was concluded, that law notwithstanding, should walke in e∣quall ballance, and in some places take the vpper hand of Physicke, for as the one in∣tends to preserue health, which is the Iew∣ell of the body, so the other, to preserue peace and wealth, which is the hand that weares it, being the thred by which wee
ut betweene all estates and rights, being o lesse needfull to the Common-wealth, hen the Sunne is to the world: but for such  degenerate from the truth of their pro∣ession, and onely like Vultures prey vpon he carkasses of spoyle, it were not amisse if such were cast out of the society of men, as most hurtfull infections to the Common-wealth. Q. From whence had Physick his beginning and perfection? A. Out of Diseases, Sores, and distempe∣ratures of the body, which consisting of 4. contrary Elements, are euer at opposition and oddes among themselues, still mena∣cing and offending each other: and so vp∣on this regard, to maintaine vnity and pre∣seruation, this great Lord Sicknesse admit∣ted Physick  weare his Liuery, which now since is growne greater then his ma∣ster. For it hath the way to increase. For, what in health men grapple and retains, If sicknesse comes, it flies to ease their paine. And it is the Physicians rule, well appre∣hending the aduantage of extremity, to cry Giue, Giue: whilst the sicke hand re∣plies,
Take, Take. The truth whereof was well approued by Philip king of Macedon, when being dangerously sicke, and hauing a most skil∣full, yet most couetous Physician, that eue∣ry day asked him a reward: (Quoth hee) Take what thou wilt out of my Treasury: for thou hast the key that will open the locke of it. Whereupon it is guessed that sometimes Physicians vse their Patients, as Lawyers doe their rich Clients, who keepe them long in hand, not for difficulty of the Cause so much, as for the prolonging o their gaine: and if it be alwayes true, that as the market goes, the market-folke will talke, some say, and which is a worse fault too, that their conclusions are as deare as mens liues, and that no Physician can be ex∣pert, before he haue made  dangerous experiment: but they are happy say some in this regard, because their successes the Sunne shall behold, but their errours the Earth shall bury: and as one once spoke to a Paracelsian Quackesaluer: I commend thy Art, because thou sufferest not poore men to languish long in misery, but helpest them quickly to their graues. Q. What Art or faculty hath the most Profes∣sors?
A. One answered, Physicke, but another replied, that could not be, because there was not aboue two Physicians in a whole Towne: when the other to maintaine his argument, thus proceeded to the confirma∣tion. Vpon a market day he sets one in the principall place thereof very ruthfully as∣pected, his gummes trust vp with a Hand∣kercher, making lamentation, and to euery one that demanded his griefe, he answered, his paine was tooth-ach: vnto which euery one that demanded, taught a medicine; so that he had as many medicines as market folkes, with which pretty conclusion, the verdict was giuen vpon his side: To which purpose one thus writes, In mundo omnes volunt esse medici, omnes vo∣lunt aliorum infirmitates curare, nemo suas: Euery one would be a Physician to cure o∣ther mens infirmities, but no man his owne. Q. What is that we first wish for, and are neuer after weary of? A. Health, which makes the most ex∣cellent harmony of content, especially where there is a sound minde, in a sound body. Q. From whence had Law his originall and commencement?
A. It had his Originall from the corrup∣tion of cunning and corrupt braines, and since by the infection thereof hath spred and infected far and neere, that if it be de∣manded what is the reason that men, hou∣ses, and volumes increase so fast: It is an∣swered in these two verses: Queritur vt crescunt tot magna volumina legis In prompts causa est, Crescit in orbedolus. Q. What effect of all other is the most iust, and the most vniust? A. Enuy, vniust, because for the most part it pursues good men. But secondly iust, because it most hurts those that most cherish it, for the enuious man is grieued, not so much for his owne euill, as for others good: and so saith Dauid, concerning the felicity of the godly, Impius videbit & irascitur, the wicked shall behold it, and be sorrowfull, and as the Poet sayes: Inuidiâ Siculi non inuenêre tyranni, Tormentum maius. No Tyrant ere did greater torment finde, Then enuy, that corrupts & frets the mind. And as Seneca likewise saith, The enuious man drinkes the greatest part of his owne
poyson himselfe, and therefore let vs auoyd that euill, if not for others, yet for our own sakes. Q. In how many dayes consists the whole span of mans life? A. Ah, the many dayes that wee can re∣member, when as yet our whole life is but one day; for what see we in our whole life, that we see not euery day, the same Sunne, the same Moone, the same Winter, the same Summer, the same businesse? and what is that, that hath bin, but the same that shall be? & there is no new thing vnder the Sun: yet for this little inch of time, and the les∣ser variety therein, how many sell them∣selues to perdition? for computate the whole extent of time, I doe not say from this day to the end of the world, but from Adam: and what is it but a drop of water to the whole Ocean? not a minute to eter∣nity. And yet saith one, We liue here as if eternity were vpon earth, and time onely in heauen. Q. What two things are those that make e∣quall the happy and the wretched? A. Sleepe and death, that makes one the oppressor and the oppressed, the seruant, and the master, Codrus and Crassus, and so
like the Publican giues away the one halfe from our vse, out of the little that we haue. Q. What is the Nature of sleepe? A. Aristotle affirmes it to be the porch betweene Life and Death, for he that sleeps, is neither aliue nor dead, neither mortall nor immortall, but hauing a kind of tempe∣rature of either. It is mentioned in the Romane Histories, of a certaine man, that being in much debt and danger, the perturbations of humane mindes, and depriuers of this nurse of Na∣ture sleepe, notwithstanding as one insensi∣ble thereof, he securely tooke his rest: Af∣ter dying, the Emperour would needs haue his bed, as though perswaded some hidden vertue had beene in the same, that nothing could breed his distemper thereupon. Q. There are three messengers of death, and which are they? A. Casualty, infirmity, and old age: The first shewes it lying hid, second appraring, third at hand. An Explication of the word Mors, and the letters thereof. M-ordens O-mnia R-ostro S-uo. M-utans Omnes Res sepultas.
English. Death controules all mortall things, Wasting subiects, changing Kings. Q. There are three things especially, that are enemies to sleepe (deaths Image) and what are they? A. An vnquiet bed, vnrestlesse cares, a troubled mind. And therefore as the Poet saith: When all things else to rest themselues betake, Then theeues, and cares▪ and troubled mindes they wake. And so the contrary. Where vnbrused youth with vnstuft braine Doth couch his golden limbes, there sleepe raigne. Her soueraignty being for the  sooner found in a thatcht Cotta a Lordly Palace. Question. BEfore I proceed any further, I know tho not ignorant, that it hath beene a questio old, and discussed by wise men of either part,  as yet I thinke sub iudice lis est, whether it  necessary for a wise man to marry, and enter th society by which generations are produced, and death is exercised, notwithstanding his wastfull
sickle, with still pletifull Haruests and in∣crease? A. Though some hold it a weakenesse in a wise man to marry, to deliuer vp his freedome, and inthrall himselfe and his li∣berty into the hands of a woman: yet wise men that better haue wayed the con∣dition thereof, finde many profits that ac∣crue vnto man thereby, without which, a wiseman can hardly liue a contented life: as first, the benefit of society. For, It is not good for man to be alone. Secondly, of the Marriage bed: For auoyding of Fornicati∣on, let euery man haue his wife. And third∣ly for the fruit thereof, which are Chil∣: Thy Wife shall bee as the fruitfull d lastly, herby thou hast found out uardian for thy house and goods; er of thy Seruants, a comforter in nd misery, and the full accom∣ of thy ioy and felicity. Away there∣ ye haters of women; for it is verified  by the Oracle of God, that they are dfull, necessary, behouefull. The Author∣y whereof, without further question, here eales vp the controuersie. And as another saith, He that hath no wife; is as a man vn∣built, wanteth one of his ribbes: is like
Ionas in the middest of the Sea, ready to be ouerwhelmed with euery surge and billow; but then comes a wife like a ship, and wafts him ashore, and so saues him from perish∣ing. Of whom the Poet thus further addes, Prima fuit mulier, patuit cui ianua lethi: Per quam vitaredit, prima fuit Mulier. English: As by a Woman entred Death by sinne: So, by a Woman, Life and Grace came in. Q. What was the Wise-mans counsell for the choyce of a Wife? A. Non solùm est oculis ducenda, sed auribus Vxor: Not to choose a wife by the eye, that is, for beauty, a brittle and fading dow∣ry; but by the care, that is, from the good report and commendation of others. Q. What comparison haue the Ancients made betwixt the Woman and the Ribbe, and what reasons haue they thereupon framed, for their much Loquacity and babbling? A▪ These: That first as the Ribbe is a bone, hard, crooked, and inflexible: so is a Woman in her will, like the forme there∣of, crooked and peruerse, and hardly incli∣ning to the desire of her husband: and for
their much loquacity, hereupon they ground their reason: That, as if you put a company of bones or ribbes into a bagge, they will rattle and clatter together, but if you put certaine lumpes of earth therein, the metall of mans creation, they meet without noyse or iarring violence. But we pursue this argument no further, because we haue formerly toucht vpon the same in an∣other kind, and place. Q. Who was hee that had that one woman, that was to him both mother, sister, and wife? A. Euphorbus, of whom the verse follows, Me Pater è nata genuit, mihi iungitur illa: Sic soror & coniux, sic fuit illa Parens. Q. What is the true law of friendship? A. To loue our friend as our selfe, and neither more nor lesse, but so: to which purpose is here inserted a story of a certaine wise woman, that had but one onely sonne, whose society in the way of friendship ma∣ny desired: to him she gaue three Apples, willing him to giue them to his three friends, when they were hungry in the way to be cut & diuided among them. In the do∣ing wherof, the first cuts his Apple in two,
in equall parts, giuing this lesse to the wo∣mans sonne, and reseruing the greater part vnto himselfe. The second likewise vne∣qually diuided his, but yet gaue the bigger to this womans sonne, and kept the lesser for himselfe: but the third diuided his e∣qually, reseruing iust the one halfe that he gaue; which being told to his mother, she bade him choose the last for his associate; because the first was vniust to another, the second to himselfe, and he onely vpright in his diuision. Q. Who was hee that first forbade Priests marriage, and whereupon did he afterwards al∣ter that constitution? A. P. Greg. 1. was the first that procee∣ded in that restraint: But when afterwards hee heard to be found the heads of 6000. in∣fants, that had beene drowned in the riuer Tiber: he then sighing, repelled his decree, and said, It is better to marry then burne. Q. Whence proceeds it, that those creatures that are most vsefull and beneficiall to man, are so fruitfull and plenteous, whereas those other wilde, rauenous, and cruell, are more rare and retired? A. This proceeds meerely from the prouidence of God, and his goodnesse to
mankind; for otherwise how would it be▪ it there should be as many wolues as sheep, which though killed and eaten daily, are notwithstanding plentifull, as diuers o∣thers of his good creatures, whom he mul∣tiplieth aboue measure? As for example likewise; The Hare whom all doe hunt and pursue, yet her kinde is not diminished in regard of her fruitfulnesse, which is such, that when she is with young, shee againe coupleth, hauing within her some of a for∣mer maturity already hairy, others naked without their furre others not yet formed, and yet others conceiuing: whereas the Lyon, a cruel creature, brings forth but one in her whole life time. Q. What little creature is that, that hath the softest body but the hardest teeth of all other? A. The white worme, the body where∣of is more soft then wooll, yet with her teeth doth she pierce the hardest Oake. Q. What Artificers are those that haue most Thieues come vnder their hands? A. Not Taylors nor Myllers, as the old saying is, but Barbers: for euery thiefe and Knaue, to disguise themselues, falls vnder their hands. Q. What was S. Chrysostomes opinion con∣cerning Dancing?
A, That where dancing was, there was the Diuell: neither (saith hee) to that end did God giue vs our feet, so want only to a∣buse them. For, if we shall answer for eue∣ry idle word, shall we not likewise for e∣uery lasciuious and idle motion of the bo∣dy, which tend onely to folly and lust? Hereupon was annexed a story of a cer∣taine dancer, whose ambitious actiuity was such, that forsaking the ground, hee would needs shew his trickes in the Ayre; to the which purpose hauing there fastned a Rope, hee beginning after his accustomed manner, to caper and dance, his footing fai∣led him, and downe he fell, whereat some laughed: when among the rest a Foole not standing farre off, fell a weeping; of whom a reason being required, he thus answered: I weepe, because Jam counted a foole, yet haue more wit then this Dancer, because I know that it is written in the Psalme, that not the Ayre, but the Earth is giuen vnto the sonnes of men: vpon which I content my selfe to tread, not atttempting further, as Icarus, and Dedalus, and some others as wel as this fellow, that hath payed for his pre∣sumption. Q. What two things are those that many desir be¦fore
they haue them, and when once possest, with a greater desire would bee depriued thereof a∣gaine? A. Old age and Marriage, the latter whereof, hath oft beene compared to a Feast, where those that are within and full, would faine come out, and those that are without empty, would faine come in. Q. In what things doth laudable Old age most solace, and make glad it selfe? A. In the remembrance of an honest fore-passed life, and in the hope of a better nre succeeding. Q. Whence was it that of old, Bacchus or the God of Wine, was pictured like a Childe? A. Thence it was, because the drinking of wine puts care and troubles out of the minde, and in stead thereof, fills it with mirth and lightnesse, making men free from sorrow, louiall, lightsome, and plea∣sant as children: And secondly, Like chil∣dren it makes them speake all they know. Q. In what part of the Earth doth no Snow fall? A. In the Sea, which by reason of the hot vapours it sends vp, dissolueth it before it falls therein. Q. In what part of the Earth doht it neuer rayne?
A. In Egypt, which is watered by the o∣uer-flowing of Nylus. Q. A certaine Scholler told Esop, hee had heard there was nothing more strong then Iron, by which all things are wrought and ouercome: but yet for all that (quoth he) I think the Smith to be more strong then it, which workes and in∣forceth it as he pleaseth: But what was Esops answer? A. The mother of the Smith which he held to be more strong then either, which bore the tamer of Iron. Q. Dionysius the Tyrant demanded the rea∣son why Philosophers visited the gates of rich men, and not rich men the gates of Philosophers? A. It was answered by Diogenes, Because Philosophers know what they want, but these know not, and therefore seeke it not; for if rich men vnderstood they wanted knowledge, they would much more visit the doores of Philosophers: for the pouer∣ty of the minde, is much more then the po∣uerty of the body, for hee is a man that wants money, but a beast that wants know∣ledge. Dionysius King of Sicilia sent for an ex∣cellent Musician, to sing and play before him, promising him a reward therefore.
The Musician, after three dais imployment, demanded his reward, which this King re∣fused to pay, telling him, the pleasure of the hope of his reward, was as much to him as the pleasure of his singing, and so hee should take one pleasure for another. Q. Who of all other were the best Orators? A. Tully and Demosthenes. Q. Wht did the Ancients thinke of Homer? A. That he was the Father of all wits: and hereupon it was that Palaton the pain∣ter drew Homer vomiting, with a flocke of Poets standing about him, ready to sup it vp; one of which, it was obiected to Virgil, that he had beene, in that hee had stollen some of Homers verses, and framed them into his owne worke: who thereunto an∣swered, Am not I then a strong man, that can wring Hercules Club out of his hand? Q. Whether is that Common-wealth more happily gouerned, in which the Prince is euill, and the Counsellors good, or where the Counsel∣lors are euill and the Prince good? A. Most true it is, that Lampridius re∣ports, that that Common-wealth is more safe and better gouerned, where the Prince is euill and the Counsellors good, then where the Counsellors are euill, and the
Prince good: and the reason is, for that one euill man or disposition, is more easily amended by the example or perswasion of many good, then many euill by the exam∣ple of one good may become bettered: for instance whereof, Saul was a wicked King; yet by the Counsell of Samuel did he those things, which otherwise he would not haue done: on the other side, there is no Prince so good, that may not be seduced by wicked Counsellors. Q. S. Austen wished he had liued to haue seene Rome in her florishing estate, to haue heard S. Paul preach, to haue seene Christ in the flesh. But what saith Lactantius and Bede? A. Thereupon, Peraduenture (saith hee) the first wee shall neuer see, that is, Rome, neither is it any matter to see that harlot as she now is, but for the other two, I trust both to see & behold in a greater perfectiō. But saith Bede, my soule desires onely to see Christ my Redeemer, in his exaltation and glory. Q. Wherein doth principally consist the wor∣ship of God? A. In one word, God is to be worship∣ped. AMORE.
Amore summo More vero Ore fideli Re omni With all our loue, With the right ma With faithfull mouth, With all affection. Q. How is his Kingdome to be purchased? A. Hearken, and S. Austen will tell thee, where in the person of God he thus saith, Venale habeo: Quid, domine: I haue to bee sold, What, Lord? The Kingdome of Hea∣uen. How is it to be purchased? My King∣dome is to be purchased by pouerty; my ioy, by griefe; my rest, by labour; my glo∣ry, by ignominy; my life, by death, &c. Q. What heires are they that first die, before they enter into their possession? A. The Faithfull. Q. Wherein consists the faith of most ignorant Romanists? A. To beleeue as the Church beleeues: for instance whereof, saith one, A Collier being tempted of the Diuell about his faith, the Diuel thus asked him how he beleeued? (quoth he) I beleeue as the Church beleeues. And how beleeues the Church, quoth the Diuell: As I beleeue, saith the Collier; and further the diuell could not driue him▪ Euen
such is the faith of the Church of Rome, and her ignorant followers, vnderstanding nothing, but following others opinions, in beleeuing as they beleeue. Q. A certaine godly man being inuited to a banquet on the morrow following, what was his answer? A. If you will any thing with me, now I am ready; but I will not promise you to be so to morrow: for of all the dayes that I haue liued, I haue not beene assured of one morrow. Q. Wherein consisteth true wisedome? A. Not in grauity of looke, in face or hayre, but in the wisedome of the minde, which is to remember time past, to imbrace the present, and wisely prouide for the time to come; to which purpose is heere inser∣ted the error of King Fredericke, to whom the Venetians sometimes sent Embassadors two Gentlemen very seeming young, but of ripe wisdome & vnderstanding: the King distasting their too-much seeming youth, would not admit them into his presence: who thereupon answered him, that if the Senate of Venice had imagined wisdome to cōsist in hoarinesse or beard, they would haue sent him two long bearded Goates: to
which purpose the Poet thus supplieth: Si prolixa facit sapientem barba, quid obstat Barbatus possit quin caper esse Plato. English, If wisdome did consist in hayre or beard, A Goat might then, to Plato be preferd. Q. What part of what creature is that which mingles all the foure Elements in one? A. The belly of man, which receiues in∣to it the fruits of the Earth, of Trees, the fishes of the Sea, the fowles of the ayre, and in stead of the Element of fire, strong wines, spices, and the like, that it is no wonder if they ruine the whole, where such diuersities of mixtures are— Frigida cum calidis pugnant humentis siccis, Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus. Where cold, and hot, and moist, and dry, And soft, & hard, things light & heauy lie. Q. What was the Greeke Monkes answere to him that demanded the reason: wherefore he would not eat his meat sitting, but walking? A. Because (quoth hee) I will not make of it as a worke, but as an accessory there∣unto:
but our seasons yeeld more Philoxi∣nes, then such Greekes that will not onely sit with ease to prolong time, but with him could wish there crane neckes might more long retaine their pleasure. Q. Three things are moderately to be vsed, and what are they? A. Baths, wine, and women: the meane or excesse whereof, either much helpe, or hurt the body. Q. How doth the wise man interpret the drunkards cups? A. The first (saith he) is for health, se∣cond for pleasure, third for excesse, the fourth for madnesse, the fift for quarrell, and the sixt for sleepe? Q. What foure good mothers are those, that bring orth foure bad daughters? A. Truth, hatred; security, danger; prosperity, pride; familiarity, contempt. Q. Whence was it that Architas that fa∣mous Architect became so admired for his Art and skill? A. By his woodden Doue that hee so quaintly made for the tryall of his worke∣manship, which as many Authors doe de∣liuer, being filled with ayre and breath, and hung with wings and appurtenances neces∣sary,
flue in the ayre like another liue Doue. Q. Whether are there Antipodes or not? A. The ancient Philosophers and Geo∣graphers haue gathered by strong conie∣ctures and reasons, on the other side of this habitable world, to be another earth be∣yond the Ocean, and couered therewith, in which are men that with their feet walke opposite to ours: Saint Austin and Lactan∣tius deride the conceit heereof, without shewing any reason to the contrary: But Pliny is not of their opinion, who saith, that there are such, euen reason it self perswades, and experience showes. Q. An old Courtier being asked by what meanes e continued so long to liue, and grow olde in Court, being a thing so rarely happening? A. Answered, By taking of iniuries, recei∣uing wrongs, and returning of thankes: And thereupon grew his happinesse, to be one of those few, according to the saying, for Paucos eauit Aula, plres perdidit, & quos beauit, perdidit: The Court hath made few happy, it hath vndone many; and those that it hath most fauoured, it hath vndone; dealing with her fauourites as Dalilah with Samson, or as Time with her Minions, that still promiseth better and
longer dayes, when in a moment she with∣draweth the one, and performeth not the other, but falsifieth in both; as one lately to this purpose hath both experienced, and vttered as followeth. Euen such is time, that takes in trust Our youth, our ioyes, and all we haue, And payes vs but with age and dust, Within the darke and silent graue. When we haue wandred all our wayes, Shut vp the story of our dayes. — But this generall rule is not without exception. Q. What Westerne Iland is that, that hath lost more people and blood, then all the Easterne can repaire to her former station againe? A. The Iland of Hyspaniola, oner-runne by the Spanyard, where the poore Indian Sauages haue beene slaughtered in greatest number, in greatest cruelty, yea euen vpon wagers laid vpon their liues, for sport and merriment; vpon the simplicity of one of which, this ensuing story hath de∣pendance. A certaine Spanyard sent his poore Indian seruant of a message with Birds and other
gratuities to another of his country-men, with a Letter therein mentioning the par∣ticulars sent, which this vassaile something pinched by hunger, not trustily carrying▪ had made bold by the way, now and then to eate one of the Birds, thinking his ma∣ster could neuer come to knowledge there∣of. But after, deliuering the residue and the Letter: He to whom they were sent, fin∣ding his number short, wrote backe he had not receiued his due: whereupon the Master questioning his seruant, with threates and blows, compelled him to reueale it: where∣upon he wondring, gaue notice to his coun∣try men, that they should take heed of those white papers with black notes in them, for they could tell tales. Q. The Roman Indiction is a Phrase much met withall in Almanackes, and there likewise are the Dogdayes noted in Iuly and August; now I would know the signification and meaning of both these, and what they import? A. The Roman Indiction is the space of 15. yeeres, by which account Charters and publike writings are dated at Rome, euery yeere still increasing one till it come to 15, and then returning to one againe. The Dogdayes or Canicular dayes, which
are in Iuly and August, are so called of the Starre Canis, which then riseth with the Sunne, and maketh his progresse in an e∣quall coniunction therewith, and much ad∣deth to the heat of the Sunne, and faintnesse of that season, much infeebling thereby mans body. Of Thought and Opinion, that trauell the world without a pasport. Saith a merry conceited wanton, Euery Bird thinks his owne the fairest, the Crow thinkes his owne Bird the whitest. Not alwayes so, saith another, for many there be that thinke their neighbors wiues fairer then their owne, and of such their speech will somewhat point them out: for no man can so change himselfe, but his heart will be seene vpon his tongues end. Hereafter follow certaine collections or choy∣ces of things most materiall and ciuill, out of Albertus Magnus, Lemnius, and others. Of the Longing of women. ALbertus saith, that the longings of women most commonly haue their
beginnings at the end of three moneths, e∣specially conceiued of a female child, which is the time that the haire beginneth to grow; and the effect thereof proceedeth of the abundance of cold, and raw humours concreted in the wombe. The reason of∣tentimes that they are indangered, disap∣pointed of their longings, growes through the vehement pursuite, and desire of the ob∣iect presented to the minde, which is so ex∣treme, that it alters and stops the course of nature, and office of the members within, whereupon many times death ensueth, but most commonly to the childe. For proofe whereof, A woman there was, that longed for a bit of the buttocke of a man, and ha∣uing obtained it, was not satisfied, but like∣wise desired another, which failing of, she afterwards was deliuered of two children, wherof the one was liuing, preserued there∣by, and the other perished. Of the strength and power of Imagination. IMagination according  Lemnius, &c. of that strength and force, that it makes the things to be, that many times it imaneth are: as for example, It hath infe
a body by meere imagination that it hath taken infection; and strong it is, that it makes a begger a King, and a King a beg∣ger, deceiues poore fathers, blessing their children for their owne, by apparance of similitude. In forming whereof; the ima∣gination of the mother is of no little force, as is witnessed by the story of an Ethiopian Queene: Which by her husband of the same kinde, conceiued and brought forth a childe, of a delicate hiew & complexion, by fixing her eyes and intention vpon a beau∣tifull picture that hung before her. To which effect Sir Tho. Moore likewise in an Epigram and other writings of his, wittily iesteth at one, who exceedingly doted on his childe, because it so truly resembled him, when his wife, and some other, knew (as he addeth) it was begot when hee was not at home: for which similitude he thus giueth like reason: The strong imagination of the mother dwelling vpon her husband, in thought of his wrong, and feare of his re∣turne, had power to create in this act, his similitude of body, by his presence in mind. And this likewise is the reason, saith ano∣ther, that children are sometimes like their vncles, grandfathers, or others (one more
of thought most commonly seated vpon them then strangers.) And therefore we conclude it of more certainety to iudge our children our owne, by their inclinati∣on & disposition drawing neere vnto ours, than by the Physiognomy or feature. Whether monstrous births, or abortiues of reasonable soules, shall be partakers of the Resurrection? IT is answered, that whatsoeuer indued with humane forme, and takes from our first parents, the due order of their naturall procreation and birth, although monstrous in shape, and deformed in habit, indued with the gifts of reasonable soules, shall be partakers of the resurrection: yet those things which present nothing but the shape of man, and commixt with other creatures, exercising their actions otherwise then men, they haue no part of this promise, nor shall haue the honour of renouation at the latter day: such are Fawnes, and Satyres, Centaures and Syrens, and such like: but for the other borne and begot of reasonable soules, they shall be raysed vp, and their de∣formities done away. But for such vntime∣ly
births, whose bodies vncompact and de∣stitute of reasonable soules, deseruing not the name of humane creatures, shall not be raised vp againe. And therefore wee con∣clude, that whatsoeuer is brought forth of humane seed, and not ingendred of the con∣course of vicious and superfluous humours, although neuer so deformed, hauing once receiued the breath and Spirit of life, shall be raised vp at the latter day, and made beautifull and perfect. What it is that prickes the conscience, guil∣ty of any notorious crime? THe Conscience is the true witnesse of Gods diuine power and iustice, seated in the bosome of euery liuing man, by that finger that made all men and creatures, as the faithfull Teste or witnesse, to approue or condemne, to our ioy or grief the whole actions of our liues, either good or euill, performed or intended: the force whereof is so great, that in its owne purity it ac∣quits amiddest a thousand condemnations, but tainted, condemneth it selfe where no man accuseth: It is like the vpright Iudge that will not be corrupted, but ay open the
sowne bosome, euer presenting the most carlet sins, and such as we would labour to put from vs, and wash away in wine and strong drinkes, or forget with merriment, setting them before the face and forehead of him that committeth them, with the deserts and punishments due vnto them, from which continuall apprehension and terror, as our naturalists doe obserue, is strucken a chilling and coldnesse into the blood, and a retyring of it selfe into the more interiour parts: which feare and ap∣prehension of iustice, an instinct of that di∣uine impression, suddenly strikes & startles, thereby causing as it were a sensible com∣punction or pricking in the brest; and by which terror of the minde, and inordinate retirement and shrinking of the blood and spirits, the countenance becommeth pale and meager, the body and all the parts thereof deficient. For as (saith Salomon) the body will beare his infirmity, but a woun∣ded and broken spirit who can sustaine? &c. Of the strange nature of the Cocke. THe Cocke, as Pliny writeth, and as our owne experience witnesseth, is a bird
not great, yet of that height and courage, that it rather dyeth in fight, then yeeldeth to his aduersary: of that piercing voyce, that it daunteth the Lyons courage▪ of that obseruance and intelligence, that he distin∣guisheth houres, and seasons: and whereas all other creatures after the act of venery, are dull and melancholike, only the Cocke, the country horologe, as one tearmeth him, is otherwise; as appeareth, by the after-clap∣ping of his wings, sprightly rowsing of himselfe, and sending forth of his note, yet in his age, it is obserued, as at 5.8.12.14. yeeres, sooner or later in some than in o∣thers; he layeth an egge, which is round and small, in some hole, or hedge, which by sitting vpon, he bringeth forth to some ve∣nemous serpent, or other thing, but most commonly to the Basiliske, a serpent that poysoneth by his breath or sight: As Afri∣ca and some parts of Germany doe witnesse as our Poet writeth to that effect. To lurke farre off, yet lodge destruction by, The Basiliske doth poyson with the eye.
Of the strange nature of the Wolfe. PLiny likewise noteth of the Wolfe, a creature outwardly resembling a dog, yet for her sence in some degree drawing neere vnto man, that, minded to make prey vpon any thing, as by extremity of hunger oftentimes inforced thereunto, Shee first suruayes the likelihood of aduantage to be made against her, which if she finde too a∣ble for her single incounter, shee presently by howling drawes together more of her cumrades; which so assembled, deuoure either man or beast. And it was credibly informed by a Gentleman long resident in Ireland, of one that trauelling in an Eue∣ning betwixt two townes in that countrey, some three miles distant, was three seuerall times set vpon by a Wolfe, from whose iawes by his sword he so oft deliuered him∣selfe; approaching neere the towne where∣to he was bent, hee incountred a friend of his trauelling vnarmed towards the towne from whence he came, vnto whom (aduising him of his perill, and assault, accounting him selfe secure so neere the towne) he lent his sword: now hauing parted and diui∣ded
themselues some little distance, this old Wolfe sets vpon his new guest, who finding him armed with the others wea∣pon, presently leaues him, making after the other with all speed he might; ouertooke him before he came to the towne, assaulted and slue him. Pliny likewise addeth, that the breath of a Wolfe, who-euer it breathe vpon, maketh hoarse. Of the Tyger and the Elephant. THe Tyger, as Gesner and Pliny make mention▪ is of stature not great, yet o foot the swiftest of many swift ones, which i noted of her in the pursuite of her yong, fetcht off when shee trauelleth for prey, which when she returneth and findeth not, she presently coasting the countrey about, in a moment ouertaketh her fellon, that many miles was before her, which he wa∣rily obseruing, as behoueth his safety and cūning, perceiuing, setteth down one of her young ones, which shee taking vp in her mouth, seeketh no more till shee haue brought that home to her furre againe, how farre soeuer in distance, which there deliue∣red, out shee maketh againe, and vnlesse
more speed preuent, or cunning preuaile, she recouereth another, which sometimes by looking-glasses and such like, laid in her way; wherein viewing her selfe, or the like of young, she amazedly stayeth: so hin∣dred and disappointed, loseth the substance for shadowes; which when she perceiues, returning with rage, she furiously assaulteth what re she meets in her way. Of the excellency, vertue, and nature of Stones. THe Turcoyse stone, if the wearer of it be not well, changeth his colour, and looketh pale and dimme, but increaseth to his perfectnesse, as hee recouereth to his health, with which our Poet thus accordeth in his comparison: As a compassionate Turcoyse that doth tell, By looking pale, the wearer is not well, Many other precious Iemmes there are, that lose their vertue and splendor, worne vpon the finger of any polluted person; and therfore lewd and vncleane liuers, such as defile their bodies with women, neuer a∣dorne themselues with these dissenting ie∣wels, which would blush at their shame,
and betray their guiltinesse. A rich inue∣sture, saith one, they are, but of small vse in our dayes, hardly meeting with a finger that spoyles them not. In the end of August, the Moone increa∣sing, there is found in the Swallowes belly a stone of excellent vertue, for the cure of the falling sicknesse, and which dries vp the thin and glutinous humours where∣upon it is chiefly ingendred. There is likewise found in the head of an old Toad a stone very precious against all inflamations and swellings; as bytings of venemous beasts, poysonings, and such like▪ Likewise there is sometimes found in the head of a Carpe, a stone that stancheth all bleeding at the nose. Hereafter follow certaine Epigrams, Riddles, and witty Positions. Epitaph 1. Vpon Matilda, Augusta daughter to Henry the first of England, wife to Henry the fourth Emperor, & mother to Henry the second of England. Magna Ortis, maiorque viro, sed maxima prole,
Hic iacet Henrici, filia, sponsa, parens. English. Great by thy birth, but greater by thy bed, Yet by the issue greater then both th'other, To dignifie all which, it may be sed, Here lies a Henries daughter, wife and mo∣ther. 2. A thing there is hath neither flsh nor bone, Yet of the liuing once depending on: So dry it is, no creature can it cate, Yet may stened by some. Art, it words can speake. It workes not treason first, like traitors many, But i beheaded ere it can doe any; And then it falls to action without rest, Whispers with secrets of a Ladies brest: Conuayes a message, be it farre or neere, Five hundred miles from hand vnto the eare. It faster binds by dashes and by blots, Ten doth a Cable with a hundred knots. Thus and much more it works by slight of hand. Now what this is I faine would vnder stand. Resol. A quill, of which is made a pen. 3. h. b.f. Musca. a lie. h. b.f. Musica, musike. 1. With head I run, with foot & head I fly:
2: With these intire, I musicks sweet notes try. 4. In Tibiam. Non ego continueè morior, si spiritus exit, Nam re dit assiduè, quamuis & sape recedat. Englished. All creatures that subsist and liue by breath, When it departs, is life for euer fled, But mine is contrary, that brings no death, But as it wastes, is new breath'd in & bred. 5. A Harpe. Thus the Harpe sounds out it selfe. A Silent tree I was, and mute did stand, That now doth speake sweet tunes to euery hand. My life was death, my death to me was life, For heere with nature, art begins her strife, That since in life by her I might not liue, Art after death a life to me did giue. 6. Q. What is the ground and vse of Musicke, and wherein doth it consist? A. It consists in these fiue keyes or words, turned into these two Verses.
Ve releuet mi-serum fatum solitosque La-bores▪ Eua sic dulcis Musica noster amor. Englished. Sweet Musicke doth refresh and ease those cares, To which, by Eues offence we al are heires. 7. Si caput est, currit; ventrem coniunge, volabit; Adde pedem, comedes, & sine ventre bibes. ca. ven. pes. Resol. mus. musca, muscetum mustum. A mouse, a Flie, Muscadel. Englished. With head I run, with head and belly flie, With foot thereto am food, and for the dry Without my belly drinke, all this am I. 8. Sir Tho. Moores Epig. vpon a poore Physicion. TV te sers medicū, nos te plus esse fatemur: Vna tibi plus est litera quàm medico. Englished. Thou tearm'st thy selfe Physician, and would'st be, And yet thy Art and Skill both keepe thee poore, That I can hardly yeeld thee that to be,
And yet I will allow thee some∣thing more. Not Medicus a Physician, but Mendicus, a Begger, A word of a letter more. 9. In somnum. Sponte mea veniens, varias ostendo figuras, Engo metus varios, nullo discrimine veri. Sed me nemo videt, nisi sua lamina claudit. Vpon Sleepe. Of selfe accord I come and fill the minde, With thousand toyes and fancies I deuise; But few thereof for truth I noted finde, And none sees thē, or me, but winkin eies. 10. Aliud. Dum nihil ipse vides, facio te multa videre, Lumina ni claudat, me quoque nemo videt. Thou seeing nothing, many things I show, Which but with closed eyes thou canst not know. II. Ter tria dant septem, septem sex, sex quo{que},  sunt, Octo dant quatuor, quatuor faciunt tibi septem, Haec numeres rectò, faciunt tibi milli quinque.
It is vnderstood of the letters in the words, for the 2 first words, ter tria, yeeld seuen letters, the word septem six, the word sex 3. Octo 4. quatuor 7. millia 5. though it sig∣nifie 1000. 12. Vpon a Hammer or Mallet. THe strength of all my body's in my head, With what I fight, am neuer vanquished, My head is great, my body is but small, A Hammer, or a Mallet most me call. 13. Mulae Asinae{que} duos imponit seruulus vtres Impletos vino, signémque vt vidit Aseam Pondere defessam, vestigia figere tarda Mula rogat, &c. Englished. A Mule & Asse did each a vessel beare, Repleat with wine, the Asse slow creeping on The Mule did thus regreet, My parēt deer, Why doest so heauy passe and make such mone? If thou one measure vnto me doe lend, Then twice thy Burthen's, borne vpon my backe: But out of mine, if I to thee one send,
Then both of vs doe beare one equal packe. Now learn'd Arithmetician, I would know Vnder what burthen each of these did goe. Resol. The Mule bore 7. and the Asse 5. 14. In clauem. Virtutes magnas de viribus affero paruis, Pando domos clausàs, iterum concludo, petentes Seruo domum domino, sed rursum seruor ab illo. Vpon a Key. Great vertue I afford in substance small, To shut and open when mine Owner will, Whom faithfull I attend at becke, at call, When many times the Theefe doth curse my skill. 15. Sunt duo quae duo sunt, & sunt duo quae duo non sunt: Quae duo si non sunt, sunt duo nulla duo. Englished. There's two that are not two, yet are not one, Which two another saith, are two, none. The wedded paire.
16. Dictio lassat equum, mel comedit, abstrahe primam, Tolle sed inde duas, remanebit amica luto su. Cursus, versus, sus. The Horse for Race, the Beare for hunny sweet, The durty Sow makes these three names to meet For of Cursus for a Course, take away c. it is Vrsus for a Beare, and the latter part o the word is sus for a Sow. 17. How is this verse construed? Sunt oculus clari qui cernis ydera tanquam. Dico Grāmaticum versum qui construit istum. c. o. q. s. e. t. s. Cernis oculos qui sunt clari tanquam sydera. Thou beholdest eyes, As cleare as the skies. 18. In iuris Consultum. A Lawyer sitting plodding at his book, Expecting Clients in a long vacation, Sometimes Fitzarbert, turning sometimes Brooke; In comes his mā & brings him this relatiō;
That one had late discharged to his cost, A Peece for pleasure, that might breed his paine, For by the Statute there was 5. pound lost. To whom his Master thus repli'd againe, Who was the man so fondly him behau'd? Quoth he, I know; then there is fiue pound sau'd. 19. Vpon disparity of dispositions in two sonnes. TWo Sons there were that issued from one Mother, In disposition far vnlike each other: The one delighted onely in his pride, His care was for neat clothing, naught be∣side, And rather if his coyne did fall but scant, Three dayes hee'd fast, before one button want. The other made his belly all his care, To clothe his carkasse, that had little share: As the other all he got, hung on his backe, So this would eat his shoos rather thē lack; The mother 'twixt them twaine, this dif∣rence puts, Her silken son, and sonne with silken guts.
Vpon a bragging Angler. ONe that to Angle often did resort: For well it seem'd, he lik't the patient sport: Meeting another, would relate and show What store of fish he caught, as braggards doe: When passing by a May-pole, he did say, He caught a Trout as thick as that lait day: This thoght incredible by his gaping friēd, His man must thereto confirmation lend▪ Quoth he, Because I would not speake a wrong, I thinke 'twas scarce so thicke, but 'twas as long. Of money and the quality thereof, that well knowne metall, first made by man, as afterwards man seekes to be made by it. THat which imployes the world, toyles Sea and Land, Is but t'atchieue this creature of mans hād, Which since the world began, what sundry shapes,
It hath transform'd it in, what murders, rapes, It might haue blusht for, but that guiltlesse pale, It is being so pursude being each mans tale: It cannot colour, can in no place lye, Made after with such ceaslesse hue and cry, It sets the world a sweating by the eares, Entring the rich with cares, the poore with feares, To either sometimes both a foe and friend, Sometimes prolongs a life, hastens an end, So slie a shifter, that it finds an houre, To break each prison, to escape the Tower▪ Though all the warders round about it stād, Yet out it gets and flies about the Land, As by experiēce many a one to his sorrow, Hath bin today his keeper, not to morrow. Worse for to fit a garment, & more strange, Then for the Moone, which euery month doth change. Because no Worke-man hath the skil or power, To fit the thing that's changed euery houre, Within that leathern Channell that it goes, It like the Sea continuall ebbes and flowes, And is of such strong power, such secret might,
It makes the Lady, as it bought the Knigh▪ It sends the Merchant ouer shelues & sands, To forraine Regions and far distant lands; Who in his watry pilgrimage is sed, To be with neither liuing nor yet dead: To deale with doubtfull foes, for firmest friends, Leauing his wife at home to doubtful ends. This draws the Lawyer, dwel he ne'r so far, With gainful tearms, to wrangle at the bar, Whose breath like to a whirlwind this to boot, Towseth a State, and turns it vp by th'root For this the Doctor dealeth out his skill, Which sometimes aues, and oftentimes doth kill. For this the Broker to the diuell drawne, Writes bought, and halfe worth seaseth on your pawne. Who coozning Statutes strangely to be wondred, Makes forty of his fourscore or his hūdred▪ The gain of this each Tradesmās liuing ca Opes euery shop, and vttoreth euery ware. This makes the vsurer, & no wonder then, That would be boundles, be confin'd to te Defraud his brother, ventersoule and nam Though Scripture say,
thou shalt not doe the same. This from that fatall Newgate, old gate Iayle, Hath sēt forth many, a short life to bewail: Her helpelesse fortune, and her fatall hap, On Doctor Stories first three cornerd cap; Many a rich chastity strongly pursu'd By iust, effectlesse, yet by this subdu'd Hath here been captiu'd to this ruine won, That else in former times had beene a Nun. More Orator then Tully to preuaile, By force of Tongue, then Samson, to assaile By might of strength. For this men sweare and sinne, Seeke both by good & bad to gaine & win. And in a word, this is that good and euill, Brings some to God, but more vnto the Diuell. A Supplication to Lady Pecunia. GReat Lady, how vnlike some sollid maid, That long in vaine hath for a sutor staid, Art thou, which not for worth, but beauty too, Makes all in loue, and all the world to woo! Grant me, tho neither fauorite nor friend,
Nor none that thy great troopes nor traines attend; Not of so meane a fauour to bee bard, That craue, though not redresse, yet be heard: That since thou oft hast progrest by my doore, That makes all rich, & yet I still am poore That thou wouldst one day call, and lodge, and rest With one had ne'r more need of such a guest. Which if thou daigne, this fauor thou shalt finde, Ile not vplocke thee with a Mysers minde But vse thee as a Lady of Respect, Which dost from care and misery protec All that imbrace thee with a plentious hand Most cōstant, that most aydfully dost stand Where friends forsake vs, and where kindred fall, A Bulwark to vs, thou that all in all Commandest; art sought vnto, to thee I cry To fal some drops into a ground that's dry Vnlike to Vsury that euer yet Appli'd her needlesse moisture wet to we O Monarchs hands, that let not bounty fa Where want cries some, but where exces gets all.
Her reply. OF all the Ladies ere were woo'd or wed, Or euer forst vnto a loathed bed, Am I most wretched, that the least may chuse Where I affect, or where I loath, refuse, But like some misers Daughte made a Bride, To Riches onely, and naught else beside: Am I thrust off to euery worthlesse clown, When men of vertue, goodnesse & renown, Are bar'd my presence, whilst I am inforst, Rauisht, offended, striue to be deuorst, Abus'd with Vsurers, and forst to bred, Quite against Nature, without wombe or seed; Yea, held in darknes vnder barres & bolts, Where none but earth-wormes court me, fooles, and dolts, Depriu'd of light, of liberty, and view, And whatsoeuer else a Ladies due. Could I deceiue those Argoses me keepe, With many thousand eyes that neuer sleep: I would take my progresse to each prison doore, Shake off their Shackles, & let out the poor
That long haue look't with pouerty & pain Expecting my returne, but all in vaine. I would build Churches, be in godly motiō, But that such Nabals hinder my deuotion. From a captiuing hand I broke of late, And out I got, and straight rais'd vp a gate. Frō thence I took my progresse into Pauls, And glas'd some windowes that did want no holes; And if it were not for such stayes and lets, I'de giue security for all mens debts. For without me, where-euer I am staid, is no bond canceld, nor no reckoning paid. For me are al brains labor'd, hands imploid, And without me the world is not inioyd. And therefore at my latest cloze of breath, Great King of Mortall things (I clipped death) To thee I humbly my petition make, That thou thy haruest of such Iaylors take; That till their death will grapple what they haue, And naught shall part them but thy sithe and graue: That thou wouldst mow them downe, euen vnto dust, From others wants, that bar me till I rust.
Deaths supplication to Time. WIthin a Dungeon all in darkenesse grounded, Sate a grim Ghost, of sinews al cōpounded: Where more to increase his melancholy moanes, He grapples to himselfe, the sculs & bones Of men departed, & with these he playes, As sorrowes were his ioyes and shortning dayes. Which though his workmen, sicknesse, ach, and paine, Were all in labor, yet he thought his gaine Was small or nothing, without plague, or warre; Which Time still fauouring, did prolong too farre. Gainst whom, was deadly enmity and hate, For safe protecting all things to their date: Before which expiration Death may stand▪ In expectation, but with empty hand: And therefore to this Lady did reply, The fault was times, thogh hers the iniury▪ For if that I were master of my will, With blood I'ld surfet, and the whole world kill.
There should not such a miser liue so long, To iniure many, by one Ladies wrong. And therefore vnto Time I humbly pray, To stir his wings more swift and fly away, That I with griefe and stay, no longer pine, But so many haue my wish, and thou haue mine. Times reply. OF all the Ages that are past and fled By me out-worne, decay'd, deceast, and dead: Was neuer any spoke with so small heed, To say that Time was slow & had no speed. Although I might fly faster farre away, With Snayle I euer creepe, when swift things stay. And that our Parallells a sudden hast, Which swiftly doth begin, but slowly last. Indeed tis true, all liuing things depend On my supplied minutes, which shall end, And euery sublunary thing below, But when that time shall be, Time doth not know. Yet now I must confesse, that I grow old, Hauing fiue thousand yeeres six hundred told.
In which long Summer I am so well read, That I doe teach all Arts that skil are bred. I know all History how ere it runne, And the truth thereof, being witnesse when 'twas done. The death of Kings, of Princes, change of State, What is't I know not, to discourse, relate? With many secrets I doe counsell keepe, Done at darke midnight, in contempt of sleepe. Which some Petitioners to me would know: To all which sifting thoughts, I answer, no I must not tell, the Linnins then are tost, Those dainties touched, and those nice things lost. This minutes guiltines of losse of strength, Decay of stomacke, and eclipse of length. Of which, another time I more may say, But now must answer death, which craues with stay, Licence to hurry forth, to mow and kill, Which yet I cannot giue, but shortly will. For I am but a seruant, and this sore Must be indur'd with griefe, or patience bore. For till this worlds cōsumption there must bee
Rich Diues, and poore Lazar, wants to see. And yet I cannot hasten to amend, What heere thou dost complain vntill the end. And then this Lady that thou wouldst set free, Shall want her Courtiers and a vaine thing be.
Table-Talke, AS MVSICKE TO A BANQVET of WINE: Serued in, in witty propositions, Seasoning and Questions: To∣gether with their Resoluti∣ons and Answers: To exhilarate and recreate the bodies and mindes both of our selues and our friends at our Tables and Meetings. Singula cum valeant, sunt meliora simul. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Brudenell, for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his shop in the Temple neere the Church. 1630.
PREFACE. AT Bed and Boord, where pleasures are exact, At both we complement as well a act: And at them both should euery one desire Something to bring, to crowne delight the higher. Who brings himselfe as an inuited guest, Onely to fill a roome and taste the best, And nothing more retaines, nor can im∣part, Doth recompence but ill by his desrt The fauour hee hath found, to taste g fare, And come in company where betters are,
That can discourse, that know what doth befit, Whose euery word, out-values euery bit, So wisely strow'd befitting time and place, Such shine like lampes, whilst the vnlette∣red base Smother t'th socket, whilst these lights ex∣cell, To th' eare as welcome, as theirs harsh to th' smell. Therefore to further such as would partake Of the best things, but cannot, for their sake Is here a Dictionar, where phrases walke And subiects of Discourse and Table-Talke, Are various intermixt, some graue, some light, Like to our courses methode, noone and night: Her's Questions, Answers, Riddles, Tales and Iests, To crowne with laughter both our friends and feasts.
Here is a Garden, wherewith weedes are flowers, To sticke in Princes Halls, and Ladies Bowers, To giue their pretty persons some delight, In tedious day-times, that are made for night, The which to all I wish of either gender, In lieu whereof the sequell here I tender, Wishing it musicke to th' inchanted eare, Vnto the taste a feast of Christmas cheare. And this is all the trumpet shall be blowne To th' troope so small, that will so soone be showne.
The Introduction. HE that knowes not what he ought to know, is a beast among men. He that knoweth no more then hee hath need of, is a man among beasts. But he that knowes all that may be knowne, is a God amongst men. He that knoweth only but to know. hath a silent, but a fruitles knowledge. Hee that knoweth onely to make o∣thers know that he knoweth, hath an ambitious▪ but a vain glorious know∣ledge. Hee that knoweth onely to instruct others, and make vse himselfe, hath the true and blessed knowledge.
Table-Talke. Question. IN what part of the yeere (accor∣ding to the coniectures of the learned) was the world created? Answer. Concerning the resolution of this question, much controuersie hath arisen, as well betwixt seuerall Nations, as men: As among the Hebrewes, the Chal∣deans, the Arabians, the Egyptians, the Greekes and Latines: some conceiuing it to be created in the Summer, others in the Spring, others in Autumne; to which (as say some) Moses seemes to assent, where it is said in Genesis, Let the earth bring forth the greene herbe, and trees bring forth fruit ac∣cording to their kinde. The Egyptians thinke it was created in Summer; most in the Spring. Likewise they vary about the Pla∣nets, and what houses they were created
in: some thinke when the Sunne was in Leo, the Moone in Cancer, and so of the rest. Which may be somewhat more confirmed by this necessary rule following, for the fal∣ling of Easter day, which is, As vpon the 10 day of the first moneth from the cre∣ation, which is March, at the coniunction of the Sunne and the Moone, next the Equi∣noctiall; the Paschall Lambe was chosen out of the flocke, and kept till the 14. day, or full Moone: so the tenth day of the first moneth, being Palm sunday, our Saui∣our entred into Ierusalem, and the 14 day suffered his passion; so as the next Sunday after the 14. day of the Moone or full Moon in the moneth of March is alwayes Easter day, and probable to confirme the former supposition. Q. But of this what shall I determine? A. That by the wisedome, mercy, and goodnesse of God it was created, in the ful∣nesse of time, in what part his wisedome thought most meet: the admirable compo∣sition and frame whereof, that wee daily contemplate and behold with the eyes of our vnderstanding, with the diuersity and distinction of all the creatures therein; they and all these for the seuerall vses and ser∣uice
of man, and man onely for the seruice of God. Q. Wherefore then, since the world was on∣ly made for man, (for man onely knowes the vs thereof) are the dayes of his pilgrimage von earth, contracted from the length of many cu∣bits to a span-long, in comparison of the trebled date and extension of bruit beasts, senslesse and irrationall creatures; as the Hart, the Daw, the Oake, Rauens, Rockes, and such like, most of which haue trebled dates beyond the short pe∣riod of mans life? For concerning the Hart, one of the most doubtfull, of whons notwithstanding Histries make mention: How Alexander desi∣rous to aepproue to posterity the long life of this creature, to that end caused to be put certaine golden collers about diuers of their neckes, with the time of their dates, some of which were found 100. yeeres after his death in full vigour and liuelihood, not perceiued to decline, or grown into age, but continuing and lasting: when the life of man doth vanish like a shadow, like a flower; when neither Absolons beauty, Samsons strength, Salomons wisedome, Asaels swiftnesse, Croesus wealth, Alexanders liberality, He∣ctors strength, Homers eloquence, Augustus fortune, Traianes iustice, Ciceroes zeale, one, nor all of these can protect it, but that hee falls
from the graue of the wombe, to the wombe of the graue, cut downe like a flower, as these ver∣ses seeme to import: Est hominum status per florem significatus: Vt flos cito perit, sic homo puluis erit. Mans life is fitly semblanc'd by the flowers, Which flourish now, and fade ere many hores▪ Therefore this inequality considered, may it not be thought iniustice and wrong to man in this disposure? and if not, by what consequent or reason may he settle his appeasement? For as the Poet: If death destroy vs quite; we haue great wrong, Since for our seruice al things else were wrought, That Dawes, and Trees, and Rockes, should last so long, When we must at an instant turne to naught. A. By this, Because the wise Creator fore-saw that these in their dislolution, though neuer so long protracted, should al∣together perish, but man at his end should but renew a better, nay an immortall life: and therefore what he is abridged of here, he hath amends for hereafter. Q. Wherein consists the naturall life of man,
that it so soone doth cease, and so quickly wheele off from the thing of so vnstable continuance? A. In heat and moisture, which daily wasting themselues to keep life afoot, are a∣gaine daily replenished in vs by our meat and drinke; for by our meat is our naturall heat maintained, and by our drinke the ra∣dicall moisture daily replenished. Q. Why should the Epicure then say, Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow wee shall dye, when by eating and drinking, our life is strengthened and renewed? and why may not the life of man by this moderate and seasonable supplie, be preserued continually, at least-wise the life of our fore-fathers? A. Because as the Sea hath bounds which it cannot passe, so is there to euery life a pe∣riod set, Hitherto shalt thou come, and no fur∣ther: which though it may be shortened, as it is in the Psalme, The bloud-thirsty and deceitfull man shall not liue forth halfe his daies, yet can it in no wise be prolonged further, at leastwise prorogued euer: for set all other aduersaries aside, Time it selfe shall at last bring in age, whose antipathy shalbe such, that it shal quench thy heat, and dry vp thy moisture; for be thou neuer so well fenced▪ comes death at last, and with a little pinne
bores thorow thy Castle wall, and farewell man: But of this formerly more at large. Q. What were the opinions of the Egyptian Sages and Philosophers concerning the longitude or breuity of mans life? and whereupon did they ground their reasons? A. They were conceited that men did liue according to the increasing or dimini∣shing of the heart, some thinking the heart to grow and increase till 50. yeers, and that it did▪ augment euery yeere 2. drachmes weight; & grown to the full bignes, did a∣gain diminish euery yeere as much, vntil it came to nothing, whereupon ensued death. Q. What are the opinions of some more mo∣derne Physicians for the naturall length or short∣nesse thereof, vpon the dependencie of Complex∣ion either good or euill? A. Some thinke that the more better complexion, as those of the Sanguine, bee long in growing old, because they haue much heat and humidity. That the melancholy waxeth soone old, because they be cold and dry; and as touch∣ing the feminine sex, they become sooner old then the masculine. Hipocrates repor∣teth that female children, in their mothers wombes are formed in seuen moneths, and
then after grow slowlier then men; but borne, grow faster, and become sooner wise, and sooner old, for the feeblenesse of their body and manner of life, being for the most part idle, is an inducement to old age. Q. Whether are the tall or low of stature, ac∣cording to the coniectures of some learned, of longest health or life? A. Some thinke the shortest statures, because their vitall spirits are more strong and nimble, imparting their liuelihood with more vigor in their shorter circuit, then in the more spacious compasse: others again that they are more durable, because the Cedar many times is sooner blasted with a tēpest then the shrubs; others are of a con∣trary opinion, that the taller limbes haue the more temperate humours and comple∣ctions, that fumes not so much do offend the braine, because the stomacke and it are more separate: but howsoeuer we conclude these arguments of small validity, because Death lookes not so high, that hee passeth by the low, nor so low, that hee passeth by the high, but leuels equally at both alike, as that more high Prouidence guides the hand from which there is no euasion.
Q. Whether were the yeeres of thncient Patriarches, when they liued eight or nine hun∣dred yeeres, of the length of our yeeres with vs; or so short as some haue imagined, that tenne of theirs made but one of ours, or an hundred of theirs but ten of ours? A. Of equall length and parity with ours, finished by the course of the Sunne: and for further proofe hereof, the Scriptures affirme, that in the 600. yeere of Noahs life, in the second moneth, ad 27. day of the moneth, the flood came: now if the yeere were but 36. dayes, so little a yeere must either haue no moneths, or it must haue but three dayes in a month, to make twelue moneths in a yeere after that computation. And as in this, so likewise it may be infer∣red in diuers other places, to proue that their yeers had their equall longitudes and continuance with ours. Q. What accidents or other remarkeable con∣sequence of time and place, haue followed the day and houre of the weeke, since the creation of A∣dam, as I haue seen it recorded in an ancient ma∣nuscript, but of what probability I auere not? A. That as vpon the 25. day of the moneth of March, the first month from the creation, the 6. day of the week, & 6. houre
of the day, Adam was created, brake the Commandements, the seed of the woman was promised, & he for disobedience bani∣shed out of Paradise: So the same day of the moneth, the same houre of the day, Cain slue his brother Abel, the promise was renew∣ed vnto Abrahā, Isaac was to be offred vp in sacrifice, the message by the Angell to the virgin Mary, our Sauior Christ was concei∣ued, deliuered, suffered his passion on Mount Caluary, the same place where Adam was buried, that the second Adam might there by his obedience, make good to man, what the first Adam lost by disobedience and sin, & that the Crosse whereupon he died, was a part of the same tree from which Adam plucked the forbidden fruit. But of the cer∣tainty hereof, I can auouch no warrant. Q. We reade in the Scripture, after Cai had slaine his brother Abel, that hee was our to be a vagabond and runnagate vpon the face of the earth, and that he had a marke set vpon him, that no man might slay him? yet after it is said that he built a City, and dwelt at the East side of Eden: now I would know what was the end of Cain: How if he were a housholder & a Citizen, he was a runnagate? And if hee built a City, who were his workmen? what Masons and Car∣penters
had; for it is thought by some, there were not as that time aboue fiue or six persons in the whole world, neither are there more nominated in the Scripture? A. In that primitiue age of the world men liued long, for Adam his father liued 930. yeeres; and some are of opinion, that he liued the longer, by reason that he knew the vertue, nature, and operation of euery beast, and herbe, & plant, as well as to name them, and could apply them, wherein they were most seruiceable to his vse. Now it is not improbable that Cain in his longin∣quity of life might wander foure or fiue hundred yeeres, and in his latter age build a City, which might bee caused out of his feare, for before that guiltinesse of consci∣ence that he had, no man intrencht himselfe within walles or bulwarkes, neither feared the violence of man or beast. And for his worke-men, they might be many; for in the latter end of his age, it may not bee thought but his children, and his childrens children might be many generations, and enow to build and inhabit a City, though Moses onely names but some principall parties. And for his death, wee leaue it as doubtfull, though the Hebrewes doe re∣port,
that Lamech being led a hunting (be∣ing blinde) by his sonne Tubalcaine, shoo∣ting at wilde beasts, kild Cain in the thic∣ket vnawares; and after hearing thereof by his sonne, strooke him ouer the head with his bow, that he died likewise: groun∣ding their opinion vpon the words of La∣mech, Gen. 4. where hee saith to his two wiues, I haue slaine a man to my woun∣ding, and a young man to my hurt: both which we leaue as vncertainties. Q. By what signes doe we iudge men to be the more long or shorter lyued? A. The life of man is compared vnto an Apple, which being ripe drops downe of it selfe, and sometimes in the immaturity is cast downe by windes and tempests. The signes of a short life are ancientl noted to be these three: 1. Thinnenesse of Teeth. 2. Longnesse of Fingers. 3. Leaden or heauinesse of Colour▪ The contrary, or of a long life. 1. Straight Shoulders. 2. Wide Nostrils, and the opposite ad∣uerse signes, that is, 1. Many Teeth. 2. Short Fingers, and 3. A good Color.
Hereafter followeth a Triplicity of some∣more diuine, witty, short and compendious Precepts and Conclusions to seuerall natures and purposes. Q. THere are three inuisible vertues of God, and which are they? A. Power, Goodnesse, Wisedome, which are thus explicated: Of Power, all things proceed. Of Wisedome, all things consist. Of Goodnesse all things are gouerned. Q. What was the wise mans Memento to preuent sinne? A. Recordare nouissima, & non peccabis in ternum. First, to remēber these foure last things, before wee accomplish any euill, and then we shall seldome doe amisse: which are Death, Iudgement, the paines of Hell, and the ioyes of Heauen. And they are so called for these foure reasons: 1. Because Death is the end of life, and the last thing which is to happen to vs in this world. 2. Because this Iudgement is the last of
all iudgements that are to bee giuen, and therefore there is no appealing from it. 3. Because Hell is the last euill that Ma∣lefactors are to haue, and they are to remaine therein for euer. 4. Because Heauen is the last good which the good are to haue, and they are ne∣uer to lose it. Q. What foure things are those that most plainely proue the bookes of the Apocrypha not to be Canonicall? A. 1. Because they are not written by any Prophet, neither containe they any Prophesies in them. 2. Because they were written in Greek, and all the rest in Hebrew. 3. Because Malachy the last of the Pro∣phets, saith, that after him they should not looke for any other Prophet, till the com∣ming of Eliah, that was, S. Iohn Baptist. 4. Because the Author of the Machabeas in one place craueth pardon for his work and saith, If it be not so wel as it shuld be, yet it was as well as he could, which is no fitting phrase for a Penman of the holy Scripture. Q. There are three sayings found in Saint Pauls Epistles, which are taken from the Hea∣then, and which are they?
A. The first out of Menander, Euill words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.32. The second out of Aeratus, Couetousnesse is the root all euils, 1 Tim. 10. The third out of Epimenides, Cretans are al∣wayes lyers, euill beasts, flow bellies, Tit. 1.12. Q. What are the three parts of Repentance? A. Contrition in Heart, Confession in Mouth, Satisfaction in Workes. Q. What foure things are those that ouer∣come one another? A. 1 Death ouercomes Man. 2 Fame ouercomes Death. 3 Time ouercomes Fame. 4 Eternity ouercomes Time. Q. There is held to be a scarcity of two sorts of men in our age, and who ore they? A. 1 Of Noblemen, because Citizens doe daily aspire to honour and buy No∣bility. 2 Of Iewes, because Christians make an occupation of vsury. Q. Wee cannot know the Authors of three mischiefes which happen oftentimes, and what are they? A. 1. Hee that is drunke, cannot iust∣ly say, This cup of wine, or that, made me drunke.
2. He that walketh among thorns, knows not which woundeth him. 3. A common whore being with childe, knowes not who is the father of it. The Husbandmans lesson to his sonne. Be holy in Lent. Be painefull in Haruest. Be merry at Christmas. A further counsell or lesson. Touch nothing in a Smiths forge. Taste nothing in an Apothecaries shop. Be not curious in reading other mens let. Bragge not of three things, if thou wouldest  ioy plenty, and preserue a good name. That thou hast good wine in thy house. A faire wife for thy bed. Plenty of money in thy chest. Q. Whether is a good name sooner lost, or found? A. As soone lost as sound, and therefore
be diligent to atchieue it before thou hast it, in embracing wise counsell; and can∣full to keepe it when thou hast it: For Actum est de homine, Quum actum est de nomine. There be three manner of Sages. The Sage herbe, The Sage wise, and The Sage foole. Of which one writes, Whost for wise himselfe doth accept, May match any Sage, the Sage wise except. He that comes to a Lawyer, must bring with him three pockets, which must bee thus imployed: In the first must be his Declarations and his Euidences. In the second his siluer and his gold. In the third his patience for expence and delay. Likewise three things are said to be ne∣cessary for him that is a Student in the law. 1 An Iron head. 2 A purse full of gold. 3 A leaden taile.
Q. What and how many are the properties of a good seruant? A. To haue the backe of an Asse, The tongue of a sheepe, The snowt of a swine: To beare all patiently, To keepe all silently, To digest all things heartily. Likewise: To be long of eare, Light of foot, Trusty of hand: To heare quickly, To run swiftly, To execute honestly. And not to haue, Mel in ore, verba lactis, Fel in corde, fraus in factis. Q. Three things should be alwayes at  and what are they? A. The Hen-roost, the Cat, and the good Wife. Three occasions many times moue de∣ate, and these are they: To talke with him that is angry. To send him of an arrand that is weary. To wake a man out of his sleepe. Q. How stand the English, the French, the
Italian and the Spaniard affected to their wmen for stature or complexion? A. The English is indifferent for stature, so she be amiable and beautifull. The French affects the pale & the slēder. The Spaniard, the round and the tender. The Italian, the ruddy, and the tall, as their owne Prouerbe seemes to confirm it▪ Grande & alia me fare Dîo Bella & bianco me fare î. Englished: If God will make me tall and hye, What wants in beauty, Ile supply. And therfore it is said, As he affects dear∣ly, so he suspecteth deepely: yet cannot his most narrow suspition so turne the key to his owne safety, thereby solely to ingrose and secure the portion of his owne right, without a most hatefull riuall; to which purpose vpon the generall inconstancy of women, after triall of so many beauties a∣broad▪ in so many seuerall Countries, by two such worthy personages so vnworthi∣ly wronged by their owne wiues, and none found constant or of better condition, then their owne at home, but many worse; re∣turned homewards, refuging their sorrows with the generality of others fortune▪ a
in my Hostes tale in the story of Orlando, is more largely dilated to the comfort of his▪ country men, where this was acted. To which purpose and effect, one ill o∣pinioned generally of women, thus further adioyneth. Go and catch a falling Starre, Get with child a mandrakes root: Tell me where all past yeeres are, And who cleft the diuels foot. If thou be'st borne to strange sights, Things inuisible to see: Ride ten thousand dayes and nights, Till age snow while hayres on thee. Then a hen thou returned wilt tell me, All strange wonders that befell thee. And sweare, no where▪ Liues a woman true and faire. Or as another woman-hater thus w∣teth causelesly, if he meant all. Go and diue the Ocean vnder, Where vnfathom'd deepnesse be: Then go scale the clouds of thunder, Where the fiery Regions be. Through the ildernesse goe creepe,
Thorow the brakes where ne'r shone day, Where the venome wonders keepe, And the Dragons haue their way, And thou as soone shalt know the skill, All these wonders to impart, As to know the winding will Of a womans Protean heart. Vpon the euill and inconstancy of which wicked women, one began thus to make an Alphabet. Auidissimum animal, Bestiale barathrum, Concupiscentiam carnis, Duellum damnosum, &c. Englished. Auaritious, Beastly, Concupiscentious of the flesh, Dangerous duellists, &c. Which afterwards, another as their friend, thus inuerted it vpon the good, Al∣phabeticall wise. Amabiles, Beneficae, Castae, Deuotae, Elegan∣tae, Fideles, Gratae, Humiles, Iucundae, Lenes, Misericordes, Negotiosae, Obedientes, Prudentes, Qustuosae, Reuerentes, Sapientes, Tacitae, Verae, Xenophilae, & Zenobiae. Englished. Amiable, Bountifull, Chaste, Deuout, E∣egant, Faithfull, Gratefull, Humble, In∣genuous,
Lightsome, Mercifull, Needfull, Obedient, Prudent, Quiet, Reuerent, Si∣lent, Trusty, Vertuous, Expert, &c. Q. For the precedence betwixt England, France and Spaine, which kingdome may the most iustly challenge the priority? A. Some writers affirme that the King of France may iustly claime the first place, and that for these reasons, as they alledge. 1. For that it pleased God to send from Heauen, vnto Clodoneu, the first Christian King of that Nation, three Lillies as a di∣uine fauour to be from thencesorth borne in the armes of that Kingdome, before which time, the Kings armes was three Toads, as some write. Secondly, for that, as they affirm, France is the most ancient Kingdome in Europe, and that Swardus was King of that  in the time of Alexander. Thirdly, because the King of France is anointed, which seemes a note of anti∣quity. Fourthly, for his Title, the most Chri∣stian. Others hold that it belongeth to Spaine, and that for these reasons.
1 Because hee is intituled the most Ca∣tholicke. 2 Because hee is King of many King∣domes, and so of much honour. But we conclude, the chiefe place and pre∣cedence belongeth to the Kingdome of England. First, in respect of antiquity, for Brute was King of England, when Alexander, the first King of the Grecians called, him∣selfe King of the whole world. Secondly, the King of England is anoin∣ted, and so is no other king but the French King, the King of Cicill, and Ierusalem. Thirdly, the King of England is a Prince most absolute in all respects. But the rea∣son is, for that England receiued the Chri∣stian faith before either France or Spaine, notwithstāding the title of most Christian. There are 6. happy men among many o∣thers, and these are they. 1 Foelix qui Deum timet, qui mundum odit, qui nemini fert iniuriam. 2 Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. 3 Foelix qui didicit contentus viuere paruo. 4 Foelix qui nihil debet. 5 Foelix qui possidendo nihil, omnia possidet.
6 Foelix qui omnia quae vult habet, &  mali vult. Englished. 1 Happy is hee which feares God, hates the world, doth no man iniury. 2 Which hath learned to be content with a little. 3 That owes nothing but loue. 4 Which knowes the causes of things. 5 Which possessing nothing, yet inioyes all things in not desiring. 9 That hath all that he desires, and desires nothing that is hurtfull. Q. What three things are those to be auoided▪ A. 1 Medicus inctoctus. 2 Cibus non coctus. 3 Praua mulier. An vnlearned Physician, Meat ill dressed, A wicked woman. Q. Three things to bee bewayled, and the  are they. Tempus amissum, Peccatum commissum, Bonum omissum. Time lost, Sinne committed, Good omitted.
Q. Who are the famous fooles? A. A faithfull louer of an vnfaithfull friend. An honest gamester. A mercifull souldier. Q. Three things are to be taken heed of an these are they; A dogges tooth, A horse heele, and A womans tongue. Q. There are three things, for which a wise∣man should not giue counsell, and which are they? A. For another man to take a wife, To make a voyage by sea, To follow the warres. Q. Three things concurre to make a man quickly rich, and what are they? A. The fall of wiues, and the standing of sheepe and Bees. Q. What foure things kill a man before his time? A. A faire wife, A troubled houshold, Immoderate meat and drinke, and A corrupt ayre. Q. There be three shooing-hornes to pluck on
a Cuckolds cap, and what are they? A. A faire wife. A iealous husband. A wanton louer. Foure workes of a Tyrant. 1 To destroy the good. 2 To hate the poore. 3 To extoll the euill. 4 To root out the vertuous. Q. What one thing is that, that is boh the hardest and easiest thing of all other? A. Tis the hardest for a man to know himselfe, and the easiest to deceiue him∣selfe. Foure vnlikelihoods, which yet sometimes come otherwise to passe. He that is not Faire by 20. Strong by 30. Wise by 40. Rich by 50. Tis vnlikely he will euer be any of them. Q. When is the best time to vndertake a iourney? A. To answer as one merrily answere. It is then, when a man hath a good horse
money in his purse, and good companions. Q. Two things thou maist shew, but not lend, and what are they? A. Thy sword, and thy wife which is thy scabberd. Q. What in times past was the controu between the Coffin-maker and the Chest-ma for superiority? A. The Chest-maker vaunted, that the commodity that he made, was of grea∣test worth, for that it lockt vp money that commanded all things. But (quoth the Coffin-maker) The chest that I make, lockes vp him that commands money, euen the money-master himselfe; and as the worthiest thing, hee takes that with him when he leaues all other behind. Q. What creatures are those that sleep with their eyes open? A. The Lyon, and the Hare, that bold, and fearefull creature. Q. What binds faster then Obedience, Wed∣locke, suspicion, or necessity? A. Fate and Death. Q. It is an approued Maxime, that in na∣ture is no vacuity, nothing produced in vaine: and hath this generall rule euer passed without exception?
A. Not so, for the wisest and most pre∣cious good, but hath found some Momus to carpe at it, and like the Wolfe, turne their throat against the Moone, to quarrell the highest and best things, as to this purpose is here annexed a story of some triall. Certaine ordinary Gentlemen meeting at an Ordinary, amongst many propositions and discourses one to another, according to the too much liberty of such places, one at last began to fall into this admiration, that since God and Nature, the common parent of all creatures, produced nothing in vaine, why man, a creature of their principall workmanship▪ in himselfe was altoget vanity? For confirmation whereof, sai he of some, I knew a Countrey Church wel∣furnished with a Clocke, whose  was stricken with an image like a man, vp∣on the wheele stood a ca which when the image strucke, made such haste away, as  parishioners, when they should haue  for their sinnes, fell a laughing at the  nimblenesse: And to furnish the Ch with better merriment, their Parson  conceited as their Clocke, amongst  of his digressions, falling to spke  prouidence of God, and such like,
sometimes in the first it might seeme weak to humane capacity, when notwithstanding it was wise in the ends propounded: As for example, (said hee) Walking one eue∣ning in my garden vnder mine Apple tree, I looked vp, and saw the little Apples ad∣uanced on the top of the high tree, eminent to the sight, whilst at my foot grew grub∣ling the huge Million, and the Pumpion (as me thought) vnseemely, because obscurely on the ground: Whereupon I began to thinke, it had beene more seemely and fit, that this worthier and fairer fruit should haue growne on the more high and perspi∣cuous place, and the apples neerer to the ground, or in the place thereof: when so∣dainly thus gazing vp to behold the vnfit∣nesse of their growing, one blowes mee downe from the top of the high tree, and hits me on the top of my bald head. Being so amazed, I began to thinke on mine owne folly; for thought I then, If this Pumpion had growne and fallen in this apples place, it had knocked out my foolish braines. To this seconded another, to falsifie the generall proposition, that Nature had erred in many tngs, and might (as in others) haue beene better aduised in these:
for a man to repent in; and hee  Repent a day before thy death. Quo that is ignotum per ignotius, one vnknown thing answerd by another more vnknowne For (quoth he) I know not when the day  my death will be. Why then (quoth  repent to day, for (for ought thou  thy death may be to morrow. Q. There are three powers of the soule  signed vnto three parts of the body  are they? A. Reason to the Head, A Heart, Lust to the Liuor: like yeeldeth sense, the Heart Life,  nourishment. Q. Why doth the bayre and nayle  man, as also Onions, and Garlicke,  grow and increase after they are thered? A. Those haue their issue  out of the abundance of mo in men, though dead, or these  not in a long time diminishe Q. Why are Bastards  strong, forward, witty, and  those which are legitimate an locke? A. Some thinke,
vehement and perpetuall, and  whatsoeuer outward heat is pre∣reunto, is weakened by the grea∣ ued within, which allayeth the eof, as the heat of the fire is aba∣ beames of the Sunne. omes it, that by looking vpon one  sore, our owne many times be∣? done partly by the mutuall weene the eye and the eye, but lly because the eie doth attract  it beholds, certaine rayes nto it, by which it sees, and so  from thence what is infectious, it  the likewise infected it selfe. doth the Tyranny of age most ap∣ it self thy changing the haire from  into white, and dying the lockes  what meanes doth it most vsu∣? that Summer is decayed,  approching on, the frosts and  of she effecteth by drying ch should digest superflu∣ ours, through the defect lly proceed. through the ouer∣much
much care and feare, by which dined men affirme that some men prehension of death, haue grow their youth, euen at 25 yeeres o Q. How doth the Basiliske poy eye; and the sight of the woolfe  voyce of him that beholdeth it,  Poet? To lurke farre off, yet lodge de The Basiliske doth poyson with The Wolfe that howles for han noyse Doth by her neere approach  voyce. A. By infection of the aye gres approacheth the ray  so likewise is the hoarnesse  effected, by drawing in y deg after another, till that app infected by the first. Woluered and destroyed in Eng∣mand of King Edgar, and  Princes had beene deuour Q, What substace or  commonly oppresseth hea and is commonly called th A. The Night-mamour or bloud, whi
the vitall spirits of those that pecially on their backe, in such  if some heauy weight or lumpe heir stomack, which they would ff, but cannot, and is not, as many  liuing thing or spirit. foure things are those, that being  be recouered? Time, Virginity, a Word erefore for many causes wee  them present, and to a∣ in words, especially for easons▪ cause in multiloquy the wisest fend. because it is a signe of folly. ecause many words are the  dtents & displeasings,  more manifest by these exam∣ the gates that are alwayes  time admit an enemy as  is euer vncouered, is vn∣ infectious: to which pur∣ Philosopher, amongst ing his peace, and be∣ so, answered, Because  times for speaking, but ne∣uer
