1955 S101566 99837375 1694
A KEY OF KNOWLEDGE FOR THE OPENING OF THE SECRET MYSTERIES OF ST IOHNS MYSTICALL REVELATION. By Ric. Bernard, preacher of Gods word, at Batcombe, in Somersetshire. The Contents ar in the next page before the booke. Blessed is he that readeth, & they yt heare the woords of this prophēc̄ie. Reuelatīon. 1. 3. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1617.
Academiae
REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, AC DO∣mino, ARTHVRO, prouidentiâ diuinâ, Bath. & Wellensi Episcopo, omnimo∣dè in Domino debit a reue∣rentiam. QVamvis (Praesul ornatissime) ab hac Sede, ad Episcopa∣tum Wintoniensem, nupe∣ra mei Domini Iacobi tran∣slatio, nonnullam moeroris causam adferre, non imme∣ritò videri possit; (nam, dum in Academiâ Cantabrigi∣ensi, bonis literis operam darem, paupertatem me∣am ille sublevavit; ex quo autem, relictâ Acade∣miâ, in publicum prodirem, humanissimè semper habitum, consilio, atque auxilio juvit, & cohone∣stauit; pro suâ demum singulari in me beneuolen∣tiâ, ex natali solo evocatum, haud vanâ spe deti∣nuit, donec, numinis divini suasu, vir ille venerabi∣lis, Phil. Bissis, sacrae Theologiae Doctor, & Pa∣stor vigilantissimus, quem hîc etiam non possum non honoris gratiâ nominare, Beneficii sui, cujus advocationem esset nactus, successorem me dice∣ret, scriberét{que}) tamen, ne rem meam pluris quàm
Ecclesiam Dei; ▪ne commodum privatum, quàm illustris illius viri (cui ita meipsum, meáque omnia debeo) dignitatem & honorem, facere videar; tûm hanc novam illi honoris accessionem, tûm etiam hunc Successorem impense gratulor. Dicant mihi fratres mei, assumpsisse Iehovam Dominum meum à me: at verò ego illum non relinquam, sed omni, quo possum, obsequij, observantiae, gratitudinis genere prosequar, & obnixè (ut antehac solitus fui) apud Deum optimum maximū precibus meis contendam, ut ad hoc dignitatis in Ecclesiâ & Re∣publicâ fastigium, diuinae benignitatis & gratiae cumulus par, nunquam deficiat. Abîit ille vir, mul∣tis nominibus mihi honoratissimus, quò deus vo∣luit, & serenissimi Regis nostri gratia illum avoca∣vit: Verùm (ut fertur) Vno avulso non deficit alter. Aureus, quandoquidem ad sedem hanc Episco∣palē Majestas Regia, tûm singulari gratiâ, tûm sum∣mo judicio, dominationem tuam evexerit. Ad cu∣jus publicam vbique & solennem famam, quum viri cujusdam eruditi, & amici mihi fidelissimi, e∣tiam literae, de tuis virtutibus, accederent, in qui∣bus ille hoc elegio uteretur; nisi me spes mea, &, ad minus, septem supra viginti. annorum experientia fe∣fellerit, vitae morúmque integritatem, timrem Dei, hospitalitatem, & charitatem in fratres, unà cum Ar∣thuro ad nos appellere, & nobiscum commorari experie∣mur: equidem non potui non vehementer gaude∣re, & pro hoc maximo dei in nos collato benefi∣cio, etiam ipse mihi, & hujus vestrae Dioecese▪s fratribus meis, & symmysts gratulari. Quid enim faelicius evenire, quidve magis optari potest Eccle∣siae
dei viventis, quàm Episcopus vigilantissimus, quàm Rector prudentissimus? Hic exemplari pie∣tate, dei servos, tûm in officio retinebit, tûm con∣firmabit. Hic Evangelium ipse annunciando, emis∣sos in Vineam Domini operarios, sudantésque, pondus aestúmque diei portantes, corroborabit. Hic, vigil ipse, somnolentos; sedulus ipse impigér∣que, torpentes & negligentes excitabit. Hic, ut malè feriatos homines, & vitae perditae, coercebit, & in ordinem coget: ita aberrantes Christi ovicu∣las, tenerrimâ misericordiâ, in viam veritatis revo∣cabit. Hic, cui Grex Domini commissus est, ipsum se praestabit exemplar & typum Gregi; inculpa∣tum, non sibi pertinaciter placentem, non iracun∣dum, non vinosum, non percussorem, non turpem quaestum facientem: sed hospitalem, bonorum a∣mantem, temperantem, iustum, pium, continen∣tem, tenacem fidelis sermonis, potentémque do∣ctrinâ sanâ exhortari, & contradicentes convince∣re. Ad hanc autem imaginem Evangelicam, ad hoc Apostolicum exemplar veri & germani Episcopi, Te forè conformem, non familiarium aliqui, aut Oxonienses solùm omnes tui, sed aliorum vbique vox certissima, immò & tuijpsius dicta, facta, totús∣que vitae tuae tenor, de dominatione tuâ spondent ac pollicentur. Et talem profectò Episcopum Ec∣clesiae Dei apud nos status videtur magnoperè fla∣gitare, qui tm mores nostros instituat, restituát∣que; tûm lupos à Christi ovibus arceat, ut nec Brounistarum schismate pax Ecclesiae perturbetur, & ut Antichristianorum haeresis (quae vires assu∣mere, & cristas erigere, vulgò passim creditur)
juguletur. Quid dicam ego nunc de Papicolis, dominationi tuae? quorum insolentiam, atque im∣probitatem, sat scio tibi notiorem esse, quàm ut indigeat narratione meâ; quin etiam de remediis huic malo adhibendis, jam antè apud te delibera∣tum ac statutum esse, quàm misellus ego causas tam pestiferi grassantisque morbi fortè satis pos∣sum concipere. Tamen ex Iohannis Apocalypsi, prophetiâ quidem illâ nobilissimâ, & ad vnguem ediscendâ, clariùs mihi videor quàm dudum, cer∣tiúsque didicisse, quid de totâ nunc-Romanâ, seu Papanâ Ecclesiâ debeam judicare. Non enim illic leues aliquas opiniones, aut probabiles de illo per∣ditionis filio conjecturas, sed grandes mihi certás{que} videor apodeixeis intueri, quibus Papam, Synago∣gae illius atque Apostaseos Caput, ipsissimum esse Antichristum; pseudocatholicam Romanam Ec∣clesiam, Babylonem esse, illam purpuream meretri∣cem; Spiritus illos, ranis similes, ex ore Draconis, Bestiae, & pseudoprophetae prodeuntes, immundos esse istos Iesuitas, liquidò demonstretur. De hisce autem Iesuitis, Satanae, regnique Pontificii Pri∣mipilis, quid attinet dicere, quantâ cum anima∣rum strage feroces, spretis Regni legibus, obambu∣lent, quâ humanitatis pietatisque lervâ, quibus le∣nociniis illecebrisque meretriciis, quali arte, quoto fascinationum genere, Babylonem illam suam re∣staurare studeant? Nostrum ergo est, fateor, con∣junctis operum viribus, eor machinationes amo∣liri: & quando ad perdendas Christi oves, velut lupi rapaces, audacter illi atque animosè discur∣runt, ad earum animarum vindicias, quas pretioso
suo sanguine Dei filius redêmit, strenuè ac forti∣ter, tanquam fidos pastores, oportet nos vnanimi∣ter convolare. Verùm, quid nostra, si ita dicam, pa∣storculorum vox fuerit illis, praeter inane, & ad momentum, futile terriculamentum? Quid pro∣fuerimus nos homunciones, quos isti papani con∣temptui habent, etsi quod & loci nostri, ac ordinis, illud, quantâ possumus, fide ac diligentiâ, facia∣mus, tûm voce, tûm stylo evangelizantes, nisi An∣tistitum nostrorum zelus, veluti summorum pasto∣rum ardor, unà adcurrat? Bonorum certè om∣nium tûm oculi, tûm animi in tuam dominatio∣nem sunt conversi, & ad certam spem foelicissimae tuae administrationis eriguntur. Nam te inprimis facturum quod tui sit officii, nobis non solùm con∣firmant, sed etiam persuadent, & ille anteactae summâ cum laude vitae tuae decursus, & hic no∣vus dignitatis in domo dei cumulus: quorum al∣ter, pro amore tuo in Deum, in Ecclesiam, in om∣nem pietatem, magnopere te velle & cupere sal∣vum gregem domini; alter pro eodem plurimum nunc te posse, pollicetur. Quamobrem, ut testatū faciam, tûm bonorū commune omniū gaudium, tûm priuatum & meum; hasce, quales quantásque, in Apocalypsin lucubrationes meas dominationi tuae affero, offeróque, tibi ausus inscribere, & sub tui nominis auspiciis in lucem dare. Quin & in tantâ Commentariorum, tûm mole, tûm numero, & uando hodiern scribendi cacoëthes tantope∣re infamàtur, & verò quum quod maximé videtur velle Spiritus sanctus in hac Revelatione, idipsum quidam nō indocti homines aliter longè at{que} ego
interpretentur: necessarium mihi omnino videba∣tur, tûm meipsum, tûm quicquid hoc opere praesti∣terim, in hoc tantum patrocinium recipere. Erra∣re possum (& quis non, & semel, & iterum in hac mystic Apocalypsi erraverit?) tamen haereticus esse nolo. Nullo enim ambitionis aestro percitus sum, ut scribendo priuatas spargam opiniones, eas∣dém{que} erroneas, pro veris pertinaciter defendam, nam abs quovis mihi errore monstrato palinodiā canere statim non gravabor: sed dei & inuictae ve∣ritatis promulgandae zelo, uti arbitror, accensus, in gazophylaciū domini hunc meum quadrantē, eun∣dém{que} sub tuis (domine) auspiciis immisi. Et pro∣fectò, cui potiùs ego labores meos inscribam dedi∣cémque, quàm privatus, publico; parochus, Dioe∣cesano; pastor pusilli gregis, tûm gregū nostrorū, tûm ipsorum pastorū Episcopo, cui non otii modò nostri, sed & negotii & studiorū ratio reddēda sit? Itaque, ut non ingratū sit apud te officiū hoc meū, & verò etiā liceat praetensa nominis tui dignitate homines Christianos ad harū Commentationum mearū lectionem allicere, utrum{que} quâ decet reve∣rentiâ, peto obsecróque: Deúm{que} Patrem domini nostri, obnixè oro, ut quae in pectore tuo dona jam olim infudit at{que} inspiravit, eadē insuper de die in diem adaugeat, & in hac novâ, quam concrederit, provincià, spiritu sapientiae, intelligentiae, consilii, fortitudinis, scientiae, pietatis, dominationi tuae semper adesse velit. Summâ observantiâ, domination tuae obsequentissimus, Ric. Bernardus. Batcombiâ, Martij die 14.
TO THE RIGHT RE∣VEREND, THE IVDGES of the common Lawes of this Realme, and to the foure worthie Soci∣eties of the Innes of Court, the learned Lawyers and Students of the same. AS I highly esteeme of my mother the Church of England, which at this day is renouned in the Christian world, howsoeuer many with an enuious eye looke vpon her prosperity; and for the e∣uill will they beare to her welfare, vtter many vnsauory things against her: so I also blesse God for the happie Policy of the Ciuill state, wisely established, and most succesfully maintained, in peace and iustice, beyond all comparison of other kingdomes. The praise whereof, (next vnto God, and true religion) is to be ascribed to the most iust and wholesome lawes of this Nation; byLeg. sanct. Edw. cap. 19. which very tenderly and watchfully, the prerogatiue Royall is preserued, the Supremacie is giuen to Soue∣raigne authority, and the Bishop of Rome quite shutout,Edw. 1. 19. E. 3. tit. for hauing any thing to doe with the regality of the Crowne, or within the dominions of our Lord and King;K. Rich. 2. An. 16. ca. 5. as his Maiesty himselfe fully hath shewed, in the Pre∣monition
to all Christian Monarches, free Prin∣ces, and States. Albeit that Iupiter of Olympus, and rauening Wolfe, (as once Boner, that bloody butcherPreface be∣fore Gard. b. de vera obed. Rom. 13. 1. of Gods Saints, called him) chalengeth Saint Pauls sword, but altogether contrary to Saint Pauls doctrine, to shake off all obedience to the higher powers, and also by the same, to bee as God aboue all that is called God,The second part of the Catho. Apol. and so to claime the right to depose Kings, and to dis∣pose of kingdomes, (which the Popes lawes maintaine, and chalenge most wickedly, vpon these words, pasceC. praecipuè XI. q. 3. Can. alius. 15. q. 6. Clem. vnic. de Iureius. oues meas), hauing claues regni coelorum, to v∣surpe authority, and enterprize against all the Kings in the world; which made that proud beast, Alexander the third, set his feet vpon the necke of the Emperour Fredericke Barbarosse, saying, tu es Petrus, &c.C. venerabi∣lem ext. de elect. adding withall, ecce constitui te super Gentes & regna, the saying of God to Ieremie; and that of the Psalmist, Super aspidem & basiliscum ambulabis, & conculcabis leonem & draconem. In this pride, Pope Coelestine the fourth, crowned the Emperour, Henrie the sixth, with his foot; Gregorie the seuenth, made Henrie the fourth, with the Empresse, and their son, to stand waiting long at the gates of the Popes pa∣lace, to speake with him; and Adrian wil haue the Em∣peror Fredericke the first, to hold his stirrup. Oh dam∣nable pride, to be abhorred of God and men! But yet this is not all the ill fruit of this Antichristian vsurped power, but also treasons, open rebellions, and bloody warres, making thereby these parts of Christendome a very butchers shambles of Christen men; and yet mustReade Acts and Mon. pag. 719. A summe of the Popes lawes for this. his flatterers still stand for the same. So as Bellarmine, and his Ghost dare boldly affirme, that this supremacie
of the Pope is one of the chiefest points of their faith, andBel. epist. ad Archipresb. apud Matth. Tort. of the very foundation of the Catholicke religion. Marke heere then, you my Lords the Iudges, and you the learned in our Lawes, how vnsafe that religion is for Kings, whose foundation is for the Popes authority to throw them out of their Thrones; how dangerous Iesuites, Priests, and all other Papists bee to our State, which be acquainted with the foundation and principles of that their hellish profession. For they cannot possibly be good subiects, entertaining such a religion, builded vpon such a foundation. And hence may it appeare, that it is no maruell, why Papists are such enemies to the common lawes of England; by which the lawfull authority of Kings is maintained, the Popes pride and vsurped power flatly troden vnder foot; such traitrs as Campion, Sherwin, and others, haue been indi∣cted, arraigned, tried, adiudged, and executed; and so the very foundation of that Antichristian heresie by our common Law vtterly raced, the Supremacie of our So∣ueraigne maintained, and subiects hept in due obedience, to the great tranquillity and happie peace of our present State, and welfare of the Common-wealth. Neither are these Lawes for ciuill policy, for Prince and people onely, as they bee in a body politicke, but also for the singular benefit of the Church of God; the rights and liberties whereof the common Law maintaineth in∣uiolably: being (as one defineth the same) sanctio san∣cta,Iudge For∣tiscue. Lib. 2. de natu∣ra deorum. iubens honesta, inhibens contraria: the same in effect which Cicero saith; Lex est recti praecep∣tio, praui est depulsio. And indeed, when the Pope, with his pretended keyes of Peter, ut contrary to Saint1. Pet. 5. 3. Peters precept, would lord it ouer Gods heritage, in his
cursed lawes and decrees, in his vncharitable vsurpati∣ons, and intolerable exactions, in his prouisions vpon the collating of benefices in his legatiue iurisdictions, in his most vniust excommunications, and in forcing such a continuall posting to Rome, and a thousand such intole∣rable burthens, and Egyptian bondages; what stayed the current of this streame? what dryed vp this corrupt fountaine, and filled vp this deouring gulph, and whirle-poole, that no more men might perish, in passing any longer too and fro, but the course of the common law of England? The Clergie was in great thraldome, and by the Popes lawes so bound and fettered, as slaues in the Turkes gallies, that they durst not so much as mutter a word against his vsurpations, encrochments, and most mercilesse cruelties; so as his power was onely opposed, and his proceedings hindred by our owne lawes, as may be seene in the booke intituled, de iure Regis Ecclesi∣astico, set out by that most learned and iudicious in the lawes of England, Sir Edward Coke, Knight. As therefore, I vnderstanding hereby, the excellency of these our lawes, and how forcible they haue euer been against Antichristian tyrannie, not only to shake off that heauie yoke of cruell bondage, both from off the Church, and common-wealth; but also still to maintaine the ab∣solute power of Soueraigne authority, and the laudable customes and liberties of our Church, against all vniust innouations, and vsurpations: I could not (next after the highest honour to Gods law, to his Church, and to some such worthie of honour, as be in the chiefest places of au∣thoritie therein), but doe this duty of honour vnto you, my Lords the Iudges, and the worthie Societies, conuer∣sant in, and about such lawes, as (next to the law of Al∣mighty
God) are most Christian and iust, and most pro∣fitable for our Church, (her priuiledges euer preserued entire), and for this our most happie and flourishing Common-wealth: if, if (I say) the equity of the lawes themselues (which the Lord moue you euer to obserue with vpright minds, that howsoeuer some grow despe∣rate, and bloodily disposed, yet your consciences may euer plead for you) be truly kept, and the proper and right end of them, without by-respects, only aimed at. But here, it may be, it will be said, as some vnaduised perhaps haue already said, that this book of the Reuelati∣on little concerneth you, and therefore that this my la∣bour will not bee so acceptable to you, as I wish it might be, and indeed as I desire to haue it. Surely, except I mistake, (and, we thinke, I should not lose my aime so much, when I know of you, both religious and very ver∣tuously giuen), I write to the seruants of our heauenly Sauiour, as well as of our earthly Soueraigne; and to such as doe as well studie the lawes of God, (else farre be their counsell from me, and all men of peace), as the lawes of man: and if so, how can this booke but concerne you,Chap. 1. 1. being sent to bee shewed to the seruants of God? whose you are, and whom it shall very greatly profit, to vnderstand, what the Lord hath herein reuealed to his Church. For you (Right reuerend, the Iudges) doe see the due execution of iustice, vpon the enemies of our God and King: and you, the rest of those worthie socie∣ties, learned in our lawes, study cases, plead causes, and vrge reasons for sentence according to law, that due iu∣stice may be executed vpon Priests, Iesuites, and other traiterous spirits, set on worke by them, when they come to the barre of iustice. Now that you may euen before
God, without any scruple, in a good conscience, iustifie the equitie of our lawes, against these enemies of the Go∣spell, and execute the due deserued punishments vpon such malefactors, as the Law in such cases hath proui∣ded, for the preseruation of the Gospell, and the safety of our King and countrey: this booke will tell you, that there is no cause, why any mans spirit should quaile in him, to aenge the Lords quarrell, in the cause of religi∣on; and our King and countreyes quarrell, in cases of high treason, and other vnmatchable villanies, vpon the heads of all those wicked ones, which carrie such trai∣terous hearts against their naturall leige Lord and So∣ueraigne. They pleade conscience of their Catholicke, as they call it, religion: which, indeed, is nothing else, but a patched profession, framed of Iudaisme, Gentilisme, and superstitious inuentions of man; a very counterfait of Christianity, but is Antichristianity it selfe. And where∣as they call themselues, the Catholicke Romane Church, they speake most absurdly, as to say, an vni∣uersall particular Church, and more absurdly, then falsly: as that right reuerend Father, the now Lord Bi∣shop of Salisburie, (Nonnullis sui ordinis praecla∣rum exemplar, cûm regendo, scit enim regere pru∣denter; tûm docendo, nam diligit Christum, vult igitur fideliter ouiculas Christi pascere), hath pro∣uedCounterproof. in the 1. part. chap. 1. against Doctor Byshop, by an argument thus fra∣med; No particular Church can bee the Catho∣licke Church: But the Church of Rome, is a parti∣cular Church; Therefore the Church of Rome, cannot be the Catholicke Church. The maior hee proueth thus: No particular Church can bee the vniuersall Church: But the Catholicke Church is
the vniuersall Church: Therefore no particular Church can be the Catholicke Church. This false pretended title therefore, should not hoodwinke any, to blind mens eyes from beholding that Church, to be that which indeed she is, euen the very whore of Babylon, mentioned in the seuenteenth chapter of the Reuelation, as is after proued at large. So then the Church of Rome, is not Catholicke; much lesse, the Catholicke Church, and spouse of Christ. Neither is the Pope Pe∣ters successour, as he would be accounted: nor Papa, aBro. in his com. vpon chap. 9. father; but Popes, (which is in Eustathius, daemon) a diuell. In a word, that no man may mistake the Pope, and Papists, but iudge so of them, as they be, Saint Iohn telleth vs, that that company in a body (as I may say) and gouernment, is a foule monstrous Beast, like a Leo∣pard,Chap. 13. 2. Beare, and Lion, substituted by the Dragon. The Head thereof, the Pope, is the lamb-like beast, and falseChap. 13. 11. and 20. 19. Chap. 9. 1. 11. prophet, the very Antichrist, the angell ascending out of the bottomlesse pit, the starre fallen from heauen, and king of Locusts. The Iesuites and Priests, his emissa∣ries,Cap. 16. 13. 14. the very vncleane spirits like frogs, the spirits of diuels; Incendiaries, setting on fire the hearts of de∣sperate cōpanions, to do one mischiefe or other, to further their defignmēts, hardening their harts to an vnheard▪ of hellish urie, euen to blow vp at once, a whole State with gun-powder. The religious orders of those MonksCap. 9. 7. 8. 9. and Friers, the fearfully deformed and mis-shapen Lo∣custs.Chap. 11. 2. 10. The Papists, those Gentiles, and Inhabitants of the earth, which wonder after the beast, and reioyce at the murthering of Gods faithfull messengers. That Church, the whore. That City, Babylon; yea Se∣dome,Cap. 17. and 18. and 11. 8. and Egypt; at the length utterly to be destroyed.
Let ther  good les passe in their full power and strength, against those Iebusited, rather then Iesuited, disloyall Ignatian Locusts; against the Priests pleading for their Baal, and Balaam of Rome: that these seeds-men of the mysterie of iniquitie being cut off, there may be lesse perill to our State, and lesse danger to the person of our dread Soueraigne, whom the Lord in mer∣cie preserue still from their bloody hands. Let the law al∣so, haue the due course against those obstinate Recu∣sants, which after all meek and gentle vsages to reclaime them, will not be wonne; especially such wicked Apo∣states, as doe fall from vs, in so cleere light of the Go∣spell, whose example, (if they be not made an example of iustice, according to our lawes) will doe very much harme. These, with impudent faces, discouer their who∣rish hearts to that idoll-seruice. These are they, that (a∣boue other) disgrace our religion, turning their backes vpon it, like Zimries, carrying their Cozbies, before all our Israel, into their habitations, highly prouoking Gods wrath against vs. These are they, that contemp∣tuously tread vnder foot the blood of Christs Martyrs, suffering for our religion; and that with a high hand, offend against our King and his lawes, intolerably abu∣sing his Maiesties singular clemencie; and therefore are these most sharpely to be dealt with; yet euer accor∣ding to iustice, that they may not (as wickedly and false∣ly some of them doe) complaine of cruelty. In thus do∣ing, the lawes of our kingdome shall bee to our religion a great furtherance; to Antichrists kingdome, a ruine; to our King, glory; to our Church, peace; to our Coun∣trey, safety; and to all true-hearted subiects, cause of great ioy and reioycing, when the traiterous-hearted are
remoued from among vs. And you, the right Reuerend Iudges, and sages of the Law, shall proclaime to all men, your Zeale to religion, your hatred of Poperie, your loue to Gods people, and speciall respect to the glory and praise of God, and cause such honourable esteeme of our lawes. as is meet; and thereupon the like loue to the study there∣of, and such worthie regard vnto your persons, as shall procure a name of honour and eternall praise to all po∣sterities. The Almighty God, by the law of his spirit, in the mouthes of his messengers; and by the law of our kingdome, in the mouthes of all such as bee aduanced to high place of iustice and iudgement, consume and vtter∣ly extirpate the aduersaries of the Gospell from among vs, that we may (in peace and piety) enjoy thankfully, the blessings which the Lord in mercy, hath plentifully en∣riched this noble Iland with, and sing to his holy name all praises for euer. Your Lordships, and the rest of the right Worshipfull, in all due honour to your persons, and to those worthie Societies: RIC. BERNARD. Batcombe in Somersetshire: March, 14.
TO THE WATCH∣FVLL EYES IN THIS OVR STATE, THE WORTHY IVSTI∣ces, Imprisoners of Malefactors, and Preseruers of peace; that peace is wished which passeth all vnderstanding, with the zeale of God, in due execution of Iustice against the enemies of Christ, and our Countrey. WHat furtherance your places of Iustice bee to Iudges, sitting in the seate of iudgement, is better knowne vnto your wisedome, and learned selues, then I can any way imagine or think. Yet I, by my light obseruation, perceiue thus much, that without your vigilancie and faithful∣nesse; the Iudges cannot do, what either their pla∣ces require, or themselues desire to doe, for the good of our countrey. As therefore I haue been bold, in the zeale of God, and cause of religion, humbly to petition them: so in like manner, I be∣seech you, in your places; to doe this good for Gods Church, to search out these walking spirits of Antichrist; I meane, the Priests and Iesuites, that they may bee coniued downe by the power
of the law and sword, which do so audaciously rise vp, with contempt of the word and spirituall po∣wer of Christ. Likewise that the statutes bee exe∣cuted vpon open Recusants, who too boldly dare to professe themselues of the Popish Church. And withall, that a circumspect eye bee had of our Church-Papists: such, as for all their open com∣ming to our assemblies, doe sufficiently in many particulars, declare themselues to be in their com∣ming to Church, the very meere seruants of men; their course at home, and abroad, being duly exa∣mined. And that you may see, what may truly, and without breach of charity, bee thought of these, IMr. Ro. B. will be bold with a godly learned friend of mine, to set downe vnto you, what he, concerning these Church-Papists, openly deliuered, as a preface be∣fore his Sermon once, at Pauls Crosse, word for word, as neere as may bee. His affirmation was this: Conformity to the Oath of alleagianed, and other out∣ward formall satisfactions of the State, concurring with a resolution to continue in Poperie, is farre more perni∣cious to the State, then open and profest Recusancie. I say it againe (saith hee), A follow which hath taken the oath of allegiance; first, either by power of some popish dispensation, which great men especially may easily procure, because by their wit, or worth, or high roome, they may be more horo∣riously seruiceable to the Church of Rome; or se∣condly, by proportionable deduction of some war∣rant to their consciences in that case, from that briefe of Pius Quintus, in the Queenes time, men∣tioned
before, which any vnderstanding Papist will easily apprehend: or thirdly, by the cousoning art of mentall reseruation, of which (perhaps) some of their Priests and cunninger sort, especially of the equiuocating generation, will bee ready to make aduantage of; or fourthly, by reason of wide∣nesse of conscience, euen directly and grosly a∣gainst the corrupt notions and instructions there∣of; which is much incident to the more ignorant & inferior rank of Papists, who through basenesse and lownesse of state, are exempted from intelli∣gence with the Consistorie of Rome, and acquain∣tance with the liberty of many popish resolutions in such cases; and hauing no grounded and reall as∣surance of saluation in that profession, (which is an inseparable miserie to popish heresie), dare not hazard their temporall happinesse, for any hope of future comfort they are euer like to haue, or reape by such a miserable religion: I say, a fellow hauing thus taken the oath of allegiance, either by popish dispensation, mentall reseruation, or di∣rectly and grosly against the checke and contra∣diction of his popish conscience, is by accident, and by consequent, farre more pestilentiall to the State, then he was before, for such reasons as these: By this formall outward false hearted-conformitie, First, he diuerts and declines the watchfull eye of state-iealousie, from ordinary excubation and vi∣gilancie ouer his popish villanies and machinati∣ons; from a more narrow particular insinuation into his vnder-ground vaults, and timely obserua∣tion of his engrossing too much gun-powder; and
so, workes a great deale of mischiefe vnobserued∣ly; fearfully vndermines, without any countermine of policie; and concurres most dangerously with the outraged malice of that man of sinne, for the wasting of our Church, and dis-strengthening the Ste, without sense or suspition. Secondly, he is vnworthily armed with the re∣spect and reputation of a good subiect; and so may more boysterously, and with greater brauery, wound and weaken the better side; vexe good∣nesse, and good men, more boldly without con∣trolment; and secretly promote Poperie, and hin∣der proceedings against Papists, euen with autho∣rity, and some colourable ostentations of safer po∣licie, and flourishing pretences of deeper reaches into the mysteries of State. Thirdly, hee may thereby giue deeper wounds into the heart of the truth, through the sides of those they call Puritans; and ouer their heads doe his worst to knocke out the braines of the blessed Gospell of the Sonne of God. It is incredible, what a world of wrong and mischiefe is wrought vpon the truth which we professe, and true professours thereof, by politicke conformable Papists, vpon the wofull aduantage of certaine Ministers incon∣formitie. If such a fellow spie out a conscionable painfull Minister, and finde him obnoxious to the rigour of the law, but in the least point; and that (perhaps) out of a peacefull tendernesse of con∣science, while himselfe is in heart a ranke traitor to the State: O then he plies the aduantage with much malice and bitternesse, by informations, ag∣grauations,
exasperations, fawning concurrence with Ecclesiasticall Courts, vntill hee haue procu∣red the putting out of that burning and shining lampe, (for he well knowes, when such lights ex∣pire, the noysome snuffe of Poperie is like e∣nough to infect that darksome place): and God knowes, all this is done, not for preseruation of peace, as he publikely pretends; but for promoti∣on of poperie, which he secretly intends. I would to God, the reuerend Bishops and Fathers of our Church, would wisely thinke of this point, before it be too late. I speake not heere any thing to har∣ten the Separatist, or any truly tumultuous; but to point out a dangerous depth of the mysterie of iniquitie, which worketh pestilently vpon such ad∣uantages. I rather pray, that all the blessings of the God of peace, both in this world, and in the world to come, may be heaped vpon his head, whosoe∣uer he be, which doth any way (with holinesse and good conscience) labour to further the peace of our too much distracted Sion. Fourthly, he that conformes, in outward obedi∣ence, to the State, by warrant of popish dispensati∣on, must labour to recompence the Popes liberali∣ty in that kind, with some more remarkable and notorious seruice to the See of Rome. Hee shall find himselfe, out of a sense of such extraordinary fauour from that vnholy Father, bound in consci∣ence, and ingaged in congruitie, to be more ready & resolute vpon occasion or aduantage, vpon any desperate aduenture and high attempt, for the ad∣uancement of his triple infernall crowne.
Fifthly, hee that with wilfull inlargement of conscience, and secret sturdie resolution, takes the oath, will easily and naturally grow reuengefully inraged against the righteous Torturers, & cōfor∣mers of his corrupt and exorbitant conscience. The conscience receiuing a sting, transfuseth the smart into the affections. Which when they feele, they are presently furiously inraged against the occasioners of that their bitter miserie. And therefore I am perswaded, such a fellow, so taking the Oath, howsoeuer he may beare himselfe reser∣uedly, is afterwards transported, with more vio∣lent and implacable spite, against the power of that truth, and patrons of that profession, (a sacred zeale where of hath iustly brought a racke and vexation vpon his misguided conscience), then he was before. And assuredly, if the times should turne, (which God forbid) wee should finde the Church-Papist, and the politicke conformable Psendo-Catholicke, more mercilesse and blood-thir∣stie against vs, then the Recusant. Though the best of them, no doubt, at that day, would bee as a brier, and sharper then a thornie hedge; nay euen as a woolfe in the euening. For there is no malice neere vnto the malice of Poperie, faue the malice of hell. Vpon these grounds also, I haue thought, that as the state of a Church-Papist, obstinated in po∣perie, is most damnable in it selfe, (euen the po∣pish Doctours themselues being witnesses), as I haue proued elsewhere: (see my book of legall re∣pentāce, p. 59.) so it is most dāgerous to the State.
I speake not this to driue or deteine any Papist from the Church; for I pronounce vnto him, out of the word of life and truth, hee must flie out of Babylon, into Sion, if euer hee will saue his soule: but to let him know, that comming to our con∣gregation, he ought with humility, reuerence, and prayer, to submit his vnderstanding to illuminati∣on with truth, and his heart to sanctification with grace, both for the procurement and comfort of his owne saluation, and the contentment and safe∣ty of the State. Otherwise, as his dangerousnesse to the State is euident and extraordinary: so his owne damnation sleepeth not. For, if poperie were truth, as it is not, but the very doctrine of di∣uels; yet his state is dānable, because he should so, denie Christ before men: if it be false, as indeed it is, and most accursed from heauen, then hee iustly perisheth in his heresie. But, it may be, some will here reply; what can possibly be more required, and exacted from these men, then conformity in outward obedience to the State? what better security, or surer bond, can be thought vpon, then an oath, the sacred and soueraigne instrument of all iustice and obedience amongst men? what further inuention of State, shall be able to stay the fearfull mischiefes, that hang hourely ouer our heads, from this malicious and murtherous generation? I answere, none in the world, while they stay a∣mongst vs: not the most exquisite and quintessen∣tiall policie of all the wisest Sates, that lie vnder the face of the Sunne, can affoord helpe in this
case. Idolatry is euer attended with this insepara∣ble curse, that it will plague the kingdome that nourisheth it, and pay it home at length with a witnesse, except some right round, and resolute course be taken in the meane time, for the rooting of it out. And indeed the depthes of the mysterie of iniquitie are so vnfathomable, that they cannot bee sounded by the plummet of any honest and Christian policie, without diuing into the bot∣tome of hell. It is a right iust and holy thing, to giue them the oath, and to bring them to the Church. But their violations of oathes, dispensations, equiuo∣cations, mentall euasions, corruptions of consci∣ence, and execrable transgressions of all lawes, both of God and man, of nations and nature, are so infinite and endlesse; and they so mingle their conclusions of Sate, with the very confusions of hell; that it is euen in proportion as easie, to chaine vp those damned spirits, from tempting men vp∣on earth; as to bridle those blood-thirstie mon∣sters, from vndermining and ouerturning those States, which professe the truth of Christ, if power and meanes were answerable to their malice and reuengefull humours. It was a royall prouidence of our gracious So∣ueraigne, in his first speech in the parliament, to admonish the Papists, that they would not so far presume vpon his lenitie, as thereupon to thinke it lawfull for them, daily to encrease their number and strength in this kingdome: whereby, if not in his time, yet at least in time of his posterity, they
might bee in hope to erect their religion againe. But it is more then manifest, by daily and wofull experience, that their maine end, all their plots, practises, strange insolencies, & the whole sphere of a world of Papists, that swarm amongst vs, hold a strong opposition and counter-motion to that gracious counsell and first motion of his Maiesty. A blessed and happy thing had it been, had his Princely pleasure been followed in that point. For assuredly, were we rid of the Papists; and were I∣dolatry banished out of the kingdome, as in con∣science, and policy, reason, and religion, it ought: the King and his posterity, by the mercies of God, might sit vpon the throne of England, as fast as the strong and mighty mountaines vpon their sure foundations. Oh, then would the for∣raine mint and forge of popish mischiefe, discon∣tinue and expire. Iesuites, the diuels Iourneymen, would take breath, from hammering any more, their hellish powder-plots in hast. That malici∣ous and murthering generation would grow dis∣hartened and vnspirited, for matter of proiect, and conspiracie, against this noble Sate. The royall person of the King would haue none about it, but Angels, and good subiects. The concurrent furie of the greatest enemies in the world, durst not en∣tertaine a thought of inuasion, or stirre a finger a∣gainst the vnconquerable glory of our peace. For certainly, the crowne of this kingdome is incircled and surrounded with such infinite and endlesse va∣riety of popish insidiations; and stands farre more liable to the furious thirst of forraine ambitions,
vpon this ground principally; because they hope, when time serues, to finde amongst vs, a side and faction of Papists, to serue their tume. Cut the thred of this hope; and cut the throat of all plots against the Kings person; and crush the Popes heart, for any probability, or possibility, of euer re-establishing, and erecting his accursed ty∣rannie, in this Iland againe. Now this blessed businesse of most important and highest consequence, for the pleasing of God, security of the State, and preseruation of his reli∣gion, and royall seed, that now sits with incompa∣rable glory vpon the throne, would bee happily furthered. First, if lawes worthily prouided in such cases, might haue their course and current, without op∣position, diuersion, partiality, interception by false friends, or any cunning defraudations and delusi∣ons of the holy intentions thereof. Secondly, if on our side there were but halfe the care and conscience, for the maintenance of Christs truth, and extirpation of the infectious he∣resies of the man of sinne, which are incompati∣ble, both with saluation of mens soules, and the safety of imperiall Crownes: as there is curious∣nesse, and cruelty, in popish kingdomes, for the continuance of Antichristianisme; and, by a bloo∣dy inquisition into the very thoughts of men, (the greatest slauerie that euer the sunne, or the world tasted), for the banishing and barring out, euen of all possibility, (so far as in them lies) of reformatiō, plantatiō of primatiue truth, & professiō of grace.
Thirdly, and aboue all, the plantation and pro∣tection of a conscionable learned ministery, must doe the deed, when all is done, and strike the dead∣liest and irreuocable blow into the heart of the Pope, if the neuer-erring Spirit of God haue told vs the truth, 2. Thess. 2. 8. The Lord will consume the wicked man, with the spirit of his mouth. Po∣licy, State, wisedome, confederations of Christi∣an States, inuention and execution of good lawes, the disarming and disabling of the Popes vassals, and the like are very notable and needfull meanes, glorious attendants, and assistants vnto this holy worke. But the sword of the Spirit, managed by the hand of a powerfull ministery, must strike off Holosernes head; and knocke out the braines of that great Goliah of Rome, which with intolerable in∣solencie doth reuile the host of the liuing God, and trample vpon the neckes of the Lords annoin∣ted. The champions of Christ, in the battell of the great day of God Almighty, at Armaged don, may beare themselues brauely, and triumphantly: but the spirit of the mouth of the Lord Iesus, shall carry away the chiefest glory of the day, in that conquest and confusion of Antichrist, and in lay∣ing his triple crowne in the dust. But in the meane time, (vntill the Lord put to his helping hand, for setting those means on foot, with resolution and constancie) it is a matter of prodigious amasement, to consider, how mightily impunity of popish idolatry prouokes the wrath of God against vs, & in what danger we stand; the State, the Gospell, the royall person of the King,
the daily inualuable hope of the succession of his children, and particular welfare of euery loyall subiect in the Land. For, if any man be so void of braine, to doe himselfe and the State that wrong, as to thinke that there are not still new mischiefes on foote, and secret workings against vs still, by powder-plots, Parisian Massacres, or some pro∣portionable vilanies: let him thinke there is no diuell in hell, no Pope at Rome, no malice in the heart of a Iesuite. Me thinks, it is an astonishment beyond the com∣prehensions of nature, reason, religion, policies of State; that such an intolerable generation, so odi∣ous both to heauen and earth, with abominable I∣dolatrie; so visibly infamous, both to this, and the other world, with many capitall characters of blood; so endlesse and implacable, in their rage∣full designments, against the crowned Maiesty of the Kings Throne; so prodigious in their plots, that they haue cast an inexpiable and euerlasting aspersion, vpon the innocency of Christian religi∣on; such furious Assasins and Incendiaries, for murthering of Princes, butchery of people, and fiering of Sates; so iraged, euen like Wolues in the euening, to swallow vs vp quicke (if the time did serue); I say, that such, in so orthodoxe a Church, and noble a State, should by allowance, toleration, conniuencie, or remissnesse, and para∣lyticall distemper of the arme of iustice, or some thing, be suffered to receiue encreasement, and multiplication, both in number, and insolencie, to the great dishonour of God Almighty, the conti∣nuall
vexation of Gods people and good subiects, and the most certaine hazard of the whole State, and the peacefull succession of the Kings posteri∣ty. It would neuer bee, but that the Lord in his iust indignation, intends, and prepares vs for some dreadfull iudgement. And I am afraid, Papists will bee the men, to execute Gods heauie wrath vpon vs: because they are a principall matter in the meane time, of high offence against his Ma∣iesty. To let passe infinite more of very speciall, and materiall ponderations, to this purpose; consider, I pray you, but this one point, with feeling appre∣hensions, which is able to inflame the heart of an ingenuous Heathen with extraordinary indigna∣tion. I am perswaded, there was not a Papist in this land, whatsoeuer may be pretended, or prote∣sted to the contrary, but did heartily reioyce, at the taking away of that thrice, nay thousand times noble and blessed Prince, of sweetest memorie, for which the heart of euery true subiect, did shead most worthily, euen teares of blood. Now, what a rufull case is this, that such vipers should bee nou∣rished in the bowels and bosome of this king∣dome; the breath, heart, and life whereof, they har∣tily wish, and would reioyce to haue extinguished? To conclude the whole point for the present: it is the generall ioynt consent, and current conclusi∣on of all the Christian orthodox reformed Chur∣ches vpon the face of Europe; and it is worthily, and vnanswerably demonstrated by our gracious Soueraigne, that the Pope is Antichrist; and
Rome, mysticall Babylon. Some particular men, (out of curiosity and conceit of their owne wit, af∣fectatiō of singularity, doting addictiō to popish writers, want of further illumination in the point, partiall inclinations towards the diuinity of Rome, or the like), may dissent, without preiudice of a truth, so vniuersally resolued vpon, by Diuines of best learning, and sincerest iudgement. If so; then tell me the meaning of such places as these, and to whom the spirit of God directs the edge and execution thereof. Reward her euen as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double, according to her works: and in the cup that she hath filled you, fill her the dou∣ble; Reu. 18. 6. And the ten hornes, which thou sawest vpon the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eate her flesh, and burne her with fire, Reuel. 17. 16. This prediction, by the iudgement of the best diuines, hath the power, and passeth into the nature of a precept, and therefore is charged as a commande∣ment, vpon those of whom it is spoken. These, and the like, doe indeed strongly con∣firme, and make good those three propositions of that learned man, and excellent light of Heidel∣berge, in his booke de iure regum, pag. 6. & sequ. The summe whereof may bee contriued into this conclusion: Princes and Magistrates, with their swords and scepters; Preachers, by the word and writings; priuate men, by prayer, and all lawfull opposition, ought to doe their best and vtmost, to
bring confusion vpon that man of sinne, and his ac∣cursed doctrine. And thus to follow the counsell of the blessed Spirit, in rooting out the limbes of Antichrist, and Antichristianisme, is so farre from being persecution, that it is a very glorious ser∣uice vnto the Maiesty of the God of heauen. The neglect whereof, and impunity of Idolatry is able in short time, to shake the pillers, and distreng∣then the sinewes, to decrowne the head, and shor∣ten the raigne of the strongest State, and most po∣tent Prince in the world. Delayes are dangerous; policy to the contrary is pernicious; and conni∣uencie, cruelty; in such places where these sayings haue place, blessed shall he be, that taketh and dasheth her children against the stones, Psal. 137. 9. All yee that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrowes: for she hath sinned against the Lord, Ier. 50. 14. In as much as she glorified her selfe, and liued in pleasure, so much giue you to her, torment and sorrow, Reuel. 18. 7. In the meane time, vntill the holy Spirits coun∣sell and commandement to this purpose, be taken to heart, and throughly put in execution, I pray the Lord to stay their rageful malice, and to turne their popish murtherous hearts, from whetting a∣ny more swords, to shead the blood of the Lords annoynted: or else, to returne the sharpest swords from the poynt, with a cutting edge on both sides, in vp to the very hilts, in their owne hearts blood. And in despite of hell and Rome, good Lord, wee pray thee, let King Iames flourish still, with a crowne of glory on his head, and a scepter of triumph in his hand; and still wash his Princely
feete in the blood of his enemies. Thus much I thought good to preface at this time, from this place, for the discharge of my owne conscience, and the needfull refreshing your me∣mories, with the apprehension of those dreadfull dangers, which howerly hang ouer our heads, by reason of the impunity of popish Idolatry, and the endlesse ineuitable malice and machinations of the Papists. We haue had prouocations, and war∣nings enough; from this place, from the Parlia∣ment house: from heauen, by Gods messengers; from hell by the powder-plot; from Rome, by the roring of their Buls; from France, by their massa∣cres, and butcherie of their Kings: by more me∣diate, and politicke; by immediate and miracu∣lous reuelations, discoueries, deliuerances: by a blacke and bloody catalogue of most hatefull and prodigious conspiracies, which runne parallell with the golden fine of Queene Elizabeths life; by the daily villanous libels of the swaggering run∣agates of our countrey; base and illiterate pam∣phlets, stuft with ribaldrie, and railings, and per∣sonall slanders, impudencies, out-facings, vtterly without any passage or impressions of grace, or gracious spirit. A thousand times, a thousand waies. And yet what good haue they done, sith nothing will serue the turne? Gods will must bee done. For mine owne part, I haue deliuered mine owne soule. If any will not take warning, whom it concernes, his blood be vpon his owne head. But blessed is he, who fore-sees the storme, and hides himselfe in the meane time, vnder the wings
of Christ, and shelter of a good conscience. With which Conclusion as hee ended, I also conclude, commending this pithie speech of my so learned a friend, to your wisedome and godly considerati∣on, your selues to Gods holy protection, and all your iust proceedings to his gracious blessing; that you may confidently looke for a reward of your well doing in the end of your dayes. Your Worships in all seruice∣able duties of my calling RIC. BARNARD. Batcombe, March, 14.
TO ALL GENEROVS AND NOBLE SPIRITS, THE VA∣liant Worthies of our DAVID, euen the sonnes of valour, Martiall men, and louers of Armes, of what degree and place so euer, resolute for Religion, rea∣dy to fight for the honour of Christ, the safety of our King and Countrey, against the Popes vsurped iurisdiction and Anti∣christian power, renowne for euer. MAy I be bold (you valiant men of warre, and Souldiers of Christ) to speake vnto you? Then prepare your selues a∣gainst the Romish Midianits, and shoute with courage, say∣ing; For the Lord, and for our Gideon, at the day ap∣pointed: for the time draweth on, to auenge the bloud of the Saints vpon Babylon, that where of Rome. Be∣hold the progresse, and whereto wee now are come, that you may looke for the ruine of that mother of where∣domes, and abominations of the earth. The Angell sworeChap. 10. 6. solemnely, long since, that there should be time no longer; and the kingdoms since then, are become the kingdomsChap. 11. 15. of our Lord, and of his Christ, so as he shall reigne from this time forth for euer. The Church shall florish more
and more: but the enemies power shall be diminished. Wrath is vpon them, though they see it not. For this is the time of the pouring foorth of the vials, the last plagues of God, vpō that Antichristiā state; and they areChap. 16. to be poured out, by such instrumēts of the true Church, as God shall raise vp. And though I cannot conceit, that this prophecie pointeth at any one particular kingdome, or person, to say, this is the man, this is the Countrey, that shall sacke Rome: yet when we see what hath already fal∣len out, according to things foretold, and by whom the Lord hath effected the same, wee ought to giue glorie to God, and also acknowledge those his instruments raised vp, either in other places, or here among our selues, to do his will; and by former acts of God done by any of our Nation, wee may (and not without reason) coniecture, what may after be effected by vs, the prophecie it selfe speaking rather for, then any way against the same. The destruction of the Popedome must be by degrees, and the same effected by the power of God in vs of the reformed Churches. For the Angels that must plague that earthly state, come out of the Temple, the type of the true Church, as is cleere by the prophecie it selfe. These,Chap. 15. 6. and 16. 1. all of them, are commanded to poure out their plagues vpon the Earth, which is the generall tearme giuen to set out that worldly and Antichristian state. Which commandement they fulfill, and execute the decree of God vpon the seuerall parts thereof, one after another. As first, vpon the Earth of that Earthly state. And in this worke, the Lord employed, as in Bohemia, and else∣where, others; so specially in this our Realme, that va∣liant Iehu, the renowned King, Henry the eight, who tooke away the lands and possessions here, from the Anti∣christian
Locusts, dissoluing Abbeyes, and Monesta∣ries, sending that hellish rabble packing home againe to their grandsire the Pope, that king of the Locusts. Then in the next place, wrath is poured out vpon the Sea of that Earthly state, which is the Ecclesiasticall part there∣of, touching the idolatrous seruice, and worship of that man of sinne. And in this thing, the Lord vsed (I ex∣empt not here Gods worke by men in other places) that our blessed Iosias, the noble Prince, Edward the sixth, renouncing that false seruice and idolatrous worship, establishing Gods true worship among vs. In the third place, is the viall of wrath poured vpon the Riuers and fountaines of that Earthly state, that is, both vpon the heretical, and traiterous doctrines of that Sea of Rome, full of poyson, and plots of villanies; and also vpon the Teachers thereof, which come like riuers and fountains from thence, and returne backe to the same againe: all tending, to seduce people from the truth, to withdraw subiects from their allegiance, that the Romish state, whorish religion, and Sea of Rome might still be main∣tained. In this the Lord our God set on worke, that most high and mightie Princesse ELISABETH, Semper eandem, a Queene of euerlasting memory, (their name rot, that doe her not honour) a zealous professor, a true defender of the faith, a succour to all her friends and fa∣uourers of religion, a hater of Poperie and Romish pope∣lings, enemies of the truth, a myrrour to the world, and a terror to all that bare ill will to Sion, and against whom she had to doe; blessed be her name for euer. Her Ma∣iesties royall authoritie made these Riuers and foun∣taines, bloud; by causing it (and that most iustly) to be death for any Iesuits or Priests, to come with their he∣resies,
and treasonable purposes, into her dominions; and for any of her subiects so to receiue them, duly executing the lawes vpon them: who so therefore had (as they wor∣thily deserued, and according to the words of this pro∣phecie)Chap. 16. 5. 6. bloud giuen them to drinke, for shedding the bloud of the Saints & Prophets of God. In the fourth place, the wrath of God is poured vpon the Sunne of that Earthly state; that is, vpon that, which, as the sunne in the firmament, is in that state most glorious, giuing that lustre and shine vnto it, as the Sunne vnto the Earth. And this is the Popes supremacie, vpon which wrath is come, and the viall of contempt is begun to be poured vpon the same. And in this hath our gracious God set on worke, the most high and mightie Monarch of great Brittaine, our now dread Soueraigne, our wise Salomon; whose most learned penne, in his Maiesties owne Preamble to his reprinted Apologie, hath made knowne to the Christian world (for which I say, and all Gods people; O King, liue for euer), that the supremacie of the Pope, is a proud vsurpation; that hee hath been (and of due, still ought to be) subiect to Em∣perours and Kings, who are to challenge their right of him, and to take it out of the hands of that Antichristian Tyrant, that blasphemous vsurper of Gods place; who will be as God in the temple of God, yea the most greatSee Morneus his preface to the mysterie of iniquitie. and excellent God on earth, as the stile must runne of Paul the 3. Horrible blasphemy! Marueile it was, that the thunder bolt of vengeance smote him not dead from heauen. But great is the Lords patience: therefore will these monsters of men still exalt themselues, and Paulus Quintus will euen now be Vice-God; and boast of hisLib. Benedicti de Benedictis Bouoniae excuss. Anno 1608. power, being called the inuincible Monarch of the
Christian Common-wealth, and the most valiant Protector of the Pontifical power. But oh! how sud∣denly should he perish, and come to a fearefull end; if the Lord would make a combination of the hearts of Chri∣stian Kings against him, and his inuincible Monarchi∣call power in his pontificality? He would then, like Zid∣kijah, that false Prophet, runne from chamber to cham∣ber, seeking where to hide himselfe. But let him boast, and presume of his preuailing, till the time come, that the Beast be pulled out of his throne, and his kingdome become full of darknesse; which indeede is now the next thing, after the viall poured vpon the Sunne, that must come to passe. For the fifth viall must be poured vpon the Seate of the Beast, which is Rome it selfe, for thereChap. 16. 10. the Beasts seate is; as it was before, the seate of the Dra∣gon,Chap. 13. 2. which he gaue vnto the Beast. They are vnder, we see, now, the fourth viall. The fift therefore is the next, euen Romes ruine. Looke for it, in the due time, (O you valiant hearts). And when the houre commeth, feare not: but, I say, as did Ioab to Dauids armie, going to battell against the enemies of God, and their King, Be of good courage, and play2. Sam. 10. 12. the men; let your swords then doe seruice for God, and his Church: and take heed (you hoste of God) of that say∣ing, which Ieremy pronounceth in the like case; Cur∣sed be he, that doth the worke of the Lord negli∣gently, or deceitfully: and cursed be hee that kee∣peth backe his sword from bloud. These be the A∣malekites, which God hath determined vtterly to roote out. Fight ye therefore valiantly, and with stout coura∣ges. The cause is Gods. Hee will be with you, and vn∣doubtedly fight for you. Reward her (saith the Lord)
as she hath rewarded you, and double vnto herChap. 18. 6. double, according to her workes: and, in the cup she hath filled, fill to her double; onely, in the Zeale of God, for the cause of religion, and hate of Antichri∣stianisme. Let not (you Sonnes of valour) iust pietie lose her perfect worke, for fleshly and foolish pitie. For thus to repay her, is the Lords owne commandement, which may not be transgressed. But it may be, you will say to me, that you perhaps shall not be employed herein. Well, for this, know for your comfort (you that desire this honor), that this most noble Iland shall not haue the least hand in this glorious enterprise, when the time appointed shall come. For what kingdome in all Christendome, hath God made so renow∣ned in the cause of religion, as this? Was it not our Constantine, that made a world of Christians? Our Lucius, that was the first Christian Monarch? Who was so valiant and powerfull a Champion for Christ, in the time of darknesse, before him, as our Iohn Wick∣liffe? You haue heard, how the Lord hath set on worke, our valiant Henry; our noble Edward; our famous Elizabeth; and now, our most learned and renowned King. What Nation gaue euer the Pope, and Spanish power, such an ouerthrow, as this did, in the yeere 88? Hath not the Lord hitherto, euer made vs one, for his name, Church, and people, against that Antichrist? and can you thinke, he will passe vs ouer in the last act of the tragicall end of Rome? Are not we one of the ten hornes,Chap. 17. 11. 12. that gaue our kingdome once to the Beast? For who went at the Popes commaund, to the holy Land, sooner then we? Who defended the Pope, more then we? What kingdome, according to the power thereof, enriched the
Popes coffers, so much as we? What King yeelded vp his Crowne to the Popes Legate, but ours? Thus were wee for him, and so shall wee be against him. And, as theChap. 17. 2. Where made our Kings to loue her, and to commit for∣nication with her: so haue they begun to hate her, andChap. 17. 16. still shall, and be with those, as chiefe, that shall make her desolate, and naked, and eate her flesh, and burne her with fire. Consider this, you that be wise hearted, why aboue all other Nations, they haue sought to inuade vs: and why they assay by vnheard of, and vnmatchable villanies, to roote vs out from vnder heauen, if it were possible. Why the Popes Bulls so terribly rore against vs. Why those spirits of Diuels busie themselues so much a∣bout vs. Can any other reason be giuen, thē this, that the Diuell their Lord, and our deadly foe, suggesteth into them, that wee are, and shall be, one of the greatest meanes, vnder God Almightie, to bring an vtter ouer∣throw and desolation to that Antichristian state? And doe wee not all know, that there is a miraculous prote∣ction of the highest, in soueraigne authoritie? Who durst once touch King Henry the 8, who shaked that Romane state, and made it to totter? What fiend durst be-bloudie his murthering hands in Prince Edward, though hee young, did tread popish religion vnder foote? But won∣derfull was the preseruing hand of God vpon the late Queene; and no lesse ouer our now dread Soueraigne, when other haue elsewhere been cut off. And surely so long as we soundly maintaine, and vphold the faith, and truth of the Gospell, not fearing what the man of sinne can doe against vs, in spite of hell and Rome, of the Pope and all his power, we shall stand safe and sure, vnder the Almighties powerfull protection; till gloriously, in that
day of Romes vtter ruine, we triumph ouer them. Euen so, Amen. And till then, for all you, that be readie to draw your swords in this quarrell of Christ, for Christ, our King and Countrey, I heartily wish, fauour with God, honour with our King, a faithfull and holy resolution in your selues, victorie ouer the enemies, praise of the Saints, and after this life, the reward of eternall glorie in heauen, for euer and for euer. A true honourer of you, in your iust attempts, for euer RIC. BERNARD. Batcombe in Somersetshire: March, 14.
TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, a louer of truth, all friendly well-wishes. FRiendlie Reader, albeit I haue giuen some reason of my omitting to speake of the three first Chapters of the Reue∣lation, for that they seeme to all not to need any great labour to explane thē, and are vsually taken in hand of most that preach out of this prophecie; and also because Ma∣ster Perkins, a learned and reuerend Diuine, hath very largely commented thereupon; which I supposed might haue giuen al satisfaction, touching my omission of them: yet by conference with some, I perceiue that men rest not satisfied, but desire to be informed in some particulars, and especially touching an opinion of Master Bright∣mans, which is this, that the seuen Churches mentioned in the first chapter, vers. 11, and seuerall Epistles written vnto them in chap. 2. and 3, are so many types representing and containing the vniuersall condition of the whole Church of the Gentiles. Now what may bee thought of this, is the thing which many stand in question of. Some will haue thē so, and are fully of his mind; some do vtter∣ly reiect the same, as a foolish fancie, a conceit without ground or reason. I will not contend with either, neither will I presume to be an Arbitratour betweene them, to iudge of either, or to take vpon me to giue either satisfa∣ction; for in this I hold my selfe farre too weake, the point not so easie to bee cleered, and mens forestalled iudgement most hardly to be reformed: only I will (as I
hope I may without giuing iustly either side offence) set downe what I thinke hereof, with my reasons; and so leaue the matter to the indifferent iudgement of euery one, to allow or disallow, as vpon good reason they shall like best, without vncharitable contention, which from my soule I hate and detest. What Master Brightman hath held, Iunius before him in a few words saith as much; In the number of seuen, theIun. Com. on cap. 1. vers. 13. slat (saith hee) of the whole Church of Christ militant here vpon earth, is represented. And Grasser saith, that theIn his Plagae Regiae by po∣thesis. Apostle in the Epistles shadoweth out a most generall tincture of the Antichristian infection. And to me the o∣pinion seemeth probable (for otherwise will I not say of it) and my reasons be these: I. Because the number of seuen is kept here, as elsewhere in this prophecie repea∣ted 37 times; and is a number of perfection, seuen put for all of that, whereof the number is giuen: as here seuen Churches, for all the Christian Churches; so seuen stars, all the Angels of the Churches; seuen spirits, all the ma∣nifold graces of the spirit. And from this number, Iunius in his Comment. saith, that it signifieth to vs perfectly andIun. on cap. 1. vers. 4. generally the Church of Christ that is conuersant here be∣low. And it may seeme likely that the number of seuen Churches (seeing there were moe besides) was obserued of the Lord for further purpose, then to note out the pre∣sent state onely and no more. II. Because at the end of euery Epistle, though Iohn bee commanded to write to the Angell of that Church, and in him to that flocke; yet the exhortation is, to heare what the spirit saith to the Churches, and so by one, teaching all those whereof that is a type: or if you will, so by one, all the seuen, and by them the whole vniuersall Church. III. The things mentioned in the Epistles, (to wit, the allusions to the old time, in these words, Iewes, Synagogue, doctrine of Balaam, and Iesabel, not mentioned so in other Epistles, nor sound to be in any other Churches, to whom any other of the Apostles did write) may seeme to intimate hereby, that
some other thing is intended, then the discouerie only of these Churches present state. So in like manner, the pre∣dictions of ten daies persecution to Smyrna (which Ex∣positors are forced to stretch further then Smyrna, when they apply the historie to the text), biddeth vs in this Church so to consider it in affliction, as it also may type out a more generall state of Gods Church. Likewise the prediction of the houre of tentation to come vpon all the world, mentioned to Philadelphia, cannot concerne that Church in particular to haue that exemption from the same, more then the rest of Christs Church then be∣ing in that houre of tentation, but as it is here a type thereof. Furthermore, why should those Iewes in Smyr∣na be suffered to grow to such a height of wickednesse, and must be made to stoupe to no Church, but to the An∣gell and Church of Philadelphia? and why (I say) to this, and not to the other, or any of the rest, but that they bee types of the seuerall times of the state of Christs Church, as shall be shewed afterwards? IV. It is said in the end of the Reuelation, after that all future things before spo∣ken of, touching the whole Church of Christ, and of the kingdome of Antichrist, to the full, that Iesus Christ sent his Angell to testifie these things to vs in the Churches: which (as may seeme) can no otherwise be interpreted, but that these seuen Churches (for no other is mentio∣ned in the whole prophecie) doe type out to vs, what in the rest of the Reuelation is foretold, touching the Chur∣ches future estate: which words, admitting this sense, make the opinion cleere, that they set out the whole Church of Christ. V. Because there is such an answe∣rablenes of the Antitype to the type in the seuen-fold state of the Church, following so cleerely one vpon ano∣ther, as the beholding thereof may induce a man very much to entertaine this opinion. Which to see more ap∣parently, we must first make a seuen-fold state of Christs Church, as there be seuen Churches. Secondly, as these Churches are ordered and set one after another, as first
Ephesus, next Smyrna, and so foorth of the rest: so one state of the Church followeth another, the first may bee called the Ephesine state; the second, Smyrnean; the third, Pergamine; the fourth, Thyatiran, and so foorth to the seuenth and last. Thirdly, that euery Church is a type of that whole state of the Church, whereof it is a type, and doth not type out any one particular Church, as Master Brighman would haue it in some, which I take to be herein his mistake, as after I shall shew. Fourthly, These Churches are types of the Christian Church, as the same is troubled with Antichrist in his breeding, rising vp, height, the Churches knowledge of him, departing from him, and preuailing against him, as it is foretold al∣so in the rest of this prophecie. Fifthly, that in the Chur∣ches therefore, wee must take notice of two things: first of the same as it is the Church of God, with her graces and defects; and then next, of Satan his instruments in euery of them: that so by the one, Christ and his Church may be typed out, and Antichrist by the other; and the false Church may bee discerned in euery state, as farre foorth as they be mentioned together, which is apparent∣ly in the foure first Churches, but not in the three last. The foure first set out the state of Christs Church, where∣in and among whom Satan bred vp his eldest sonne An∣tichrist, till that false Church came to bee Iesabel, that whore of Babylon; the three last set out the three-fold state of the Church, come out of Babylon. For let it bee marked, and the Reader shall see, that in the foure first there is mention made of the instruments of Satan, pra∣ctising euill, getting strength ouer the godly; but not so in the three last, being not at all in them named, but only once for the ioy and comfort of the Church. These things thus being first considered of, I will, ac∣cording to my poore abilitie, shew how these seuen Churches type out the seuen-fold state of the whole Church of Christ, the Antitype answering fitly to euery type. The first type is Ephesus, the Angell of which
Church is commended for labour, patience, zeale, the vsing of his authoritie with boldnesse and wisedome a∣gainst the wicked, and hating the deedes of the Nicolai∣tans, and yet at the length did decay in loue. In this Church were such as tooke vpon them the name of A∣postles, but were none. The Antitype to this is the Ephe∣sine state, as I may call it, because the one is like the o∣ther. And this is that which we call the Primitiue Church, or first Christian Church, during the time of the Apo∣stles, and Apostolicall men, their immediate successors; or, as some thinke, to Constantine the Great: in which these vertues of this Church of Ephesus did shine, This first Christian Church was full of good workes, PastorsIust. Mar. A∣pol. 2. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 33. Iust. Apol. 2. Cyprians Epi∣stles. painfull in teaching, the wicked not tolerated among them, but the censure of the Church passed vpon the ob∣stinate, Tertul. Apologet. cap. 39. Origen in his treatise on Matth. 35. Hom. 7. on Iosua. Great was the patience of the Saints and Teachers in the Church, whom persecu∣tions could not daunt. Stories are plentifull for this. In which time the deedes of the Nicolaitans were hated, the Church was a pure virgine, from fleshly filthinesse and spirituall fornication, it had not yet waxed wanton with fleshly deuices of humane wisedome. But as the Angell of Ephesus left off his loue at length, euen so this Ephesine state decaied in the first loue, declining there∣by to worse and worse; as may be gathered from Cyprian,Epist. lib. 4. 4. and Eusebius speaking of the Church a little before Dio∣clesian. It seemeth to bee like the state of the Israelites, who serued the Lord all the daies of Iesua and Elders ouerliuing him, but after fell away. Now Satan, in this defection of the Churches loue, slept not; but when she began to be drowsie, hee awoke and rose vp to sow tares. And as Ephesus had counterfeit Apostles, the picture of false Teachers; so had this Ephe∣sine state detestable Heretikes, Menander, Ebion, Cerin∣thus and diuers others. And thus wee see Ephesus, the type; and the Primitiue Church, the Ephesine state.
The second type is Smyrna, poore and in affliction, yea and the same foretold to bee greater afterwards, though the time should not be long. This poore afflicted Church is approued of God, as rich. The Antitype is the Smyrnean state, which followed vpon the Ephesine, and was from Constantine the Great, (if the former extended thither) vnto the time of the Em∣perour Gratian, for that so the type and this Antitype a∣greeth. This Smyrnean state was poore and afflicted, more towards the end, then at the first; yet were euen there found such as were, as this Angell of Smyrna, rich in gifts and graces, earnestly contending for the truth; such a one was Athanasius, a right Smyrnean Angell. But this state is better seene by considering the false Church, of which much is spoken in the type. At this time Satans kingdome was greatly encreased. His false Apostles in the Ephesine state, had so bestirred themselues, as now in this Smyrnean there was a Syna∣gogue of Satan; before, onely a sending out of his Apo∣stles to gather a false Church, and here in this state it was effected. So as now the counterfeit Christians, and false Iewes, blasphemed the true seruants of Christ, the true Smyrnean Angels; and they onely would bee the true Church. So heere was now Christians (in name) persecu∣tingSocra. lib. 2. 4. Theod. lib. 2. & 4. Sozom. lib. 3. 4. 6 Christians in deed. These Iewes in type were Arian Bishops and their fauourites in this Antitype, who would be the true Church, but were indeede the Synagogue of Satan, and fore-runners of Antichrist. For from almost the beginning of the Ephesine state in Iohns time, were many Antichrists, and the mysterie of iniquitie was in working; and the now Antichrist of Rome his seate was by Satan in these great broyles (yea and bloudy persecu∣tions) in preparing: when at this time a golden scepter was offered to Syluester, then Bishop of Rome, by Con∣stantine;Anno 314. Sa∣bell. which howsoeuer it was refused, yet we may see Satans working, and abusing the Emperors good mind, to get vp, in this Smyrnean state, his sonne of perdition
into the chaire of pestilence, and high throne, of which in the next Pergamine state. The third type is Pergamus, in a miserable condition, dwelling where Satans throne was, yet holding con∣stantly the truth, euen when some did suffer martyrdome for it, and when Balaamites and Nicolaitans were among them, which they too much bare with; so as the throne of Satan was erected, and false waies taught. The Antitype is the Pergamine state following vpon the Smyrnean, which taking beginning from the time of Gratian, vnto the Popes, seated in their supremacie at Rome, the Diuels thrones, called the seate of the Dra∣gon, Reuel. 13. 2. continued a long time after, till neere the time of Iohn Wickliffe. In which time there yet were Pergamine Angels, such as held fast the truth of God. And of that Church were holy Martyrs suffering death. Such were Antipases, a sit name to the Martyr in the type to be called Antipas, to set out the Martyrs now in this state; who might haue y• name, either because the whole world went after the Beast, and so they against all; or else for that they were against the Bishop of Rome, called Papa, and so they Antipapa, for contending against the Pope and his pride. Among such Martyrs were the Bi∣shop of Florentine, one Arnulphus, Gerardus, and Dul∣cimus Nauarensis, with others. Yet this was a fault in this Pergamine state of the true Church, that though some suffered, yet the Church is blamed for too much forbearing; this was her weaknesse. But now, touching the false Church. In the type at Pergamus, there was Satans throne, the murthering of Antipas, Teachers of the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans: so now, in the Antitype at Rome, the Pope inthronized in his supremacie by Satan, who, as it was said, in the Ephesine state, sent out his false Apostles; in the Smyrnean, got a Synagogue and false Church; and here in the Pergamine, a throne: in which the sonne of perdition being setled, murthered many An∣tipases,
and like a false Prophet (as he is called, Reuel. 20. 19, euen another Balaam) taught Balacs, that is, the kings of the earth, to cast a stumbling blocke before the chil∣dren of Israel. That is, hee made them to take his part, to vphold his wicked Decrees, Canons, Constitutions, and Popish doctrines, and to force Christians to the obedi∣ence of the same; to eate things sacrificed to Idols, that is, to allow of his Antichristian Idolatrie, worshipping of Images, and praying to Saints, and so to commit whoredome against the Lord. Yea, such was his filthi∣nesse, that the Nicolaitans doctrine must be held, that is, stewes must bee allowed; and rather then some sort of persons should marry, fornication must bee committed, yea and mens wiues abused, being done cautè, though not castè, as the old saying hath been among them. These things are so knowne, as the very relation, without wit∣nesse of storie, is sufficient. The fourth type is Thyatira, which is commended for loue, seruice, faith, patience, workes, and that the last workes were more then the first: yet herein faultie, in tolerating Iesabel the false Prophetesse among them, which Satan had raised to deceiue the people. The Antitype is the Thyatirane state, following vpon the Pergamine, beginning somewhat before the twelfth hundreth yeere of Christ, when certain godly men prea∣ched openly against Antichrist, and many other things in Poperie. In this time were the Waldenses, and other moe,Tripart. hist. & Henr. Monachus Tolosanus. who shewed the commendable vertues of Thyatira; much charitie, seruice, faith, patience, and good workes. Which state increased more and more in weldoing. For God raised vp Wickliffe, and after him Iohn Hus, and Ie∣rome of Prage, which greatly discouered the tyrannie, idolatrie, and filthinesse of Rome, so as the Bohemians would no more be vnder the Diuels throne, as they had been. But towards the end this Thyatirane state passed her beginning and middle state, (in which, Iosabel was too much suffered of many) when Luther with others
shaked the Popes throne so, as they made him to quake, and his throne to continue tottering vnto this day. Thus much touching the true Church in this Thyatirane state. Now for the false Church in the time of this state, when Satan perceiued how now the game went; that the authoritie of his hellish sonne vpon his infernall throne, could not preuaile any further, but that the Thy∣atirane Angels would breake out from vnder his obe∣dience: to keepe the Kings and inhabitants of the earth still vnto the sea of Rome, hee taught the Romish Syna∣gogue to act Iesabels part, euen to play the whore, the deceitfull Sorceresse, to paint now out her selfe with glo∣rious titles of antiquitie, vniuersalitie, consent, the Mo∣ther Church, the Catholike Church, the seate of S. Peter, and many other such paintings: hauing also her false pro∣phets to sooth her vp, as the onely Prophetesse and true Church that cannot erre; yea to worke miracles, thereby seducing the world, and enticing earthly mindes to com∣mit whoredome with her, as is at large set out in Reuel. 13, and 17. Which great Whore there, is this Iesabel here, whom (as in chapter 18) the Lord threatens to de∣stroy: so heere in this place, to kill her children with death. The fifth type is Sardis, which had workes, and gotten a name of life; but in the generall state was dead, hauing onely a few names, which defiled not their garments. In this Church is no mention of false Apostles, Iewes, Sy∣nagogue of Satan, Balaam, Nicolaitans, Iesabel, or any such; because this is a type of the Church, and the first of the three come out from Babylon. The Antitype is the Sardine state, the first state of the reformed Church escaped from the Whore; and there∣fore is not here either Balaam, or Iesabel mentioned, but the Church is considered as being come out of Babylon. This begun with Luthers time, and holdeth on to the time of the Harmony of Confessions published. In this
state the Lutheran Churches got a name, in which they seemed to reioyce more, as being come out from Rome; and were no Papists, then, indeed, sound Protestants. For, as it was said of the type, that her workes were not per∣fect: so may it bee said of these in this Antitype, that their workes are imperfect, as appeareth by their erro∣neous doctrines, and remainders of Popish deuices a∣mong them. Yet in this Sardine state there was to bee found a few names, that is, some particular Churches, which cleerely quit themselues of Popery, so as their gar∣ments were not defiled therewith, as is sufficiently well knowne. The sixth type is Philadelphia, which hath a doore o∣pen before her, and none can shut it; and though her strength be small, yet she holdeth the saith, and word of truth; and to her shall the false Iewes bee made subiect, and doe her all honour, as beloued of the Lord. The Antitype is the Philadelphian state, and is now that wherein we doe liue, and shall continue to the ouer∣throw of Rome. In this state, the passage of the Gospell shall be no more letted; the doore is open by the power of Christ, and no man shall shut it: though our strength (in the reason of man) be very little, the word shall be vp∣held, til the false Iewes (the Romish Catholikes) be made to stoope vnto vs, as wee haue afore time been subiect to Rome. And lest this might seeme incredible, the Lord saith. I, (that is, he himselfe,) will make them come and worship at our feete: it will be his worke, and not mans: neither shall this be done for our desert, but his own loue to vs will bring it to passe; that they may know, that the Lord loueth vs. This is the beloued state, this is the Phila∣delphian state, beginning with the Harmonie and sweete consent of Confessions, wherein brotherly loue should abound: which the Lord grant, euen for his Gospels sake, our peace, and the Enemies destruction. The seuenth type is Laodicea, a luke-warme Church, neither hot nor cold, without all praises.
The Antitype is the Laodician state, which followeth next vpon this Philadelphian, after the Church of Christ hath gotten full victorie ouer the Enemies, and shall be inriched with abundance of all things, wanting no∣thing; which is that, which breedeth luke-warmnesse. This state then is not yet. For first, in the Philadelphian state, the Enemies must be made to stoupe to vs, which is not yet come to passe: then a tentation must come ouer the world, from which mercifully the Philadelphian state shall be preserued; which I take to be the great bat∣tell at Armageddon, Reu. 16. 16. vpon which shall come such an Earthquake and alteration, as was neuer, since men dwelt vpon the earth: and lastly, as is said, in the Philadelphian state y• Church must grow to such wealth after these things, and enioy such peace and liue so se∣curely, as shall breed that Laodician condition and state, a time like the daies of Noah, before the comming of the Sonne of man. But here wee must thinke, that the fol∣lowing state shall not bee so of a sudden; but onely by length of daies, after the Church hath florished glori∣ously for a time in a most gracefull state; as the new Ieru∣salem, in a very vnspeakable manner. These things being so, this sheweth vs Master Bright∣mans errour, in making the Church of England to be ty∣ped out by the Church of, Laodicea: when wee see, that these bee no types of any particular Church in any one Countrey or other; but are types generall, of a generall state of Christ his Church. And hee himselfe maketh no such particular application in any of the first types; nei∣ther, indeed, could hee, nor in this ought hee so to haue done. I cannot but blesse the Lord for very many things in his Commentary vpon the Reuelation; as (be it spoken without offence to any) being the best of most before him, that I haue read of, and a labour praise worthie; but for descending to such particulars, as by the text and words of the prophecie cannot be made good. And yet haue I obserued, that for these particular applications, his
booke hath been more bought vp, then for the rest of his most praise-worthie labour; and the same places so ap∣plied, most studied of all other: by some for the pleasure they take in them, but without good ground from the text; and by othersome, to carpe so at them, as thereby they may vilifie all the rest of his paines; by which both the one sort and the other might greatly profit them∣selues, if they would lay aside their by-respects in their readings, and giue themselues to the best things, and make a right vse thereof, in his and other mens labours. But as their sinister readings on the one side, maketh thē cunning, perhaps, in their picked places; so it maketh them barten in the rest of the prophecie, which I finde many very ignorant of, and yet can name very readily the fore-mentioned places. But I leaue them both, the one sort to their selfe-pleasing fancifulnes, and the other to their ill-bent carping peruersnes, til the Lord teach them a better way to reade godly mens labours. Thus (Christian Reader) haue I, as I promised, shewed briefly, what I thinke probably of this opinion touching these seuen Churches. In which (besides what hath been spoken) may bee obserued a gradation of corruption in euery state, as if one came out of another. As, defeat of loue, or decay of zeale, in the Ephesine state, brought This is implied in the exhort. Reu. 2. 10. feare of man, in the Smyrnean. This feare brought forth a forbearing to deale with the wicked, in the Pergamine. This forbearing brought a plaine toleration, in the Thya∣tirane. This brought foorth a meere conformitie to a bare outward profession, without the life of religion, in the Sardine. And hereto a superioritie being added, and peace obtained ouer Enemies, in the Philadelphian, brought foorth luke-warmnesse in the Laodician state. And as these may be noted in the states of the Churches; so here may bee obserued certaine steps, one after ano∣ther, in the working of the mysterie of iniquitie in the foure first Churches. Where we may see, how Satan be∣gun it with subtiltie, sending out his wicked seedsmen
vnder the name of Apostles: he increased it by hypocrifie, & contempt of the godly, by making men to professe to be that they were not, and to speake ill of other better then themselues: he inforced it by Tyrannie, hauing exalted it into a throne: and lastly, hee did vphold it by wicked sorcerie, and all manner of deceiueablenesse of vnrighte∣ousnesse, by which to this day that Iesabel of Rome yet remaineth, and so shall, till the appointed time come, of her finall destruction. Which Kings and Princes must at∣chieue by the sword; which Preachers must vrge them vnto by the word; and which people must heartily pray for: which I doe; and so (friendly Reader) oughtest thou to doe, and thou verely wilt doe, if thou beest a sound Protestant, a Protestant in good earnest, which I hope thou art; and if thou beest not, I pray God thou maist be, and so I bid thee heartily fare∣well. Thine, as thou art Christs, R. B. Batcombe: March 14.
THE WRITERS VPON THE Apocalyps, read by the Author of this booke, for his helpe and furtherance to the vn∣derstanding of that heauenly Prophecie. Andraeas Caesariensis. Rich. de Sancto Victore Rupertus. Haymo. Thomas Aquinas. Dionys. Carthusianus. Marlorat. Bullingerus. Lambertus. Meyerus. Aretius with N. Coladō. Leoninus. Fox. Eglinus. Grasserus. Piscator. Carolus Gallus. Iunius. Bezae annotat. Brocardus. Forthus. Alphonsus Conradus. Brightmanus. Napier. Fulk. Gyffard. Dent. His Maiesties Medita∣tions. Simonds. Forbes. Broughton. Bale. Tafin. Master Perkins. Pererius. Ribera. Viegas. Bulengerus. Alcassar, omniū pessim{us}. Reade we may all of all sorts: but in the first place, the best and last of our owne, and other reformed Chur∣ches; the more ancient, as liuing in greater darknesse, and so not so well seene into this prophecie, in the se∣cond place. And the enemies, as per∣uerters, in the last place.
THE CONTENTS OF this Booke. I. That this booke of the Reuelation, is to be dili∣gently studied of all sorts, in these last times. II. That it is an Apocalypsis, and not an Apocrypsis, but a mysterie made manifest. III. What hath made this booke till these later times so obscure; wherein the obscuritie lieth; and to whom (chiefly) it becommeth so hard to be vn∣derstood. IV. What is to be done, to come to the vnderstanding thereof, to remoue the obscurities, and so rightly to expound the same. V. An interpretation giuen, of all the most difficult things in the Chapters, throughout the whole booke.
A KEY OF KNOW∣LEDGE, FOR THE OPENING of the secret mysteries of S. Iohns my∣sticall Reuelation. THE FIRST PART. CHAP. I. The summe of this chapter. This booke ought to be more diligently searched into, and better knowne of all Christians of what estate and degree soeuer, of Magistrates, of Ministers, and people, then it is. Manifold are the reasons to perswade all Christs seruants to reade, heart, and carefully to studie it. THE verie title may greatlieReasons mouing to reade and stu∣die this booke. moue. It is not the Vision of Esay, or of Obediah, but the Reuelation of Iesus Christ. A more excellent title then all the Prophecies that euer∣were , the title. before it▪ Many times faire titles prefixed to mens workes not answering to such glorious titles yet doe intice vs to take vp and reade, yea the very name of an Author maketh currant often times his labour, and shall this ex∣cellent
title, and the name of Iesus Christ, the Au∣thor hereof, be no inducement to vs to take vp, and reade? It is fore-fronted with admirable grace of autho∣ritie,2 Reason, the au∣thoritie. not any other treatise of the sacred Bible hath so worthie a fore-speech to begin it with, as this hath. It was giuen by God the Father, to his Sonne Iesus Christ, who signified it by an Angell to Iohn; and this beloued Apostle, receiuing it by the aide of Gods spirit, hath written it at Christs comman∣dement for vs. Behold here the grace, the maiesti∣call authoritie of this diuine booke! shall not the carelesse neglect hereof cause vs to bee guiltie of too great prophanesse? weigh and consider. The words of this booke are the true sayings of3. Reason, the veritie, cap. 19. 9 and 21. 5. and 22. 6. God, they be true and faithfull, by the testimonie of God sitting vpon his throne, and by the witnesse of his Angell. The loue therefore of the truth, should moue all the louers of this truth, to studie the same. The booke was reuealed for this end, to be shew∣ed4. Reason, the end, cap. 1. 1. and 22. 6. to the seruants of Christ; it was vnsealed for that purpose, therefore the seruants of God should thankfully receiue it, and care to learne what here∣in he would haue them to know that they may not be guiltie of neglecting the grace offered from so high and excellent a Maiesty, much lesse contemne the studie thereof, as some doe too irreligiously. Iesus Christ giueth a commandement to euery5. Reason, Christ a commandement, cap. 2. 7 11. 17. 19. and 3. 6. 13. 2. and 13. 9. one that hath an eare to heare, to hearken what the spirit of God saith vnto the Churches; and to shew how earnest Christ Iesus is, to haue all his people acquainted with the things reuealed in this booke,
this his charge he repeateth eight times, as the quo∣ted places shew. A blessing is pronounced vpon the reader, hea∣rer,6. Reason, a bles∣sing, cap. 1. 3. and 22. 7. and doer of the things written in this booke; if wee beleeue this to be a true saying, and that wee iudge it any thing worth to be blessed, let vs reade, heare and studie to keepe the things here foretold. Such as keepe the sayings of this booke, are fel∣low-seruants7. Reason, com∣panion with Angels; cap. 22. 9 with the holy Angels, for so speaketh the Angell of God himselfe vnto Iohn, so much ac∣count doe they make of them that become obedi∣ent to Gods will herein. The excellencie of this booke is such, as neither8. Reason, the excellencie of this booke, cap. 5 man nor Angel, none in heauen, earth, or vnder the earth was found worthie so much as to looke into this booke, till Iesus Christ went and tooke it out of his Fathers hand to open it vnto vs. The benefit of this booke so much concerneth9. Reason. the profit of it, cap. 5. 8. 9.-14. the good of the whole Church, as, when Christ had preuailed to open it all the creatures of God, men and Angels sang praises vnto him therefore. The blessed Apostle Iohn could not but weepe10. Reason, the Apostles desire, chap. 5. 4. for feare that this booke should haue bin kept close from him, and from the Church; such an earnest spirit was in him to know those things which wee neglect to know. Albeit it bee the last booke of the Bible, it is11. Reason, the paines of other. thought yet to bee the first that euer receiued any mans exposition, as a booke thought most necessa∣rieBale his Pre∣face to the image of both Chur∣ches. to be knowne of Christians. The exāples there∣fore of former and later Diuines, first and last ta∣king paines to comment hereupon, should make
vs that come after them, and haue their helpes be∣fore vs, to be studious herein. It as much belōgeth vnto vs now liuing as it did12. Reason, it concerneth vs. vnto others in times past, and as it shall vnto those which are to come after vs; for it concerneth the whole Church to the worlds end, the state whereof is fully set foorth through her whole course vpon the earth, till all be fulfilled and this tragicall Co∣medie bee ended, the great and last Acts whereof are shortly to come vpon the world; at the finish∣ing whereof the Plaudite shall be giuen to Christ by the voyce of a great multitude, as the voyce of many waters, and as the voyce of mightie thun∣drings, saying, Halleluiah, the Lord God omnipotentChap. 19. 6. reigneth. The matter of the booke may moue to the stu∣dying13. Reason, the matter of this booke, which is foure-fold. thereof, which is foure-fold, Dogmaticall, Morall, Historicall, Propheticall. Dogmaticall is that which serues to strengthen our faith in the points of our Christianitie the particulars whereof are many. I. Concerning the whole Trinitie, chap. 1.Dogmaticall points. 4. 5. II. Of Christ for his humanitie, chap. 1. 13. Di∣uinitie, chap 2. 18. his power and properties plentiful¦ly set downe in many places chap. 1. 5.-7. 13.-16. chap. 2. 1. 8. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. 14. besides other pla∣ces, speaking of his Omniscience, chap. 2. 23. and 5. 4. 5. His care for the Church, chap. 7. 17. and 1. 9. 10. 11. and 10. 2. and 14. 1. and 12. 7. His soueraigne power ouer all chap. 19. 16. and 17. 14. and 1. 5. ouer Angels, chap. 1. 1. His victorie ouer his ene∣mies chap. 1. and 17. 14. and 19. 20. and his righte∣ous iudgement chap. 18. 14. and 19. 7. III. Of An∣gels
who are obedient to Christ, chap. 1. 1. and 22. 6. They are for the Church, reioycing with it, chap. 5. and compassing about it, chap. 4. They are the fel∣low-seruants and brethren of the Prophets and Saints, chap. 22. 9. They refuse to be worshipped, chap. 19. 10. and will haue God be worshipped, they are innumerable, chap. 5. IV. Of the Church, shewing what she is, a woman glorious, 12. 1. the Spouse of Christ chap. 21. 2. 9. the new Ierusalem, chap. 21. 1. the holy Citie, chap. 11. 2. Here is noted her attire, chap. 19. 8. her Crowne, chap. 12. 1. her footstoole, chap. 12. 1. her Defender, chap 12. 7. and 14. 14. her Ministers, chap. 11. the body of which she consisteth, chap. 4. 14. and 17. 14. Whence they be, chap. 5. 9. and 19. 4. their raiment, chap. 19. 14. and their Guide, chap. 14. Also whom she serueth, chap. 5. 12. 14. and 19. 7. and 4. 11. and how long, chap. 7. 15. Eue esus Christ day and night, cap. 5. 12. 14. and 19. 7. and 4. 11. who therefore giueth her constancie, chap. 12. 11. victorie, chap. 12. 11. and great rewards, chap. 2. 7. 17. and 3. 10. with vn∣speakable comforts, chap. 7. 15. 16. 17. V. Of the kingdom of darknesse, & the enemies of the Church, of the Diuell, chap. 2. and 12. 9. and 20. 11. of his grand instruments, the beast and false prophet cap. 13. and their practises against the Church, chap 11. and their vtter ouerthrow by Christ in the end, chap. 19. 20. and 20. 10. Morall matters concerning vertue and vice,Morall matters in this prophecy. this booke is plentifully stored with. Here be pre∣cepts affirmatiue imposing vpon vs duties of ver∣tuous liuing, pressed by exhortations thereunto;
neither want heere promises of reward and due praises for well doing, for incouragements therein, chap. 2. 3. and 22. 14. 15. and 14. 13. and 20. 6. The ex∣ample, illustrating these precepts, is the Spouse and Church of Christ, euen the elect, chosen, and faithfull, whose loue to the truth, feruent zeale, strong faith, rare constancie, admirable patience and other most excellent Christian vertues, are here left vs for our godly imitation. On the other side, here be negatiue commandemēts forbidding all vicious liuing, with manifold disswasions from the same. Here the offender is reproued, and the impenitent threatned with destruction, chap. 2. and 3. and 14. 10. 11. and 21. 7. 8. Neither doe here want examples to explaine the same. Are not here to be found the authors of al mischiefe, both within and without the Church? Here may wee reade of the Diuell and the Dragon, chap. 12. of the first and se∣cond beast, the false prophet, chap. 13. of the filthie Nicolaitans, deceitfull Palaamites, bewitching Iesabel, chap. . the deuouring Locusts, chap. 9. and seducing spirits of diuels, cap. 16. The whole booke is spred ouer with store of examples, yea it may bee as a faire table, in which is pourtraied and drawne out to the view of the eye, liuely pictures of the vertuous, and vicious; of the good and bad, of E∣lect and Cast-awaies; and of such as go the way of life to glorie euerlasting, or the way of death to endlesse paine. Historicall is the matter concerning the state ofHistoricall mat∣ter. the Church, from the daies of Iohn in Patmos hi¦therto, now aboue fifteene hundred yeeres. In the
reading whereof (as farre as we consider the things to be fulfilled) we may see how in Iohns daies, when he did write this Reuelation, Satan had began to sowe his tares among the Lords wheate, sending foorth false Teachers of all sorts, to breed heresies, to raise contentions, to intice to Idolatrie, and fil∣thinesse, and in a word, either to ouerthrow vtterly, or at least greatly to hinder the holy profession of Christian religion. Of these things may wee reade in cap. . and 3. to be sound in the particular Chur∣ches. But Satan not herewith contented, being full of mischiefe and inueterate malice against the true Church, raised vp bloodie persecutions against all Christians by cruell heathenish Tyrants, who put to death infinite innocents: which wicked outrage and crueltie, Christ Iesus auenged vpon the heads of these miscreants to the full (of this we may reade chap. 12. and 6). And in time raised vp a Christian Emperour, by whom was expelled the Dragons heathen power from ruling ouer the Church, and through whose embracing of Christianitie, there became a world of Christians; among whom the elect, faithfull, and true people of Christ were hap∣pily preserued, albeit Satan assaied once more by a flood of nations, a barbarous people in this out∣ward furie and rage, to haue destroyed the remnant of the Church, chap. 12. But at the length finding his force to be of no force, he turned his course into subtill fraude, and so wrought, that hee bred his grand-child, that Antichrist and Pope of Rome the Dragons substitute; who after deadly schismes, damnable heresies, (he falling as a starre from hea∣uen,
apostating from the truth through Gods per∣mission, and Satans power secretly working in and by him) led (through the thick smoake of darke ig∣norance) the Christian world captiue againe into heathenish waies, into heretical doctrines and ido∣latrous courses; and became so great, that whosoe∣uer would not submit themselues to his yoke, were not suffered to liue; (of this we may reade, chap. 8. and 9. and 13.) and vnder this spirituall yoake of bondage liued the true Church troden vnder foote a long time, (cap. 11.) mercifully yet protected by the Lord Iesus, (chap. 7. and 14.) vntill the time came that Antichrist must be reuealed; then the Lord gaue his word vnto his seruants & sent them foorth to preach, (cap. 10.) who (though they indu∣red great and bloodie persecutions) yet preuailed against the beast, Christ plaguing his enemies, and making successefully powerfull the labour of his seruants, by whom hitherto hee hath gotten the vi∣ctorie, and also now begun to poure foorth the vials of wrath against that Antichristiā state, which is fallen into a deadly consumptiō. Of these things thus fulfilled, as the matter of Historie, may wee reade in chap. 7. and 11. and 14. and 15, and some part of the 16. Chapter. The Propheticall matter (if we consider the bookPropheticall matter. from and in the time when Iohn wrote) was the most of the matter contained in it, and therefore called a prophecie, chap. 1. 3. but now passing ouer that which is fulfilled, as historicall, only that part, and so much of the booke as remaineth yet to come to passe, is propheticall; fore-telling the vt∣ter
ruine of Rome, and Romish Hierarchie, with al the enemies of the true Church of Christ, as also after that, the most happie condition of Gods peo∣ple freed from their enemies, for which they shall reioyce and sing. Which things are recorded in some part of the chap. 16. in the whole: 17. and 18. and 19. and 20. and 21. and 22. chapters. Thus brief∣ly as I could, haue I laid open the matter of this booke, still to perswade, to the diligent reading of the same. THE OBIECTIONS THAT MAY be made to hinder the studie of this booke. I. Obiect. This booke is vnpleasing, and there is no delight in the reading thereof. Answ. A godly mans delight is, to meditate in Gods Booke, for therein hee findeth pleasure and ioy. That the words of this booke are the say∣ings of God, faithfull and true, wee haue heard; what causeth it to be so vnpleasing then? But to sa∣tisfieThis booke af∣foords as much delight to an vnderstanding Reader, as any part of Scriptare. It is full of all varieties. thee herein, this booke to an intelligent rea∣der, will affoord as much delight, as any other booke of Scripture whatsoeuer, it is full of variety, for all sorts and conditions of men. To them that delight in historie, or in the knowledge of future predictions, here is a propheticall historie, and an historicall prophecie, for them from Iohns dayes to the worlds end. Heere the Linguist hath the Origi∣nall text, and plentie of Hebraismes for his studie. Heere are tropes and figures for the Rhetorician,
variety of numbers for the Arithmetician: the na∣turall Philosopher may discourse of the Lambe and Lion, of the Leopard, the Beare, and the Dragon, of Frogs and Locusts, of Horses, and of Eagles; al∣so of thunder and lightening, haile, and earth∣quakes. The Astronomer may shew his skill of the heauens, sunne, moone, and starres. Here be strange and rare pictures for the most cunning Apelles that euer was, of Christ, of his Church, of the Dra∣gon, the beast, and false prophet, of the holy Citie and Temple, and of what not through the whole booke? Is any skilfull in mettals? Here is for him gold, siluer, brasse, and iron. Art thou a Lapidarie? behold pearles and precious stones; the Iasper, the Sardine, the Emerauld, and Carbuncle, the Sa∣phir, Chalcedonie, Sardonix, Chrysolite, and Be∣rill, the Topas, the Chrysoprasus, the Iacinct, and the Amethist. But what need I to run on in particu∣lar instances thus? seeing this book is full of simili∣tudesIt is adorned with similitudes fetched almost from euery thing. fetched from euery thing: from heauen, sun, moone, and starres: from the rain-bow, windes, haile, thundering, and lightening; from the ayre, fire, water, sea, riuers, fountaines; from the earth, and earth-quakes, Ilands, and mountaines; from foules, fishes, beasts, and creeping things; from An∣gels, and men; from trees, grasse, greene hearbs; from wild wildernesses, and Cities inhabited; from warre hosts, and armies the sword and battell, hor∣ses and Chariots, with triumph and victorie; from high callings, Princes, Kings, Priests, & Prophets, Merchants, and sea-men; from thrones, crownes, and seates; from musicke, and musitians, pipers,
trumpetters, harpes, viols, and sound of voices; from rayment, long robes, golden girdles, fine white linnen purple, silke, and scarlet; from vessels of thin wood, iuorie, brasse, and marble; yea heere is mention of Cinamon, odours, oyntments, fran∣kincense wine, oyle, fine flower and wheat, of the vintage and haruest; a very world of particulars is mentioned in this booke: so as if the heauen or the earth, or any thing in either of them, either of na∣ture, or art may intice a reader, this booke may allure him to the studie hereof. And besides allHere be plea∣sant allusions to the state of the ancient people of God vnder the Law. these, heere the Christian by allusions may behold the state of the old and ancient people of God vn∣der the Law, their Kings, Priests, Elders, Temple, Arke, Tabernacle, Altars, seruice and worship, and also Ierusalē the holy Citie: as if in mentioning of these, Iohn were Iudaizing & leading vs againe to the old Law abolished▪ And the Iewes (if now God would open their eyes) may see in their owne ce∣remonies, Citie, Temple, Priests, Altars, and in∣cense; in their Kings and Elders, the glorious state of the Christian Church, certainly established by the blood of their promised Messias,  blessed Sauiour. Great herefore is the delight and pleasure, which may bee had in reading and study∣ing of this booke. II. Obiect. Albeit it may hereby  indeed to be pleasant, and to affoord deligh  so great variety of things herein mentioned, yet the profit will be littled perhaps not worth the labour which a stdious reader would bestow vpon it. Answ. The booke is as profitable as pleasant,This booke is as profitable as pleasant.
and more too: indeed, the benefit of this booke being vnfolded and made knowne, is more then by pen can be set downe, or by the tongue bee vtte∣red. I. We may see by this, all things falling out, in,The first benefit of this booke. with, or against the Church of Christ, from the day of the reuelation hereof vnto the worlds end, to haue been by God fore-determined. So as nothingChap. 1. 19. and 4. 1. and 5. 1. hath, doth, or heereafter shall come to passe by chance, by policie of the Church, by the subtiltie of the enemies; but onely according to the good will and pleasure of God, guiding and ordering all things, in all circumstances, by the had of his pro∣uidence, in diuine wisedome, to the glory of his name, and good of his Church. This will cause pa∣tience, quietnesse of spirit, & a submitting of our wills vnto Gods will, in all the Churches change∣able courses, whether in ebbing or flowing, rising or falling, in peace, or vnder persecution; and neuer to feare the enemie, who can do nothing, but what is fore-ordained. II. Wee haue heere a booke of Martyrs, shew∣ingThe second benefit. Chap. 2. 13. and 6. 9. 11. and 11. 3. 7. 8. and 12. 11. Chap. 9. & 12. and 13. and 14. and 16. and 17. and 18. and 19. and 20. the sufferings of the godly, their zeale, and pa∣tience, and tribulation; their opposing of the ad∣uersaries, their death and martyrdome; with all the enemies, policies, and cruelties, and Gods re∣uengefull hand vpon them for the same. The consi∣deration whereof may affoord vs examples wor∣thie our imitation in the one; and in the other, cause of thankfulnesse to God, taking his peoples part: and to be couragious, and confidently bold in the Lords quarrell still against these enemies, as
the godly before vs haue been. III. We heere may learne, who were the ene∣miesThe third be∣nefit. cap. 12. and 13. and 9. and 11. and 17. 18. 19. 20. of the Church, who now be, and hereafter shal be, with their nature, courses, intendments, and practises, from their vprising, to their fall and vt∣ter ruine; by which wee may learne truly to dis∣cerne them, to stand against them, to watch, and stand continually armed in the defence of the truth to preuent their mischiefes. IV. Wee may heere see Christs presence euerThe fourth be∣nefit. cap. 1. 13. and 14. 1. and 4. and 5. and 7. cap. 11. 17. 1. and 19. 1-21. and 21. and 22. with his Church, his care to teach them, and to preuent their destruction in a world of mischiefes, safely carying them through all the flouds of euils (with which earthly mindes were ouerwhelmed) and sending them safe (as the Israelites) to the shore, there to behold the vtter destruction of all their enemies. This will strengthen our faith, encrease our ioy, comfort our hearts in a ioy∣full expectation, and keepe vs constant vnto the end.The fifth be∣nefit. cap. 17. and 13. and 18. V. Hereby may we see, if wee will see the cleere light at noone day, that Rome (not heathenish, but professing Christ) is Babylon, the Pope, that Anti∣christ, & false prophet, vnder the name of Christ, to be the very enemy of Iesus Christ, & that star fallen from heauen, whose Egyptian cruelty, sodomiticalcap. 13. and. 19. and 9. practises, and Heathenish Idolatrie, sorceries and deceits, hath brought vpon the Christian world,cap. 11. 8. and 9. 20. 21. and 18. 23. the furious and hellish rage of the Turkish power, as a plague, in his wrath, for this Romish iniquitie. This should cause all Christians to detest Pope and poperie, and such as yet remaine vnder his iu∣risdiction,
to get out quickly from vnder that who∣rish gouernment, and bloody state; and wee, thatCap. 9. 14. 21. haue escaped, should bee moued heereby to sing praises vnto God for euer. VI. By this booke may we, the reformed Chur∣ches,The sixth be∣nefit. the true members of Christs Church, know our happie estate, and what is our dutie, what God commandeth vs to doe, for the furthering of our promised future happinesse, in endeauouring the vtter ruine of that cursed state of Antichristia∣nisme: Kings are to warre against her with theCap. 17. 16. sword, and to burne the whore with fire: The Pro∣phets, into whom is come the spirit of life from God, are to fight against the same with the word,Cap. 11. 11. sword of the spirit; and by the power of instru∣ction and prophecie, to giue vnto the Angels in∣struments of wrath, the vials full of the wrath of God, to poure vpon that state the plagues due, forCap. 13. 7. the blood of the Saints and Prophets, shead by the same. All the flocke of Christ, elect, called and faithful, which stand on the Lambs part are to pray for her ruine, and to reioyce at her destruction.Cap. 17. 14. with 19. 1. 2-7. This should make vs keepe the words of this pro∣phesie, which is, in our places, to seeke the fulfil∣ling thereof, and to bring that to passe which isCap. 1. 3. prophesied of vs, so shall wee bee blessed; it is our dutie to fulfil all righteousnesse, as Christ speaketh, who did carefully fulfill all the words of Scrip∣tureMat. 3. 15. and 4. 14. and 2. 4. and 2. 4. and 26. 54. prophecying of him, as the writings of the E∣uangelists euery where doe shew; therefore let vs take heed, lest we will be luke-warme and carelesse, and the Lord spew vs out of his mouth. If wee will
not fulfill the words, and keepe the sayings of this prophecie, to be blessed, let vs feare to bee cursed;Cap. 22. 7. according to that threat of the Prophet; Cursed is he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently.Ier. 48. 10. VII. By this booke may all we Protestants see,The seuenth benefit. Cap. 10. 11. how farre we haue preuailed by the little booke in the Angels hand, giuen vnto Iohn, for the recouery of Christs flocke, from vnder the generall Aposta¦cie;Cap. 11. and. 14. 6. 7. 8. 9. how forcible the preaching of the Gospell hath been hitherto against the beast, and the whore sitting thereupon; how the time of Antichrists de∣structiō is very nigh at hand, so as we haue no need to feare the rising vp thereof any more; but ratherCap. 10. 6. 7. and 17. 8. 11. and 19. 20. certainly to expect the vtter ruine and desolation thereof. This should cause vs to reioyce in the preaching of the Gospell, to seeke to maintaine and further it, by all possible means, not fearing any of the plots or attempts of the enemies, our popish aduersaries. For by the Angels oath the Church isCap. 10. 6. 7. to prosper, and the enemies are no more to en∣crease, but to be vnder the vials of Gods wrath, as they now are, and shall bee, till they bee consumed. The words of the book is plaine for this. And now aboue fiftie yeeres God hath giuen vs experience hereof: and euery day shall the Church of God finde the verity of the Angels words more and more: for the seuenth trumpet hath blowne, the e∣uents contained vnder it, shew it to the simplest that shall obserue that which is in the tenth, and e∣leuenth chapters of this heauenly Reuelation. VIII, By this booke are wee foretold of futureThe eighth benefit. Cap. 16. 18. euils yet to come vpon the world, the like was ne∣uer
before, and that at the pouring out of the se∣uenth viall, which should make euery one of vs watchfull, that in the dayes of tentation we perish not. Yet for the consolation of Gods people, letCap. 19. and 21. and 22. them know certainly this, that all shall turne to the good of Gods Church, the euils shall light vpon the wicked, but the Lords people shall in the ende find peace, euen heere, and shall sing praises to the Lambe, and to him that sitteth vpon the throne, for euer and euer. And thus we see the singular and vnspeakable profit of this heauenly prophecie, the words whereof are faithfull and true. III. Obiect. Bee it that it be pleasant and profita∣ble, yet it is not a booke of that necessity, as we need to bee so carefull to studie it. Answ. How necessary it is for vs to be wel ac∣quaintedThis booke is most necessarie to be knowne. with this booke, the first reasans giuen to reade it, and the manifold profit comming hereby to Gods Church, shew sufficiently to euery indif¦ferent man. Our dread Soueraigne, whose learned pen hath proclaimed open warre to Antichrist, in his Highnesse meditations vpon chap. 20. vers. 7, 8. 9. 10. saith thus: As of all bookes, the holy ScriptureHis Maiesties meditations on Reuel. 20. is most necessary for the instruction of a Christian, so of all the Scriptures, the booke of the Reuelation is most meet for this our last age, as a prophecie of the latter times. How can it be but necessary, when indeed the matter therein concerneth vs so neerly? If we doe iudge our selues to be the Church of God, and his seruants, whose it is chiefly to know the things heerein contained, and to endeauour to fulfill them.
IV. Obiect. But many great schollers, and in no meane place, thinke it not so necessarie, but leaue it as an obscure booke not to be medled-with. Answ. Why they leaue it vntouched, these great schollers best know in themselues; but to their opi∣nion, as a booke not so necessarie (as they say) for all now to vnderstand, I oppose, I. the authoritie of God, and the words of this booke, from whence the former reasons are wholly fetched. II. TheQui augustis∣simis sacrosan∣ctae hujus pro∣phetiae corus∣cat donis, qui∣bus omnes om∣nium aetatum interpretes longo post se interuallo reli∣quit. Bullinger in his Preface to the Reuel. In his Dedicat. Epistle before his Com. vpon this booke. authority of our gracious Soueraigne, One hardly matchable for his knowledge in this booke, (as Eglinus a learned man affirmeth) who hauing stu∣died it, speaketh according to veritie and sound iudgement, from the booke it selfe. III. The au∣thoritie of learned men, Bullinger, Meyerus, and o∣thers; yea, I oppose the painfull labours of all the learned (both old and new) that haue written vpon this booke, as a sufficient confutation of their idle and ill conceit, against the most necessarie vse of this booke to the whole Christian world.
CHAP. II. The summe of the second chap∣ter. Not only wee, who by Gods mercie are come out of Babylon, are to reade, & study this book; but also all those that neuer yet came out of that state, and such miserable soules, as haue wofully apostated from vs, are to bee acquainted with this booke, for these reasons following. I.THis book doth shew them, that theirThe Papists are diligently to studie this booke. The first reason. dwelling is in Babylon, the habita∣tion of Diuels, the hold of all foule spirits, and a cage of euery vncleane and hatefull bird, chap. 18. 2. 3. yea it is spirituallie Egypt and Sodome, chap. 11. 8. Not heathenish, but their popish Rome is Babylon, euen Rome now Christen. It is then Babylon, first, when Anti∣christRome is Babylon by the Popes seate therein. sits there, which must be after the heathenish Emperours, 2. Thess. 2. Secondly, when it becom∣meth a whore, deceiuing by whorish allurements, chap. 17. 1. 2. 18. and 16. 19. and not only (by strength of armes) subduing as the heathen Emperours did. Thirdly, when it is called a mysterie, chap. 17. 5. which cannot be, as it was heathen, but Christen. Fourthly, when it is the beast with seuen heads and ten hornes, chap. 13. & 17. 7. bearing vp the whore, and hauing Crownes vpon the hornes, chap. 13. for being Heathenish the Crownes were vpon the heads, and not on the hornes, chap. 12. Fifthly, when the ten hornes receiue power as Kings with theReuel. 17. 12. beast, which cannot be, while the heathen Empe∣rours
reigned, who shared no kingly soueraigntie to any other with themselues. Sixthly, when it hath a marke, a name, and the number of a name, ha∣uing gotten such power by wonders and mira∣cles, as it causeth al vpon paine of death to receiue this marke or the name, or to haue the number of the name, chap. 13. 11.-17. and 14. 9. which things cannot bee auouched of heathenish Rome: there∣fore of Rome Christen, or rather Anti-christian. Seuenthly, when one of the heads is wounded and healed againe, then Rome is Babylon, chap. 13. Eightly, when Rome bewitched Kings with the wine of her fornication, chap. 17. 21, and God raised vp Preachers to proclame for that cause her down-fall, chap. 14. 8. Ninthly, when the seuenth viall is poured out, chap. 16. 19. which is many hundreds of yeeres after Rome was rid of heathen Emperours. Lastly, when Rome is threat∣ned that it shall be no more, but come to vtter de∣struction, chap. 18. 2. 21, and that vnder the seuenth head, chap. 17. 8. 11, when the Heathen Emperours (the sixth head) was past. II. Hereby may they heare, how the Lord com∣mandethThe second rea∣son, they are in Babylon. them to come out of this their Babylon; if they will be held the people of God, and if they will not be partakers of her sins, that so they may not receiue of her plagues, Reuel. 18. 4; for as Ba∣bylon, she shall be laid waste, chap. 18. 2. as Egypt be horribly plagued, chap. 16. and as Sodome with fire be burned, chap. 18. 8. III. This will shew them, that their Pope isThe third rea∣son, the Pope is Antichrist. that Antichrist, the starre fallen, and the King of
the Locusts, chap. 9. 1. 11. the horned beast like the Lambe, speaking as the Dragon, chap. 13. 11. for inChap. 13. 11. 12.-17. al things the Pope agreeth with that second beast, which hath the shew of a Lambe, but the veryChap. 19. 20. Dragons mouth; which exerciseth all the power of the first beast, which causeth all to worship him for to aduance the Romane state; which doth wonders & miracles, as a false prophet, to deceiue them that dwell on the earth, and commandeth them to make an image to the beast, and to wor∣ship the same vpon paine of death: which cureth the deadly wound, and lastly forceth all to receiue a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads, or else to haue no commerce with them. Al which are the Popes properties and practise, as after is shewed at large. IV. This booke will tell them, that their ser∣uiceThe fourth rea∣son, their ser∣uice abominable. is but the acts of an whore (fornication, abo∣minations and filthinesse, though that state seeme neuer so glorious) being attired in purple and scar∣let, decked with gold and pearle; and though that these things bee reached out to them in a golden cup, in that whores hand, chap. 17. 2. 4. So as, ac∣cording to the positiō deliuered by a learned Di∣uine, proued, and not hitherto disproued, a Papist by his Romish religion cannot goe beyond a Reprobate:Master Perkins position. which being true, is enough to condemne their religion, their profession and practises therein for euer. V. By this shall they know, who they bee thatThe fifth rea∣son, they shall know who are Papists. are carried away with that Romish religion and state, euen such as be earthly inhabitants, cap. 17. 2.
Such as be seduced by their sorceries, chap. 18. 23. by the wonders and false miracles of the beast, chap. 13. 13. 14. and of the false prophet, cap. 19. 20. Such as be drunke with the wine of that fornica∣tion, the outward pomp and glory of that whore, chap. 17. 2-4. Such as gaine therby, and liue in the pleasures of that state, cap. 18. 3. 9. 10. 11. Such as haue foolishly admired the power, seate, and great au∣thoritie thereof formerly receiued from the Dra∣gon, cap. 13. 3. 4. Such as cannot submit themselues to the powerfull preaching of the Gospell, but hold themselues tormented by the true Ministers of Christ, chap. 11. 10. Such as in the loue of life and goods haue through feare submitted to the power of the beast, cap. 13. 16. Lastly, such as whose names are not written in the booke of life of the Lambe, slaine from the foundation of the world: chap. 13. 8. and 17. 8. VI. Hereby may they learne to see, what shallThe sixth rea∣son, to behold their end. become of their Pope and state, their beast and false Prophet; yea and what shall become of those that worship that beast, his image, and re∣ceiue the marke of his name; verily they shall bee plagued with exquisite torments, chap. 19. 20. and 14. 9. 10. 11: and of her plagues, in the destruction of that state, shall all receiue that will not depart from her, chap. 18. 4. VII. By this booke shall they learne to satisfieThe seuenth reason, to satis∣fie themselues of a maine que∣stion betweene them and vs. themselues in that question, which they so often haue propounded to vs: where our Church was before Luthers daies? Certainly euen in the wil∣dernesse with the woman, chap. 12; hauing the
two witnesses prophecying in sackcloth, cap. 11. 3. and in the temple, while the holy citie was troden vnder foote by that Antichristian state, chap. 11. 2. and 13. 5. VIII. By this booke they shall see the reasonsThe eighth rea∣son to be  of. of those things, which now doe so greatly vexe and torment that their state, their Pope, their Iesuits, Priests, and all the obstinate route of them: I. How it is, and by what meanes it commeth to passe that so many countries, kingdoms and people in Chri∣stendome, since Luthers time, haue forsaken their Antichristian state? Euen Christs owne power by his Preachers recouering his owne, that is, people, nations, tongues and Kings from vnder that pseu∣do-catholike and Apostatical Church, chap. 10. 11. and 14. 6. II. How it was, that after they had slaine and murthered Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage, with many other, at seuerall times, and became so merryChap. 11. 7. 10. after their cruelties, as if all had been safe; yet must Luther, and with him many other rise vp in their sight preaching against them powerfully, and yet neuerthelesse doe escape death at their hands? Euen because the spirit of life from God entred into them, and tooke them vp vnto him, in the sight of those their enemies, chap. 14. 7. 8. 9. and 11. 11. III. How it is, that now their Iesuits and Priests are of vs put to death, and with them other traite∣rous persons? Euen the iudgement and hand of God vpon them, who auengeth hereby the blood of his Saints and Prophets, and doth to them, as they haue done to vs, chap. 16. 5. 6. and 13. 10. IV. How it is possible, that wee can so preuaile against
them, and that they get not the hand against vs? why their inuincible Armado came to naught? why their vnheard-of plot of Gunpowder-treason came to none effect? why they prosper not against vs, sithen they bee so subtill, so trecherous and hel∣lishly false, that no oath can binde them to faith∣fulnes; but now doe, and daily shall by little and little decay to their vtter ruine? Euen because their date of growth is past, chap. 10. 6. the kingdomes are become the Lords, who shall raigne for euer, chap. 11. 15. for now doe come out of the Church the Angels to poure out the last plagues, and that vpon them, till they bee destroyed, chap. 15. 6. 7. and 16. IX. The holy Apostle S. Iohn our Prophet hereThe ninth rea∣son, to see how they ouerthrow themselues at vnawares. would let them see plainly (if they would see the light at noone day) that in the mainest arguments they bring to ouerthrow vs, they doe vnawares strengthen vs; and what they thinke doe serue to make for themselues, in those they be confounded and ouerthrowne. Good Reader in wisedome di∣scerne, and iudge righteously. The Papists against the Protestants. Iohn for the Prote∣stants. Their The Papists arguments a∣gainst vs, answe∣red by the Apo∣stle, who ouer∣throweth them by the words of the text. Church (if it had any being) was hid∣den till of late yeeres, troden vnderfoote, and of no esteeme in the world. So should the true Church be, the Temple and holy Ci∣tie must bee troden vnder foote, and bee of no esteeme in the world; chap. 11. 1. 2. 10. and 12. 6. 14.
Their number small, in comparison of ours. The flock of Christ is but an 144000: chap. 14. 1. it is a small number, when the whole world followeth after Antichrist: chap. 13. 3. 16. Their first vpsetters, which taught them this their religion, were but a few, and those base fel∣lowes too. Christs witnesses against the Antichristian state were at the first few, and poore, and for a time clo∣thed in sackcloth: chap. 11. 3. They were iudged and condemned, & not held worthie to liue, and that not of a few, but gene∣rally of the whole earth. So Christ by his Angel foreshewed the same, that it should so fall out with the true Preachers of the Gos∣pell: chap. 11. 7. 9. 10. They haue wickedlie forsaken our Church, contrarie to the practise of their forefathers, ma∣ny hundreds of yeeres. Not wickedly, but iustly at the commandement of God, chap. 18. 4; not con∣trarie to the will of their heauenlie Father, though contrarie, to earthly forefa∣thers misled by Antichrist: chap. 13. 13. 14. They condemne our Church as an whore, and call our estate Babylon; and yet they cannot but acknowledge that they came out from vs. The spirit of God calleth your Church the Whore, chap. 17. 1. and Rome (that great City) Babylon, cap. 17. 18. and 18. 2. out of which they may well confesse that they came, as the Lord com∣manded them: chap. 18. 4.
They are all for prea∣ching, and singing of Psalmes, leauing the old & ancient seruice of the Church. The true messengers of Christ are Preachers, and doe performe that dutie, cap. 11. and 14. and the true Church praiseth God, with singing of Psalmes, cap. 15. 3. They abhorre Images, and will not worship ei∣ther Saint or Angell, which hath beene a cu∣stome of the Church. They iustly abhor those things, for which God pla∣gued the Romish people, cap. 9. 20. and concerning wor∣ship, the true Church onely worshippeth God, cap. 4. 8-11. & 5. 14. so being com∣manded, cap. 14. 7. and by an Angell forbidden to worship Angels, cap. 19. 10. These late vpstart-Preachers haue troubled the world, & haue drawn away many from their old obedience. The true Prophets of Christ must torment the in∣habitants of the earth, cap. 11. 10. and by the ministe∣ry of the word, preach to people, nations, tongues, and Kings, to bring them from Antichrist, and the Romish Church, cap. 10. 11. and 14. 6-9.
These Preachers doe incite and stirre vp au∣thority against vs, and to deale hardly with vs. They exhort to no more then God cōmandeth, say∣ing, reward her, as shee re∣warded you, and giue dou∣ble vnto her, according to her workes, in the cup shee hath filled, fill to her dou∣ble, cap. 18. 6. Their Kings and Ma∣gistrates murther holy and learned men, Iesuits, Priests, and other of our religion. They murther none, but execute iustice vpon them, as the Lord foretold they should doe, cap. 13. 10. and heerein the Lord is righte∣ous, to giue them blood that haue shead blood. cap. 16. 5. 6. The Papists for the Papists. Iohn against the Papists. Rome is the mother-Church. Yea, The Papists arguments for themselues, tur∣ned against themselues, by the words of the prophecie. the mother of har∣lots and abominations of the earth, cap. 17. 5. Our Church is the holy Catholick Church. It is Babylon the great, cap. 18. 2. and 17. 5. spiri∣tually Sodome and Egypt, cap. 11. 8. The Pope in his Pope∣dome, is a holy father, Christs Vicar on earth, and sitteth at Rome. He is the beast, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 1. 11. the Dragons Substitute, cap. 13. 2. and at Rome the whore sitteth, cap. 17. 1. 3.
Christ gaue to him his power, seate, and au∣thoritie. No: the Angel hath told thee, that the Dragon the diuell gaue him his po∣wer, seate, and great autho∣ritie, cap. 13. 2. 4. Kings and mightie Potentates haue submit∣ted both themselues, and their kingdomes to our Churches authoritie, which they would ne∣uer haue done, if it had not been of God. The Kings of the earth must commit fornication with that where, cap. 17. 2. and must giue their power, strength and kingdome to the beast, cap. 17. 13. for God hath put into their hearts, to fulfil his will, ver. 17. All the world haue bin of our religion, and depended vpon the au∣thority of Rome. All the world must won∣der after the beast, and wor∣ship him, cap. 13. 3. and 17. 8. yea peoples and multi∣tudes, nations and tongues, must bee subiect to that whore of Rome. 17. 1. 15. Those that haue wor∣shipped this high Ec∣clesiasticall power, and haue giuen the suprema∣cie to that seate, were godly, learned, and de∣uout people of all sorts. They were such as were deceiued, cap. 13. 14. or by feare compelled, vers. 16. 17.  carally  that , cap. 17. 2. or that liued in pleasures with her, cap. 18. and that were not in the booke of life, cap. 13. 8.
Our Church is full of glory and magnificence, wee spare no cost to set out our seruice with. Indeed the where must be arrayed in purple, scarlet co∣lour, and decked with gold, precious stones, and pearles, cap. 17. 4. Our Church hath heretofore commanded all ouer, chalenging Su∣premacie, and had it yeelded to her general∣ly. Great Babylon saith in her heart, I sit as Queène, cap. 18. 7. and the whore sitteth vpon many waters, ca. 17. 1. that is, peoples, mul∣titudes, nations & tongues, vers. 15. Great was the vnitie and consent of Princes and people, while the au∣thoritie of our Church preuailed. So must it be, while the beast beareth rule; Kings will be of one mind, and a∣gree with him, cap. 17. 13. 17. and the inhabitants of the earth will be merrie, ca. 11. 10. Our Church hath bin famous for miracles, by which many haue been moued to imbrace our religion. The beast, chap. 13. 13. 14. and the false prophet doe wonders and miracles, and deceiue thereby earthly people, cap. 19. 20. yea Ba∣bylon by these her sorceries deceiue the nations, cap. 18. 24.
Our Church hath bin visible and apparant vn∣to all; yea, and hath flou∣rished a long time, in the spight of all her gain∣sayers. This proueth you not to be the Temple or holy City, but indeed the out-court, which hath been apparant vnto the nations, who haue heretofore murthered and oppressed the Saints and people of God, that did re∣fuse to subiect vnto you, ca. 11. 2. 7. and 20. 4. and 13. 15. Our Church hath e∣uer bin a cōdemner (vn∣to the death) of all those vpstart Preachers, and o∣ther troublers of the peace of the Christian world: so zealous hath she euer been to vphold religion. Indeed the woman (the whore) could away with no opposition, cap. 11. but hath risen vp against Christs ser∣uants, and become drunke with the blood of the Saints and the blood of the Mar∣tyrs of Iesus, cap. 17. 6. Our Popes haue made war against such as op∣posed the Churches au∣thoritie, and God gaue them victorie ouer their victorie ouer their enemies, and none were able to withstand them; such power they had from God. The beast shall make war against the Saints, yea and also ouercome them, for not yeelding vnto him; and put many to death therefore: and power was giuen him ouer all kindreds, tongues, and nations, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 4. 7. 15. cap. 20. 4.
Our holy fathers acts against these busie fel∣lowes, that rose vp to speake against the esta∣blished authority were (I am sure) approued then of all vniuersally: which would not haue been, if they had been wicked and euill. Their beast full of blas∣phemies, and his deeds full of cruelty against the true Prophets of God, must bee applauded of all the inhabi∣tants of the earth, yea they must reioyce at his ill deeds, cap. 11. 10. Our Church is so carefull for soules-safety, that she wil permit none to liue with in her lap, vnlesse they shew them∣selues to be her obedient children. The beast will make all to receiue a marke in their right hand, or fore-head, else no buying or selling where hee hath to doe, ex∣cept they haue his marke, name, or the number of his name, cap. 13. 16. 17. Our Church hath yet many endued with gifts of miracles to go out for her, and is able to make an armie with kingly aid against our enemies. Indeed out of the mouth of the Dragon, beast, and false Prophet come forth vncleane spirits like frogs, the spirits of diuels work∣ing miracles, to goe vnto Kings, to fight for them, cap. 16. 13. 14.
Our Church wanteth not yet, neither euer shal (I hope) the countenance of Kings, and great men, to like and approoue of her, yea and to main∣taine her, say, and doe what men can, and al the Heretickes in the world with them. True it is, Babylon hath, and shall haue Kings, and great men of the earth, to loue and like of her, yea to fight for her, cap. 17. 14. & 19. 19. and when she is de∣stroyed, then to mourne and to  for , cap. 18. Thus may these deceiued people, behold and see how they speake against themselues, while they would gladly speake most for themselues. They would be held to be the true Church, and yet they prooue it by the infallible markes of the false Church; they would be the cst spouse of Christ, and yet they set out themselues with the apparant tokens of the woman the whore; behold, stay and wonder! can there bee vnder heauen a more eui∣dent bewitching then this? consider thou that readest, and giue true iudgement by euidence of truth.
CHAP. III. The summe of the third chap∣ter. Reasons for both Protestants and Papists. The first reason, to know in what state they doe stand. Protestants and Papists (as seuerally, so ioyntly) should studie this booke, for the good of them both. I. BY this booke shall they know, that which is most necessary to bee knowne of them both, that is, in what state they stand, whether they bee for Christ, or Antichrist; what marke they haue, the fathers, or the beasts; in what place they stand, in Babylon, or in the Temple of God; among whom they are, whether of the Gen∣tiles and nations following the beast, or with the Lambe on mount Sion, among the elect, chosen, and faithfull. To know all things, and not to know these things, is to know (indeed) nothing at all; without this knowledge, no true comfort, no assu∣rance of saluation. Now this booke, (aboue all o∣ther parts of sacred Scripture) discouereth plainly and fully these things vnto vs, ranking al that beare the name of Christians, in their due order & place, to the one side or to the other. For in this booke is shewed: I. Two persons (principall heads) that is, Christ, and Antichrist. II. Two places, new Ierusalem, and Babylon. III. The inhabitants of the one, and the inhabitants of the other, with the qualities and conditions of either of them distinctly noted. IV. Here be two markes, the fathers marke, and the beasts marke, either of them to know their owne by. Now euery one of vs, are either Christs, or An∣tichrists,
either citizens of the new Ierusalem, or dwellers in Babylon, and haue verily vpon vs, the fathers marke or the beasts; which in this book we shall, by Gods mercifull assistance, well discerne, if we by ardent prayer and diligent studie seriouslie peruse and carefully reade it ouer. These are points of so great moment, as euery man, that hath any care of his saluation, should labour for the certaine knowledge thereof, and right gladly should these things cause vs to take, now at the length, this holy booke into our hands, by which we may of so great and necessarie truths be fully resolued. II. This booke will decide the mainest pointsThe second rea∣son, to know how to decide maine points of contro∣uersie betweene vs and them. of controuersie betweene vs and them, as the last section in the former chapter doth shew, concer∣ning the Church, the Ministerie, our callings, the visibilitie, and hidden state of the Church, with such other points, about which there is such eager contending, and about which many great and troublesome disputations are daily in hand, thou∣sands of questions propounded, and learned men on both sides euen wearied therewith; which bring weake apprehensions into amazments, and the vn∣setled into desperate thoughts of Atheisme, to thinke it no matter whether they be of this or that side, or of neither, but to liue as Newters to either, and so to be in themselues of no religion at all, as too many be. But if this book were better knowne, and more plainly laid open, without all sinister and partiall respect, the weake ones on our side would bee strongly setled, and many deceiued soules on their part would be recouered, and made zealous
in this libertie of the Gospell and freedome from Antichristianisme, which the Lord Iesus grant, euen so, Amen. III. This booke so cleerely setteth out in flatThe third rea∣son, to know the true and false Church asunder. opposition the true and false Church, with their heads, members, parts and properties, as any indif∣ferent Reader, Protestant or Papist, may iudge which is the one, which is ye other; who are Christs, who be Antichrists, who bee true Christians, who be Antichristians, as the difference and also the op∣position now here following fully declareth. Christ. Antichrist. The King of Saints:The opposition betweene Christ and Antichrist, only out of this prophecie in all these particu∣lars. chap. 15. 3. The King of Locusts, chap. 9. 11. The faithfull and true witnesse, chap. 3. 14. and 1. 5. and 19. 11. The false Prophet decei∣uing, chap. 19. 20. A Lambe, chap. 14. 1. chap. 5. 14. A beast like a Lambe ha∣uing two hornes, but spea∣king as a Dragon, chap. 13. 11. The Angel comming down from heauen, cap. 10. 1. and the bright mor∣ning-starre, chap. 22. 16. The Angell of the bot∣tomlesse pit, chap. 9. 11. the beast ascending frō thence, chap. 11. 7, out of the earth, chap. 13. 9. and the starre fallen from heauen: chap. 9. 2. The Redeemer, chap. 5. 9. The Destroyer: chap. 9. 11.
Vpō his head a crowne of gold, chap. 14. 14. Vpon his head the name of blasphemie, chap. 13. 1. Hee hath the Key of Dauid, chap. 3. 7. This, the Key of the bot∣tomlesse pit, chap. 9. 1. He sitteth in his fathers throne, chap. 3. 21. This in the Dragons seate and throne, cap. 13. 2. He warreth in defence of his Saints, chap. 12. and 17. This maketh warre a∣gainst the Saints, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and 19. 19. He winneth people to him only by the preach∣ing of the word, chap. 10. 11. and subdueth them by the sword, which cō∣meth out of his mouth, chap. 19. 15. 21. This by false miracles, by force and feare of death, if they will not submit them∣selues to his will, chap. 13. 13. 14. 15. 16. Christ permitteth mē to liue, and to buy and sell, though they doe not yeeld to him. This counterfeit Lambe will let  man buy nor sell, except him that hath the marke, the name of the beast, or his number, chap. 13. 17. Christ fitteth his ser∣uants to preach, & com∣mandeth them to do so: chap. 10. 11. This beast alloweth of no Preachers of Gods word, but riseth vp and murde∣reth them, chap. 11. 7. Christ the Lambe hath his wife, chap. 19. 7. This beast and false Pro∣phet his whore, chap. 17.
Christ was, is, and shal be, chap. 1. 8. and 11. 17. and reigneth for euer: chap. 11. 15. This beast was, is not, and yet is, and shall haue power 42 moneths, and goe into destruction: chap. 13. 5. and 17. 8. 11. The true Church of Christ. The false Church of Antichrist. This is the holy belo∣ued Citie, new Ierusa∣lem, chap. 20. 9. and 21. 2. This that great The opposition betweene vs the true Church of Christ, and the popish Syna∣gogue, or Church of Antichrist, as this prophecie sets vs at odds for euer in these particulars. Citie, chap. 14. 8. and 17. 18. the Citie of the nations, chap. 16. 19. great Babylon, cap. 18. 2. This the tabernacle of God his habitation, cap. 21. 3. This the habitation of Diuels, the hold of euerie foule spirit, and the cage of euery vncleane and hate∣full bird, chap. 18. 2. This the Lambes wife, chap. 19. 7. and 21. 9. This Antichrists whore: chap. 17. This the Temple, cap. 11. This the Out-court, chap. 11. 2. This the Woman clo∣thed with the Sunne, and the Moone vnder her feete, and vpon her head a Crowne of 12 starres: chap. 12. 1. This the Woman ar∣raied in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold & precious stones and pearle; vnder her the scar∣let coloured beast, and vp∣on her forehead, a name written mysterie, Baby∣lon, &c. cap. 17. 3. 4. 5.
This troden vnder foote, cap. 11. 2. escapeth into the wildernesse, and there is hidden for a space and nourished 1260. dayes, ca. 12. 6. 14. This treadeth vpon the Church, cap. 11. sitteth as a Queen glorifying her selfe, and liuing deliciously, chap. 18. 7. This is hated of the Dragon, cap. 12. and 20. 9. persecuted by the beast and false prophet, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and 19. 19. and against whom the Kings of the earth rise vp, cap. 17. 14. and 19 19. This fauoured to the vtmost by the Dragon, ca. 13. 2. borne vp by the beast, cap. 17. 3. 7. assisted by the Kings of the earth, cap. 17. 14. and 19. 19. who haue committed fornication, cap. 17. 2. and liued deliciously with her, cap. 18. 9. This hath in the hand of the Angell, the little booke for to teach the people, cap. 10. This hath in her hand a golden cup, full of abomi∣nations, and filthinesse of her fornication, cap. 17. 4. This is led by Christ to the liuing fountaines of waters, cap. 7. 17. euen the waters of life to drink thereof, chap. 21. 6. and 22. 17. This woman is drunke with the blood of the Saints and the blood of the Mar∣tyrs of Iesus, cap. 17. 6. This hath the Lambe to instruct al hers, cap. 5. This hath the false pro∣phet working miracles to deceiue all hers, cap. 19. 20. This hath onely God himselfe, and Christ in the middest, ruling her, cap. 1. 1. and 22. 3. This hath Antichrist, the King of the Locusts, whose harlot shee is to rule ouer her, cap. 9.
This hath the appro∣bation of God, and the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honour to her, cap. 21. 24 This hath damnation from God, chap. 17. 1. and the Kings at length shall hate this whore, as shee de∣serues, and burne her with fire, cap. 17. 16. The Seruants of Christ. The Seruants ofThe opposition betweene the Preachers of the Gospell, and the seruants of An¦tichrist the Pope. Antichrist. These are Angels and Starres, cap, 1. and 2. and 3. These are Locusts, frogs, and vncleane spirits of di∣uels, cap. 9. and 16. These are Prophets, and doe preach the Go∣spell, cap. 11. and 14. 6. These preach not, or preach mns precepts, and doe torment men, chap. 9. and worke deceitfull mira∣cles, to deceiue them that dwell on the earth, cap. 13. 13. 14. and 19. 20. These come out of the Temple, and are sent by Christ, cap. 14. and 10. 11. to whom hee giueth power, cap. 11. 3. These come out of the smoake of the bottomlesse pit, cap. 9. and are sent by the Dragon, beast, and false prophet, ca. 16. from whom they receiue power, cap. 9. 3. These goe forth with the euerlasting Gospell, exhorting men to feare God, and to worship him, cap. 14. 6. These goe forth, without the Gospell, to hurt, chap. 9. 3. 10. and to inrite the Kings of the earth vnto mischiefe, against Christ his people, cap. 16.
These preach against Babylon, and proclaime her fall, and do threaten vengeance against such as do subiect themselues thereto, chap. 14. 8. 9. 10. 11. These, out of the mouth of the Dragon, beast, and false Prophet, doe vse all their deceitfull working of miracles, to procure helpes for the vpholding the same, cap. 16. 10. 13. 14. These haue been kil∣led onely for preaching Gods word, and for the testimonie of Iesus, cap. 14. 6. and cap. 11. 7. and 20. 4. These are put to death for the blood they shead, chap. 16. 6. and for their damnable trecheries and treasons. Christians. Antichristians. These are they that dwell in heauen, cap. 13. 6. These are the inhabi∣tants of the earth, chap. 13. 8. and 11. 10. These doe worship God, chap. 4. and 5. and 11. 16. and 22. 3. These worship the Dra∣gon and beast, chap. 13. 4. 18. 12. diuels and idols of gold and siluer, and brasse, and stone, and of wood, cap. 9. 20. These are without guile in their mouthes, cap. 14. 5. These bee guilefull equi∣uocators, and makers of lies, chap. 22. as their pra∣ctice proclaimes to the world.
These are not defiled with women, but are virgins, cap. 14. 4. These are guiltie of for∣nication spirituall, cap. 17. 2. and corporall. cap. 9. 21. These do follow the cōmandements of God, and doe keepe the faith of Iesus, cap. 14. 12. These doe what the beast and false prophet will haue them to doe, by whose false miracles they are deceiued, chap. 13. and 19. 20. These reuerence the voice of Christs Mini∣sters, and openly shew it, cap. 4. 9. 10. and 5. 14. These hold them to be a torment to them, and re∣ioyce and are merry, if the beast kill them, cap. 11. 10. These reioyce, that Christ taketh to him his power and raigneth, ca. 11. 16. 17. These like Heathen na∣tions, and Gentiles, cap. 11. 2. are angry thereat, cap. 11. 18. These are written in the Lambes booke of life, cap. 21. 27. The names of these are not written in the Lambes booke of life, cap. 13. 8. and 17. 8. These get the victory ouer the beast, and hee cannot make them to take his marke, or wor∣ship his image; but doe get out from the num∣ber of his name, ca. 15. 2. All these both small and great, rich and poore, free and bond, he causeth to re∣ceiue his marke in their right hand, or fore-heads, cap. 13. 16. These haue the Lord and his workes in admi∣ration, cap. 4. 11. and 5. 12. 13. and 15. 3. 4. These haue the beast and his power in admiration, cap. 13. 3. 4.
These are content to be martyred, and to bee slaine for the word of God, rather then they will worship the beasts image, &c. cap. 20. 4. These do shead the blood of the Saints and Prophets, cap. 16. 6. for testifying the truth, chap. 11. 7. and for not worshipping the beast, and his Image, cap. 13. 15. These follow the Lambe, cap. 14. These wonder after the beast, cap. 13. 3. These haue his fathers name written in their fore-heads, cap. 14. 1. and 7. 3. 4. and 22. These haue the marke of the beast in their hand, or fore-heads, cap. 13. These haue beene by the beast and his instru∣ments, afflicted and brought downe, cap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. but now are preuailing, and shall bee glorious, chap. 7. 9-14. and 11. 11. 12. 16-18. and 14. 6-20. and 15. 2. and 16. These now are plagued, chap. 16. 2. and rewarded for their crueltie, vers. 6. their kingdome groweth darke, vers. 10. and shall come to destruction, chap. 18. These will reioyce, and so ought to doe, at the ruine of Babylon, chap. 18. 20. and 19. 1. 2-7. These doe rage and blas∣pheme at Babylons decay, chap. 16. 10. 11. and shall at length bewaile and la∣ment her finall destruction, cap. 18. 9. 16.
These with the names in their fore-heads, cap. 14. are sealed of God for assurance of their safety, cap. 7. These with the marke and name of the beast, cap. 13. are cursed of God, and vnlesse they turne, are sure to be damned, chap. 14. 9- 11. Heere behold now and see, all these particularsAn exhortation. set forth to the open view of euery mans eye; let vs, which haue happily escaped, and those that are yet among them, which in honest simplicitie of heart mistake things, learne hereby to discerne be∣tweene Christ and Antichrist, the true spouse, and the filthie whore; the faithfull seruants of Christ, and the diuellish instruments of Antichrist; be∣tweene true Christians in name and deede, and Christians onely in name, but Antichristians in deed; so shall we still stand in the way of life, and they (poore soules) escape the snares of death, e∣uen so Lord Iesus, Amen. But because I know, that obstinate spirits will obiect against the cleere light; but other, for better satisfaction to them∣selues; I will heere doe my best to resolue the one, of whom I am hopefull, and leaue the other more inexcusable, of whom there is no hope; for full well I wote by this booke, that such as liue in this Romish fornication, such as partake of her delica∣cies, such as gaine by her, such as God leaueth, andSome shall ne∣uer be brought from Poperie. the false prophet, or Lambe-like beast, and beastly Lambe deceiueth, they shall bee her louers to the vtmost end; and therefore of these wee shall bee sure to finde some wickedly opposing against
the most plaine truthes that may bee, still to harden their owne hearts, and to deceiue others; which point (good Christian reader) I pray thee seriously take notice of, that by these obstinate persons, thou be not either seduced from vs, or mi∣serably kept within that most accursed state. Lord open thine eyes to see, to consider, and to be resol∣ued, if yet thou shalt doubt; and the Lord con∣found all obstinate and malicious gain-saying. Amen. I. Obiect. You in these oppositions do take for gran∣ted,By Babylon is not meant Rome. that by Babylon is meant Rome; which if it were so, who would not come out of her, seeing the Lord so plain∣ly commandeth it, cap. 18. 4? but it cannot bee proued, that by Babylon is meant Rome. Answ. It is most cleere to the eyes of all thatIt is cleere, that by Babylon, Rome is to be vnderstood. winke not wilfully, that by Babylon, Rome is vn∣derstood by Iohn, which I thus euidently prooue from the text. The Citie which then raigned o∣uer the Kings of the earth, was Rome, the Euan∣gelist sheweth it, Luk. 2. 1. The Acts of the Apo∣stles, where is shewed what a great matter it was to be a Romane, ca. 16. 37. 39. and 22. 25. 28. Also the dominion of Rome ouer Cities and coun∣tries, cap. 16. 21. and 23. 24. 26. 33. and 24. 2. 3. and the soueraignty of Caesars, cap. 25. 10. 12. and 26. 32. Of this, humane stories giue witnesse, that the point herein is vndeniable; except mans impu∣dencieMachabees, Iosephus, and others. will giue the lie to God and men. Now this great Citie so raigning, is said to bee the wo∣man, euel. 17. 18. this woman is the condemned whore sitting vpon many waters, in vers. 1. which
are peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues, vers. 15. the dominion of Rome. This whorish woman hath the name of Babylon vpon her, chap. 17. 5. therfore I conclude, if the raigning City be Rome, and this Citie the woman, and the womans name Babylon, that Rome is here meant by Babylon. A∣gaine, that Citie which is seated on seuen hils is Rome; that Rome was seated vpon seuen hils, all that haue described it, and spoken thereof do wit∣nesse the same. Virgil, lib. 2. Georg. in fin. lib. 6. Aen. Propertius, Eleg. 10. lib. 3. Varro, lib. 5. de lin. lat. Plu∣tarch calleth Rome seuen-hilled, and the names of. the hilles are knowne; Palatinus, Capitolinus, Qui∣rinalis, Caelius, Esquilinus, Viminalis, Auentinus. But the Citie here vnderstood, and called Babylon was seated on seuen hils, for the woman the City (saith the text) sitteth on seuen mountaines or hils: therefore by this must Rome needes bee vn∣derstood: consider with this, chap. 16. 19. where this great City, and Babylon are mentioned toge∣ther, as one and the same. To this the testimonies of good authors may be added, and the confessi∣on of Papists themselues, which may bee seene at large, in Master Doctor Downhams booke against Antichrist, cap. 2. pag. 11. and 12. to which I refer the Reader. II. Obiect. I thinke it is granted, indeed, that Ba∣bylonRome Heathen, and not Chri∣sten, is Babylon. is put for Rome, but so it must bee vnderstood, as it then was Rome, heathen, being a bloody Citie by the persecution of those tyrannicall Emperours, and not as it is Rome Christen, vnder the holy Father, the Bishop of Rome.
Answ. Rome is in this prophecie called Baby∣lon,Rome is Baby∣lon, as it is Chri∣sten, vnder the Pope. 1. Reason. Esay 1. Hos. 2. 1. -5. not as it was then Heathen, but as it became Christen, and that vnder the Pope. I. Rome can∣not be called the whore, but in respect of her Apo∣stacie from her former faithfulnesse, for she was a glorious Church, Rom. 1. from which she falling, the faithfull Citie became an harlot, as in the like case the Prophet speaketh. Therefore is it not Rome Heathen vnder the Emperous, which was neither then, nor before, the Church of Christ; but euer liued in Gentilisme; wherefore Rome must be vnderstood to be the whore, as it was Christen and an Apostaticall Church. II. Rome is not2. Reason. described in the woman, cap. 17. 2. 3. as it then was in Iohns time, but as it afterwards should be. 1. For that Iohn was in a great admiration at this sight of her, as a thing not before knowne vnto him; now he knew Heathen Rome in the present state well enough, and so hee had no cause of so great admi∣ration, as at this, which should be: 2. This City was not yet (as is proued) become the woman, the whore. 3. The text saith plainly, that the beast, described so as Iohn saw him bearing the whore, was not then, cap. 17. 10. 11. which may by reason be further proued; because his originall is shewed vnto Iohn, cap. 13. 1. which cannot be the originall of the Romane Empire; for that nothing prophe∣cied heere, must bee extended beyond the time of Iohns receiuing of this prophecie, cap. 4. 1. and 22. 6. Now the Romane Empire was, before Iohns Re∣uelation, set out in the Dragon, whose originall therefore is not mentioned, chap. 12. 3. this one
point obserued would loose many a knot in this booke: also, for that this beast heere is after the Dragon, which being cast out of heauen, the beast receiueth his power, seat, and great authority, cap. 19. 12. and 13. 1. 2. Lastly, for that the hornes of this beast are crowned, cap. 13. and are ten Kings, cap. 17. 12. which in Iohns time, (as the Angell saith) had (as yet) receiued no kingdome, but should (at one houre) with the beast, cap. 17. 12. therfore was the beast (so described bearing the whore) yet to come. III. Then is Rome Babylon, when it is3. Reason. also a mystery, chap. 17. 5. and such a mysterie as needeth an interpretation, vers. 7. as also being the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, vers. 5. alluring Kings, vers. 2. and making all the earth to wonder after the beast, vers. 8. which must needs be Rome Christen, deceiuing the world, ca. 13. 13. and not Heathen, murthering such as made open profession of the very name of Christ, in Iohns daies, which to him was no wonder or myste∣rie. IV. Rome is Babylon, when she sitteth vp∣on4. Reason. the beast, for so the text saith, the great Citie is the woman, cap. 17. 18. and the woman sits vpon the beast, vers. 3. but this is, when Rome is Chri∣sten; for this beast (as we haue heard) was not till the Heathen Emperours were gone from Rome. V. Rome is Babylon, when the beast wheron she5. Reason. sitteth, had gotten with his Gentiles (for so are the adherents of this beast called) the out-court to tread downe the holy Citie 42. moneths, cap. 13. 5. and 11. 2. which had the continuance many hundreds of yeeres after Iohns dayes, and after the
time of the Heathen Emperous. VI. Rome is Babylon, when the beast like a Lambe wrought miracles and wonders, and was the false prophet deceiuing the people, cap. 13. 11. 13. 14. and 19. 20. and causing them to make an image to the former beast, &c. cap. 13. 14. 15. which was not when Rome was Heathen, but Christen, because the first vpri∣sing of this beast is shewed vnto Iohn, chap. 13. 11. Thus therefore we see plainly, that Babylon here is Rome after she receiued Christianitie, and when she was (as now she is) ruled by the Pope. III. Obiect. If this bee so, as me thinke you doe make it most apparent, then of necessitie should the Pope be that Antichrist; for all learned Catholikes acknow∣ledge that here he is to be found, euen that great Anti∣christ, which they doe looke for to come: but you cannot proue the holy father the Pope to be Antichrist. Answ. As it is cleere, that Rome is Babylon, andThe Pope of Rome is that Antichrist. the same so, when it became Christian; so is it also, as apparent, that the Pope of Rome is that Anti∣christ, out of this booke, thus: Whom by this book we may finde to be that Antichrist, be it is and none other: But by this booke wee may finde the Pope to be that An∣tichrist: Therefore the Pope is be and none other. The first proposition is acknowledged of the PapistsRibera and Viegas in their Commentaries. themselues, for they say and write that Antichrist is described in this booke, euen that: , the grand Antichrist. The other proposition, that by this booke we may finde the Pope to be him, is eui∣dent by these arguments following. I. Argument is from the beast, chap. 1. 1. andThe first argu∣ment. 17. 4. Thus; This beast is that Antichrist but the Pope
is this beast: therefore the Pope is that Antichrist. TheThe proposition is his Maiesties in the Apologie to all Christian Monarchies, &c. pag 55. and 91. former proposition is proued, because this beast in this booke is shewed to bee against Christ, and yet is the state of Rome Christen, bearing vp the Apo∣staticall Church, chap. 17. 4. and hath the power o∣uer the holy Citie; and the Out-court, which is the visible profession of Christianitie, (as a part of the temple, which is the true Church) is granted to him and his Gentile-like Christians, who do tread vnder foote the holie Citie (Christs true Church) for a time, chap. 11. 2. 7. and 13. 7. Let my godlie and learned brethren (I humbly beseech them) not reiect, as vaine, this assertion, though the most say, that this beast is the Romane Empire of the Hea∣then. Let not our eies be shut vpon the truth, when it appeareth, though tenne thousand haue thought otherwise. I confesse it calleth that to remem∣brance in some sort, and I acknowledge it also to be a Romane Empire or Monarchie; but not that Heathen, but this vnder the Pope, in his pontifica∣litie and Popedome: which I thus proue, by the way, to euery indifferent iudge. I. The RomaneThe first beast in chap. 13. 1. is not the Heathen Empire, but the Popedome. Heathen Monarchie was in Iohns daies typed out in the Dragon, as all the particulars shew, chap. 12. II. That gaue way to this in power, seate & great authoritie, as the text sheweth, chap. 13. 3. II. This was not in Iohns daies, but to come, as before I haue shewed, and the reasons alleaged. IV. The difference of this Monarchie is such from that of the Heathen, as they can no waies agree. The Heathen Empire receiued her power, seate and au∣thoritie from no earthly power, but this wee see
doth; whence that arose is not noted, but this isSuch difference betweene this beast and the heathen Empire of the Romanes, as they cannot possibly be one. out of the Sea, chap. 13. 1; that had crownes vpon his head, this on his hornes: This followed of all the world with admiration and worshipped, so was not the other; That was set out but by one forme of a Dragon, this by seueral beasts in their parts; This must warre against the Saints, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and these against him and his compa∣nie, and at length ouercome him, cap. 17. 14. 19. 20. so did not Christians against the Heathen Monar∣chie. The hornes of this, by which hee was defen∣ded, shall be his destruction, chap. 17. 16. so were not the hornes to the other. This hath his time li∣mited 42 moneths, which the Papists acknow∣ledge, and that more truly then they wote of, to be the time of Anti-christ; and therefore cannot be the Heathen Empire, because the beginning of this is after that, as is aforesaid; this vnlike all that euer were before him, a beast of so variable beastly qua∣lities, as that, one beast is not enough to expresse his nature, and in chap▪ 17. 10. hee is not called the seuenth, but another, to note a variable difference from all the rest before him: more such differences might be noted. V. This beareth vp the Woman, which I haue prooued to bee Rome Christian, which that neuer did. If we acknowledge the Wo∣man the Citie, this Babylon, and Babylon Rome, wee cannot hold this beast to be the Heathen Mo∣narchie, for it continued not to y• Whores sitting vpon this beast. VI. This beast is in the daies of that beast, which the Papists acknowledge to bee Antichrist, chap. 13. 12. 13. for there the text saith,
he caused him to be worshipped, exercising all his power before him, yea the beast, verse 1, and this o∣ther beast, which is the false Prophet, shall euer liue together as one, chap. 16, and perish together, cap. 19. 20: therefore with the leaue of all the godlie learned, not offending them, I hope I may hence conclude that this beast is not the Romane Mo∣narchie Heathen, but indeede, and truth, Antichri∣stian, and against Christ in a Christian profes∣sion. Now how contrary to Christ this beast is, ap∣pearethThis beast is contrary to Christ. fully from the text: I. Christ is against the Dragon, chap. 12. 7: but this and the Dragon be in amitie, chap. 13. 3. 4. II. Christ commeth from heauen, chap. 10. 1. this out of the bottomlesse pit, chap. 11. 7. and 7. 8. III. Christ warreth on the Saints part, chap. 17. 14. this against them, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and against Christ himselfe with all his, chap. 19. 19. IV. Christ exalteth the true Church on high, chap. 14. 1. this with his Gentiles treadeth her vnder foote, cap. 11. 2. V. Christ pro∣tecteth his Ministers, hauing them as starres in his hand, chap. 1. and 2. 1. and praiseth their well do∣ing, chap. 2. and 3. This, for the discharging of their ministerie and preaching, murthereth them, chap. 11. 7. VI. Christ honoureth his Father, but this like a very Rabshekah, blasphemeth God, his name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heauen, cap. 13. 6. VII. Christ maintaineth his Spouse, Bride and wife, araying her in fine linnen, cleane & white, which is the righteousnes of the Saints, cap. 19. 7. 8. This vpholdeth a damned and drunken common
whore, attyring her costly, to make others to com∣mit filthinesse with her, cap. 17. 3. 4. 5. Therefore is this beast, that great and opposite enemy, euen that grand Antichrist: So much for the proposition, that This beast is Antichrist. The minor proposition is, The Pope is this beast, which, besides the text, cap. 17. 11, I thus prooue: Whom this type onely setteth out and representeth vnto vs, that is the Antitype and beast here meant. But the Pope in his Pontificalitie and Popedome is the Anti∣type and beast here meant. The maior part needeth no proofe; the minor is manifest by the full agree∣ment of the Popes Pontificalitie and Popedome with this beast in all the particulars. For this Pope∣dome is, I. a Princedome or King-like, yea rather,The agreement of the Popedome with this beast, chap. 13. an Emperiall state, as the word (beast) is taken in Daniel. II. This arose out of the Sea of false do∣ctrine of the supremacie to Peters Chaire. III. It hath seuen heads, that is, hills, where the principall seate of this Popedome is, chap. 17. IV. It hath ten hornes crowned, a potent power of Princes ai∣ding him and giuing their strength to this autho∣ritie, cap. 17. 13. Such were the Kings of Spaine, Por∣tugal, France, Hungary, Bohemia, England, Scotland, Denmarke, Poland, Russia with others. V. His heads, the high place of his Popedom hath ascribed ther∣to what is proper to God, to bee the foundation of Churches, the Vicar of Christs seate; yea vpon one of the gates of the Citie hath this blasphemie been written to Sixtus the fourth, Meritò in terris crederisIunius vpon this place. esse Deus; Thou art worthilie on earth taken for God. VI. Like a Leopard is the Pope in his Pope∣dome,
a State spotted with all filthinesse vncura∣bly; of an alluring sweetnes to get the prey, and firce with all eagernes to rampe at it; flying at the faces and eyes of men hindring the bootie, as the Leopard will doe; wholly it is as a Leopard, but partaketh of Beares feete onely, which are smooth, long and broad, the nailes whereof in going enter the earth, where they are set downe. This Popedom partakes of the Beares feete, it passed smoothly a long time, spreading farre and wide, and wherefoe∣uer it setled, there it left good testimonie of the piercing nailes, and strength of the feeting behind continually. A Lions mouth it hath, terrible is it vpon the prey, and roaring out fearfull excommu∣nications and cursings, making, as the Lion, the rest of the beasts of the forrest to tremble with feare. VII. He hath (the Heathen Emperours taken out of the way) the Dragons power to enforce and sub∣due perforce, as they did; his throne is Rome, for he hath reigned and obtained so great authoritie, as hee hath said and done, euen what hee pleased, without controlement, as did the heathen Empe∣rours. VIII. It receiued a deadly wound by the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and other Northerne people comming as a flood, making as it were no being thereof for a space, but the deadly wound was at length healed, and this Popedome, this Romane Ecclesiasticall Monarchie and Papall dignitie re∣uiued. IX. With this pontificall state fell the world in admiration, highly esteeming the seate, for that it
was the head of the Romane heathen Empire, and so strōg was this beast (the Pope) in his Popedom, that none was able to make warre with him; Em∣perours had the worst, and their neckes haue been troden vpon, and glad they were to kisse his feete. X. A mouth, that is, habilitie to declare his pleasure, and power was giuen to the same by the flatterie of some learned men, by base feare of o∣ther some, by the wicked decrees of Councels, and by Kings yeelding their power and kingdome to the beast: so as great things and very blasphemies were commanded, taught and maintained by this Antichristian Hierarchie; for the particulars of these great things & blasphemies, reade D. Down∣hams booke of Antichrist, chap. 5. XI. In this hautie state and proud blasphemous loftinesse he hath had his 42 moneths to continue, or 1260 daies, to tread downe Gods true Church, which are prophetically put for yeeres, which is the full time of this popish rule and vsurped po∣wer, now againe greatly decaied, blessed be God. XII. Of the Popes purple and scarlet coloured garments, giuen (as they say) by Constantine the Emperour vnto Siluester the first, may wee reade in the Decret. distinct. 96; and how bloud-red this Popedome hath been made by the warres raised against the Saints, the stories doe shew. XIII. This pontificall dignitie and power hath been ouer all kindreds, tongues and nations, this is the Vniuersalitie which this beast hath, and we yeeld to the Popedome. XIV. This Antichristian authoritie beareth vp
that whorish religion, for the woman Babylon sit∣teth thereon, as is noted chap. 17. 4. XV. The Popes dominion was the next (to the heathen Emperours) that spred out it selfe from Rome, so considered is the beast that was, vz. in the beginning to rise, but is not, vpon the comming-in of the Gothes & Vandals was ouerthrowne for a time, and so in mens opinions seemed not to be, for that Gensericus bereaued Rome of euery dweller: Totilas made it a wildernesse, as Bloudus witnesseth in his booke of Decad. And Adaulphus so de∣stroyed Rome, as she was minded to change her name to Gothia; so the reigne of these Gothes dark∣ned the rising of (this new dominiō) the Popedom, which yet is had a being in the time of this Go∣thian furie, and so was the seuenth head: but the Pope arising and recouering his begun dignitie, curing the wound giuen, and being established in his Popedome, ruling ouer Kings and Emperors, was now as another gouernment, and state from the former, and so in account the eighth, and yet of the seuen; to shew, that though hee be the eighth now, he is one of the seuen, as before he was, retai∣ning the right in the Romane Kingdome, which one of the seuen heads, and not the eighth, must doe, for that the beast hath but seuen heads. And this is the reason, why he saith he is the eighth, and one of the seuen; to shew (I say) that being thus the eighth, yet he held the place among the seuen heads, and so his right to the beast, that is, to the Romane kingdome, and not to put vs into doubt, which of the seuen he should be; when it is euident,
that the Caesars were the sixth head in Iohns daies, and the Popes Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction follow∣ing vpon the translation of the Empire was the seuenth, as our Soueraigne most learned in these mysteries, in his Apologie affirmeth. For if theApol. pag. 81. Gothes and that rabble had been the seuenth, how could this be the eight, and one of the seuen? there should haue been no roome for him there then, all the places in full order being taken vp before him. And if wee note it, though it bee said one of his heads was wounded, chap. 13. 3, without naming which; yet it is said, it was his owne deadly wound, meaning the wound of him which now is the eighth, and which Iohn in all this type pointeth vs vnto. Therfore was he one of the heads in the time of the wound giuen by the sword, which head though wounded, yet did liue, chap. 13. 14: by which it is euident, that this beast was in the se∣uenth head, is not in respect of the deadly wound receiued in that head, in which he was to haue his being, and now might seeme hopelesse of that be∣ing, and yet is by being aliue, that is, retaining life still vnder that deadly wound: which comming to be cured, and hauing gotten now an addition of temporal power (in this his second appearing) to his former Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, hee was the eighth and one of the seuenth, euen indeed the se∣uenth, which was in the view of the world, but of a short continuance, and so scarcely taken notice of, to be any head at Rome succeeding the Empe∣rours. Lastly, this beast for al his great power and glo∣rie
goeth into perdition, in him this Romish do∣minion must come to ruine. And doe not we see, blessed be God, doe all the Papists in the world what they can, that this Popedome decaieth dai∣ly, and shall so doe, euen to vtter perdition? And thus haue I shewed, the Pope in his Popedome and the beast to be all one: therefore the beast be∣ing Antichrist, the Pope must needes be so also; so much for the first argument from the beast arising out of the sea, to proue the Pope that Antichrist, for a greater then this beast neuer was, nor shall be, as that which hath been said sufficiently ma∣keth manifest. Quest. If this beast be the Popedome, and not the Heathen Empire; why is it said that he hath seuen heads and ten hornes, as that had? Answ. Indeede, by this likenes in the number of heads and hornes it hath passed along, by a mi∣staking at the first, from hand to hand, in the pen of almost all Expositors, that hereby is typed out the Romane heathen Empire: but wee see by the difference so great betweene this beast and the Dragon, as also by other reasons, that they cannot be both one, though they do agree in these things, which agreement is made only to declare, how he is the Dragons substitute. For it is said, chap. 13. 3.Why the Dragon and Beast agree in seuen heads and ten hornes. I. That the Dragon gaue him his power, that is, leaue, way, and withall, habilitie to succeed him; be∣cause what hee had, he gaue to this beast, to make him great: thus is the word taken, chap. 17. 13. for when the Dragon (called the Diuell and Satan) chap. 12. 9. in the Heathen Emperours, was cast
out from Rome, there was leaue and way for this beasts entrance in, and the Diuell by all his force and subtilties gaue power & strength to this beast, to take possession of that place, in stead of the hea∣then persecuting Tyrants. II. Hee gaue him his seate, hence is it, that this beast hath seuen heads, because Rome is his seate, where the Emperours sate, being situate vpon seuen hills, chap. 17. 9. and because of the seuen kinde of gouernments at Rome. III. Great authoritie: Now to expresse this, this beast also hath ten hornes, and the same crowned, which are tenne Kings, chap. 17. 12. by whose great authoritie hee getteth victorie and preuaileth against all that rose vp against him. Thus we see the text taketh away this mist, which hath been before the eyes of many Interpreters. II. Argument proouing the Pope (out of thisThe second argu∣ment, that the Pope is that An∣tichrist. booke) to be Antichrist, is fetched from his seate at Rome thus: He that is the liuely head of that Church, which professing Christ is against Christ & his Church, is that Antichrist. This is cleere from the like na∣ture of the true head and body together; for if the body bee against Christ, the head by which that body liueth and moueth, must needes bee against Christ. But the Pope is the head of that Church, which professing Christ is against Christ and his Church. For hee is the head of the Romish Church, and that Citie, which first is mysticall Babylon, the whorish woman, chap. 17. 5. 18. as hath been proued, and the same also opposite to the true Church, as is also before fully shewed. Therefore is the Pope of Rome that Antichrist. If any say, that they are not Anti∣christians,
neither he Antichrist that maketh a pro∣fession of Christ, for Antichrist must be one in op∣position to Christ. I answere, that the preposition , noteth not only an opposition, as in the word , to resist and stand against, Matth. 5. 39. as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, 2. Tim. 3. 8. but it noteth the putting of one thing for another by way of exchange, as Esau sold his birth-right  for a morsell of meate, Hebr. 12. 16. The Pope herein is Antichrist, being more prophane then Esau, in changing Christs Spouse, the true Church, for y• whore of Babylon, the false Church. Also it noteth one to bee in the place of another, thus Archilaus reigned  in the roome of Herod, Matth. 2. 22. And thus is the Pope Anti∣christ, euen a proud Archilaus, ruling as a Prince ouer Gods people; and as wicked Herod, preten∣tending to such as seeke Christ, to bee his Vicar, and to desire to worship him, when indeed he see∣keth to murther Christ, in his members, as Herod did seeke the life of Christ himselfe, and to destroy him did put to death many innocents, as this He∣rodian Antichrist, or Antichristian Herod the Pope hath done. If these aduersaries replie, that  may note subordination in opposition, yet not in composition, I answere, what is , but one case for another? , such things as are ordained in the new Testament for those that were in the old time before, 1. Pet. 3. 21? Therefore albeit hee pro∣claime himselfe Christs Vicar, and those of his kingdome to be Christians, yet hee being against Christ indeed, and his, the false Church also, as is
proued, hee is Antichrist, and they (the Papists) Antichristians. III. Argument in this booke, is in chap. 13. 11,The third argu∣ment, prouing the Pope that Antichrist. where mention is of another beast, from which I reason thus: This beast is that grand Antichrist, so Bellarmine saith all men doe confesse, lib. 3. cap. 10. & 15. de Pontif. Rom. and if any should denie it, the text it selfe maketh this proposition sound. For he that exerciseth all the power of the kingdome of Antichrist, is Antichrist: but this beast doth so, chap. 13. 11. for hee exerciseth all the power of the first beast, which I haue proued to be the kingdom of Antichrist, or Romane Ecclesiasticall state vn∣der him: therfore is this beast Antichrist. Againe, this beast giueth life to that state, chap. 13. 15. and with this beast that state is ouerthrowne, chap. 19. 20: therefore is this the head thereof, and that ve∣ry Antichrist. Many other arguments may be vr∣ged from the text, but these two shall suffice to confirme what is alreadie granted. But the Pope of Rome is this beast. Therefore that grand Antichrist. He that is the eighth and one of the seuen, is this beast. This is also acknowledged by Bellarm. lib. de Pont. Rom. 3. cap. 10. 15. from chap. 17. 10. where the first beast, chap. 13. 1. with chap. 17. 3. with this head (the eighth and one of the seuen) are made one and cal∣led the beast, that is, the head with the body, the King with his kingdome, the Antichrist with his dominion. But the Pope of Rome is the eighth and one of the seuen. This I before haue shewed, how hee in his Pontificalitie and Popedome is this beast, ac∣counted the eighth and one of the seuen. Therefore
is he this beast, which fully appeareth in this, that the Pope in al things is like this beast, as his Pope∣dome is like the other beast. THE TRVE LIKENES AND FVLL agreement of the Pope and this beast, shewing them to bee one and the same in substance. Vers. 11. This commeth out of the earth. The Popes originall is earthly,The second beast (chap. 13. 11.) and the Pope are one and the same. by earthly meanes and fauour of earthly men, who were seduced and gaue their power to him, chap. 17. 12. Hee hath two hornes like a Lambe. The Pope is but in shewe a Lambe, he is indeed , a raue∣ning beast, hauing two hornes, a double power, Ecclesiasticall and temporall. And hee spake as the Dragon. Empiring peremptorily, com∣manding, decreeing, and ordai∣ning as heathen Emperours did, what he pleaseth without all con∣trole, teaching damnable and di∣uellish doctrine. Vers. 12. And bee exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him. And whatsoeuer is the power of the Popedome, that doth he (as head and chiefe) exercise in the highest places of that state, euen before him, that is, at Rome the very face (as I may say) of that An∣tichristian dominion; so that, the
other beast, the Popedome, is but as a dead thing, without this beast (the Pope) who worketh all in all therein. And causeth the earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was hea∣led. So the Pope caused all earthly Christians and worldly minds to admire (as vers. 3.) and to wor∣ship that Romane power and do∣minion set out vnder the former beast, after that it was recouered from vnder that miserie & dead∣ly wound receiued by the Gothes and other barbarous nations. Vers. 13. And he doth great won∣ders, so that hee maketh fire come downe from hea∣uen on earth, in the sight of men. The Pope becommeth a false prophet, and doth great won∣ders, chap. 19. 20: and thus lear∣ned men commenting vpon this place shew out of histories, and giue instances of the kinde here mentioned, in Hildebrand, Zacha∣rias, and Innocentius bringing fire from heauen. Vers. 14. And deceineth thē that dwell on the earth, by the meanes of those miracles, which hee had po∣wer to doe in the sight of the beast. But it was to deceiue world∣lings, such as had submitted to that state, chap. 19. 20. and were not in the Lambes booke of life, chap. 13. 8. as all the Popes and fained miracles of Papists haue been done euer, to misleade the people, reade their Legenda, which was to vphold lying doctrines, Idolatrie, and false worship.
Saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an I∣mage to the beast, which had a wound by a sword and did liue. This beast (the Pope) wrought miracles, and withall adioyned thereto his doctrine, declaring whereto his miracles tended, e∣uen to bring to passe this, to wit, that the people would make an Image to the former beast, that is, to his Popedome; which is no∣thing else, but that meanes, by which his Popedome, and pontificall state might (by the remembrance thereof) bee had in autho∣rity with men. For so the word Image is taken for power and authoritie, represented in one that hath power and authoritie ouer another, 1. Cor. 11. 7. Now what other thing then is this Image, but oneThe Image of the Beast, what it is. of these two? either first (as the Pope would per∣swade the people to beleeue) Peters supremacie A∣postolicall, from Christ Iesus ouer all the Apostles and Churches of God, and so he Christs Vicar on earth. This Image, the Pope did striue-for long, and at length obtained it; for the beast (after the deadly wound was healed, and the people also be∣leeuing the same, and yeelding to it, which was their making of it) had his triple crowne, and his crosse keyes for his armes; then sate the whore vp∣on the beast, arraied gloriously, for the people wor∣shipped this Image, giuing to this Church, gold, pearles, and precious stones. Indeed the Pope, by obtaining the Image to be set vp, euen to be aboue all Churches in his Popedome, made Rome to bee as a Queene, cap. 18. 7. yet a queane for al that. cap. 17. 1. being a Catholick, that is, a common whore
with all she could allure to her, cap. 17. 2. Now that this obtained prerogatiue is an Image, is plaine, not onely by the vse of the word, as before is no∣ted, but also in the common acception thereof, for a likenesse and resemblance of one thing to ano∣ther: for a Vicar, is an Image of him in whose place he is; then heere is, as the beast perswadeth the earthly sort, Christs Vicar; first Peter in his supre∣macie, and the Pope his successor sitting in Peters chaire, with the crosse keyes in his hand, and triple crowne vpon his head; all which, in the minds of such as beleeue this, is an Image of the authoritie, antiquitie, and glory of the Popedome; which this beast will haue to be beleeued, by all the wonders that he can worke, without which (indeed) his do∣minion would come to nothing quickly. And here we may see, how the Dragon (the diuell) ma∣kethHow Heathen and Christen Rome vnder the Pope, agree. Christian Rome, and Heathen Rome alike: in Heathen Rome there belonged to it a great domi∣nion; so to the Christian, a Popedome: in the Heathen were Emperors, in the Christian, Popes: the Emperours were Empiring in their dominion ouer all Kings and kingdomes; so these Popes Em∣pire ouer all Kings and kingdomes: they had titles giuen, by which they claimed & held soueraignty ouer all; so haue these this their title, by which they claime and vsurpe authoritie ouer all. Or second∣ly, this Image is a representatiue power (agreed vn∣to by the people, and so established by the Pope) of such persons, as were most fit for the maintenance of the Popedome: hence arose the Spanish Inqui∣sition, a liuely Image of the cruell beast. Reu. 11. 7.
Vers. 15. And hee had power to giue life vnto the Image of the beast, that the I∣mage should both speake, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the beast, should bee killed. After the Pope had gotten vp this Image, to the honour of the Popedome, he wanted not power then to giue life, that is, power to moue, and to doe actions of life for selfe-preseruation, and the state; making it speak, that is, ma∣king decrees, lawes, canons, con∣stitutions, and sending forth e∣dicts all from this supremacie, and authoritie ouer the Chur∣ches, Kings, and kingdomes, and if any withstood this authoritie, and would not worship the same, the Pope, (as a Nabuchadnezzar, that had his Image despised, would cause this authority to bee of force against them, and so to be put to death: of which, stories giue plentifull examples, as well in most mightie, as other meane persons. Vers. 16. And he caused all, both small and great, rich and poore, free and bond, to receiue a mark in their right hand, or in their fore∣heads. The Pope, because hee would be sure to know his owne, deuised a marke for his subiects, without respect of person, for all and euery of them to receiue; that so, either by some act, or by outward pro∣fession, they might (as by a marke) bee knowne to belong vnto his kingdome.
Vers. 17. And that no mā might buy or sell, saue hee that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Yea, so peremptory hath this beast (the Pope and false prophet) been, since the making of the I∣mage, as none might buy or sell within his dominion, but such as professed, or did some way shew themselues members of the Ro∣mane Church, and subiects to the Pope, of which the world can speak, and stories do hereof beare witnesse. Thus we see this beast, and the Pope to bee both one; and therefore that grand Antichrist. IV. and last argument is from chap. 9. vers. 1.The fourth ar∣gument, that the Pope is that Antichrist. and vers. 11. that the Pope is Antichrist, which I will onely but propound for breuitie sake in these formes. The starre fallen from heauen to the earth is that Antichrist, as may appeare by his authority giuen him, and effects thereof; But the Pope of Rome is the starre fallen from heauen to the earth, that is, from the true and heauenly Church, to the false and earthly, as his doctrines, now held and taught by him, contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, taught in S. Pauls Epistle written to the true and heauenly Church then, doe plainly e∣uince.
The doctrine ofThe now pre∣sent Church of Rome is Apo∣stated from the Church at Rome, in Saint Pauls time. the Church of Rome, in Saint Pauls time. THE DOCTRINE of the now Romish Church. 1. That Church might erre, as wel as other haue done, cap. 11. 20. 21. 22. The present Romane Church, nor head nor members can erre; nll casu, in no case the Pope, be∣cause hee is supreame Iudge of faith and manners; Bellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. cap. 1. 3. nor Coun∣cels particular, if hee approoue them; nor general, if he confirme them, Idem lib. 1. de concil. et ccles. ap. 25. surely not their particu∣lar Romane Church, that is, their people and clergie cannot erre in the faith Idem de Rom: Pont. Ib. 4. cap. 4. 2. That Saint Paul was the A∣postle of the Gen∣tiles, cap. 11. 13. and 15. 16. 19. 20. and was at Rome. Act. 28. The Pope stileth Peter vniuer∣sall Bishop, though the Scripture call him the Apostle of circum∣cision, and though it do no where expressely teach that Peter was e∣uer at Rome. Hence their out∣cry, that wee are pernicious here∣tickes, to denie Peter his head∣ship, whereas; they say, Christ e∣stablished the same Idem lib. 1. e summo Pont. cap. 10.. Hence they call Peter the Ordinarie shep∣heard, and head, vpon whom e∣uen the Apostles depended, the Rocke of the Church, the onely person vpon whom the keyes were immediately, truly, and
principally bestowed Idem lib. 1. de Pont. ca. 12.. Hence ra∣ther then faile, to prooue him to haue bin at Rome, they confesse Rome to bee figured and meant, in the name both of that Baby∣lon whence Peter wrote, as also that Babylon in the Apocalyps Idem lib. 2. de Rom. Pont. cap. 2.. As for his presence at Rome, iu∣dicious and learned Caluin hol∣deth the whole matter doubtfull, and questionable Caluins Inst. lib. 4 cap. 6. §. 15.. But Illyricus saith, that it is a certaine demon∣stration that hee was neuer at Rome Illyric. lib. cont. primat. Papae.. And Velenus by eighteen motiues hath so cleered that de∣monstration, as that it hath not hither to by any aduersarie (that I know) been sufficiently dispro∣ued  presso. 3. That Church and all thereof, were taught to be, and so were, sub∣iect to the ciuill power and world∣ly Rulers, cap. 13. 1. 2-7. The Pope and his Clergie ex∣empt themselues from duties, tri∣bute, custome, feare and honour in true subiection to Kings, and temporall authoritie. Hee will tread in the neckes of Kings, and sway their Scepters, taking the words of the Psalmist as literally, as did Alexander the third, trea∣ding vpon the necke of Frede∣ricke the first Emperour, saying the words of the Psalme in ex∣treame pride and high blasphe∣mie,
super aspidem & basiliscum, &c. He will haue the Emperour, and Kings to wait on him, and to hold his stirrop Lib. sacrae. ceremon.. But how ex∣cessiue is that pride and vsurpati∣on, when alone, without the Councell, hee hath power to de∣pose Kings and Emperours, to substitute Legats, and protectors, and co-adiutors at his pleasure Lancellot. concord.: to transferre Empires, King∣domes, principalities, from race to race, not onely among Chri∣stians, Heretickes, and Schisma∣tickes Bellar. de translat. Im∣perij.; but euen throughout the whole world, as Lord and so∣ueraigne of the world Iacob de Te∣rano, cited in the reision of the Councell of Trent. lib. 2.? and these are not words only, but this soueraignty hee did put in exe∣cution, Anno dom. 1493. Alexan∣der the sixth, bestowing all the territories and dominions of the poore barbarous Princes of the West, vpon Fordinande of Ara∣gon; as some other, both of his predecessors and successors, haue giuen away Christian King∣domes, yea the Empire, in their displeasures. And as himselfe withdraweth his obedience, in like manner hee exempteth his whole Clergie; so that his
Clerkes offending the Prince his lawes, may not be iudged by the secular power Bellar. lib. 1. de clericis, cap. 28.. Yea one dare to affirme, That it is better that sinnes should rest vnpunished, then such immunities and priuiledges should be cancelled Ioh. Mariana Iesuita, lib. de Rege & lib. 1. cap. 10.. As their persons, so their goods also they challenge to be exempted, whether they be secular, or Ecclesiastical, from tri∣bute vnto Princes Bellar. lib. 1. de cler. cap. 28. propos. 5.. 4. All true be∣leeuers in Christ, then were Saints, chap. 1. 7. and 8. 27. and 15. 31. The Pope will haue those on∣ly to be generally throughout the whole Church, esteemed, and without all doubt to be beleeued for such, whom hee onely canoni∣zeth for Saints Bellar. lib. 1. de beat. sanct. cap. 8.: yet it is a con∣fessed case, that the first Pope which inuented this canonizati∣on was Leo the third Idem eodem cap. §. Dices., euen some 800. yeeres after Christ: and the pretended saint may also bee a limbe of the diuell, as may seeme by the view of the liues of Saint Francis Hospiniam lib. de origine Monachatus.; and Saint Thomas of Canterburie Histories of England.. Yet forsooth wee must beleeue in euery such cano∣nization (yea though it bee, per∣haps) the sainting of Henrie Garnet, or Catesby, or Faulx, and such like monstrous traitors) that
the Pope cannot erre Bellar. lib. 1. de beat. sanct. cap. 9.. 5. They were taught and bele∣ued, that by works then none were iustified, Rom. 3. 20. and 8. 3. and 9. 31. 32. and 11. 6. The Pope teacheth, and his be∣leeue and professe, that they shall be saued by their workes, and at∣taine eternall life thereby. That their good workes after iustifica∣tion, are truly properly deser∣uings, or merits, not of any slen∣der reward, but of eternall life it selfe Bellar. lib. 5. de ius. cap. 1.. That to haue confidence towards God, a man must seeke after such merits, and may also safely trust in them Idem lib 5. de  cap. 7. propo 1. 2.. That the workes of loue deserue eternall life by inward value, worth, pro∣portion to the reward Idem lib. 5. cap. 16.. Nay, that an vnreconciled wicked man may in a congruitie, deserue the grace of iustification Idem. lib. 5. cap. 20.. 6. They were taught, and belee∣ued, that by prea∣ching, and hea∣ring the word of God, faith was wrought, Rom. 10. 14. 15. 17. The Pope, with his, teach and beleeue, that there is no absolute need of Scriptures Bellar lib. 4. de verbo Dei non scripto.: they keepe the word of God from the peo∣ple, by not suffering the Scrip∣tures to be translated into known tongues, and to come abroad, holding them to be not only not profitable, but hurtfull to Gods people Bellar. lib. 2. de verbo Dei. cap. 15.; vsing vnknown tongues to them in their diuine seruice, and prayers: as namely, Hebrew, Greeke, or Latine; approouing
the faith of the Colliar, pinned vpon the vnknowne infolded be∣leefe of the Church, affirming, that faith is better defined by ig∣norance, then by knowledge Bellar lib. 1. de iustif. cap. 7.. 7. They belee∣ued, and were taught, that reli∣gion stood not in differēce of daies, and meates. Rom. 14. 5. 6. 14. 17. The state and Church of the Papacie beleeue and teach, that there is holinesse and religion to bee put in obseruing of daies, or∣dained by man, being celebra∣ted (ratione mysterij) more sacred and holy then other dayes, and a part of Gods worship Bellar. 3. lib. de cultu sact. à cap. . ad finem.. That the obseruation of such dayes is well enioyned by the Church, by a law binding conscience Idem ibid. cap. 10.. Likewise the like holinesse is taught a∣mongst them, to consist in the difference of meats; comman∣ding, that who so fasteth accor∣ding to the manner and forme of the Church, should make choyce of his meates, but especially take heede to abstaine from flesh Idem lib. 2. de bonis operi∣bus in partic. cap. 1. and at large, cap. 5.. 8. They were taught, and belee∣ued, that all borne of a woman, Iewes and Gentiles, are sinners, Rom. 3. 9. 19. 23. & 5. 12. The Pope and his, beleeue and teach, that it is an holy opinion probable, yea more probable then the contrary, that the Virgin Mary was without sinne, both actuall and originall Idem lib. 4. de amiss. gra∣tiae et statu pecati. cap. 15. 16.; albeit she with her owne mouth acknow∣ledged the contrary, Luk. 2.
9. They were taught and belee∣ued, that euery sin is deadly, Rom. 6. 23. yea Originall sinne, Rom. 5. 14. and 7. 7. 17. 24. The Pope & his Church teach and beleeue, that some sinnes are veniall, and pardonable in their whole kind, not disagreeing with the loue of God or man, though their obiect be disorder or euill. Againe, that some are pardona∣ble, through the imperfection of their worke, either as they ouer∣take him at vnawares, or as the matter wherein they are commit∣ted is of little or no value: and thus idle words, excessiue and foo∣lish laughter, ill motions of the heart, filching and stealing small matters are accounted pardona∣ble. Bellarm. de amiss. grat. & stat. peccat. lib. 1. cap 3. Moreouer, concupiscence or naturall corruption, is so light∣ly esteemed, as it is not to bee thought originall sinne, nor to be imputed for sinne, nor possible in iustice to bee imputed for sinne, but in it owne nature to bee no manner sinne at all, Idem lib. 5. cap. 5. de amiss. grat. & statu peccat.. 10. They were taught and belee∣ued, that they were to auoid such as serued their owne bellies, and caused diuision & offences contrarie The Pope with his Ecclesia∣stiques serue only their owne bel∣lies, as may appeare by the com∣plaint of their owne friends. A Secretarie of the Popes saith, in the vniuersall Church, from the head to the sole of the foote, there is no part sound. Theodor. à Nihem. de schism. lib. 2. cap. vlt. A learned Bi∣shop
to the doctrine, which they had learned. Roman. 16. 17. 18. of France, besides his owne complaints, hath filled 10, or 11 pages with the verses of Baptist Mantuan an Italian, and a Prier Carmelite, which speake of no∣thing more, then the vices, abuses, abominations of the Popes and Courts of Rome. Espencaeus ad Com. in epist. ad Titum digres. 2. pag. 76. &c. A Cardinall saith, All care is for the temporall estate, and none for the spirituall. The best and the fat, which the Emperors gaue and ordained for the seruice of God, and publique good; is so imbezeled by colou∣rable pretences and new trickes, (since lust and auarice stole in) that what was imperiall is be∣come Papall, and the spirituall is become temporall. Cusanus lib. 3 de concor. cap. 29 as he is alleaged, lib. 1. Reuil. of the Trident. Coun∣cell, cap. 3. An Augu∣stine Frier speaking of ye Church, which was so much abased and degenerated, that from gold by degrees it came to clay and dirt, asketh this question, What is ba∣ser then dirt? and thus he answe∣reth; I remember my selfe, it is the dung wherein the whole Court walloweth. Theodoric. vric. de consol. Eccl. ad Sigis∣mundum Im∣peratorem, ci∣ted by Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizensi sub anno Dom. 1404. And as they liue in this manner, so they rend and di∣uide the Christian world, causing scandall, diuision and sedition, contrarie to the doctrine taught
and learned out of this Epistle to the Romans. Who was the cause of those horrible tragedies in Sicilia long since, when the French were cut in peeces in one night? Paulus Ae∣mylius. Who gaue counsell and armed the French at the mariage of Hen. the 3, to commit that bar∣barous massacre? Inuent. of France. Who streng∣thened the Spanyard against France, stirred him vp against the English, inraged him against his owne subiects the vnited Prouin∣ces? Who praised the murtherers of Hen. the 3 of France? WhenceMeteranus his historie of the Low Countries. came the blow, which took away blood and life at once from the last Henry? Where had the inten∣ded vnmatchable powder-trea∣son, counsell, comfort, pardon a∣forehand,Proceedings a∣gainst Garnet. and promise of eternall reward, if not from this spring of murther and blood the Pope? Not to speake of an Hildebrand, that setteth sonne against the fa∣ther, subiect against the Prince, brother against brother, since for these many hundred yeeres the very seate and state of the Ro∣mane Church hath bin as a brand of hell fire, to consume euerie friend and opposite.
Thus in these and many moe points of great weight doe they teach and beleeue, contrarie to the ancient Church of Rome in S. Pauls time; and therfore hath the Pope and his people fallen from that first true and heauenly Church, to a false and earthly. Therefore is he the starre fallen, and that An∣tichrist. Againe, to conclude this point: The king of the Locusts is that Antichrist for hee is the Angell of the bottomlesse pit, and also the beast ascending out of it, chap. 11. 7. and 17. 8. But the Pope of Rome is the king of the Locusts; for these Locusts are his creatures, and he is Apollyon a destroyer, as all his do∣ctrine, worship, bloodie persecutions, massacres, treasonable practises in his approued seruants, set on by him to stab, poyson and otherwise to mur∣ther Kings at his commaund, doe publish to the world. Therfore is he that grād Antichrist. And thus it appeareth fully and plainly by this booke to all vs Protestants that doe see, and to any Papist that will see, that the Pope is Antichrist, that Rome is Babylon, that very Church the Whore, and all thereof Antichristians. Quest. Some perhaps here will aske me, if the true Church be so liuely here painted out, and this Antichri∣stian state of Rome so plainly discouered, as I seeme to make it; why doe not the Papists themselues, especially the learneder sort of them, see the same and come out of Babylon? Answ. Many reasons there bee for this, and to giue the Reader satisfaction, that hee may not stumble hereat, as many doe, (who doe so behold men, their place, their learning, and seeming
deuotion, as they are therewith carried away, be∣cause they ignorantly know not, or carelesly re∣gardReasons why the learneded Pa∣pists come not out of Babylon. not to know, the true reasons of this their so continuing in such a damnable estate) let him con∣sider seriously of these reasons. I. Because Rome is an inticing whore, beauti∣full,1. Reason, Rome is an inticing whore. rich, and of great authoritie, chap. 17. 2. and 19. 2. and maketh her louers drunke with the wine of her fornication, and carrieth them away with her delights, chap. 17. 2. and 18. 3. Wee see that a man addicted to whoredome, and led with such an in∣ticing whore, and made drunke by her; can hee in that state forsake her? Yea though he sometime a∣wake and consider with himselfe of his estate, yet as long as she is with him, he still yeeldeth, as Sam∣son to a Dalilah, till he come to destruction. Such is the state of the great pompous Clergie and Clerkes of Rome; and therefore no marueile they returne not, being drunke with the pleasures, pro∣fits and honors of that state, and liuing deliciously with that inticing stately Queane and mother of harlots, who hath varietie of whorish trickes to re∣taine her best beloued louers. II. Because this booke of the Reuelation2. Reason, they cannot vnder∣stand this booke. was sent from God to his owne seruants, to bee shewed to them, and not to the wicked, though neuer so wittie bondslaues of Antichrist, branded with his character and marke, chap. 1. 1. to whom it is not giuen to know the secrets of the kingdom of heauen, but only to the flocke of Christ and his chosen ones. Matth. 13. III. Because they be of the world, and cannot
receiue the spirit of truth, Ioh. 14. 17: neither can3. Reason, they cannot receiue the spirit of truth. they beleeue, because they receiue honour one of ano∣ther, and seeke not the honour which commeth from God only. Ioh. 5. 44.4. Reason, they faine a false Antichrist. IV. Because they bee like the Scribes and Pha∣risies, who could speake of their Messias; but yet when he came, some would not acknowledge him through infirmitie, fearing to be put out of the Sy∣nagogue, and because they loued the praise of men more then the praise of God, Ioh. 12. 42. 43: so some beleeue vs to bee in the truth, and themselues out of the way; yet for feare to lose their places and credits with that state, they confesse not the truth. Some other would not acknowledge Christ of meere enuie and malice, conuicted of the truth in their owne consciences; some such also there may be, whose state is most damnable. Othersome there are, and these the most of the learned sort, who like as the Iewes did acknowledge the Messias in the Scriptures, yet framed a Christ and his kingdome out of their owne braines, such a one as the Scrip∣tures neuer taught; whereby the people misled, could not know Christ indeed, but then did, and yet doe expect the comming of such a one, where∣as Christ was alreadie come, & was among them. Euen so these learned Papists, though they ac∣knowledge that the grand Antichrist is in this booke; yet for that they haue framed such an Anti∣christ out of their owne wicked wits, as the booke doth not lay open vnto vs, they expect him to come, who indeede and truth is their head in the midst among them: and so by their false doctrine
of Antichrist, and by their wilfull opposing the light cleerely discouering him, they wretchedly keepe the poore seduced people blinde, that they cannot see how they liue vnder, in stead of Christs Vicar, the very Vicar of the Diuell, the grand An∣tichrist and Pope of Rome. V. Because in generall the things that belong5. Reason, that is hid from them which they should know. to the peace of that people are hid from their eyes, in Gods secret counsell, as once from Ierusalem, Luk. 19. 42, though plainly enough then by Christ foretold, that that Antichristian state might come to destruction, and the word of the Lord be fulfil∣led, according as here in this book he plainly fore∣telleth, that so due vengeance may be taken there∣of, for the blood of the Saints & seruants of Christ shed vpon the earth. What God hath decreed shall come to passe: the wicked will not haue that grace to foresee betime, and preuent by amen∣ding, but through vnbeleese will goe on in sin and perish. Did not the Lord say plainly that the dogs should eate Iesabel, and that in the gates of Iesrael? was it not plaine enough? yet neither she, nor her 400 priests of Baal tooke heed thereunto to pre∣uent it, but rather soothed her vp in her wicked∣nes, and secured her in sinne, till the day of her de∣struction. So shall it verily fall out with this Iesabel of Rome, who is plainly told of her destruction, cap. 17. 18. and 19; yet by the soothing of her Baals priests they make her secure, till a day come that God shall raise vp a Iehu to reuenge his quarrell vpon the head of them all, to their ruine and ouer∣throw; which the Lord Iesus hastē, euen so Amen.
VI. Because these great Clerkes simply seeke6. Reason, they seeke not after the truth. not the truth, but the glorie and maintenance of their state, as appeareth by their dealings: I. In withholding the word from the people. II. In maintaining a corrupt translation. III. In only allowing those truths which serue to vphold their state, but opposing, teaching and practising con∣trarie to any euident truth, which may any way crosse their Antichristian doctrine and gouern∣ment, and idolatrous worship and superstitious practises; approue they will not any truth against them, but what they are forced vnto for common shame. IV. In peruerting the truth, by wicked and most false distinctions, playing fast and loose, as they list and like of. V. In falsifying Councels, corrupting Fathers, pretending their authoritie, where they make for them, (whether the writing, whence the testimonie is fetched, bee true or false, they care not): but if any Councell or Father bee against them, they by one deuice or other shake off the authoritie. VI. In vpholding their state and the credit thereof by counterfeit miracles, ly∣ing signes, forged deuices, humane traditions, le∣gends of lyes, trecherie, treasons, murthers, sorce∣ries and open rebellions. The truth of these things are to bee either read in stories, or seene in their daily disputatiōs against vs, or else are wel enough knowne to vs all, by their courses and continuall practises among vs, and therefore no marueile that these come not out from that Romish Anti∣christian state. VII. Because they seeke to expound this book
only by meere wit, and by their onely humane lear∣ning,7. Reason, they of purpose ob∣sture the truth. and by sole testimonies of men consenting with them, the truth thereof, their comments hereupon doe plainly shew; by which only naturall and out∣ward helpes, they are so farre from opening the booke, and declaring the truth therof, as they may seeme to any iudicious reader, to endeauour of set purpose to couer their Antichristian state, to ob∣scure vtterly the Text, and to burie the truth it selfe, that it may neuer come to the light. They should know, that though wit and reason bee ne∣cessary, learning in tongues and arts bee very needfull, much reading in histories, and the la∣bours of godly and learned men cannot bee wan∣ting; yet if one thing bee wanting, all these are of no efficacie or forcible effect, to open vnto vs the mysteries of God in this booke. The author must be the reuealer, euen the holy spirit, without which we cannot conceiue the things heerein deliuered. Iohn must be in the spirit, to see things present, cap. 1. 10. He must be in the spirit to see things to come, chap. 4. 2. to see the whore of Babylon and her damnation, chap. 17. 3. and to see the spouse of Christ, the new Ierusalem, chap. 21. 10. Spirituall things are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2. and by the spirit must be taught, without which, though the words bee neuer so easie and plaine, the reader shall not see what is before him. If God open not our eyes, we shall remaine blind, and not behold what is before vs in the open Sun-shine. Let me here demand of such as doe stumble atNo reason to stumble at the Papists blindnes. the blindnesse of the Papists yet, in the cleere light
of truthes, as if it still were of force to make them to doubt, whether their state be so bad, as we shew it to be, or no; let me (I say) aske them: I. whyWhy men re∣maine ignorant of apparant truth. did not the people in Moses dayes know the Lord, who so apparantly shewed himselfe vnto them by miracles, and wonders, by iudgements and strange deliuerances, the like neuer seene nor heard of? was it not (as Moses saith, Deut. 29. 4.) because God gaue them neither eyes to see, nor eares to heare, nor hearts to perceiue? II. Why did not the foolish Idolaters discerne their grosse fol∣lieWhy Jdolaters discerne not their madnesse and follie. and madnesse, when they bowed vnto a piece of wood, worshipped it, and prayed vnto it, desi∣ring deliuerance from it, as God; which Idoll themselues made with their owne hands, yea and of the same matter which they made it of, they tooke and turned to othervses? doth not the Pro∣phet giue a reason? Because God (saith hee) hathEsa. 44. 17.▪ 20. shut vp their eyes, that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot vnderstand, nor consider what they doe, a deceiued heart hath turned them aside: reade the place, and weigh it well. III. IfWhy Balaams Asse saw, what his master could not see. any yet thinke, because they be such great Clerkes, that it should not be possible for them not to see, what other seely ones doe see, I aske them; whyNumb. 22. did the poore and seely Asse see and speake before his master Balaam? Was it not for that God had opened the poore beasts eyes to see and auoid the perill, and also his mouth, to speake vnto his great master, so renouned with Balak, and worldly potentates; who yet remained without the sight of that which the Asse saw, though he wanted not his
naturall eye-sight? The Lord hideth his counsels from the wise and prudent when hee will, and re∣uealeth them vnto babes, and very asses, in compa∣rison of these great and grand masters, high in the eyes of earthly mindes; because so it is his good pleasure. Mat. 11. 25. 26. Obiect. But some (perhaps) may yet haue one stum∣bling blocke before them, and may say vnto mee; well, though this bee a good satisfaction to any concerning those that are in Babylon, of the Romane state, and neuer were of vs; yet why should such as bee among vs, some learned, some great persons, and others fall off from vs to them? Answ. If any one propound this out of an ho∣nestWho they be, that be come now in this so cleere light, Apostates from vs. Male∣contents. heart to resolue himselfe, then let him consi∣der and be satisfied, and the Lord perswade him as the truth is: Such as fall from vs, are either male∣contents, high spirits, thinking better of themselues then they deserue of the state, and wanting an an∣swerablenesse to their owne expectation; out they goe like male-contents, with ill intents. Or they beeBusie headed, quick-wicked. Polypragmaticall fellowes, and will haue employ∣ments according to their humours; and if not here, then in, and vnder that busie state, which by an instrument will put an oare into euery mansNouices in re∣ligion. boat, as we say: or they being young Nouices, tra∣uellers, not before well grounded, (though some (perhaps) by good education well instructed) who by vaine sights, great shewes of deuotion, glorious outward worship, outward workes of great cost in that voluntary religion, and by quick-wicked wits, instrumēts of seduction, cunning Artisans of Anti∣christ,
christ, (pretending antiquitie, vrging vniuersality, alleaging mens testimonies, and falsly accusing vs) are brought into a foolish conceit and approbati∣on of that way, and into an vngodly dislike of our holy profession, against al truth and verity of Scrip∣ture.Such as had no loue of the truth. Or they bee meere carnall prosessours formally, seruing God in our Church; but indeed neuer re∣ceiued any sincere loue, of the truth, neither euer felt any effectuall power thereof; therefore God in his iust iudgement, sendeth them strong delu∣sions, that they should beleeue a lie, that they might be damned, 2. Thessal. 2. 11. 12. Or they beeBad-liuers. wicked liuers here with vs, either as open prophane, or more closely vicious; who (for that they, accor∣ding to their knowledg and meanes of sanctifica∣tion offered, glorifie not God, neither were thank∣full) doe become vaine in their imaginations, and their foolish heart is darkened, and are giuen ouer of God, Rom. 1. 21. Or they be such, as in a well∣meaningSimple and ig∣norant. (as men say) haue a will to serue God, but yet know not how, for want of illumination, and spirituall wisdome in heauenly things; and so by seducers, Priests, Iesuites, and papisticall spirits, pretending antiquity of old religiō (which indeed is new) the custome of fore-fathers, and many such false grounds, (the only grounds of Antichrists re∣ligion) are taken in the snare of mens inuentions, and are led by a false deuotion, to death and dam∣nation, vnlesse they repent. Or else they be such as haue played the hypocrites with God and men in this state, pretending to be of our Church, but in∣deed and truth, Antichristians in their hearts; such
as be all our Church-Papists at this day among vs. These are the Apostats from vs to the Apostaticall Romish Synagogue. See before who are Papists, and weigh the causes there. Thus I haue shewed why some Papists, though learned, returne not to vs, and why some miserable soules fall away from vs, that we might not stum∣ble at these things, when the reasons truly laid downe be well weighed, which (I hope) will be of force to establish the heart of euery true beleeuer, and if God please, may serue also to bring some backe againe, or at least be a meanes to preuent o∣thers from falling; which God of his mercy grant. Amen.
THE OPENING OF SAINT IOHNS MYSTI∣call Reuelation. THE SECOND PART. CHAP. I. The summe of this chapter. This booke, though it be held obscure, yet is it not soobscure, but by Gods helpe, if not easily in all, yet euen in the most things, it may be vnderstood. IT is too generally receiued an opinion, that this booke is in∣extricable hard, and the truth so infolded in obscurities, that it is not to be vnderstood; so as of most it is laid aside, as a sea∣led booke, not to bee vnsealed, or almost at all to be read. But that godly and stu∣dious Readers may bee encouraged to vndertake the studie hereof, with good hope to vnderstandReasons prouing the summe of the chapter. what the Lord hath herein signified, to bee shewed to vs his people; let them weigh these reasons. I. The very title telleth vs, that it may bee vn∣derstood,1. Reason, it is a Reuelation. for it is a Reuelation, that is, a discouering and making manifest of secret and hidden things,
cap. 1. 1. If it could not be vnderstood, it should not be answerable to the title, and might rather haue been tearmed an Apocrypsis, then an Apocalypsis. II. It is vnsealed by Christ himselfe to be read,2. Reason, it is vnsealed. cap. 5. and a commandement is giuen, not to seale the sayings of the prophecie of this booke, cap. 22. 10. but if it be not to be vnderstood, it is the words of a sealed booke, Esa. 29. 11. III. The end why God sent it is, that his ser∣uants3. Reason, sent to e knowe. should be acquainted with the things there∣in contained, cap. 1. 1. and 4. 1. and 22. 6. Now this end should bee frustrate, if it could not bee vnder∣stood; shal any thinke God in vaine gaue it, or that Iohn needlesly wrote it? IV. The manifold exhortations so earnestly4 Reason, ex∣hortations to ,  stirring vs vp to heare what the spirit saith, chap. 2. 11. 17. 29. and the promise of a blessing repeated, cap. 1. 3. and 22. 7. to the keepers of the words ther∣of, doe assure vs that it may bee vnderstood, for what readers, hearers, and doers are here to be vn∣derstood, but such as be intelligent, beleeuing, and conscionable? V. The holy Ghost himselfe (to further our vn∣derstanding, expoundeth plainly his owne mea∣ning in very many places, as in chap. 1. 13. expoun∣ded in vers. 17. and vers. 12. and 16. expounded in vers. 20. so vers. 15. expounded in chap. 17. 15. the chap. 4. 4. expounded in chap. 19. 8. yea in chap. 4. 5. and 5. 6. the exposition is with the words. So chap. 13. 1. 2. expo. in chap. 17. 8. and 12. 3. expo. in vers. 9. and 17. 3. expo. in vers. 15. and so are many other places. Now if heere any
man aske me, Why doth not God expound all places, as well as some, if hee would haue it vnder∣stood? I answere, for that the Lord hath giuen to his Church the gift of interpretation, which he wil haue them to exercise, which shee could not doe, if all were plaine; and to shake off sloth. and to stirre vs vp to a diligent searching, inuocation, & praier, at Gods hand, to craue his aide, the grace and assi∣stance of his spirit to vnderstand them. VI. And lastly, diuers godly men haue attai∣ned6. Reason, the learned com∣mentaries of the godly. to a great measure of vnderstanding in much of it, in the most of those things which are now come to passe, and haue left their labours behind them to the Church of Christ, of which wee may haue the benefit to further vs very greatly, to finde out the true sense and meaning, by the good and blessed assistance of Gods spirit. Obiect. It is deliuered in strange and obscure fi∣gures, as no true meaning can be gathered thereof.The tropes and figures are not vnusuall. Answ. I. The types & figures are no more strange heere, then in other places, as in Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zacharie. II. Though it be deliuered my∣stically, and in figures, yet nothing is set downe doubtfully, for this should argue either vncer∣taine knowledge in the author, or deceit; neither of which we can impute to God without blasphe∣mie. III. Albeit metaphoricall speeches, and allegor call discourses may haue (in some sort) a double vnderstanding; yet the words weighed, as with a ballance, in the circumstances of the text, and proper scope with all, they haue as certaine a signification as other places, and as direct an end;
from which they cannot be drawne without mani∣fest absurditie; and therefore this is no reason to force such an obscuritie vpon this booke, as if it were not at all to be vnderstood. Obiect. If God would haue had it knowne, Iohn would not haue penned it in such a darke manner as it is. Answ. I. Iohn must write it as he seeth it, and noIohn wrote so mystically in three respects. otherwise; as also the former Prophets did their vi∣sions. II. Iohn here pleaseth not himselfe, but is guided by the spirit of God, to set downe the mat∣ter in that forme of words, as it seemed best to him, not to hide the truth from Gods people, but for other respects in all probabilitie; and first for1. Of Christ. the safety of Christians, that the Heathen raging already enough against them, might not vnder∣stand, that Christians had any such booke among them, as did foretell their ruine to them, and deli∣uerance in time from them. This was the reason that S. Paul spake so warily, and in such couert termes of the Emperours remouall from Rome, in 2. Thes. 2. 7. And also why Daniel wrote his Pro∣phecie, some part in one tongue, and some in ano∣ther, to conceale from the enemies, what might haue bin the cause of more mischiefe to the Iewes,2. Of Antichri∣stians. the people of God then. Secondly, in respect of An∣tichristians, the now deadly enemies to the Church, to whom it is not giuen to know the se∣crets of the kingdome, but by parables and darke speeches; that so they seeing, might see, and not perceiue; and hearing, might heare, and not vn∣derstand, lest at any time they should bee conuer∣ted,
and their sinnes forgiuen them, Mark. 4. 11. 12. but they must goe on still to fulfill, (as they doe) the Lords secret purpose, that their destruction may come vpon them, as is heere certainly fore∣told. Thirdly, in respect of the Iewes, Gods anci∣ent3. Of the Iewes. people, that they might see (as it were) a para∣phrase of the Prophets, and a spirituall applicati∣on of the Citie, Temple, Altar, Elders, Prophets, Kings, Priests, ceremonies, and seruice; from which (and the words of the Prophets) all the frame of Iohns speech is fetched; that by this last booke, thus clothed in the Iewes habite, they might learne, andThe Jewes shall returne to the truth, and be one people with vs. we might foresee, that at the last they shall come to vs, and wee to them, to be one people to God in Iesus Christ; of which I am further per∣swaded by these reasons: I. By their distinct pre∣seruation still, these 1600. yeeres, in all confusion of states vnder the Heathen Emperours, Saracens, Turkes, and in all other countries dispersed, and dwelling onely by leaue, the like neuer so seene to befall a people (which was once a stately common∣wealth) since the beginning of the world. Which strange prouidence of God, may conclude some future good vnto them at length, seeing the Israe∣lites of the ten Tribes once remoued, were no more any knowne distinct people, as these Iewes yet be, but their name perished among the nations very soone. II. By the words of S. Paul, Rom. 11. 25. 26. 2. Cor. 3. 16. and the words of our Sauiour, Luk. 21. 24. foretelling their conuersion. III. By the writings of the Prophets, Ezech. 37. 16. 17. &c. Zach. 14. 7. 8. &c. and cap. 12. Esa. 60. and 61. & 62.
not heeretofore fulfilled vpon that nation; and therefore hereafter to be performed, for the word of the Lord is true, and standeth fast for euer. IV. The consent of godly and learned men gi∣uing witnesse of their faith herein, from the place in Rom. 11. 25. Thus may wee see, why the spirit of God thus led Iohn on in this kind and manner of writing this Prophecie. Obiect. The matter of this booke is obscure and hard to be conceiued. Answ. I. All dogmaticall points, and morall,What matters in this booke are not obscure, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 43. are here as plainly set downe, as in any other place of Scripture. II. That also which is fulfilled hath a cleere and certaine exposition, and may without great difficulty be vnderstood, as one saith. III. Al generals are agreed vpon, that heere is Christ, and his Church set out, and the enemies, the diuell and his instruments, Heathen Emperours, and Anti∣christ, of these be no doubt made, either by Prote∣stant or Papist; so as this matter is cleere, though the circumstances of the time and place concer∣ning Antichrist, are not so easie of all to bee found, and to be fitly applyed. Some actions both of the Church and enemies are to be done, which yet are not come to passe, these must wee bee content to guesse at, till the very fulfilling of them expound to vs the prophecie in that behalfe. We liue now vn∣doubtedly vnder the sound of the seuenth trumpet, and in the time of Antichrists consumption, the strength whereof began about 1558. or 60. soone vpon the beginning of the raigne of the late Queene of most blessed memorie: if we reckon the
42. monethes of the beast from after 300. yeeres, when by Constantine the Dragon wa constrained to leaue Rome, and to substitute h ristian vice-gerent in his Throne; since we (in¦spight of Romane subtiltie, Spanish power, and Ie∣suites villanie) he hath decayed, and ouen our na∣tion hath obtained great victory against him. And therefore we being now so long time hitherto vn∣der the seuenth trumpet, in which space the seuen vials must be poured out, there is fulfilled a great part of this prophecie, and the most of it thereby made cleere vnto vs. Obiect. Oh but (will some say) there is such disa∣greement among expositors, euen in things that may be thought to be past, as well as in those things yet hereaf∣ter to be fulfilled, as we cannot but held it a booke too obscure to be medled with. Answ. This is no reason to condemne the bookDifferences in expositions may not cause vs to condemne the booke of obscu∣ritie, nor dis∣hart vs from the study therof. it selfe of such obscurity, but it rather discouereth mens weaknesse in mistaking the Lords meaning; the light is cleere, if men haue but eyes to see: Ha∣gar will be wailing for want of water, because shee supposeth there is not a well of water, when yet it is before her, till the Lord open her eyes, and shee see it. But for further answere to this, wee must know; I. That Expositors doe varie in some o∣ther bookes of Scripture, as well as in this, and the same books, plaine histories▪ therfore not obscure, though men in some things doe therein varie and differ in iudgement, neither for this their diffe∣rence, doe other cease to meddle with the booke, or with that very place of difference. II. As Expo∣sitors
doe in some things, in some places disagree, so in many places they doe well accord and agree in one. Therefore as their discord may seeme to withdraw vs from the studie of this booke; so their vnity and concord, in the maine and principall things, should stirre vs vp to the reading and me∣ditation of the same: and as their disagreeing may make men to thinke, that those places wherein they agree not, are hard to be vnderstood: so their own & also ful consent together, wel grounded vpō the text, may note to vs, that those places, wherein they so constantly agree, are easie to bee vnderstoode. III. Their differing opinions vpon one place ought to bee so farre from making any to thinke the meaning to be more hardly found out; as by their variable interpretations therupon, a wise and discerning Reader may peraduenture find out the the true sense: for among so many Expositions, some (perhaps) may hit vpon the true meaning of the place. Expositors shew their iudgements, and are so farre from obscuring a place to a godly and iudicious Diuine, as hee may reade them as his friends, (if they bee godly and holy men, and not malicious peruerters of the truth) giuing their best aduice and counsell, for his better vnderstan∣ding of the place in hand; therefore wee see, that variety of interpretations may not hinder vs, or make vs vnwilling to studie this booke. Obiect. Lastly, it may be demanded, if it may bee vnderstood now, why was it not better vnderstood of the ancient fathers, who were learned men, and liued so neere the time of the Apostle himselfe? surely it may bee
held, if they vnderstood it ot, as many doe now say, let not men at this day thinke themselues, so wise, so lear∣ned and so hy, as that they can now vnderstand it bet∣ter then those so renowned men before them. Answ. I answere thereto with the words of our most learned Soueraigne: That the Fathers of the first age, spake of this matter, but only by coniectures, whereas we speake of it by experience; for as one saith,Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43. All prophecies, before they haue their efficacies, be rid∣dles, and ambiguities vnto men: but when the time is come, that that which is prophecied bee come to passe, then haue the prophecies a cleere and certaine expositi∣on. Likewise (saith one of our learned DiuinesWhitak. de Pontif. Ro. q. 5. pag. 631. speaking of Antichrist, the Pope of Rome) Surely we are not to be vrged with the testimonie of Fathers, who in many things belonging to this question haue bin deceiued, and haue grossely erred, because they liued be∣fore Antichrists comming. For as they were nee∣rerWe may vnder∣stand this pro∣phecie, though the Fathers could not. to the times of the Apostles, so much the more were they the further from beholding the things fulfilled and done; and therefore lesse able to shew the true meaning, then wee which haue the fulfil∣ling hereof (as it were) a good and true expositi∣on of the words before vs. Therefore, albeit the fa∣thers could not then well vnderstand this booke, yet (without any derogation to their persons, lear∣ning▪ and piety, and without any proud conceit of our selues now) men learned and godly, may in these daies truly interpret the matters of this booke, then much mistaken; for now Antichrist is reuealed, the beast discouered, and many things come to passe, which so farre do make cleere to vs,
that which could not but bee obscure and hidden to them then, except they had had the same spirit, which Iohn had, to giue a propheticall exposition, as he had toforetel things to come, and as the Pro∣phets had of Moses and the Apostles of them both. CHAP. II. An exhortatiue conclusion for the studious reading of this booke. NOw therefore (my brethren) in a reue∣rend feare, with a minde bent to en∣dure some paines in this studie for a time, let vs take this so diuine, hea∣uenly and profitable a booke into our hands; in the first part we haue many reasons there to moue vs, The rare title, the admirable grace of authoritie, the truth of the sayings, the end of re∣ueiling it, the earnest exhortation, and comman∣dement of Christ, the blessing promised, the asso∣ciation with Angels, the eminencie of the matter, onely meete for Christ alone before all other to reueale it to vs, the earnestnes of Iohn, euen with teares, to haue the book opened; likewise the pro∣fit, pleasantnes, and necessitie of the knowledge thereof, is fully laid downe. In this part wee see, that by Gods blessing it may be vnderstood, as the title, the vnsealing, the exhor∣tation to reade, the blessing promised, the spirits owne interpretations vpon places, and the succes∣full paines of godly men, may fully perswade vs. What if many things at the first seeme very intri∣cate?
Let vs not therefore despaire, but therein re∣uerence the Lords wisedome, and craue his assi∣stance, and not idlely lay it aside; pray with Da∣niel, and waite the time: Peter had a reuelation,Act. 10. 17. which hee, a while, vnderstood not; yet did not therefore let it slip out of his minde, but still con∣tinued in meditation thereof, vntill, as I may say, an actuall exposition was giuen him to vnder∣stand the meaning: so let vs reade, pray and waite in our godly and diligent studie, till an exposition be giuen vs from God. It is a common thing to reade mens writings, some learned Philosophers, some the pleasant Po∣ets, some the most exquisite Artists; some study one thing, some another, as this man the Common law, that the Ciuill and Canon; yea some cannot be withheld from the deuouring studie of Alchy∣mistrie, till all their substance be eaten vp thereby: and all this vndertaken for pleasure, profit, or ho∣nourable fame with men. Yea to winne praises, and in great hope of profit and preferment by their studies, men can take great paines, be at excessiue charges, and spend much time: though the Au∣thors which they reade be very obscure, the words vnusual, the phrase harsh, the stile crabbed, the mat∣ter very intricate, and the whole order of the book, be almost in a manner altogether disordered; yet will men for these worldly and carnall respects, endure all, and not giue ouer their studie for any such very troublesome lets and impediments, but will bend their wit to make streight the crookedst thing, to cleere the darkest point, and to loose the
most difficult knot. And should wee by any thing be dishearted, in the studie of Gods most holie word, wherein is the most hidden treasure of wise∣dom, abundance of heauenly delights, and a name of blessednesse to bee gotten, which neuer shall be forgotten? Obiect. But it is well knowne that not one or two, or few men, but very many, and those also persons of note, which speake of the obscuritie of this booke, and do as much, as lieth in them, to withhold men from the stu∣die of it hereby. Answ. Many (I doe confesse) crie out against theFoure sorts crie out against the obscuritie of his booke. They which ne∣uer made sound triall. studie of this booke, as full of vnintelligible obscu∣rities: but these may be reduced to foure sorts, whereof the first are they, who yet neuer made any painfull assay vpon it. These be like vnto Salomons sluggard, louing to sleepe, and to lie in bed at ease, crying, A Lion is in the streete, because hee would not arise to labour: so is it with these, this euill thought they do nourish in themselues, and I wish it did remaine onely with themselues: but hereby they doe not only seeke to couer, indeed, their own negligence and sloth, but endeuour to disheart o∣thers from taking paines therein, by iudging (in scorne and contempt) too basely both of other mens persons, and of their paines bestowed herein, according to the measure of grace receiued; for that these want (perhaps) the outward endow∣ments, learning, gifts, power and place that those men haue. But I leaue them to themselues, with their pride, sloth, enuie, or malice, and wish them either more grace, or lesse learning and esteeme
with men, that so they may not cause contempt vpon other mens well doing, or at the least vpon their honest endeuour and desire to doe well. A second sort are Papists, who haue good causeThe second sort are Papists. for their owne behoofe to haue this book of Scrip∣ture, aboue all other, to be hidden from men; be∣cause it toucheth them to the quick, it shakes their state, and will batter to the ground their great Ba∣bylon: for no part of Scripture laieth Rome, the Pope and Papacie so open in their colours, to bee had in detestation of all true Christians, as this booke doth. A third sort are such, as perhaps, with an vnbe∣leeuingThe third sort are they which make a light as∣say, and giue ouer. heart haue taken a view of the booke, and, with an euill eye, being like the bad spies returning from Canaan to the Campe, who did vniustlie bring vp an ill report of the land, which God him∣selfe had commended, because they saw some gy∣ants, and places hard by humane power to bee wonne: so these men finding some things hard and very difficult to bee vnderstood at the first view, doe bring an ill report vpon this book, which the Lord himselfe hath so highly commended vn∣to vs. But let vs beware wee take not vp this ill re∣port made by these men against the Lord and his word. If they did but vrge onely the obscuritie, to make men seeke more vnto God for helpe, and to become more studious herein to get the vnder∣standing hereof, it were praise worthie; but these like wicked spyes doe thus speake of the hardnes, to disheart men altogether from taking any paines at all in the booke, who are herein no lesse in∣struments
of Satan to keepe the booke close, which God would haue opened for the saluation of his people, then the vngodly spyes, who by their false report brought euill vpon themselues, and vpon all that beleeued them. A fourth sort, are such carnall Gospellers, as liueThe fourth sort, carnall Gospel∣lers. in ignorance of the whole booke of God, who speake of this booke but onely by report and here∣say, hauing neuer read a chapter in it all their life. None of all these are any fit Iudges, or to be belee∣ued in this case. Let vs hearken therefore rather vnto God himselfe, to good men also, who haue with all their power and strength, with Gods bles∣sing written of this booke; these out of knowledge and conscience doe commend the studie hereof vnto vs, as neither so difficult nor obscure, as these former sorts would haue it. Now whether these louers of the truth, hauing care of mens soules, be to be credited before the Antichristian louers of lyes; these painfull labourers, before the other loy∣terers, these speaking of triall, the other taking all vpon trust, let any wise man iudge. Obiect. Belike you make all cleere, as if there were nothing in it darke and hard to be vnderstood. Answ. No, not so, but I confesse all such things as are not yet come to passe, are very hard to be vn∣derstood, yea and some things fulfilled, hard also, for want of wisedome to make a fit application of the words of the prophecie to the things done, which is rare vnderstanding, and not euery mans gift. Neuerthelesse, this I say, that most of the things fulfilled, are plaine and easie to bee vn∣derstood,
though some yet make riddles of them; and that the obscure part is not such, or so much, as should perswade any to beleeue the whole book to be beyond all mens vnderstanding, as enemies to the true Church of Christ, and friends of Anti∣christ would make men thinke. But thus much for the second part. THE OPENING OF SAINT IOHNS MYSTI∣call Reuelation. THE THIRD PART. CHAP. I. Of the obscuritie of this booke, to whom it is obscure, and whence the same doth arise. THis holy booke, and all other Scriptures, are the cleereThe Scriptures are obscure to the wicked. truthes of God, though they become obscure to men, through our owne default, as this booke doth general∣ly to all the wicked and vn∣godly, such as are not holpen by the heauenly il∣lumination of Gods diuine spirit. For men natu∣rally discerne not heauenly things, 1. Cor. 2. euen as Eue beleeued Satan rather then God, Gen. 3. so
men in corrupt nature loue darknesse more then the light, and till they enter into the Sanctuarie of the Lord, they are but as beasts, Psal. 73. 22. 27. A∣gaine, God will not giue holy things vnto dogs, nor cast pearles vnto swine; therefore must we la∣bour and pray for grace; for as Salomon saith, Sure∣lyEccles. 1. 26. to a man that is good in his sight, God giueth wise∣dome, knowledge, and ioy. And they are they that shall know the doctrine of Christ, that doe his Fathers will:Ioh. 7. 17. but those that hate to be reformed, are so far from expecting a blessing in medling with the word of God, as to them the Lord saith, What haue ye to doe to declare mine ordinances? neither shall theyPsal. 50. vnderstand, Dan. 12. 10. But more specially this booke becommeth ob∣scureThis booke is obscure to se∣uen sorts espe∣cially. to seuen sorts of persons: as, first to all Anti∣christians, and subiects to the See of Rome, espe∣cially the marked ones of that grand Anti∣christ; for else how should this prophecie beeTo all the mar∣ked ones of An∣tichrist. fulfilled vpon them? how should they performe what heere is foretold of them, and of their dam∣nation? If they should see, vnderstand, beleeue and returne; How should that body and state be blin∣ded, and goe on to destruction, chap. 17. 8? I con∣fesse, that the learned Papists may shew great skill in the outside, the ryne or barke (if I may with re∣uerence so speake) of holy Scriptures, that is, of the Grammer, the Logicke, the Rhetoricke, the na∣turall Philosophie of the Bible, and such other things to be foūd here, as wel as in other writings of men, which may be called (as it were) the huma∣nitie of the Scriptures; yea they can speake of mo∣rall
precepts, of duties, of common honesty very excellently; neither can we denie their knowledge in the generall heads of the Gospell, wherein wee and they agree, and by profession whereof they be called Christians; but the secrets of the kingdome they know not, neither the working of the mystery of iniquity among them, these things are hid from their eyes; that that might come vpon them, which is determined on all those, whom the Lord in iu∣stice will leaue in that spirituall captiuitie, and not call out from among them. Secondly, to all proud selfe-conceited readers,To the proud nd selfe∣conceited. comming in the strength of their wit, memory, learning, and reading, and not in feare and humili∣tie; for such proud ones God resisteth; this wise∣dome of the flesh is enmitie with God; the key of mans wit, or meere artificiall skill, cannot open the closet doore of Gods secret counsels, mans corrupt reason is too shallow to comprehend the deepnes of Gods determinations; to the humble will thePsal. 25 9-14. Lord teach his waies, and to such as feare him will he reueale his secrets. Wherfore let men, how lear∣ned soeuer, come in all humility and reuerence to Gods word, and handle the same with such holy sobriety, as is meet for the sacred oracles of God, that the Lord may blesse them. Thirdly, to all such as come to these true say∣ingsTo such as haue not the loue of the truth. 2. Thess. 2. of God, (cap. 19. 9.) without the loue of truth; for it will bee iust from God, to giue such ouer to beleeue lies; & such are all they which reade it, but not in simplicitie of heart, to make it their guide of life, to see their errours and mistakings to bee
better informed, and their vices to bee reformed; but force it to maintaine their fore-conceiued opi∣nions, their owne inuentions to the pleasing of o∣thers, and for aduantage to themselues in outward things; causing it to speake according to the pre∣sent times, and what they themselues doe loue and like: making the word of God (indeed) their owne will, to say, as they would haue it say, and to ap∣proue of what they doe, though it bee neuer so vn∣iust, wicked or euill. These sacrilegiously rob Gods word of the due honour, and prophanely abuse it, which the Lord reuengeth vpon their owne pates, in giuing them ouer to their owne lusts, and to the wantonnesse of their owne wits, to liue in the errour of their owne waies without repentance, to their confusion. Fourthly, to such as reade this booke cursorily,To such as reade it carelesly, and superficially. with a carelesse and vnattentiue spirit, without di∣ligent searching and comparing of one place with another. It is not possible but that this booke should be hid, and be obscure vnto them, who en∣deauour so little to get vnderstanding of those things which are heerein reuealed; let not the slothfull hand thinke to prosper. Fifthly, to such as come with a too much deie∣ctedTo such as onely and wholly tie themselues to the opinions of others. spirit of feare, without daring to attempt any thing, beyond, besides, or any whit otherwise then other men write or speake before them; such can neuer haue certaine knowledge in themselues, or be satisfied: for vnlesse they can iudge from the text it selfe, betweene opinion and opinion, the va∣riety of expositions will ouerwhelme their mind,
and be as a darke myst before their eyes, obscuring rather then cleering the text vnto such. As it is good not to be presumptuous, or of too daring and bold a spirit in holy mysteries, where great, lear∣ned, and many godly men haue erred and been mistaken before vs; so it is not euill, in godly hu∣mility, with reuerence of others, by earnest prayer for Gods assistance, to trie what the Lord may doe by vs, for the wind bloweth where it listeth, and the spirit enlighteneth whom he pleaseth. Sixthly, to such as be altogether ignorant in theTo such as be altogether ig∣norant of hi∣stories. stories of the times, by which there may bee made an illustration of the prophecie, and a fit accom∣modation of the things falling out, according as in the words heere they are foretold to come to passe, without which a prophecie cannot bee well expounded, as before I haue shewed And lastly, to such as know not some necessary and maine points, which greatly serue to lay open, and (as it were) to conceale the whole booke, without the vnderstanding whereof, it will not bee so cleere, as otherwise it would be: of which things in the next part at large. CHAP. 2. THis booke, euen in the things, otherwiseObscurers of the text. cleere of themselues are somewhat ob∣scured by some sort of Expositors, which may bee accounted the trou∣blers of the text, muddying the cleere running
streame by their interpretations, and they be these: I. The enemies of the truth, the Iesuiticall sect,The Iesuites, and other Papists. and others adhering stiffely to the sea of Rome, who of very set purpose by false glosses, false expo∣sitions, and by vrging the erronious iudgements of men, seeke to obscure the light of truth, shining vpon them, as cleerly as the Sunne at noone, but that they will needs winke, and also maliciously will (with the cloud of their owne inuenti∣ons) darken, and hide the same from the eyes of others. They study not carefully the text, as their comments doe shew, but whatsoeuer they can find deliuered by others, either for their state, or not at allReade with iudgement Ri∣bera, and Vie∣ga's, the Iesuites commentaries. against them, that they greedily take, not at all ca∣ring how it can stand with the text, and the truth of the word it selfe. Let▪ none therefore which de∣sire simply to be informed in the truth, be led with their false expositions; yea it were indeed very good not to reade them at all, vnlesse the readers be wel grounded in the truth, and wel acquainted with the text itselfe, that so in reading them, they may trie all by the touchstone, lest their words preuaile without authority. Whosoeuer is throughly acquainted with the truth, cannot but detest their damned expositions, as farre from the truth, as darknesse from light, and falshood it selfe from the truth it selfe, in those things which set out the Pope, and Papacie. II. The vaine and faithlesse Expositors, who inThe vaine and faithlesse. their interpretations, respect neither the truth, nor falshood much, but write not to offend, and so balke or obscure the truth; or to please, and then they doe
writhe and wrest euery thing to make for their pur∣pose; or to get themselues praise, then they labour to bombast and stuffe vp their writing with all variety of what themselues haue, or would seeme to haue, and this they doe to the vtmost, too much paines to themselues, and a needlesse labour for others, if they did intend onely the opening of the truth barely and nakedly, to the true informing of the readers vnderstanding; or else doe write, to try and oppose some time, in some thing their readers, and then, if they haue euer an odde conceit, crochet, or question, forth it must come, to make (as they imagine) themselues merrie, while they thinke they can propound a riddle for an Oedipus. These now in so doing, spend time, and are altogether vaine in their labours, troublesome to the text, and vnprofitable to the Reader. III. The singularly-opinionated, who hauingThe singular∣ly opinionated. fore-conceiued an opinion from themselues, or o∣therwise, before they learned it from the text, they frame in themselues a building, and then come to the words of God to vnder-prop the same, tur∣ning all vpside-downe, to make good what they haue fancied; these must needes therefore obscure the text, when they thinke to leade the text, and not it them, of whom in reading wee must be∣ware; for, they seldom write soundly, that will be euer writing singularly, and going by themselues, without respect of others: Neuerthelesse it must bee yet ac∣knowledged, that sometimes in expounding some part of a prophecie, a man may goe almost alone, and yet not bee condemned of pride, and concei∣ted
singularity. For the truthes of prophecies ap∣peare in the accomplishment, and the wisedome of discerning, rightly to apply the same, is not eue∣ry mans gift, nor at one time giuen vnto all; very plaine things to some are hidden, and hidden points, by well obseruing of some circumstances, become most cleere to othersome. If God there∣fore affoord this light to one, which hee doth not to another, nay not to many, and hee publish the same in the spirit of humilitie, before others; must it be adiudged pride and singularitie in him? veri∣ly not iustly. IV. Such as doe make this booke dogmati∣call,They that neg∣lect the histo∣ricall sense. and make of almost all these things a spiritu∣all sense: these draw the readers quite from the hi∣storicall sense, and so from obseruing things to be done, which is the true scope and proper sense of this booke; and which in the reading must bee most carefully attended to, as wee may learne out of cap. 1. 1. and 4. 1. and 22. 6. V. They doe greatly darken this prophecie,They that mi∣stake the time. who doe draw backe the beginning of these things, which doe concerne the whole Church, higher then that time in which Iohn did receiue the same; when these things doe follow after the time of the giuing of this Reuelation vnto him, as chap. 4. 1. with 22. 6. sufficiently euince: which not being obserued by Expositors, greatly ob∣scureth the order of the things heere foretold vn∣to vs. VI. Lastly, hereunto may be added, the negli∣genceThe negligent Historiogra∣phers. of Historiographers, not marking the daily
administration of Gods prouidence, from time to time (euen from the beginning to this day) bring∣ing things to passe, as heerein they are foretold: This hath been (and is yet) no small hinderance to the reuealing of this heauenly Reuelation. If this booke (from the beginning) had been obser∣ued, and made the ground euer to our history wri∣ters; and that in the acts done (which was by them recorded) they had been carefull to haue had re∣spect to the course of this prophecie, how things herein were foretold, to be fulfilled; their histories had been so cleere an exposition, as there had now beene no doubt of the true interpretation of it.
THE OPENING OF SAINT IOHNS MYSTI∣call Reuelation. THE FOVRTH PART. Herein is shewed what is to be obserued and done, to come to the vnderstanding of this Reuelation; the particulars are in the seuerall Chapters. CHAP. I. Of the scope of this booke. THE first thing to bee obserued toTo marke the scope. vnderstand this book, is the scope and drift of this Reuelation, which, what it is, is most euident out of the text, chap. 1. 1. and 4. 1. and 22. 6, euen this, to make the seruants of God acquainted with the things, that were to come to passe, and to be done in the world, as farre as the same things doe concerne the Church of Iesus Christ, from the daies of Iohn, vnto the very end and second comming of Christ. So that in the first place we are to look vpon and behold the Church, and to attend this principally, for whose sake this
propheticall historie was written, as the first verse of the first Chapter doth shew. And therefore also wee haue in the very beginning of the prophecie (concerning future things from the time of IohnsChap. 4. and 5. Chap. 21. 22. receiuing the Reuelation) a goodly type of the Church, and when the prophecie commeth to an end, there is a glorious description thereof; so as all may see, that the principall thing to be marked in this tragicall Comedie, (if I may so call it) isThe Church of Christ and her state is first and principally to be considered of. the Church of Iesus Christ, that is, consisting of true and faithfull Christian beleeuers, their doings and sufferings, their battels, and victorie at the length ouer all their enemies: of which to haue, according to this prophecie, a short historie rela∣ted, and the same kept well in memorie, shall be exceeding auailable to the vnderstanding of this Reuelation. When the maine scope is certainlie knowne and attended vnto, other things will be discerned in their place, and become apparent and euery thing be seene in due order, as may particu∣larly bee obserued, from one Chapter to another throughout this booke, vnto the end. But if this scope be neglected, and the Church her estate, ri∣sing, decay, eclipse, recouery, her dangers and alte∣rations be not diligently attended vnto, (from whence the reason, causes, and order of all other things are to be fetched) it will make this booke to such Readers very obscure, and confused. For the world and plagues vpō it are not here brought in further, then there is in them a respect, and a consideration had vnto the Church; neither any other thing, but as the same hath to doe with the Church, and the
Church with it. Therefore the Church must first be attended vnto, and then the reason, the causes, and order of other things brought in, and foretold for the Churches sake, will bee better vnderstood, as will appeare by the order of the Chapters, and the orderly cause of things therein contained. Now next and secondarily the greatest and chie∣festA second thing to be attended vnto, is the Churches grea∣test enemie. enemie of Christ and his Church is to be con∣sidered of; which is not here indeede the heathen Empire, and Tyrants then in Iohns time ruling the world, and bloudily persecuting the Church, but the Popedome and Bishop of Rome, that grand Antichrist. For the Dragon and heathen Empire was well enough knowne to the Church then, so as there needed not a prophecie to speake of that enemie or outward power and rage of the Dra∣gon, further then to declare their end; and how Antichrist came into the Dragons place, obtai∣ning his power, state & great authoritie: of which, in chap. 13. 3, this man of sinne, this Antichristian state, this mysterie of iniquitie is next the Church chiefly to bee considered of, as the enemie princi∣pally to be discouered vnto y• Church in this pro∣phecie. For this Empire is the longest during, the heathen Tyrants from the time of Iohns receiuing this Reuelation (about anno 96, to anno 311, when Constantine began his raigne) raigned but a small space about 215 yeeres; but this Antichrist must haue his reigne 42 moneths of yeeres, being pro∣phetically spoken and expressed by daies, euery day being put for a yeere, is 1260 yeeres; and we see by lamentable experience, that he hath endured
long, albeit now his power be abated. Againe, this enemie is the worst that euerThe Pope the worst enemie to the Church. the Church had, for hee bloudily persecuteth the godly, as did the heathen, chap. 11. 7: hee blasphe∣meth God, his name, his tabernacle and Saints, chap. 13. 6, as they did; he hath done and yet doth trouble the world with bloudie warres (chap. 13. 7. and 17. 14.) as they did; hee hath gotten great po∣wer ouer kindreds, tongues and nations, chap. 13. 7, as they had; but he (which they could not doe, neither euer did) bewitcheth the world by sorce∣rie, false miracles and wonders, chap. 13. 13. 14. and 19. 20. and will be worshipped of all vpon perill of their states and liues, chap. 13. 15. 16. 17. This sel∣leth also soules, chap. 18. 13: so as he is such an ene∣mie to the Christian world as neuer was: to which may bee added this to all the rest, that his cursed apostacie brought vpon the Christians, the hellish furie and outrage of the Turkes power and tyran∣nie, chap. 9. 14. 15. 21. Lastly, the greatest part of this prophecie is spent about this wicked enemie, either in the preparation to his fall from the Church, chap. 8, or in the fall itselfe, chap. 9, or in his rising in worldly state and power, chap. 13, or in his crueltie in persecuting, chap. 11. and 13, or in his plagues begun vpon him, chap. 16, or in his womanish condition inticing to filthinesse, chap. 17, or in the ouerthrow of his state, chap. 18, or else lastly in his owne finall destruction, chap. 19. This therefore is the grand Aduersarie principally by this book to be found out, as the greatest, the worst and longest enemie in continuance against the
Church. And thus much for the scope, the first thing to be obserued. CHAP. II. Of the order and methode of this booke. THE second thing for the vnderstan∣ding of this booke, next the scope, is the order and methode which the ho∣lyThe methode and order is to be obserued af∣ter the scope. Ghost hath kept, in reuealing to vs the things herein contained. For the order being knowne will carrie vs a long, and will be, as it were, a guide leading vs by the hand to the view of euery thing in their due places. And to haue a full sight of this, the studious herein must looke to three things. I. He is to take a view of the whole worke, andThe first thing to be done for to vnderstand the order and me∣thode. lay it out in his principall parts analitically, that so the outward frame and proportion of this worke in the maine parts may bee easily seene, and that so the chiefest matters and scope may be vnderstood; in which some latest expositors haue taken paines, which the godly reader may take for his helpe herein, till hee be able to discerne the platforme of the worke himselfe, and so hee with his owne pen set downe his owne iudgement before his owne eyes. Many in reading think they see fully enough, what by others is laid before them; but when they come to the worke themselues, to draw that out, which in conceit before, they iudged themselues
skilfull in, they shall often finde that they come short of their conceit by many degrees. II. Hee is to consider the generall contents ofThe second thing to be noted. euery Chapter, and the orderly laying downe of things successiuely therein; which will marueilous∣ly hearten an intelligent reader to the studie of this booke: for hee shall see a delightsome cohe∣rence of one thing with another, and a pleasant passing-on of the propheticall narration, with a reason of euery Chapter following orderly one another. Which for better incouragement to such as will take paines in this holy and blessed prophe∣cie, I haue thought fit here to set downe, Chapter by Chapter vnto the end, onely omitting the three first, as more easie and well knowne to euery one; except only perhaps in this thing that they be set out as so many types of the vniuersall condition of the Churches of the Gentiles, and so haue in them some future thing to bee considered of, as well, as that present state of euery one of them then in Iohns daies. Which I leaue, whether any such thing be so or no, to the wisedome and learning of the god∣ly-wise in such mysteries. The future state of the Church is set out, from the beginning of the fourth Chapter, whence, for the order of the propheticall narration, I will begin. The fourth Chapter sheweth vs the Lord GodChap. 4. of heauen sitting vpon his Throne in the heauen, his Church, and all his Saints and seruants round about him; which godly type of him & his Church is to bee considered of in the first place, to whom and for whose sake, he reuealeth his secret counsell
in this Reuelation, and which also hee carrieth through all troubles, with a strong and out-stretch∣ed arme, as Israelites through the red sea, and brin∣geth them safe to their rest. The fifth sheweth the meanes by which thisChap. 5. Church becommeth acquainted with her future state, to wit, by this booke of the Reuelation, the opening whereof none but Christ Iesus could ob∣taine at the hands of his Father, who gaue it him, (chap. 1. 1.) and hee here tooke in hand to open to the ioy of all, both men, Angels and other crea∣tures, blessing God therefore. The 6. sheweth to vs his Church, how in the ope∣ningChap 6. of the six seales of the book, the Lord with va∣riety of plagues, would punish y• heathen world vn∣der the persecuting tyrants of Rome, til the Dragō should be cast out of heauē, (cap. 12) & that heathē Empire be ouerthrowne, for murthering of Chri∣stians, professing so cōstantly Christ & his Gospell. The seuenth Chapter commeth in by the wayChap. 7. of a preuention. For in the time of the heathen tyrants, the Diuell had hatched and prepared great mischiefes, that, against the time that the world should become Christian, (by meanes of Constan∣tine) and the heathen Empire bee abolished, hee might thereby ouerthrow the Church; which mis∣chiefes were prepared and aduanced vnder the sixth seale, but the power thereof not seene, till the opening of the 7. seale. Now for that the plagues vnder the seuenth seale, in the blowing of the Trumpets, should be so great a plague to the earth∣ly Christian world by a fearfull apostacie, and that
the Church might not doubt yet of her owne wel∣fare, here in this Chapter is giuen vs another ge∣neral type of the Churches state to the worlds end, shewing two things: I. That in the world of earth∣ly Christians apostating with Antichrist, there should be a sealed number, though but a very few in number, certainly preserued from falling from Christ, and so escape this plague and the mischiefs which God brought vpon the Christian world for the earthlinesse thereof, and for falling to Anti∣christ and that Romish Whore; for in this time are these sealed Ones a hidden number with Christ Iesus on the Mount, (chap. 14. 1.) and with the Prophets in the wildernes (chap. 11.) whitherto the Woman was fled, chap. 12. II. That the Lord in his time would bring these hidden Ones to light againe, and by the word win an innumerable mul∣titude vnto the Church of all nations, kindreds and people and tongues, to worship him, and to serue him ioyfully without interruption. The eighth Chapter sheweth vnder the seuenthChap. 8. seale the breaking out of the mischiefes restrained (in chap. 7. 1.) for a while; being from God so ma∣ny plagues to the world, called Trumpets, and in themselues the foure steps to the generall aposta∣cie of that Romane Bishop: for after the heathen persecutors were taken away, the Diuell caused great contention among Christians, set their mindes to ambition, and wrought effectually in many to make them damnable heretiques, and by part-takings was much bloudshed. So that hereby found doctrine failed, sincere worship decaied, and
faithfull teachers were hard to be found, but in ge∣nerall a darke mist of ignorance began to spread it selfe ouer the Christian world, which was an effe∣ctuall meanes for Satan to worke thereby, for the aduancement of his grand-child the sonne of per∣dition, that Antichrist the Pope of Rome. The ninth Chapter sheweth that the apostasieChap. 9. was now come to a head; for here the fall is shew∣ed, and the Angell of the bottomlesse pit made a King, hauing his hellish Locusts to trouble and torment the earthly Christians. Now was there a world of misery vpon men & manifold mischiefes, the worshipping of Diuels, and Idols the workes of mens hands, murthers, sorceries, fornication, and thefts, for which God in his wrath sent an horrible vengeance vpon them by the Turkish power, his hosts and armies furiously raging: which yet brought not any amendment to the Antichristian state and apostating Church of Rome. The 10. Chapter sheweth how after long dark∣nesseChap. 10. and defection, the Lord (as he did to the Is∣raelites oppressed in Egypt) in mercie commeth downe to deliuer his people from this spirituall Egypt, (so called chap. 11. 8.) and doth furnish with knowledge of Gods word such as should recouer by preaching of the truth from vnder the Antichri∣stian apostasie, many again vnto the true religiō of Christ, euen people & nations, tongues & kinreds. The 11. Chapter is a storie, as it were, of theChap. 11. great troubles which fell out vpon the Preachers executing faithfully their ministery, and in seeking to bring Christs people out of this Romish Baby∣lon,
as Moses and Aaron did, in bringing the Is∣raelites from vnder the bondage of Pharaoh. Which Preachers, after great persecutions and troubles, at the length preuailed; for which the people of God reioyced, as wee may doe at this day. And here is the end of the sixth Trumpet hi∣therto: the seuenth beginning to blow, Christ be∣ginneth to raigne powerfully, and kingdomes be∣come his from vnder Antichrist. The 12. chapter beginneth the more large ex∣planationChap. 12. of such things as were but obscurely handled before, in chap. 6. touching the Romane Heathen Empire (vnder the type of the great red Dragon) and of the ouerthrow thereof, that here∣by we might more cleerly see, when the out-Court (chap. 11. 2.) was giuen to the Gentile-like Chri∣stians, the Romish Antichristians; and also when the true Church, the heauenly woman fled into the wildernesse, and when Antichrist succeeded in the place of that Dragon. The 13. chapter is a continuing-on of the expla∣nation,Chap. 13. amplifying that short and briefe mentio∣ning of the beast, in chap. 11. 7. the very same that is heere now set out at large, substituted in the Dragons roome, so as now the old Pagan Empire, is turned into an Antichristian Popedome; the tyrannizing Emperours, into tyrannizing Popes; and the lawfull ciuill authority, into an vnlawfull Hierarchie, and ecclesiasticall Regencie: in which his originall, the meanes of his rising vp, the power and properties of him, are fully laid open. The 14. chapter goeth on to tell vs more large∣ly,Chap. 14.
what became of the sealed number mentioned in cap. 7. where they were, and with whom, in that Antichristian Apostacie; then is shewed more am∣ply also what was foreshewed summarily concer∣ning the ministery of the word, (in cap. 10. 11. &c. cap. 11. 3.) the Ministers doctrine, the power and effect therof against Antichrist, his Babylonish state, and that whorish iurisdiction. The 15. chapter sheweth, how the Church (be∣ingChap. 15. by the former ministery, and powerfull effica∣cie thereof, set free from the Romane beast, and his Antichristian power) now doth exceedintly re∣ioyce, and is rising vp into a preuailing estate, ha∣uing now receiued vials of wrath, and power from heauen to plague that state, which so long time had wickedly ruled ouer the people of God. The 16. chapter declareth in order, how fromChap. 16. the Church, the instruments of Gods anger doe poure forth their vials of plagues, and doe execute vengeance according to the power and comman∣dement from God, with the effects and euents thereof. The 17. chapter sheweth the reason, why theChap. 17. Angels of these vials did so plague this Antichri∣stian state, therefore is it, that one of them infor∣meth Iohn of their doings, and expoundeth what is meant by the great City, and by Babylon, which the Preachers so preached against, in chap. 14. as also, what the beast is, which is mentioned in cap. 13. that we might know plainly Rome to be Baby∣lon, and the Pope certainly to bee that Antichrist, with the wicked conditions, pride, and cruelty of
that whorish Church, for which she, and all her as∣sociates receiued such plagues, and deserued so iustly to be punished and hated of all Gods peo∣ple. The 18. chapter foretelleth, how vpon the vi∣alsChap. 18. poured out; also vpon the liuely discouery of her, not to bee the true Church, but that whore of Babylon; and withall, vpon their forsaking of her, who gaue their power and kingdome formerly vnto her, she should come to vtter ruine and her place and seat to be found no more. The 19. chapter foretelleth, how great ioy theChap. 19. Church of Christ should conceiue at this destru∣ction of Rome, singing aloud praises vnto God for the same, being formerly exhorted thereunto, in cap 18. 20. and which here they performe, exhor∣ting one another to praise the Lord, for this his righteous iudgement vpon this Babylon, and who∣rish state; after which, for further encrease of ioy, is foreshewed the full victory ouer the beast and false prophet, with their finall damnation. The 20. chapter falleth in, to speake of the Dra∣gon,Chap. 20. mentioned in chap. 12. and chap. 16. 13. shew∣ing first what was become of him since his casting out of heauen, and since the beginning of the raigne of his grand-child, the Antichrist, set vp in the Dragons seat, cap. 13. 3. that hee was chained vp, and kept from his open rage a long time, but at length let loose againe; and then secondly, af∣ter that his loosing, and now also Antichrists de∣struction, what his vtmost and last attempt should be, to wit, open force, and what also should be the
euent thereof, euen his owne and their destructi∣on also, (which were deceiued by him) and that e∣uerlastingly. The 21. and 22. chapters, after this destructionChap. 21. and 22 of these enemies; do set out the gracefull and most happie estate of Christs Church, in the gloriousest manner that may bee, and so thereupon conclu∣deth this prophecie. And thus from chapter to chapter, wee see a most heauenly order obserued, which being well marked and vnderstood, will giue to the godly and studious reader, a great in∣sight into the chiefe and principall things laid downe in this propheticall narration. If any doubt whether yet this be the order, course, and progresse hereof thus laid downe chapter by chapter: Let such, (as I myselfe haue done) painfully examine the truth by the matter in the chapters, and by the generall parts of the whole prophecie, and see whether this will stand, or another more agreeing to the text, and the truth of story; if so, I imbrace the truth gladly, but if not, let this be accepted. III. He that would vnderstand the order yetThe third thing to be obserued, for the know∣ledge of the method. more at large in particulars, he must make a literall analysis of euery chapter, following the guiding of the spirit in his owne order, word for word. By which, this benefit shall hee reape, that the text shall become familiar vnto him, and the order of things more apparantly seene, and the circumstan∣ces better obserued, and through Gods mercy, shall he see, (as I may say) round about him, that he mistake not grossely in giuing the sense and meaning of a place (as some haue done) contrary
to the cleere light before them, in the very words of the text, which was for want of obseruing this course, and withall, by an vnaduised rushing vpon the text, with a hasty interpretation, or with a re∣ceiued opinion, but vnexamined, to the great pre∣iudice of the truth. By this course shall he come to the first degree of the knowledge of this prophe∣ticall narration exactly; for it is to be noted that there is a double knowledge, or rather a twofoldA twofold knowledge of a prophecie or rather two de∣grees thereof. degree of vnderstanding of the words of a prophe∣cie. The first degree is this, to know what is fore∣told in the very letter and words, without any par∣ticular application, further then in the text is laid open plainly, and also without the consideration of the accomplishment and fulfilling therof. The second is to know the fulfilling, and to bee able rightly to accommodate to the text, the truth of story, to declare the verity of it, according as in the words it is laid downe. The first is easie to al∣most euery one; as to tell for example, that the 12. chapters speaketh of a woman thus and thus ar∣rayed; also how she was with child and trauelled, and that there was a red Dragon watching, &c. In like manner, chap. 17. there is mention made of a whore, and how shee is apparelled, and sits on a beast in glorious rayment, with a cup in her hand, and so forward, as it is in the text. This may seeme an idle labour, which yet will not proue so to him that endeauours seriously to attaine to the second degree, which indeed is wisdome; but this other is in the first place to bee obserued, that wee may know what to expect and looke for to be fulfilled.
This first degree the holy and ancient people of God sought after in the old Prophets, reading them diligently before they were fulfilled, expe∣cting and waiting for the accomplishment. The second was the wisedome in Christ and his Apo∣stles, applying fitly the Prophets sayings, as theyMatth. 2. were fulfilled; the former vnderstanding had the Scribes and Pharisies, who could readily tell by the words of the Prophet, where Christ should be borne, and did expect his comming, but had not the knowledge to apply the same to the time, and to the person fulfilling the same, according to the prophecie of the place, where he was to be borne; and such vnderstanding may now also the Ro∣mane high-priest, his Scribes and Pharisies haue, but the latter is the wisedome of Gods seruants, to whom the Lord is pleased to make knowne his will. And thus much for the order, the second thing to bee obserued, to come to the knowledge of this diuine prophecie. CHAP. III. Of the matter and historicall sense of this booke. THe third thing in reading this Pro∣phecie (now in respect of our times) is to consider what is done already, what is in doing, (for it is in continuall act) and hereafter to be done, concerning either the Church, or the enemies thereof. The matter of this Prophecie, was things to come to
passe, chap. 1. 1. was things that were to be done after the reuealing of this reuelation to Iohn▪ cap. 4. 1. euen things to be done, chap. 22. 6. The mat∣ter then of this prophecie is historicall, as it com∣meth to be fulfilled. It is therefore not a spirituall or allegoricall, but an historicall sense, which in this booke wee must attend vnto, from the begin∣ning of the fourth chapter, to the end of the pro∣phecie. For to Iohn was reuealed what things should come to passe here vpon earth, before the worlds end, as far as concerned the Church; and the same he here setteth forth to vs, as to him it was reuealed. If we then doe loose the historicallThe matter of this prophecie is historicall. sense, we loose the proper sense of this booke, what other spirituall vse soeuer we make of it. By this then we see what necessity there is toIt is necessary to be well read in histories. reade histories, into which wee must looke and search diligently, according to the times, and ac∣cording to the course of this prophetical narratiō, but in the reading of histories we must be guided by the order kept here; and as the things are fore∣told by the holy Ghost to come to passe: for as I haue afore noted, if Historiographers had kept the direct course of this prophecie in penning their stories, concerning all the troubles & altera∣tions in the Church, they had cleerly commented vpon this prophecie, as far as it is fulfilled. And so should these likewise that yet write an ecclesiasti∣call storie of the things now in doing, or such as liue to write what shall hereafter fall out. In ap∣plyingHow to reade histories with the order of this prophecie. the histories to the text, the way is to reade them in the order of the prophecie: and to doe
this, we must consider these things: I. That the narration of future things taketh date from the time that Iohn receiued this reuelation, as is to be learned from chap. 4. 1. and 22. 6. about Anno 96. in the raigne of Domitian, and therefore to begin from that time to reade, marking the order of the prophecie, and the fulfilling thereof. II. That it beginneth with the Dragon, the Heathen persecuting tyrants, in chap. 6. and 12. shewing how God would plague (with sundry iudgements) the world then, chap. 6. and would ouerthrow that Empire, and cast out those Pagans for ruling and tyrannizing ouer the Church, as is noted in chap. 12. therefore the stories of those times are to be studiously read, attending vnto the text, as the spirit of God leadeth, to find the fulfil∣ling and accomplishment thereof accordingly. III. That the prophecie carrieth vs from the Dragons rage, to the view of Antichrist, but yet by degrees from the time of that godly and wor∣thie Emperour, Constantine the great. And so we are to search and apply the stories of those times, but (I say) going on with the prophecie in the steps thereof concerning Antichrist. As first to marke what went before the generall Apostacie of Rome▪ or Romane Bishop, set out in the blowing of the foure trumpets, in chap. 8. from Constan∣tines daies, till about the yeere, as some thinke, of Christ, 530. or thereabout, some 230. yeeres space; for exposition whereof, the stories of those times are to be searched into, the prophecie will be a guide into the stories, and these an exposition to
the prophecie. Then to consider his getting into the Dragons seate, with power and great authori∣tie, causing a generall Apostasie, (chap. 9. and 13.) regaining great glory to Rome, as before vnder the Heathen Emperours. To vnderstand these things, and to haue an exposition of the 9. 13. and 17. chapters, we must reade what Rome doth chal∣lenge from Constantine, for the Romanists brag∣ging of Constantines donation, giueth vs light to know how the Pope crept into the Emperiall seat; also we must reade the Popes liues, their decrees, their practises, in, and ouer Councels, the arising vp of their religious orders, the whole body of their Canon law their Legenda aurea, for lying miracles and words, their warres, with all other the deeds, power, seat, and great authority of that Antichri∣stian state, because they giue cleere light vnto such things, as be spoken of the beast in those chapters, to the full. For how can the prophecie of the Pope and his popedome be otherwise cleered to vs, then by reading of those things which are set forth of them by authenticke authors, and appro∣ued authorities? So to come to vnderstand such things as be in the 10. 11. and 14. chapters, touch∣ing the arising of the Church from vnder Anti∣christ; as also the preaching of the Gospell, to bring that hidden number vnto open light, the witnesses of the truth and their doctrine; also Antichrists opposition thereto, his tyrannie, and their constant suffering must be knowne by such as haue faithfully made knowne these things. Now for that Antichrists power of generally
persecuting is restrained, and that the true Church (blessed be God) now some late yeeres since, hath begun to get an vpper hand against him, as is fore∣shewed in chap. 15, and 16, that they that killed must bee kild, and such as murthered, must haue bloud to drinke, the vials of wrath being begun to be poured out vpon those Antichristians from vs; as also for that this part of the prophecie is in ful∣filling, and shall not now cease till full wrath bee poured vpō that Romish state, to the vtter destru∣ction thereof. We may reade late writers, and, asThe stories of the present times cōcerning things done betweene Protestants and Papists, are to be read of vs. I may say, yesterday histories, and make a daily ob∣seruation of those things which now doe fall out, or of late haue fallen out, betweene the Papists and the Protestants, especially from the yeere 1558, or 60, about which time was the full period of the Popes generall preuailing; and since which time hee hath nothing increased vpon vs, but wee by Gods power haue preuailed against him, and so, maugre their malice, and in spite of their policie, trecheries and treasons, we shall goe forward to a better estate against that Romish power for euer vnto the end. Doe not wee see here in England since that time the truth hereof; haue not the Pa∣pists had ill successe in all their attempts against vs? Though impious Pius roare with his Bulls, though Iesuites, these frogs comming out of the Dragon, Beast and false prophet, stirre vp Kings a∣gainst vs, with a supposed inuincible Armado to conquer vs; though Gunpowder-plots be deuisedThe Popes power shall no more increase. to destroy vs in our Regall and princely powers, yet wee stand▪ and they fall; and so must they now
continually, for by an oath from God it is confir∣med vnto vs, chap. 10. 5. 6, That there should be time no longer. Let none doubt of this exposition, the acts of God from the forenamed time confirme it vnto vs; howsoeuer other haue, or yet doe take it, wee must certainly know this, That things done, in doing, or hereafter to be done, are the exposition of this prophecie, and not what men doe imagine. And if the Pope daily decay, and not preuaile, as formerly heretofore, and wee also still preuaile a∣gainst him, thē let this work of God giue authority to this interpretation; but if contrariwise & here∣after any shal see things fall out to crosse this expo∣sition, then reiect the same as false: in the meane space, let the obseruation of the acts of our blessed God, past, present, and to come, bee iudge herein, and therein let vs rest and praise him. Obiect. But may some say, because the Pope hath not preuailed against vs, can it be made a generall rule for a testimonie of the decaying of his whole state? and for that wee haue, and doe preuaile, therefore shall also the whole Church of Christ preuaile with vs in other places? what is this nation, that hence should be made such a conclusion? Answ. Surely I am not led by any vaine phan∣tasie vpon the loue of mine owne countrey so to thinke; but from things done by God himselfe, leading me by the hand thereto, from the Popes first rising, and the Lords honouring this little, but most noble Iland, aboue all other places in the Christian world, in the matter of Christianitie: First, our Constantine, whether by birth, or here first
proclamed Emperour, was the first Christian Em∣perour,The renowne of our Nation in the matters of Christian reli∣gion. that brought to the profession of Christ a world of Christians. Secondly, Lucius our King the first Monarch, that was Christian. Thirdly, Wickliffe our countriman, the first man of fame, standing vp against the abominations of Rome. Fourthly, Henry the 8 our King, the first Monarch that vtterly reiected the Popes supremacie, and cast him out of his Dominions. Fifthly, Elizabeth our Queene, a Queene of eternal memory, the first kings daugh∣ter that suffered persecution for the Gospell vnder Antichrist; the first Queene that banished the pub∣lique Idoll seruice of the Masse out of her King∣dome, and the whole Popes power irrecouerably to this day. Sixthly, Our now learned Soueraigne Iames our King, the first Monarch, that euer publiquely with his owne penne, proclamed to the Emperour, Kings, and Princes, the Pope to be Antichrist. Se∣uenthly and lastly, this our Nation hath vexed, and yet doth vex, the Pope and his marked Antichri∣stians more then any, yea or all the kingdomes in this part of the Christian world, where the Pope hath had iurisdiction at any time. First, in making most iust lawes, before all others, to put deseruedly their Iesuites and Priests to death, therein follow∣ing the words of this prophecie, chap. 16. 1. 6. 7. Se∣condly, in getting so admirable and glorious a vi∣ctorie in the yeere 88, the like neuer heard of, and with so great shame, losse, and destruction to the Pope and his powers aiding him, as the like they neuer had at the hands of any people or nation, from the beginning, to that day. Thirdly, in our
aiding, and relieuing, all other needing our helpe, against the Pope; this the Low Countries can witnesse, Geneua, yea and the late King of France, when he was but King of Nauarre. Fourthly and lastly, in the Lords most rare and wonderfull preser∣uation of vs, our late Queene, and our now Soue∣raigne king, from all their hellish plots, trecheries, conspiracies, treasons and rebellions, that haue at any time been deuised, practized, or raised vp a∣gainst them, the mischiefe euer returning back vp∣on the heads of the euill instruments themselues. So as this nation may be the instance for al Christs people, to behold Gods mercie and fauour to his Church, to conclude the ouerthrow of the Pope∣dome, according to this prophecie. And from which (if from such strange workes of God, for∣merly any thing may bee concluded) it is most likely, that Rome it selfe shall chiefly receiue her vtter destruction, when God shall see his time, to aduance his glorie, by such an heroicall spirit, and princely power, as he may, and can make fit to doe the deede, which verely is not long to, euen so, A∣men. If this coniecture may seeme any thing pro∣bable, then let not the accommodation of some things in this prophecy, particularly to our natiō, and to some of the Lords instruments in the same, raised vp to doe Gods will, according to this pro∣phecie, be held too foolish and ridiculous. And thus much for the matter and principall sense which in this Reuelation is to be sought out.
CHAP. IV. Of the manner of setting downe this prophecie, and the reuealing of the things foretold in this booke. IT may be said of this booke, as is said by the Lord in Hosea, chap. 12. 10. I haue multiplied visions, and vsed simili∣tudes: for here are manifold visions and similitudes; the Lord by certain formes, shapes, and figures, as it were Images and pictures, did liuely represent the whole Comicall tragedie, or tragicall Comedie, that was from the time of the reuealing of the Reuelation, to be ac∣ted vpon the stage of this world, by the Church militant, vnto his Apostle, and Prophet Iohn; whoThis prophecie is deliuered, after the manner of prophecies of old, by visions, si∣militudes and figuratiue spee∣ches. was an eare-witnes of all that was spoken, and a be∣holder of these shadowes and resemblances of what was truly to be done vpon the earth, being played, as I may say, before him, euen as in the words it is written. So as we must learne by these visions, things done, things in doing, or hereafter still to bee done, till the world come to an end, as hath been alreadie said. Againe, as it is composed of such similitudes, so the words are figuratiue, the whole prophecie full of Metaphors, and almost altogether Allego∣ricall; so as we must take heede, that we looke fur∣ther then into the letter and naked relation of things, as they are set downe, otherwise the booke
should be full of absurdities, impossibilities, falsities, and flat contradictions vnto other truthes of Scrip∣ture: all which are farre from the words of Gods holy spirit, which are euer holy and true. For who can beleeue a Lambe to haue seuen eyes, a moun∣taine burning to be cast into the sea, and this there∣by in a third part to become blood, a starre to fall from heauen, Locusts to bee of so monstrous a shape, as is set downe in chap. 9. and horses with Lions heads, fire, smoke, and brimstone comming out of their mouthes, and a hundred such things? Therefore wee must not sticke in the letter, but search out an historicall sense, which is the truth intended, and so take the words typically, and not literally. For propheticall descriptions much dif∣fer from common historicall narrations. A storie sets downe things indeed done: a prophecie re∣presents to the view, as present, by similitudes, the things not come to passe, but afterwards to bee done. Also we must note, and this very carefully, thatThis prophecie is framed to the words of the Prophets, and custome of the Jewes. all this whole prophecie is framed after the state and condition of the ancient people of God, the Iewes, and after the words and visions of the anci∣ent Prophets; as we may see by comparing the words and visions of this booke, to Moses and the Prophets, to which the Prophet Iohn alludeth eue∣rywhere.To what Iohn alludeth in this prophecie. First, to their sufferings vnder their e∣nemies, of which there were three: first, Pharaoh in Egypt, called by Ezechiel, a Dragon, and there∣fore here mention of a Dragon, chap. 12. The Se∣cond, Babel, and the beasts noted in Daniel, chap. 7.
and 11. therefore here is mention of the beast, ca. 13.Ezech 38. and 39. and of Babell, chap. 14. and 17. The third and last enemy was Gog, and Magog, euen the Kings of Syria, and among them, chiefly Antiochus Epipha∣nes, therefore the last enemies here are called Gog, and Magog, chap. 20. Secondly, to the twelue tribes, chap. 7. to the wildernesse, chap. 12. thun∣der, lightening, and earthquake, chap. 5. to the Ta∣bernacle, chap. 13. and 21. 3. the Arke of his Testa∣ment, chap. 11. 19. the Priests, chap. 1. to white rai∣ment, chap. 1. a golden girdle about the paps, cap. 1. the Altar, incense, chap. 8. Odours, cap. 5. lamps, chap. 4. Candlesticks, chap. 1. and 11. golden Cen∣sor, chap. 8. Temple, chap. 11. to singing, chap. 5. and 15. to instruments of musicke, chap. 5. and 15. to the sea, chap. 4. and 15. 2. to the smoake filling the Temple, chap. 15. 8. to the Trumpets, chap. 8. to Ierusalem, chap. 21. Kings, chap. 1. Thrones, Crownes, and Elders, chap. 4. Thirdly, to the say∣ing of the old Prophets, as chap. 1. 7. to Zach. 12. 8. and 21. 3. to Ier. 31. 32. and 7. 17. and 21. 4. to Esay 25. 8. and chap. 3. 12. to 1. K. 7. 15. and infinite other places, and also to their visions, as chap. 1. 13. to Dan. 7. 13. and 10. 6. cap. 4. 6. 7. to Ezech. 1. 10. Yea the allusions are euery where to the words of the old Testament, which were too long to set downe here, though most necessary to be quoted, of such as would truly comment vpon this booke. Now an allusion is a respect had, and a resem∣blanceWhat an allu∣sion is. made vnto some other thing, agreeing in some sort together; as in all the things before men∣tioned, the Apostle, (or rather the holy Ghost) hath
respect vnto that which hath been formerly, and maketh some resemblance in some sort thereof in the things in hand, of which he (heere in this pre∣sent prophecie) doth speake: which allusions are made in this last booke of holy Scripture, for ma∣ny reasons: I. And that most vsually, rather forWhy Iohn is so full of allusions. amplification and illustration, then for proofe and confirmation: as for example, as Babylon held captiue Gods people a determined time, but at length they were deliuered, and Babylon at last, came to vtter destruction; so shall it be with Rome, spiritually captiuating Gods people, these being deliuered, and the heauenly Temple built, she shall vtterly perish, and so of euery other allusion. II. For that the ancient people, their state, suf∣ferings, ceremonies, worships, Temple, City, Priests, and Kings, were liuely types of Christ and his kingdome of true Christians; and therefore now doth our Prophet set out the truth by the sha∣dowes, and the substance by the very words of the ceremonies. III. To shew that the words and vision of the holy Prophets, to which our Prophet alludeth, besides the first and proper accommo∣dation, had also typically in them a further signi∣fication and relation, as the frequent allusions in this booke, from them doth shew, and in other pla∣ces of the new Testament, Rom. 10. 18. Psal. 19. 4. and Galath. 4. IV. To teach vs by these mysticall speeches, (wrapping, as it were, the old couenant into the new, the Iewes into Christianisme, and we Christians, by these typicall termes, made mind∣full of them) that the mystery of God, declared to
his seruants the Prophets, is not finished, but shall be, when this prophecie is fulfilled, at the blowing of the seuenth trumpet, chap. 10. 7. These I take to be the reasons of these frequent allusions, from Mo∣ses, the Law, & the Prophets: the knowledge here∣of, and the maner of the deliuering of this prophe∣cie, in similitudes, types, tropes, figures, and allusi∣ons, will giue a great light to the vnderstanding of this Reuelation, and preuent the foule mista∣king of many things, by marking the allusions, and the common vse thereof. It would be a worke worthy praise, and requiring the diligence of a learned man, well acquainted with Moses, the Law and Prophets, to set downe throughout this prophecie, to what places of the old Testament, this our Prophet alludeth euery where; it would cleere many points, which for want of this know∣ledge are to many very obscure; it would preuent an vsuall mistaking, and an ignorantly-seeking of propriety of speech, in a meere allusion, as may be obserued in the writings of men, and their com∣ments on some places of this prophecie. And thus much for the manner, the fourth thing to bee no∣ted for to further our knowledge, in the vnder∣standing of this heauenly Reuelation.
CHAP. V. Of the way and meanes to expound this booke. TO interpret this most heauenly pro∣phecie, most necessary for these our times, after those things in the for∣mer chapter, laid downe and well ob∣serued, the Expositor, before allTo begin with prayer. things, is to beg at the Lords hand earnestly, in a holy affection to the truth, in a desire to aduance Gods glory, and to edifie the Lords people in the truth, the aid & assistance of the holy Ghost: For the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 11. by whom we know the things freely giuē vs of God, 1. Cor. 2. 12. There is a spiritIob 31. 8. Iob 38. 36. Prou. 2. 6. Dan. 1. 17. and 2. 20. 21. Iam. 1. 5. 1. King. 3. 9. in mā, but the inspiration of the Almighty giueth vnderstanding. The Lord putteth wisedome into the inward parts, hee giueth vnderstanding vnto the heart. The Lord giueth wisedome, out of his mouth commeth knowledge and vnderstanding, which if any man lacke, (saith Saint Iames) let him aske of God, that giueth to all men liberally, as itProu. 2. 4. appeareth in his mercy towards Salomon, asking wisedome at his hands. But we must cry for know∣ledge, and lift vp our voice for vnderstanding, and seeke it as siluer, and search for it as treasure, then through Gods mercy, wee shall attaine to know∣ledge, in that measure as shall be fit for vs. After this holy & heauenly preparatiō, I suppose it to be very meet to proceed in this manner following.
I. To looke carefully into the very text it selfe,The second canes, care∣fully t oke into the text. originally set downe by this our Apostle and Pro∣phet, as also by faithfull translations, turned into other knowne languages: be exercised, first in rea∣dingAct. 8. the words of God himselfe, like the godly Eunuch, though at the first thou doest not vnder∣stand them, God may send thee an interpretor, as he did to him. What things thou doest vnder∣stand, blesse God for the same, therein reioyce, and retaine that knowledge of those things, and la∣bour for more; giue not ouer to reade the booke againe and againe, thou that art able, in the origi∣nall; others, in the best translations, as most excel∣lent helpes to giue men knowledge of the things therein contained, in that tongue with which they be well acquainted. For the oftener wee reade it, the better shall wee vnderstand it; but where wee doe not vnderstand, there let vs admire Gods wise∣dome, and the depth of the mysterie: be humbled in our selues, but not giue ouer, as without hope, either through impaciencie, not enduring the paines in studie, or pride of heart, not vouchsafing any longer our labour thereto, because the Lord forthwith descendeth not to our capacity in these his mysteries. II. In the next place obserue, whether there beObserue the allusions. any allusion in the words, (of which before in the former chapter) and then whereunto the allusion is made, that from thence the place in hand may be illustrated, as in chap. 2. 7. is an allusion to Gen. 2. 9. from whence the reward of eternall life pro∣mised to him that ouercommeth, is illustrated by
eating of the tree of life; and the heauenly mansion, by that garden and Paradise; so the allusion giueth the exposition of the words. Likewise in chap. 4. 4. mention is made of 24. Elders, which is an allusi∣on vnto the 1. Chron. 24. where the gouernours of the Sanctuarie and house of God, (vers. 5.) were before the King, (vers. 6.) ordered into the number of 24. elders, or chiefe Fathers, in verses, 7. 18. like∣wise the chiefe for the temporall affaires, were or∣dered in the number of 24. 1. Chron. 27. 1. So whether we respect the laity, or Clergy, as we now speake, the body of the whole people of God, were 24. Elders and principall Fathers, being for all the rest. This allusion will make plaine the truth, and cleere the interpretation from the obscurity, wher∣in it is inuolued by many erronious expositions; I need not instance more places, the whole pro∣phecie being full of allusions, as is before shewed; onely here the interpretor is to consider the great benefit, which he shall reape by obseruing the al∣lusions in expounding of the text.  It may bee it will heere be asked, How may one know whether an allusion be in the words or no; as also how to know whereunto the words doe allude?  I answere, that an allusion is knowne by the figuratiue and typicall speech in this prophecie, framed vnto the very like words vttered, or like things spoken of in the old Testament. Therefore to know an allusion, a man must be acquainted with Moses, and the Pro∣phets, the types and figures, the worship, and ma∣ner of worshipping God then; also with the trou∣bles and deliuerances, the state and gouernment
of that ancient people of God vnder the Law. Likewise to know wherunto the Apostle alludeth, the place in hand must bee well considered of, and that in all the circumstances, if there seeme to bee any doubt of the allusion; for some are so plaine, as the very words carrie vs to the place, as chap. 2. 7. to Genes. 2. 9. chap. 4. 7. to Ezech. 1. 10. and 10. 14. chap. 11. 4. to Zach. 4. 3. 11. 14. and 6. 5. and an hundred such, the very words being taken out of the old Testament, and so will direct vs plainly to the places. But some are not so cleere at the first without some further consideration of cir∣cumstances; and therefore to finde whereto the allusion is, we must marke what is spoken of in the place of this prophecie, where wee seeke the allusi∣on, then, where any such thing is in the old Testa∣ment, where the fittest resemblance may be made,How to finde a more hidden allusion. most agreeing with the matter, and the circum∣stances of the text in hand; as for example, to know whereto, the allusion of the 24. Elders is in chap. 4. we must consider, first, that the chapter is a common type of Gods Church, and then these 24. the type of all the faithfull, both Kings and Priests, vnto God, which is cleere out of chapter 5. 9. for they bee redeemed by Christs blood, out of euery kindred, tongue, people, and nation; by which words it is euident, first, that they bee in type, men; secondly, Christian men; thirdly, put for all, as beeing redeemed out of all places. Now this so vnderstood, the allusion must be to a num∣ber of 24. Elders, or chiefe Fathers, vnder a Soue∣raigne, as these here, which is in the 1. Chron. 24.
and 27. and therefore thereto the allusion is, and not to any other place: for that the resemblance cannot bee found elsewhere. So chapter 8. 3. 4. hath a type of one mediating betweene God and the people, to preserue his from destruction; now to know whereto hee alludeth, wee must finde one hauing this office, to stand and offer at the Altar, which was the high Priests office, in the Leuiticall ministerie; and therefore doth Iohn allude thereunto, Exodus, 30. 3. 7. 10. Le∣uiticus, 16. 17. Thus wee see how to know whereto our Prophet doth allude, in many of his allusions; which one thing being well obser∣ued, obscurities will bee better cleered, the truth in differing opinions will bee more discerned, and the words of the prophecie become somewhat more easie to bee vnderstood. For the allusion will keepe vs to the resemblance, it will illu∣strate the place cleerely, it will affoord a rea∣son of the speech, and of the thing in hand, and preuent also moreouer grosse mistakings, and erronious expositions, as wee see in those that make the 24. Elders, the 24. bookes of the old Testament; in others that make them the twelue Patriarkes, and twelue Apostles; all which loose the allusion, the scope of the chapter, also the historicall sense, and are besides most plainly consuted, out of the 5. chapter, and the 9. verse. But yet for more full cleering of this point, aboutThree things to be noted con∣cerning an allusion. an allusion, let these three things be diligently no∣ted: First, that all the allusions from chap. 4. to the end of the prophecie, are taken out of the old Te∣stament,
and therefore there let vs looke to finde them. Secondly, that in one and the same place of this prophecie there is varietie of allusions, as chap. 4, and 5, so chap. 7: so in one chap. as in chap. 8. and 11, &c. Thirdly, that albeit in an allusion, there is a resemblance and some proportion, be∣tweene one thing and another; yet may wee not thinke that in those two places, one and the same thing is meant, as such haue thought, who haue made the foure beasts (chap. 4.) to be all one with those in Ezech. chap. 1. 10. and 10. 14, because there is some kinde of likenes betweene them in num∣ber and fashion. And thus much for the allusion, which is to be obserued in the exposition. III. Next after the allusion, to interpret anyThe third meanes. To marke whe∣ther the place be expounded by the holy Ghost himselfe. place, let the Reader marke whether the holie Ghost doth expound the same or no: for as I haue shewed before, the Lord himselfe doth interpret his owne meaning in very many places of this booke; whose interpretation is most faithfull and true. Now this his exposition is two-fold, eitherThe holy Ghosts exposition is two-fold. more cleere, and this is sometime in the same chap∣ter, as in chap. 1. 12, by verse 20. and in chap. 17. 1, by verse 15, and verse 3, by verse 9. 10. and some∣time in one and the same verse of a chap. as chap. 4. 5. and 5. 6. and 19. 8. Or it is more obscure and hid∣den, & is to be found out thus, first by considering the words with all the circumstances of the same place, also the argument of the chapt. and the scope thereof. Thus may wee see the foure beasts in chap. 4, to be ecclesiasticall persons, the very ar∣gument and circumstances of the same chap. fully
sheweth it: for it typeth out the whole militant Church in the head, and bodie, and principall members, and that vnto the end; their place, their properties, and their office considered, plainly tell vs what they be. So wee may see the great Citie mentioned chap. 17, to be Rome, the circumstan∣ces considered there, verse 18, with the 9, and also the same to bee Babylon; for the great Citie is the Woman, vers. 18, and the Woman hath a name written Babylon, in vers. 5. Secondly, if the exposition cannot be found in the same Chapter, then seeke the interpretation elsewhere; for surely the Scriptures are interpre∣ters of the Scriptures, and the meaning of the spi∣rit is to be found out by his owne words. There∣fore seeke the like phrase, words, or matter else∣where mentioned, and there compare place with place, circumstances with circumstances, and one thing carefully with another, to finde out the true sense of the place sought for. But first seeke y• expo∣sition thus in this booke, and if the book expound not euery thing in it selfe, then compare the place with other places of Scripture. As for example, I would know what is the beast in chap. 11. 7. there∣fore I looke into the very place it selfe, and do ob∣serue first, That he ascendeth out of the bottomlesse pit, and then, that hee maketh warre against the Saints, and preuaileth. Now I seeke out first the word Beast, which I finde in chap. 13. 1: but there is not this originall nor practice here set downe, in chap. 11. 7 therefore I seek a beast—ascending out of the bottom∣lesse pit, such a one I finde in chap. 17. 8: next I seek
one making warre against the Saints, and preuailing, such a one I finde in chap. 13. 7. Therefore I con∣clude, the beast in chap. 13. 7. and 17. 8, is the same that is mentioned in chap. 11. 7, for the agreement is full without any difference. Now who, and what this beast is, I haue before fully shewed, by compa∣ring one place with another at large. Againe, I would know what is that cōpany with the Lambe in chap. 14. 1. therefore I looke vpon the place, and finde a number 144000, and which haue the Fa∣thers name written in their forehead; I seeke therfore the number, and the marke in the forehead, and I finde it in chap. 7. 4, and those there sealed in the forehead; so as those 144000, and the sealed Ones in cap. 7, be one and the same number in the type, and therefore cannot be Iewes properly so called; but there is only an allusion, the number are those elect and faithfull number of Christians protected by Christ, and hidden with him in the time of An∣tichrists tyrannicall rule and dominion. Which exposition the course of this prophecie and cir∣cumstances of the places will proue, if any doubt of it. If I would know what is the seale in chap. 7,Exod. 28. 38. and 12. 13. I seek in the Reuelation, but cannot find the word; therefore I consider an allusion in the speech, and that I find in Ezech. 9. 4; by which in a resemblance and conformitie of case, I see what kind of persons these sealed Ones in this Reuelation (chap. 7) be, such as sigh and crie for al the abominations com∣mitted, as they did, and therefore are protected as they were. Now for the exposition of the seale, I finde by comparing of places, 2. Cor. 1. 22, with
Ephes. 4. 30, and 1. 13, that it is the earnest of the holy spirit of promise giuen into their hearts, by which they are sealed vnto the day of redemption. And thus doe wee see, that the holy spirit of God interpreteth himselfe, either in this prophecie, or in some other places of Scripture. IV. With these helpes and meanes the faith∣fullThe fourth meanes. Manifold consi∣derations. interpreter must besides haue with him these manifold considerations, as so many directions and guides in the way. I. That from the beginning of the fourth chap.The first is of the time of this prophecie. are those things handled, which concerne whollie and only the Christian Church to the worlds end; and this prophecy taketh beginning from the time of the Reuelation made, and the things shewed vn∣to Iohn in the Ile Patmos; for so is it cleere by the words of him that spake vnto Iohn, chap. 4. 1. and chap. 22. 6. which diuers learned men haue noted vpon the words of the chap. 4. 1, but haue not ob∣serued in their expositions: and therefore haue greatly mistaken things, and confounded the or∣der and course of this prophecie. This considera∣tiō giueth vs to know, that this prophecy of future things taketh beginning only in the raigne of Do∣mitian, the twelfth Romane Emperour after Caesar, who exiled Iohn into Patmos in the yeere of our Lord 96, or 97, or there about, as before is noted; aboue twentie yeeres after the destruction of Ie∣rusalem; so as hence may be noted, that it is an vt∣ter mistaking to call backe the beginning of this prophecie, to the time and life of Christ, of his A∣postles, of Ierusalem, or any thing literally of the
Iewes. For although allusions be frequent to the Iewes, yet this prophecie toucheth nothing those times, much lesse the times before from the worlds beginning; but it onely concerneth, as I say, the Christian Church, as easily appeareth by the or∣der, and whole course of all the parts of the pro∣phecie, from the beginning of the fourth Chapter vnto the end. Therefore to conclude this, the en∣trance vpon this propheticall historie, taketh be∣ginning by and by after this was shewed vnto Iohn; which rule being kept, the whole order and course of the prophecie will be better seene, and the wide mistakings of others better discerned, and their er∣ror auoided. II. That this part of this booke, from the begin∣ningThe second con∣cerneth the se∣uen seales, seuen trumpets, and seuen vials, and what they be. of the sixth Chapter to the end, (after the in∣troduction in the fourth and fifth chapters) is set out in the opening of the seuen seales, blowing of seuen Trumpets, pouring out of seuen vials; of which for our better vnderstanding we must know thus much: First, that they be all plagues vpon the worldly sort; the seales are plagues, the sixth chap∣ter doth shew it, in the euents vpon the Heathen world; the Trumpets are plagues, the euents at theThey be all plagues vpon three sorts, Hea∣then, earthly Christians, and Antichristians. sounding thereof doe manifest, chap. 8, and 9; as al∣so that the three last are called woes, in chap. 9. 12. which fell vpon the earthly Christians. The vials are plagues, the euents shew in chap. 16, and they bee called the seuen last plagues, cap. 15. 1, which light vpon the Antichristians; and by terming them the seuen last plagues, it teacheth that the former are plagues also. So as they tell vs, how God in the
first place reuenged himselfe vpon the Heathen for despising the Gospell, and persecuting of Chri∣stians: in the opening of the seales which are the first plagues; how next (in the second place) he pu∣nished such as professed Christianitie, and were but earthly, and carnally minded, in the sounding out of the Trumpets, in chap. 8. and 9. vers. 21. the second kinde of plagues: lastly, how at length hee would plague these Antichristians for vpholding a defection, and an apostaticall course in the pou∣ring out of the vials, chap. 16. which are the last plagues, as they be called, chap. 15. 1. Secondly, that these are in order and time oneThey are in or∣der and time one before another. before another, the Seales before the Trumpets, and the Trumpets before the Vials; so one Seale is opened before another, so one Trumpet blowne before another, and one Viall poured out before another, as the order of 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7. obserued constantly by the holy Ghost in all of them eui∣dently doth declare, chap. 6. & 8. and 9. and 16. The Seales are the first sorrowes, the Trumpets the se∣cond, and the Vials the third and last plagues; and so considered, are one before another in order and time. For the effects of the sixe Seales, are before the seuenth Seale, which bringeth forth the Trum∣pets, whereof six be the proper euents thereof, then the seuenth Trumpet bringeth foorth as the pro∣per effects thereof the seuen Vials. Therefore the first Seale, Trumpet, and Viall, are not of one time, nor the second Seale, Trumpet and Viall, nor so the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7, as some would haue them; for they are brought foorth one of another, as wee plainly
see. Secondly, they are plagues vpon different sorts of persons, in differing times, as is aforesaid, and as storie wil witnesse. Thirdly, this iumbling of them together, confoundeth the cleere order of the pro∣pheticall narration, as the wise and iudicious Rea∣der acquainted with the order, will easily perceiue in the reading thereof. Such as hold this tenent, do make balkes of whole Chapters, either cutting thē off, as idle; or else bringing them into such a mis∣conceiued order, as is without all order, either of the prophecie it selfe, or historie to explaine the same. Yea some would make the first of the seuen Churches, to agree with the first Seale, Trumpet and Viall; and the second, with the second, and so in order also throughout all the seuen: when the text sheweth, that the seuen Churches are of the times then present, and the other three seuens, of the time to come, chap. 1. 19. and 4. 1. Yea euerie one may see, that will, how the seuen Seales, Trum∣pets and Vials, differ both in varying types, and al∣so in the degrees of euill: Thirdly, that one Seale from another Seale, oneThey are distin∣guished within themselues one from another, and how. Trumpet from another Trumpet, one Viall from another Viall, is not distinguished cleerely by pe∣riods of time, but by diuersity of matter, and diffe∣ring euents. Therefore to find out the time of ope∣ning a Seale, sounding of a Trumpet, and pouring out of a Viall, and so Seale from Seale, Trumpet from Trumpet, and Viall from Viall, wee are to marke carefully the diuers and sundrie euents, of all, and euery one from another, and to search in storie, when such things fell out, and so come both
to a true and full distinction of them one from an other; and also to know whether they be as yet come to passe, or no. Neuerthelesse note, that theirNote this. perfect difference and a true discerning of them is not, nor cannot be taken from the first moment of the time of their beginning, but by the height of one from the height of another: for as the former or precedent plague, of Seale, Trumpet, or Viall, may hold on in the next succeeding, some space of time; so may the latter take beginning before the former be come vnto the very height. For as God hath ordained iudgements, so haue they their be∣ginnings, and their periods; which beginnings and endings in the continuation of linked plagues one continually succeeding another, haue their measures and termes betweene the height of the one, and the height of the other, from whence the seuerall plagues doe take their denomination, of 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7. plague; or else at least when the latter is come to such a degree, as the former plague is not thought of, in comparison of the lat∣ter; in respect wherof the former euill is not much felt, albeit the euill effects thereof remaine still; so in the height of the former, though the latter bee begun, and growing, yet is same much complained of, so long as the strength of the for∣mer euill continueth. As for example, a man tor∣mented with the gowte, in extremitie complai∣neth of that, as in a sort his only disease, albeit the stone be breeding, which he but lightly feeleth, for the anguish of the gowte in extremitie or height; but when the stone is growne to the height of tor∣ment,
though the gowte be not gone, yet the grie∣uous torture of the stone, maketh the lesse paine of the gowte, being somewhat also allaied, not to be remembred or spoken of, while the torment of the stone is in the height. So must wee conceiue of these plagues, in one Seale, Trumpet, and Viall, going before and following another, hereby right∣ly to distinguish them, and to know one from ano∣ther, where to begin the account, and to end the same: as also that we doe not mistake them, when we see the effects of one with another, preceding and succeeding in a continuall linke one in ano∣ther, not onely in Seale and Seale, Trumpet and Trumpet, Viall and Viall, but also in the Trumpets following vpon the Seales, & the Vials the Trum∣pets in one continued course, without interrup∣tion, till all the wicked sort be ouerthrowne. For this prophecie telleth vs, that there hath been from Iohns time til now, a continued vengeance of God vpon the wicked, first vpon those that were not Christians, but Heathen, then on earthly and worldly Christians, making a defection; and now is vpon the Antichristians, and so shall continue till they be vtterly destroyed, as wee may see from the be∣ginning of the sixteenth Chapter, to the end of chap. 19: and by the parts of this prophecy, which are as it were drawne on and coupled one to ano∣ther, Trumpets to the Seales, and Vials to the Trumpets, so as the same shew a continued course of Gods plagues vpon the wicked, till they bee destroyed, and the Church victoriouslie exal∣ted.
III. Wee are to consider, that the beginningThe third con∣sideration. Nothing past, or present, which hath the be∣ginning shew∣ed in type vn∣to John. and originall of any thing shewed in type vnto Iohn, was not past, nor then present, when this Re∣uelation was shewed to Iohn, but to come after∣wards, according to that saying, I will shew thee the things that must be done hereafter, chap. 4. 1. There∣fore wee see that the originall of that great red Dragon, typing out the Heathen Empire, is not no∣ted in chap. 12. because it then was. But the origi∣nall of the beast, in chap. 13. is set downe; there∣fore it is manifest that that beast was not in Iohns time, and so not a type of the Heathen Romane Em∣pire.The benefit of this conside∣ration. This consideration will distinguish betweene one thing and another, and by marking vnder what seale, trumpet, or viall, the originall is menti∣oned, we may know the time. Which yet is not (as I take it) meant of the very beginning and first moment of time, but of the first powerfull effect of the thing typed, by which the same is notably ma∣nifested; as in chap. 9. 1. the fall of a starre from heauen is set downe, which was yet in falling be∣fore, but now was fallen vnder the fifth trumpet, to the place where it should be. As appeareth by the power of the key, receiued forthwith vpon this fall mentioned. So chap. 13. 1. the rising of the beast, must be vnderstood of an eminent height, and not of a creeping, and secret rising; for that vp∣on this rising, his enthronizing, his great power and authority is mentioned withall; for the types here are remarkable things of that which is typed, at least in the most principall matters, instruments, and agents, if not in all and euery particular.
IV. That one singularly mentioned in type,The fourth con∣sideration. One in type, put for many, and all of that sort, whereof the one is a type. (except it bee of that whereof there is but one in nature) is to be taken for a generall type of all of that sort, whereof that one is a type, paterning out the nature and acts of all: for in such signes of fu∣ture things, the agreement rather of the things themselues, are to be marked, then the very vnities of persons. In Exod. 4. 2 2. there is the singular number of person, put for all Gods people in E∣gypt. It is not rare therefore to haue one put, to set out many, agreeing and alike in the same matter. Thus is Angell after Angell, chap. 14. 6. 8. 9. to bee taken for the seuerall sorts of Euangelicall Prea∣chers, in the diuers singular types. So one or ma∣ny in a type, for one and the same thing in kind, condition, or office, is to bee so taken of some, at one time, as the succeeding posterities also be ther∣in vnderstood, and not a continuing of one and the selfe same to all succeeding ages. As for exam∣ple, the 24. Elders, chap. 4. are a type of the peo∣ple of God, euen then when this prophecie came to Iohn, as also of the posteritie continuing in the faith, or such as shall succeed in their place, they being dead. The foure beasts are types of Ecclesi∣asticall gouernours, not onely the first, but of the last that shall be, to the worlds ende. The two Pro∣phets, in chap. 11. being slaine, as is noted in vers. 8. and raised vp againe, vers. 11. are a type of the first in that act, and also of others succeeding them when they be dead. So the one false prophet, chap. 19. 20. and the beast like a lambe, chap. 13. 11. is a type of a personall succession in the continuing of
Antichrist, in one and the same apostaticall seate, power and authority. V. That some time, one and the same person,The fifth consi∣deration. and thing, is diuersly set out; we shall find Christ set out in a diuers manner, in sundry places; asA person or thing but one, yet diuersly set out. chap. 1. 5. 13. 14. 15. 16. chap. 3. 7. chap. 5. 5. 6. chap. 10. 1. 2. chap. 19. 12. 13. 14. So is the Church of Christ typed out diuersly, in chap. 4. chap. 12. 7. chap. 14. 1. 5. chap. 15. 2. 3. chap. 19. 8. chap. 21. 1. 2. 10. 27. Likewise Antichrist is diuersly set out in sundry types; chap. 9. 1. 11. chap. 13. 11. chap. 19. 20. as also the Ministers of the Gospell, by starres, chap. 1. 20. by beasts, chap. 4. 7. by Prophets, oliue∣trees, and candlestickes, chap. 11. 3. 4. and by An∣gels, chap. 14. 6. 8. 9. This is necessary to bee ob∣serued, lest out of the variety of figures, termes and types, of one and the same person and thing, wee imagine differing things, and differing persons. VI. That the holy descriptions here, and typesThe sixth con∣sideration. of differing persons and things, well weighed in all the circumstances together, doe truly giue theThe descriptions of things, or per∣sons, doe giue vs the true diffe∣rence of them, one from a∣nother. difference of these differing things & persons, one from another; for the descriptions are not so ge∣nerall and common, as that they may be applied, now to this, and then vnto that thing, which doth differ one from another: for that is contrary to the nature of a true description of differing things, which should, and here indeed doe, point out one thing from another, truly and faithfully, according to the meaning of the holy Ghost. Therefore as things the same, may not bee made differing; so things cleerly distinguished, are not to bee con∣founded;
but yet to haue a right iudgement to know the same things to be the same, and to di∣stinguish well, and to preuent this confounding of things, let vs consider carefully in what they a∣gree, and in what they fully differ. For some things may in some light circumstances varie a little, and yet be the same; so may there be some manner of agreement in some speciall points, and yet againe withall, such a cleere disagreeing in some other maine matters and circumstances of great ∣ment, as thereby they may bee fully knowne, not to be the same things. The Dragon and first beast, chap. 12. 3. and 13. 1. agree in some things plain∣ly, yet in othersome so disagree, as they cannot be one and the same, as is before shewed at large. The starre, chap. 9. 1. and the Angell, chap. 20. 1. agree in this, that both haue the key of the bottomlesse pit, yet in other things, such is the difference, as they cannot possibly be the same; the one falleth, (which is euer to bee heere in this booke taken in the euill part) but the other doth descend; the one openeth, the other shutteth the pit: the time also maketh a great difference, the one is vnder the sixth seale, the other is vnder the fifth trumpet. The Angels, in chap. 7. 1. and chap. 9. 14. agree in number, 4. and 4. as also, that they all be angels of wrath; but yet such is the difference, and so great, that by no meanes can they be one and the same: as by comparing them together, from their places and standing, from their time before one another, and from their differing executions, may appeare. This consideration is very behoofefull, to know
what things are one, and what doe differ, and are not the same. VII. And lastly, a speciall consideration is toThe seuenth consideration. be had of the times mentioned in this prophecie, which are put partly indefinitely, as in chap. 2. 10. Where ten a (certaine number) is put for an vn∣certaine, and is a common figuratiue number, thus put in many places: as in Gen. 31. 7. 41. and Num. 14. 22. Iob 19. 3. so halfe an houre, chap. 8. in all common speech for a little space; so is an hower, day, moneth, and yeere, in chap. 9. 15. put indefi∣nitely, which is a gradation of the time, the lesser making the greater, as a day is of houres, a moneth of daies, and a yeere of monethes, to shew onely how from time to time, from the least space to the greatest, God hath certainly set them their termes, which they shall not passe. Othersome I take to be set downe definitiuely, yet so, as one number is set downe in proper termes, as is that of binding of the Dragon a thousand yeeres; the rest propheti∣cally, daies put for yeeres, as in Dan. 9. 24. 25. 26. weekes of dayes for yeeres; such are these numbers 5. moneths, chap. 9. 42. moneths, in chap. 11. 2. 1260. dayes, in chap. 11. 3. and 12. 6. And albeit they be allusions, as some will haue the 5. moneths to allude to Gen. chap. 7. 24. as the time, two times and a halfe, to Dan. chap. 7. 25. which is all one with 42. moneths, and 1260. dayes, (counting 30. dayes to a moneth) that is three yeers and a halfe, alluding vnto 1. King. 17. 1. which time is expoun∣ded to be so much, in Luk. 4. 25. Yet allusions to the times in the old Testament, doe here no more
take away the certainty and definitenesse of num∣ber; then the allusion to the beasts in Daniel, taketh away the certainty of a state in the beast, typed out vnto vs in chap. 13. 1. I confesse that allusions in the numbers giuen vnto persons; as the number of foure, to the foure beasts; the number of 24. to the Elders; the number of 144000. in chap. 14. 1. and the number of twelue times twelue, to the Tribes, cannot be taken for so certaine a number, the absurdities thereof is so apparent; but that these numbers of time before mentioned, are defi∣nite and certaine limited spaces of time, wee may yeeld it; for that the spirit of God setteth downeWhy some num∣bers are heere to be taken definitely. this number of fiue moneths, as it were; so careful∣ly, againe and againe; so the 42. and 1260. as ther∣by aduising vs to a carefull taking vp of the same; as also for that these numbers are tied to some cer∣taine circumstances of persons and actions. More∣ouer, for that this is a propheticall history; and therefore sheweth vs with the persons and their deeds, the certaine time thereof; also for more cleere sight of things and comfort to the Church. Lastly, because the holy Ghost taketh vp such numbers of 5. 42. 1260. as are no where put inde∣finitely in Scripture, nor else in any common vse of speech, which the spirit doth not so much swerue from in such things, but to make vs to vnderstand more certainly times set downe. And thus much for these considerations, as being the most gene∣rall and necessary to helpe vs to the vnderstanding of this booke. V. Meanes in expounding this prophecie is,The fifth mea
to vse the helps of the seruants of Christ, to whomTo take helpe of others. this Reuelation is sent to be shewed, such as bee li∣uing, and haue painfully studied this booke, are to be consulted with; for albeit there be but one spi∣rit, yet are there variety of gifts, and the measure of knowledge is not alike in all. By godly confe∣rence, done in true humility, and in onely loue vn∣to the truth, (which ought in all the true godly onely to be sought after) great good may be got∣ten. The labours and learned Commentaries of o∣ther holy men, must also be carefully read, wherein it shall be profitable to obserue, how they doe ex∣pound euery place; noting, first, by what meanesWhat to obserue in reading of commentaries vpon this booke. they doe it. Secondly, what reasons they do giue for their interpretations. Thirdly, wherein one dif∣fereth from another, and vpon what grounds; all which carefully marked (partiall respects of opi∣nions laid aside) the text diligently viewed, and the reasons brought to the true touchstone, the truth will (by the aide of Gods spirit) better ap∣peare. Yea and by these obseruations, an intelli∣gent Reader may gather rules for himselfe, to help to the interpreting of this booke, as peraduenture some haue done.The sixth meanes. VI. And lastly, to confirme the exposition, there is to bee added the story, according to the progresse of this propheticall narration heere, gi∣uen from God, vnto Iesus Christ; and from him to his Angell, to signifie the same to his holy Apo∣stle, for the vse of the Church, and profit of all Gods people. The accommodation of storie willThe accommo∣dation of storie to the text. greatly cleere the words of the text, and open the
meaning of this prophecie vnto vs, some haue ta∣ken commendable paines heerein, and are wor∣thie of praise therefore. It were much to bee wished, that learned men, and well read in histo∣ries, would labour yet more to apply the same to the prophecie, but according as the order of this booke, and method thereof requireth; not explaning some places onely, but to take vp this prophecie before them, and that also in the very steppes troden out by the holy Ghost, fore∣shewing, in an euen and very orderly progresse, how euery thing should come to passe, from the times of Iohns receiuing the same, to the worlds end. For seeing this prophecie foretelleth most orderly, how one thing in time goeth before ano∣ther, & in the same order as it is set downe, and no otherwise; it must needs bee most meet, to bring the story to the methodicall prediction of the holy spirit, to cleere euery part in his pro∣per place, and not to inuert the order of the pro∣phecie, to draw it to our method in reading of hi∣stories.
CHAP. VI. Of the interpretation of the most principall and hardest things in euery chapter, from the beginning of the fourth chapter, throughout the Prophecie. Notes vpon Chap. 4. HEauen is the true Church, (so taken,Vers. 2. Esa. 65. 17. and 66. 22. Dan. 8. 10. Luk. 10. 18. chap. 9. 1.) in a heauenly state and condition here vpon earth, and the Church is called Heauen, first, because their names are written in heauen, which are truly of it, Hebr. 12. 23. Secondly, for that their consolation is in heauen, Philip. 3. 20. Thirdly, because it is a liuely image thereof, heere on earth. Fourthly, because it is the true home of the Church. And fifthly, because the true Church is from aboue, chap. 3. 12. and 21. 1. Here is a de∣scription of the true Church militant, which shall get victory ouer her enemies, and raigne on earth, chap. 5. 10. Also such as bee typed out by the El∣ders, and beasts, are continuall actors with the Church in euery estate, as appeareth out of chap. 6. and 14. 15. and 19. And this note, that through∣out this prophecie, that Heauen, in opposition to the earth, is taken for the state of the true Church, as the earth is for the worldly sort. Vers. 4. 24. Elders, type out the whole com∣pany
of the elect people, chapt. 5. 9. Kings and Priests to God, Exod. 19. 6. 1. Pet. 2. 5. being round about him, Psal. 76. 11. the allusion is to 1. Chr. 24. Vers. 5. Lightenings, thunders and voices. An al∣lusion to Exod. 19. 16. for the effects whereof in Moses, see Hebr. 12. 21. and the vse, Exod. 20. 20. these words are repeated in three other places of this prophesie, chap. 8. 5. and 11. 19. and 16. 18. which well considered doe shew, that these signifie Gods iudgements going forth from God, for the Churches safety, vpon her enemies; for heere they are said to come out from the throne, as being for the Churches good, Ier. 25. 30. Ioel 3. 16. and in the other places of this Reuelation, they be named with iudgements, as earthquakes, and haile, and doe come forth onely against the wicked, chap. 16. 18. for lightenings and thunder, see Psalm. 18. 13. 14. for voyce, Psal. 46. 6. His iudgements are swift as lightenings, terrible as thunder, and vnauoidable, also not without fearfull speaking to the conscien∣ces of his enemies, as voyces to make them to tremble. Vers. 6. A sea. Though waters in this booke be put for people, nations, and tongues, chap. 17. 15. yet the word Sea, is not here so to bee vnderstood; wee must take the words, as may agree with the scope of the chapter, and the rest of the circum∣stances setting out the Church, and those things which are behoofefull for it; neither will the mat∣ter, nor that whereto it is compared, admit that exposition. This is a Sea of glasse like vnto Chri∣stal, which be words of praises to set out this sea by:
it is also such a Sea, as on which the godly stand re∣ioycing, and admitteth a mixture of sire, ch. 15. 2. It is also euer with the people of God, they and it neuer separated, so as it cannot be meant the sea properly, nor yet be put, as the word waters be, for multitudes of people of diuers nations; heere in this, as in the other words, is an allusion to the huge vessell called a Sea, 1. King. 7. 23. 2. Chron. 4. 3. the vse whereof was for the Priests to wash their hands and feet, when they went into the Ta∣bernacle, and when they went to the Altar, Exod. 30. 18-21. It is therefore here put for the whole worship of God, being that which the Priests were first to goe vnto, before they came before God, and for that, water is put for doctrine, Esay 55. 1. 2. for Baptisme, 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. for the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 4. for prayer, 1. Sam. 7. 5. By which sanctified means, we are (as it were) washed to draw nigh vnto God, as Dauid said, I will wash my hands in innocency, and so will I goe to thine Altar, Psal. 26. 6. Vers. 6. & 7. Foure Beasts, an allusion to Ezra. 1. 5. and 10. 5. they are types of Ecclesiasticall persons, their place betweene God and the Elders shew it; also by this it may be knowne, that they be leaders of the publike actions of Gods worship, vers. 9. 10. chap. 5. 14. Types of men they are, because they be redeemed from among men by Christs blood, chap. 5. 9. therefore no Angels. They are also said to be redeemed out of euery kindred, tongue, people, and nation, chap. 5. 9. Yea they also doe type out such as liue after the destruction of Rome, reioy∣cing
with Gods people, chap. 19. 4. and there∣fore cannot bee the foure Euangelists: and where doe we finde a man typed out to himselfe in a vi∣sion, as Iohn needes must here see himselfe in a vi∣sion? yea moreouer hee should be made to speake to himselfe, chap. 6. 1. 3. 5. 7, if by these beasts were signified the foure Euangelists; but Iohn heere, vers. 1, is shewed things not present, nor past, but that must bee after the reuealing of this Reuela∣tion. Notes vpon Chap. 5. Vers. 1.—A book. This is this book of this Reue∣lation, for the book in Gods hand, which Christ Ie∣sus tooke of him, vers. 18. is that which is called the Reuelation of Iesus Christ, which God gaue vnto him, chap. 1. 1. Againe, the matter of that and this is one and the same; for the things which fell out vpon the opening of the seuerall seales, are the par∣ticular matters contained in this booke; neither came Iohn to the knowledge of what here is writ∣ten to vs, before this booke was opened, to shew vnto him things to be done afterwards. So as this now written booke, called the Reuelation, hath the full contents of this booke in Gods hand, and nei∣ther more nor lesse, and so both bookes are one and the same. The opening also of the booke and opening of the seales is one, chap. 6. 1, and heere vers. 9, for the seales are the parts of the booke: nei∣ther is there any thing contained in the booke, which is not within the seuen seales, for out of these
come the trumpets, and out of the trumpets the vials, as before is noted. Notes vpon Chap. 6. Vers. 1. Seales are the first plagues vpon the world of heathen, called seales, as certaine and irreuocable iudgements, from Gods determined counsell, to re∣uenge the wrongs of his Church vpon them, and as assurances to the godly to confirme their faith, in the truth of the rest which follow in this pro∣phecie. Or, they may be called Seales, because they imprint Gods displeasure vpō the parties plagued, making certaine their damnation, except they doe repent: Or, for that the things contained vnder the seales were hidden, and the reason of them vn∣knowne, till▪ the Lambe Christ Iesus did open them. For though other did sound the Trumpets, and poure out the vials; yet hee onely opens the seales, as containing the whole booke, which hee onely tooke out of his fathers hand, and was onely found worthie to open the same, chap. 5. 9. Sixe seales are opened in this Chapter, and are so many types of ensuing euils to fall out, after Iohns receiuing of this Reuelation, vpon the hea∣then persecutors of Christs Church. Vers. 2. A type of a preuailing iudgement, theHabac. 3. 8. If these seales be∣gin with Con∣stantine the Emperour, then the first seale is his triumph ouer the heathen Em∣perours conque∣ring to conquer: the second seale the bloudy wars following. 3. the famine. 4 the mixture of all, an allusion to Ezech. 5. a type of peace granted for a space. 6. the furie of the Gothes & Van∣dales: and so af∣ter in the Chap∣ters following, the arising vp of Antichrist, which may per∣haps stand, if truth of storie will go with this order, which I doe leaue to the learned to exa∣mine. Horse here and in the other are an allusion to Zach. 1. 8. and 6. 2. 3, to set out (as it were) the act and carriage thereof by the Horse, which is strong, Iob. 39. 19, swift, Iere. 4. 13, and carelesse of any op∣posite, not turning backe, Iob. 39. 22, without the
commaund of the Rider. White is a colour for tri∣umph and peace, which as in this, so in all the rest, sheweth the qualitie of the plague, to be a destru∣ction quiet, as in peace and triumph without resi∣stance: for if it be marked, a colour is giuen to e∣uery horse, according to the seuerall plagues. The Rider to guide this horse is not named, yet chap. 19. 11, Christ so rideth, and it is sure that the wic∣ked tooke notice of the Lambes wrath, after these iudgements came out, vers. 16. The storie of this time in the latter end of Domitian, and after him would (perhaps) cleer this more to vs. A bow: an in∣strument vsed in warre, Psal. 44. 6, it is put for some meanes, by which God vseth to destroy the wic∣ked, Psal. 7. 12. Lam. 2. 4: but with the bow must be vnderstood Arrowes, Lam. 3. 12, which are called instruments of death, Psal. 7. 13. and by shooting of an arrow Gods heauie iudgement is noted, Psal. 64. 7. A Crowne: noting victorie; the words conquering and to conquer giue the reason there∣of, and are added to this first plague, as the end why God doth punish, to bring men in subiection; which if it will not bee, then other and greater plagues shall follow, (so in Leuit. 26. 18. 24. 28.) as wee may note in euery one of these to bee greater degrees of plagues one after another. Whatsoeuer the plague here is, I cannot be induced to thinke it the power of the preaching of the Gospell, first, because the Gospels power was knowne to all Gods Church, but this not knowne till the seale was opened. Secondly, this is one of the things to bee done after the reuealing of this prophecie,
chap. 4. 1. Thirdly, the Gospel cannot be counted, neither is noted any where, as a plague, in Gods word. Fourthly, because the other types follow∣ing, as also the Trumpets and vials are plagues, therefore it seemeth to mee altogether an vtter mistaking, to make this type to differ in nature from them all; and to make that a plague among the rest, which is in deed and truth the first of all blessings, howsoeuer the wicked make it to them the sauour of death. Fifthly and lastly, this was such a plague, as the faithfull beleeuers need rou∣sing vp, by the first beasts voyce as thunder, to take knowledge of the same. If I may giue my conie∣cture, I suppose it (with learned Iunius) to be the pe∣stilence; first, because the arrow and pestilence are together in Psal. 91. 5. 6. Secondly, it is the iudge∣ment in which God of all other most triumpheth, as being his immediate hand, and acted of him, as in triumph, when such as bee so plagued doe lie dead before him, and hee riding ouer their heads. Thirdly, because of the degrees of these euils, one greater then another; as first pestilence here; the se∣cond, sword, in vers. 4; the third, famine, in vers. 5. 6; the fourth, all these foure great plagues together, vers. 8. Vers. 4. A type of warre: It is plaine and easie, on∣ly note here as before in the other, the colour red, is answerable to the iudgement, bloudy warres. Vers. 5. A type of famine: The horses colour, the ensignes and the voyce giue the explication, and shew what is hereby meant. The voyce in the middest of the foure beasts, is the voyce of Christ,
for he is in the middest of them, chap. 5. 6. Vers. 8. A type of deadly mortalitie. The colour of the horse, the name of the Rider, his power to kill by the sword, doe tell vs fully the meaning of this type; the allusion is to the foure great plagues in Ezech. 14. 21. Vers. 9. 10. 11. A type of the bloudy slaughter of Christian Martyrs calling for vengeance against their cruell persecutors, as Abels bloud did for re∣uenge vpon Caine, Gen. 4. 10; as also shewing Gods iustice ready to auenge the bloud of his Saints vpon the murtherers, so as here also is giuen a rea∣son of the equitie of the great plague in the sixth seale. This is a great plague of God, to bee guil∣tie of innocent bloud, which so loudly crieth in Gods eares, as in iustice he cannot, but as a Lord holy and true, iudge and auenge the same, verse 9. an allusion to Exod. 29. 12, where the bloud of the sacrifice was poured out, at the bottome of the Al∣tar. Christ is our altar, at whose feete, he being now in the highest heauens, these faithfull martyrs haue their bloud shed and poured out, whose persons are as acceptable sacrifices to him; but their bloud call for vengeance, as Abels bloud, to which the allusion is. White robes noteth their iustification, and peace obtained. For their robes are only made white by Christs bloud, cap. 7. 13. The crying loud voyce, and answere thereto, must bee well noted, for they shew the scope and meaning of the type. Vers. 12. 13. 14. A type of the wrath and fearefull vengeance of God comming vpō the wicked world, vers. 17, telleth vs, that all is to expresse the great
day of Gods wrath, which none should be able to endure. A great earthquake: that is, a great change, andEsa. 24. 19. 20. notable alteration of the present state in the world by Gods iudgements vpon the wicked, so it is taken, cap. 16. 18. and elsewhere, Heb. 12. 26. Psalm. 68. 9. because great alterations in high matters, either in the Church or common-weale, cannot be without great stirres, mouing euery man in his place and standing, to tremble, as by an earth-quake▪ The blacknesse of the Sunne, the turning of the Moone into blood, the falling of starres, and the de∣parting away of the heauen, the mouing of mountaines and Ilands, are figuratiue and hyperbolicall kinde of speeches, framed according to the words of the Prophets, Esa. 13. 10. 13. and 50. 3. and 34. 4. Ier. 4. 23. Ezech. 32. 7. 8. Ioel 2. 31. and 3. 15. onely to expresse, as Esay speaketh, in chap. 13. 9. 11. the day of the Lords comming, cruell with wrath and fierce anger, to make a desolation, and to pu∣nish the world for the euils and iniquities therof. The storme and tempest, whereof shall be so boy∣sterous and terrible, as shall make all sorts to be as at their wits end, not knowing what to doe. The 15. 16. 17. verses, with the allusions, shew the sense and scope, and that the words are not further to bee extended. They are not meant of the last iudgement, for this is  of the sixth seale, the seuenth remaineth  these to be opened, and the effects thereof  bee shewed in the trumpets, and after them the vials before
the day of the Lord come. Neither can they bee meant of the decay of the visible Church, for that matter is handled in the opening of the seuenth seale, and the sixe trumpets which bee the parts thereof: also the deed and words of such as felt this plague, in vers. 15. and 16. shew, that it is not to bee vnderstood in any sort of the Church, for the plagued of all sorts acknowledge, this horri∣ble vengeance to bee from him that sits on the throne, and from the wrathfull displeasure of the Lambe, the Churches Sauiour. Notes vpon. Chap. 7. Vers. 1. Foure Angels: These are ministers of indignation, and of the ensuing euils to come vp∣on the world, vpon the opening of the seuenth seale, in chap. 8. which yet were prepared heere in some degree vnder the sixth seale, as the words imply, being ready standing to execute their po∣wer; as also for that they bee named heere before the seuenth seale be opened, that they bee instru∣ments of euill, is plaine in vers. 3. Foure: A number according to the foure cor∣nersIer. 49. 32. of the earth, and the foure windes, noting an vniuersality (Matth. 24. 31.) of the iudgement. Holding the foure winds: Winds properly taken, when they be tempestuous are hurtfull, but mo∣derate blowing is most necessary and profitable: and the restraint of them from blowing, causeth corruption, & so breedeth diseases, and bringeth destruction to the creatures; therfore in this figu∣ratiue
speaking, holding of the winds from blowing, is noted here a plague, which should bee hurtfull to the earth, sea, and trees. Wind: Foure winds are named, because of the parts of the earth from whence they blow, yet in nature all but one, and therefore also hee heere speaketh singularly, that the wind should not blow. Wind is here taken figuratiuely, we cannot vnder∣stand it after the letter, for wee reade not of euer any such plague, and if any such had been, the sea∣led ones could not haue escaped it, being so vni∣uersall, and being so notable a plague, it could not but haue been obserued of some in the world. Therefore by winds, we must conceiue some other thing then wind properly, euen an heauenly in∣spiration, and spirituall breathing of truth; as it is taken in Cant. 4. 18. Ioh. 3. 8. Act. 2. 2. which these are said to hold, by hindering the faithfull and sincere preaching therof. A spirituall plague vpon the earthly Christians, is here to bee vnder∣stood, which now followeth after all the former corporall plagues vpon the Heathen. For the pre∣seruation signified by the sealing in the fore-head is spirituall, & such a preseruation as keepeth thē that are sealed, safe frō the hurt which the earth, sea, and trees were subiect vnto, vers. 3. And this calamity, though prepared vnder the 6. seale, yet hath his force and power felt vnder the seuenth seale; the euents whereof are spirituall plagues, contention, ambition, corruption of doctrine, fearfull Apostasie, and Antichrists getting into his throne, the false prophet deceiuing the world;
all which follow vpon the blowing of the trum∣pets, the proper effects of the seuenth seale, wher∣of these withholders of the wind, are a part, and from whence the other mischiefes ensue, which yet so are spirituall, as there is also corporall ca∣lamities often mixed therewith. Earth: Is the place of the visible Church; and the earthly ones of it, among which the sealed ones are, and therefore need speciall protection. Sea: is the common worship, pure, or impure. Trees: are men, chap. 9. 4. to which vsually men are compared in the Scriptures, Psalm. 1. 3. Esa. 61. 3. Ezra. 47. 7. as the wind and withholding thereof, hath a spirituall interpretation, so must these also. For if they be taken literally, they are not capable of a spirituall plague. Of the Seale: see before in chap. 5. of this preparatiue. Of all the tribes of the children of Israel: As the Is∣raelites were together the visible Church of God, yet but a chosen number the true Israelites indeed, Rom. 9. 8. 27. for all were not Israel, which were of Israell, Rom. 9. 6. neither he a Iew which is one out∣ward, but one inward, Rom. 2. 28. so here by an al∣lusion to them, the Prophet sheweth, that among Christians, and in the visible Church of Christ, and in the ouerspreading of Antichrist, there are only a speciall chosen number, in comparison of world∣ly Christians, a few the true Israelites of God, as they be called, Galath. 6. 16. For an Israelite and Iew, are now common names to Iewes and Israe∣lites by nature, and to Gentiles, Israelites and Iewes by grace. For such as be of the faith of Abraham,
are his children, Galath. 3. 7. and now the Israelites of God, are now Iewes inward, and circumcised in heart, Rom. 2. 29. These heere are not to bee taken for Israelites properly, and naturall Iewes, for the consideration of the time here to bee noted, when this number was taken, will not permit that they should be so vnderstood. Againe, this is a part of the things to be done after Iohns time, chap. 4. 1. Moreouer this number of 12. times 12. is the same with chap. 14. 1. that number of an 144000. which was in Antichrists time; these haue also the com∣mon name of the seruants of God giuen them, in vers. 3. of this chapter, and which sung the new song, in chap. 14. 3. before the throne, and before the beast, and Elders, that is, in the true Christian Church. And what should perswade any man to thinke, that God respected only the Iewes, to seale them, and to let passe all other true and faith∣full Christians, vnder this so great and vniuer∣sall a plague, here foreshewed to be ouer all parts of the earth, from which these sealed ones were to be exempted? Therefore the sealed ones are all that chosen and secret number of true and faithfull seruants of Christ, following him, and redeemed from among men, being the first fruites vnto God, and to the Lambe, (chapt. 14. 4.) preserued in the generall defection and Apostasie of Antichrist, till the light should breake forth againe, and a great multitude without number be added to them, and so make an open profession of Christ, and sincerely worshipping of him, as is foreshewed here in this chap. 7. 9. 15.
Notes vpon Chap. 8. Vers. 2. Seuen trumpets: these are the euents of the opening of the seuenth seale, these bee the se∣cond euils vpon the worldly sort, as the 6. seales were the first. They are called trumpets, as soun∣ding out Gods displeasure to the earthly minded, to awake them; as also to note, that these plagues should not bee without open hostility, a proclai∣ming of open defiance, and prouoking to warre, gathering troopes together, to make assaults, and to encounter one another, as deadly enemies in battell. These seuen trumpets and alarmes, vpon the worldly-minded Christians, shall shake them, and the last sound shall bring down their strength, as at the sound of the seuen trumpets the walles of Iericho fell, Iosh. 6. 20. to which is the allusion. Vers. 3. The Angell. Heere by all probable ar∣guments is the same, that is in chap. 7. 2. there sea∣ling the godly, here praying for their safety; it is an allusion to the ministery of the high Priest vn∣derExod. 30. 1. 7. 8 the Law; noting that at the going forth of wrath, God remembreth mercy, and receiueth by Christ, an attonement for his people. Vers. 5. For the fire of the Altar, it is an allu∣sion to Leuit. 16. 12. 13. and the casting of it to Ezech. 10. 2. 7. a type of Gods wrath. It is heere cast into the earth, among the earthly Christians, whereupon follow voices, &c. of which in chap. 4. Vers. 7. An allusion to the plague, in Exod. 9.
24. Psal. 105. and 18. 13. 14. as waters bee put for the graces of Gods spirit, and holy Scriptures, Psalm. 46. 4. Esa. 12. 5. and 55. 1. and 44. 3. Ier. 2. 13. and 17. 13. Zach. 14. 8. Ioh. 4. 10. 14. and 7. 38. 39. 1. Cor. 36. So haile, of a waterie nature, is cor∣ruption of Scripture, and false doctrine, and may well be called haile. 1. because it is not of pure water, but of a vapour from the earth; so false do∣ctrine cannot arise from the pure fountaine of Scriptures, but as a vapour from earthly minds. Secondly, haile is neither in extremity of heate, nor cold, but betweene both: so false doctrine commonly is hatched in a state of luke-warme∣nesse. Thirdly, it is of droppes of raine con∣gealed, and by staying aboue, and turning in the fall, becommeth round: so false doctrine is of par∣cels of Scriptures abused, turned vp and downe in mans vaine heart, without the heate of Gods spirit, and becommeth hurtful hailestones, being not square and stable as truth, but round, vnsta∣ble, resting grounded sollidly vpon no place of Scripture, but verie easie to bee tost too and fro. Fourthly, because haile is hurtfull to corne and fruit: so is false doctrine hurtfull to them vpon whom it falleth, destroying the graces and fruits of the spirit. Fire mingled with blood: Thus is the heate of contention▪ like fire not without blood-shead. Trees are men, (Luk. 23. 31.) as before is noted. Greene grasse, young and tender plants in religion, weake and fading, as grasse; so weake persons are com∣pared, Esa. 37. 27. This is the first plague, and
step to the generall Apostasie of Antichrist. Vers. 8. An allusion to Exod. 7. 20. 21. by earth before is noted the visible Church; now a moun∣taine is that which is of height out of the earth; so it must be a proud aspiring aboue others, in am∣bitious eminencie, shewing it selfe aloft an the visible Church, wherupon it is called great; which inflameth mens hearts, as fire burning with the heate thereof. For vnlawfull authority aboue o∣thers, both in the getting and maintaining of the same, is not without burning and the fire of con∣tention: men eagerly and hotly pursue their de∣sires therein. Now that here is meant an vnlaw∣full getting vp aboue others, is euident. First, be∣cause this, as well as the former trumpet is a plague. Againe, it is (as it were) a great mountain, not one indeed truly arising out of the earth, as a true mountaine doth. Moreouer it is of an ill ef∣fect, working destructiō, which lawfull authoritie doth not, but as it is abused. Lastly it keepeth not the proper place on the earth, but is cast into the sea, that is, into the ordinary worship of God, and so is where it should not be, vsurping power in spirituall things. The third part: It is vsuall in the Prophets to speake of a third part, Ezech. 5. 11. Zach. 13. 8. 9. So heere Saint Iohn, vers. 7. 10. 11. 12. and cap. 12. 4. and 16. 19. which is to bee taken for a great part. Became blood: that is, deadly corrupted bring∣ing death, as the next verse sheweth, the like phrase is, chap. 16. 3. Vers. 9. Creatures in the sea: are the sort of
Church-men, which exercised about the seruice of God. Ships are the principall and chiefe offices, in and about the publike worship. Of such ships mention is also made, cap. 18. 19. Vers. 10. A great starre: Here is some one mi∣nister of speciall note typed out, yet so, as other declining with him bee heerein also vnderstood. Starres, cap. 1. 20. are Angels of Churches. Heauen is the true Church: Burning as it were a lampe. Such a one was this starre in his fall, not shining with a cleere, gentle, and comfortable light, as a starre; but flaming as a torch, with great heate of spirit, making his falling most apparent. Fountaines and riuers, are the Scriptures and interpretation there∣of. Vers. 11. Wormewood, is a bitter herbe, Prou.Deut. 29. 18. 5. 4. the Lord expresseth a heauie plague by this, Ier. 8. 14. and 9. 15. and 23. 15. And heereby the afflicted Church of God setteth out her affliction and misery, Lam. 3. 15. 19. This starre hath the name from the effect vpon these spirituall waters, as the words of the text it selfe doe shew: and this is the plague, the lord giuing-ouer some to drinke of these bitter waters, to make them die. Vers. 12. A type of great darknesse, for heere smiting of the Sunne, Moone, and starres, is plainly in∣terpreted darkening of them. By Sunne, Moone, and starres, is noted all meanes of spirituall lights in the highest, middle, and lowest degree; all is to aggra∣uate in these speeches, the grosse ignorance, dar∣kening all true knowledge in euery degree. Note heere, that in all these foure there bee de∣grees,
according to the letter, from the lowest to the highest, as first, earth, the Sea, then riuers and fountaines, then Sunne, Moone, and starres, spiritual∣ly, giuing vs the degrees of euill, and corruptions in religion. First, corruption and decay of religi∣on in mens hearts and liues, vers. 7. then in Gods worship, vers. 8. 9. after this the abuse, and corrup∣ting of Scripture, vers. 10. And then lastly great ignorance: for that darknesse had come vpon the lights of truth, noted in this vers. 12. all in course of time, following one vpon another in order, as notable steps and degrees of that generall Aposta∣sie, noted in the blowing of the next trumpet, cap. 9. 1. And as the other were corporall plagues, so these are for the most part, spirituall plagues, ther∣fore need there trumpets to awake men to take notice of them, for spirituall plagues are more hardly taken notice of, then corporall. Vers. 13. A type of godly learned men, among which, some of most speciall note, foreseeing the mischiefes ensuing vpon these former euils, giueth warning. Flying: noteth an exceeding forwadnesse, and earnest endeauour with all speedinesse to doe a thing. Through the middest of heauen, the like phrase is, chap. 14. 6. and 19. 17. which noteth a beeing in the open view and hearing among o∣thers: Thus is (in the middest) taken. Act. 2. 22. Heb. 2. 12. Phil. 2. 15. It may imply some of special estee∣me aboue the rest in the Church, whom God had qualified with excellent gifts, and endued with heauenly wisdome, to fore-warne the true people of God, of the things which should after fall out.
Notes vpon Chap. 9. Ver. 1. A starre: is here a Pastor or Bishop, or great Clergie-man set out, for a starre is an Angell of the Church, chap. 1. 20. yet not to be taken for one man personally, but the generall type of such as be heere vnderstood. Fall: so it is an Apostaticall Churchman. Falling is to be taken in the worst part in this booke, it may bee an allusion to Esai. 14. 12. This falling or great apostasie, grew vp by the for∣mer euils mentioned in the other Chap. as so ma∣ny steps to this, which is the first of the three woes spoken of before. From heauē to the earth: that is, frō the heauenly state of the true Church, to a world∣ly state among earthly Christians. This starre is not that mentioned in chap. 8. 20, for they are vn∣der seueral Trumpets, and are also one before ano∣ther: moreouer that falleth vpon riuers and foun∣taines, this on the earth; that is limited to a third part, this is without limitation; the difference is great in other particulars, to shew they are not one and the same: for if they had, Iohn would not haue said a starre, but that starre; neither would hee haue said I saw, which is euer vpon some thing not men∣tioned before, as may be obserued in all the places where the speech is vsed, chap. 6. 1. 2. 5. 8. 9. 12. chap. 7. 1. 2. 9. chap. 8. 2. 13. and so elsewhere. Key: This is a signe of gouernment, Esai. 22. 22: so this Apostaticall Bishop, obtained to haue po∣wer and authoritie in the earthly Church: but this key is the key of the bottomlesse pit; by this cannot be
meant properly hell, for all the words are figura∣tiue: Starre, Heauen, Earth, Key, and so the rest fol∣lowing, in vers. 2. 3. &c. Againe, this booke being a propheticall historie of things here to be done on earth, wee must needes here finde things done by men, and among men; it were very absurd to take it then for hell it selfe, for it breeds no Locusts, that can come out thence to hurt men heere in this world; neither hath any earthly man power to o∣pen or shut that place. Therefore these words of the bottomlesse pit are added to shew, that the po∣wer which this Apostaticall Churchman hath, is a hellish and a destroying power and iurisdiction, according to his name Apollyon, in the height of this his dominion and rule, vers. 11, and is a mini∣ster of the kingdome of the Diuell and darknes. Vers. 2. The opening of the bottomlesse pit, is the v∣sing of his key and authoritie to cause those ensu∣ing euils to bee, which are of the diuell, and as it were from hell, for the depth of the impious mis∣chiefes thereof, leading to vtter perdition. This starre falling to the earth, hath then his key heere in earth, to note an earthly condition; here is a pit, no∣ting perill and mischiefe within this earth, vnto which this starre hath fallen; and it is bottomlesse, to set out the depth of the hellish policie of this ac∣cursed power, not to bee sounded, nor the bottome thereof to bee found out of men, for Antichristia∣nisme is a mysteria. Smoake: This is of a moist and earthie matter very hurtfull to the eyes, and causing obscuritie, ta∣king away the light, that wee cannot see, which is
the effect of the smoake here; so hereby is meant spiritually, whatsoeuer, as smoake, darkeneth the light of truth, as errors, heresies, inuentions of men, humane traditions, will-worship, superstitious ob∣seruations, Decrees and Canons, inhibiting the cleere shining foorth of the light, and such like. The smoake cannot be the darknes it selfe, but is the cause of it, the words of the text distinguish them. Vers. 3. Locusts: These are, after the starre is fal∣len, and after that his authoritie is obtained, and put in execution. The pit maketh the smoake, and the smoake breedeth these Locusts, who with the starre are vpō the earth, so as they haue their whole dependencie from the starre; which being the apo∣staticall Bishop of Rome, these must needes be his Romane clergie. By Locusts cannot be vnderstood the Saracens; first, for that these Locusts arise vpon the fal of a great Churchman, are vnder his power, and are let out to the earth by him. What Church∣man once in heauen, that is, in the true Church, were euer the Saracens vnder? Againe, these are bred of that ignorance and darknes, which came ouer the light of the Church, in which they were; but not so, the Saracens. Thirdly, these haue no power allowed to kill, but to torment people, and that only the cast-awaies; when the Saracens made horrible slaughters of all sorts. Lastly, these Lo∣custs liuely paint out vnto vs the popish Clergie, by which description is foretold, what they should be, and what now the world haue found them to be, as the particulars doe shew. Vers. 7. First these Locusts are like horses prepa∣red
vnto battell, that is, they goe out with strength, fierce courage, and ready bent to attempt whatso∣euer they shall bee put vnto; such haue been the Romane Clergie, like lustie, fed, strong and fierce horses, ready to rush vpon all, that did but mutter against them and their authoritie. Secondly, on their heads were as it were Crownes of gold: This no∣teth out both their immunities from Kings, (as be∣ing subiects to none, except to their owne king, the Angell of the bottomlesse pit) as also their vsurped authoritie; for Crownes note authority, which they also got, commanding and ruling, euen as KingsBy Crowne some hold the round shauing of the crowne of the head: the anoin∣ting of the head is a crowne. Leuit. 21. 12. for a time; yet their Crownes were but as it were of gold, they were not truly Crownes of gold, that is, their authoritie was but counterfeit, not true and lawfull indeed, onely like to gold, that is, which carried a shew of lawfull authoritie, but in very truth counterfeited and false. Such as was, in the shew therof, so like gold, as the blind world could not then, in the smoakie darknesse of those times, see & rightly iudge of, because they wanted Gods word, the true touchstone to trie gold by. It is here by the way worthie our noting, that the type of the true Church-men in the foure beasts are not crowned (chap. 4.) but these Locusts must domi∣neere. Thirdly, Their faces were as the faces of men: Here is noted their hypocriticall shew of curtesie and humanitie; but they were nothing lesse then they pretended to bee, that is, they made shew to be gentle, louing, full of curtesie by bowing and becking, that by these means and fawning insinua∣tions, they might allure the peoples harts vnto thē.
Vers. 8. Fourthly, They had haire as the haire of women: This noteth their effeminatenes, their lust, and wantonnes in themselues, and withall their carnall allurements to spirituall idolatrie, as wo∣men doe by their haire intice to corporall filthi∣nesse. Fifthly, And their teeth were as the teeth of li∣ons. This sheweth their strong deuouring of their prey. Where they set their teeth, that could not be gotten from them. How they got lands and li∣uings, and preyed vpon the estates of men, the world can witnesse, and the signes, where they set their teeth, yet remaine among vs? They are of a deuouring nature, Deut. 28. 38. 2. Chron. 7. 13. for Locusts are most belly, and therefore insatiable. Sixthly, They had breast-plates of iron: They were ofVers. 9. daring spirits, being hardned as iron in their harts, in their vnmercifull deuourings, and are armed strongly with their kings power, as with a corselet of iron, so as they were without feare of any; and what durst they not doe? and who durst resist them, or offer violence to any of them? for they were all alike, and all armed alike, how differing so euer in themselues. Seuenthly, They had wings, to passe with more speed, and to get vp aloft, the sound whereof was as the sound of chariots of many horses run∣ning to battell: This setteth out the great feare they wrought in al places where they came, for the noise of chariots and horses is terrible, as appeareth 2. King. 7. 6. 7, which made the Syrians leaue al that they had, to the King of Israel and his people; and such effect this their sound wrought in mens harts, to make them to leaue all to them and their king,
for safetie of their soules, as they foolishly and fear∣fully imagined. Eightly, They had tailes like vntoVerse 10. Scorpions, and there were stings in their tailes: Tailes are ascribed to all the Locusts, without distinction, and also to haue stings all of them in their tailes; therefore by tailes cannot be meant any particular sort of them. Tailes sometime are put for the base and contemptible sort, as in Deut. 28. 13. 44. Esai. 9. 15, but then the Head is of one sort, and the Taile vnderstood of another, and not both attributed to the same things, as is here, and in vers. 19. Tailes are the hindermost part and furthest from the sight of those, which behold and look vpon the fore-parts; and therfore as the fore-parts of these Locusts haue been set out, and thereby their properties, so here is noted to vs by Tailes that, whereby they doe play the Scorpions, and sting men vnwitting to them at the first. This is the power they haue, and this is the end of their comming foorth, euen to play the Scorpions with their tailes, (vers. 3.) stinging men therewith, and so grieuously tormenting them, (vers. 5.) as they shall bee thereby weary of their liues, vers. 6. So the plague and mischiefe, which these Locusts bring, is chiefly by their tailes, that is, their last (but worst) act, which is their popish & Antichristian doctrine; for this is common to them all, and may bee called a taile, for the basenes and filthinesse therof. It hath also the nature of a Scor∣pion, for as the Scorpion is first earthy, so is their doctrine, earthly mens inuentions: secondly, poy∣sonfull, so is this doctrine, as poyson infecting their soule, with superstition, will-worship, idolatrie, ly∣ing
equiuocations, deceits and periuries, also with heathenish practises, yea hellish attempts, treche∣ries, treasons, and rebellions. Thirdly, as some doe write, the Scorpions poyson is white; so this An∣tichristian doctrine to the ignorant and besotted people is white, that is, seemeth pure and good, though it bee poyson indeede vnto the soule. Fourthly, the Scorpion when he would strike, tur∣neth himselfe somewhat round before hee can doe it; so this doctrine of the beasts, before it can bee made to bee receiued, must come circularly about, by pretended antiquitie, conceited vniuersalitie, and fained consent, that it might enter more deep∣ly into weake hearts. Lastly, a Scorpion hath a sting which woundeth deadly; but women (as one writeth) sooner then men, whom yet also theyBartho. Angl. lib. 18. cap. 96. greatly hurt, but especially when in the morning the Scorpions come out of their holes: so this An∣tichristian doctrine, deadly woundeth weake wo∣men, who sooner, as Eue, receiue the Serpents false perswasion, then Adam. As now our present daies shew vs by experience, so doth it some vnaduised men, at the first broaching, as it were the morning thereof, till they haue found out y• poyson. To con∣clude, it is a stinging doctrine tormenting the be∣leeuers by an vncertaine hope of saluation, by fire of Purgatorie, by seeking heauen in their owne righteousnes, &c. Ninthly, And their power was to hurt men fiue moneths. The Romish Clergie is to do hurt, this is the end why they are, for they bee a plague of the fifth Trumpet. These Locusts had their time limited fiue moneths. Now this time is
called fiue moneths, by a proportionable speech fitting to the Locusts, which liue the hottest mo∣neth of the yeere; for a little cold either killeth them, or maketh them to lie as dead. Tenthly, They haue a king ouer them. Wherein though they differ from naturall Locusts, Prou. 30. 27, yet doth this agree well with our popish Locusts, who haue (Antichrist) this Angel of the bottomlesse pit ouer them, who as a Monarch and Soueraigne King, maketh lawes, prescribes rules, orders, and ordi∣nances, to be without all exception obserued, vn∣der that great penaltie, euen the perill of mens soules; for he doth and will sit, as God, in the Tem∣ple of God. 2. Thess. 2. Vers. 11. And they haue a king ouer them: This king is the same which before is called the starre, for he is the Angell of the bottomlesse pit: to the starre fallen was giuen the key thereof, the Locusts came out from vnder his authority, his vsing of the key brought them foorth; yea the pronoune de∣monstratiue pointeth out that which was before, for the words are, That Angell, of the bottomlesse pit: now hitherto no mention hath been made of any one hauing to doe with the pit, but the starre. That starres authoritie was for destruction, as the execution of it sheweth, in opening the pit and letting out smoake to cause such darknesse, and there-out such Locusts to come to doe such mis∣chiefe; and therefore may by his authoritie ouer the Locusts be their king, and by the euill thereof be well called Abaddon and Apollyon destroyer. If any stumble at the Angell, chap. 20. 1, who hath the
key of the bottomlesse pit also, and shall thinke (perhaps) that he may be the king here. I answere, that that is a good Angel descending, not as this, falling from heauen: and he commeth to binde vp the Dragon from doing mischiefe; but this king is Abaddon, a bad one indeed, a very destroyer, Apol∣lyon, euen as Apollo, the heathen Diuell of Del∣phos. This starre and king is the Pope of Rome, and none other, in all things they agree. The Bishop of Rome was a starre in heauen, it cannot be denied, but is the starre fallen, as before I haue proued, by his differing (yea contrary) doctrine to Saint Paul, writing to the Church of Rome in his time. This starre is become earthly, so the Pope; this got a key, so the Pope bragges of a key, though he would not haue it to be this key of the bottomlesse pit, as it is indeede: a King also hee will bee; for what Churchman euer wore a Crowne, but he? or euer tooke vpon him to vsurpe authoritie ouer Kings, but he? He is a murtherer of soules, a murtherer of bodies, a destroyer of the Church of Christ, and an ouerthrower of his true worship; for the things (for which the next woe vnder the sixth Trumpet came) noted in vers. 20. 21, arose from this Aposta∣ticall starre, this hellish king, (who hath power to commaund, and to doe what he list) and from his smoakie Locusts. Vers. 13. Heere is the next woe and terrible plague, from Christ, vpon the wicked idolatrous Antichristians. The iust cause of this great woe is set downe in vers. 20. 21. a corporall punishment,
after the spirituall, which was vnder the fifth trum∣pet; and those two verses shew against what kind of persons this sixth plague came out from Christ, for the good of his Church. This plague is the plague of Turcisme, following vpon the Antichri∣stian Apostasie. The words shew this to bee a plague of warre, the armie infinite, euen a Turkish power, as stories tell vs, raised vp to scourge a wic∣ked & idolatrous people, and such as did apostate from the true Church, by the wickednesse of the angell of the bottomlesse pit, and his Locusts. Vers. 14. Loose: Therefore heere is necessarily implyed, that they were at liberty once, but restrai∣ned till now, the word is so to be taken, chap. 20. 7. The story of the Saracens and the Turkes, will shew this first liberty, then the restraint or bin∣ding, and now liberty againe. Foure Angels: not diuels and euill spirits, though (no doubt) di∣uels may be in such instruments, but hereby men are to be vnderstood; for this is a propheticall nar∣ration, of such things as are to bee done heere by men; howsoeuer also diuels may be among them, and in them. Againe, these Angels are heads and chiefetaines of the armie, which were raised vp to fight, and by warre to kill men; therefore these must be iudged to be of the same nature that the armie is of; that by Angels may bee vnderstood men, but such men as are sent out to execute Gods will, whether in good or in euill, is plaine in chap. 14. and 16. Foure: they are said to be, not for such a certaine number, either of chiefe heads, as some would haue them; for no such certaine number can
be found out, or of so many nations, but for that it is a competent number (as in chap. 7. 1. chap. 4. 6.) for all occasions. The great riuer Euphrates: which was once the bounds of the Romane Empire that way, is that famous riuer that did runne nigh the City Babylon, in Chaldea, and here is mentioned, to shew from whence, and from what part of the world this great armie should arise, euen from a∣bout Babylon, and the countries bordering vpon Euphrates; whence they got free scope, in Gods iust iudgement, to destroy a third, that is, a great part of men, in Asia, Africa, and some part of Europe, where God was dishonoured by all manner of im∣pious and vnrighteous dealing, as the verses, 20. and 21. doe shew. Vers. 16. Two hundred thousand thousand, it is almost an innumerable multitude, as such great numbers do imply, cap. 5. 11. Dan. 7. 10. The adding of Iohns hearing the number, is onely to shew that certainly, how incredible soeuer it seems to men, the armie should bee exceeding great. Horsemen: these are onely named, because they are the greatest strength of an armie; (not that the Turke commeth into the field onely with horse∣men, as wee well know) as also to note the swift course of the Turkish power, in their hostile inua∣sions, fierce and vnresistable. Vers. 17. A description of the warlike expedi∣tion of this furious, and (as I may say) infernall host. Horses cannot here bee properly meant in the type, such as wee call horses properly; for there were neuer any of so monstrous a shape as these,
whose head should be Lions, and their tailes like Serpents, with heads at the end. These therefore type out not horses themselues, but by the horses, a part put for the whole, is to be vnderstood the car∣ryage and managing of the whole Turkish armie, and all war-like instruments, and hurtfull meanes, from the head to the taile, from the beginning to the ending. This Turkish power and forces therof, is likened to horses, because of the properties of horses fitting thereunto (of which, in chap. 6. vers. 2. before); they are strong, Iob 39. 19. swift, Ier. 4. 13. carelesse of any opposite, taking pleasure in bat∣tell, not turning backe without the riders com∣mand, Iob 39. 22. And such is the Turkish armie, strong, swift, carelesse of any enemies, yea taking delight in warre, neuer returning without their masters command. The forefront thereof is like the heads of Lions, that is, fearfull and terrible to those whom they come against, and of vndaunt∣able courages, roring vpon the prey before them, which they are ready to deuoure. Fire, smoke, and brimstone, proceeded out of their mouthes; this is called (vers. 19.) their power to kill; so this sheweth to vs their mercilesse rage, as fire; their furie, as smoke; their cruell disposition and readinesse to be inflamed, to make an vtter desolation, as brim∣ston: poured vpon the places where they do come. For by fire, smoke, and brimstone, is noted fearfull destruction, Genes. 19. 24. Iob. 18. 15. Psalm. 18. 8. and 14. The middle of the hostile power differs nothing from the forepart; for such as sit vpon the horses, that is, which be managers of this furious
raging and destroying host, are armed with breast∣plates of fire, of Iacinct, and of brimstone. Iacinct is put for smoke, of which colour it is, omitting the name of smoke, as not so fit for the brest-plate: for it is meet to haue in allegoricall speeches, in euery part, a fit proportion of one thing with another: by naming only (of all the parts of armour) the breast-plate, which is before their breast and heart, it noteth their courage and prepared hearts, infla∣med with rage to destroy all things before them, as with fire and brimstone, that the smoke thereof like Iacinct might ascend vp; as at the ouerthrow of Sodome. So as the fire, smoke, and brimstone, which came out of the horses mouthes, is no other thing, but that desolation, and mercilesse destru∣ction by all warlike meanes, conceiued in the harts and breasts of the Turkish commanders, and ma∣naged by them, to deuoure and consume vp all where they come: of, and among which may the great Ordinance be reckoned, out of which com∣meth forth fire, smoke, and brimstone, (gun-pow∣der being made of salt-peter, coles & brim-stone), which deuouring Artillerie, tooke almost the be∣ginning (as some auouch) with these Turkes; as a means in Gods iustice, to further their hellish rage, in the destruction of men. For of all inuentions for murthering of men, and to make a speedy rid∣dance of mens liues, the like was neuer found out; which instruments of death the Turkes doe vse with a more furious will to kill without mercy, and to get into their hands what places they assault, then any other nation; making them so huge and
great, as is beyond credit to report, such as 70. oxen must draw one of them, and 2000. men at∣tend vpon, as the Turkish history doth shew. Vers. 19. They had power in their tailes, which were like serpents, and had heads, and with them they doe hurt. By tayles, is meant the things that follow after, as tailes, which here are said to haue power in them, which what else may it be, then the autho∣rity and gouernment gotten ouer those places, where this hellish armie hath obtained victorie. It is base, therefore called tailes, for so the word is v∣sed for base and vile, Deut. 28. 13. 44. It is yet not without order, and superiority, so heads are taken, Deut. 28. 13. 44. Esay 9. 14. And lastly, it is tyran∣nicall, and therefore it is said, that with them they hurt. These cannot be the popish clergie, which are vnder the fifth trumpet, noted by the locusts: first, because of the place Euphrates, whence these come, (vers. 14.) farre from Rome. Secondly, for that these are a type of bloody, furious, and mercilesse warriours, appointed to kill and slaughter men, vers. 16-18. Thirdly, these are a corporall plague, to punish Idolaters, and other wicked men, vers. 20. 21. whereas the Romish Clergie are a spiritu∣all plague, and Idolaters, against whom this Tur∣kish power came forth. Notes vpon Chap. 10. Vers. 1. Another mighty Angell: This is a type of Christ comming forth to comfort his Church;
this appeareth to be so, from the place whence he came, by his clothing, crowne, face, feet, which are more glorious then can bee ascribed to any crea∣ture. This comming now of Christ sheweth, how about this time he begun in more open manner to shew his care for his Churches safety. The rain∣bow is here mentioned fitly, after a deluge of im∣piety and miseries, set out in the two former trum∣pets, as a generall destruction to the world. As Noahs flood was once, to shew that such a destru∣ction should no more come vpon the world; for God by Christ was reconciled to his people, who now againe sent them meanes, to recouer them out of that darknesse of Antichristian Apostasie, into which men were plunged, and sure to bee drowned, except the Lord would call them out of the same. Vers. 2. A little booke: The type of holy Scrip∣tures, and words of God. For this is that which Christs Ministers must receiue, and preach vnto the people euery where, to gather them vnto him, vers. 10. 11. Open: to shew that the booke of God should now bee no more hidden, but bee made knowne vnto his people. And he set his right foot vp∣on the sea, and his left foot vpon the earth: Christ here commeth as an opposite to Antichrist, to ouer∣throw his kingdome, who arose out of the sea, cap. 13. 1. and out of the earth, chap. 13. vers. 11. There∣fore Christ sets his feet of brasse on both, to note his inuincible power, treading vpon his enemies, and subduing them, and to take, by this his booke, possession of all places; for now would he raigne,
and take to him the kingdomes of the world, as we may see in chap. 11. 15. in spite of Antichrist and all his power. Vers. 3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a Li∣on roreth: This sheweth how Christ will haue his truth published with a loud voice, and with ter∣ror, as the roring of a Lion. He reuealeth (by this booke) his will, his voice is as the Lions roring, to worke feare; and thus speaking, who can but pro∣phecie, Amos 3. 7. 8? Yea thus roring, sheweth how he commeth with terror against his enemies, for his Churches safety, Esa. 31. 4. for Christ heere is described according to his vertue working in his seruants, whose powerfull speaking wil make seuen thunders vtter their voices. These therfore are cau∣sed by Christs voice, and are effects of it, in that place of Amos, chap. 3. (to which happily may be the allusion, for any other agreeing hereunto, in any sort, I find not) there is a reuealing of his will to his seruants, vers. 7. to which this opened booke answereth: then there is the roring of the Lion, vers. 8. so is there heere. Lastly, vpon that roring there is a prophecying, and heere the voices of thunders, or thunders vttering voices; which type out prophecying, and reuealing of those things written in this booke open in the Angels hand, which was to be receiued, to inable the Prophets to prophecie to peoples, nations, tongues, and Kings, as is said in vers. 11. The number of seuen, answerable to the seuen trumpets is noted, to shew, that now the Lord would begin to send out a plentifull meanes of instruction, to recouer a∣gaine
his people from vnder Antichrist; and the times from thence till now, shew vs, that hee hath so done. This ministery of the Gospell, published by his faithfull seruants, is compared to the voyce of thunder. First, for that it shall bee made to bee heard aboue all voices, as being the loudest, as the degrees of sound of voices set out, cap. 19. 6. shew. No voice of multitudes, no voice of many waters, is so loud as the voice of thunde. As such a voyce was needfull at the giuing of the Law, Exod. 19. to cast downe all humane reason, and to cause men to submit themselues to the Lords will: so was it now, to beat downe mans carnal reason, now pear∣ked vp in the Antichristian state, prescribing rules of religion, and making a meere will-worship of seruice vnto God. Secondly, because of the power of Gods word, being powerfull as thunder, as Iob speakes, (chap. 26. 14.) to strike terror and feare in∣to mens harts: hence Iohn and Iames were Boaner∣ges, sonnes of thunder, Mark. 3. 17. So was Paul to Felix, when he made him to tremble, Act. 24. 26. as mans hart doth at the thunder, Iob 37. 1. Third∣ly, because as the thunder of Gods power is not to be vnderstood, Iob 26. 14: so the power of Gods word passeth all mens vnderstanding, they cannot comprehend the reason of such a mighty and ter∣rifying a power, as thunder, to bee in so weake meanes, in all outward appearance. Vers. 4. Scale vp these things: The Church here is told of seuen thunders, of which we are to take notice, for these are made knowne to vs, but now what they vttered, that is not written; Iohn heard
what was by them deliuered, for that he was about to write, as he receiued a commandement, chap. 1. 19. But here he was forbidden to write, and com∣manded to seale vp these things, that is, not to re∣ueale them. Now why such thunders should bee, and the things vttered by them, not written and made knowne, may be, for that peraduenture, as in Dan. 8. 26. and 12. 9. the things were not now to be done: or for that they were not necessary; or not fit for mans reason to be vttered; as S. Paul spea∣keth of some things reuealed to him in the third heauen. 2. Cor. 12. 4: or to shew that the things vt∣tered, were only to be knowne immediately by the voices of the thunders themselues; God reseruing the opening of mens hearts, and enlightening of mens minds by the word preached, vnto himselfe; euen to make the things vttered, then to bee knowne, when the thundering power of the word was to be sounded out, lest it should be despised: or for that here is set out the secrets of God, Amos 3. 7. and of his kingdome, Matth. 13. which is to be reuealed onely to them, to whom it is giuen to vnderstand the same; for albeit powerfull preach∣ing, and the Preachers be as thunder, euen vnto al, yet the things vttered are sealed vp, except to those, whom God shal please to make them known vnto. Vers. 6. There should be time no longer: that is, there shall be no more delay, or deferring off of time to finish the mysterie foretold by the Pro∣phets; the next verse ioyned to this, plainly giueth this exposition. It is not said, that there shall be no
more time (as if here he spake of the worlds end, as many doe suppose); but time shall be no longer, so speaking, rather of shortening some time, then of a consummation of all time. In the next place it is to be noted, how solemnly he sweareth, which had bin needlesse, if it were to be taken for the end of the world, which was both a knowne truth alrea∣dy, and sufficiently confirmed in the hearts of all Gods people, for whose comfort hee taketh this oath. Thirdly, here is not a word of the last iudge∣ment, but of the finishing the mystery of God, cap. 10. 7. for the fulfilling whereof the time shall no longer be deferred. Fourthly, in the time of the sounding of the seuenth Angell, great and mighty matters must come to passe before the worlds end, as a great part of this booke, from chap. 14. ver. 14. to the end of the prophesie, foresheweth. Vers. 7. The mysterie of God: This mystery is ta∣ken commonly for the day of iudgement, albeit we hardly find the last iudgement day to be called a mystery, though our change and alteration then so suddenly be so called, 1. Cor. 15. 51. But here is spoken of such a mysterie, as hath a beginning, a progresse, and a finishing: yea such a mystery, as by the meanes of this little booke, commeth to be finished. The mentioning of this mysterie is here inserted betweene the Angels bringing forth of this booke, and Iohns receiuing of it, vers. 10. and therefore may seeme not to be vnderstood of the last iudgement. It is taken by some for the conuer∣sion of the Iewes, which is called a mystery, Rom. 11. 25. and may so well be, both for the hidden se∣crecie
thereof, and the vnlikelihood thereof in all mens reason, so obstinate are they. By it may bee vnderstood, all and euery thing concerning Christs Church here vpon earth, of which the Pro∣phets haue spoken, Christ himselfe, and the Apo∣stles taught, and this very propheticall history de∣clareth vnto vs; which Church and state thereof is a mystery from the very beginning, to the per∣fecting vp of the body of Christ, and so called, Ephes. 3. 3. 4. 6. which place well noted, will tell vs, that the calling of the Gentiles is a mystery, and so also the place in the Romans, chap. 11. vers. 21. that the calling of the Iewes againe is a mystery, so as Christ his Church and kingdome is nothing but a mystery in the calling of the Gentiles, and recal∣ling of the Iewes. Vers. 11. Thou must prophecie againe before many people, and nations, and tongues, and Kings: Iohn our Prophet here beareth vpon him the person of all faithfull Preachers of Gods word, sent out by Christ, to preach. For these words cannot bee vn∣derstood to be performed in the very person of Iohn, but of such as should be raised vp by Christ, to prophecie, that is, to preach the holy word of God, To people, nations, tongues, and Kings: Which words shew, that the fallen Starre, chap. 9. 1. that Angell of the bottomlesse pit, (vers. 11.) and false prophet, (chap. 13. 11. 14.) and whore of Babylon, (chap. 17. 3. 15.) had now gotten these vnder his power, and hellish iurisdiction; from vnder which to recouer his owne, such as were ordained to life, Christ Iesus sendeth his seruants, and that only by
preaching to regaine them; the effect and power whereof, wee haue found vpon people, nations, tongues, and Kings, who in Gods mercy haue im∣braced the Gospell, and haue renounced that An∣tichrist the Pope of Rome, with all his vsurped po∣wer, blessed be God. Notes vpon Chap. 11. Vers. 1. Giuen mee a reed: The allusion is from Ezech. 40. 3. That Prophet, liuing in the captiuity of Babylon, after that the Temple and Ierusalem was destroyed, was foretold of the reedifying and building therof againe, by taking measure of all & euery part therof; so now the Church of Christ being in spirituall Babylon at this time (not when Iohn wrote, but when the Lord raised vp now his faithfull teachers, and commanded to measure the Temple), heere is prophecied and foretold how God would restore againe his people, and bring them out of Babylon, in which they were by the fall of the starre, and the power of that Angell of the bottomlesse pit, chap. 9. 1. 11. A reede: It is the truth of Gods word, receiued and learned out of that little book, the holy Scrip∣tures; for before Iohn had eaten it, hee could not measure this Temple, altar, and worshippers, nei∣ther can there be either other rule or line but it, to measure heauenly things by. This Reede here, is also a line, in Ezech. 40. and that line is the faith∣full and Apostolicall preaching of Gods word; so is a line taken (Psalm. 19. 4.) by Saint Pauls expo∣sition,
Rom. 10. 18. It is called a golden Reede, (chap. 21. 15.) vsed about the measuring of the Temple, Altar, worshippers and City of God, ca. 21. 15. which can be nothing else but Gods word, for onely by it know we Gods Church, his wor∣ship and people. It is the onely Canon to walke by, Philip. 3. 15. 16. Galath. 6. 16. by it onely doe we truly know, the length, heighth, and breadth of these spirituall things, as Moses knew by God, his owne prescribed paterne, how to set vp the measure of the Tabernacle, Exod. 25. 9. Like vnto a rod: Rod in Scripture, is a note of soueraignty, which is a scepter, Ester 4. 11. so is Christs word called a rod, Psal. 110. 2. and is his Scepter, Psal. 45. 6. noting that Christ will rule with this Reede, as with a Rod. And measure: This is the vse to which the Reede is to be put; now measuring, in Ezech. 40. & Zach. 1. 16. and in Ierem. 31. 39. sheweth a re-edifying and building of that which was destroyed, in a sure and certaine proportion, Zach. 1. 16. where the stretching out of a line, and building, are put for one; and vpon the hauing of a measuring line, to goe to measure Ierusalem, the Lord doth pro∣mise that Ierusalem shall be inhabited, Zach. 2. 1. 2. 4. So here is prophecied, that the true Church and people of God, captiuated in spirituall Baby∣lon, shall certainly be restored to their liberty. The Temple of God: Heere is not meant the Iewes Temple, now destroyed before this time, but here is set out the true Christian Church, allu∣ding to the Temple of the Iewes, the place wherin
the Lord is worshipped, cap. 7. 15. Into that place, where the Altar was in the Iewish Temple, came onely the Priests to doe their seruice, and to wor∣ship God, Luk. 1. 9. Now all true Christians are the Lords Priests, chap. 1. 6. and his Temple, 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6. Ephes. 2. The Altar typeth out the worship of God, a part for the whole; for so it is taken for the worship exhibited there, 1. Cor. 10. 18. Matth. 5. 23. 24. This cannot type out Christ, for this is to bee measured as well as the Temple, by the Reed. Now in that Iohn hath the Reed giuen to measure the Temple, Altar, and them that worship therein, it is to fore-tell that God would raise vp Iohns, that is, faithfull Prea∣chers, endued with knowledge of the heauenly truth of Gods word; to measure, that is, to de∣scribe and set out thereby, as by the only true rule, the true Church of Christ, his true worship, and his sincere worshippers therein, whom the Lord tooke care of & sealed, (ch. 7.) and here measureth out for his owne peculiar people from all other. Vers. 2. The Court: Esay 1. 12. This is the place, into which the multitude came to pray in the time of the Law; this is the place without the Temple, Luk. 1. 10. and Ezech. 44. 19. This is that which is called the great Court, 2. Chron. 4. 9. where Salomon and all the people were, 2. Chro. 6. 13. called Salomons porch, Act. 3. 11. and 5. 12. and the Temple, Matth. 21. 12. In this were the buyers and sellers, which were cast out by Christ. Hereby is typed out the visible Church of com∣mon Christians, such as bore the name of Christi∣ans,
but were cast out as excommunicated of God, and not measured; the Lord would not take it for his owne Church, it was none of his building, the Reed of his word squared it not out, neither were the seruants of God to esteeme of it, by measuring to bring it into any holy account with (the Tem∣ple) the true Church. Giuen to the Gentiles: An allusion to the Babylo∣nians treading downe the holy Citie for a certaine time, or to the place of Daniel, concerning Antio∣chus Epiphanes, Dan. 7. 21. Gentiles are such Chri∣stians, which become as Gentiles. Here cannot bee meant Gentiles properly: but as by Iewes and Ie∣rusalem the holy Citie, are vnderstood true faith∣full Christians and the Church of Christ: so by the out-Court, Babylon, and Gentiles, false Chri∣stians or Antichristians. These Gentiles are not the persecuting Heathen, for Iohn speaketh here of things to come to passe after his time, chap. 4. 1, and after the fall of the starre, chap. 9. 1. Yea he spea∣keth of such Gentiles, as heere haue the out-court giuen them, and such as liue the whole time of the beast, for he shall continue 42 moneths a blasphe∣mous Enemie, and bloudie aduersarie to Gods Church, chap. 13. 5: and these Gentiles, as here we see, shall so long tread the holy Citie vnder foote. These Gentiles are therefore the worldly sort of Christians, mentioned in chap. 13. 5, following the beast, and reioycing at the killing of Christs ser∣uants, as here is noted, vers. 9, being angrie at the successe of the Gospell. The word is in vers. 18, tran∣slated Nations, but better Gentiles, for the word is
in both places one. These then bee the Papists, (as the Beast is the Pope and Papacy) which are called Gentiles, by an allusion to the state of Gods ChurchRibera the Je∣suite expoun∣deth these of An∣tichrist and his armie in his Comment▪ on this place. vnder the Law, in which the Lords people were called Iewes, and all other Gentiles, which were not Gods people; also for that they are like Gentiles in leading (like Babylonians) Gods people into Capti∣uitie; in treading vnder foote (as wicked Antiochus did and his companie) the holy Citie certaine yeeres, so these the true Church for a certaine time; and because in their seruice, worship, and other their abominable waies they be as the Gentiles, of whom S. Paul speaketh, 1. Cor. 10. 20, and such are these Antichristian Gentiles, chap. 9. 20. Fourtie and two moneths: Of the times in this Reuelation, see before in this book, 4. part, chap. 5, Consideration 7. This number is one & the same with 1260 daies, for so many moneths are somany daies, and so these 1260 daies make the number of the moneths. An allusion vnto Antiochus in Da∣niel so long treading downe Ierusalem, Dan. 7. 25. Vers. 3. Two witnesses: These be not Enoch and Eliah, (see this Popish opinion ouerthrowne by our most learned Soueraigne in his Highnesse Apol. pag. 62. 72) but the true Preachers of Gods word sent to preach throughout the kingdome of Anti∣christ; for as he had power ouer kindreds, tongues and nations (chap. 13. 7, and 17. 3. 15.) which took part with him, (vers. 9.) so to thē must these preach, chap. 10. 11, and 14. 6.) to regaine Christs owne from among them. Here is set down the execution of the cōmandement giuen in the former cap. vers.
11. Two, is a certaine number put for an vncer∣taine, so in 1. King. 17. 12, and is here an allusion to Zachary and Haggai the Prophets, prophecying when God raised vp Iehosus and Zorobabel, retur∣ning with the Iewes to Ierusalem from Babylon, to comfort and encourage the people in the Lords worke, as also to set them forward to the same: or Two, because of the fewnesse of such faithfull Tea∣chers at the first; or Two, because two witnesses are a competent number to iustifie a truth, Deut. 17. 6. Therefore the Lord sends two, Moses and Aaron to bring Israel out of Egypt; and Christ sends his Disciples out by two and by two, Mark. 6. 7. Here cannot bee meant properly two; for how could peoples, kindreds, tongues and nations see their bodies? By two then are all those, which God rai∣sed vp to preach in all the Popes iurisdiction and dominion, as farre as the authoritie of that great Citie vnder Antichrist extended. Vers. 4. Two Oliue trees, and the two Candlestickes: An allusion to Zach. 4. 3. 11. 14: Oliue trees affoord oyle out of themselues; oyle vnder the Law was to bee brought of the people to the Priests for the continuing of the lights, Exod. 27. 20: but now here is not oyle, but Oliue trees themselues, which haue oile (by Gods blessing) in themselues; to shew vnto vs, in this extraordinary time, the Lords gi∣uing of the graces of his Spirit supernaturally: for Oyle is put for the holy Spirit and the gifts there∣of, Psal. 45. 7, and 89. 20. Act. 10. 38. Oliue trees shew, how the Lord furnisheth these his Prophets and Teachers, not by the helpe of others, but by his
owne hand, to be full of his spirit and graces ther∣of, to cause light in the Temple of God to be euer shining, in the darknesse of the Antichristian state. In Zachary are but two branches emptying golden oyle out of themselues, chap. 4. 12; but heere bee whole trees; so much greater grace the Lord gi∣ueth to restore the puritie of Religion, and his true worship from vnder Antichrist and spirituall Ba∣bylon, then for the reedifying the Temple, and set∣ting vp of the worship at Ierusalem, after the Iewes returne from Babylon. They be also Candlestickes, a name giuen to Churches, chap. 1. 20, Ministers are candles, Matth. 5. 25, and not Candlestickes, yet here so called, because they were as Candle∣stickes bearing foorth the light; for in the begin∣ning of reformation, the Candlestickes were to be found out by the lights; where the Lord raised vp faithfull Preachers, there was both the candles and the Candlesticke, by them were the Churches to bee discouered. So then they were Candlestickes by bearing foorth the light, as also that by them the Churches were to bee found, and the ioyning vnto them was an adioyning of mens selues vnto the Churches of God. God of the earth: Thus the Lord himselfe is inti∣tuled, Zach. 4. 14. and 6. 5, who is the God of hea∣uen, and the God of the earth, Genes. 24. 3. And this title was most fit for the Churches comfort, to shew, that howsoeuer Antichrist swaied, and the world wondred after him on earth, chap. 13. 3: yet the Church should know, that God ruled the whole earth.
Vers. 5. Fire proceeded out of their mouth: In this and the next verse is an allusion vnto two Pro∣phets, Moses and Elias; the one bringing the chil∣dren of Israel out of bondage in Egypt, the other restoring the Law, and destroying the idolatrous priests; by both came great plagues & vengeance vpon their enemies. The words are not to bee ex∣pounded after the letter, for such wonders were neuer done by any against Antichrist; but hereby is to bee vnderstood the great power of the Mini∣strie, the contempt whereof the Lord would no more suffer, then hee did the contempt of the mi∣nistrie of those former Prophets; but that venge∣ance should be taken of the aduersaries of these, as was before of their enemies, as we may see Exod. 7 20. 2. King. 1. 10. Vers. 7. The beast: Who this is, is before shew∣ed in chap. 4.—of this preparatiue, and is one and the same with the beast in chap. 13. 1; an allusion to Dan. 7. 21. Vers. 8. Great Citie: Chap. 17. 18. and 18. 2. 16. Hereby is meant not onely a Citie within walles, but the dominion thereof; this is Rome with her rule and dominion. It is called Babylon for capti∣uating Gods people; Sodoma, for her filthinesse, Genes. 19. and Ezech. 16. 49, vexing the righteous hearts of holy. Lots; and Egypt for her crueltie, and desire to keepe in bondage Gods people; such is the whole kingdome of the Papists. Where also our Lord was crucified: These words shew, that by great Citie, must be meant not a wal∣led place, but the whole dominion thereof, for else
Christ could not be said to be crucified there: this also sheweth plainly what Citie here is to bee vn∣derstood, euen Rome: for vnder Pontius Pilate the Romane Deputie was Christ our Lord (for a Ro∣mane quarrel pretended by Scribes and Pharisies, Ioh. 19. 12.) crucified; so here Rome is made guilty of the bloud of Christ, and of the bloud of all his seruants and Saints slaine vpon the earth, chap. 18. 24. Vers. 9. Three daies and a halfe: The space and time of the Antichristian crueltie from the begin∣ning of his open murthering of Christs seruants, vnto the time that God raised vp such, as he would take speciall protection of, to deliuer them from the bloudy hands of their enemies: for here the beast warreth and ouercommeth the Saints, which is, when hee hath gotten his great authoritie ouer people, nations and tongues. as this verse and cap. 13. 3. 7 doe shew. These Prophets lie dead till the spirit of life enter into them, that is, till God raise vp other to defend the truth; which is here called the space of three daies and a halfe, the whole time of bloudy persecution, till there came to be a vi∣sible separation from Antichrist. For these three daies and a halfe, is not the time of their prophecy∣ing; but of the furious rage of the beast, and the triumph of his subiects ouer the seruants of Christ, vntill God had stirred vp other like them, ascen∣ding vp in the sight of their enemies, making a vi∣sible separation from them, the words in the text from verse 7 to the 12, shew this. Vers. 12. And they ascended vp to heauen in a
cloud: That is, now these Prophets raised vp were by Gods power exempted from the power of Anti∣christ. Now the Lord erecteth vp a visible Church, his true seruice and worship; but yet as in a cloud. This word is vsed either to set out the Prophets honour, or their imperfect knowledge (as yet) of those things which belonged to the heauenly con∣gregation and Church of Christ. The words can∣not be vnderstood literally of the same parties be∣fore murthered, such a bodily rising is not till the last day; and for the ascending of their soules, the wicked could not see. Iohn speaketh of things to be done, chap. 4. 1. Heauen is heere the true Church, their ascending is Gods raising vp of others, (en∣dued with the same spirit of life frō God) to bring his people from Babylon by preaching the truth, as wee see in chap. 14. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11; which the ene∣mies tooke notice of with rage and sorrow, as the stories in Luthers time, and after doe shew. Vers. 13. The effect of this their ascending, euen a great Earthquake: That is, a great commotion; for vpon a more cleere light of the truth, and some visible separation made by the Lords seruants, there was great stirres, troubles and warres, as hi∣stories tell vs. And the tenth part of the Citie fell: By the Citie (as before) is meant the popish do∣minion, which now (by the preaching of the Gos∣pell, and the great troubles that rose thereabout) came to be diminished, and there was a decay of the same Antichristian iurisdiction; God begun now to ruine that state, which had so tyrannically ruled ouer the world. In a tenth part: That is, a
great part. This number is mentioned to shew, wherein this raine was, to wit, in the meanes of their Churches maintenance. Because a tenth was appointed vnder the Law for the Priests seruice, which these claime for their seruice; or for that there is the number of Ten giuing their power to that Beast, (chap. 17. 12.) of which a tenth now fell away. Slaine 7000: A destruction of the aduersa∣ries, a certain number for the vncertain, (as 1. King. 19. 18. Rom. 11. 4.) the Spirit being pleased to vse this number more often then any other, euen 37 times in this booke. The words are in the origi∣nall, were slaine the names of men 7000: It may bee for that this destructiō lighted vpon men of note, losing their dignities, honours, and reuenewes, by which they did before liue. Vers. 19. The Temple: Here is that which was called the Oracle, the most holy place, where the Arke was put, (1. King. 6. 19. & 8. 6.) into the which none went but the high Priest once a yeere. This noteth to vs, that at this time the mysteries of sal∣uation (shut vp before by the Antichristian dark∣nes) should now bee made knowne and become common to all Gods people, as they were before to the learned ecclesiasticall persons. And therfore the 24 Elders (without mētioning the foure beasts) a type of all faithfull Christians, doe praise God, (ver. 16.) as being now to be in riched with heauen∣ly graces, to know the holy things of God hid be∣fore. The allusion is to the Temple at Ierusalem. The Court, that is, the mixt multitude had now possessed a long time; the Prophets and faithfull
witnesses had gotten the reed to measure the Temple; some of the Clergie-men God had raised vp to teach the people: the most holy place, that is, the more secret and hidden things of God, were little knowne; only as it were the high Priest was admitted to enter therein, that is, a few of chosen instruments made acquainted therewith, and had wisedome to see those heauenly mysteries; but now at this time were they to be laid open, and made knowne vnto all. Of Lightening, Voices, and Thunders, see chap. 4. 5. Earthquake and Haile, set out Gods terrible iudgements vnresistable, Esay 29. 6. Exod. 9. 25. Esay 28. 2. Haile, in chap. 16. 21. is called a plague. Notes vpon. Chap. 12. Vers. 1. A woman: The true Church of Christ is here set out by a woman; so also compa∣red to a chast virgin, 2. Cor. 11. 2. espoused, Cant. 1. 8. and 4. 1. 10. to a bride, chap. 19. 7. and 21. 9. to a married wife, Esa. 54. 1. 5. 6. to a widow, Lam. 1. 1. The Church heere described, is not the Iewish Church, the last words in the 17. verse shew; nor the Church in the Apostles times, when they were on the earth, though the same in succession. For Iohn telleth vs of things to be done after his transe in Patmos; and the things heere prophecied of, bring vs downe to the times long after the Apo∣stles dayes; to the times of the bloody rage of the Heathen Emperours, and the time of Antichrist, when the out-Court was giuen to the Gentiles,
and when the two Prophets prophecied in sack∣cloth, with whose doctrine this woman was fed in the wildernesse, vers. 6. where the time of her be∣ing there, and the Prophets prophecying, chap. 11. 2. are all one; neither is here the Church trium∣phant figured: for this woman is in trauell with paine, vers. 2. the Dragon makes her flie, she nee∣deth foode, and is nourished in the wildernesse, vers. 6. 14. which cannot agree to the Church tri∣umphant, but to the Church militant, of which only Iohn indeed here speaketh. Clothed: The Church is set out here most glo∣riously, in chap. 19. 8, there is she clothed after an∣other fashion, though the Church bee found na∣ked, yet the Lord puts vpon her clothing, Ezech. 16. and that most heauenly and glorious, as the particulars following doe shew. Her crowne of 12. starres sheweth her to haue obtained victory, and by what meanes, euen by her faithfull Pastors, which are called starres, chap. 1. 20. the number of twelue, is noted with a relation to the twelue A∣postles, whose doctrine they did teach. The Sunne and Moone are lights, Genes. 1. 16. Esa. 60. 19. Ier. 31. 35. So are the starres to giue light, Gen. 1. 17. Ier. 31. 35. these are vpon her head, the Moone vnder her feet; and the Sunne, as in the middest betweene the starres and the Moone, is her clo∣thing; all to set out her heauenly illumination, or glorious state shining bright, in euery part en∣lightened, and bringing light as the Sunne, and treading likewise in lightsome pathes, in the very night of ignorance to others. By these shee raign∣eth,
and is crowned as a conquerour, hereby shee sheweth light to others, and doth tread downe al changeable and transitorie things of this life. Vers. 2. And she being with child: What shee was with child with, is noted in vers. 5. for what she brought forth that was she with child with, in this place. This cannot be meant of the Churches generall trauell in this place, to bring forth peo∣ple vnto Christ; for of these had she been fruitfull before, as vers. 17. sheweth; yea to an exceeding encrease almost all the world ouer, at this time, before the tyrannicall rage of the Heathen Emperours, & their last furie against the Church, of which he speaketh in this Chapter: but of some more speciall and particular child-birth, which now she was readie to bring forth, as the words taken from a woman in trauell shew; for shee is heere set downe to be in the very act of bringing forth. Cried: that is, made ardent prayers, as cries in the eares of the Lord. Trauelled in birth: That is, vsed all meanes for the effecting her desire, to haue that child which shee trauelled with: and pained to be deliuered: that is, feeling the want of this child, through cruell persecutions which she suffered, did in anguish of spirit seeke to bring forth. Vers. 3. A great red Dragon: This is expoun∣ded to be the old Serpent, the Diuell, and Satan, vers. 9. by an allusion to Genes. 3; but yet so vnder∣standing him, as hereby bee vnderstood also the speciall Ministers of his furie, the Heathen perse∣cuting Emperours of Rome; for this prophecie
is of things to be done here on earth by men; al∣so the woman noteth out a company here in this world; and so must the Dragon note out in like sort such here, as be her aduersaries. Againe, the description of this Dragon cannot agree proper∣ly to the diuell himselfe, but is indeed the Armes of Rome when it was Heathen, and had Heathen Emperours ruling there, who worshipped the di∣uell, 1. Cor. 10. 20. and were led by him, as all the wicked be, Ephes, 2. 2. he persecuting Christians for the very name of Christ, so as the battell was directly against Christ Iesus himselfe, as the bat∣tell set out vers. 7. and 8. doe shew. No maruell then that they bee called the Dragon, that is, the Diuell, who is put for his instruments, chap. 2. 10. as here his instruments for him. The Heathen Em∣perours are called a Dragon, as Pharaoh King of Egypt was, Ezech. 29. 3. Red, for the bloodinesse of those Emperours: great; for that they raigned in that great City, which raigned ouer the Kings of the earth, cap. 17. 18. and so the greatest in the world for rule and dominion. All set out by one Dragon, for that they all worshipped in their Ido∣latry, the diuell; one in their cruell nature against Christians; one in place succeeding another; one in gouernment, and therfore are all but one head in chap. 17. 10. Seuen heads, expounded chap. 17. 9. 10. Ten hornes, chap. 17. 12. And seuen crownes vp∣on his heads, for that Rome had the soueraigne au∣thority, and that there were seuen kindes of go∣uernment. For the heads either note out the Ci∣ty with seuen hils, or the seuen kinds of their king∣ly
gouernments. Vers. 4. His taile: Dragons haue more force in their tailes, then in their iawes, so this figuratiue speech is kept, fitting to the nature of a Dragon, for the signification of taile, and third part, see cap. 9. 18. 19. starres of heauen; that is, Ministers of the Church; and cast them downe to the earth; an allusi∣on to Dan. 8. 10. that is, were made to leaue their standing, and to forsake their profession, by the rage of persecution, and weaknesse of their owne hearts, and to become earthly, like other men of the earth. The Dragon stood before the woman, &c. This no∣teth how the diuell, in, and by these Heathen Ro∣mane Emperours diligently obserueth the Chur∣ches trauell; (as Pharaoh, the Dragon of Egypt, Exod. 1. to which is the allusion) that albeit her conceiuing, her trauell, and bringing forth, could not be preuented by him, yet he hoped to deuoure that which should be borne. Vers. 5. A man child: As Moses was borne in spite of Pharaoh, to deliuer Gods people out of E∣gypt; so now the Christian Church got a deliue∣rer, a man-child; the like phrase in Esa. 66. 7. This commonly is vnderstood of Christ; but we must remember, that Iohn writeth in this place a pro∣pheticall history of that, which the Christian Church obtained for her outward helpe and suc∣cour; and likewise of things to come to passe after his time, and not of any common thing before al∣ready done. Further must bee obserued, that no∣thing, whose originall Iohn saw, could be past, but
was to come. But if this birth was either of Christ personally, or of Christ mystically, that is, of the begetting of him in mens hearts, by the preaching of the Gospell, then it was of that which was al∣ready, and not of that which was to come to passe afterwards. Moreouer, we do not say the Church trauelleth with Christ to bring him forth, as a son to her, which is her head and Soueraigne. S. Paul indeed saith, Galath. 4. 19. that he (the Apo∣stle) trauelled of the Galatians; but it is not said that he trauelled of Christ, but of them; to forme Christ in them by his ministery: and yet vnad∣uisedly is this place fetched in hither, to make the Church to trauell of Christ. This man-child then is some potent Prince, as the next words follow∣ing declare, who was to rule ouer all nations, with great power for the Churches good, whose sonne indeed he was. Who was to rule all nations, &c. An allusion to Psalm. 2. 9. truly and most properly spoken of Christ; and therefore the reader heere most com∣monly conceiueth Christ to be meant, not consi∣dering that Christ bestoweth this his power vpon his chosen seruants, chap. 2. 27. And her child was caught vp vnto God, and to his throne: These words (which seeme to some, to make much to take this child for Christ) doe shew by circumstances well obserued, that it cannot be meant of him. For Iohn saw Christ Iesus before, chap. 1. and in the middest of the throne, chap. 5; hee had written in his Gospell of Christs ascension, and hee then had seene no wonder. Yea the so soone taking of him
vp from the woman to God immediately vpon his birth, without mentioning of his deeds, will not admit the meaning to be of Christ, of whose birth and ascension Iohn speaketh not one word in his prophecie: the very words themselues are against it. Her sonne: Christ is no where called the Churches sonne, and so caught vp, an vnfit word to set out Christs ascension, who is said to goe vp Act. 1. 9. and to ascend, as doing it of his owne power, and not as we, to be caught vp, 1. Thes. 4. 17. Last∣ly, heere is no naming of heauen, (vsually mentio∣ned where Christs ascension is spoken of) but of God and his throne, which as they are in heauen, whereinto Christ ascended; so are they in this Re∣uelation to bee vnderstood to bee heere in Gods Church, where, as in heauen, he setteth his throne, chap. 4. 2. Caught vp vnto God and his throne, may thus be interpreted, that now one of the sonnes of the Church, a Christian professing Christ, was maruellously preserued of God from the rage of Heathen tyrants, and exalted vnto Gods throne, that is, to be next the Lord in the highest place in his Church, the Prophets in the former chapter, chap. 11. 12. ascended vp to heauen; but this child is taken vp to the throne in heauen, to rule next vnder God himselfe, ouer the nations, that is, the enemies of the Church, with a rod of iron. Vers. 6. The reason of her flying is vers. 13. an allusion to the Israelites in the wildernesse, who escaped from Pharaoh that Dragon. They should feed her; this relatiue they, hath relation to some persons before, and that is to the two Prophets,
chap. 11. 3. their time and hers agree, where daies are put for yeeres. Vers. 7. In heauen: That is, in the Church; for in heauen properly taken, there could bee no such fighting; neither was the diuell and his angels seene of Iohn in heauen, from whence they were cast out from the worlds beginning. This warre followed vpon the birth of this child in the Church, that is, where Christ was publikely pro∣fessed; Michael, an allusion to Dan. 10. 13. and 12. 1. He is Iesus Christ, for hee is our Prince, as Daniel calleth him, chap. 10. 21. The child (as is before said) cannot be Christ; for heere wee see is Christ fighting for his Church. But as the Dragon (the diuell) is not to be taken properly and alone for himselfe, but by him must be vnderstood the chiefe aduersaries of the Church, the Romane Empire; and so by his angels, such as bee instruments at their command to fight against Christ: so by Mi∣chael, must be so vnderstood Christ, as also such as be principal helpes for the Church; and by his An∣gels, those that are with them in defence of religi∣on, and enemies to the Dragon. Vers. 8. Neither was their place any more in hea∣uen: They did now beare no more sway in the Church. Vers. 9. The reason is here giuen, because the Dragon and his angels were cast out; so as it was not want of will, but want of power to withstand Michael, and his seruants, that their place was no more in heauen. Vers. 12. Earth and sea: The Dragon was cast
from heauen; therefore earth and sea are here na∣med, as places of his walking now without re∣straint: heauen is the true Church; Earth and sea, the bounds out of the true Church. For earth and sea cannot be taken properly, for the godly are in∣habiters thereof, as well as the wicked, and they are the workmanship of God: and now the hea∣uen being taken for the Church, out of which the diuell is now said to be cast, the earth and sea must be the places not accounted the true Church; but the places where the diuell hath power, and bea∣reth sway. The inhabiters of the earth and sea, are in opposition to the dwellers in heauen, which are true professors of Christ, and are his Church, of an heauenly conuersation; and therefore those which are not of the true Church, are said to bee of the earth and sea, being meere naturall men, sauoring nothing of heauenly things; whether they be Gen∣tiles, or such as onely in name are Christians, but indeed and truth, earthly Antichristians. Vers. 14. Two wings of a great Eagle: Hereby is meant means of protection to escape perill, Exod. 19. 4. and by a great Eagle, some mighty personage is designed, Ezech. 17. 3. 7. Wildernesse: this is op∣posed to popularity, visibility, and outward glory; being a note of a retyred, hidden and poore con∣dition, like to the state of the teachers clothed in sackcloth, chap. 11, 3. Into her place: so called, be∣cause it was prepared for her of God. vers. 6. A time, and times, and halfe a time: an allusion to Dan. 7. 25. this is all one with 1260. daies, vers. 6. for here, and there, is spoken of one and the same per∣son,
and of one and the same time. From the face of the Serpent: This sheweth, that shee was hidden in the wildernesse, and by her flight lost her visibi∣lity before her enemies, as the phrase sheweth, 1. Sam. 17. 24. and 19. 10. Vers. 15. The Churches hidden condition made the Dragon, that hee could not now set vp∣on her as before by persecution; therefore now he casteth out of his mouth water as a flood, this is his wrath spoken of, vers. 12. Waters: are peoples, mul∣titudes, nations and tongues, chap. 17. 15. A floud of water, is the sudden out-breaking of such, and their violence mercilesly destroying all beforeEsa. 59. 19. Amos 8. 8. them, as a floud; so as howsoeuer this was inten∣ded against the Church, yet the inhabiters of the earth felt the woe thereof. This deuou∣ring people is said to be cast out of his mouth, as be∣ing by his diuellish suggestion, words, and counsel from him forcibly sent forth. Vers. 16. And the earth helped the woman: The Churches preseruation by the earth, vnto the which the diuell was cast, vers. 9. 12. his owne bounds a safety to Gods people. Opened her mouth and swallowed: an allusion to Numb. 16. 32. to shew, that there was a speedie riddance of this floud, within Satans owne dominion. Vers. 17. And went to make warre with the rem∣nant of her seede: What this seed is, is shewed in the next words, euen faithfull and obedient Chri∣stians; which plainly declare that the woman was the Christian Church, whose children haue the testimonie of Iesus Christ. The remnant of her
seede: Thus are all the godly called, in which a re∣spect is had to that her man-child, vers. 5. the principall of her children at this time, the rest a remnant. Or here is a respect to the whole Church hidden, and these remnant such of the godly, as were seene heere and there, as a remnant left of her, against whom Satan, in, and by his instru∣ments exercised his power. Whether this warre bee some other, or that which is mentioned in ca. 13. 7. I leaue to the godly learned to iudge of. It may seeme not to bee any warre of the Heathen against Christ and his Church, as the warre be∣tween Michael and the Dragon was; but the warre of the beast, chap. 11. 7. & 13. 7. for this war is af∣ter the woman is fled into the wildernesse, and so in the time of the two Prophets prophecying; in which time is the beast warring against, not the Church in name, (for he and his Gentiles had the out-court, chap. 11. 2. and so would bee reputed to bee of the Church themselues), but against those that heere are called the remnant of her seed, and in chap. 13. 7. the Saints, such as bee true Christians, heere described; and so in chap. 14. 12. whom the beast and his Gentiles, the coun∣terfeit Christians, doe hate as deadly, as the Dra∣gon did Christ and his Church. It may be noted, that it is said, hee went to make warre: as now ta∣king this warre in hand, not against those that pro∣fessed themselues Christians, which were at this present euery where at hand, to haue set vpon them, as hee did by Heathen tyrants, till hee was cast from Heauen; but against faithfull and true
Christians (of which there was now no visible as∣sembly) wheresoeuer he could finde them, by the beast his substitute; of which in the next chapter, where is shewed how hee went heere to warre a∣gainst these the remnant, and against the Saints therein, vers. 7. Notes vpon Chap. 13. Vers. 1. And I stood vpon the sand of the sea: These words shew, that Iohn was in a conuenient place, and there stood prepared, to behold what was next to bee shewed vnto him. To stand on the sea sand, is to bee in a fit place, to see what com∣meth out of the sea; places are giuen (as a conue∣nient helpe) to see what is to be seene, chap. 17. 1. 3. and 21. 10. A beast rise out of the sea: Allusion to Dan. 7. 3. Sea and earth, are in the former chapter the places granted to the diuell to walke in, (being cast out of heauen, chap. 12. 9. 12.) from whence this beast, and the other, vers. 11. doe arise, both from Sa∣tan; though sea bee giuen to this, and earth to the other, which in Daniel are made the originall to the selfe same foure beasts. For in Dan. 7. they are said to arise out of the sea, vers. 3. and the same are said to arise also out of the earth, vers. 17. By which wee may see, one and the same may in one re∣spect be said to come out of the sea, and in ano∣ther respect to arise out of the earth; so it is in this place, keeping the allusion to Daniell.
A beast: A state and kingdome is so called, Dan. 7. and 8: what state I take this to be is largely before shewed. Rise vp: As by the helpe of others, so not without his owne endeuour, hee is not said to be raised, but to rise vp; for this beast sought su∣premacie with might and maine. Out of the sea: This beast is the same that is mentioned, chap. 11. 7. and 17. 8, ascending out of the bottomlesse pit, as bred and brought vp of the diuell in a most se∣cret and hidden manner, as out of a bottomlesse pit, past finding out his first conception: but now here ariseth out of the sea, which is also called a depth, Genes. 1. 1. Psal. 104. 6. Antichristianisme is a deep mystery in the conception, and in the grow∣ing, both in depths; the one as in the bottomlesse pit, the other as in the deepe of the sea, not seene, nor discerned by mens eyes or vnderstanding: of the interpretation of the sea, see chap. 8. 9. Or per∣haps by sea, here may bee meant a troubled or vn∣quiet condition of people and nations, great com∣motions and alterations, out of which, as out of a troubled sea, the Popedome arose; so the foure beasts in Dan. chap. 7. 2. 3. Hauing seuen heads, and ten hornes, as the Dragon had, chap. 12. 3: for the seate and dignitie is Romane, being hills & Kings, chap. 17. 9. And vpon his hornes ten Crownes: Here is a difference from the Dragon; the Crownes were vpon his heads; but here on the hornes, which are Kings at one houre with this state, chap. 17. 11: but not any with the Dragon. And vpon his headsOf blasphemie see Mr. Shel∣don of Anti∣christs miracles. pag. 171. the name of blasphemy. The Dragon had no crownes on his hornes, but crownes on his heads; this hath
crowns on his hornes, and blasphemy on his heads, wherein he is worse then the Dragon; which shew∣eth, that the Dragon made Rome great in Soue∣raigntie, but this beast maketh it notable in impie∣tie.Marke this ye Romanists. So much worse is the Popedom, then the Hea∣then Empire. Vers. 2. The beast, a very monster like diuers ter∣rible beasts, of which also I haue before deliuered my minde. Hee is the Dragons substitute in three things, in power, seate, and great authoritie. Ver. 3. One of his heads (as it were) wounded to death: This was by warre, as vers. 14 telleth vs. Though by heads be vnderstood hills or kings, chap. 17. 9; yet here cannot be vnderstood by this head a hill, but a king or kingly gouernment, for this is capable of a wound; which wound was giuen by the barba∣rous Nations, Gothes, Vandals and Hunnes, by whom Rome came almost to vtter destruction, af∣ter the rising of this beast out of the sea, which had receiued this wound, as some thinke, in the sixth head, that is the Caesars; others in the seuenth head, the Popes, or Bishops of Rome, and it may seeme to be that head, which maketh this beast to be that which it is; for in verse 14 this beast him∣selfe is said to haue receiued this deadly wound, and in this verse it is called his deadly wound; as being so vpon the head, as the wound thereof was (as it were) deadly to ye whole state, that is, to this beast himselfe, which is also called the eighth, and one of the seuen, chap. 17. 11. Was healed: That is, got his power, seate and great authoritie in the view of the world, which seemed before to be vt∣terly
lost; for so the words following may streng∣then this exposition: first, by the worlds wondring at so rare a change and recouerie. Secondly, at their worshipping of the Dragon for his power, seate, and great authoritie giuen to the beast. And thirdly, by their worshipping of the beast, whom they now saw so powerfull after the healing of the wound. All the world: An vniuersall apostasie to Antichristianisme. Wondred: That is, followed wondring, so as they gaue themselues ouer wholly to bee led thereby, partly with admiration, saying, Who is like the beast? and partly with feare, say∣ing, Who is able to warre with him? vers. 4. Vers. 5. Allusion to Dan. 7. 25. Here is the beasts power, his blasphemie, his deedes and dominion, set downe from this verse to the end of vers. 8, well declaring, why this state is compared to a beast, and such a monstrous one too, as hath been noted, of which this and the verses following are a Com∣mentarie. Vers. 11. Here is the beast (the Pope) set out; or as the Papists themselues confesse, that very Anti∣christ, though they would haue him to be another then the Pope. But I haue before shewed at large, that this is that Antichrist the Pope. Another in sort from the former, as is onely the head from the body, and the king from his kingdome; but in chap. 17. 11, they are made both one, and do both come out of Satans dominion, chap. 12. 12. This beast is the vpholder of the glorie and honour of the other, as is cleere from verses 14. 15. 16. 17. They practice together, chap. 16. 13, they dye together,
chap. 19. 20; for this second beast, called also the false Prophet, and the first beast are so linked toge∣ther, that indeede they doe make but one whole compleat and monarchical gouernment, to which the pontificians themselues agree: See Viega in Apo. cap. 13. sect. 6. Comming vp out of the earth: He had an earthly orignall by earthly men, and earthly meanes to rule vpon the earth: for as hee fell from heauen, chap. 9. 1, to the earth, so hee ruleth ouer it, as the next verse sheweth. Two hornes: Hornes are power, Psal. 18. Dan. 8. Two hornes then are a double po∣wer, ouer the sea, and ouer the earth, for the Dra∣gon had power so, chap. 12. 12, which hee gaue to the first beast, vers. 2. and this beast tooke all that power, which the first receiued; for the Dragon, that beast, and this here, are all as one, chap. 16. 13: for the first beast receiueth power, seate, and great authoritie from the Dragon, and this speaketh as the Dragon. The Diuell and the Pope that Anti∣christ are so like, as father and sonne may be; for his lusts doth he, Ioh. 8, as may bee seene by com∣paring the Pope with the Diuell. The Diuell. The Pope. This fell from heauen, vers. 6. So did this Antichrist the Pope, chap. 9. 1. This contradicteth Gods word, Gen. 3. So hee contradicteth the place in Heb. 13. 4. doing as in 1. Timothie, 4. 3.
This maketh mē to speak lyes, 1. King. 22. 22. So he, as their Legenda aurea sheweth, and their notorious equiuocatiōs. This putteth into mens hearts, to play the traytors against their Lord and ma∣ster, Ioh. 13. 2. So the Pope maketh mē to play the traitors a∣gainst their Soueraigns, to poyson, and to mur∣ther them, as by experi∣ence we know. This will professe Christ, Mar. 3. 11. and yet not obey his lawes. So the Pope will pro∣fesse Christ, but not liue after his lawes; as his v∣surped power, wicked lawes, idolatrous seruice, and bloudy and impious practises proclaime to the world. This will corrupt the Scriptures, Matth. 4. 6. So doth hee, as may appeare in the vulgar Latin Bibles almost in a hundred places, as some particularlie haue no∣ted. This setteth his seate where Gods Church is, cap. 2. 13. persecuteth, putteth into prison, and murthereth the godly, chap. 2. 10. 13. chap. 12. 17. So the Pope, that man of sinne, he sitteth in the Temple of God, 2. Thess. 2. 4. and persecuteth, im∣prisoneth, and putteth to death the seruants of Christ, as this book fore∣telleth, chap. 11. 7. & 13. 5. and histories shew.
This will not be put to si∣lence, nor cease his wicked courses, though conuinced by Scripture, Mat. 4. 5. 8. but by the powerfull com∣mand of Christ, Matth. 4. 10. 11. No more will y• Pope, though the word plainly condemneth his impie∣tie, false doctrine, hea∣thenish worship, & hel∣lish practises to vphold his state; till the power∣ful commaund of Christ perforce constraine him to bee packing, as this prophecie foresheweth vnto vs. This would be worship∣ped as God, Mat. 4. 9. and hath obtained worship, cap. 13. 4. So the Pope sits, as God, 2. Thess. 2. 4. and hath gotten to bee wor∣shipped, chap. 13. 4. so as Kings and Emperours haue kissed his toe, a wor∣ship neuer assumed of a∣ny in the Christiā world before. This challengeth to bee the disposen of all the king∣domes of the earth, Mat. 4. 9. Luk. 4. 6. So this sonne of Sa∣tan hath this Dragons mouth, challenging all the kingdomes of the world to be his right, to giue them to whom hee will: Bellar. lib. 5. cap. 8. de pont. Rom. And thus wee see, how like the Diuell the Pope is; as in these, so in many other points, which only for breuitie sake I omit to set downe.
Vers. 12. Exerciseth all the power of the former beast: His power was the Dragons power, vers. 2. What therefore the Dragon had, the first beast ob∣tained, and this putteth in execution; so as this beast acteth and doth all, whatsoeuer the other could doe, and so as much as the Dragon did be∣fore. And full like are the Popes to the Heathen Emperours. Heathen Emperours. Romane Popes. These aspired to Empe∣riall dignity through pride, and did rule as tyrants, though all were not alike wicked. These haue gottē their high place by vsurpatiō, proudly domineering o∣uer the Lords heritage, and ruling as Tyrants, though not all euer alike wicked. These subdued kingdoms, and ruled ouer people, na∣tions and tongues. These brought vnder their yoke of bondage, kindreds, tongues, and nations, vers. 7. These placed and dis∣placed, set vp and pulled downe whom they pleased, according to their lusts. These also placed and displaced, as they listed, Kings and Emperours; the world knoweth it in Phocas, Pipine, & others. These could endure no opposites, but forced all to obey vpon losse of libertie, or paine of death. These could neuer en∣dure contradiction, nor opposition, but haue for∣ced men to obedience vpon losse of libertie,
and by putting some to death, as heere is fore∣told, vers. 12. 17. 15. and as stories doe record. These suppressed (as much as they could) the preaching of the Gospell, and vpheld their Idols. These, all know, haue to the vtmost hindred the preaching of Gods word, and maintained their idolatrie. These persecuted and murthered Christians most mercilesly. These haue done the like, and still endeuour to doe, eagerly pursuing their hellish quarrell a∣gainst the professors of Christs Gospell. These (for the most part) would hardly bee appeased in any sort toward Christi∣ans, though some dealt now and then fauourably. These haue euer shew∣ed a deadlie hatred a∣gainst Gods people, and would not bee pacified, neither stay their bloudy furie at any time, further then either for feare they durst not follow their desires, or for want of power could not effect what they purposed. Thus we see also, how the Heathen Tyrants and these tyrannicall Popes agree in one, as led by the Diuell their father vnto all mischiefes against the Church of Christ. But as the one sort are vtterly perished from among men, so shall the other in
time, and their destruction hasteneth. Now when Lord! how long Lord, holy and true! doest thou not iudge and auenge our bloud on them, that dwell vpon the earth? chap. 6. 10. Before him▪ That is, as I conceiue it, in the chiefe seate of this his dominion, and now Popely Em∣pire. For the face of a state and dominion (which this beast setteth out) is that place, where all the lawes and decrees are made, and from whence they come foorth into all parts of that dominion, as from Babylon, and Susan, the chiefe of these Em∣perials, and so from Rome in this. And we doe see that Antichrist the Pope his acts and exercise of his authoritie and power is at Rome, which is (as it were) before and in the face of his Popedome. And causeth the earth: He came out of the earth, that is, out of such an earth, as hee can cause to worship him; euen the false and counterfeit Church, and those that dwell therein, of whom is spoken vers. 8. there it is said, that they worship him; here shewed by whom they are brought vnto it. To worship the first beast: This beast is all for that other beast, as is euident in all the words following; which shew∣eth that this beasts honour stood in aduancing the honour of the other to the vtmost. Which there∣fore cannot be the Heathen Romane Empire, but the Popedome, which the Antichrist the Pope see∣keth by all meanes to vphold, as his glorie and kingdome, which was, as the words shew, after his wound receiued and healed, of which in vers. 3. Vers. 13. Here is shewed how hee caused wor∣ship to the beast, and honour thereby to himselfe,
by playing the part of a seducer, and false prophet, as he is called, chap. 16. 13. and 19. 0. These won∣ders are no true miracles; for by  bee deceiued the earth, vers. 14. and they are called, chap. 18. 23. sorceries, and by Saint Paul, lying wonders, the working of Satan, 2. Thes. 2. 9. 10. Hee maketh fire come downe: An instance of one miracle or won∣der for all. This instance is giuen before any other, for that fire comming from heauen, was a miracu∣lous act of God for confirmation of his true wor∣ship, and of such as were true worshippers of him, Leuit. 9. 24. 1. King. 18. 38. 2. Chron. 7. 1. 2. King. 1. 10. 12. and therefore the diuell makes his vice∣gerent to doe this, to make men beleeue hee is not inferiour to the Prophets, and that he hath power in the heauens. Howsoeuer the words may bee ta∣ken figuratiuely, for the lightening of excommu∣nication; yet heere it shall not bee amisse to take them after the letter, for here is mention of won∣ders and miracles; and Saint Paul foretelleth that Antichrist by the diuell shall doe miracles, 2. Thes. 2. Saint Iohn also telleth vs in this prophecie, of sorceries, chap. 18. 23. Yea Papists doe bragge of their miracles to this day; and wee doe reade of their fained miracles, and that also in this kind of wonders, done by fire, whereof Eglinus giueth par∣ticular instances from stories, in his commentarie vpon this place, and so some other; see Master Shel∣don, that zealous conuert, his suruey of Popes my∣racles, cap. 10. pag. 229. and. 163. Vers. 14. Saying, that they should make an Image: Heere is shewed whereto the miracles of this false
prophet tended. With his miracles hee teacheth cursed doctrine, to make an Image to the beast. This cannot be properly vnderstood of an Image or picture, as we commonly take the word Image; for this is an Image, which the inhabitants of the earth must make; this is then no caruers or ingra∣uers worke: such an Image it must bee, as should liue and speake, and cause men to bee put to death that would not worship it. I haue before said of this somewhat, in the third chapter, of this prepa∣ratiue. The Beast, vers. 1. is the Popedome, this o∣ther beast is the Pope and head in this Popedome, to which, by false doctrine and miracles hee ob∣taineth of them that dwell on the earth, an Image to be made, not an Image of him; for that beast be∣ing aliue, and cured of the wound receiued, and this beast being in his presence, ver. 12. it was need∣lesse to make an Image of him, whom all the world so beheld and followed after, vers. 3. but an Image to him, that is, some representation of high state to vphold this Popedome: which Image all should worship, in honour of the Popedome, hauing po∣wer to make and ordaine lawes by the Popes au∣thority, (for he must giue life and speech thereun∣to, else it is to be a dumbe Idoll, and may neither moue nor speake without him, as the next verse sheweth) to all this new Roman state. Let here the wise and learned iudge of this Image, that are ac∣quainted with the stories of the Popes, and Ro∣mish Church. First, The Pope had not power to make it of himselfe, but hee must get others to make it. Secondly, hee must cause it to bee made,
not by force, but by sorceries, and deceitfull mira∣cles. Thirdly, this hee chiefly sought to bring to passe, as without which he could doe nothing, and this by his wonders, and by his words, as the text sheweth. Fourthly, hee obtained it at the hands of those earthly Christians. Fifthly, being made, it receiueth life and speech from him that could not make it, and they that made it, had yet no po∣wer to make it breathe, or speake at all. Sixthly, this Image he vpheld, & the worship and honour thereof with all his might, causing it to speake, and to make as many as would not worship it, to be slaine. Seuenthly. This the faithfull oppose and preuaile against, chap. 15. 2. and 20. 4. which the wicked worldlings are ouercome with, and so pe∣rish vnder Gods horrible plagues, cap. 14. 9-11. Vers. 15. Caused as many as would not worship the Image of the beast, should be slaine: An allusion to Nabuchadnezzars tyrannie, Dan. 3. 6. 20. That which before was said to be the Image to the beast, (because it was for the honour of that state to vp∣hold it, without which it could not haue been con∣tinued) is here said to be the Image of the beast; for that the Popedome now by the making of it, and the power thereof was (as it were) represented to all, adored and worshipped, as Idolaters doe the Image of their God. Vers. 16. The Pope hauing gotten this Image made, and thereby established strongly his Pope∣dome, now hee vsurpeth authority ouer all, and brandeth them for his owne, as being their Lord and master: for it is said, that now hee causeth all
both small and great, rich and poore, free and bond that is, all sorts, of all orders and degrees, from the Emperour to the pesant, (so large and ample a do∣minion hath he gotten) to receiue a marke; which was by this beast, or his instruments put vpon them, and they made as his subiects to receiue, for to distinguish them from others, and to be known to belong vnto (the beast) the Popes kingdome. A marke: the word is taken for a carued or a grauen worke, Act. 17. 29. but cannot so bee here, for the Popes subiects receiue no visible or corporall im∣printed marke vpon them. This marke is called the marke of the beast, chap. 16. 2. that is, the marke of the Popes, and Antichrists dominion, that Ro∣mish state; it is also called the marke of his name, chap. 14. 11. so that this marke is such a thing, as maketh him that receiueth it, to bee one of that body and state, for it is the marke of the beast. And the same person also thereby is caused to carrie the name of that beast and state vpon him, for it is the marke of his name. So then this marke doth make him truly the Popes, in name & subiection; it is (wee may see from the text) a marke of the whole state; a marke bearing the name of that state; a marke so necessary, and so generally fit for all, as the Pope causeth all sorts to receiue it; a marke which Christs flocke escapeth, chap. 15. 2. and refuseth to receiue. chap. 20. 4; a marke which who so willingly and wittingly receiueth, and not casteth off, shall perish, ca. 14. 11. Now this being a marke of the whole state, and a marke of the name thereof; it is necessary before wee can know
the marke, to know the beast and his name first. The beast is not this second beast, in vers. 11. which is the very Antichrist; but is the other first beast, vers. 1. which is the Romane state vnder the Pope, as is already declared: therefore this character is not the marke of the person of Antichrist, the second beast; but of his kingdome and state, the first beast: neither therefore is the name a mans name, but the name of this state; and not a name giuen of o∣ther men, as they shall please to call it, but what Antichrist the Pope, this second beast, shall like and allow of; yea and so allow of, as they that re∣fuse it, or the character of it, or the number of it, shall bee restrained of their liberty in common trafficke, vers. 16. Now then this beasts name, the Romish Antichristian dominion vnder the Pope, is (as they would haue it called and esteemed) the Apostolike Church, or the Romane Catholie Church.The Beasts name. This is the name of the Popedome, which the Pope (that Antichrist) of Rome would haue giuen to it, and chalengeth as proper to his hierarchicall iurisdiction, and to his emperiall state; thus I sup∣pose we haue the name. Now the marke of that Romane Catholike Church, or the marke of the name of the beast, of which all sorts are capable, small and great, rich and poore, free and bond; and therefore a common marke to any of them, which is Saint Peters keyes, branching out it selfe in eueryThe Beasts marke. maine Antichristian doctrine, euery counterfeit sacrament, idolatrous practice, superstitious in∣uention, canon, or decree, contrary to Gods word, made and confirmed by the generall consent and
authority of that see, called Romane Catholicke Church; and receiued by that onely authority: for in al and euery of these is a marke of the name and authority of that beast, which his subiects doe re∣ceiue in their right hand, when they doe practice the same in subiection to that state; and in their fore∣heads, when they doe make open profession there∣of. Let none except against this, for that here ma∣ny particulars are noted, when in text a marke sin∣gularly is mentioned; for they are all but bran∣ches of Peters keyes, that one marke of that abso∣lute and vnlimited power of the beast, and euery one a marke of that state, with these circumstan∣ces concurring; that is, that it be a generall tenent of that Church; that it be contrary to Gods word; that it bee imposed by the authority of that Ro∣mish Church; that in subiection to the same it bee receiued, professed, and practised. Hee that recei∣ueth so any one of the particulars, following with∣all the beast, and worshipping his Image; (for that is to be presupposed before he receiue the marke, as being imposed by Antichrist (as we here see) on∣ly on such), he hath the marke of his name, is held by him one of his; and so wee also account euery such a one to be a Papist, Romanist, or Romane Catholike. Vers. 17. No man might buy or sell: (Rome, or Romane dition, a trading place; all there, for mo∣ney) saue hee that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. The marke of his name is first, as being indeed the chiefe, and onely (as it were), maketh the proper subiects of that
kingdome; therefore it is said, that hee causeth them to receiue the marke, but not so the name and number (though such as haue not these cannot trafficke amongst them) and they that receiue the marke are threatened with damnation, chap. 14. 9. 11. as being of those, whose names are not written in the Lambes booke of life, vers. 8. Yo haue the name of the beast, is to be accounted a Romane Ca∣tholicke, after the name of the beast, as before is noted; which name is better esteemed then the name of a Christian, a louer of the Gospell, a child of God, a beleeuer in Christ: take all the names in Gods booke, and reiect this one, there is no buy∣ing or selling with them; and this is a second ranke of Papists. The number of his name: Heere is the third sort of the Popes subiects, some haue the marke, some but the name, and not the marke; o∣ther some onely the number of the name, and so seeme to bee the vtmost ranke or sort of Antichri∣stians. This number of the beasts name, is such a number, as the Pope liketh well of; for whosoeuer hath this number, is admitted to be among them, as well as they that haue the marke, and name: of all which he is the inuentor, hee causeth the Image to be made, he inuenteth the marke, hee giueth the name, and findeth out a number for the name of the beast; which at least such as haue not the marke or name must needes haue, or else not to come where hee hath to doe. What this number is, is shewed in the next verse, for the number of the beast, and the number of his name is all one; as we see before the marke of the beast, and the marke of
the name of the beast to be all one, cap. 14. 11. cap. 16. 2. both which (to wit, the marke and number) the faithfull escape from, chap. 15. 2. Therefore as in the Image and marke is impiety, so also in the number, though the perill be not so great to haue the number, as to worship the beast and his Image and to receiue his marke; because these onely are seuerely threatened with dreadfull vengeance, chap. 14. 9. 10. 11. and not the other; yet is there euill enough in it, seeing it is part of the praises of the faithfull, that they get victory ouer the num∣ber of the beasts name, chap. 15. 2. and that the Pope can like them so well, that haue this num∣ber; which therefore must also needs bee a thing knowne to him, and that which withall maketh those openly known to him that haue it, that they thereby may be admitted to buy and sell, as well as they that haue receiued the marke of the beast, and his name. Vers. 17. Heere is wisedome: that is, heauenly wisedome, for this is the wisedome which the ho∣ly spirit commendeth, and here is required to the vnfolding of this point in hand. Let him that hath vnderstanding count: Here men of vnderstanding and endued with wisedome, are stirred vp to rec∣kon and count the number of the beast, or the number of his name, which is all one. The beast is the first beast, and therfore the number of the beast is the number of that Romane state vnder the Pope, or the number of the name of that state, that is, the number of the Romane Catholicke Church, if that may be the name of the beast. For it is the
number of a man: that is, which a man may num∣ber, comming within the vnderstanding of a man endued with wisedome; for these words may bee put for encouraging of him that hath vnderstan∣ding, to fall to make the count: or, it is the number of a man, that is, of mans deuising, euen of Anti∣christs, as also the Image and marke, and name of the beast were; and therefore there is great subtilty in the number, which needeth a wise man, and of vnderstanding to count and reckon the number. This being the exposition, the words are brought in as a reason why it should be said, that here is wis∣dome, and why a man of vnderstanding is needful∣ly required to count the number; euen because of Antichrist, that man of sinne, his subtelty, in deui∣sing of the beasts number, or his names number, and this number of the beast, being the subtilly∣inuented number of a man, is sixe hundred three∣score and sixe; which being a bare propounded number to a state, and to the name thereof, with∣out mentioning of times, persons, or things, which by this might be numbred, (as to say 666. dayes, monethes, or yeeres, as wee see in all the numbers noted, in chap. 11. 3. and 9. 5. and chap. 12. 6. and chap. 20. 3; Or to say 666. persons, as in cap. 5. 11. and  16; Or to say 666. things, as in chap. 21. 14. 17.) declareth a full deepe mysterie heerein, from all other numbers mentioned in this prophecie. Diuers are the minds of men concerning this number of the beast, which the subiects of Anti∣christ must haue, as Iohn prophetically foretels in the former verse; and heere plainly telleth vs what
that number is, if we had wisedome to count▪ it. There are to be read many and sundry interpre∣tations; and of these, one saith, it is a military num∣ber of the ancient Romane legion; so Doctor Si∣monds, in his pisgah. euang. pag. 120. 121. Another, that it is the profound wisedome of the canon law, in the booke of Decretals, as Iunius vpon this place: a third maketh it the time of Antichrist, as Eglinus commenting on this verse; when one should take vpon him, first the title of vniuersal Bishop, which is the stile of Antichrist; and this was Boniface the third, as our learned Soueraigne sheweth in his Highnesse Apologie, pag. 93. which title was fully setled vpon the Pope, about the yere 666. A fourth, that hereby is pointed out a name in the old Testa∣ment, setting out by it, Antichrist; for by a poste∣rity of 666. we may finde Esdr. 2. 13. Adonikam, that is, a Lord standing vp; so Master Broughton, in both his short, and now also in his last and large Commentarie on this booke. A fifth, that it is a name of number, the letters, of which it is made be∣ing numerall, containing in them this number, 666. Of this opinion are the most, yet differ euen to an astonishment in me. Some will haue an He∣brew name, as Romagnosh, (Romanus, a Hee Pope) or Romiiith, (Romana, perhaps a shee Pope): some a Greeke name, and this one word, as , or two words, as , or three words, as , and such like, of which are many other in commentaries, both of Prote∣stants and Papists to bee found, especially of the Iesuites, Ribera and Bla. Viegas. Some a Latine name,
as Diclux, generalis dei vicarius in terris, all which words must containe by the letters of number in them 666. as for plainnesse sake, thus: 200. 200. λ 30. 5. 10.   . 20. 40. 6. 1. 20. τ 300. . 20. 1. 70. 40. τ 300. 20. 1. 40. 20. 9. 50. 10. 5. λ 30. λ 3▪ 1. λ 30. 70. 6. 10. 10. 8. 0.   8. λ 30. 300. 400. 50. ς 200. 20.   200. 10.     70. 10. 1.   10. 20.     ς 200. .     α 1. α 1. 666 666 666 666     666   And so of all the rest, which men haue suppo∣sed to be the beasts name, whether the names bee Hebrew, Greeke, or Latine, they containe letters expressing this number of 666. A sixth, that this number setteth out the comely proportion of the whole frame, structure and building of that beast the Popedome, the kingdome of that Antichrist, (the man of sinne his inuention) in all the parts well agreeing and compacted together, each part answering and fitly agreeing, as this number doth within it selfe. Now which of all these come nighest vnto the truth of this point, and the meaning of the holy Ghost, I dare not set downe, all of them being the opinions of learned men; onely I will freely tel, to which of them all I encline, with my reasons, leauing euery man to Gods guiding to like, as hee shall be enlightened, by well weighing some cer∣taine obseruations out of the text, most necessary to be prefixed, and for euery one to be acquainted
with, for guiding of his iudgement, either to finde out some other thing, or rightly to discerne of these opinions already set downe. The obseruati∣ons are thse▪ I. That the number is the number of the   of the second; and therefore is  number of the state, and nor of the person ruling  state. II. That the second beast greatly , for it getteth them that beare it▪ freedome to buy and sell within that state, and exem em from the displeasure of Antichrist. III. That this must be a knowne num∣ber, both to Antichrist to discerne his fauourites by, to giue them leaue to buy and sell, (as well as they that haue the marke and name), as also to Christs seruants, who must striue against it, and get also the victory ouer it, cap. 15. 2. IV. That the beasts name, and the number of his name are plain∣ly distinguished. So that, albeit the beasts number, and the number of his name bee one, yet not so his name, and the number of his name; for the text cleerly maketh the marke, tee name, and the number to differ; and therfore it is said the marke, or the name, or the number of the name; so as some may haue the marke of his name; some his name, and some onely the number of his name, as before is noted. V. That there is great wisedome required here. VI. That this wisedome and vnderstanding stand  counting the number of the beast, which is 666. and not in finding the first beast his name, or number, which many shall haue, vers. 17. nor in finding a mans name, that is (as some expound it) Antichrists name, and so this number of 666. in
that name; for first, neither in this propheci, nor elsewhere in the Scriptures, hath Antichrist any proper name giuen vnto him. Secondly▪ the text here saith, that the number of the beast is the num∣ber of a man; it saith not either a mans name, or a number in his name. Thirdly, by seeking out a mans name, viz. Antichrists name; such leaue the name of the first beast and state, of which onely the text speaketh, and seeke the name of the second beast, of which there is not one word in the text. Fourthly and lastly, wee may as well seeke a marke in his name, as a number in it, for that it is as well said, the marke of his name, chap. 14. 11. as heere in vers. 17. the number of his name▪ now none haue en∣deauoured to seeke a marke in his name, and yet the ground is as good for it, as to seeke a number in his name. These are the obseruations to bee ta∣ken for our direction in this point of wisedome; all, and euery of which, the words of the text, in the 17, and 18. verses do cleerly affoord vnto vs with∣out any wresting. Now touching mine owne mind, it leadeth me to approue of the sixth and last opinion set downe; not of any loue of noeltie (though it be the opi∣nion of one man, and the first that I read of, so ta∣king this place, albeit (perhaps) occasioned from Iunius his words vpon this verse), but for that it is (in my poore apprehensi  likeliest truth. It may bee, vpon these forr  obseruations laid downe, that other shall concei  what else; yet let none bee offended, that of all these, I make my choyce for the present of this vpon probable
coniectures. The whole body and frame of Anti∣christs kingdome is set out in this number 666. the beasts number. This number runneth all on sixe euery way; sixe in vnities, in tens, and in hun∣dreds. Now this number of sixe, hath it perfection (of which Iunius hath written vpon this verse at large) and is the first perfect number, of which Bo∣niface the eighth speaketh, in the preface of the sixth booke of the Decretals; which booke hee calleth the sixth, because it is a perfect number, and for that being added to the fiue other before, maketh the perfect volume, containing (as he saith) a perfect plat∣forme for the gouernment of affaires, and a perfect dis∣cipline, for the rule of good manners. Thus we see the Popes high account of this number of sixe, of which this number of 666. consisteth, notably set∣ting out this Antichristian kingdome. I. This number is a number of perfection, so that state in their account, a most perfect structure and buil∣ding. II. This number, though it differ in de∣grees from 6. to 60. and from 60. to 600. yet it holdeth in the perfect vnity, keeping the number of sixe; so that state hath degrees one greater then another, as much as 60. is a greater number then 6. and 600. greater then 60; yet keepe they all the number of sixe, that is, as they call it, their vnitie both to their perfect head, their Pope, who, as they hold, cannot erre, and to his perfect decrees, with∣out any sects or schismes among them. III. The decrees in this number arise without any dispro∣portion, by a like fit proportion in euery part of the number, from one degree to another. For
looke what is betweene 6. and 60. the same, in the rule of multiplication, is betweene 60. and 600. So (as they make the world beleeue) in that state in all the frame thereof, there is such a comely order, and faire proportion, as might allure all men thereunto; if the parts bee considered from the lowest to the highest, from their vnities to their tens, and from their tens to their hundreds. IV. This number in the degrees is raised by tens, from sixe of vnities, to sixe of hundreds, without which, this number so proportionally could not be raised. Ten is Gods number in giuing of his Lawes, Exod. 20. and Ten is his number, for the vpholding of his worship and seruice, performed by his seruants the Priests and Leuites, for their maintenance, Leuitic. 27. 30. 31. 32. So this Ro∣mane state hath been raised vp from the sixe of v∣nities, that is, from their smal beginnings, vnder pretence of perfection (euen their number of six) to their sixties, and sixe hundreds, by tenths clai∣med on Gods behalfe (but most vniustly) for the seruice and worship, which those Antichristian Priests would seeme to performe vnto him. Thus wee see, how this number is the number of the beast, setting out the whole frame and body of that state; this is the number which that second beast (the Pope) liketh of; this is a knowne num∣ber to all that haue any knowledge of that Ro∣mane state; here also is wisedome required: and by this which is said, it may appeare, that this wise∣dom standeth in the wel counting of this number, which is to finde it (for all this goodly accord, order, propor∣tion,
and pretence of pietie (all which are in this num∣ber) to be onely the number of a man, that is, a plat∣forme of a state deuised by man, euen that man of sinne. This is the number which the godly get vi∣ctorie ouer, chap. 15. 2, and by counting the same, finde it a number without valuing of any thing; and so to be reiected as a number of nothing, alto∣gether differing from Gods number set downe in the next chapter, which is 144000, which at the first view may not seeme so proportionable a number as 666, in which yet there is no comparison, this differing from that in three things. First in the fra∣ming vp of the building, Gods number riseth on twelues, for this number 144000 is the number of twelue times twelue in chap. 7, to shew, that the Church and kingdome of Christ is raised vpon the doctrine of the twelue Apostles: therefore is euery part of the number at the first raised aboue twelue, declaring that nothing commeth into his Church to bee of account with God, till it come aboue twelue, that is, till it bee laid vpon the true foundation. The beasts number beginneth before it come at twelue, of which number it cannot bee raised; that kingdome hath not the doctrine of the twelue Apostles to begin it with, or to raise it vpon; but indeed the inuentions of men and hu∣mane traditions. Yet here note, that twelue may be found in this number, but neither the number in the foundation which is but sixe, nor in the rai∣sing vp of the number by tens, but only in the num∣ber multiplied; as ten times sixe, and ten times six∣tie, so is twelue to be often found, but this is secret
and hidden; to shew, that albeit that state be nei∣ther built nor raised vpon the twelue Apostles doctrine, yet is it hidden for the elect sake within that state for their edification; or else it may bee found in the number by addition, as 6 and 6 doe make 12; where 12 is outward so and apparent, and yet but so once neither, to bee found in the whole number, and that by breaking of the order through addition, when otherwise there is onely numeration and multiplication. Teaching hereby this, that as in three 666 is outwardly but 12 once, and that by addition too; so that state, though it haue within it often the number of twelue, that is, the doctrine of the Apostles hidden for the elect sake; yet outwardly it hath it but once, that is, that doctrine is the least part of the building of that state, and also not to be found, but vpon the disor∣dering of the same, setting it out of the proper frame of it owne number and count. Secondly this number differeth from Gods number in the figure, for 144000 maketh by twelues a square number of equall sides, such is the figure of the new Ierusa∣lem, chap. 21. 16, to shew the stable and vnmoue∣able state of the Church of Christ, holding in the building, and also in the figure and whole frame thereof, the Apostles doctrine; the number of ten is Gods nūber for the maintenance of his Church, but only the number of 12 to found it, proportion the parts, and to reare it vp. Now the beasts num∣ber cannot be made in full proportion square, it is but a tottering state, a kingdome that shall be sha∣ken, and perish for euer. It is a state that howsoe∣uer
it hath a number, yet can it not endure the reed of Gods word to measure it by, as the Lords buil∣ding will, chap. 11. 1. and 21. 15; for they wel know, that it hath not the Apostles doctrine written in holy Scriptures for the foundation thereof. I hird∣ly, the beasts number differs in this, that Gods number beginneth the first figure of valuation in the fourth place, the square number, chap. 21. 16, and not at meere vnities, nor at tens, or hundreds; but at thousands, and multiplieth into thousands, shewing, that Gods Church beginneth in a solid communion and fellowship of many not to be di∣minished; and so increaseth with the increasing of God into thousands of tens, and thousands of hun∣dreds, though not into ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands (the Angels number, chap. 5. 11.) here in this life; for that is the perfection of their number with the Angels in the life to come. The Beasts number beginneth at meere vnities, and ascendeth to tens and hundreds; but neuer attaineth to the fourth place, the square number, nor to the number of a thousand, in this number here of 666, which is the figuratiue num∣ber of that state, (though otherwise the world fol∣low after the Beast), to shew, that the vnitie of that Church ariseth not from the communion of ma∣ny primarily, but by simple vnities or ones, that is, by the vprising of the Popes one after another; not in the fourth place of thousands, a solid encrease, but by little and little to the certaine height, after which it shall also by little and little be diminish∣ed, till it come downe againe vnto nothing. This
is the wisedome giuen to count the beasts num∣ber, which whosoeuer can rightly count, will not at all make any account of that Antichristian state, and Dragon-like dominion. But here it may be asked, what reason there is of this, to set out this state by a meere number ap∣plied to nothing that is numbred? This is not with∣out reason, to all that haue the wisedome of God. It is set out first by a nūber, because one day God will number it, for he hath written Mene ouer it, as hee did ouer Balshazzars kingdome, and now hath begun to finish it, chap. 10. 7, and wil finish it, chap. 18; and it is (secondly) set out by a number without naming any thing that is numbred, to shew, that as such a number is to no vse, but to reckon, to see an order, to see a forme and a fashion of a num∣ber, but without substance; so this Romish state is vnusefull to Christianitie, and standeth onely in a faire shew of order, in meere formes and fashions, without substance of pietie. And indeed who seeth not, how that Antichristian Hierarchie standeth more in forme and fashion; in number of daies, in number of prayers, in number of orders, in num∣ber of yeeres, for their antiquitie; in number of Councels, Fathers and others, for their consent; in number of countries and kingdomes, people, na∣tions and tongues subiecting themselues thereto, for their vniuersalitie; then in any solid substance of true religion, holy & sincere worship, and faith∣full teaching of the Apostles doctrine? But here a∣gaine may some demaund, why this number of 666 must be the Beasts number rather then any o∣ther?
Ans. The reasons may bee these: I. For that the Pope himselfe approueth of this number as perfect, as before is shewed. II. For that it excel∣lently setteth out that state fully (as we see), yea so, as this number may be found in such names and tearmes, as doe rightly euery way set him out in diuers languages; for the countrey, in Hebrew, Ro∣magnosh (Romanus) 666, in Greeke  (Latinus) 666: for his supremacie and glorie as the Sunne aboue other starres,  666; for the name of his Popedome, , 666; for the title, that is, to be Christs Vicar, which he claimeth generalis Dei Vicarius in terris, 666, in English, By vertue of Peters seate Gods general Vicr on the earth, 666; for his be∣ing substituted in the roome of the Emperours, chap. 13. 3. in our tongue, according also to the truth of the text, The Pope by superioritie is the Diuels Leiftenant, which is 666: yea one of their own men Benedictus à Benedictis, in his booke De Antich. con∣tra Whitacerum, giueth this to the Pope, Paulo quin∣to vice Deo, which in numerall letters is 666: so as his owne chosen and approued number sets him out most liuely in his colours. III. To giue vs iudgement to discerne them, and to know what kinde of Christians they be, euen Christians by halfes; the true Church ariseth on 12, this false Church only on 6 throughout; some word of God, some word of their owne; some one Sacrament of God, some of their owne; some part of Christs discipline, the rest their owne; in some sort allow∣ing the Scriptures, in some sort not; so in their prayers and ordinances partly of God, partly of
men; their nighest accord to the truth, wherein they hold any truth, is but as 6 to 12, halfe way, further they come not: for their whole number standeth all of sixes, 666; which number the ser∣uants of Christ by wise counting get victory ouer, but others embrace, approuing of that state for outward beautie, order, accord, shew of pietie, and I know not what, and so are friends to that beast; and stepping on a little further will receiue his name, and also take his marke vpon them, as our late Apostates do to their damnation, vnlesse they repent. Fourthly and lastly, for that heere is in a sort an allusion to Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 3. 1, which was sixe cubites in breadth, and three score in height, which hee would haue to bee wor∣shipped. This state is a framed Idoll of that proud Nebuchad. of mysticall Babylon, which the Princes and people on the earth fall downe and doe reue∣rence vnto; but Shedrach, Meshach and Abednego will rather be burnt in the fire, for they haue wise∣dome to count the number of the beast. Notes vpon Chap. 14. Vers. 1. Here the true Lambe Iesus Christ is set against the counterfeit Lamb, chap. 13. 12. that the Lambe heere is the Sonne of God, is cleere from these words his Father. A lambe so called by allu∣sion to the Lambe, his type in the Law; also for that hee patiently endured hitherto the Dragons substitute the Beast, and false Prophets wickednes and rage. Stand, as now one readie prepared a∣gainst
his enemies. Or vnderstanding this of the time of the Churches hidden estate, it noteth, that Christ stood vp, and by him and with him his peo∣ple, when all the rest of the world fell downe and worshipped the Beast. On mount Sion: An allusion to the place where the Temple was built, here meant, the Church of God, Heb. 12. 22. 23. 24, euen the same which was called before, the Temple, cap. 11. 1. and the Woman in the wildernesse, chap. 12. 6. 14. and 144000 the same in chap. 7. the number of twelue times twelue. Of which before in the se∣uenth chapter, and in the former chapter. His fa∣thers name, called also the name of his God, chap. 3. 12. This no doubt was the marke they were sea∣led with in chap. 7: his fathers name is to bee their God, and to haue this written in their foreheads, (an allusion to Exod. 28. 38.) is either to make a con∣stant outward profession of their faith in God tho∣rough Christ, as that full notice might bee taken thereof: or it is their spiritual son-ship and adop∣tion, which they had as certaine, as a thing writ∣ten, and as euident testimonie thereof, as a marke in the foreheads, for children beare the fathers name: and this exposition seemeth the better, for the name written in their foreheads is rather the act of another on them, as is shewed by the sealing, chap. 7, then any act of their owne, as the former exposition implieth. In this verse, is the Lambe with his number also, and name and marke or seale, chap. 7. opposed to the Beasts number, name and marke. Vers. 2. From heauen: That is, the true Church
of God, the same in chap. 4. as appeareth here by the mentioning of the foure Beasts, and foure and twentie Elders, which are said to bee in heauen, that is, the true Church here vpon earth, chap. 4. 3. A voyce: This is the sound of Gods word, for the voyce from the true Church is no other but Gods voice, for the true Church soundeth out only Gods word, as Christ commanded, Matth. 28. 18, and as the historie in the Acts doth shew, and S. Paul in his Epistles: now how commeth this voyce and word of God from the Church, but by the Mini∣sters of Christ? Therfore here is the sound of Gods word preached by the messengers of Christ going out into the earth, set out in a three-fold degree thereof in the hearts of the hearers. The first is as the sound of many waters, which is a mightie great voyce, but being a confused voyce teacheth no∣thing distinctly to the mindes of the hearers; it only worketh a wonder and admiration at the pre∣sent, as Christs preaching did in many, Mar. 1. 22. 27. Matth. 7. 28. Luk. 4. 32. Ioh. 7. 46; but for want of distinct apprehension, it is only as a noise of ma∣ny waters to them, they doe learne nothing, yea the eares of such become deafe many times with hearing at the length. Some expound these words (many waters) for the sundrie sorts of people, as in chap. 17. 15, but they consider not the plaine diffe∣rence: Here it is said, the womā sittth vpō many wa∣ters, vers. 1, without any word of similitude, which here is with a word of similitude, as the voyce of many waters; and therefore waters must be here ta∣ken properly as the word thunder after, else it were
not a plainly expressed similitude to illustrate the voyce by. Let the speech of a plaine similitude, and without such a similitude, be well obserued in this booke of the Reader. The second degree is, as the voyce of a great thunder, which is strong and loud in the hearts of men, like the terror of Gods voyce in giuing of his Law; which in the consciences of vn∣regenerate men is so fearfull, as it maketh them to tremble as Felix, (Act. 24.) and to flie from the word, as not being able to heare the same. The third and last is, the voyce of harpers harping with their harpes, an allusion to the sweete melodie in the Temple at Ierusalem. This is the effect of the word in the godly, which maketh them to take as it were harpes, instruments of praises, to become Harpers, spirituall Musitians filled with sweete peace and ioy of the holy Ghost, by the word of the Gospell; in which the Saints accord, and with full concord of heart-strings, as harp-strings, from the comfortable promises of God, doe praise him melodiously. Vers. 3. And they sung as it were a new song: These words doe shew, that the former verse is not to be vnderstood of the voyce of the Church hidden in the Temple, and fled into the wildernesse; for the state thereof affoorded not this new song, neither in that state is the Church called Heauen, but when it commeth foorth to bee, in some sort at least, visi∣ble; so is heauen taken, chap. 12. 7. It is therefore to be vnderstood of the Church breaking out, whē the two Prophets before slaine did ascend vp, cap. 11. 12. Then sang this Church this new song; for
in Dauids Psalmes a new song, is of new occasions offered, and new matter of reioycing. Before the throne, &c. See for this the Elders and beasts, in the fourth chapter. And no man could learne that songue but the 144000. that is, none but the chosen number sealed of God, and were his people, cap. 7. Which were redeemed from the earth: that is, from the false Church, and earthly state of Antichrist. Vers. 4. Defiled with women: This speech can∣not be meant of marriage, as Papists would haue it; for marriage is honourable among all, and the bed vndefiled, Heb. 13. 4. and no where by Gods word called a defilement. If it were so, how could it be a Sacrament, as our enemies would haue it? The words may bee an allusion to the Israelites, whereof many were inticed by the Midianitish women to Idolatry, Numb. 25. but many were kept from them, and from that sinne against God: so this 144000; that is, all the faithfull and elect of Christ, when the Locusts with womens haire, (ca. 9. 8.) those effeminate instruments and spirituall adulteresses for Antichrist, enticed the world to worship the beast, and his Image, these were not defiled by them. These women then are these Lo∣custs of Antichrist, and to be defiled with them, is to be corrupted by their doctrine, and idolatrous seruice, that which is plagued by the Turkes ar∣mie, chap. 9. 20. for the text saith, these were not de∣filed with women: as speaking of that now which they had escaped, and were before in danger of; neither is it noted of one, or some of them, but that they all had escaped the pollution of these
women of the earthly Church, from which they were redeemed, when the foure Angels stood vp∣on the foure corners thereof, holding the winds from blowing thereupon, chap. 7. 1. These be wo∣men of that earthly state, from which was with∣held the inspiration of Gods spirit, and to which the starre fell, chap. 9. 1. The king of these woma∣nish Locusts, with whom these 144000. haue not been defiled, in the words (cap. 7.) is to be vnder∣stood a spirituall preseruation; and so here ver. 3. a spirituall redemption from the earth; for other∣wise the 144000. were liuing vpon the earth, but in a spirituall safety in the Temple, chap. 11. 1. in the wildernesse, chap. 12. and on mount Sion here with Christ, vers. 1. Therefore also here must bee vnderstood a preseruation from spirituall defile∣ment. For if women be here taken in the proper sense, then must they be either honest women, or dishonest; but to say that they were not defiled with honest women, is to imply an absurdety and falshood, that by honest womē they might be de∣filed; and that either they inticed honest women to vncleannesse, or honest women them, which cannot be, if these be holy, and the women honest. To say they were not defiled by dishonest wo∣men, is too meane a praise for these holy Saints with Christ on mount Sion; for here must be vn∣derstood a singular praise of them in this particu∣lar, but it were no rare praise in this, so vnder∣stood; for that many Heathen, and meere ciuill men among Christians, who neuer ascended vp∣on mount Sion, neither were sealed for Gods e∣lect
by the spirit of adoption, may haue this praise, that they were neuer defiled with dishonest wo∣men, whores and harlots. Lastly, note that this is the praise of the whole 144000. euen all the people of God, women as well as men; vnlesse wee will say, that Gods number consisteth onely of men, and these also of the Clergie only, as they must needs be, if the Papists foolish conceit were true; and so all the laity excluded out of Christs flocke, which to thinke is most false, and a mercilesse con∣ceit, to bee abhorred. For they are virgins: Pure worshippers of God, and not hauing committed Idolatrie, or declined to crooked pathes, to bee corrupted in mind by Antichrist or his instru∣ments, but haue stucke vnto Christ in the simpli∣city of the Gospell of truth, in the generall Apo∣stasie. In this case the Church is a chast virgin to Christ, 2.▪ Cor. 11. 2. and the whole company of the faithfull are called virgins, Psal. 45. 14. These are they which follow the Lambe, &c. The world fol∣loweth after the beast, and worshippeth him, ac∣knowledgeth none but him for their head and guide. These are redeemed from among men: before from the earth, now from among men. This ex∣poundeth the former; earth, being men in an earth∣ly state, from which Christ tooke out his, and from which he yet calleth them, chap. 18. 4. The first fruits, &c. An allusion to the words of the Law; Deut. 18. 4. the high Priests due, so are these his e∣lect, the Lords portion. Vers. 5. No guile: So like Nathanael true Isra∣elites, not like the equiuocating Antichristian Lo∣custs,
Priests, Iesuites, and our Church-papists, in whose mouthes guile enough is found. Without fault: They being accepted in Christ, and walking as Zacharie and Elizabeth, in all the Lords waies blamelesly, Luk. 1. 6. Vers. 6. Here is the breaking out of the light of the truth set out, in three degrees, in three An∣gels; three seuerall types of so many sorts in the Ministery at that time, contesting against the Ro∣mane beast. Another, in respect of that in cap. 8. 13. this being the next following, and not the same, though both flie in the middest of heauen, chap. 8. 13. that foretelling the euils to come vpon the earth, and this the comforts now to the Church. Angel, the type of the first sort of Prea∣chers, messengers of Christ called Angels, Mal. 4. chap. 1. 20. and 2. 1. One representeth all of the same sort. Fly, noting the readinesse and earnest∣nesse of the teachers, and the speed they made in setting forth the truth, after God raised them vp, for it went abroad very swiftly at the first brea∣king forth of the light. In the middest of heauen, see chap. 8. 13. Here also noting, that now it was not to be hindred by humane power vpon the earth; hauing the euerlasting Gospell: This sheweth that the Angell was Christs Ministers, for they preach the Gospell, called euerlasting, because it was said, cap. 11. 15. that Christ now was to raigne and to sub∣due his enemies, and that by his word, which now shall for euer preuaile more and more against that man of sinne, consuming his kingdome, and en∣creasing the power and kingdome of Christ. The
Gospell (in the time of Antichristian darknesse) did seeme to bee lost, but now againe preached, should be no more eclipsed. The euerlasting Go∣spell, not an euerlasting Gospell, as shewing it to be no new Gospell, but the same that was before, the enduring word for euer, 1. Pet. 1. 25. That dwell on the earth, and to euery nation▪ &c. Here beginneth that which was giuen Iohn in charge, chap. 10. 11. not to performe the charge in his person, as heere wee may see, but as a type of the Ministers of the Gospell, receiuing the charge which they heere now put in execution. This so large a commission to preach, sheweth the Gospell was to bee againe spread ouer the dominion of Antichrist, who had brought vnder him nations, &c. chap. 13. 7. and 17. 1. 15. and the people of God, by the onely prea∣ching of the Gospel to bee recouered from vnder his power. Vers. 7. The Sermon which hee preached, or the summe of that which was taught by these faith∣full men, raised vp at the first to vndermine the beasts kingdome; they onely sought to bring the people to the true knowledge of God, and his wor∣ship, which was almost cleane put out by Anti∣christ. The true knowledge of God then, while he wholly raigned, was blotted out of mens minds al∣most, and his true worship troden vtterly vnder foote. These two things are these first Ministers sent to repaire in the first place, as the only meanes indeed to vndermine Babylon, and to make it fall. The words are plaine and easie, as the common truthes in other Scriptures; onely note this in
them, that what here men are exhorted vnto, that had been neglected, and the contrary done; no feare of God, but of men; no glory to God, but to the works and merits of men; no worship to him, but to stockes, stones, Angels, men departed, and so to diuels, chap. 9. 20. Vers. 8. Another Angell: A type of a second sort following vpon the rest, by whose ministery (the summe whereof is here set downe) it appea∣reth, that they saw the Popes kingdome by the o∣ther Angels ministery, sore shaken, and to begin to totter; therfore these plainly and certainly, by the doubling of the words, foretell the fall thereof. Babylon is heere spoken of, as a knowne thing by these Preachers, and yet no mention before, but of the beast, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 1. 7. It seemeth, that by the truth taught by the other Angell, Rome was discouered to bee no more the Church of Christ, but Babylon, which in chap. 17. 1. 2. &c. is fully de∣scribed; the words here following, giuing the rea∣son of her fall, leade vs thither, see that 17. chapt. vers. 2. Vers. 9. The third Angell: The third type of Christs Ministers setting themselues against the Romane Beast, and his miserable subiects. Saying with a loud voice: The degrees in proceeding is worthie noting; and withall, the manner of hand∣ling the busines. The first teach plaine doctrine, and most necessary truthes, vndeniable of either side; and therefore doe it with a loud voice. The se∣cond sort (after the truth taught) begin to speake directly and plainly against the state of the beast,
calling it Babylon, and foretelling the destruction thereof; but here is no mention of any loud voice, they doe their dutie faithfully, but yet more wari∣ly, for awaking too much the bloody beast. This third (as the first sort) dare bee stout with a loud voice, to denounce plagues against the subiects of Antichrist for following of him. The denunciati∣on is most terrible, as the words sufficiently de∣clare, in the 10. and 11. verses: but yet note, that e∣ternall vengeance is so seuerely threatened onely against them that worship the beast, and his I∣mage, and receiue his marke, omitting them that haue his name, and the number of his name; not that they are not in danger, (ca. 18. 4.) but for that these are not so imbowelled (as I may say) in that state as the other be, which know the deepnesse of Satan, and are Antichrists darlings. The iudge∣ments threatned are after, and according to the sinne of that state. They made others to drinke, so shall they bee made to drinke; others haue they burnt, so shall they be; others haue found no mer∣cy at their hands, no more shall they at Gods hand. Vers. 12. There be heere two sentences in this verse, which are vttered vpon the consideration of the troubles and great persecutions, which (vpon the forenamed Angels ministery) the beast shall raise vp against the Saints, set out in chap. 11. 7. and 17. 7. For these words heere, and in the next verse, are to be referred to the troubles of those times. Here is the patience of the Saints (vnderstood) to be tried: as if he had said, so furiously shall the
beast rage, as it will trie the faith and patience of all the true seruants of Christ. Heere are they that keepe the commandements of God, and the faith of Ie∣sus (vnderstand) to be knowne, for by such fiery per∣secution the chaffe and wheat shall be seuered, the drosse from the pure gold. Vers. 13. A consolation to such as shall be kil∣led and ouercome of the beast, as it is said, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. They shall be blessed. Henceforth, that is, as well in dying in this quarrell of Christs against the beast, as formerly they were blessed in dying against the Dragon; this is the meaning of henceforth. And this sentence of comfort now was more necessary to be vttered then before; for men were put to death vnder the Dragon for professing Christs name by the Heathen Tyrants, and there∣fore was there no doubt to be made of their hap∣pie and iust suffering and blessednesse after death: but now vnder the beast, though men die for the truth, yet should they be condemned generally as Heretickes, by such as should beare the name of Christians; yea and would also bee held the best Christians too, the onely Apostolicke, the onely Catholicke Christians, which might shake the faith of many, and make them forsake their place and standing. Vers. 14. At the sound of the seuenth trumpet, chap. 11. 15. great ioy was foretold to bee in the Church, for that Christ tooke vpon him then so to rule, and to subdue the beast and his subiects in that manner, as they should thereat be wroth, vers. 18. and therefore here in this verse, which is to bee
annexed to that there, is Christ set out trium∣phantly, through whose soueraigne power, is brought to passe by his instruments that which the second Angell, vers. 8. proclaimed, to wit, the ru∣ine of Babylon, of the destruction whereof, and the vengeance now ready to bee executed, is a briefe summe laid downe from the beginning of this present verse, to the end of this chapter. A white cloud: the speech is from Esa. 19. 1. In the chap. 20. and 11. verse of this Prophecie, is a white throne; white, noteth cleernesse and purity, cloud, eminency and maiesty, as a throne, on which sate, as Iudge, or rather as a kingly Soueraigne, one like the sonne of man, which is Iesus Christ, chap. 1. 13. on his head a golden crowne: this sheweth, how hee was now installed, and did take vpon him to rule, as in chap. 11. 15. is foreshewed; for hitherto was he not set out with a crowne, whilest hee suffered others to rule and raigne. And in his hand a sharpe sickle. A sickle among the Iewes (to whose customes in this prophecie euery where the spirit alludeth) was an instrument to cut downe corne, Deut. 16. 9. and 23. 25. and the branches of the grapes, Esa. 18. 5. The Hebrew word there, is the same that is translated sickle here. It is heere figuratiuely put for the meanes of ready and sharpe vengeance, which Christ will vse to cut off the wicked with, as the reapers doe the corne, off from the earth with a sickle. Vers. 15. Christ being ready prepared to take vengeance, which he had (chap. 6. 11.) hitherto de∣ferred, but now the time being come, here another
Angell, besides the three former in vers. 6. 8. 9.—Com∣meth out of the Temple, of which in chap. 11. 1, those in the Temple were the true Saints and seruants of Christ, as appeareth chap. 7. 15. and those also that were the hidden sealed number with the Lambe on Mount Sion in vers. 1 of this Chapter. Therefore this Angel is a type of the faithful ones, renewing the suite of the soules vnder the Altar, (chap. 16. 11.) that God would execute vengeance vpon the earth. And is said to come out of the Temple, as being now by the ministerie of the o∣ther Angels imboldened to come abroad, and o∣penly to make prayers and earnest request vnto Christ to proceed against that Antichristian state. Thrust in thy sickle: The words are from Ioel. 3. 13. Reaping, is here put for cutting off the wicked. The haruest of the earth is ripe: The haruest ripe, is the fit time of vengeance not to be deferred, Ier. 51. 33. Of the earth: That is, of the false Church or Anti∣christian state; for of this here is spoken, as all that before from the beginning of the 13 chapt. hither∣to, and the chapters following shew. The Earth is the place where the beast ruleth, chap. 13. 8, out of which the counterfeit Lambe commeth, in the same chap. 13. vers. 11: and they that dwell on the earth now to be reaped, are the Antichristians, the worshippers of the beast and makers of his image, vers. 14. of that 13. chapter. Vers. 16. The request granted, and by the thing successiuely executed, a riddance was made of the false Church. Vers. 17. The words in this chapter from vers. 14
to the end, setting foorth summarily the iudge∣ment executed vpon the false Church, the Spirit doth it by a double similitude▪ the one, by reaping of the haruest; the other, by the gathering of the Vintage. In the former, Christ himselfe at the ear∣nest supplication and prayers of the Church is made the Actor, shewing (as I conceiue) that there shall be two degrees of this vengeance; the one (like the reaping of ye haruest) more easily done by men, yea the destruction shal come vpon the beast and his state with so little violence and force on mans behalfe, as all may behold the immediate hand of Christ himselfe, obtained by the prayers of his people. And indeed so hath it been hitherto in the downfall of the Popedome by the power of Christ, and almost no power of man at al, but done as easily as a sickle cuts downe corne. And there∣fore we see the plagues and iudgements vpon the beast to bee ascribed vnto the Lord, chap. 16. 5. 7. and the enemies took it to be his very hand (ver. 9) in the first sorts of plagues. In the latter set out by the vintage. Another Angell, that is, a type of the in∣struments of Christs comming from among the faithfull out of the Temple in heauen, that is, from those of the hidden number constantly faithfull now in the visible assembly, hauing also a sharp sickle, that is, being appointed in Christs stead to auenge his quarrell, into whose hands he had put the sickle, that is, effectuall meanes, to execute his wrath vpon the Antichristian state; so as now he will work the destruction thereof by men in a more apparent and forcible manner, then afore had been done,
that is, by sword, warre, and bloud, typed out by the figuratiue speeches heere drawne from the Wine-presse, this is the second degree of his ven∣geance. The first of the haruest being set out in the fiue first vials, chap. 16. 1. 11. and this of warre and bloudshed, set out in the sixth and seuenth viall, chap. 16. 12. 17. and 17. 16. and chap. 18. & chap. 19. In all which what is meant by this wine-presse, and by this bloud running out thereof, is fully expla∣ned. Vers. 18. The former Angell is a type of those instruments, which the Lord will prepare to this his businesse, which shall performe the same, as vers. 19—sheweth; but yet must first some be mo∣ued by the Lord to encourage them thereunto. Another Angell, a type of faithfull Pastors, who is said to come out from the Altar, for that they were stirred vp in the cause of the Saints slaine and ly∣ing vnder the Altar, (chap. 6. 9.) to stirre vp others to auenge their quarrell; as also to shew that they came with authoritie from Christ, who had obtai∣ned by his sacrifice vpon the Altar peace with God for his elected ones, and that now their cause might be reuenged. Which had power ouer fire: To haue power ouer any thing what is it els, but to be able to restraine that thing, and to haue it at com∣maund? Fire is put for vehement contention, Iudg. 9. 20. Ouer this had this Angell great power, that is, God by his ministerie wrought so, as peace was among Protestant Princes, and such as were to rise vp against the beast; God was reconciled to them, and they among themselues. This Angell is the
type of those faithfull Pastors, who now therefore cried with a loud crie, that is, with all vehemencie of spirit and boldly without feare; and exhorted the Angell with the sharp sickle, that is, those that they saw made fit instruments by Christ, to fall to the execution, which is the thrusting in of the sickle or hooke. Vine is a Church: of the earth, the false Church: Clusters, the distinct orders, societies, and brotherhoods of the same: to gather them, is to take them away: grapes, the fruites of that Church; fully ripe, is (as it was said of the Amorites) their sinnes come to the height, and may now no longer be forborne and passed ouer. Vers. 19. The execution, according to the word of exhortation and prosperous successe thereof; gathered the vine, not onely the clusters and bran∣ches, but Babylon her selfe is destroyed, chap. 18. Cast into the great wine-presse of the wrath of God. The words taken from the Iewes custome, who had a wine-presse readie, when they had gathered the grapes to cast them into. These words shew this Angell to be the type of the instrument of Gods wrath against the Antichristians. Vers. 20. The similitude is followed; for when grapes are cast into the wine-presse, then are they troden, Iudg. 9. 27, and the iuyce of them runneth out of the same, Nehem. 13. 15. Esai. 63. 3. 4: The wine-presse is the place, where the Antichristians are troden downe: without the Citie, as did the Iewes tread their wine-presses without Ierusalem. This noteth the true Church to bee without danger, when this slaughter shall be made of the enemies.
And bloud came out of the wine-presse euen vnto the horse-bridles: These words and the other following, are to expresse the greatnes of the slaughter of an exceeding multitude of enemies, as chap. 16. 14, and 19. 18 shew: for I suppose heere to be vnder∣stood that battell, which should make such a slaughter of them, as that Christ is said to weare a garment, after the ouerthrow of these enemies, dipt in bloud, chap. 19. 13. By a thousand and sixe hun∣dred furlongs, Thus farre the bloud must runne: as the vine, the wine-presse, and manner of treading out the grapes, is an allusion to the custome of the Iewes, and the Citie to Ierusalem; so these words are an allusion to the length of the land of Ca∣naan, which, as some write, is 1600 furlongs; which was, as it were spread ouer with bloud, being made the Lords wine-presse of his wrath once by the hand of the enemie, whether we vnderstand the de∣struction of that nation by the Chaldeans, or after by the Romans. Notes vpon Chap. 15. Vers. 1. Another signe, besides that mentioned in chap. 12. 1. Signe, so this representation of future things to Iohn is called. In heauen, so chap. 12. 1. Great and marueilous, in respect of the effects there∣of, so great and wonderfull a change brought to passe thereby, in vers. 3. The whole Church ac∣knowledgeth this to be such a worke of God, great and marueilous. Seuen Angels: So are the instru∣ments appointed by God to execute his will called
before, chap. 8. 7. 8. 10. 12. and 9. 1. 14. and 11. 15. Hauing the seuen last plagues: Of whom they had these, and what they were, is expounded vers. 7, cal∣led here the last, for that by them shall be filled vp the wrath of God, and so the thing done, (as is said, cap. 16. 17.) which God hath decreed, vpon the Anti∣christiā state, as before he sware for the fulfilling of the mysterie of God, (chap. 10. 7.) when the seuenth trumpet should blow, of which these seuen plagues are the distinct parts. Vers. 2. These words shew, in what state the Church was now at this present come vnto, before the pouring out of those vials, vpon the preaching of the three Angels, in chap. 14. 6. 8. 9. The word had wrought effectually, so as many had gotten the victorie ouer Antichrist and his power, and preuailed, and were now standing on the sea of glasse. For this, see chap. 4. 6. But this is at this time ming∣led with fire, euen the fire, which Christ desirerh to be kindled, Luk. 12. 49. for now it inflameth with heate and feruencie all godly professors, which at this time were growne to be many, hauing shaken off the yoke of Antichrist, now standing as vpon safe shore, on the sea of glasse, as the Israelites on the sea shore when they escaped from the Egyp∣tians; to which here is the allusion, Exod. 14. 30. 31. Hauing the harps of God: That is, most excellent harps, or rather which are of Gods gift. Harps or musicall instruments for praises; so then figura∣tiuely it is this; they had gifts and graces from God to set out his praises, which they with con∣ioynt affections and well tuned hearts perfor∣med,
as the two next verses shew. Vers. 5. After this shewing of the Churches state, hee beginneth to goe on with that which was be∣gun in vers. 1: but withall calleth vs backe to re∣member where hee left off, to prosecute the matter and parts of the seuenth trumpet, chap. 11. 19. For by considering what is there said, and here repea∣ted againe after so long an interruption, all may see, that here is a falling-in vnto the same matter there left to bee spoken of, till this place. By which will appeare most plainly, how the seuenth seale hath the seuen trumpets, and the seuenth trumpet these seuen vials. The Temple of the tabernacle of the testimonie: Words of allusion vsuall and common to the time of the Law. The Temple, the inmost place of the tabernacle, as hath been shewed, chap. 11. 19, where (as there is declared) was the Arke, 1. King. 8. 6, and in it the two tables of stone, which are the testimonie; because of the Law written in them, which testified the will of God: so the two tables are called the testimonie, Exod. 25. 21: and be∣cause they were put in the Arke, it is called the Arke of the testimonie, vers. 22, and for that the Arke was in the inmost part of the tabernacle, that part is called the tabernacle of witnesse, Numb. 17. 7. Af∣ter the two Prophets were ascended vp, chap. 11. 12, and that now the Church became visible, the Temple, that is, the hidden things of God formerly vnknowne, became now to bee manifest by those Angels, (cap. 14. 6. 8. 9.) who taught what this true testimonie of God was vnto the people. In heauen, that is, in the true visible Church of Christ.
Vers. 6. The seuen Angels (mentioned before in vers. 1.) came out of the Temple; the Temple, that is, that part of it where the Arke was, the place where God gaue answere to Moses and Aaron of all things hee would haue done, Exod. 25. 22. Leuit. 7. 89. Numb. 17. 4. This sheweth, that these had their au∣thoritie and commaund from God to come forth, and were of his chosen ones raised vp to execute vengeance vpon the Pope, vpon the Papists, and vpon their Romish state, as chap. 16. vers. 1. shew∣eth plainly. Hauing the seuen plagues: How they had them, the next verse telleth vs. Clothed in pure and white liuen, and hauing their breasts girded with a gol∣den girdle, as Christ was, chap. 1. 13. An allusion to the Priests habit ministring in the Tabernacle, Ex∣odus 28. 40. 42. Leuit. 16. 2. This is to shew, what manner of persons they were, and how qualified, whom God thus appointed to execute his will. They were of those that were of the true societie and temple of the holy Ghost, Priests by Christ, hauing pure and white linen, the righteousnesse of the Saints, (chap. 19. 8.) ready prepared to do their office: girding noteth care and diligence bent to performe what is imposed, and they resolued to doe without impediment, Exod. 12. 11. 1. King. 18. 46. Luk. 12. 35. A girdle of gold, (which was also a∣bout Christ) is righteousnes and faithfulnes, Esai. 11. 5. By the way then (for this one time) heere note, that they which are lewd and vicious, though neuer so wise, politique, rich, and valiant, shall not be Gods instruments to plague Antichrist and his kingdome. This their Priestly apparell sheweth
also how that these Angels come forth in the Churches cause, and for her sake, without any o∣ther by and sinister respect. Vers. 7. Here is shewed, by whom they were furnished with these seuen last plagues, that is, the seuen vials, and of whom they did receiue them: And one of the foure beasts: What the beasts bee, is shewed (chap. 4. 6.) euen Ecclesiasticall persons, which of the foure it is, is not here noted, as being a conioynt act of them all, the deed of one, as well as of another. Gaue vnto the seuen Angels, seuen gol∣den vials. The instruments containing the plagues are here compared to cups, or bowles, holy vessels of the Tabernacle made of pure gold, Exod. 25. 29. and 37. 16. Ier. 52. 19. A viall is a cup with a big bellie, and a narrow mouth, so as that which it containeth, is poured out by leisure, and not all (as it were) at once, as out of cuppes with wide mouthes. That which is in them is Gods wrath, of which they are full; for as the grapes were full ripe, (chap. 14. 18.) so heere bee the cups full of wrath. Which is said to be in vials; first, for that Gods iudgments are prepared, vnseene to the Antichri∣stian state, and not discerned till they fall vpon them: also, because these plagues are executed by the seruants of Christ vpon the enemies with no difficulty, euen as easily as licour is poured out of a vessell, and that without noise, tumultuous stirs, and hurli-burlies on their part. Of gold they bee, for that Gods wrath is iust, pure, and vncorrupt. And giuen of one of the beasts: To shew, that these An∣gels, that is, men, appointed by God, were furni∣shed
hereunto from the Ministers of Christ, by doctrine and instruction, for other vials haue they none to giue. God himselfe calleth out these An∣gels; that is, qualifieth them with gifts, power, and place to execute his will. The Ministers of God they teach the truth of religion, the doctrine and discipline of Christ, the vnsufferable state of Antichrist, his Idolatrie, false worship, hereticall doctrine, tyrannicall gouernment, his proud vsur∣ped power ouer Kings, his trecheries and treasons to vphold the same; and so doe vrge these Angels by the word of exhortation, the commande∣ment of God, the safety of his Church, and welfare to themselues and all Gods people, to set them∣selues for the Lord, and against that Antichristian state: which ministery the Lord blessing, and put∣ting thereby into the hearts of these Angels to do such things, as may annoy, and at length ruinate that state, they hereby may bee said to giue these vials of Gods wrath into their hands. This is my guesse of this, how true this interpretation is, I leaue it to be iudged; the ground of my conie∣cture is, that these words cannot bee taken literal∣ly: Ministers haue not any materiall cups full of Gods wrath, and the effects of pouring out the vials, shew, that the plagues are not any way to be vnderstood after the letter; for we reade not of any such thing done in any story in the Christi∣an world. When men giue any thing, wee know it is that which they haue, and termes of such things must be interpreted according to the nature, con∣dition, and place of the giuer, as it may bee most
likely to that which such a one can giue. Vers. 8. And the Temple was filled with smoke: An allusion to Exod. 40. 34. 35. 1. King. 8. 10.Numb. 9. 15. shewing, the Lords approbation and sanctifying of the Tabernacle finished; so heere now at this time the Lord hauing erected vp againe a visible assembly, a temple of true Christians, from among the Antichristians, he sheweth his glory and po∣wer, approuing and sanctifying it with his pre∣sence, both for comfort to his people, as also for terrour, as then vnder the law, to the wicked and rebellious, Numb. 16. 19. 42. No man was able, &c. This is the following of the allusion in Exodus be∣fore mentioned, and is onely to shew, what a hin∣derance to the encrcase of true Christians the Ro∣mish Antichristian state is, which therefore the Lord will see destroyed, and then shall euery cloud of darknesse be remoued, and the most holy things of God bee reuealed, yea the gate Ierusalem shall then stand open for all to enter in, cap. 21. 25. Notes vpon Chap. 16. Vers. 1. Heere Iohn sheweth, how the Angels prepared, were now commanded to execute their charge. A great voice out of the Temple: Either the Lords voice, as chap. 9. 13. or the important vr∣ging of the faithful, who being now inflamed with the zeale of God, desired the destruction of that Antichristian kingdome; for in, and from the Temple, neither is, nor commeth any voice, but the Lords voice, and the voice of his faithfull ser∣uants.
Saying to the seuen Angels: those before in chap. 15. 1. 6. The vials of the wrath of God: of which in chap. 15. 7. they are also called the plagues of God, chap. 15. 1. being the tokens and effects of Gods wrath: herein is an allusion from the plagues in Egypt, as in the former chap. vers. 3. was an al∣lusion of the Churches deliuerance from Egypt. Vpon the earth: that is, vpon the false Church, the Antichristian kingdome, as the words following tell vs. For the plagues fall vpon the marked ones, vers. 2. and vpon the beasts throne, vers. 10. also the Dragon, beast, and false prophet take it grieuously, vers. 13. 14. and seeke to reuenge their wrongs by warre. The word Earth, here comprehendeth the whole state of Antichrist, and containeth vnder the same, all those particulars following, because all the seuen Angels are commanded to poure out their vials vpon the earth, and yet onely the first poureth his viall vpon the earth, the other vpon the other things; which must therfore needs belong vnto this earthly kingdome of Antichrist, as the particulars of that state. The plagues of these vials by degrees doe answere the trumpets, that looke how Antichrist by his rising, was a plague to the Christian world; so in like manner these plagues light vpon him, from the lowest to the highest, as in the following verses shall bee shewed. Vers. 2. All commanded to poure out their vi∣als, but yet doe execute the same by degrees. For the first went and poured his viall vpon the earth. By this first Angell is meant all instruments raised vp
of God to execute this plague, and so vnderstand by the 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Angell, not one onely instru∣ment, but all and euery one vsed and employed to bring that plague vpon the Antichristian state, in the seuerall particulars, in order here set downe. Earth was before taken generally for Antichrists earthly state; heere earth is put for one part and degree thereof, and answereth to the commodi∣ties of that state, by which it rose and was vpheld, and now begun to decay. For after the Gospell became to be published, and the wickednesse of that state discouered, the earthly profits and the wealth thereof began to be lessened; this is the vi∣all poured out vpon the earth; this is the euill which befell their wealth, riches, and earthly pos∣sessions, euen gotten from Princes and people, on∣ly to waxe proud, to lord it, and to tyrannize ouer them, and to liue after their owne lusts, in all plea∣surable fulnesse of earthly things. And there fell a noysome and grieuous sore: The effect of this euill: It is an allusion to one of the plagues vpon the E∣gyptians, Exod. 9. 10. heere a noysome and grie∣uous sore in the mind of the men, which had the marke of the beast. It vexed these marked men, and them that worship the Image, at the very heart, as a sore plague, and as a painfull boyle vp∣on them, to see this mischiefe to befall them; their conscience also accusing them for their deuouring and vnsatiable auarice. The words cannot bee ta∣ken after the letter; for who euer heard yet of any taking a cup, hauing such licour in it, as the same poured out on the very earth, should fill mens bo∣dies
with grieuous sores? And when hath any man read and seene the prime seruants of Antichrist to be full of scabs & sores? Neither haue the 4. beasts ca. 4. 7. any such cups, with any such licour, to giue to any, as they do these vials, ca. 15. 7. Such instru∣ments we reade not of, nor of such marked mēbers of the Romane Clergie, and prime persons of that state to be so, all of them plagued with botches. To auoid therfore absurdities & falshood, the text en∣forceth a taking of the words figuratiuely, and to vnderstand hereby a spirituall sore of the mind, for their earthly losses. And as this is spirituall, so vn∣derstand the rest, which the very text will make vs of necessity to grant. Ver. 3. The 2. Angell: that is, the 2. sort of instru∣ments raised vp of God, hauing their vial from one of the beasts, ca. 16. 3. They poure it vpon the sea: This 2. degree of the Popes downfall, answereth to the 2. degree of his rising, in ca. 8. 8. wher the word sea, & turning into blood, are expounded. An allusion to Exo. 7. 20. 21. Here frō the instruments of the true Church, a mischiefe befalleth their common wor∣ship and seruice; it is made to bee abhorred, and as lothsome as the blood of a dead man, and becom∣meth mortal and deadly. The words cannot be vn∣derstood of the sea properly, that it became blood, and that euery fish died in it; as the Iesuite Ribera will haue. This literall exposition is full of absur∣dities; for here the ouerthrow of the Antichristian state is foretold, and that by the true Christians: now what great harme had that state particularly receiued by this viall more, then all the world be∣sides,
if it were after the letter? And how can this bee a reuenge from God for his Churches sake, (which is in all these plagues intended) if it be ta∣ken litterally? How should not this also be a mis∣chiefe to the Church? Here must be a plague vpon the Roman and Antichristian kingdome, effected by such as the Lord raiseth, comming out of the Temple, and it must be an answerable reuenge for the euill, which y• Antichrist in his rising brought vpon the Christian world, noted in cap. 8. 8. Now what euil hath ye sea (taken litterally) done to Gods people, by the Popes means, in his creeping vp? & what reuenge is it in ye Churches behalfe to plague the sea? It is a most absurd apprehension to take it litterally, & most false. For neuer such a thing euer was: who euer heard that the sea hath bin as the blood of a dead mā, & that all the fishes died ther∣in? Or who can imagine euer any such thing here foretold to come to passe hereafter? Neither can it be vnderstood of battels fought by sea. This is a sea, which must become as the blood of a dead man, thicke, blacke, and lothsome; and here is no speaking of men dead vpon the sea, but of euery liuing thing in the sea; that is, euen euery soule maintained by the sea to liue, as the fishes natural∣ly be in the waters of the sea. To take vp the true sense and meaning of this plague, three things are to be well weighed. I. What is meant heere by the sea? II. How by any of the true Church of Christ, (such as come out of the Temple) it can be made like the blood of a dead man? III. How euery liuing thing hereupon dyeth in that Sea?
My coniecture is this, that as earth sets out the wealth, riches, reuenewes, and possessions of that state, vpon which the first viall was poured; so by Sea, (another thing of that state, and the next vnto the earth to be considered of) is meant the Popes ecclesiasticall lawes, Church-seruice, and com∣mon worship; a sea of euils, of a salt and brinish tast to all Gods people, in which none can liue, which haue drunke soundly of the sweet and liue∣ly waters of life. A sea, more for trade and trafficke to these ecclesiasticall merchants, then to bee drunke of any, to quench the thirst of the soule▪ It became as the blood of a dead man: by such as are of the Temple receiuing true doctrine and instru∣ction frō the faithfull messengers of Christ, when they that come out of the Temple, being potent persons, do iustly (by wholsome lawes) condemne the same for Antichristian, Idolatrous and He∣reticall; and when such liuing soules, that is, such Ecclesiasticall persons, and others, as do stand for the same, (seducing Christian subiects from their true allegiance), be by their lawes made worthy of death, and by due execution thereof are made to die in this their sea; else how are they made to drinke blood, vers. 6? And this they doe in the righteous and iust iudgement of God, vers. 5. 7. for the blood of the Saints which they shead: by which words we may se, what by liuing soules in this third verse is meant; such liuing soules, as could shead the blood of the Saints; these bee the fishes  should haue seene, and himselfe a∣mong them; but they will not see themselues by
any meanes in this prophecie. Vers. 4. The third Angll: that is, the third sort of instruments raised vp of God, for his Church against the Romane state: Poured ut his viall: that is, did execute that vengeance by the power giuen them of God: Vpon the riuers and fountaines of waters: This is the third degree of Romes ruine, and Antichrists destruction, answe∣ring to the plague of his rising, in chap. 8. 10. 11. and it is an allusion to Exod. 7. 20. Riuers and foun∣taines come from the sea, and returne thither a∣gaine, so the Antichristian, idolatrous, hereticall traitors, and rebellious doctrines doe flow from that sea, and are put in practice to returne to the vpholding of that sea againe; which iustly being condemned by true Christian Princes, (these An∣gels pouring out the vials) and such likewise as do bring them, and the receiuers also of them being iudged to bee worthie of death, they so become blood to them. Vers. 5. And I heard the Angel of the waters say: That is, the Angell before mentioned; for the word the Angell, and not an Angell, sheweth it a knowne Angell before; now before was no other Angell of waters, but onely this, that had the viall to poure it on the riuers and fountaines; who in the execution of the iudgement, and the effect thereof approueth of Gods righteous iudgement, as did Iehu, the auenger of Gods quarrell vpon   house, at the destruction of ,  9. 36. Vers. 6. For they haue shea, &c. This sheweth still plainly, that these plagues concerne the Anti∣christian
christian state of Rome; for the beast & his Image is mentioned in the second vers. and here his mur∣thering of the Saints, before shewed in chap. 13. 7. and 11. 7. and 17. 6. and 18. 24. And againe in this chapter is spoken of his seate, vers. 10. and of Anti∣christ that false prophet, vers. 13. The degrees shew the downfall of the Pope and his kingdome, by step and step, and that agreeable to his rising vp; which, according to the former expositiōs in these three, may appeare to euery one to bee fulfilled; and vnto vs particularly in this nation, who before all other haue giuen them blood to drinke, by wholesome lawes enacted against their traiterous Priests and Iesuites, and the receiuers of them. Vers. 7. The consent of another, affirming the Lord herein to be iust and true in his iudgements poured out of the vials of these Angels, vpon the Antichristian state, in the forenamed degrees ther∣of, but especially in giuing them blood for blood. Vers. 8. The 4. Angell: That is, the 4. sort of Gods instrumēts types out in this one, poured out his vial wee haue heard, in chap. 15. 7. was full of Gods wrath, which is poured here vpō the Sun. This is the 4. degree of the destructiō of Antichrist, answering to the like degree in rising, set downe in cap. 8. 12. This Sun is a part of the Antichristian Kingdome, as the rest before were. This point must be well marked, that here the Antichristian state is ouer∣throwne by degrees, in the parts therof beginning with the earth of it, then with the sea of it, next with the Riuers and fountaines of it, and now with the Sun of it, that is, with that part or portion of it, which
is as the sunne in that state. This cannot bee the sunne properly, as some would haue it; for what man can smite the sunne, or poure a viall vpon it? And againe, how can the Church (if any one ther∣of could doe it) make the sunne in the firmament hurtfull to the Papists, and not also to themselues? It cannot bee the light of the Gospell, and holy Scriptures, as other conceiue it; for they are no part of the Antichristian Kingdome, as this sunne is. And it is too grosse to say, that the viall, that is, the plague of God is poured by the friends of the Gospell, vpon the light of the Gospell, or vpon the holy Scriptures, therewith to plague the enemies of the Gospell, as this viall poured vpon this sunne must. Here the true Church of God, in the instru∣ments thereof appointed by God, is to poure out a viall, (not throw vp a viall, as it should haue bin said, if it were the sunne properly) vpon the sunne of that state; such a sunne, as the appointed instru∣ments for the Church may reach vnto, and in some sort be ouer, to poure the viall vpon it. Now in that state, what is so like the sunne for glory and for brightnesse, to cause that false Church so to shine, (as the sunne in the firmament lighteneth the world) but only the Popes supremacie? which in that earthly orbe supplieth the office of the sun, to that state, as the glorious light of heauen doth to this earth wee tread vpon. The pouring of the viall receiued from one of the beasts, (chap. 15. 7.) vpon this sunne, what can it bee else, but Princes receiuing this doctrine of truth, that that supre∣macie is an Antichristian vsurpation, and so ther∣upon
begin to enact lawes vpon extreame perill against it; and also to set vp the lawfull suprema∣cie of Kings, Gods vicegerents in their owne do∣minions, to make men to sweare thereunto; and in detestation of that Antichristian pride of the Pope (lifting vp himselfe aboue al that is called God) to proclaime him openly to bee heerein that Anti∣christ? By which this Angell, that is, these Princes and Potentates haue scorched the Pope and his men with fire; that is, made them burne with the rage of impatiencie so, as they blaspheme euen God himselfe, as the next words in the verse fol∣lowing doe shew. Vers. 9. And they were scorched with great heate: That is, they were inraged in their harts with ran∣cour and malice, as with a burning fire. And blas∣phemed the name of God: euen as the beast doth, ca. 13. 6. For that state of Rome now vnder Anti∣christ and his subiects, are blasphemers of God. And doe not we here in England find this true in their writings and speeches? They spare not the workes of God, his immediate hand for vs, (in de∣stroying their Spanish Armado, in discouering their Gun-powder plot, and ouerthrowing them in all their trecherous, treasonable, and rebellious attempts) saying, that it is by the helpe of the di∣uell; a hellish blasphemie! they spare not to blas∣pheme his holy word, his worship, doctrine, and sacraments with vs; so inflamed with furie are they, when their Pope is challenged for that Anti∣christ, in his proud and tyrannicall supremacie. Behold their heart scorched with heate, in their
fierie malice against our Soueraigne, for his most rare and admirable Apologie; sent out to the Em∣perours, Kings, Princes, and States of all Chri∣stendome, touching this particular point. Thus farre I suppose the Lord hath executed his wrath in all these foure degrees, vpon the present Anti∣christian Romish state; the euents seeme fully to prooue the same. Vers. 10. The fifth Angell: That is, the fifth sort of chosen instruments typed out by this, poured out his viall vpon the seat of the beast. This is the fifth degree of his ruine, answering the fifth trumpet, and to the Popes earthly vprising, in his falling from heauen, and becomming the king of the Lo∣custs; for there is he called a king, chap. 9. 11. and heere is attributed to him a kingdome; and as there was darknesse, so heere; and as the Locusts did torment men, so heere now are they againe tormented. His seate is Rome, chapt. 13. 2. vpon this must wrath come by the Angels out of the Temple, and then that Popedome shall bee full of darknesse, that is, full of miserie; whereupon shall follow their desperate sorrow, expressed in these termes, they shall gnaw their tongues for paine; and yet continue obstinate, blaspheming without re∣pentance, vers. 11. This viall is not yet poured forth, but is next in order, and not long to; let Rome see to it, and Gods people come out of her. Vers. 12. And the sixth Angell poured out his viall vpon the great riuer Euphrates: This answereth to the sixth trumpet, chap. 9. 14, where out of the riuer
came foure Angels to plague the world; this is now here to be dried vp for a plague to Antichrist, and is an allusion to the drying vp of the riuer, before the winning and destruction of Babylon, of which Ieremy speaketh, chap. 51. 32. From this verse to the end of the chapter, it is of things to come; and prophecies are best knowne when they are fulfilled. I will therefore intreate the Reader, if he be desirous to know what men coniecture here, to looke vpon the labours of others, especially those that haue written the very latest, who declare their minde to the full, and perhaps truly too; the euent which wee must expect will shew it in time; I for my part will onely set downe, according as in the text is deliuered, what we are to obserue and looke for to come to passe. By Euphrates, an allusion to the riuer of Babylon, is meant lets withholding to come at that mystical Babylon, mentioned in vers. 19, vpon which, the viall, that is, a iudgement, is poured; which is here called the drying vp of the waters thereof, that is, the remouing of the impe∣diment, and so making a way for the Kings of the East. Vers. 13. The bestirring of the instruments of the Romish Church foretell vs, that the drying of Euphrates, and the prepared way for the Kings, is a∣gainst that state, & for the good of Gods Church. The Dragon not spoken of, hitherto, but in chap. 12, is now one with his substitute the Beast, and with the false prophet; they all ioyne in one, and send out their messengers. Vers. 14. Here is shewed, what these frogges be,
what they doe, to whom they goe, and wherefore. Though they be likened to frogges, and are called vncleane spirits, and spirits of Diuels, yet are they men, as wicked as Diuels, stirring vp to battell the Kings of the earth, that is, all their fauourits gene∣rally from al parts of the world. Vers. 15. The certaintie of these things is heere set downe, and a watchfulnes commanded in god∣ly puritie vpon a consideration of these daies, so full of calamitie. The inserting of the words here, and interrupting of the course of the prophecie (as in Genes. 49. 18.) shew the greatnes of the danger, and the necessitie of this admonition to take heed before hand, as in a desperate perill. Vers. 16. Mention is made in vers. 14 of God Almightie, and here is said (alluding to Esai. 24. 21. 22.) hee gathered them, whom the three vn∣cleane spirits went to gather; so as the whole mat∣ter is at the Lords guiding, his prouidence ruleth, and his counsell shall stand. The place of this great battell is called Armageddon in Hebrew; not that there is such a place, but so according to the inter∣pretation of the word, har, being a mountaine, and Megaddo the place of Barc his victorie; that is, a place as a mountaine of defence to the godly, but to the enemies destruction: as it came to passe, at the waters of Megeddo, when the Lord gathered the Armie of Sisera together to ouerthrow them, for his Churches full deliuerance, Iudg. 5. 19, to which here is the allusion. Vers. 17. And the seuenth Angell poured out his viall on the aire: The last degree of destruction
bringing an end to all the attempts of the aduer∣sarie, as chap. 15. 1: and also the last words (it is done) doth shew. The words, it is done, (alluding to Ezech. 39. 8.) haue reference to chap. 10. 7, by which is noted, that a finall end shal be made of the ene∣mies, (of which in chap. 19. 20. and 20. 10.) and also the Church of God shall be gloriously exalted to a most gracefull and peaceable estate for euer, chap. 21. 6. Vers. 18. Heere is foretold the iudgement of God, and of a great Earthquake, such a commo∣tion and alteration, and as it were a shaking of all things, the like was neuer before; such a speech in Dan. 12. 1. Of the words in particular, see chap. 4. 5. and 11. 13. 19. Vers. 19. The effect of these iudgements and this Earthquake vpon whom it shall fall, and who shall feele the same. The great Citie and Babylon here is one, for these words, and great Babylon came in remembrance, &c. is put expositiuely, shewing what is meant by the great Citie, (of which see chap. 17. 18.) and why such a destruction now be∣fell the same, which had so long continued in great pompe and glorie. And the cities of the Nations: What is meant by nations, see chap. 11. 2, for the same there and here is all one. There is summarily set downe, what shall come to passe vnder the se∣uenth trumpet; of which here this, & the rest of the seuen vials are the parts, fully explaining what is there briefly noted. So then the cities of the nations, are all the places depending vpon, and containing the subiects of the great Citie; the destruction
whereof is their ouerthrow; it was diuided and they fell therwith, through that great Earthquake; these Nations and Antichristian Gentiles tread vnder foote the holy Citie, chap. 11. 2, but now are they themselues troden downe, and rewarded for their wickednes. Vers. 20. And euery Iland fled away, and the moun∣taines were not found: In the destruction of the Hea∣then Empire, they are said to be moued out of their places, in chap. 6. 14: but here, to be no more at all. Hereby no other thing is meant, but as the great Citie perisheth, and the Cities of the nations; so also the Iles and mountaines, that is, the most de∣fenced places, and the strongest places; in a word, all the whole dominion of Antichrist shall vtterly perish. There shall no where be any more footing vpon earth for the same; there shal not be an Iland to receiue it, nor mountaine to defend it. Thus shall the whole earth be purged cleane (one day) of this Pope and Papacie, and no where be found. Vers. 21. Hauing spoken of the places, now hee sheweth what shall become of the men. And there fell vpon men a great haile, an allusion to Iosua 10. 11, out of heauen; shewing hereby, that it is the Lord himselfe that shall destroy these men, and fight for his people, as hee did for Iosua and the Is∣raelites: Euery stone about the weight of a talent. In Iosua, chap. 10, they are called great stones; but here is noted an incredible weight, only to shew, that, most deadly vengeance in a most incredible man∣ner (yet as certaine as Iohn telleth the weight of these stones) shall light vpon these men to destroy
them. This plague, saith the text, shall be excee∣ding great; yet wil obdurate hearts still blaspheme. The Popish generation are so bewitched in their way, as they become obdurat and obstinatly hard∣hearted against all Gods plagues, continuing in rage and blasphemie. Notes vpon Chap. 17. This Chapter, so likewise doe the 18, and 19, and 20 Chapters shew more at large, the things foretold to come to passe vnder the sixth and se∣uenth vials. For in the sixth vial is mentioned a ga∣thering together to battell; but Iohn breaketh off the discourse, not shewing there fully the issue: And in the seuenth viall is laid downe such hor∣rible destruction, as may worke an astonishment in mens hearts; except a larger explanation were made thereof, to shew how it shall come about and why that Citie and these men should so strangely bee plagued of God, and yet remaine so hellishly obstinate. Vers. 1. And there came one of the  Angels, . Which of the it was is not named but here∣by is oed that, ow in the  of these vials  , Rome should be knowne to be Baby∣lon, and that Romane Catholike Church to be a common ; and that not onely of the ,  Bishops and faithfull Pastors of the Church, (which gaue the seuen vials into the hāds of the Angels), but also of these Angels them∣selues, who shall well vnderstand why they poure
out their vials vpon that state, euen for that it is a damned whore, which they should be desirous and ready to make knowne; which is noted by this, that this Angell informeth Iohn hereof. The iudge∣ment, that is, this plague and vtter destruction, which is briefly foretold to be executed in the pou∣ring out the last viall, and at large shewed to come to passe in chap. 18. and in chap. 19. vers. 2. Of the great whore: This is not named in this tearme be∣fore, and yet is spoken to Iohn as a knowne thing. which must needs be that great Citie in chap. 16. 19. That sitteth, that is, which reigneth (vers. 18) vpon many waters, that is, ouer peoples and multitudes, and nations, and tongues, vers. 15, this is the power also and dominion of the Beast, chap. 13. 7. Vers. 2. Committed fornication: That is, enter∣tained her false worship and idolatrous seruice, which is spirituall adulterie, as appeareth by the words of the Prophets euery where, Iudg. 8. Esai. 1. Iere. 2. and 3. Ezech. 16. Osea. 1. and 2. and 3. made drunke, as Esai. chap. 29. 9. and 51. 21, speaketh, which is a spirituall drunkennesse. With the wine, that is, with the doctrine, which as wine they haue drunk downe, to vphold her spirituall fornication: or by wine may bee vnderstood all meanes, which that Church vseth to bewitch and deceiue the mindes of people with; to draw them vnto her false worship and seruice, and to bee in loue with her, called in the next verse abominations and fil∣thinesse of her fornication. Vers. 3. Into the wildernesse: A solitarie place, there was the true Church, chap. 12. of which they
must bee, that can learne to know the Romish Church to be a whore, condemned of God. A wo∣man, that is, the great Citie, vers. 18. Sit: But note, without holding bit or bridle, euen shewing, how that state will be lawlesse, and she therewith con∣tented; the Beast is expounded vers. 8. Scarlet colou∣red, of the Dragons colour, chap. 12. 3. but of a dee∣per die; this colour the Beast got by murthering the Saints, chap. 13. 7. Full of names of blasphemie: The Beast and Popedome was now (the Whore sitting thereupon) full, all ouer bespotted, with the names of blasphemie. Of the seuen heads and ten hornes see chap. 13. 1. Vers. 4. The outward glorious state of that Church, is here set out by apparell and rich orna∣ments, as a Queene; for so also she esteemeth of her selfe, chap. 18. 7. Hauing a golden cup in her hand: Before was mention made of wine, here is the cup to drinke it out of. This cup in her hand is all the meanes, which by her power she can deuise to con∣uey into their mindes this her wine; which is here called abominations and filthinesse of her fornica∣tion, of which her cup is full. Vers. 5. And vpon her forehead: That is, openly was a name written Mysterie. This word is in the Popes Myter. Brocard, a Venetian, commenting vpon this place auoucheth it; who was at Trent at one of the Sessions of that damnable Councell there, as himselfe affirmeth vpon the first verse of this Chapter. His relation of the proceedings of the Pope in that Councell, would make that Anti∣christ to be abhorred, and his Councell too, with
all the hellish, I cannot say holy, fathers thereof: concerning this word mystery, written in the Popes Myter, many besides haue been at Rome, and professe to haue seene it: see for this, D. Iames, the keeper of the Library in Oxford, his dedicato∣rie Epistle, in his treatise of the corruption of the Scriptures, &c. The Church may be said to haue it, when the Pope the head thereof weareth it. By this word mysterie, the Prophet would haue vs to know, that Rome by a mysterie is Babylon the great, the mother of harlots, &c. This name shee her selfe boasteth not of, but the spirit of God tea∣cheth vs to take her so; what other goodly title soeuer she assumeth to her selfe. Vers. 6. She made other drunke with her for∣nication, but she her selfe is drunke with the blood of Saints and Martyrs. Vers. 7. Heere the Angell promiseth to giue Iohn (representing in this the common type of the faithfull) satisfaction touching that, which hee so greatly wondreth at. Vers. 8. The beast: This he beginneth with first, and after, vers. 18. telleth what the woman is; this is the beast (the Popedome) in chap. 13. 1. To vn∣derstand the words following, was, is not, and yet is, we must not conceiue them as spoken of the beast, either before Iohns time, or in his dayes: this visi∣on seene of Iohn, was not as yet when Iohn wrote, nor in the time of the Heathen Emperors, which is that one (when he liued) mentioned in vers. 10. but should be afterwards; and being come, should continue but a short space, by reason of the deadly
wound receiued, by which being as dead, yet li∣uing and recouering againe, then should these words, was, is not, and yet is, be spoken of him; was, to wit, in the gouernment Ecclesiasticall, by Bi∣shops vpon the translation of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople: and is not, by comming in of the Gothes and Vandals, bereauing Rome of inhabitants, ouerthrowing for a time, that ecclesi∣asticall gouernment of Bishops at Rome: And yet is, not being vtterly by the Gothes furie extin∣guished, the wound being finely healed by the se∣cond beast, (cap. 13. 11. 13. 14.) who cunningly crept vp from Episcopall iurisdiction, into a mo∣narchicall state and Empire, by his obtained su∣premacie; and so obtaining great power and au∣thority, was wondred at of them that dwelt on the earth, by beholding him, the beast that was, and is not, and yet is: And shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit: This is the beast, chap. 11. 7. which beginning is giuen vnto him, as he is in his recouered estate, and now exalted to the height, to an Antichristi∣an gouernment; for so considered is hee said to as∣cend out of the bottomlesse pit: and shall goe into perdition: that is, it shall not be a permanent state euer, but bee destroyed and vtterly come to no∣thing with him, as we see chap. 19. 20. and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, as is also said in chap. 13. 3. whose names, &c. These are the reprobates, which so shall wonder and worship the beast, cap. 13. 8. When they behold the beast that was, to wit, substituted by the Dragon; Rome being left by the Emperours, chap. 13. 3. and is not: being woun∣ded
to death, chap. 13. 3. and yet is, to wit, the beast ascended vp, (cap. 11. 7.) that is so mighty, as none is like him, none able to warre with him, hauing power ouer kindreds, tongues, and nations, chap. 13. 4. 7. Vers. 9. Hauing expounded the beast, shewing what he is; here he telleth vs, what is meant by the seuen heads which this beast hath: and of these heads he giueth a double interpretation; the one is heere, that they signifie seuen hilles, on which Rome stood, as I haue before shewed at large. Vers. 10. The other interpretation is, and there are seuen Kings, so the beast is the whole state, and the heads are the Prime gouernours of it, cal∣led heree Kings, for their soueraignty and king∣ly regencie in that Citie; they are not the seuen ages of the world, as the Iesuite Ribera dreameth. fiue are fallen, that is, the fiue heads that had alrea∣dy been. 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3. Dictators, 4. De∣cemuiri, 5. Tribuni militum: for the heads are so many differing kinds of gouernors in the Roman gouernment, and not so many singular persons go∣uerning; for then had this beast perished long a∣goe, and not now haue been troublesome to the Christian world. Andone is, that is, the sixth head, the Heathen Romane Emperors. And the other: that is, the seuenth, called an other, for his so much differing from all the rest before him, when he shal come. Neither is it said an other, as if the Apostle spake of one vncertaine, who he should be; but the other (as it is well translated), as if he said, the beast already seene in the vision, and shewed vnto mee,
in vers. 3. Is not yet come: Iohn saw not this other the seuenth, but onely in vision. And when hee commeth, he must continue a short space. It is not said by way of limitation, he must continue but a short space, as if the time of this other the seuenth, should be onely for a short space, and so perish vtterly; which hath made some (so conceiuing of the words) to vnder∣stand hereby the rule of the Gothes and Vandals at Rome, who had but a short raigne, and perished vtterly. But there is a great difference of these spee∣ches, he must continue but a short space, and hee must continue a short space; the former implyeth necessarily a cutting off, after a short space, and to be no more; the latter not so, but sheweth that hee hath a grant to bee, and that hee must haue a short space allotted vnto him to be; but not there∣fore inforcing vs to thinke, that therfore after that short time, hee should haue no being at all. It is therefore, as if the Angell had said vnto Iohn, the o∣ther, this seuenth head, which maketh the beast, which thou seest, which yet is not come, but certain∣ly will come in his time; and when hee is come in the succeeding Ecclesiasticall gouernment, vpon the translation of the Empire from Rome, to Constantinople, (as our Soueraigne in his most learned Apologie speaketh) he must continue a short space so, till hee receiue the deadly wound; and bee then as it were not, till the same againe be healed by the beast rising out of the earth, and exercising all the power of the first beast before him, cap. 13. 11. 12. Vers. 11. And (So vpon this recouerie and se∣cond
beasts great power) the beast that was, and is not, by this his so strange rising from Episcopall gouernment, by which hee was the seuenth head, into so high and supreme power, as altogether va∣rying from it, he seemed to become an other then before he was seene to be: euen he, (now in mans account) is the eighth King; for so the word eighth agreeth in gender with the word King, and not with the word beast. And is, (yet in deed and truth) of the seuen, that is, the seuenth; of which before more at large in the first part of this preparatiue, chap. 3. in the answere to the third obiection. And goeth into perdition, as is before said, vers. 8. this is his end, chap. 19. 20. Note heere, that the seuenth head, and eighth King in account, is that very An∣tichrist, chapt. 13. 11. obtaining onely of all the heads, to be called the beast, and so the first and se∣cond beast, chap. 13. 1. 11. doe heere become both one. So then the Popedome (the first beast) beareth vp Rome; the woman and the Pope that Anti∣christ (the second beast) maketh the Popedome, whose destruction shall bee the vtter ruine of all the Romane state. Vers. 12. The Angell hauing shewed, what the beast is and his heads; now hee commeth to his hornes, and telleth vs that they are ten Kings, but such as in Iohns daies had receiued no kingdome: but afterwards when this Beast should come, they then should receiue power as Kings, that is, haue so∣ueraigne and kingly regencie. For the hornes were crowned, chapt. 13. 1. Heereby therefore is meant absolute and free Princes, and not subordi∣nate
powers, and Leiftenants, or Presidents of Prouinces, as were vnder the sixth heade, the Dra∣gon, who would weare the crowns vpon his owne head, and not admit the hornes (as heere) to haue crowns, One houre, that is, in the space of an houre, that is, in a very little short time. With the beast, that is, with the state of Rome vnder Antichrist. Vers. 13, Whereupon these Kings shall be so vnited to the Beast, as all they can do, they will do for the same, and that with full consent. Vers. 14. Of the beasts warre with the Saints, we haue heard before, chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. Heere we see by whom he doth it, euen by these hornes, but (blessed be God) they lose the victorie. Vers. 15. The waters: on which it is said, vers. 1. that the woman sitteth, are expounded to be peo∣ples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues; for Antichrists dominion shall largely extend it selfe, cap. 13. 7. and 11. 9. Vers. 16. As the rising vp, and prosperity of the Beast hath bin noted; so now the ruine and down∣fall. And the ten hornes: the very same which be∣fore, with one mind gaue their power and strength to the Beast, and which hornes Iohn saw vpon the Beast. These shall hate the whore: that is, the woman sitting vpon the Beast (vers. 3.) and the whore sit∣ting vpon many waters, (vers. 1.) with whom these Kings committed fornication, which made also o∣thers drunke with the wine of her fornication, vers. 2. but her selfe became drunke with the blood of Saints. vers. 6. Their hate at length, conceiued iustly against her, shall bring Rome to vtter ruine.
Vers. 17. A reason heere is giuen, both of the strange alteration of the minds of these Kings a∣gainst the whore; as also how it was, and where∣fore they affected so much the beast before. A hand of God was in both, vntill that which he had spo∣ken should be fulfilled. Vers. 18. The Angell interpreteth the mysterie of the woman, and plainly sheweth who shee is. The woman is the great City: mystically called Ba∣bylon vers. 5. but in deed and truth, Rome; which in Iohns dayes raigned ouer the Kings of the earth, as as I haue before proued out of the Euangelists and Acts of the Apostles in part, 1. chap. 3. and in the answere to the first obiection. Notes vpon Chap. 18. Vers. 1. And after these things: These words shew the order of the vision, one thing after ano∣ther. I saw another Angell: that is, another from the seuen before mentioned; came downe from heauen: to shew, that hee commeth with the truth of God, and no dreame of his owne: hauing great power: to shew, his furnishing with strength to effect what is here spoken, touching the fall of Babylon. And the earth was lightened with his glory: to shew, that now the acts of this Angell shall make him glori∣ous and apparent euery where. Vers. 2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice: hereby shewing, that now by this Angel all should be made to take knowledge of that, which heere is spoken. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen: The
doubling noteth certainty; the words be the same with the words of the Angell, chap. 14. 8. which was a foretelling of this long before it should fall out, but here, vpon a present accomplishment, or very nigh at hand to bee fulfilled, as the words in vers. 4. imply; euen as Moses warned the Israelites to depart from the tents of the wicked men, im∣mediately before their destruction, Numb. 16. 26. Here is an allusion to Esa. 21. 9. Ier. 51. 8. Babylon here is Rome, (whereof that other old Babylon in Chaldea was a type) which is the woman, that great City, vers. 10. chap. 17. 18. and 19. 2. And is become the habitation of diuels, &c. An allusion to Esa. 13. 21. 22. and 34. 11. 13. 14. 15. Ier. 51. 37. to note her vtter desolation, and a place not to be in∣habited any more, as the 21. verse of this chapter doth plainly tell vs. Viegas the Iesuite, vnderstan∣deth the words of the Idolatry, and execrable wic∣kednesses of that City, only he thinkes it shal here∣after so come to bee; but it is true in his sense at this present, if he and his like had eyes to see it, and grace to come out from it. Vers. 3. The reason of her destruction, partly mentioned before, chap. 17. 2. The wine of the wrath of her fornication: that is, which hath procured this wrath against her by her idolatrous doctrine, which the Kings of the earth: that is, those of her false Church haue drunke vp with her. And the merchants of the earth: Here by Merchants, cannot be properly meant such as we account to bee mer∣chants; for these mourning merchants are not a∣mong the Saints, who as they are commanded, so
doe they reioyce at Babylons destruction, chap. 19. 1-6. These be such Merchants, as after her destru∣ction haue no more trafficke for their merchan∣dize, vers. 11. and yet gold, siluer, and the other things mentioned in vers. 12. 13.. will not cease to be in vse among Merchants, as we call them; nei∣ther can her fall stay the common vse of such things. These Merchants bee Merchants of mens soules, vers. 13. such be spoken of, 2. Pet. 2. 3. What is meant by Merchants, is expounded, vers. 23. The great men of the earth: That is, of the earthly Anti∣christian state, such as trade in the sea of that state, of which in chap. 16. 3. of these Merchants and their merchandizes speaketh, Mantuan, Saint Ber∣nard, serm. 1. de conuers. Pauli, Budaeus in his Pan∣dects, Lodoicus Viues, vpon St. Aug. booke, called the City of God, lib. 18. cap. 22. Vers. 4. A charge to all Gods, people to get out of that Antichristian state, and from that Babylo∣nish Citie; the exhortation is from Ier. 51. 6. 46. and 50. 8. & Esa. 52. 11. Vers. 5. The greatnesse of her wickednesse, al∣luding to Ier. 51. 9. and to the sinnes of Sodome, Gen. 18. 20. 21. and 19. 13. Ion. 1. 2. the time of her iudgement being at hand, God now remem∣breth her iniquities to plague her, as is also shew∣ed in cap. 16. 19. Vers. 6. An exhortation stirring vp to reuenge the cause of God vpon her: the words are from Ier. 50. 15. 29. Vers. 7. I sit a Queene, &c. An allusion to Esay, 47-7-8.
Vers. 8. In one day: That is, speedily, for her de∣struction is said to bee in one houre, in vers. 10. 17. 19. The plagues which shall be vpon this City are death, sorrow, famine (which argueth a besieging of it before it be taken), then the vtter consuming of it by fire, as is shewed before, chap. 17. 16, where they that shall doe this, are foretold vs. The reason is like to that in Ierem. 50. 34, The worke is Gods, and his power only shall bring this to passe. Vers. 9. The Kings of the earth: These are they in chap. 17. 2, as the next words following do shew; and not the tenne hornes in chap. 17. 16. Vers. 12. The merchandise are reckoned vp; An allusion to that rich Citie Tyrus, Ezech. 27: these are said in the former verse, not to be bought any more, vpon Romes destruction. Therefore by these things must be figuratiuely meant al precious and pleasant spirituall things of esteeme in that state: for it is not like that these things, taken after the letter in their proper signification, shall lose their estimation by Romes fall, which are of great ac∣count among those, that both haue shaken off Rome, and with others, which neuer had to doe with it. Vers. 17. The other sort of Mourners for Baby∣lon, after the Kings and Merchants here, are, Euery ship-master, and all the companie in ships, and sailers, and as many as trade by sea. An allusion still to the destruction of Tyrus, Ezech. 27. 29. 30. 31. 32. As the Merchants haue a figuratiue meaning, so must these bee vnderstood figuratiuely. A ship-master is one that hath an ecclesiasticall office, which is his
ship, with which he doth traffike for the great men the Merchants: The companie in ships, all that de∣pend vpon such offices at the commaund of the ship-master. As many as trade by sea, that is, which get their liuing by the Church seruice. Vers. 18. The like complaint for Tyrus, Ezech. 37. 32, so for Babylon, Iere. 50. 46. The smoake of her burning: An allusion to Esai. 34. 10. Vers. 19. Cast dust: The like is said in Ezech. 27. 30. The manner of heauie and downe-cast spirits, Iob. 2. 12, and the crying, weeping and wailing shew deepe and most passionate sorrow of heart. All that had ships in the sea: That is, offices and dig∣nities in that ecclesiasticall state. Vers. 20. The dutie of the godly (Psal. 58. 11) is here vrged vpon them, that they should reioyce, as the other did mourne. Heauen is put for the faith∣full people and Saints on earth, that is, the true vi∣sible Church, as may appeare in chap. 19. verses 1. 6, where this exhortation is performed by the Saints of God in heauen. Holy Apostles and Prophets: In these are to bee vnderstood all true Ministers of Christ, the Apostles successors, who are termed A∣postles, because they were ordained by them, doe succeed them, and teach their doctrine: we see be∣fore, how the ordinarie Ministers are called wit∣nesses, and their ministerie prophecying, chap. 11. 3, and themselues Prophets, heere in vers. 24, so 1. Cor. 14. 32. Or, the words may bee taken, as spo∣ken figuratiuely, after a propheticall manner, as in Esai. 1. 2, and in Deut. 32. 1, and as it is foretold of the ioy ouer the destruction of Babylon, Iere. 51.
48, to set out a cause of exceeding ioy to the whole Church of God in heauen and in earth. Vers. 21. In this verse and the rest is foreshewed the finall and vtter ruine of Rome, neuer to bee in∣habited againe, which is here expressed by an act of a strong Angell. An allusion to Iere. 51. 63. 64. Found no more: That is, shall neuer bee any more inhabited, as is said of typical Babylon, Esai. 13. 20. Iere. 50. 40, and as the next verses, 22. 23, plainlie declare by particulars, and as doe the words of the Prophet, to which these doe allude, Iere. 7. 34. and 25. 10. 11. Vers. 22. There shall be no more pleasurable delights, no more men of trade to liue there, no sound of a milstone, that is, no vse thereof for food, for that there shall bee none dwelling in that place. Vers. 23. Hee still sheweth by particulars, that all inhabitants shall thence be remoued, and no more there the increase of posteritie, nor solemni∣zing of any mariages. For thy Merchants, &c. These be one cause of Romes finall destruction, and ther∣fore cannot bee (as before is said) vnderstood of Merchants properly, such as liue vpon honest tra∣fique and trading, which (though they become rich) yet are not the great men of the earth, as these be. Sorseries: Another cause of her destruction, hereby is to be vnderstood that wine of her forni∣cation, chap. 17. 2. 4, and the deceitfull miracles of the second beast, chap. 13. 14, and false Prophet, chap. 19. 20. Vers. 24. The third cause of her ruine, her mur∣thering
and shedding the bloud of the Prophets and Saints, that is, the bloud of the Ministers and people of God. And of all that were slaine vpon the earth: To the like effect speaketh Christ of the bloudy Scribes and Pharisies, Matth. 23. 35: for the last murtherers of the Saints fill vp the mea∣sure of the bloudshed of all before them, as Christ there saith (vers. 32), and so become guiltie of all the bloud shed before them. Notes vpon Chap. 19. Vers. 1. After these things: To wit, before in the former chapter of Babylons vtter ruine, which first must bee, ere this ioy heere expressed befall the Church of Christ. I heard a great voyce of much peo∣ple in heauen: The true Church here reioyceth now at the destruction of Babylon, growne into a great multitude, as is said vers. 6, of which also in chap. 7. 9, who there, as these here, giue praise vnto God, vers. 12. Vers. 2. The reason of their ioy here expressed, for he hath iudged. These words shew what, is meant by iudgement in chap. 17. 1, euen Babylons de∣structions, set out in cap. 18. The great whore: Thus he calleth Babylon so iudged, as is shewed, in the former chapter. And it is euident by this, that the great Citie Rome is the woman, chap. 17. 18, the woman is the whore, chap. 17. 1. 4, this whore is Babylon, for vpon Babylons destruction the whore here is said to be iudged. Vers. 3. A doubling of their ioy againe, crying,
Halleluiah, praise God. And her smoake rose vp for euer and euer: Her eternall vengeance. The like words are in Esai. 34. 10. An allusion to the destru∣ction of Zodome and Gomorrhe, Gen. 19. Vers. 4. The former reioycing may seeme to be of all true Christians, heere and there dispersed abroad, when they shall heare of this destruction of Rome; but this verse is of the publique assem∣blie lauding and worshipping God. Of the foure and twentie Elders and foure beasts, see chap. 4. Vers. 5. And a voyce came out of the throne: The throne is Gods seate, here vers. 4. and chap. 4. 2. The voyce is therefore from God, yet vttered by some of the Church, because hee saith, Praise our God, &c. It may bee some one of the beasts (who are in the middest of the throne, chap. 4. 6.) which exhor∣teth all of all sorts to praise God. Vers. 6. The effect of this exhortation, God was praised. And Iohn heard (as it were) the voyce of a great multitude, and as the voyce of many waters: because this, great multitude was of people, nations, and tongues, chap. 17. 1. 15. chap. 7. 9. and as the voyce of a mightie thunder: Because as thunder it was heard a farre of, and men made to attend thereunto. Vers. 7. The Godly exhort one another to ioy, and to giue honour to God, for the now glad∣some state of the Church after the destruction of the Whore; For the marriage of the Lambe is come, and his wife hath made her selfe readie▪ Christ is heere set out as an husband; and the Church as a wife; the time after the burning of that com∣mon whore, to be the mariage day of Christ with
his Church, which was all the time before, as only espoused, but now is solemnely, as it were, to bee married; which ioyfull time the cursed Pope and Papists in their Antichristian glorie at Rome yet doe hinder. It is hence cleere, that there shall be as great difference between the state of Gods Church now, and that which is to come after Romes ruine, as betweene the time of honourable persons only betrothed, and the high ioyfull and glorious day of their publike marrying; and as betweene the time of a King comming on to his kingdome, and his actual and powerfull reigning as King in deed. Vers. 8. The Brides raiment fit for her pure and holy husband, the apparell is named, and the signi∣fication giuen. Vers. 9. The Angell who receiued these things from Christ to shew vnto Iohn, chap. 1. 1, and whō in the next verse Iohn would haue worshipped, here willeth him to write; so was he also comman∣ded, chap. 14. 13. This is for the certaintie of the things which are to be written, as the last words of this verse shew, being added as a reason of the commandement to write; not that there is any mistaking of any other thing of all the rest, either done or said to Iohn before; or, that there is any more or greater truth in this here commanded to bee written, then in all the rest: but for the incre∣diblenes of the so glorious and most ioyfull estate of the Church, and their happinesse also which shall be partakers thereof. Vers. 10. Iohns readinesse to fall downe to wor∣ship this Angel (which he ought not to haue done)
at these words, more then at all the rest, doth im∣plie necessarily, that hee was exceedingly lifted vp with some sudden ioy of some strange and happie matter foretold here vnto him; which moued his hart to an extraordinary gladnesse, & himself thus to fall downe, as Abraham did vpon his ioy concei∣ued of that, which was foretold him touching the birth of Isaac, Gen. 17. 17. Now what matter could so greatly rauish the heart of Iohn, as to heare of the calling of the Iewes? which in all probabilitie is the thing foretold; whose obstinacie made S. Paul to haue great heauinesse and continuall sorrow of heart; and that he could haue wished himselfe ac∣cursed from Christ for their sakes, Rom. 9. 2. 3. That haue the testimonie of Iesus: That is, which be prea∣chers and witnesses of Christ hauing the spirit, that is, the gift of the spirit to prophecie and to beare witnesse of Christ; for here the hauing of the testimonie of Iesus is (in chap. 22. 9.) expounded by the word Prophets. Vers. 11. And I saw heauen opened. Before the A∣postle can follow on, to tell vs further of this Bride thus arraied, and of the Churches happie estate, he must first shew vs the maine lets yet hindring, and wholly to be taken out of the way; the lets are two, Antichrist and the Dragon, both which are vtterly to bee confounded, before the perfection of the Churches gracefull state. Of the first and his vtter damnation he speaketh in this chapter; of the o∣ther in the next. For wee must know, that when Rome is destroyed, the Pope and his aiders shall liue for a while after, vntill the great battell spoken
of, chap. 16. 16, and the euent here (in verses 18. 19. 20.) be ended: of this hee hath a most perfect vi∣sion, therefore it is said, he saw Heauen opened, as did Stephen, Act. 7. 55, not a doore only, as in chap. 4. 1. Or, by Heauen opened, may be meant the open accesse vnto the Church euery where, and euery way, as being now apparent to all; in which Christ and his armies were readie to breake out vpon their deadly foes, gathering themselues together against them, as is shewed, chap. 16. 14. 16, and here in ver. 19. Here is shewed, in what state the Church shall be in, vpon the ruine of Rome; euen as a peo∣ple standing in armes vnder their Generall Christ Iesus for a time, till the last battell be fought, and the enemies destroyed. And behold: Spoken both for certaintie and also for matter needing atten∣tion, and our carefull consideration of so great troubles, as then shall be in the world, by open ho∣stilitie and bloudie battels, betweene true Chri∣stians and the Antichristians. A white horse: A horse is a beast for warre; by this is to bee vnder∣stood the meanes to encounter the enemies. White noteth his righteousnesse in proceeding to warre, and in the triumph. And he that sate vpon him was called faithfull and true, and in righteousnesse hee doth iudge and make warre: These last words tell vs, why he hath a white horse. This Rider is Iesus Christ, as all the words here and after shew: faithfull, chap. 1. 5. and true, chap. 3. 7. 14: for his righteousnes in iudgement, see Psal. 9. 8. and 96. 10. 13. Vers. 12. His eyes were as a flame of fire, so is Christ set out, chap. 1. 14. and 2. 18. And on his head
were many crownes: in cap. 1. 14. no mention of any crownes, then vpon his head, while his Church was to liue vnder crosses and persecutions, he was then bare headed: when she crept from vnder An∣tichrist he put on one crowne, cap. 14. 14. but now many crownes. A crowne, noteth out victorie, many crownes, many victories, either gotten, or to be got∣ten, now ouer all his enemies. Many crownes hee weareth, because he taketh the crowns from Kings now, whom he conquereth, vers. 19. and therefore is called King of kings. The Beast (the Pope) now shall weare no longer his triple crowne; for hee, and also his Kings shall perish together: all nations: shall now doe worship to this King of Saints, cap. 15. 4. And he had a name written: to shew, that it was sure and permanent. That no man knew but him∣selfe: such a name as Iehouah, not knowne to the Israelites, till Moses came to deliuer them, Exod. 6. 3. but with his deedes hee declared his name; euen so here, Christ, while his people were in Egyptian bondage, his name written King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, vers. 16. was actually vn∣knowne; but in this his maruellous worke of deli∣uering his people, in so strange an ouerthrow of all his and their enemies, was made now manifest. Vers. 13. And he was clothed in a vesture dipt in blood: A garment expressing the exceeding great slaughter of his enemies, and the abundance of blood-shead, in which (as it were) his vesture is dipped. The allusion is to the words of Esa. chap. 63. 2. 3. And his name is called the word of God. Of this title we may reade, Ioh. 1. 1. and Ioh. 5. 7. but I
take it, that here hee is so called, for that hee doth make good his fathers word, euery way fulfilling it; and obtaining grace from God to haue it fulfil∣ed, euen in euery thing whatsoeuer was threatned against the enemies of the Church, for the Chur∣ches sake. By him are the promises to Gods peo∣ple accomplished, the mysterie of God, chap. 10. 7. finished; by him iust vengeance passeth vpon the Churches enemies, that so he may well bee called the word of God; as also that by him (now Anti∣christ being destroyed) the word of God at this time chiefly shall take place, by which he shall bee knowne, as by a name. Vers. 14. Here are his souldiers, the armies in hea∣uen, that is, of the true Church: followed him vpon white horses; clothed in fine linnen, white and cleane: This their rayment is expounded in vers. 8. The spirit of God setteth them out, not as going to battell, but as in triumph hauing obtained the vi∣ctorie; euen as also their captaine is set out. Here∣by rather setting the end of the battell before vs, that in consideration thereof wee (the Church) might be comforted; then the warlike proceeding and bloody encounter, which without the certain knowledge of the issue, would worke nothing but feare and terrour in mens harts, which here is pre∣uented. Vers. 15. Here is shewed, how the righteous and stout warrior obtaineth the victory: Out of his mouth goeth a sharpe sword: of this there is mention, ca. 1. 16. & 2. 12. 16. which is Gods word. that with it he should smite the nations: That is, those Antichri∣stians,
against whom he goeth to warre. An allusi∣on to the words of Esa. chap. 11. 4. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron. An allusion to Psalm. 2. 9. nothing his strong power to keepe them vnder, and to force them to obedience, which will bee obsti∣nate. And he treadeth the wine-presse of the fiercenesse and wrath of Almightie God. An allusion to Esa. 63. 2. of the wine-presse, see cap. 14. 20. here is the par∣tie treading it; whence it is that his raiment is so bloody, as in vers. 13. The Grapes are the Antichri∣stians or nations here so called, the winepresse the place Armageddon, chap. 16. 16. where the great battell, mentioned in the 19. verse of this chapter, shall be fought. The treader of the wine-presse is Iesus Christ with his armies, victoriously destroy∣ing their enemies, till the blood come vp to the horses bridles, cap. 14. 20. by which the fiercenesse and wrath of Almighty God, here mentioned shal be made manifest; for it is called the battell of the great day of God Almighty, cap. 16. 14. Vers. 16. And he hath on his vesture, and on his thing a name written: This is the name before vn∣knowne, but now certainly known to all, as written on his vesture, to wit, that which was dipt in blood, shewing it to be his title gottē victoriously in the destruction of his enemies: and on his thigh, be∣cause now all the world should acknowledge him to be such a one, and doe homage vnto him. The word is taken from the ancient custome of the He∣brewes, the thigh being put for strength and po∣wer; and the putting of the hand vnder the thigh for a token of subiection and seruitude, Gen. 24. 2.
9. and 47. 29. Or, it is to shew, that as hee had got∣ten it vpon his garment by victorie, so was hee a∣ble by power and strength to maintaine, it, for the name is written where the sword was wont to bee girded, Psal. 45. 3. Iud. 3. 16. Cant. 3. 8. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the honour of his victo∣rie, chap. 17. 14. now hee raigneth, vers. 6. and the kingdomes of the world are Christs, and that for euer, cap. 11. 15. This is the time foretold by Dani∣el, cap. 2. 44. Vers. 17. And I saw an Angell standing in the sun. After the description of Christ and his glorious title, here commeth forth before him his Herald, making an open and a loud proclamation to the foules of heauen, to come and feede vpon the bo∣dies of the slaine. He is said to stand in the sunne, that there may be an answerablenesse of one part of this propheticall speech with another. For here he is brought in, to make proclamation to all the foules vnder heauen; therefore is the sunne made his standing place, as fittest to make his voice to be heard abroad. The drift is, to set out the euident and cleere certainty of the victory, of which the Church shall be so assured, as if in the sunne one stood to make proclamation thereof vnto vs. This Angell may type out such, as by cleere light of truth shall make knowne the certaine destruction of the enemies, before the battell bee fought: the words in this 17. verse, and in the next, vers. 18. are an allusion to Ezech. 39. 4. 17. 20. noting out the exceeding great slaughter, which shall be made of those Antichristians of all sorts.
Vers. 19. This is the beast in cap. 13. 1. and 17. 8. 11. which is noted to make war with the Saints, in chap. 11. 7. and 13. 7. and his kings with the Lambe, cap. 17. 14. but here is the last battell, and his vtter ouerthrow for euer, as the next verse sheweth. Kings of the earth; these are mentioned in cap. 17. 2. and 18. 3. 9. Vers. 20. The false prophet: There is onely a briefe mentioning of this prophet, in chap. 16. 13. but heere is plainly shewed who this is, euen the beast, in chap. 13. 12. 13. 14. that very Antichrist. These both were cast aliue: An allusion to Numb. 16. 31. 32. to shew, that their destruction shall be more then ordinary, to the terrour of al beholders, a ven∣geance for notorious wickednesse, Psal. 55. 15. Into a lake of fire burning with brimstone: of this lake spea∣keth Iohn, in ca. 20. 14. and 21. 8. and of this plague, in ca. 14. 10. noting out fearfull and most exquisite torments, Ezech. 38. 22. as in the destruction of So∣dome, Genes. 19. thus shall perish the chiefe ene∣mies of Christ and his Gospell. Thus (as is said, cap. 17. 8.) shall the beast goe into destruction. Vers. 21. And the Remnant: that is, the Kings of the earth, and their armies, vers. 18. 19. for they are the rest or remnant left after the beast and false prophet: were slaine: These also perish, though not after that manner, as did the Beast and false pro∣phet. With the sword of him that sate vpon the horse: vers. 11. which sword proceeded out of his mouth: vers. 15. that is, they perished, as the Lord had threa∣tened in his word. For the word is said to slay them, when the Lord maketh that to come vpon
them which he denounceth against them; so is his word as fire, deuouring the people as wood, as Ie∣remie speaketh, cap. 5. 14. And all the foules were fil∣led with their flesh. These words are added to shew, that that shall be fulfilled, which the Angell in the sunne proclaimed in vers. 18. and withall it giueth vs to know, what is meant by the remnant, whose flesh is heere said to be eaten by the foules, which are there called to the Supper. Notes vpon chap. 20. It is not said, as in the beginning of the former chapter, after these things I saw; but onely barely, I saw, because Iohn heere calleth vs backe to the Dragon, of whom before, chap. 12. mention was made, but hitherto passed ouer silently, except in chap. 16. 13. Heere is declared, what became of him all the time, that the beast bare a sway; and what hee did vpon the beasts destruction, whom hee did so much fauour, chap. 13. 3. and so en∣deauour to helpe and vphold, as is shewed in cap. 16. 13. To this place is the matter reserued to bee spoken of, as most fit to giue vs in one view, his whole story. For after the spirit had spoken in can. 12. of his casting out of heauen; and in ca. 13. of his substitute the Beast, there could bee no con∣uenient place before this time, to make againe full mention of him, till all things concerning the said beast were fully ended, but now the beasts fi∣nall destruction being shewed, here commeth in this last enemie, & his last attempts to be spokē of.
Vers. 1. An Angell: Not that in the ninth chapter, vers. 1. as is shewed there in vers. 11. for as in this one thing, to wit, that both haue the key of the bottomlesse pit, they doe agree; so in many o∣ther things, the circumstances compared toge∣ther, they doe greatly disagree. This Angell is a type of some one or moe, (such) instruments, as Christ did vse to curbe the open rage of Satan and his instruments murthering the Saints. Came down from heauen: This telleth vs of what sort this An∣gell is, receiuing his power and authority from out of heauen aboue, for, and in the behalfe of the heauen, the Church of God beneath. Hauing the key: Key is a signe of gouernment, power and au∣thoritie, Esay 22. 22. which this Angell bringeth from heauen with him; but the starre, chap. 9. 1. brought it not from heauen (from which hee fell) to the earth, but it was giuen to him. Of the bot∣tomlesse pit: I thinke this bottomlesse pit, is that which in cap. 12. 13. is called the earth, into which the Dragon was cast out of heauen. For of that time is this matter which is here handled, and the same Dragon spoken of. Of this pit see before, cap. 9. 1. 2. And a great chaine in his hand: A chaine is that, with which are bound such as be kept in bon∣dage. Iudg. 16. 21. 2. King. 25. 7. hereby is noted the meanes of restraining this Dragon within this bottomlesse pit, and it is said to be great, for to set out the strength of the means to hold in the great red Dragon; as hee is called in chap. 12. A great chaine for a great Dragon. Vers. 2. And hee laid hold on the Dragon: The
words imply a forcible strength in apprehending of him, as in the battell between Michaell and him, chap. 12. 7. 9. The Dragon, the Serpent, the diuell and Satan, foure names, to set out the head of all the power of darknesse; so in chap. 12. 9. and hee sheweth himselfe powerful, to be such a one agree∣able to all these in his instruments. And bound him a thousand yeeres: The chaine is vsed, and therwith is he bound; that is, the Lords meanes are of force holding in (as it were) bound in a chaine, this great enemie within the pit; so as hee could not openly rage in bloody persecutions, by his Ethnicke and Pagan instruments, as before hee had done: from this is he bound, in this respect is his restraint, for the space of a thousand yeeres. The beginning wher∣of is (as some thinke) in the yeere 300. or there∣about, when Constantine the great began to beare rule, and became the Christian Emperour; and the ending was about the 1300. yeere, in the time of Pope Boniface the eighth. This binding implyeth a liberty before, from which he is now restrained; now his liberty before was open rage and bloodie persecution, as is shewed in chap. 6. and 12. and as may appeare by his practice, when hee getteth loose againe, here in vers. 8. 9. returning to his for∣mer bloody rage, and murtherous disposition to∣wards the Saints: therefore his binding this space of a thousand yeers, is a restraining of him so long from the open slaughtering of the Saints, (for else he is not bound simply one houre, Iob 1. 1. Pet. 5. 8.) but this was not before Constantine his dayes. Againe, Iohn seeth the beginning of his binding
in vision; therefore (according to a rule giuen in this preparatiue from cap, 4. 1. That, nothing, where∣of the original is shewed vnto Iohn, is to haue beginning before the time of this Reuelation) this binding be∣longeth not to the time of the beginning of the preaching of the Gospell; nor to take beginning in the time of Heathen Emperours, who bloodily in open furie raged against Christians, from which onely here he is now shewed to bee bound and re∣strained. The very act of this his binding, that is, of the restraint of his open and bloody slaughter∣ing of the Saints was begun, when he was cast, cap. 12. 9. out of heauen, (that is) when his instru∣ments (the Heathen tyrants) were by Constantine throwne from the Empire of Rome, the City then raigning ouer all, cap. 17. 18. Vers. 3. And cast him into the bottomlesse pit: that is, into the earth, ca. 12. 9. where, and vpon which, he must onely exercise his furie: and therefore is it said, cap. 12. 12. woe to the inhabitants of the earth; but with the Church in open rage, as be∣fore, he now was not to meddle; and therefore al∣so in the same place the heauens are exhorted to reioyce. The Earth is the state of the worldly sort, to which the starre fell, cap. 9. 1. and where he, be∣comming the beast, got by the Dragons helpe, do∣minion, cap. 13. 8. so as all the world did follow af∣ter him, chap. 13. 3. This earth is the bottomlesse pit, out of which the beast commeth, chap. 13. 11. and 17. 8. and 11. 7. when this Dragon was cast in∣to it, cap. 12. 9. for he (in the Heathen Emperours) no sooner was cast out of heauen into the earth,
(being then not able longer openly to persecute the Church) but began to worke for his grand∣child that Antichrist, to raise him out of the earth, in which among the earthly sort, hee was chained vp, as in a prison, as it is called heere in this chap∣ter, vers. 7. for it is a prison for Satan to be restrai∣ned from publicke and violent rage, yea from any degree of mischiefe against the Church. And shut him vp: that is, he was not suffered to goe beyond his limitts, but was kept within his bounds, as in a close prison-house: the phrase is in Genes. 7. 16. but to another end and purpose. And sealed, (to wit, the doore or stone) vpon him: An allusion to Dan. 6. 17. to signifie, as there, so here, that the pur∣pose was not to be changed. That he should deceiue the nations no more: These words shew the end of his restraint. By nations here is not meant the na∣tions and Gentiles, in chap. 11. 2. 18. for these hee had liberty to deceiue, making the Beast speake like him, chap. 13. 11. by which hee seduced the earth, vers. 14. and did helpe to send out frogs, (those vnclean spirits) from out of his own mouth, and out of the mouth of the Beast and false pro∣phet, chap. 16. 13. 14. But nations here must bee ta∣ken, as in vers. 8. here following, for the open ene∣mies of Christ; such as was formerly the fierce ty∣rants of Rome, and all such as professe not Christ. His deceiuing of them, was to moue them to bloody outrages, and open hostility against the Church, as appeareth in the said 8. verse. For his deceiuing heere, in this time of his binding, must bee vnder∣stood, as his deceiuing is to be takē, at his loosing
againe, from which here he is bound. So then the meaning is, that Satan should not haue for his in∣struments the open enemies of Christ (in all this space of a thousand yeeres) to kill, murther, and to make warre vpon the Saints, the true worshippers of God; though the earthly sort should neuerthe∣lesse bee plagued, and that with bloudshed and slaughter: for albeit he was cast out of heauen, yet with great wrath hee came vnto the inhabiters of the earth, (chap. 12. 12.) and the Turkish furie (in Gods iust iudgement) spared not the Antichri∣stians, chap. 9. 18, from whom hee was not at all bound. Till the thousand yeeres were fulfilled, and after that, he must be loosed a little season, as is againe deli∣uered in verse 7. Vers. 4. The Apostle telleth vs, what he saw af∣ter that Satan was cast into his prison and there bound vp. This vision is concerning the Church of Christ, that hidden number sealed (chap. 7.) and standing with Christ on Mount Sion, chap. 14. 1. And I saw: To wit, after the Dragons binding, thrones, that is, seates for Kings reigning with Christ. And they sate vpon them: who is meant by they may be vnderstood by considering the words following, and the last words of this verse, euen they that had iudgement giuen vnto them, that is, the spirit of discerning betweene Christianitie and Antichristianisme, they liued and reigned with Christ those thousand yeeres. And I saw the soules of them that were beheaded: Among this reigning companie, Iohn saw, that some of them should bee found out by the Dragons substitute, the Beast that Anti∣christ,
and by him be put to death. First, for main∣taining the truth, for the witnesse of Iesus, and for the word of God. Secondly, for not worshipping him the Beast, neither his image, &c. By which words it is cleere, that the Beast in chap. 13, euen that Romane Antichrist, is of great power, ruling mightily with∣in the space of these thousand yeeres; putting, as we here see, some of the faithfull to death, for vp∣holding the truth of Christ and his word, against his vsurped Antichristian power and authoritie. And they (that is, those that sate on the thrones, not they that were beheaded) liued and reigned with Christ those thousand yeeres. It is said with Christ, shewing, that this was not seene to the world; their life and reigne here was not worldly and open to mens eyes, but spirituall and hidden. If those that were beheaded liued not againe, some may heere aske; why are these words (they liued) added after, as if they had risen from the dead to reigne with Christ here; for this life and reigne is to be vnder∣stood to bee here on earth? I answere, for that in some sort, though not properly, those that were slaine may be said to liue and reigne; first, in respect that by their constant profession and suffering, they strengthened others in the faith to liue and reigne with Christ; and secondly, for that (when the ad∣uersaries had slaine them, and so thought them∣selues to be rid of them) the Lord raised vp others in their stead, to witnesse the same truth against those their enemies; in whom these slaine ones may be said to liue againe, as Eliah did in the person of Iohn Baptist, as Christ witnesseth: and as did also
the two Prophets, of which before in chap. 11. 3. 7. 8. 11. Vers. 5. But the rest of the dead: That is, such as were without the spirituall life of God, and so dead in the sinnes and trespasses of that Antichristian state, as Ephraim was dead in Baal, Hosea. 13. 1: and as the Church of Sardis was said to be dead, chap. 3. 1, so these left, according to the appointed time of God, to be seduced by worshipping of the Beast and his image, and by receiuing his marke also vpon their foreheads or hands, became dead to Godward; though as Sardis they were aliue in the iudgement of men. Liued not againe, till the thousand yeeres were finished: These words implie that first they once liued, then were dead, and after a thou∣sand yeeres were to liue againe, which cannot bee vnderstood of the selfesame persons. But thus wee must conceiue of this speech, that Antichrist sedu∣cing men from the true worship of God (in which respect men are said to be aliue) vnto a false wor∣ship of Christ, (in which respect they are said to be dead) and therein holding them for the space of a thousand yeeres; God would at length, by his faith∣full Ministers, call them out of this spirituall dark∣nes, as out of the graue, to liue in the light of the truth, which formerly had been forsaken. And here the text seemeth to speake of the same persons, (which yet cannot be) onely for that thefe last doe (through Gods mercy, after so long time) enter in∣to ye profession of that truth & true worship, which the first sort did receiue, and the seduced did for∣sake. This verse is a short repetition or remem∣brance
of that which is before spoken, concerning the power of the Gospell preached, regaining vnto Christ his people from vnder Antichrist, out of people, nations, and tongues, cap. 10. 11. and 14. 6. This is the first resurrection, to wit, so to be inlighte∣ned with the truth, as they come from popish su∣perstition and idolatrie, to the true and sincere worship of God, shewing foorth the powerfull ef∣fect thereof in life and conuersation. Vers. 6. As the spirit of God gaue before com∣fort to such, as should die for the truth against An∣tichrist, chap. 14. 13; so here he foretelleth such as haue been deceiued in that way, how happie and holy they shall be, when God giueth them grace to see the abomination of that whore, and vtterly to forsake her: Euery such a one shall be held holy and blessed, on whom the second death shall haue no po∣wer, so as they shall not perish for euer; touching the second death, what it is, see chap. 21. 8. But they, to wit, such as before are mentioned to sit vpon the thrones, vers. 4, who (before the end of the thou∣sand yeeres doe preuaile ouer the Beast, his image, and marke) shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reigne with him a thousand yeeres: so here great comfort is offered to all and euery one, which at the length are called out from vnder Antichrist; but such are most happie, which are euer preserued from him. Vers. 7. Here we are foretold, what shall happen at the end of a thousand yeeres. Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, the bottomlesse pit before named, vers. 3, that is, hee shall haue libertie to vse his for∣mer
power, and to rise vp in open rage against the open professors of the Gospell. Vers. 8. This setteth foorth the Diuels last at∣tempt being let loose. He shall goe out to deceiue, as he did before his binding, chap. 12. 9. the nations, that is, the open enemies of Christ, which are in the foure quarters of the earth, so it shall be the greatest power that he can make. Goe and Magog: So are the nations called, which Satan hath here the com∣maund of. The words are an allusion to Ezech. chap. 38. 1. and 39. 1. 6, who speaks of these enemies of the ancient people of God, being their last ene∣mies before the comming of the Messias, Christ our Sauiour, among them. So Iohn heere maketh mention of their names, to shew, that as they then were the last enemies of the Iewes before Christs first comming; so these nations deceiued by Sa∣tan, shall be the last open enemies, that euer the Church shal haue, to interrupt her outward peace, till the second comming of Christ, as the finall doome of the Diuell in vers. 10; and next the re∣membrance of the last iudgement, in verses 11. 15, plainly tell vs. Some here vnderstand by Gog the Pope and his strength, by Magog, the Turke and his power; for that the one is a couert enemie of Christ; the other an open: but they, that thus take the name Gog, doe not consider, that before this battell be, the Pope the Beast and false Prophet are vtterly destroyed, and sent packing vnto hell; as in the former chapter may be seene, vers. 20. To gather them together in battell: The end of deceiuing them, to make them to intend the vtter extirpation of
the Church of God. The number of whom is as the sand of the sea: Noting hereby the innumerable multitude of them, as in Iudg. chap. 7. 12. Vers. 9. After the gathering of the armie, the enterprise is here set downe, going and spreading themselues, as a floud vpon the face of the earth, farre and wide; words of allusion to Ezech. 38. 9. 16, and endeuouring that none of the faithfull should escape them, they therefore compassed a∣bout the tents of the Saints, as the Aramites did Dothan, 2. King. 6. 14. 15, and the Chaldeans Ieru∣salem, 2. King. 25. 1. And the beloued Citie, the hea∣uenly new Ierusalem, cap. 21. 2. And fire came downe from God out of heauen and deuoured them: By this is meant some ineuitable deuouring destruction, as it were out of heauen, from Gods immediate po∣wer vpon these enemies, who had compassed so a∣bout the Church of God, without whose especiall helpe, they could not haue escaped the rage and bloudy intendment of their foes; fearefull destru∣ction is set out by fire, Iob. 15. 34. and 20. 26. Psal. 21. 9. an allusion either to ye destruction of Zodom, Gen. 19, or to the deuouring vp of the proud Cap∣taines with their fifties by fire, 2. King. 1. 10. 12. Vers. 10. The finall conclusion of the last enemy here is shewed, after the destruction of his armie, the Diuels endlesse damnation, with his grand∣child Antichrist, chap. 19. 20. Vers. 11. From this verse to the end of the chap∣ter, is, as it were, a description of the last iudge∣ment; first to shew, that from this last battell, in which the last enemies were ouerthrowne, and Sa∣tan
cast into hell, there should bee peace to Gods Church vnto the comming of Christ vnto iudge∣ment; of which peaceable and gracefull state of the Church is spoken in the next chapter, from the be∣ginning thereof vnto the end of the fifth verse of the 22 chapter. But secondly, to giue vs another consideration of the end of all sorts of enemies to Gods Church: for the Spirit hauing giuen vs knowledge of two battels, with the issue of both, and of the destruction of the grand Captaines, chap. 19. 20. and here in this chap. vers. 10; now for that it is not likely that all and euery one of their part were in the said Armies, but that there were also many other which came not to the battels, here we are giuen to know, how the Lord procee∣ded against them; euen as a Iudge in a most holie and vpright course of iustice to reward them after their workes; and so to remoue from before his presence, whatsoeuer might hinder the making of a new heauen and a new earth, of which he speakes in the next chapter, and of the abolishing of an earth and an heauen in this verse of this chapter. And I saw a great white throne: An allusion to Dan. chap. 7. 9. 10. A throne is a seate of kingly maiestie; white noteth puritie, and so vprightnes of that seate of iustice: great, as fit for so glorious and high a potentate as Christ is, Tit. 2. 13. Luk. 1. 32. And him that sate on it▪ Christ the Iudge of quick and dead, (Act. 10. 41.) who was brought foorth heere in this booke first standing, in chap. 1, and in the time of the Churches troubles, chapter 8. 3, and 14. 1: but after the Church was somewhat recoue∣red,
and heere now victoriously preuailing, hee is shewed here sitting, and in chap. 14. 14. From whose face the earth and the heauen fled away: What this flying away is, the next words shew, and there was found no place for them, because they are corrupt be∣fore him, and all shal become new, the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. verses of the next Chapter doe expound this verse. Vers. 12. And I saw the dead: These be they that be brought before the Iudge, small and great, that is, all without exception, stand before God, making now their appearance. And the bookes were opened: An allusion to Dan. 7. 10. His proceeding is by cleere euidence in writing; the bookes here be the consciences of men, which as open books, when men come to be iudged, shall shew what euery man is; these be the common books of all men, in and out of the Church, not ordained to be saued; for there is another booke for the elect, which is the booke of life; of which mention is made chap. 3. 5, and 13. 8. Luk. 10. 10. Exod. 32. 32. Phil. 4. 3. This booke here is opened, that Gods elect may be seene & knowne. By the way note, that all things here thus set down are spoken according to men in iudiciall procee∣dings, not that God either hath or needeth any such booke. And the dead were iudged out of these things, which were written in the bookes, that is, accor∣ding to their workes. So these last words shew, what are those written things in the bookes, euen mens workes. Vers. 13. Here is shewed, whence all these dead appearing before God are fetched; from the sea,
the graue, or place where death hath seased vpon them. Vers. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, where the diuell, the beast and false pro∣phets are, vers. 10. The meaning I take to be onely this, that there should bee a full end of the Chur∣ches enemies▪ and of all deadly meanes whatsoe∣uer, that might hinder her gracefull and glorious state, described in the Chapter following. Vers. 15. And, to wit, for to know a conclusion of all reprobates, all such inhabiters of the earth, that haue worshipped the beast, chap. 13. 8. and haue holpen him to tread downe the holy Citie, cap. 11. 2. and merrily reioyced at the murthering of the faithfull witnesses and Preachers of the truth, chap. 11. 10. Whosoeuer was not found written in the booke of life, was cast into the lake of fire. In this description of iudgement, mention is onely made of the dead, and of the reprobates, and of Christs proceeding to remoue them, as he did before their captaines and heads; which maketh me to thinke, that this heere is onely made mention of, to giue full comfort to the Church of her perfect deliue∣rance, from all and euery enemie, small and great, and from all meanes of her future hurt and ruine, as is death and hell: that so, without any let or hindrance, she may be that holy and heauenly Ci∣ty, that bride adorned for her husband, to liue with him for euer. Notes on Chap. 21. Vers. 1. Iohn hauing told of the vanishing of
the earth and heauen, in the former chapter, vers. 11. heere hee sheweth what ensued thereupon, all became new; a new heauen and a new earth: as in Esa. chap. 65. 17. and 66. 22. for the first heauen, and the first earth were passed away, as in cap. 20. 11. is foretold. And there was no more sea: that is, no more vnquietnesse and troublesome state. The sea cannot rest, whose waters cast vp dirt and mire, Esa. 57. 20. therefore may an vnquiet state be com∣pared to the sea. Vers. 2. And Iohn saw the holy City: The same that was before troden vnder foot, chap. 11. 2. but now exalted on high from her former low state, and obtaineth a new name, and is called the new Ierusalem, the bride, and the Lambs wife, cap. 19. 7. and heereafter, vers. 6. So all the company of the faithfull are compared to the City Ierusalem; and to a bride to be a wife vnto Christ, comming downe from God out of heauen: This new Citie is the very hand of God, and his worke from aboue out of hea∣uen, whence she hath her birth, and which she shal possesse for an euerlasting inheritance. Prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, whē she is of a most heauenly condition, shee is then prepared; and when she is arayed in fine linnen, cleane and white, cap. 19. 8. shee is adorned, and a wife ready for her husband, the Lambe Iesus Christ. Vers. 3. And I heard a great voice out of heauen: as it were following this bride, this new Ierusalem from heauen; to shew, that the matter here spoken of, was so indeed, and not a dreame, how strange and incredible soeuer to mans reason; and there∣fore
a heauenly voice confirmeth it, saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, &c. chap. 7. 15. all the words taken out of Ezech. 37. 27. 28. Vers. 4. God his dwelling with his people ma∣keth all things happie to them, and remooueth a∣way all sorrow with the causes thereof; heere is shewed, when that was to come to passe, which in the generall view of the Churches state is set downe, in chap. 7. 16. 17. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes, (as he speaketh in Esa. 25. 8.) who before haue wailed and lamented, because now they see, that God is reconciled to them, and become their God, and also come vnto them, which might seeme before to haue been forsaken; and that it might appeare how effectually the Lord would wipe away teares, it is said, that there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nei∣ther shall there be any more paine. That is, no more such causes, meanes and instruments of death, sor∣row, crying, and paine, as formerly had been: of which happinesse summarily before, in chap. 7. 16. 17. And the reason of all this is giuen, because the former things are passed away, that is, the first earth, and heauen, and sea, all the Dragons Empire, the Beasts dominion, power and practice, the deceits of the false prophet, and whatsoeuer was before a∣ny annoyance to the Church, and hurtfull to the quiet peace thereof: for now it may be said of the Church, as in Esa. 54. 14. and 60. 18. and 61. 3. 7. reade the places. Vers. 5. And for that these things here spoken seeme so impossible, and so hard to bee beleeued,
he that sate vpon the throne, that is, God Almighty, chap. 20. 11. 12. and one that cannot lie, said, be∣hold I make all things new: a new heauen, a new earth, all things new. And that what here he hath spoken might be taken for certaine truth, Iohn is commanded to write them, with this reason, that these words are true and faithfull; and therefore to be assuredly fulfilled in their time, though men should hold them false, and not worthie credit. Vers. 6. And he said vnto me, it is done: So in E∣zech. 39. 8. Behold it is come, it is done saith the Lord God, this is the day whereof I haue spoken. The mystery of God spoken of, in chap. 10. 7. now was finished, and that in two things, wherein the fulfil∣ling did consist: The one in taking full vengeance vpon all the enemies of Christ and his Church, at the pouring out of the seuenth viall, the last of the last seuen plagues; and therefore it was there said, it is done, cap. 16. 17. The other, in bringing the Church into so glorious and happie estate, as is heere set downe; and therefore now also againe it is said, it is done. I am Alpha and Omega: that is, the beginning and the end; this here foretold and pro∣mised, is of me; I begin it, I finish it: for of mee, by me, and for me, are all things, Rom. 11. 36. The Lord is the first and the last, Esa. 44. 6. & 48. 12. he hath wrought and done it, Esa. 41. 4. Now for that the Lord knew, that such happie and excellent things as here are spoken of, and so certainly to be fulfilled, would worke in the hearts of the faithfull, a vehement desire for the accomplishment there∣of, he here promiseth in a figuratiue speech to sa∣tisfie
their thirst, to the full; to giue to such a one as is athirst, ardently inflamed in his affection after these things, of the fountaine of the water of life, chap. 7. 17. and that such a one shall partake of the gra∣ces of his spirit, Ioh. 7. 38. 39. and that freely of his sole mercie and good fauour towards him. Vers. 7. Here, lest men should thinke a feruent desire to be enough, to assure them of that which is heere foretold and promised, the Lord telleth them of a victorie which they must get, saying, hee that ouercommeth shall inherit all things. Concluding with the words of the Couenant made of old with his people, I will be his God, and he shall bee my sonne. Vers. 8. But (as if he had said) what here I pro∣mise concerneth nothing the vngodly, of which, for example sake, I will name some, the fearfull and vnbeleeuing and abominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and lyars, they shall not enioy any part or portion of this new heauen and earth, but shall haue their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, the place of the diuell, the beast and false prophet, chap. 19. 20. and 20. 10. which is the second death, separation from God for euer. Vers. 9. Now that it might appeare, that no such filthie persons can come into this heauenly Citie, (as is noted also in vers. 27. of this chapter) and to shew the Lords seruants more at large what this new Ierusalem is, before mentioned, for whose sake he would make all things new, heere is a most full and perfect description giuen therof, which Iohn is made to behold, the same being
shewed him by one of the seuen Angels, which had the seuen vials full of the last plagues, the same that shew∣ed him the damnation of the great whore, chapt. 17. 1. which is (as I take it) the discouerer of the one, and of the other; because these Angels and in∣struments of God were the meanes of the destru∣ction of the one, and the furtherers of the Chur∣ches happinesse and glory here spoken of. Vers. 10. Iohn to see the whore, was carried in the spirit into the wildernesse, chap. 17. 3. for it was necessary to be set apart from the whorish pain∣ting of that harlot, and with a spirituall vnderstan∣ding to bee enlightened, that hee might truly dis∣cerne her to bee the whore, though beloued of men, yet hated and condemned of God: but here Iohn is carried away in the spirit to a great and high mountaine: (an allusion to Ezech. 40. 2.) for the Ci∣tie is on high; therefore must Iohn bee on high to see it; as Moses was vpon Pisgah, to behold the land of Canaan, Deut. 34. 1. This Citie for com∣passe is great, many shall enter into it, vers. 24. For qualitie, holy, no vncleane thing shall come into it, vers. 27. Ierusalem it is called; for that, God, as there once, so now heere, will dwell in it for euer, Ezech. 48. 35. and it descended out of heauen from God, as in vers. 2. Vers. 11. Hauing the glory of God: that is, such maiesty, beauty, and excellent brightnesse, as God himselfe did put vpon her; whereupon it is said, And her light was like vnto a stone most pretious, euen like a Iasper stone: such a one, as with which God himselfe is set out, cap. 4. 3. cleere as Chrystall, with∣out
any dimnesse at all; for Gods glory did ligh∣ten it, vers. 23. Vers. 12. And had a wall great and high: freed from perill of aduersaries, and now safe on euerie side: and had 12. gates; that is, passage into the same euery way; an allusion to Ezech. 48. 30. And at the gates twelue Angels, as Porters to let in, not now to keepe men out, as the Angell with the sha∣king sword, Genes. 3. And they had names, (both for assurance and direction) written thereon, what these be is expounded, euen the names of the 12. tribes of the children of Israell. Vers. 13. The placing of the gates, three to e∣uery quarter, of which also Ezechiel speaketh, though not in the same order, chap. 48. 31. 34. The mysterie may be, in bringing these faithfull Israe∣lites to God. Vers. 14. And the wall of the Citie had 12. foun∣dations. As the wall had twelue gates, and the names of the twelue tribes written vpon them: so had it twelue foundations, and in them the names of the Lambes twelue Apostles; Peters supremacie here is quite out of date. The Romish Synagogue layeth Peter for the foundation, or Peters person, (for that hee was at Rome, as they say, but can not certainly prooue it), rather then his true preaching, which they hate and abhor. The Pope loueth not Pauls doctrine, but hee loueth to bee wealding his sword; therefore hath neither hee, nor his, any part or portion in this new and holy City. Vers. 15. And he that talked with me, had a golden
reede to measure the City, and the gates thereof, and the walles thereof: An allusion to Ezech. 40. 3. 5. The Temple was onely measured before, cap. 11. 1. but here the City, gates and walles, euery thing must come exactly vnder rule and line now; a golden reed shall mete out euery thing to a fit and most certaine proportion. Of this reed see chap. 11. 1. which is here golden, a reed most fit to measure such a City with. Vers. 16. And the City lieth foure square: because it is most firme and stable without any tottering and moueable state, and because it looketh euery way to the foure corners of the earth; by the gates to receiue in vnto it frō all parts of the earth. And the length is as large as the breadth: As this hath compasse and is spread abroad, so hath it like length and full continuance without alteration. And hee, that is, the Angell, vers. 9. 15. measured the Citie with a reed: as he had a reed for the purpose, so hee applieth it to the worke, and findeth it by true measure to he 12000. furlongs, eight furlongs being a mile, it is 1500. miles. Now the length and the breadth, and the heighth being equall, it maketh this to be wonderfull incredible; but all is to set out vnto vs, how abundantly capable this City is to entertaine the innumerable multitude, which shall come vnto it. Vers. 17. And hee measured the wall thereof, 144. cubits: which is twelue times twelue, of which number it wholly consisteth, according to the 12. foundations of the twelue Apostles, vers. 14. This measure is of the walles breadth for the heighth;
and length must bee iudged by the heighth and length of the Citie, else it could not compasse the Citie, nor be high enough for so high a City; and necessity requireth that there bee an answerable thicknesse to so long and high a wall, that it may be strong and defensible for the Citie; nothing a∣ble to shake it or pierce it through. The length and spaciousnesse of the City is for capablenesse of in-commers, the height is for the manifold and goodly mansions, the thicknesse of the wall com∣passing round the same with answerable height, giueth vs the inuincible strength of the City, and the security of the inhabitants. Iohn hauing told vs of the measuring of the wall, he in the last place sheweth, vnto vs, what kinde of measuring here is meant, the measure of a man; that is, (saith he) of an Angell, that is, so a mans measure, as it is also the Angels measure. Vers. 18. After the forme and measure, heere we are shewed the matter of which the wall, City, foundation, and gates were made of, yea and what the very street of the City was paued with, vers. 19. 20. 21. all to point out to vs the vnspeakable glory of this heauenly Citie, as Esay likewise doth to comfort the afflicted, cap. 54. 11. 12. Vers. 22. And I saw no Temple therein; no secret or hidden number, (as in chap. 11. 1.) no separated place, as in old Ierusalem to beautifie and to make glorious this City. For now the Lord God Almigh∣ty, and the Lambe are the Temple of it. To whom all haue free accesse, and who doth make his Saints in this heauenly Ierusalem glorious, as the Tem∣ple
did afore time Ierusalem. Vers. 23. And the Citie had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moone to shine in it. Words of allusion vnto Esa. ca. 60. 19. 20. and borrowed from thence. Now the Prophet meant not in comforting the Church then, that they should haue no more light of Sunne and Moone: for liuing in the world, they so should haue liued in perpetuall darknesse, and not haue enioyed the common blessings of this life; from which meaning the Prophet was farre, seeing the Lord created Sunne and Moone for mans vse, which therefore hee would not de∣priue his owne people of. But the light of the Sun and Moone is put for earthly and fading comforts of this life, as the rest of the words of the Prophet in the same verses shew; for instead of the light of Sunne and Moone, which is not euer, he opposeth the Lord the euerlasting light, and so concludeth, that the dayes of mourning shall bee ended. Be∣cause this their comfort by the Lord, shall not bee like the light of the Sunne and Moone, which ei∣ther passeth away, or is often darkened: Therefore here by the not needing the light of Sunne and Moone, (the glory of God and the Lambe being the light of it) is meant, that such solace and ioy, such glad∣nesse of heart and heauenly comfort this City ta∣keth in the Lord, and in his glorious presence, as all earthly comfort, though it were as the light of the Sunne by day, and as the light of the Moone by night, should bee as superfluous and needlesse and of no respect in comparison of it. Vers. 24. And the nations of them that are saued,
shall walke in the light of it, and the Kings of the earth: that is, euen such as before were bewitched with the whore of Babylon, chap. 17. 2. and some (per∣haps) of those that bewailed her ouerthrow, cap. 18. 9. doe bring their glory and honour to it, of this speaketh Esa. 60. 3. Vers. 25. And the gates of it shall not bee shut at all by day: and the reason is giuen, for there shall bee no night there: the like saying is in Esa. chap. 60. 11. Vers. 26. And they (that is, as I take it, the Kings, vers. 24.) shall bring the glory and honour of the nations vnto it. Vers. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, &c. Here is the pure and vn∣defiled state of this new Ierusalem, which is ther∣fore called holy, vers. 2. of the inhabitants heere of speaketh also Esa. cap. 60. 21. Ioel 3. 17. Zach. 14. 21. Esa. 52. 1. Notes vpon chap. 22. Vers. 1. And he, that is, the Angell, chap. 21. 9. 10. shewed me: as before the excellent beautie of the Citie, so now the abundance of the meanes of life in the same, by which the inhabitants liue therein plentifully. A pure riuer of water of life. Wa∣ter is the spirit and heauenly graces thereof, chap. 21. 6. Ioh. 7. 38. 39. Of life, for that it maketh such as drinke thereof to liue for euer, Ioh. 4. 14. Ezech. 47. 9. Riuer, for the plentie and continuance here∣of. Pure, for the sanctity thereof in it selfe, and ma∣king
others pure also. Cleere as Crystall: the purity is without any mixture of vncleannesse. Of these waters speake the Prophets, Ezech. 47. 1. 8. Ioel 3. 18. and Zach. 14. 8. Psal. 45. 4. proceeding out of the throne, (that is, the head of the riuer) of God and of the Lambe: for the Lambe is in the middest of the throne, chapt. 5. 6. the waters flow out from the Temple and Altar, Ezech. 47. 1. but here being no Temple, chap. 21. 22. and so no Altar, but God and the Lambe in the roome thereof; therefore this water commeth from his throne, of which menti∣on is made, as in many places of this prophecie, so in cap. 4. where it is set in heauen, vers. 2. but there proceeded out of it, lightenings, thunders, and voices, vers. 5. but here only water of life. Vers. 2. And in the middest of the street of it: that is, of the Citie which is of pure gold, chap. 21. 21. and of either side of the riuer was there the tree of life: an allusion vnto Paradise, Gen. 2. 9. of which also in chap. 2. 7. of this prophecie. So it was in the o∣pen place for euery one to come to, as a tree in the middest of the street, in which al the Citizens may walke, and so haue freedome to eate of the fruite. And it is euer greene and fruitfull, being planted so in the street, as also the riuer passed on both sides of it. Which bare twelue manner of fruits: The number of twelue the spirit keepeth constantly, in this and the former Chapter; but here because of the faithfull, comprehended vnder the twelue tribes, chap. 21. 12. whom it shall bee sufficient to feed with fulnesse, and yet without lothing, as bringing forth variety, twelue kinds of fruits, and
that euery moneth, so as heere should be no want at any time, Ezech. 47. 12: and the leaues of the tree were for the healing of the nations, Ezech. 47. 12. The fruite was for life, and here are leaues for health, so as this tree of life maketh them not onely to liue, but to liue healthfully. Vers. 3. And there shall be no more curse: An allu∣sion to Zach. 14. 11. Men (saith he) shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more vtter destruction; and the reason is giuen, because God and the Lambe shall continue in it, and his seruants shal serue him; the curse is for transgressors, and not for the obe∣dient. Vers. 4. And they shall see his face: They shal haue comfortable and familiar knowledge of him; for hee shall challenge them to himselfe, and they shall be sufficiently knowne to be his people; ha∣uing his name in their foreheads, as those in chap. 14. 1. Vers. 5. And there shall be no night there: No darknesse of aduersitie, or discomfort, that they should either need lesser or greater earthly means of comfort; either deuised of themselues, as the light of a candle; or otherwise affoorded them, as the Sunnes light: for that the Lord himselfe gi∣ueth them light, as is noted before (chap. 21. 23). And they shall reigne for euer and euer: Vnspeakable is the happinesse of the Saints in this new Ieru∣salem, which here is made vp to the full, that it shall be without end. Hitherto is the description of the most gracefull and glorious estate of the Church of Christ, which may rauish the hearts of
all that reade it, to say with the Lords people, verse 20, Come Lord Iesus. Now concerning this so holie a Citie and bles∣full state of the Church, I finde two opinions: the one, that here is set out the Church triumphant in hea∣uen, after the resurrection at the last day: the other, that here so is to be vnderstood the Church triumphant, as yet neuerthelesse withall, is foreshewed such a most happie condition, as in some sort to befall the Church of Christ here on earth, after the happie conuersion of the Iewes; whose embracing of the Gospell, shall be as life and riches to the Christian world, Rom. 11. 12. 15; and in comparison of which time wee are yet, but as in a kinde of liuelesse state and poore condi∣tion. The reasons for the opinion fetched from the text are these: I. Because this Citie is said to come downe from God, cap. 21. vers. 2; and not to ascend vp, or to be taken vp vnto God, as the Church tri∣umphant, at the last day shall be, 1. Thess. 4. 17. Christ will come to take the Church vp to him∣selfe, Ioh. 14. 3. it shall not come downe after the last iudgement to remaine here. II. Because she is said to bee prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband, vers. 2. Now the Church triumphant of all the elect gathered together, is not a Bride pre∣pared, but a wife in mariage fully accomplished. III. Because it is called a Tabernacle, a remouing state, and God also said to be with men, and to dwell, as in a Tabernacle, with them. Concerning the Church triumphant, the manner of speaking is to say, that it is with God. IV. Because the holy Ghost so strongly confirmeth this renouatiō of al things,
auouching it againe and againe, vers. 1. 5, com∣manding to write it, and affirming the words to be faithfull and true: which needed not in so ge∣nerall approued and beleeued truth, touching the state of the Church triumphant. V. Because Iohn is made to ascend high vp, to see this new City be∣low him descending out of heauen from God. VI. Because it is said to bee measured, and that with the measure of a man, ver. 16. 17; which shew∣eth it to bee the Church militant, which is onely measurable, and to be measured, chap. 11. 1. Zach. 1. 16, but not the triumphant. VII. Because here is said, that nations shall walke in the light of it; and Kings of the earth bring their glorie and honour vnto it, vers. 24, yea, the glorie and honour of the Nations to it, vers. 26. But can any bring earthly glorie and honour (for of such glorie and honour hee speaketh) vnto heauen aboue, to beautifie it withall? VIII. This opinion seemeth not altoge∣ther vnreasonable, albeit some things spoken after the letter, carrie our thoughts to a state of full per∣fection, chap. 21. 4. and 22. 3. 4. 5; for that the like speeches are vttered by the holy Prophets afore∣time, to set out the gracefull and peaceable state of the Church, Esai. 65. 17. 18. 19. 25. and 60. 18. 20. and 25. 8. and 60. 21. IX. Because some such like thing is promised to the Iewes, in the books of the Prophets, not yet hitherto, as may seeme, fulfilled; but deferred till the seuenth trumpet bee blowne, when the mysterie of God shall be finished, as hath been declared to his seruants the Prophets, chap. 10. 7. By which words it is cleere, that all things in the
Prophets are not accomplished, till this booke of the Reuelation bee fulfilled; for the Prophets for∣merly haue spoken of this mysterie to be finished vnder the seuenth trumpet. Now that wee may not wonder at the new Ieru∣salem here set foorth, looke vnto the prophecies of old, and marke what by them the Lord did pro∣mise vnto the Iewes after their captiuitie. I. He tel∣leth them, they shall bee brought backe againe to Ierusalem, and to inhabite Iudea, Zach. 8. 7. 8. and 10. 8. 9. Esai. 60. 10. 15. and 62. 10: and this shall the Lord doe, who will cause righteousnesse and praise before all nations, Esai. 61. 11. II. Hee will poure vpon them the spirit of grace and supplica∣tion, and they shall looke vpon him whom they haue pierced, and they shall mourne for him, &c. Zach. 12. 10. 14. III. He will make them strong to ouerthrow all their enemies, and they shall in∣habite Ierusalem againe, Zach. 12. 6, and build the old wasts; they shall raise vp the former desola∣tions, and they shall repaire the waste Cities, and the desolations of many generations, Esai. 61. 4. and 58. 12. and that by the helpe of strangers and their Kings, Esai. 60. 10. IV. Being so built, where∣as it had been forsaken and hated, so as no man went thorough it, he will make it an eternall excel∣lencie, and a ioy of many generations, Esai. 60. 15. For first, violence shall no more bee heard in the land, wasting nor destruction within the borders, but her walls shall bee called saluation, and her gates praise, Esai. 60. 18: the Sunne shall be no more her light by day, neither for brightnes shall
the Moone giue light vnto her, &c. Esai. 60. 18. 19. 20. Secondly, all the people shall bee righteous, Esai. 60. 21, and no Canaanite there, Zach. 14. 21. Thirdly, her officers shall be officers of peace, and her Exactours, righteousnes, Esai. 60. 17. Fourthly, her watchmen shall neuer be silent, Esai. 62. 6, nei∣ther euer be wanting, Esai. 59. 21: but the false pro∣phets and vncleane spirits shall be cut off, Zach. 13. 2: so as by this glorious and gracefull state she shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, Esai. 62. 2, that is, Hephzi-bah, and the land Beulah, for the Lord would delight in her and marrie her; or Iehouah-there, shall be the name of that Citie, Ezech. 48. 35. V. Hereupon they shall be knowne among the Gentiles, & peo∣ple, and all that see their seede and ofspring, shall acknowledge them the seede which the Lord hath blessed, Esai. 61. 9, a holy people, the redeemed of the Lord, sought out and not forsaken, Esai. 62. 12. VI. The Gentiles and their Kings shall see her righteousnesse and glorie, Esai. 62. 2: whereupon they shall come to her, Esai. 60. 3, and that with earnest desire and high estimation of her, Zach. 8. 22. 23, and be ioyned to the Lord, and become his people also with her, Zach. 2. 11. These Nations and Kings shall bring to her sonnes & daughters, Esai. 60. 4. and 49. 22, inrich her mightily with a∣bundance and precious things, Esai. 60. 6. 17. she shall eate the riches of the Gentiles, Esai. 61. 6, and sucke the milke of the Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings, Esai. 60, 16, who shal be her nursing fathers, and the Queenes her nursing mothers, Esai. 49. 23,
bringing her presents and gifts, Esai. 60. 6. and 45. 14. They shall fall downe and make supplication, Esai. 45. 14: they shall worship with their faces to the earth, and licke the dust of her feete, Esa. 49. 23. Zach. 14. 16. Strangers shall be her seruants, Esai. 61. 5: yea such as will not serue her, shall be de∣stroyed, Esai. 60. 12. Zach. 14. 17. She shall bee a crowne of glorie in the hand of the Lord, and a royall Diademe in the hand of her God, Esai. 62. 3. And this her excellencie shall neuer bee changed, her daies of mourning shall be ended, Esai. 60. 19. 20, her ioy euerlasting, Esai. 61. 7. for euer shall her land be inherited, Esai. 60. 21. Zach. 14. 11: for to the Lord is she married, Esai. 62. 4, who sweareth by his right hand, and the arme of his strength, to giue her no more ouer to her enemies. Esai. 62. 8. At that day the Lord shall bee King ouer all the earth, and in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name One, Zach. 14. 9. Thus wee see, what glo∣rious promises are made to that people; which, whether alreadie fulfilled, or yet to be expected, and in this prophecie here foretold, I leaue to the godly, wise, and learned to iudge of, and to deter∣mine. Whatsoeuer is hereby to bee vnderstood, (whether only the Church glorious and trium∣phant after the resurrection; or a peaceable and gracefull state of the Church militant, for a time, after her enemies are destroyed, and the ancient people of God called) the Angell which spake vn∣to Iohn telleth him, that these sayings are faithfull and true, vers. 6. Therefore let vs beleeue, pray, and expect the accomplishment of the words of this
blessed prophecie: The rest of the words from verse 6 to the end are not difficult, and therefore here I end this preparatiue. Thou O Lord which testifiest these things, saist, Surely I come quickly, Amen, euen so come Lord Iesus. THE ART OF ARITHMETICKE for Papists, to reckon the iust worth of their Pope: OR, The skill of counting the number of the Beast, which is 666 by numerall letters in seuerall languages, shewing his full valuation, and how truly to price him. The Papists claime for the Pope. The Protestants grant. The Beasts marke fitteth him. As all other here∣tofore, so the now present Pope Paul is in Gods stead. PaVLo V to VICe-Deo. 666 Wee ought so to account of him. PaVL'ssVre a VICeGoD 666 He is, by his seate at Rome, a Romane. — 666 He standeth vp as supreme Lord iust∣ly. Adonikam— 666 He is of the Latin church, establishing only Latin seruice. — 666
Hee is heere on Earth, Gods Vicar generall. GeneraLIs DeI VICarIVs In terrIs—— 666 He is a very great Commander, & yet professeth himselfe a seruant of seruants. Loe, a serVant of serVants, a LorDLy SoVeraIgne— 666 Hee is a shining light. ——— 666 Hee is as farre a∣boue the Emperour, as the Sunne aboue the Moone. ———— 666 He may doe what he will, & none may say, why dost thou so? FaCIat qVoD VVLt— 666 Peters keyes giue him authoritie to dispose of kingdoms. EXtera Dant CLaVes Pe∣trI——— 666 He sitteth as Tea∣cher of the people, in the holie Chaire of Saint Peter. In pIâ CatheDrâ St. I PetrI InstrVens popVLI— 666 Hee cannot erre, as Pope, sitting in that seate. Vt Papa neqVIt è CatheDrâ faLsa statVere.— 666 His particular Church is the Ita∣lian Church. — 666 But Rome, or the Rom. Church is the Catholike Church. — 666
He is the Head of the onely Catholike Church on Earth. CapVt soLIVs ECCLesIae Ca∣thoLICae hIs In terrIs— 666 He hath giuen to him a triple crowne. TrIpLeX Corona DatVr— 666 Therefore wee must account him blessed. —— 666 Behold now the account you make of the Pope (ye Papists) we do willingly agree in the rec∣koning, and hereby finde him to be In his teaching a bad Guide. —— 666 Through his pride. In hIs sVperIorIty the DI∣VeLLs LeIfetenant— 666 A Tyrant by his lawes. DeCreta sVa SVnt Leges Ve∣rè TyrannI—— 666 And therefore should euery one say to him,   Ito Lege eXeCranDVs— 666
THE BVILDING OF Babylon: OR, THE PORTRAITVRE OF THE Popedome, and the Church of Rome in the Beasts number 666. The Papists praises thereof. As this number 666 is comely and faire to the eye: So is our Church of Rome, very beautifull and comely. As this number 666 is outward in all parts the same and a like, and one figure differing from an other in place onely and valuation: So our Church is at vnitie in it selfe, in the whole and euery part, and no difference but in place for order sake, and valuation, after mens worthinesse. As this number 666 a∣riseth by an orderly and iust proportion, from 6 to 60, and from 60 to 600, to make this whole summe: So the degrees in our Church, arise in a due proportion one aboue another, to make vp this Hierarchicall state. As this number 666 is made of six, six, and six, which is a perfect num∣ber; yea it hath such per∣fection in it, (as Fra. Iu∣nius vpon Reu. 13. 18, our So is our Church such a state, and so perfect a structure, squared after the perfect platforme of gouernment and disci∣pline in the volume of
aduersarie saith) as no o∣ther hath the like what∣soeuer: Decretals; especiallie since Boniface the 8 ad∣ded to the fiue bookes the sixth, as the like is not to be seene. As this number 666 cannot in any figure bee altred, but the whole wil thereby be changed; such a coherence is in euerie part to the whole, and the whole to the parts: So our Church can admit no alteration in a∣ny part, without a great change in the whole; so firmely and with such an agreement is the whole with the parts, and these againe with it compa∣cted together. As this number 666 is raised vpon ten, as ten times 6 make 60, and ten times 60 make 600: So our Church by the peoples deuotiō giuing a tenth of their labour, and the tithes due is thus raised, and come to this glorie and excellencie. THE PROTESTANTS TRVE AND right insight into this so cunningly framed Synagogue of Satan. I. This number of 666 how comely so euer it be, yet is it not numerus nu∣meratus, but onely nume∣rus numerans, as the text sheweth, Reu. 13. 18, and therefore is but a meere So this Antichristian state is a meere number, standing vpon fashiona∣ble formalitie, Canoni∣call order, places and degrees, but teaching nothing; a state kee∣ping
number in a forme and order, without any thing numbred; and therefore teacheth nothing, but formes, orders, & places. the people in igno∣rance. II. This number 666 is a number of a man, Reuel. 13. 18, and for the Beast; not Gods number, which is another farre differing from this, and opposit to it, Reu. 14. 1. So this Babylonish building is but the inuē∣tion of man, for the beast∣like Harlot: and therfore what vnitie soeuer there be, it is contrary to God, as the state is to Christ and his Church. III. This number 666 neither beginneth with 4, nor attaineth to the fourth place, which 4 is the square number, Reu. 21. 16, for stable buil∣ding. So this Romish Hierar∣chie was not begun vpon stable ground, neither yet hath attained to an vnmoueable certaintie; but is a tottering state, & ere long will fall down flat, Reu. 14. 8. and 18. 2. IV. This number 666 cannot be raised vpon 12 by any meanes, which is Gods nūber; vpon which he buildeth his heauenly Ierusalem, and by which he numbreth his people, Reu. 21. 14, and 7. and 14. So this Synagogue cannot bee raised vp by the twelue Apostles do∣ctrine, but by the sixe bookes of the Decretals, mens precepts, inuen∣tions and traditions; and therefore not to be held Gods building, nor they numbred for Gods peo∣ple.
V. This number 666 is raised onely vpon ten, & the difference in place and valuation of the fi∣gures is only by it. So this Rom. Church, abusing the true Chur∣ches maintenance, to wit, the tenths & tithes, hath raised vp her selfe in such degrees, orders, and places of esteeme, which is an Antichristiā practice: for ten is Gods number appointed to maintaine his Church, alreadie raised vpon 12, and not for the reareing of it vp, that is the abuse of the maintenance. VI. This number 666 cōmeth but to the third place, when Gods num∣ber cōmeth to the sixth place, 144000; and so is but as the halfe thereof, as it is of sixes; sixe being the halfe of twelue, the number for Gods buil∣ding. So this Church of Rome, whatsoeuer it pre∣tendeth, is in the best, (ei∣ther of all, or any part thereof) only halfe Apo∣stolike, halfe Christian; agreeing with the true Church in some gene∣rals, but being hereticall, idolatrous & Antichri∣stian in particular do∣ctrines, in discipline, and many practises. VII. This nūber 666 cannot admit of 12 for the multiplier, but must alter wholy the number. So this Pseudocatho∣like Church cannot ad∣mit of the twelue Apo∣stles doctrine, the num∣ber
for multiplying the true Church; for if it did, it would be wholly alte∣red frō the present state, and the building bee quite chaunged into a true Catholike Church. VIII. This nūber 666 hath no figure of vniuer∣salitie, for 6 is neuer vsed in Scripture for an vni∣uersall number, as some other numbers be. So this Counterfeit Christian Church, how∣soeuer otherwise the Pa∣pists doe boast, is not the vniuersall Catholike Church, but a particular Church. Here is wisedome, let him that hath vnderstan∣ding, count the number of the beast; for it is the number of a man, and his number is, sixe hundred, threescore and sixe. Reu. 13. 18. SALOMONS TEMPLE: OR, THE NEW IERVSALEM, THE Church of Christ his building framed in the number of 144000. 144000. Christs Church. This number is all of sealed ones, Reuel. 7, such as bee euer with Christ. Reuel. 14. So this companie a chosen flocke sealed vp vnto the day of redemp∣tion, with and among
whom Christ is, Reuel. 5. Matth. 18. 20. This number is raised vpon onely 12, and ad∣mitteth no other multi∣plier. So this spirituall buil∣ding is built vpon the 12 Apostles doctrine, and admitteth of no o∣ther meanes to raise it vp. This number is not on∣ly numerus numerans, but also numerus numeratus, shewing what is num∣bred, Reuel. 14. 1, and is therefore for vse and in∣struction. So this Temple of the holie Ghost, is not a number standing onely on forme, fashion, pla∣ces and degrees, but is for vse and edification, for teaching and instru∣ction. This number, accor∣ding to the places, stan∣deth first of cyphers of no valuation, and then of figures of valuation. So this Church was for a while, as the three cy∣phers, that is, a time, times, and halfe a time, of no esteeme as not be∣ing; because of the hid∣den state thereof, till it became visible from vn∣der Antichrist, and then got esteeme with men, as we see at this day. This number begin∣neth the figures in the fourth place with the fi∣gure of 4, and in the next So to set out (after this Church became visible from vnder the dominiō of Antichrist, for of this
place hath y• figure of 4, and in the last place the figure of one. nūber the Prophet spea∣keth, Reu. 14. 1.) her stabi∣litie, for 4 is the square and stable nūber in Gods building, Reu. 21. Her v∣niuersalitie, for so foure is vsed, chap. 7. 1. and 4. 6. and lastly her vnitie, for there is no greater vnity, then all in the last place to be one. This number riseth to the sixth place, but not to the seuenth, which God vseth to note out perfection. So this Church of Christ ariseth to a kinde of perfection, but not to a fulnesse therin, for that is her place in heauen, whē her day of mariage shall be solemnized. This is the true Church, the Spouse of Christ, which seemeth outwardly to the eye of the world and the carnally minded, to bee lesse glorious, and nothing so faire as the false Church; the honest Matrone and chast wife is nothing so outwardly decked, trimmed and painted, as the inticing Strumpet and Whore. This number 144 giueth not that shew to mans sight as 666; It is nothing so faire, nothing so desirable, there is no such outward shew of vnitie, and formalitie euery way: yet for all this, to teach vs to iudge a∣right, and that wee erre not, and mistake the
one for the other, hearken to the vnerring voyce of Christ and his Church. The Church. Looke not on me, because I am blacke: I am black, but come∣ly. Cant. 1. 5. 6. Christ. Behold, thou art faire (my loue) behold, thou art faire, there is no spot in thee. Cant. 4. 1. 7. FINIS. Faults escaped amend thus. Page 55. line 27. for 7th, reade 7: p. 70. in marg. h. cap. 16. r. 17: p. 70, in marg. i. Idē lib. 5. cap. 20. r. The Rhē. Act. 10. ad versum secundū: p. 72. lin. 10. him. r. men: p. 72. in marg. cap. 3. r. cap. 7: p. 73. l. 8. courts. r. court: p. 73. in marg. alleaged cap. 3. r. alleaged cap. 2: p. 74. lin. 8. Hen. 3. r. Hen. 4: p. 74. lin. 14. murtherers. r. murtherer: p. 92. l. 9. owne, r. one: p. 103. l. 20. conceale. r. vnseale: p. 113. l. 30. godly. r. goodly: p. 121. lin. 21. chapters. r. chapter: p. 125. l. 15. words. r. works: p. 152. lin. 20. saying. r. sayings: p. 157. l. 14. consolation. r. conuersation: p. 159. lin. 22. Ezra. 1. 5. & 10. 5. r. Ezech. 1. 5. & 10. 5: pag. 172. l. 5. an. r. in: p. 190. l. 16. of it, in that. r. of it. In that: p. 205. l. 31. put out, that is: p. 230. lin. 18.. And. r.; and: p. 246. l. 17. Diuels. r. De∣uills: p. 246. l. 20. Paulo quinto. r. Paulo Vto: p. 273. l. 17. for 16. 3. r. 15. 7. Gentle Reader pardon these Escapes, and amend them I pray thee: o∣ther faults not darkning the sense, or troubling therein the reading, a was, is, hath, and such like, for were, are, and haue, I passe by.
