19978 22095229 25027
DELIGHTES for Ladies, to adorne their Persons, Tables, closets, and distil∣latories: WITH Beauties, banquets, perfumes and Waters. Reade, practise, and censure. AT LONDON, Printed by Peter Short. 1602.
To all true louers of Arte and knowledge. SOmetimes I writ the formes of burning balles, Supplying wants that were by woodfals wrought Sometimes of tubs defended so by Arte, As fire in vaine hath their destruction sought: Sometimes I writ of lasting Beuerage, Great Neptune and his Pilgrims to content: Sometimes of foode, sweete, fresh, and durable, To maintaine life when all things els were spent: Sometimes I writ of sundrie sorts of soile, Which neither Ceres nor her handmaids knew, I writ to all, but scarsly one beleeues Saue Diue and Denshire who haue sound thē true When heauens did mourne in cloudy mantles clad, And threatned famine to the sonnes of men: VVhen sobbing earth denide her kindly fruit To painefull ploughman and his bindes, euen then I writ relieuing remedies of dearth, That Arte might helpe where nature made a saile: But all in vaine these new borne babes of Arte, In their vntimelie birth straight way do quaile.
Of these and such like other newe found skils, VVith painfull pen I whilome writ at large, Expecting still my Countries good therein, And not respecting labour, time, or charge. But now my pen and paper are perfum'd, I scorne to write with Coppres or with galle, Barbarian canes are now become my quils, Rosewater is the inke I write withall: Of sweetes the sweetest I will now commend, To sweetest creatures that the earth doth beare: These are the Saints to whom I sacrifice Preserues and conserues both of plum and peare. Empalings now adew, tush marchpaine wals Are strong enough, and best be fits our age: Let piercing bullets turne to sugar bals: The Spanish féare is husht and all their rage. Of Marmelade and paste of Genua, Of musked sugars I intend to wright: Of Leach, of Sucket, and Quidinia, Affording to each Lady her delight. I teach both fruits and flowers to preserue, And candie them, so Nutmegs, cloues and mace: To make both marchpaine paste, and sugred plate, And cast the same in formes of sweetest grace. Each bird and foule so moulded from the life, And after cast in sweet compounds of arte, As if the flesh and forme which nature gaue,
Did still remaine in euerie lim and part. When chrystall frosts haue nipt the tender grape, And cleane consum'd the fruits of euerie vine, Yet here behold the clusters fresh and faire, Fed from the branch, or hangng on the line, The walnut, small nut, and the Chesnut sweete, Whose sugred kernels loose their pleasing taste, Are here from yeere to yeere preserued, And made by Arte with strongest fruites to last. Th'artichoke, the apple of such strength, The Quince, Pomegranate, with the Barberie, No sugar vs'd, yet colour, taste, and smell, Are here maintain'd and kept most naturally. For Ladies closets and their stillatories, Both waters, ointments, and sweet smelling bals, In easie termes without affected speech, Theere present most ready at their cals. And least with carelesse pen I should omit, The wrongs that nature on their persons wrought, Or parching sunne with his hot firie rayes, For these likewise, relieuing meanes I sought. No idle thoughts, nor vaine surmised skils, By fancie framde within a theorique braine, My muse presents vnto your sacred eares, To win your fauours falsly, I disdaine. From painfull practise, from experience, A sound though costly mysteries I deriue
VVith firy flames in scorching Vulcans forge, To teast and fine each secret I do striue: Accept them well and let my wearied muse Repose her selfe in Ladies laps a while, So when shee wakes, she happely may record, Her sweetest dreames in some more pleasing stile. H. Plat.
THE TABLE. GOod Reader, for the vnderstanding of this Table, know that a, b, c, d, do giue dire∣ctions vnto the foure seuerall parts or trea∣tises of this Booke, (a) for the first, the rest in their order. A AENula Campana rootes preserued. a, 1 Almonds in Leach a, 27. Almond butter to make a, 57 Almonds into gelly a, 58 Alliger distilled b, 16 Apples kept drie all the yeare a, 47 Aqua rubea. b, 7 Aqua composita of D. Steuens b, 8 Artichokes kept long. a, 69 B BAgs sweet to lie amōgst linnen. d, 35 Ball to take out staines d, 3 Ball to wash with d, 8 Balme water. b, 5 Beaumanger. c, 11 Beefe roasted kept long. c, 18
Beefe powdered kept long without charge. c. 19 Beefe fresh at the sea. c. 20 Beautie for the face. d. 7.14 Bisket bread or French bisket. a. 19 Bisket called prince bisket a. 20 Bisket called biskettello. a. 21 Bloud of hearbes. b. 22 Borage candied. a. 11 Botling of beere truly. c. 27 Bottles mustie helped, c. 28 Bottle ale most excellent. c. 32 Brawne to eat tender and delicat. c. 13 Broome capers preserued. a. 37 Broyling without smoake. c. 26 Bruse helped. d. 24 Butter tasting of spice or flowers. c. 21 C. Cakes sweete without spice or sugar. a. 60 Candying of flowers. a. 9.53 Candying in rocke candie. a, 33.42 Candying of Orenge pilles. a. 35 Candles for Ladies tables. c. 39 Candles hanging in the aire. c. 40 Capers of broome preserued. a. 37 Capon boyled in white broth. c. 5
Casting in sugar plate. a, 13 Casting of sugar in partie moldes. a, 43 Casting and molding of fruit. a, 44. Cheries preserued. a, 8 Cherie pulpe kept dry all the yeere. a 45 Cheries dried in the sunne. a, 46 Cheese extraordinarie. c, 22 Chesnuts kept long. a, 73 Chilblaines helped. d, 15 Chine of veale or chicken boiled. c. 10 Cinamon water. b, 10 Collis white and like gellie. a, 55 Comfits of all sorts. a, 54 Conserue of Prunes or dāsons. a. 50, 52 Conserue of Strawberies. a, 51 Cowcumbers preserued. a, 36 Cowslep paste. a, 40 Cowslip water or vineger of the colour of the cowslep. c. 34 Crayfish kept long. c. 31 Creame clowted c. 23 D DAmaske powder. d, 1, 9 Damsons in marmelade. a, 31 Damson pulpe kept all the yeare. a, 45 Damsons in conserue. a, 50, 52 Dentifrises for the teeth. d, 26
Distillation of hearbes in a new maner. b, 11 Drying of fruits in the sun a, 46 E EGlantine water b, 20 Eringo rootes preserued. a, 1 Extract of vegetables. b, 19 F FAce spotted or freckled to help. d, 6 23 Face made faire d, 7.14 Face full of heat helped. d, 11, 16 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 Face kept white and cleere d, 12 Fish into paste c, 14 Fish fried kept long c, 17 Flesh kept sweete in summer c, 24 Flies kept from oile peeces c, 30 Flounder boyled on the french fashion c, 3 Flowers preserued a, 7 Flowers candied a, 9, 11 Flowers in rocke candie. a, 42
Flowers dried without wrinkling a, 63 Fruit preserued a, 8 Fruit how to molde and cast a, 44 Fruit kept drie all the yeare. a, 45, 46.47 Fruit kept long fresh. a, 70 G GEllie chrystalline a, 26 Gelly of fruits a, 29 Gelly of Almonds a, 58 Gilloflowers kept long a, 61 Gillowflowers preserued a, 7 Gilloflower water b, 20 Gingerbread a, 22 Gingerbread drie a, 23 Ginger in rocke candie a, 33.42 Ginger greene in sirup a, 49 Ginger candied a, 53 Gloues to persume d, 34 Gooseberies preserued a, 8 Grapes growing all the yeere a, 62 Grapes kept till Easter a, 64 H HAndwater excellent d, 2, 28 Hands stained to helpe. d, 5
Hands freckled to helpe. d, 6 Handwater of Scotland b, 21 Hasell nuts kept long a, 72 Haire blacke altered d, 30, 37 Haire made yellow. d, 36 Hearbs distilled in a new maner. b, 11 Hearbs to yeeld salt b, 12 Hearbs to yeeld bloud b, 22 Honey to yeeld spirit b, 13 I IRish Aqua vitae b, 9 Isop distilled in a new maner b, 11 Iuice of Orenges or lemmons kept all the yeare. c, 35 Iumbolds to make a, 16 L LArkes to boile c, 4 Lauender distilled in a new maner. b 11 Leach of almonds a 27 Leach a, 59 Leg of mutton boiled after the French fashion c, 7
Lemmons in Marmelade a, 41 Lemmon moulded and cast a, 44 Lemmon iuyce kept all the yeere c, 35 Lettuce in sucket a, 32 Liquerice paste a, 40 Lobsters kept long c, 31 M MAce in rocke candie a, 42 Mallard to boile c, 6 Marchpaine paste a, 12, 18 Marigolds preserued a, 7 Marigolds candied a, 9, 11 Marigold paste a, 40 Marmelade of Quinces or Damsons, a, 3 Marmelade of Lemmons of Orenges. a, 41 May deaw clarified d, 33 Morphew helped d, 21, 22 Mulberies in gellie a, 29 Muske sugar a, 2 Mustard meale c, 25 Mustinesse helped or preuented in wa∣ters b, 24
N NVtmegs in rocke candie. a, 33, 42 Nutmegs candied a, 53 Nuts molded and cast off a, 44 Nuts kept long a, 72 O ORenges preserued. a, 34 Orenge pilles candied a, 35 Orenges in marmelade a, 41 Orenge molded and cast off a, 44 Orenge iuice kept all the yeere c, 35 Oisters kept long. c. 15 P PAste of flowers a, 14, 40 Paste of Nouie a, 15 Paste to keepe one moist a, 17 Paste called pust paste a, 24 Paste short without butter a, 25 Paste of Genua of Quinces a, 30 Paste of fish c, 14 Peare molded and cast off a, 44
Peares kept drie a, 47 Perfumes delicate, and sodainly made. d, 31 Perfuming of gloues d, 34 Pickerel boiled on ye french fashiō. c, 3 Pigeons of sugar paste a, 10 Pigeons boiled with Rice c, 9 Pig to sowse c, 1, 2 Pigs petitoes boiled after the French fashion c, 8 Plums preserued a, 8 Plums dried in the sunne a, 46 Pomander to make d, 4 Pomander renewed d, 32 Pomatū most excellēt for the face. d, 13 Pomgranats kept long a, 68 Pieseruing of Roots a, 1 Preseruing of cowcumbers a, 36 Prunes in conserue a, 50, 52 Pulpe of fruit kept all the yeare. a, 45 Q QVidinia of Quinces a, 28 Quinces into paste of Genua. a, 30 Quinces in marmelade, a, 31 Quinces kept drie all the yeare. a, 47
Quinces kept long. a, 67 R Rabbets of sugar paste. a, 10 Raspices in gellie. a, 29 Rootes preserued, a, 1 Rootes candied a, 53 Rosa solis to make b, 6 Rosemarie flowers candied. a, 9 Roseleaues to drie. a, 3, 6 Rose sirup, a, 5 Roses preserued. a, 7 Roses and Rose leaues candied. a, 9, 11 Rose paste. a, 40 Roses kept long. a, 61 Rose leaues dried without wrinckles. a, 63 Rosewater distilled at Michaelmas. b, 14 Rosewater distilled in a speedy manr. b, 15 Roses to yeeld a spirit. b, 17 Rosewater most excellent b, 18 Rosewater, and yet the Roseleaues not discoloured. b, 23 Rosewater and oyle drawne together. b. 25
Rosewater of the colour of the Rose. c, 34 Rose vineger of the colour of the Rose. c, 34 Rose vineger made in a newe manner. c, 41 S SAlet oile purified and graced in taste and smell. c, 36 Salmon kept long fresh c, 16 Salt of hearbs b, 12 Salt delicate for the Table c, 38 Sawsedges of Polonia c, 12 Sirup of Violets a, 4 Sirup of Roses a, 5 Sparrowes to boile. c, 4 Spirit of wine extraordinarie b, 1 Spirit of wine ordinarie b, 2 Spirits of Spices b, 3 Spirit of wine tasting of any vegetable. b, 4 Spirit of honey b, 13 Spirit of hearbs and flowers b, 17 Skin white and cleare d, 2 Sunburning helped d, 22
Stoue to sweate in, d, 27 Strawberies in gellie a, 29 Strawberies in conserue a, 51 Sucket of Lettuce stalkes a, 32 Sucket of greene walnuts a, 49 Sugar musked a, 2 Sugar paste for foule a, 10 Sugar plate to cast in a, 13 Sugar plate of flowers a, 14 Sugar plate to colour a, 38 Sugar cast in partie molds a, 43 Sugar smelling and tasting of the cloue or cynamon. a, 71 T TEale to boile c, 6 Teeth kept white and sound d, 10 25, 26 Time distilled in a new maner b, 11 Trosses for the sea a, 39 V VIneger distilled b, 16 Vineger to clarifie c, 37 Violet sirup. a, 4
Violet paste a, 40, 14 Violet water or vineger of the colour of the violet c, 34 Vsquebath b, 9 VV WAfers to make a, 56 Walnuts in sucket a, 49 Walnuts kept fresh long a, 65.66 Wardens kept drie all the yeare. a, 47 Washing water sweete. b, 21, d, 2, 28, 29 Whites of egges broken speedily. c, 29 Wigin to boyle c, 6 Wine tasting of wormwood made spee∣dily. c, 33 Y Ytch helped. d, 25.21. FINIS.
The Arte of preser∣uing, conseruing, candying, &c. 1. How to preserue Eringo roots, Aenula Campana, and so of others in the same manner Seth them til they be tender, then take a∣ay the piths of thē, and leaue them in a colāder til they haue dropped as much as they will, thē hauing a thin sirup ready, put thē being cold into the sirup being also colde, and let them stand so three dayes, then boyle the sirup (adding some more fresh sirup vnto it to supply that which the roots haue drunk vp) a little high∣er, and at three dayes end boyle the sirup againe without anie new addition, vnto the full height of a preseruing sirup, and put in your roots, and so keepe them. Rootes
preserued in this maner will eate verie tender, because they neuer boiled in the sirup. 2. How to make muske sugar of common sugar. BRuse 4 or 6. graines of muske, place them in a peece of sarce∣net, fine lawne or cambricke dou∣bled, lay this in the bottome of a gallie pot, straining your Sugar thereon, stop your pot close, and all the sugar in a fewe dayes will both sent and taste of muske, and when you haue spent that sugar, you may lay more sugar thereon, which will also receiue the like impression. Such muske sugar is fold for two shillings the pound. 3. How to drie Roseleaues in a most ex∣cellent maner. WHen you haue newly taken out your breade, then put
in your Roses in a sieue first clip∣ping away the whites, that they may be all of one colour, lay them about one inch in thicknesse in the sieue, & when they haue stood halfe an houre or therabout they will growe whitish on the top, let them yet remaine without stir∣ring till the vppermost of them be fully dried, then stir thē together, and leaue them about one other halfe houre, and if you finde them drie in the top, stir them together againe, & so continue this worke vntill they bee throughly dried, then put them hote as they are in∣to an earthen pot hauing a nar∣row mouth, and being wel leaded within, (the Refiners of gold and siluer, call these pottes hookers) stop it with corke, and wet parch∣ment, or with Waxe and Rosen mixed together, and hang your pot in a chimney or neere a con∣tinuall fire, & so they will keep ex∣ceeding faire in color & most de∣licate
in sente. And if you feare their relenting, take the Rose∣leaues about Candlemas, and put them once again into a sieue stir∣ring them vp and downe often til they be drie, and then put them vp againe hote into your potte. Note that you must set vp your o∣uen lidde, but not lute it about when you set in your Roseleaues, either the first or second time. post. numero 6. 4. A most excellent sirup of Violets, both in taste and tincture. EXpresse the iuice of clipt Vio∣lets, & to three parts of iuice take one fourth parte of conduit water, put the same into an Ala∣blaster morter, with the leaues vvhich you haue stamped, and wring the same out through a cloth, as you did at the first into the other iuice, put thereto a suf∣ficient proportion of the finest su∣ger
and brought also into a most fine powder, let the same stand 10. or 12. houres in a cleane glased earthen pan, then draine away the clearest, and put it into a glasse, and put therto a fewe drops of the iuice of Lemmons, and it will be∣come cleare, transparent, and of the violet colour. Then you may expresse more iuice into the su∣gar, which will settle in the bot∣tome, with some of the thickest part of the iuyce: and heating the same vpon a gentle fire, it will also becom a good sirup of violets, but not comparable to the first. By this manner of worke you gaine one quarter of sirup more then diuers Apothecaries doe. 5. A singular manner of making the si∣rup of Roses. FILL a siluer bason three quar∣ters full of raine water, or rose∣water, put therein a conuenient
proportion of Rose leaues, couer the bason and set it vpon a pot of hote water (as wee vsually bake a Custard) in three quarters of an houre, or one whole houre at the most, you shall purchase the whole strength and tincture of the Rose, then take out those leaues, wring∣ing out all their liquor gently, and steepe more freshe leaues in the same water, continue this iterati∣on seuen times, and then make it vp in a sirup, & this sirup worketh more kindely then that which is made meerely of the iuyce of the Rose. You may make sundry other sirups in this manner. Quaere of hanging a pewter heade ouer the bason, if the ascending water will be worth the keeping. 6. Another way for the drying of Rose∣leaues. DRie them in the heat of a hot sunnie daye vppon a Leades,
turning them vp and downe till they be drie (as they doe haie) thē put them vp into glasses well stopt and luted, keeping your glasses in warme pleaces, and thus you may keepe all flowers: but hearbs after they are dryed in this manner, are best kept in paper bags, placing the bags in close Cupboards. 7. How to preserue whole Roses, Gillo∣flowers, Marigolds, &c. DIp a Rose that is neither in the bud nor ouerblowne, in a sirrup, consisting of sugar double refined, and Rosewater boiled to his true height, then open the leaues one by one, with a fine smooth bodkin either of bone or wood, and presently if it be a hot sunnie day, and whilest the sunne is in some good height, lay them on papers in the sunne, or else
drie them with some gentle heate in a close roome, heating ye roome before you set them in, or in an Ouen vpon papers, in pewter di∣shes, & then put them vp in glasses and keepe them in drie cupbords neere the fire. You must take out the seedes if you meane to eate them. You may prooue this, pre∣seruing with sugar candie, in stead of sugar if you please. 8. The most kindly waye to preserue plums, cherries, goosberies, &c. YOu must first purchase some reasonable quantitie of their owne iuice, with a gentle heate vpon imbers between two dishes, diuiding the iuice still as it com∣meth in the stewing, then boyle each fruit in his owne iuice, with a conuenient proportion of the best refined sugar.
9, How to candie Resemarie flowers. Rose leaues, Roses, Marigolds, &c. with preseruation of colour. DIstolue refined, or double re∣fined sugar, or sugar candy it selfe in a little Rosewater, boyle it to a reasonable hight, put in your rootes or flowers when you sirup is either fully cold, or almost cold, let them rest therein till the sirup haue pearced them sufficientlie, then take out your flowers with a skimmer, suffering the loose si∣rup to run from them as longe as it will, boyl that sirup a little more and put in more flowers as before, diuide them also, then boyle all the sirup which remaineth and is not drunke vp in the flowers, to the height of manus Christi, putting in more sugar if you see cause, but no more Rosewater, put your flo∣wers therein vvhen your sirup is cold or almost cold, and let them stand till they candie.
10. A most delicate and stiffe sugar paste whereof to cast Rabbets, Pigeons, or any other little birde or beast, either from the life or carued molds. FIrst dissolue Isinglasse in faire water or with some Rosewater in the latter ende, then beate blan∣ched almonds as you woulde for marchpane stuffe, and drawe the same with creame, and Rosewater (milke will serue, but creame is more delicate) then put therein some powdered sugar, into which you may dissolue your Isinglasse beeing first made into gellie, in faire warme water) note, the more Isinglasse you put therein, the stif∣fer your worke will prooue) then hauing your rabbets, woodcocke, &c. molded either in plaister from life, or else carued in wood (first annointing your wodden moldes with oyle of sweete almonds, and your plaister or stone moldes with
barrowes grease) poure your su∣gar-paste thereon. A quarte of creame, a quarterne of almonds, 2. ounces of Isinglasse, and 4. or 6. ounces of sugar, is a reasonable good proportion for this stuffe. Quaere of moulding your Birdes, Rabbets, &c. in the compounde wax mentioned in my Iewel house, in the title of the arte of moulding & casting, pag. 60. For so your moulds will last long. You may dredge o∣uer your foule with crūs of bread, cinamon and sugar boyled toge∣ther, and so they wil seem as if they were rosted and breaded. Leach & gelly may be cast in this manner. This paste you may also driue with a fine rowling pin, as smooth & as thin as you please; it lasteth not long, & therefore it must be eaten within a fewe dayes after the ma∣king thereof. By this meanes a bā∣quet may be presented in the form of a supper, beeing a verie rare and strange deuise.
11 To sandie Marigolds, Roses, Borage, or Rosemary flowers. BOyle Sugar and Rosewater a little vpon a chasing dish with coales, then put the flowers (be∣ings throughly dryed, either by the sunne or on the fire) into the sugar, and boyle them a little, then strewe the powder of double refi∣ned sugar vpon them, and turne them, and let them boyle a little longer, taking the dish from the fire, then strew more powdred su∣gar on the contrarie side of the flower. These will drie of them∣selues in two or three houres in a hate sunny day, thogh they ly not in the sunne. 12. To make an excellent Marchpane paste, to print off in molds for banque∣ting dishes. TAke to euerie Iordan almond blanched, three spoonfuls of
the whitest refined sugar you can get, searce your sugar, and now and then as you see cause put in 2. or three drops of damaske Rose∣water, beate the same in a smooth stone morter, with great labor, vn∣till you haue brought it into a dry stiffe paste, one quarterne of sugar is sufficient to worke at once. Make your paste into little bals, e∣uerie ball containing so much by estimatiō as will couer your mold or printe, then rowle the same wt a rowling pin, vppon a sheete of cleane paper without strewing a∣nie powdered sugar either vpon your paste or paper. There is a countrie Gentlewoman whome I could name, which venteth great store of sugar cakes made of this composition. But the onely fault which I finde in this paste is, that it tasteth too much of the sugar, and too little of the almonds, and therefore you may proue the ma∣king thereof with such almonds,
which haue had some part of their oyle taken from them by expres∣sion, before you incorporate thē with the sugar, and so happely you may mixe a greater quantitie of them with the sugar, because they are not so oily as the other. You may mixe cinamon or ginger in your paste, & that will both grace the taste, and alter the colour; but the spice must passe through a fair fearce: you may steepe your al∣monds in colde water all night, & so blanch them colde, and being blanched, drie them in a sieue o∣uer the fire. Here the garble of almonds will make a cheap paste. 13. The making of sugar-plae, and ca∣sting thereof in carued moldes. TAke one pound of the whitest refined or double refined su∣gar, if you can get it, put thereto three ounces (some cōfit-makers,
put 6. ounces for more gaine) of the best starch you can buy, and if you dry the sugar after it is pou∣dred, it will the sooner passe tho∣rough your lawne searce: then searce it & lay the same on a heape in the midst of a sheet of clean pa∣per: in the middle of which masse, put a pretie lump of the bignes of a walnut of gum dragagant, first steeped in Rosewater one night; a porenger ful of rosewater is suffi∣cient to dissolue one ounce of gū (which must first bee well picked, leauing out the drosse) remem∣ber to straine the gumme through a canuas, then hauing mixed som of the white of an egge with your strained gum, temper it with the sugar betwixt your fingers by lit∣tle and little, til you haue wrought vpp all the sugar and the gumme together into a stiffe paste, and in the tempring let there be alwaies some of the sugar betweene your fingers and the gumme, then dust
your wodden moulds a little with some of that powdered sugar tho∣rough a peece of Lawne or fine linnen cloath, and hauing driuen out with your rowling pin a suffi∣cient portion of your paste to a cō¦ueniēt thicknes, couer your mold therewith, pressing the same down into euery hollow parte of your molde with your fingers, & when it hath taken the whole impressi∣on, knocke the mold on the edge against a table, and the paste will issue forth with the impression of the molde vpon it: or if the molde be deepe cut, you may put in the pointe of your knife gently into the deepest parts heere and there, lifting vpp by little and little the paste out of the molde. And if in the making of this paste, you hap∣pen to put-in too much gum, you may put more sugar thereto, and if too much sugar, thē more gum: you must also worke this paste in∣to your molds, as speedily as you
can after it is once made, and be∣fore it harden, and if it growe so harde that it cracke, mixe more gum therwith. Cut away with your knife from the edges of your paste all those peeces which haue no parte of the worke vpon them, and worke thē vp with the paste which remaineth; and if you will make sawcers, dishes, boawls, &c. then (hauing first driuen out your paste vpon paper, first dusted ouer with sugar to a conuenient largenesse and thicknesse) put the paste into some saucer, dish, or boawle of a good fashion, and with your sin∣ger presse it gently downe to the insides thereof, till it resemble the shape of the dish, then pare away the edges with a knife, euen with the skirt of your dish, or sawcer, and set it against the fire till it bee drie on the inside, thē with a knife get it out as they vse to doe a dish of butter, and drie the backside; then guilde it on the edges with
the white of an egge laide round about the brim of the dish with a penfill, and presse the gold downe with some cotton, and when it is dry skew or brush off the golde with the foote of an Hare or Co∣nie. And if you woulde haue your past exceeding smooth, as to make cardes and such like conceiptes thereof, then roule your paste vp∣pon a slied paper with a smooth & polished rowling pin. 14. A way to make sugar-plate both of colour and taste of any flower. TAke Violets and beat them in a mortar with a little hard su∣gar, then put into it a sufficient quantitie of Rosewater, then lay your gum in steepe in the water, & so worke it into paste, & so wil your paste be both of the colour of the violet, and of the smell of the vio∣let. In like sort may you work with Marigolds, Cowslips, Primroses, Buglosse or any other flower.
15. To make paste of Nouie. TAke a quarter of a pounde of Valentian almonds, otherwise called the small almonds or Bar∣barie almonds, and beate them in a mortar til they come to paste, then take stale Manchet beeing grated, and drie it before the fire in a dish, then fift it, then beat it with your almondes, put in the beating of it a litle cinamon, gin∣ger and the iuyce of a Lemmon, & when it is beaten to perfit paste, printe it we your moldes, & so dry it in an ouen after you haue drawn out your bread: this paste will last all the yeare. 16. To make Iumbolds. TAke halfe a pound of almonds beeing beaten to paste with a short cake beeing grated, & 2. egs, 2. ounces of cároway seeds, being
beaten, and the iuice of a Lem∣mon, & beeing brought into paste roule it into round strings, then caste it into knots, and so bake it in an ouen, and when they are ba∣ked, yee them with Rosewater and sugar, and the white of an egge be∣ing beaten together, then take a feather and guilde them, thē put them againe into the Ouen, and let them stande in a little while, and they will be yced cleane ouer with a white yce, and so box them vp, and you may keep them all the yeere. 17. To make a paste to keepe you moist, if you list not to drinke oft, whi h La∣dies vse t carrie with them whē they ride abroad. TAke halfe a pound of damaske prunes & a quartern of dates, stone them both, and beate them in a mortar with one warden be∣ing rosted, or else a slice of olde
marmelade and so print it in your moldes, and drie it after you haue drawne bread, put ginger vnto it, and you may serue it in at a ban∣quet. 18. To make a Marchpane. TAke two poundes of Almonds being blanched and dryed in a sieue ouer the fire, beate them in a stone mortar, and when they bee small mixe with them two pounde of sugar beeing finely beaten, ad∣ding two or three spoonefulls of Rosewater, and that will keep your almonds frō oiling: whē your paste, is beaten fine, driue it thin with a rowling pin, and so lay it on a bottome of wafers, then raise vp a little edge on the side, & so bake it, then yce it with Rosewater and sugar, then put it into the ouen a∣gaine, and when you see your yee is risen vp and drie, then take it out of the Ouen and garnish it
with pretie conceipts, as birdes & beasts being cast out of standing moldes. Sticke long cōfits vpright in it, cast bisket and carowaies in it, and so serue it; guild it before you serue it: you may also print of this Marchpane paste in your molds for banqueting dishes. And of this paste our comfit makers at this day make their letters, knots, Armes, escocheons, beasts, birds, & other fancies. 19. To make bisket bread, otherwise called french bisket. TAke halfe a pecke of fine flow∣er, two ounces of Coriander seedes, one ounce of annis seedes, the whites of foure egges, halfe a pinto of Ale yeast, and as much water as will make it vp into stiffe past, your water must be but blood warme, then bake it in a long roll as big as your thigh, let it stay in the ouen but one houre, and when
it is a daye olde, pare it and slice it ouerthwart, thē sugar it ouer with fine poudred sugar, and so drie it in an ouen again, and being drye, take it out and sugar it again, then boxe it, and so you may keepe it all the yeare. 20. To make prince bisket. TAke one pounde of verie fine flower, and one pounde of fine sugar, and eight egges, and two spoonfuls of Rosewater, and one ounce of carroway seeds, and beat it all to batter one whole hour, for the more you beat it, the better your bread is, then bake it in cof∣fins of white plate, beeing basted with a little butter before you put in your batter, and so keepe it. 21. To make another kinde of bisket, called biskettello. TAke halfe an ounce of gumme Dragagant, dissolue it in Rose∣wa
Rosewater with the iuice of a lem¦mon and two graines of muske, then straine it through a faire lin∣nen cloth with the white of an eg, then take halfe a pound of fine su∣gar being beaten, and one ounce of carroway seedes, beeing also beaten and searced, and then beat them altogether in a mortar till they come to paste, then rol them vp in small loaues about the big mall egge, put vnder the of a small egge, put vnder the bottome of euerie one, a peece of a wafer, and so bake them in an O∣uen vpon a sheete of paper, cut thē on the sides as you do a manchet, and pricke them in the middest: when you break them vp, they will bee hollow and full of eyes. 22. To make Giagerbread. TAke three stale manchets and grate them, drie them, and sift them through a fine sieue, then
ad vnto them one ounce of ginger being beaten, and as much Ci∣namon, one ounce of liquerice & anniseedes beeing beaten toge∣ther and searced, halfe a pound of sugar, then boile all these together in a posnet, with a quart of claret wine till they come to a stiffe paste with often stirring of it; and when it is stiffe, molde it on a table and so driue it thin, & print it in your moldes, dust your moldes with Ci∣namon, Ginger, and liquerice, be∣ing mixed together in fine pow∣der. This is your Ginger bread v∣sed at the court, and in all gentle∣mens houses at festiuall times. It is otherwise called drie Leach. 23. To make drie Gingerbread. TAke halse a pound of almonds and as much grated cake, and a pounde of fine sugar, and the yolke of two newe laid egges, the
iuyce of a Lemmon, and 2 graines of muske, beate all these together till they come to a paste, then print it with your molds, and so dry it vpon papers in an ouen after your bread is drawne. 24. To make pusse paste. TAke a quart of the finest flower and the whites of three egges, and the yolkes of two, and a little colde water, and so make it into perfect paste, then driue it with a rouling pin abroade, then put on small peeces of butter as big as Nuts vppon it, then folde it ouer, then driue it abroade againe, then put small peeces of butter vpon it as you did before, doe this tenne times, alwaies folding the paste and putting butter betweene cue∣rie folde. You may conuey anie prettie forced dish, as Florentine, Cherry tarte, rice, or pippins, &c. betweene two sheets of that paste.
25. To make paste short without butter. TAke a quart of fine flower, and put it into a pipken, and bake it in an ouen when you bake man∣chet, then take the yolkes of 2. or three egs, and a pint of creame, & make paste, put it into two ounces of sugar beeing sinely beaten, and so you shall make your paste short without butter or sewet. In like sort when you make sugar cakes bake your flower first. 26. To make crystall gelly. TAke a knockle of veale, and two calues feete (your calues feete beeing flayed & scalded) and boile them in faire spring water, and when they are boyled readie to eate, you may saue your flesh & not boyle it to peeces, for if you doe so, the gelly will looke thicke, then take a quart of the cleerest
of the same broth, and put it into a posnet, adding thereunto gin∣ger, white pepper, 6. whole cloues, one nutmeg quartered, one grain of muske. put all these whole spi∣ces in a little bag, and boyle them in your gelly, season, it with some ounces of sugar candie, and three spoonefuls of Rosewater, so let it run through your gelly bag, and if you meane to haue it sooke of an amber colour, bruise your spi∣ces, and let them boyle in your gelly loose. 27. To make Leach of Almonds. TAke halfe a pounde of sweete Almonds, and beate them in a mortar, then straine them with a pinte of sweete milke from the Cow, then put vnto it one graine of muske, two spoonfuls of Rose∣water, two ounces of fine sugar, the waight of three whole shillings of I singlasse that is verie white,
and so boyle them, then let all run through a strainer, then may you slice the same and so serue it. 28. To make Quidini of Quinces. TAke the kernells out of eight great Quinces, and boyle them in a quarte of spring water, till it come to a pinte, then put into it a quarter of a pinte of Rosewater, and one pound of fine sugar, and so let it boyle till you see it come to be of a deepe colour: then take a drop, and drop it on the bottom of a saweer, and if it stand, take it off, then let it run through a gel∣ly bagge into a bason, then set on your bason vpon a chasing dish of coales to keepe it warme, then take a spoone, and fill your boxes as ful as you please, and when they bee colde couer them: and if you please to printe it in moldes, you must haue molds made to the big∣nesse of your boxe, and wet your it run into your mold, and when
molds with Rosewater, and so let it is colde turne it off into your boxes. If you wette your moldes with water, your gelly will fall out of them. 29. To make gelly of strawberies, Mul∣beries, Raspisberies, or any such tender fruite. TAke your beries and grinde them in an Alablaster mortar with foure ounces of sugar and a quarter of a pinte of faire water, and as much Rosewater, and so boile it in a posnet with a little peece of Isinglas, and so let it run through a fine cloth into your bo∣xes, and so you may keepe it all the yeare. 30. To make paste of Genua of Quinces. TAke Quinces and pare them, and cut them in slices, & bake
them in an ouen dry in an earthen pot without any other iuyce then their owne, then take one pound thereof, straine it, and put it into a stone mortar with halfe a pounde of sugar, and when you haue beatē it vp to paste, print it in your molds and dry it three or foure times in an ouen after you haue drawne bread, & when it is throughly drie and hardened, you may boxe it, & it will keepe all the yeere. 31. To make marmelade of Quinces or Damsons. WHen you haue boyled your Quinces or Damsons sufe ficiently, straine them; then dry the pulpe in a pan on the fire, and when you see there is no water in it, but that it beginneth to bee stiffe, then mixe two pound of su∣gar with 3. poūd of pulp, this mar∣melade will be white marmelade: and if you will haue it looke with
with an high colour, put your su∣gar and your pulpe together, so soone as your pulpe is drawne, and let them both boile together, and so it will looke of the colour of or∣dinarie marmelade, like vnto a stewed warden, but if you dry your pulpe first, it will looke white and take lesse sugar: you shall knowe when it is thicke enough, by put∣ting a little into a sawcer, letting it coole before you box it. 32. To make sucket of Lettuce stalkes. TAke Lettuce stalkes, and pill a∣way the outside, then perboile them in faire water, then let them stand all night drie, then take halfe a pinte of the same liquour; and a quarter of a pinte of Rosewater, and so boyle it to sirrup, and when your sirup is betwixt hot & cold, put in your aforesaid rootes, and let them stand all night in your si∣rup to make them take sugar, and
then the next day your sirup wil be weake againe, then boyle it again, and take out your rootes. In the like sorte may you keepe Orenge pilles, or greene walnuts, or anie thing that hath the bitternes first taken from it, by boyling in water 33. To candie nutmegs or ginger, with an hard rocke candie. TAke one pounde of fine sugar, and eight spoonefuls of Rose∣water, and the waight of 6. pence of Gum Arabique, that is cleere, boyle them together to such an height, as that dropingsome ther∣of out of a spoone, the sirup doe rope and run into the smalnes of an haire, then put it into an ear∣then pipken, wherein place your nutmegs, ginger, or such like, then stop it close with a saucer, and lute it well with clay, that no aire may enter, then keep it in a hote place three weekes, and it will candie
hard. You must break your pot with an hammer, for otherwise you can∣not get out your candie. You may al∣so candy Orenges, or Lemmons in like sort if you please. 34. To preserue Orenges after the Por∣tugall fashion. TAke Orenges & coare them on the side and lay them in water. then boile them in fair water til they betender, shift them in the boyling to take away their bitternesse, then take sugar and boyle it to the height of sirup as much as will couer them, and so put your Orenges into it, and that will make them take sugar. If you haue 24. Orenges, beate 8. of them till they come to paste with a pouade of fine sugar, then fill euery one of the other Orenges with the same, and so boile them again in your sirup: then there will be marmelade of orenges within your orenges, & it wil cut like an hard egge.
35. To candie Orenge pilies. TAke your Orenge pilles after they be preserued, then take fine sugar and Rosewater, & boile it to the height of Manus Christi, then drawe through your sugar, then lay them on the bottome of a sieue, and dry them in an ouen after you haue drawne bread, and they will be candied. 36. To preserue Cowcumbers all the yeere. TAke a gallon of faire water, & a pottle of veriuice, and a pint of bay salt, and a handfull of green fennell or Dill: boyle it a little, and when it is cold put it into a barrel, and then put your Cowcumbers into that pickle, and you shal keep them all the yeere.
37. To preserue broome capers all the yeare. BOyle a quart of Veriuice and an handfull of baye salte, and therein you may keepe them all the yeare. 38. To colour sugar plate with seuerall colours. YOu may mixe Roset with your fine sacred sugar vntill the co∣lour please you, and so shall you haue a faire murrey colour. Sap-greene must be tempred in a little Rosewater, hauing some gumme first dissolued therein, and so laye it on with a pensill vpon your paste in apt places. With saffron you may make a yellow colour in the like manner, first drying and pow∣dering your saffron, and after it hath coloured the Rosewater suf∣ficientlie, by strayning it through fine linnen. The powder of Cina∣mon,
maketh a walnut colour, and ginger and Cinamon together a lighter colour. 39. To make crosses for the sea. FIrst make paste of sugar & gum Dragagant mixed together, thē mixe therewith a reasonable quā∣tiry of the powder of Cinamon & ginger, and if you please a little muske also, and make it vpp into rols of seuerall fashions, gilding them heere and there. In the same manner you may also conuey any purgatiue, vomit, or other me∣dicine into sugar paste. 40. To make paste of Violets, Roses, Marigolds, Cowslips, or liquerice. SHred, or rather powder the dry leaues of your flower, putting thereunto some fine powder of Ginger, Cinamon, and a little muske if you please, mixe them all
confusedly together, then dissolue some sugar in Rosewater, and be∣ing boyled a little, put some saffron therein, if you worke vpon Mari∣golds, or else you may leaue out your saffron, boyle it on the fire vnto a sufficient height, you must also mixe therewith the pap of a roasted apple being first well dried in a dishe ouer a chafing dish of coales, then poure it vpon a tren∣cher, beeing first sprinkled ouer with Rosewater, and with a knife worke the paste together. Then breake some sugar candy small, but not to powder, and with gumme dragagant, fasten it heere and there to make it seeme as if it were roch candied, cut the paste into peeces of what fashiō you list with a knife first wet in Rosewater. In licorice paste you must leaue out the pap of the pippin, and then worke your paste into drie rolles. Remember to searce the liquorice through a fine searce. These rolles
are very good against any cough or colde. 41. To make Marmelade of Lemmons or Orenges. TAke ten lemmons or orenges & boyle them with half a dozē pippins, & so drawe them throgh a strainer, then take so much su∣gar as the pulp doth wey, & boyle it as you doe Marmelade of Quin∣ces, and then box it vp. 42. How to candie Nutmegs, Ginger, Mace, & flowers, in halfe a day with hard or roch candie. Lay your Nutmegs in steepe in common Lee made with or∣dinarie ashes 24. houres; take them out and boyle them in faire water till they be tender, and to take out the Lee: then drie them and make a sirup of double refined sugar and a little Rosewater to the height
of a manus Christi, place this sirrup in a gentle balneo, or some small heate, putting your Nutmegs in∣to the sirup. Note that you must skim the sugar as it casteth anie skumme, before you put in your Nutmegs, then hauing sugar can∣die first bruised grossely, and sear∣ced through colanders of seuerall bignesse, take the smallest thereof, and roule your Nutmegs vp and downe therein, either in a dish or vpon clean paper, then stoue your Nutmegges in a cupboard with a chafing dish of coales, which must be made hote of purpose before you set them in: and when they are drie enough, dip them againe in fresh sirup boyled to his height as before; and roule them in the grosser sugar candie, & then stoue them againe till they be hard, and so the thirde time if you will in∣crease their candie. Note that you must spend all the sugar which you dissolue at one time with can∣dying
of one thing or other there∣in presently: the stronger that your lee is, the better; & the nut∣meg, ginger, &c. wouldly in steep in the lee, 10, or 12, daies, and af∣ter in the sirup of sugar in a stoue or Cupboarde with a chafing dish and coales one whole weeke, and then you may candie them sud∣denly, as before. Flowers and fruits are done presently without anie such steeping or stouing as before: onely they must bee put into the stoue after they are coated with your powdered sugar candie: and those flowers of fruits as they are so dainely done, so they will not last aboue two or three daies faire, and therefore onely to be prepared for some set banquet. 34. Casting of sugar in partie moldes of wood. LAy your moldes in faire water three or foure houres before
you cast, then dry vp your inward moisture with a cloth of Linnen, then boyle rosewater & refined su∣gar together, but not to anie great stiffnesse, then poure it into your moldes, let your molds stand one houre, and then gently part or o∣pen the moldes, and take out that which you haue cast, you may also worke the paste aniè numero. 12.13. into these molds, first printing or pressing gently a little of the paste into the one halfe, and after with a knife taking away the superflu∣ous edges, and so likewise of the other halfe: then presse both sides of the mold together, two or three times, & after take away the crest that will arise in the middest: and to make the sides to cleaue toge∣ther, you may touch thē first ouer with Gum Dragagant dissolued, before you presse the sides of the mold together: note that you may conuey comfits within, before you close the sides. You may cast of
any of these mixtures or pastes in alablaster molds, molded from the life. 44. To mold of a Lemmon, orenge, peare, Nut. &c. and after to cast it hollowe within, of sugar. FIll a woodden platter halfe full of sande, then presse downe a Lemmon, peare, &c. therein to the iust halfe thereof, then temper some burnt Alablaster with faire water in a stone or copper dish, of the bignesse of a great siluer boll, and cast this pap into your sande, and from thence clap it vppon the Lemmon, Peare, &c. pressing the pap close vnto it. Then after a while take out this halfe parte with the Lemmon in it, and pare it euen in the insides as neere as you can, to make it resemble the iust halfe of your Lemmon, then make 2. or 3. litle holes in the halfe (viz in the edges therof) laying it downe in the sande againe, and so
caste an other halfe vnto it, then cut off a peece of the top of both your partie moldes, & cast thereto another cap in like manner as you did before. Keep these three parts bound together with tape till you haue cause to vse them: and be∣fore you cast, lay them alwaies in water, and drie vp the water again before you poure in the sugar. Coloury our Lemmon with a lit∣tle saffron steeped in Rosewater; vse your sugar in this manner: Boile refined or rather double re∣fined sugar and Rosewater to his full height, viz. till by powring some out of a spoone, it will run at the last as fine as a haire; thē ta∣king off the cappe of your molde, poure the same therein, filling vp the mold aboue the hole, and pre∣sently clap on the cap, and presse it downe vppon the sugar, then swing it vpp and downe in your hande, turning it rounde, and bringing the neather parte some
times to be the vpper parte in the turning, and è conuerso. This is the manner of vsing an Orenge, Lemmon, or other round molde: but if it be long as a pigs foot will be, beeing molded, then roule it, and turne it vp and downe longe waies in the aire. 45. How to keepe the drie pulpe of Che∣ries, Prunes, Damsons &c. all the yeare. TAke of those kinde of cherries which are sharpin taste (Quaere if the common blacke and redde cherrie will not also serue, hauing in the ende of the decoction a lit∣tle oyle of Vitrioll or Sulphur, or some veriuice of soure grapes, or iuice of Lemmons mixed there∣with, to giue a sufficient tartnesse) pull off their stalks and boile them by themselues without the addi∣tion of any liquour in a caldron or pipken, and when they begin
once to boile in their owne iuice, stir them hard at the bottom with a spattle, least they burn to the pans bottom. They haue boyled suffici∣ently, when they haue caste off all their skins, and that the pulp and substance of the cheries is grown to a thicke pap: then take it from the fire, and let it coole, then di∣uide the stones and skins, by pas∣sing the pulpe onely through the bottome of a strainer reuersed as they vse in cassia fistula, then take this pulpe and spread it thin vpon glazed stones or dishes, and so let it drie in the sunne, or else in an ouen presently after you haue drawne your breade, then loose it from the stone or dish, & keepe it to prouoke the appetite, and to coole the stomacke in feuers, and all other hote diseases. Proue the same in all manner of fruit. If you feare adustion in this worke, you may finish it in hote balneo.
46. How to dry all manner of plums or Cheries in the sunne. IF it be a small fruite, you must dry them whole, by laying thē abroad in the hote sunne, in stone or pewter dishes, or Iron or brasse pannes, tur∣ning them as you shall see cause. But if the plum be of any largenesse, slit each plum on the one side from the top to the bottome, and then lay them abroad in the Sunne: but if they be of the biggest sort, then giue ey∣ther plum a slit on each side: and if the sun doe not shine sufficiently du∣ring the practice, then dry them in an ouen that is temperately warme. 47. How to keepe apples, peares, quinces, wardens. &c. all the yeare, drie. PAre them, take out the coares, and slice them in thinne slices
laying them to drie in the Sunne in some stone or metalline dishes, or vpon high frame couered with course canuas, now and then tur∣ning them, and so they will keepe all the yeare. 48. To make greene Ginger vpon sirup. TAke Ginger one pounde, pare it cleane, steepe it in red wine and vinegar equally mixed, let it stand so 12. dayes in a close vessell, and euery day once or twice stir it vp and downe, then take of wine one gallon, and of vinegar a pot∣tle, seeth altogether to the con∣sumption of a moitie or half, then take a pottle of cleane clarified honey or more, and put thereunto, and let them boile well together, then take halfe an ounce of saf∣fron. finely beaten, and put it thereto with some sugar if you please.
49 To make sucket of greene Walnuts. TAke Walnuts when they are no bigger then the largest ha∣sill nut, pare away the vppermost greene, but not too deepe, then seeth them in a pottle of water till the water be sodden away, then take so much more of fresh water, and when it is sodden to the halfe, put thereto a quart of vinegar and a pottle of clarified honie. 50. To make conserue of prunes or Damsons. TAke ripe Damsons, put them into scalding water, let them stand a while, then boyle them o∣uer the fire till they breake, then straine out the water through a colander, and let them stand ther∣in to coole, then straine the dam∣sons through the colander, taking
away the stones and skinnes, then set the pulpe ouer the fire againe, and put thereto a good quantitie of red wine, and boile them wel to a stiffenesse, euer stirring them vp and downe, and when they bee al∣most sufficiently boyled, put in a conuenient proportion of sugar, stir all well together, and after put it in your gally pots. 51. To make conserue of strawberies. FIrst seeth them in water, and then cast away the water, and straine them, then boyle them in white wine, and worke as before in damsons, or else straine them be∣ing ripe, then boyle them in wine and sugar till they be stiffe. 52. Conserue of prunes or Damsons made another way. TAke a pottle of damsons, prick them and put them into a pot;
putting thereto a pinte of Rosewa∣ter or wine, and couer your pot, let them boile well, then incorpo∣rate them by stirringe, and when they be tender let them coole, & straine them with the liquor also, then take the pulpe and set it ouer the fire, and put thereto a suffici∣ent quantitie of sugar, and boile them to their height or consisten∣cie, and put it vp in gally pots, or iarre glaffes. 53. How to candie Ginger, Nutmegs, or any Roote or flowers. TAke a quarter of a pounde of the best refined sugar, or sugar candie which you can get, pow∣der it, put thereto two spoonfuls of Rosewater, dip therein your Nutmegs, ginger, rootes, &c. be∣ing first sodden in faire water till they bee soft and tender, the oft∣ner you dip them in your sirrup, the thicker the candie will bee,
but it will be the longer in candy∣ing: your sirrup must bee of such stiffnesse, as that a droppe thereof beeing let fall vpon a pewter dish, may congeale and harden being cold. You must make your sirrup in a chafing dish of coales, keep∣ing a gentle fire: after your sirup is once at his full height, then put them vpon papers presently into a stoue, or in dishes, continue fire some ten or twelue dayes, till you finde the candie hard and gliste∣ring like diamonds; you must dip the red rose, the gillow flower, the marigold, the borrage flower, and all other flowers but once. 5. The arte of comfetmaking, teaching how to couer all kinds of seedes, fruits o spices with sugar. First of all you must haue a deep bottomed bason of fine cleane brasse or latton, with two eares of Iron to hang it with two seuerall
cords ouer a bason or earthen pan with hote coales. You must also haue a broad pan to put ashes in, & hote coales vp∣on them. You must haue a cleane latton bason to melt your sugar in, or a faire brasen skillet. You must haue a fine brasen ladle, to let run the sugar vpon the seedes. You must also haue a brasen slice, to scrape away the sugar frō the hanging bason if neede re∣quire. Hauing all these necessarie ves∣sels & instruments, worke as fol∣loweth. Choose the whitest, finest, and hardest sugar, and then you need not to clarifie it, but beate it one∣ly into fine powder that it may dis∣solue the sooner. But first make all your seedes verie cleane, & dry them in your hanging bason.
Take for euery two pounde of sugar, a quarter of a pound of an∣nis seedes, or Coriander seedes, and your Comfites will be greate enough, and if you wil make them greater, take halfe a pound more of sugar, or one pound more, and then they will be faire & large. And halfe a pounde of Annis seeds, with two pound of sugar wil make fine small comfits. You may also take a quarter and a halse of annis seedes, and three pound of sugar, or halfe a pounde of annis seedes and foure pounde of sugar. Do the like in Coriander seedes. Melt your sugar in this maner, viz. Put three pounds of your powder sugar into the bason, and one pinte of cleane running wa∣ter thereunto, stirre it well with a brasen slice, vntill all be moist and well wet, then set it ouer the fire, without smoak or flame, and melt it well, that there bee no whole
gristie sugar in the bottome, and let it seeth mildelye, vntill it will streame from the ladle like Tur∣pentine, with a long streame and not drop, then it is come to his decoction, let it seeth no more, but keepe it vpon hot imbers that it may run from the ladle vpon the seedes. To make them speedily. Let your water be seething hot, or seething & put powder of sugar vnto the, cast on your sugar boyling hote: haue a good warme fire vnder the hanging bason. Take as much water to your su∣gar, as will dissolue the same. Neuer skim your sugar if it bee cleane and fine. Put no kind of starch or amy∣lum to your sugar. Seeth not your sugar too long, for that will make it black, yellow or tawnie. Moue the seeds in the hanging bason as fast as you can or may,
when the sugar is in casting. At the first coate put on but one halfe spoonfull with the ladle, and all to moue the bason, moue, stirre and rub the seedes with thy left hand a pretie while, for they will take sugar the better, & dry them well after euerie coate. Do this at euerie coate, not on∣ly in mouing the bason, but also with the stirring of the comfits with the left hand and drying the same: thus dooing you shall make great speed in the making: as, in e∣uerie three houres you may make three pound of comfits. And as the comfits do increase in greatnes, so you may take more sugar in your ladle to cast on. But for plaine comfits let your sugar be of a light decoction last, and of a higher decoction first, & not too hote. For crispe and ragged comfits, make your sugar of a high deco∣ction, euen as high as it may run
from the Ladle, and let fall a foote high or more from the ladle, and the hoter you cast on your sugar. the more ragged will your com∣fets be. Also the comfets will not take so much of the sugar as they will vpon a light decoction, and they will keepe their raggednesse long. This high decoction must serue for eight or ten coats in the end of the worke, and put on at euerie time but one spoonful, and haue a light hand with your bason, casting on but little sugar. A quarter of a pounde of Cori∣ander seeds, and three pounds of sugar will make greate, huge, and big comfets. See that you keepe your sugar alwaies in good temper in the ba∣son, that it burne not into lumpes or gobbets: and if your sugar be at anie time too high boyled, put in a spoonfull or two of water, & keepe it warily with the ladle, and let your fire alwaies bee without
smoake or flame. Some commende a ladle that hath a hole in it to let the sugar run through of a height, but you may make your comfites in their perfect forme and shape only with a plaine ladle. When your comsites be made, set your dishes with your comfits vppon papers in them before the heat of the fire, or in the hot sun, or in an Ouen after the bread is drawen, by the space of an houre or two, and this will make them very white. Take a quarter of a pounde of Annis seedes, and two pound of sugar, and this proportion will make them verie great, and euen a like quantity take of Carroway seede, Fennell seede, and Corian∣der seede. Take of the finest Cinamon, and cut it into prettie small sticks beeing drye, and beware you wette it not, for that deadeth
the cinamon, and then worke as in other comfits. Do this with O∣renge rindes likewise. Worke vpon ginger, cloues, and Almonds, as vpon other seeds. The smaller that Annis seede comfits be, the fairer, the harder, and so in all other. Take the powder of fine Cina∣mon two drammes, of fine muske dissolued in a little water one scruple, mingle these altoge∣ther in the hanging bason, and cast them vppon sugar of a good decoction, then with thy left hand moue it to and fro, and drie it wel, doe this often, vntill they bee as great as poppie seeds, and giue in the ende three or foure coates of a light decoction, that they may be round and plaine, & with an high decoction you may make them crispe. You must haue a coorse searce made for the purpose with haire or with parchment full of holes to
part and diuide the comfets into seuerall sorts. To make paste for comfets. Take fine grated breade foure ounces, fine elect Cinamon powdred half an ounce, fine ginger powder one dramme, saffron powdred, a little, white sugar two ounces, & a fewe spoonfuls of borrage water, seeth the water and the sugar together, and put to the saffron, then first mingle the crummes of bread & the spices well together, dry thē; put the liquor scalding hote, vp∣on the stuffe, & being hot labour it with thy hand, and make balles or other formes therof, dry them and couer them as comfets. Coriander seeds two ounces, sugar one pound and a halfe ma∣keth very faire comfets. Annis seeds three ounces, su∣gar halfe a pound, or annis seedes two ounces, and sugar 6. ounces, will make faire comfits. Euerie dram of fine Cinamon,
will take at the least a pound of sugar for biskets, and likewise of sugar or ginger powder. Halfe an ounce of grosse Cina∣mon wil make almost three drams of fine powder searced, after it is well beaten. Sugar powder one ounce will take at the least a pound of sugar to make your biskets faire. Carrowaies will be faire at 12. coates. Put into the sugar a little Amy∣lum dissolued for fiue or six of the last coates, and that will make them exceeding crispe and if you put too much Amylum or starch to the comfits which you woulde haue crispe, it will make them flat and smooth. In anie other confection of pa∣sted sugar mixed with gum Dra∣gagant, put no kinde of Amylum: beware of it, for it will make thy worke clammie. To make redde comfits, seeth 3.
or foure ounces of brasell with a little water, take of this red water 4. spoonfulls, of sugar one ounce, and boile it to his decoction, then giue 6. coates and it will bee of a good colour, or else you may turn so much water with one dramm of turnesole, doing as before. To make greene comfits, seeth sugar with the iuice of beets. To make them yellow, seeth saf∣fron with sugar. In making of comfits, alwaies when the water doth seeth, then put in your sugar powder, and let it seeth a little vntill it bee cleane dissolued and boyled to his per¦fect decoction, & that the white∣nesse of the colour be clean gone, and if you let it settle, you shall see the sugar somwhat clear. For biskets take two spoonfulls of liquor, of sugar searced in a course searce one dram, and of su∣gar powder to be melt & cast, one ounce. This donne will make the
biskets somewhat faire, and some∣what greater then poppie seeds. Aliter. Take sugar powder foure drams, sugar to cast foure ounces with liquor sufficient, lay golde or siluer on your comfits. Euery dramm of sugar powder will take an ounce of sugar to be cast. 8. drammes make one ounce. To thus much powder, for biskets take half a pound of sugar to cast theron. Coriander seedes a quarter of a pound, sugar 3. pound, Corian∣der seedes halfe a pound, sugar, 3. drams will make faire comfits. For biskets, Annis seeds halfe a pound, Fennel seeds a quarter of a pound, and sugar two pound suf∣ficeth. In sixe or eight of the last coats put in two spoonefuls of sugar ve∣rie hot to make them crispe. To one pound of sugar take 9. ounces of water.
55. To make a cullis as white as snowe, and in the nature of gellie. Take a cocke, scalde, wash and drawe him cleane, seethe it in vvhite vvine or rhenish vvine, skū it cleane, clarifie the broth after it is strayned, then take a pinte of thicke and svveete creame, straine that to your clarified broth, and your broth vvill become exceed∣ing faire and vvhite: then take powdred ginger, fine vvhite sugar & Rose vvater, seething your cul∣lis vvhen you season it, to make it take the colour the better. 56. To make Wafers. TAke a pinte of flowr, put it in∣to a little creame with two yolkes of egges and a little rose∣vvater, vvith a little scarced cina∣mon and sugar, vvorke them alto∣gether and bake the paste vppon hote Irons.
57. To make Almond butter. BLanch your almonds, & beate them as fine as you can with faire water, 2. or three houres, then straine them through a lynnen cloth, boyle them with Rosewater whole mace and annis seedes, till the substance be thicke, spreade it vpon a faire cloth, dreining the whey from it, after let it hang in the same cloth some fewe houres, then straine it and season it with Rosewater and sugar. 58, A white gelly of Almonds. TAke Rosewater, gum Draga∣gant dissolued, or Isinglasse dissolued, and some Cinamon grossely beaten, feethe them alto∣gether, then take a pounde of al∣monds, blanch and beate them fine with a little faire water, drie them in a faire cloth; and put
your water aforesaid into the Al∣monds, seeth them together and stir them continually, then take them, from the fire, whē all is boi∣led to a sufficient height. 59. To make Leach. SEeth a pinte of Creame, and in the seething put in some dissol∣ued Isinglas, stirring it vntil it be very thicke, then take a handfull of blanched Almonds, beat them and put them in a dish with your Creame, seasoning them with su∣gar, and after slice it and dish it. 60. Sweete Cakes without eyther spice or suga. SCrape or washe your Parsneps cleane, slice them thinne, drie them vpon. Canuas or networke frames, beat them to powder mix∣ing one thirde thereof with two
thirds of fine wheat flower, make vp your paste into coates, and you shall finde them very sweete and delicate. 61. Roses and Gilloflowres kept long. COuer a Rose that is fresh, and in the bud, and gathered in a faire day after the dewe is ascen∣ded, with the whites of egges well beaten, & presently strew theron the fine powder of scarced sugar, and put them vp in luted pots, set∣ting the pots in a coole place in sand or grauell. With a fillip at any time you may shake off this inclosure. 62. Grapes growing all the yeare. PVt a Vine stalke through a Basket of earth in December, which is likely to be are Grapes,
that yeare, and when the Grapes are ripe, cut off the stalk vnder the basket (for by this time it hath ta∣ken roote) keepe the basket in a warme place, and the grapes will continue fresh and faire a long time vpon the vine. 63. How to drie Rose leaues, or any other single flwer without wrinkling. IF you would performe the same well in rose leaues, you must in rose time make choise of such roses as are neither in the bud, nor full blown (for these haue the smothest leaues of al other) which you must especially cull & choose from the rest. Then take right Callis sand, wash it in some chāge of waters, and drie it throughly well, either in an ouen, or in the sunne; and hauing shallow, square or long boxes of 4.5. or 6. inches deepe, make first an euen lay of sande in the bottome, vpon the
which lay your rose leaues one by one (so as none of them touch o∣ther) till you haue couered all the sand, then strowe sand vpon those leaues till you haue thinly coue∣red them all, & thē make another lay of leaues as before, and so lay vpon lay, &c. Set this box in some warme place in a hot sunnie day, (and commonly in two hot sun∣nie dayes they will bee through drie) then take them out carefully with your hand without breaking. Keepe thefe leaues in Iarre glasses bound about with paper neere a chimney, or stoue, for feare of re∣lenting. I finde the red rose leafe best to be kept in this manner; also take awaye the stalkes of pansies, stocke gilloflowers, or other single flowers, pricke them one by one in sande, pressing downe their leaues smooth with more sande layde euēly vpon them. And thus you may haue Rose leaues, and other flowers to lay about your
basons, windows, &c. all the winter long. Also this secret is very re∣quisite for a good simplifier, be∣cause he may drie the leafe of any hearbe in this manner, and lay it being drie in his Herball with the simple which it representeth, wher¦by hee may easily learne to knowe the names of all simples which he desireth. 64. Clusters of Grapes kept till Easter. CLusters of grapes hanging vp∣on lines within a close presse will last till Easter, if they shrinke you may plumpe them vpp with a little warme water before you eat them. Some vse to dip the endes of the stalkes first in pitch: some cut a branch of the vine with eue∣ry cluster, placing an apple at each end of the branch, now and then renewinge those Apples as they rot, and after hanging them within a presse or cupbord, which
would stand in such a roome (as I suppose) where the grapes might not freez: for otherwise you must be forced now and then to make a gentle fire in the room, or else the grapes will rot and perish. 65. How to keepe Walnuts a long time plumpe and fresh. MAke a laye of the drie stam∣pings of crabs when the ver∣iuice is pressed from them, couer that lay with Walnuts, and vpon them▪ make another lay of stam∣pings, and so one lay vppon ano∣ther till your vessell be full where∣in you meane to keepe them. The Nuts thus kept will pill as if they were new gathered from the tree. 66. An excellent conceit vpon the ker∣nels of drie Walnuts. GAther not your walnuts before they be ful ripe, keep thē with
out anie Art vntill Newyeers tide, then breake the shels carefully, so as you deface not the kernels (& therefore you must make choise of such nuts as haue thinne shels) whatsoeuer you finde to come a∣way easilie, remoue it: stiepe these kernels in conduit water, fortie eight houres, then will they swell and grow verie plumpe and faire, and you may pill them easily, and present them to any friende you haue for a Newyeares gift: but be∣ing pilled, they must bee eaten within two or three houres, or els they lose their whitenes & beau∣tie, but vnpilled they will last 2. or 3. dayes faire and fresh. This of a kind Gentlewoman, whose skill I doe highly commend, and whose case I doe greatlie pitie; such are the hard fortunes of the best wits and natures in our dayes. 67. How to keepe Quinces in a most ex∣cellent maner.
MAke choise of such as are sound, & gathered in a faire, drie and sunny day, place them in a vessell of wood, containing a firkin or thereabout, then couer them with peny ale, and so let thē rest: and if the liquor carrie anie bad scum, after a day or two take it off, euerie 10. or 12. dayes let out your peny ale at a hole in the bottome of your vessell, stop the hole and fill it vp again with fresh peny ale, you may haue as much for two pence at a time as will serue for this purpose, these Quin¦ces being baked at Whitsontide did taste more daintily then any of those which are kept in our v∣suall decoctions or pickels. Also if you take white wine lees that are neat (but then I feare you must get them of the Marchant, for our Tauernes doe hardly af∣foord anie) you may keepe your▪ Quinces in them verie faire and fresh all the yeare, & therein may
you also keep your barberies both full and faire coloured. 68 Keeping of Pomegraenats. Make choise of such Pomgra∣nates as are sound and not prickt as they tearme it, lap them ouer, thinly with wax, hang them vpō nailes, where they may touch nothing, in some cupbord or clo∣set in your bedchamber, wher you keep a continual fire, and euery 3. or 4. daies turn the vndersides vp∣permost, & therefore you must so hang them in packthred, that they may haue a bowe knot at either end. This way Pomgranates haue beene kept fresh till whitsontide. 69. Preseruing of Artichocks. CVt off the stalkes of your Ar∣tichokes within two inches of the Apple, and of all the rest of the stalkes make a strong decoc∣tion.
slicing them into thinne and small peeces, and keepe them in this decoction: when you spende them you must lay them first in warme water, and then in colde, to take away the bitternes of thē. This of M. Parsons, that honest and painefull practicer in his profes∣sion. In a mild & warm winter about a moneth or three weekes before Christmas, I caused great store of Artichokes to bee gathered with their stalkes in their full length as they grewe, and making first a good thicke lay of Artichoke leaues in the bottome of a great and large vessell I placed my Ar∣tichokes one vppon another as close as I could touch them, co¦uering thē ouer of a pritty thick∣nesse with Artichoke leaues: these Artichokes were serued in at my table all the Lent after▪ the apples being red & sound, only the tops of the leaues a little vaded, which
I did cut away. 70. Fruit preserued in pitch. DWayberries that do somwhat resemble blacke cherries, cal∣led in Latine by the name of Sola∣num laethale, beeing dipped in mol∣ten pitch, being almost cold, and before it congeale and harden a∣gaine, and so hung vp by their stalkes, will last a whole yeare Pro∣batum per M. Parsons, the Apothe∣carie. Prooue what other fruites will also bee preserued in this ma∣ner. 71. To make Cloue or Cinamon sugar. LAy pieces of Sugar in close boxes amongst stickes of Ci∣namon, cloues, &c. and in a short time it will purchase both the taste and sent of the spice. Probat. in cloues.
72. Hasell Nuts kept long. A Man of great yeares & expe∣rience assured mee, that Nuts may be kept a long time with full kernels, by burying them in ear∣then pots well stopt, a foot or two in the ground: they keepe best in grauelly or sandy places. But these nuts I am sure wil yeeld no oile as other nuts will, that waxe drie in the shels with long keeping. 73. Chesnuts kept all the yeare. AFter the bread is drawne, dis∣perse your Nuts thinly ouer the bottome of the Ouen, and by this meanes the moisture beeing dryed vp, the Nuts will last all the yeare: if at any time you perceiue them to relent, put thē into your Ouen againe as before.
Secrets in Distillation. 1. How to make true spirit of wine. TAke the finest Paper you can get, or else some Virgine parchment, strayne it verie right and stiffe ouer the glasse bo∣die, wherein you put your sacke, malmsie or muskadine, oyle the paper or virgin parchment with a pensil moistned in the oile of Ben, and distill it in the Balneo with a gentle fire, and by this means you shall purchase only the true spirit of wine. You shall not haue aboue two or three ounces at the moste out of a gallon of wine, which as∣cendeth in the forme of a cloude, without any dewe or veins in the
helme, lute all the ioyntes well in this distillation. This spirit will vanish in the ayre, if the glasse stand open. 2. How to make the ordinarie spirit of wine that is solde for 5. shillings, & a noble, a pinte. PVt sacke, malmesie, or muska∣dine into a glasse bodie, lea∣uing one thirde or more of your glasse empty, set it in balneo, or in a pan of ashes, keeping a softe and gentle fire, drawe no longer then till all or most part wil burne away, which you may proue nowe and then, by setting a spoonefull thereof on fire with a paper as it droppeth from the nose or pipe of the helme, and if your spirit thus drawn haue any phlegme therin, thē rectify or redistil ye spirit again in a lesser body, or in a bolt recei∣uer in sted of an other body, luting a small head on the top of the steel
thereof, and so you shall haue a ve∣rie strong spirit, or else for more expedition, distill fiue or sixe gal∣lons of wine by a Limbecke, and that spirit which ascendeth after∣ward, redistil in glasse as before. 3. Spirits of Spices. DIstill with a gentle heat either in balneo, or ashes, the strong and sweete water, wherewith you haue drawen oile of cloues, mace, nutmegs, Iuniper, Rosemarie, &c. after it hath stoode one moneth close stopt, and so you shall pur∣chase a most delicate Spirite of each of the saide aromaticall bo∣dies. 4. Spirit of wine tasting of what vege∣table you please. MAcerate Rosemarie, Sage, sweet fennell seedes, Marie∣rom, Lēmon or Orenge pils, &c.
in spirit of wine a day or two, and then distill it ouer againe, vnlesse you had rather haue it in his pro∣per colour: for so you shall haue it vpon the first infusion without a¦ny farther distillation, and some young Alchimists doe holde these for the true spirits of vegetables. 5. How to make the water which is vsu∣ally called Balmewater. TO euery gallon of claret wine put one pound of green balm Keep that which commeth first &. is clearest, by it selfe: and the se∣cond & whiter sort which is wea∣kest, and commeth last, by it selfe, distill in a pewter limbeeke luted with paste to a brasse pot. Drawe this in May or Iune whē the herb is in his prime. 6. Rosa-solis. TAke of the hearbe Rosa-solis, gathered in Iuly one gallon,
pick out all the black moats from the leaues, dates halfe a pounde, Cinamon, Ginger, cloues, of each one ounce, graines half an ounce, fine sugar a pound and a halfe, red rose leaues, greene or dryed foure handfuls, steepe all these in a gal∣lon of good Aqua Composita in a glasse close stopped with waxe, during twentie daies, shake it wel together once euerie two daies. Your sugar must be powdred, your spices brused onely, or grosselie beaten, your dates cut in long sli∣ces the stones taken awaie. If you adde two or three graines of Am∣ber greece, and as much muske in your glasse amongst the rest of the ingredientes, it will haue a pleasant smel. Some adde the gum amber with coral and pearl finely poudred, and fine leafe golde. Some vse to boyle Ferdinando bucke in Rosewater, till they haue purchased a faire deepe crimson colour, and when the same is cold,
they colour their Rosa-solis and Aqua Rube a therewith. 7. Aqua Rubea. Take of muske sixe graines, of Cinamon and ginger of each one ounce, white sugar candy one pounde, pouder the sugar, and bruse the spices grossely, binde them vp in a cleane linnen cloth, and put them to infuse in a gallon of Aqua cōposita in glasse close stopped twentie foure houres, sha∣king them togither diuers times, then put thereto of turnesole one dram, suffer it to stand one houre, and then shake al together, then if the colour like you after it is set∣led, poure the cleerest forth into an other glasse: but if you wil haue it deeper coloured, suffer it to worke longer vppon the turne∣sole.
8. Steeuens Aqua composita. TAke a gallō of Gascoign wine, of ginger, galingale, cinamō, nutmegs & graines, Annis seeds, fennel seeds, and carroway seeds, of each a dram, of Sage, mints, red Roses, Time, Pellitorie, Rosemary, wild thime, camomil, lauender, of each a handfull, braie the spices small, and bruise the herbs, letting them macerate 12. houres, stir∣ring it now and then, then distill by a limbecke of pewter, keeping the first cleare water that cōmeth by it self, & so likewise the second. You shal draw much about a pinte of the better sort from euery gal∣lon of wine. 9. Vsquebath, or Irish aqua vitae. TO euery gallon of good Aqua composita, put two ounces of
chosen liquerice bruised, and cut into small peeces, but first clensed from all his filth, and two ounces of Annis seeds that are cleane & bruised, let them macerate fiue or sixe daies in a wodden Vessel, stop∣ping the same close, and then draw off as much as will runne cleere, dissoluing in that cleare Aqua vi∣tae fiue or six spoonfuls of the best Malassoes you can get, Spanish cute if you can get it, is thought better then Malassoes, then put this into another vessell; and after three or foure daies (the more the better) when the liquor hath fined it self, you may vse the same: some adde Dates & Raisons of the sun to this receipt; those groundes which remaine you may redistill and make more Aqua composita of them, & of that Aqua cōposita you may make more Vsque bath.
10. Cinamon-water. HAuing a Copper bodie or brasse pot that will holde 12. gallons, you may well make 2. or 3. gallons of Cinamon water at once. Put into your body ouer∣night 6. gallons of conduit water, and two gallons of spirit of wine, or to saue charge two gallons of spirit drawne from wine lees, Ale, or lowe wine, or sixe pound of the best and largest Cinamon you can get, or else eight pound of the se∣cond sort wel brused, but not bea∣ten into pouder: lute your Lym∣beck, & begin with a good fire of wood & coals, till the vessel begin to distil, then moderate your fire, so as your pipe may drop apace, and run trickling into the recei∣uer, but not blow at anie time: it helpeth much heerein to keep the water in the bucket, not too hot. by often change thereof, it must
neuer be so hot but that you may well indure your finger therein. Then diuide into quart Glasses the spirit vvhich first ascendeth, and vvherein you finde either no taste or a very small taste of the Cynamon, then may you boldely after the spirit once beginneth to come strong of the cinamō, draw vntill you haue gotten at the least a Gallon in the receiuer, and then diuide often by halfe pintes and quarters of pintes, least you drawe too long: which you shall knowe by the faynte taste and milky coulour which distilleth in the ende: this you must nowe and then taste in a spoone. Now, when you haue drawen so much as you finde good, you may adde thereunto so much of your spirit that came before your Cinamon water, as the same will well beare: which you must find by your taste. But if your spirit and your Cina∣mō be both good, you may of the
aforesaid proportion wil make vp two gallons, or two gallons and a quarte of good Cinamon water. Heere note that it is not amisse to obserue which glasse was first fil∣led with the Spirit that ascended, and so of the second, thirde, and fourth: and when you mix, begin with the last glasse first, & so with the next, because those haue more taste of the Cinamon then that which came first, and there fore more fit to bee mixed with your Cinamon water. And if you meane to make but 8. or 9 pintes at once, then begin but with the halfe of this proportion. Also that spirit which remaineth vnmixed doth serue to make Cinamon wa∣ter the second time. This way I haue often proued & found most excellent: take heede that your Limbecke be cleane and haue no maner of sent in it, but of wine or Cinamon, and so likewise of the glasses, sunnelles and pots which
you shall vse about this worke. 11. How to distill Isop, thime, lauender, Rosemary, &c. after a new and excel∣lent manner. HAuing a large Pot containing 12. or 14 gallons, with a Lim∣becke to it, or else a copper body with a serpentine of 20 or 24. gal∣lons, and a copper heade, beeing such a vessell as is commonly vsed in the drawing of Aqua vitae, fill two partes thereof with faire wa∣tet, and one other thirde part with such hearbes as you woulde distill, the hearbes being eyther moist or drie it skilleth not great∣ly whether, let the hearbes mace∣rate all night, and in the morning begin your fire, then distil as be∣fore in Cinamon water, beeing carefull to giue change of waters to your colour alwaies as it nee∣deth: drawe no longer then you feele a strong and sensible taste of
ye hearb which you distill, alwayes diuiding the stronger from the weaker, and by this meanes you shall purchase a water farre excel∣ling any that is drawen by a com∣mon pewter still: you may also ga∣ther the oyle of each hearb which you shall finde fleeting on the top or summity of your water. This course agreeth best with such herbs as are not in taste, and will yeeld their oile by distillation. 12 How to make the salt of hearbs. BVrne whole bundles of dryed Rosemary, Sage, Isop, &c; in a cleane ouen, and when you haue gathered good store of the ashes of the hearb, infuse warme water vpon them, making a strong and sharpe Lee of those ashes, then e∣uaporate that Lee, & the residēce or setling which you finde in the bottō therof, is the salt which you seek for. Some vse to filter this lee
diuers times before euaporation, that their salt may be the clearer and more transparēt. This salt ac∣cording to the nature of the hearb hath great effects in physicke. 13. Spirit of hony. PVt one part of honey to 5. parts of water, when the water boi∣leth, dissolue your honey therein, skimme it, and hauing sodden an houre or two, put it into a wodden vessell, and when it is but bloud warme, set it on worke with yeaste after the vsuall manner of Beere and Ale, tun it, and when it hath lyen some time, it will yeelde his spirit by distillation; as wine, beer and ale will do. 14. To distil Rosewater at Michaelmas and to haue a god yeeld as at any o∣ther time of the yeare.
IN the pulling of your Roses, first diuide all the blasted leaues, thē take the other fresh leaues, and lay them abroad vpon your table or windowes with some cleane linnen vnder them, let them ly 3. or foure houres, or if they bee dewy vntil the dewe be fully vani∣shed, put these rose leaues in great stone pottes, hauing narrowe mouthes, and well leaded within, (such as the Goldfiners call their hookers, & serue to receiue their Aqua fortis, bee the best of all o∣thers that I know) and when they are well filled, stop their mouthes with good corkes, eyther coue∣red all ouer with waxe or molten brimstone, and then set your pot in some coole place, and they wil keepe a long time good, and you may distill them at your best lea∣sure. This waie you may distill Rosewater good cheape, if you buy store of Roses, when you find a glutte of them in the market,
wherby, they are solde for 7. pence or 8. pence the bushell, you then engrosse the flower. And some hold opinion, that if in the midst of these leaues you put some bro∣ken leauen, and after fill vp the pot with Rose leaues to the top, that so in your distillatiō of them you shal haue a perfect Rose vine∣gar without the addition of anie common vinegar. I haue knowen Refeleaues kept well in Rondlets, that haue been first well seasoned with some hote liquor and Rose∣leaues boiled togither, and the same pitched ouer on the out side, so as no aire might penetrate or pearce the vessell. 15. A speedy distillation of Rosewater. STampe the leaues, and first di∣still the iuice being expressed, and after distil the leaues, and so you shall dispatch more with one Stil, then others do with three or
foure stils. And this water is eue∣rie way as medicinable as the o∣ther, seruing in all sirrups, decoc∣tions, &c. sufficiently, but not al∣together so pleasing in smell. 16. How to distill wine vinegar or good Aligar, that it may bee both clear & sharpe. I Knowe it is an vsuall manner a∣mong the Nouices of our time to put a quart or two of good vi∣negar into an ordinary leadē still, and so to distill it as they do all o∣ther waters. But this way I do vtter¦ly dislike, both for that heere is no seperation made at all, and also because I feare that the Vinegar doth cary an ill touch with it, ei∣ther frō the leaden bottō or pew∣ter head or both. And therefore I coulde wish rather that the same were distilled in a large bodie of glasse with a head or receiuer, the same being placed in sande or a∣shes.
Note that the best part of the vinegar is the middle part that a∣riseth, for the first is fainte and phlegmatick, and the last wil taste of adustion, because it groweth heauie toward the latter end, and must be vrged vp with a great fire, and therefore you must nowe and then taste of that which commeth both in the beginning & towards the latter end, that you may re∣ceiue the best by it selfe. 17. How to draw the true spirit of reses, and so of all other hearbs and flowers. MAcerate the Rose in his own iuice, adding thereunto be∣ing tēperately warm, a conueniēt proportion either of yeast or fer∣ment, leaue thē a few daies in fer∣mentation, till they haue gotten a strōg & heady smel, beginning to incline toward vinegar, thē distill them in balneo in glass bodies lu∣ted to their helms (happily a lim∣becke
wil do better and rid faster) and drawe so long as you find any sent of the Rose to come, then re∣distill you haue purchased a perfect spirit of the Rose. You may also ferment the iuice of Roses onelie, and after distill the same. 18. An excellent Rosewater. VPon the top of your glasse bo∣die, straine a haire cloth, and vpon that lay good store of Rose∣leaues, either drie, or halfe drie, and so your water will ascend ve∣rie good both in smell and in co∣lour. Distill either in balneo, or in a gentle fire in ashes, you may rei¦terate the same water vppon fresh leaues. This may also be done in a leaden Still, ouer which by rea∣son of the breadth you may place more leaues.
19. An excellent wvy to make the ex∣tract of all Vegetables. EXpresse a good quantity of the iuice thereof, set it on the fire, and giue it onely a walme or two, then it will grow cleere: before it be cooled, pour away the cleerest, filter with a peece of cotton, and then euaporate your filtred iuyce, till it come to a thicke substance, and thus you shal haue a most ex∣cellent extracte of the Rose, Gil∣loflower, &c. with the perfect sent and taste of the flower, whereas the common waie is to make the extracte eyther by spirit of wine faire water, the water of the plant, or some kind of menstruum. 20. To make a water smelling of the Eg∣lantine, Gilloflowers, &c. DRie the hearbe or flower, and distill the same in faire water
in a limbecke, draw no longer thē you find sent in the water that is∣sueth, reiterate that water vpon fresh herbes, and distil as before, diuiding the sweetest frō the rest. 21. A Scottish hand water. PVt thyme, Lauender, and Rose∣mary confusedly together, thē make a lay of thicke wine Lees in the bottom of a stone pot, vppon which make an other laye of the said hearbes, & then a lay of Lees, and so forwarde, lute the pot wel, bury it in the ground for 6. weeks distill it, & it is called Dames wa∣ter in Scotland. A little therof put into a bason of a cōmon water ma¦keth very sweet washing water. 22. How to draw the bloud of hearbes. STampe the hearb, put the same into a large glasse, leauing two parts emptie (some commend the
iuice of the hearbe onely) nip or else lute the glasse very wel, digest it in balneo. 15. or 16. daies, and you shall finde the same very red, diuide the watrish part, and that which remaineth is the bloud or essence of the hearb. 23. Rosewater, and yet the Roseleaues not discoloured. YOu must distill in balneo, and whē the bottom of your pew∣ter Still is through hotte, put in a fewe leaues at once and distill them: watch your Still carefully, and as soone as those are distilled put in more. I know not whether your profit will requite your la∣bour, yet accept of it as a newe conclusion. 24. How to recouer Rosewater, or any other distilled water that hath got∣ten a mother, and is in daunger to be musty.
INfuse your water vpō fresh Rose leaues, or vpon Rose cakes bro∣ken all in peeces, and then after maceration for three or foure houres with a gentle fire, redistill your water. Do this in a Limbeck, take heed of drawing too long for burning, vnlesse your Limbecke stand in balneo. 25. To drawe both good Rosewater, and oyle of Roses together. AFter you haue digested your Rose leaues by the speace of 3. moneths, sicut ante, num. 13. eyther in barrels or hookers, then distill thē with faire water in a limbeck, draw so long as you finde anie ex∣cellent smell of the Rose, then di∣uide the fatty oile that fleeteth on the top of the Rose water, and so you haue both excellent oile of Roses, and also good Rosewater togither, and you shall also haue more water then by the ordinarie
way, and this Rosewater exten∣deth farther in physicall composi∣tions, and the other serueth best for perfumes and casting bottles. You may also distill the oyle of Linum Rhodtum this way, sauing that you shall not neede to mace∣rate the same aboue 24 houres in your water or menstruum before you distill: this oyle hath a most pleasing smell in a manner equall with the oyle of Roses.
COOKERIE AND Huswiferie. 1. To souse a yong Pig. TAke a young Pigge being scal∣ded, boile it in faire water and white wine, put therto some Baye leaues, some whole Ginger, and some Nutmegs quartered, a fewe whole cloues, boyle it throughly, and leaue it in the same broath in an earthen pot. 2. Aliter. TAke a Pig beeing scalded, col∣ler him vppe like brawne, and lap your collers in faire cloathes: when the flesh is boyled tender,
take it out, and put it in colde wa∣ter and salt, and that wil make the skin white, make sowsing drinke for it, with a quart of white wine, and a pottle of the same broth. 3 To boyle a flounder or Pickerel, of the French fashion. TAke a pinte of white wine, the tops of young time and Rose∣mary, a little whole mace, a little whole pepper seasoned with Ver∣iuice, salt, and a peece of sweete butter, and so serue it: this broth will serue to boyle Fish twise or thrise in. 4. To boile Sparrowes or Larks. TAke two ladles full of mutton broth, a little whole mace, put into it a peece of sweet butter a handful of Parsly being picked, season it with sugar, veriuice, and a little pepper.
5. To boyle a Capon in white broth. BOyle your Capon by it selfe in faire water, then take a ladle∣full or two of mutton broth and a little white wine, a little whole mace, a bundle of sweete hearbs, a little marrowe, thicken it with Almonds, season it with sugar, and a little veriuyce, boyle a fewe cur∣rans by themselues, and a Date quartered, least you discolor your broth, and put it on the breast of your Capon, Chicken or Rabbet: if you haue no Almonds, thicken it with Creame, or with yolkes of egges, garnish your dishes on the sides with a Lemmon sliced & su∣gar. 6. To boyle a Mallard, Teale, or Wigin. TAke mutton broth, and put it into a pipken, put into the
belly of the foule a fevve sweete hearbes and a little Mace, sticke halfe a dozen of Cloues in his breast, thicken it with a tofte of bread stieped in veriuice, season it with a little pepper, and a little Sugar, also one Onion minced small is very good in the broth of any water foule. 7. To boyle a legge of Mutton after the French fashion. TAke al the flesh out of your leg of mutton, or at the but end, preseruing the skinne whole, and mince it small with Oxe suet, and marrow, then take grated bread, sweete Creame, and yolkes of egges, and a fewe sweete hearbes, put vnto it Currans, and Raisins of the sunne, season it with Nut∣megs, Mace, Pepper, and a little sugar, & so put it into the leg of Mutton againe where you tooke it out, and stew it in a pot with a
marrow bone or two, serue-in the marrowe bones with the stewed-broath and fruite, and serue-in your legge of mutton drye with carot rootes sliced, & cast grosse pepper vpon the rootes. 8. To boyle Pigs petitoes on the French fashion. BOyle them and slice them, be∣ing first rolled in a little batter. your batter being made with the yolke of an egge, two spoonefuls of sweete creame, and one spoon∣full of flower, make sawce for it with Nutmeg, vinegar and sugar. 9 To boyle Pigeons with rice. BOyle them in mutton broath, putting sweete hearbes in their bellies, then take a little Rice and boyle it in Creame, with a little whole mace, season it with sugar,
lay it thick on their breasts, wrin∣ging also the iuice of a Lemmon vpon them, and so serue them. 10. To boyle a chine of veale, or a chicken in sharpe broth with hearbes. TAke a little muttō broth, white wine and veriuyce, and a little whole mace, thē take lettuce, Spi∣nage, and Parsley, and bruise it, & put it into your broth, seasoning it with veriuice, pepper and a little sugar, and so serue it. 11. To make Beaumanger. TAke the brawne of a Capon, toase it like wool, then boile it in sweete Creame with the whites of two egges, and beeing well boyled, hang it in a cloth, and let the whey run from it, then grinde it in an Alablaster mortar with a woodden pesteell, then drawe it thorough a thinne Strayner
with the yolks of two eggas, and a little Rosewater, then set it on a chafing dish with coales, mixing foure ounces of sugar with it, and when it is cold dish it vp like Al∣mond butter, and so serue it. 12. To make a Polonian sawsedge. TAke the fillets of an hog, chop them verie small with a hand∣full of red sage, season it hot with Ginger and pepper, and then put it into a great sheepes gut, then let it lie three nights in brine, thē boyle it and hang it vp in a chim∣ney where fire is vsually kept, and these sawsedges will last one whole yeare. They are good for sallades, or to garnish boyled meates, or to make one relish a cup of wine.
13. To make tender and delicate Brawne. PVt collars of brawne in kettles of water or other apt vessels, into an ouen heated as you would for houshold bread, couer the ves∣sels, & so leaue them as long in the ouen as you would doe a batch of bread. A late experience amongst glentlewomen farre excelling the olde manner of boyling brawné in great & huge kettles. Quaere if put∣ting your liquor hot into the ves∣sels, and the brawne a little boiled first, if by this meanes you shal not giue greate expedition to your worke. 14. Paste made of fish. INcorporate the bodie of salt∣fish, Stock fish, Ling, or any fresh fish that is not full of bones, with crums of bread, flower, Ising lasse,
&c. and with proper spices agree∣ing with the nature of euerie se∣uerall fish, and of that paste molde off the shapes & forms of little fi∣shes: as of the Roch, Dace, Perch, &c. and so by arte you may make many little fishes out of one great and naturall fish. 15. How to barrell vp Oysters, so as they shall last for sixe moneths sweete and good, and in their naturall taste. OPē your oisters, take the licor of thē, and mixe a reasonable proportion of the best white wine vineger you can get, a little salt & some pepper, barrell the fish vp in small caske, couering all the Oy∣sters in this pickle, and they will last a long time; this is an excel∣lent meanes to conuey Oysters vnto drie townes, or to carie them in long voyages.
16. How to keepe fresh Salmon a whole moneth in his perfect taste and deli∣cacie. FIrst seeth your Salmon accor∣ding to the vsuall manner, thē sinke it in apt and close vessels in wine vinegar with a braunch of Rosemarie therein. By this means Vintners and Cookes may make profit thereof when it is scarce n the markets, & Salmon thus pre∣pared may be profitably brought out of Ireland and sold in London or else where. 17. Fish kept long, and yet to eate shorte and delicately. FRie your fish in oyle, some commend Rape Oyle, and some the sweetest Siuill Oyle that you canne get, for the fish will not taste at all of the Oyle
because it hath a watrish bodie, & oyle and water make no true vni∣ty, then put your fish in white wine vinegar, and so you may keepe it for the vse of your Table any rea∣sonable-time. 18. How to keepe roasted Beefe a long time sweete and wholesome. THis is also done in wine vine∣gar, your peeces being not o∣uer great, & well and close barrel∣led vp: this secret was fully proued in that honourable voyage vnto Cales. 19. How to keepe powdered beefe fiue or six weekes after it is sodden, with∣out any charge. WHen your beefe hath beene well & thorowly powdred by tenne or twelue dayes space, then seeth it throughly, dry it with
a cloth, and wrap it in dry clothes placing the same in close vessels and Cupbords, and it will keepe sweete & sound two or three mo∣neths, as I am credibly informed from the experience of a kinde & louing friend. 20. A conceipt of the Authors, how beefe may be carried at the sea, with out that strong and violent impression of salt which is vsually purchased by long and extreme powdring. HEere with the good leaue & fauour of those curteous gen∣tlewomen, for whome I did prin∣cipally if not only intend this litle treatise; I will make bold to lanch a little from the shoare, and trye what may bee done in the vaste and wide Ocean, and in long and dangerous voyages; for the bet∣ter preseruation of such vsuall victuals, as for want of this skill
doe oftentimes meerely perish, or else by the extreame pearcing of the salte, doe lose euen their nutritiue strength and vertue: & if any future experience doe hap∣pen to controll my present con∣ceipt, let this excuse a scholler, quòd in magnis est voluisse satis. But now to our purpose, let all the bloud bee first well gotten out of the beefe, by leauing the same some nine or tenne dayes in our vsuall brine, then barrell vp all the peeces in vessels full of holes, fa∣stening them with ropes at the sterne of the ship; and so dragging them through the salte sea water (which by his infinite change and succession of water will suffer no putrifaction, as I suppose) you may happily find your beefe both sweete and fauourie enough when you come to spend the same. And if this happē to fall out true vpon some triall thereof had, then ei∣ther at my next impression, or
when I shall bee vrged thereunto vpon any necessitie of seruice, I hope to discouer the meanes also whereby euerie Shippe may carry sufficient store of victuall for her selfe in more▪ close and conueni∣ent cariages then those loose ves∣sels are able to performe. But if I may be allowed to carie either roasted or sodden flesh to the sea, then I dare aduenture my poore credit therein to preserue for six whole moneths together, either Beefe, Mutton, Capons, Rabbets, &c. both in a cheape manner, and also as fresh as wee doe now vsu∣ally eate them at our Tables. And this I hold to be a most singular & necessarie secret for all our Eng∣lish Nauie; which at all times vp∣pon reasonable termes I will bee ready to disclose for the good of my country.
21. How to make sundry sorts of most daitie butter, hauing a liuely taste of Sage, Cinamon, Nutmegs, Mace, &c. THis is done by mixing a fewe drops of the extracted cyle of Sage, Cinamon, Nutmegs, Mace, &c, in the making vp of your but∣ter: for oyle and butter will incor∣porat and agree very kindely and naturallie together. And how to make the said oyles, with all neces¦sarie vessels, instruments & other circumstances by a most pline & familiar description, See my Iew∣ell house of Art and nature vnder the Title of distillation. 22. How to make a larger and daintier Cheese of the same proportion of milk then is commonly vsed or knowne by any of our best dairiewomen at this day.
HAuing brought your milke into curds by ordinarie ren∣net, either breake them with your handes according to the vsuall manner of other cheeses, and after with a fleeting dish, taking away as much of the whey as you can, or els put in the curds, with∣out breaking, into your moate, let them so repose one houre, or two, or three; and then to a cheese of two gallons of milk, ad a waight of tenne or twelue pound, which waight must rest vppon a couer; that is fit with the moate or case wherein it must truly descende by degrees as you increase your waight, or as the curdes doe sink and settle. Let your curdes re∣maine so all that daye and night following vntil the next morning and then turne your cheese or curds, & place your waight again theron, adding from time to time some more small waight as you shall see cause. Note that you must
lay a cloath both vnder and ouer your curdes at the least, if you will not wrap them all ouer as they do in other cheeses, changing your cloth at euerie turning. Also if you will worke in any ordinary moat, you must place a round and broade hoope vpon the moat, be∣ing iust of the selfe same bignesse or circumference, or else you shall make a verie thinne cheese. Turne these cheeses euerie mor∣ning and euening, or as often as you shall see cause, till the whey bee all run out, and then proceed as in ordinarie Cheeses. Note that these moates would be full of holes, both in the sides and bot∣tome, that the whey may haue the speedier passage. You may also make them in square boxes full of holes, or else you may deuise moates or cases either tounde or square of fine wicker, which ha∣uing wicker couers, may by some slight be so stayed, as that you shall
neede only morning and euening to turne the wrong side vpwarde, both the bottomes beeing made loose and so close, and fitting, as they may sinke truely within the moate or molde, by reason of the waight that lyeth thereon. Note that in other cheeses the couer of the moat shutteth ouer the moat: but in these the couers desfcēd & fall within the moates. Also your ordinarie cheeses are more spon∣gious and full of eyes then these, by reason of the violent pressing of them, wheras these cheeses set∣ling gently and by degrees, do cut as close and firme as marmalade. Also in those cheeses which are pressed out after the vsuall māner, the whey that commeth frō them, if it stande a while, will carrie a Creame vppon it, whereby the cheese must of necessitie be much lesse, and as I ghesse by a fourth parte, whereas the wheye that commeth from these new kind of
cheeses is like faire water in color and caryeth no strength with it. Note also that if you put in your curdes vnbroken, not taking a∣way the whey that issueth in the breaking of thē, that so the chee∣ses will yet bee so much the grea∣ter: but that is the more trouble∣some way, because the curds be∣ing tender will hardly endure the turning, vnlesse you be verie care∣full. I suppose that the Angelotes in Fraunce may bee made in this manner in small baskets, and so likewise of the Parmeesan; and if your whole cheese consist of vn flatten milke, they will be full of butter and eate most daintily, be∣ing taken in their time, before they be too dry, for which purpose you may keepe them when they begin to growe dry, vpon greene rushes or nettles. I haue robbed my wifes Dairy of this secret, who hath hitherto refused all recom∣pences that haue beene offered
her by Gentlewomē for the same: & had I loued a cheese my selfe so well as I like the receipt, I thinke I should not so easily haue impar∣ted the same at this time. And yet I must needes confesse, that for the better gracing of the Title wherewith I haue fronted this pamphlet, I haue beene willing to publish this with some other se∣crets of worth, for the which I haue many times refused good store both of Crownes and An∣gels: and therfore let no Gentle∣woman think this booke too dear, at what price soeuer it shall be va∣lued vpon the sale thereof, neither can I esteeme the worke to be of lesse then twentie yeeres gathe∣ring. 23. Clouted creame. TAke your milke beeing newe milked; and presently set it vpon the fire from morning vntil
the euening, but let it not seethe: and this is called my Lady Youngs clowted creame. 24. Flesh kept sweet insummes. YOu may keepe veale, mutton, or venison in the heat of sum∣mer 9. or ten dayes good, so as it be newly & faire killed, by han∣ging the same in an high and win∣die roome (And therefore a plate cupboard full of holes, so as the wind may haue a through passage would be placed in such a roome, to auoide the offēce of fly-blowes) this is an approued secret, easie and cheap, and very necessary to be known and practised in hote & tainting weather. Veale may bee kept ten daies in bran. 25. Mustard meale. IT is vsuall in Venice to sell the meale of Mustarde in their mar∣kets
as we do flower and meale in England: this meale by the addi∣tion of vinegar in two or three dayes be cōmeth exceeding good mustard, but it would bee much stronger and finer, if the husks or huls were first diuided by searce or boulter, which may easily bee don, if you drie your seeds against the fire before you grind thē. The Dutch iron handmils, or an or∣dinarie pepper mill may serue for this purpose. I thought it verie necessarie to publish this manner of making of your sauce, because our mustard which wee buy from the Chandlers at this daye is ma∣nie times made vp with vile and filthy vinegar, such as our stomak would abhorre if we should see it before the mixing therof with the seedes. 26. How to auold smoke, in broyling of Bacon, Carbonao, &c. MAke little dripping pans of
paper; pasting vp the corners with starch or paste, wet them a little in water, but Pope Pius Quiniu: his Cooke will haue them touched ouer with a feather first dipped in oyle or molten butter, lay them on your gridiron, & place therein your slices of bacon, turning thē as you see cause. This is a cleanly way, and auoydeth all smoke. In the same manner you may also broile thin slices of Polonian saw∣sedges, or great oysters, for so were the Popes Oysters dressed. You must be carefull that your fire vnder the gridiron flame not, least you happen to burne your drip∣ping pannes, and therefore all colebrands are here secluded. 27. The true bottling of beere. WHen your Beere is tenne or twelue dayes old, whereby it is growne reasonable cleare,
then bottle it, making your corkes verie fitte for the bottles, and stop them close, bur drinke not of this beere till they beginne to worke a∣gaine and mantle, and then you shall finde the same most excellent and sprightly drinke: and this is the reason why bottle ale is both so win die and muddy, thundring & smoa∣king vpon the opening of the bot∣tle, because it is commonly bottled the same day that it is laide into the Cellar, whereby his yeast being an exceeding windie substance, beeing also drawne with the Ale not yet fi∣ned, doth incorporate with the drinke, and maketh it also verie windie, and this is all the lime and gunpowder wherewith bottle Ale hath beene a long time so wrong∣fully charged. 28. How to helpe your bottles when they are mustie. SOme put them in an ouen when
the breade is newly drawen, clo∣sing vp the oven, and so let them rest till morning. Others content themselues with scaulding them in hotte liquor onely till they bee sweete. 19. How to breake whites of Egs speedily. A Figge or two shred in peeces, and then beaten amongst the whites of egges will bringe them into an oyle speedily: some breake them with a stubbed rod, & some by wringing them often through a spoonge. 30. How to keepe flies from oyle peeces. A Line limed ouer and strained about the crest of oyle peeces or pictures, will catch they Flyes, that woulde otherwise deface the Pictures. But this Italian con¦ceipt both for the rarenesse and
vse thereof doth please me aboue all other: viz, Pricke a Cowcum∣ber full o barley cornes with the small spiring ends outward, make little holes in the Cowcumber first with a wodden or bone bod∣kin, and after put in the graine, these being thicke placed will in time couer all the Cowcumber, so as no man can discerne what strange plant the same should bee. Such Cowcumbers are to bee hung vp in the middest of Sum∣mer r omes to drawe all the flies vnto thē, which otherwise would flie vpon the Pictures or hang¦ings 31. To keepe Lobsters, Crafishes, &c. sweet and good for some fewe dayes. THese kinds of fish are noted to be of no durabilitie or lasting in warme weather, yet to pro∣long their dayes a little, though I feare I shall raise the price of
them by this discouerie amongst the fishmongers (who onely in re∣spect of their speedie decay doe now and then afford a peniworth in them) if you wrappe them in sweete and course rags first moi∣stened in brine, and then burie these cloathes in Callis sand, that is also kept in some coole and moist place, I know by mine owne experience that you shall finde your labour well bestowed, and the rather if you lay thē in seue∣rall clothes, so as one doe not touch the other. 32. Diuers excellent kinds of bottle Ale. I Cannot remember that euer I did drinke the like sage ale at a∣ny time, as that which is made by mingling two or three droppes of the extracted oyle of sage with a quart of Ale, the same beeing well brued out of one pot into ano∣ther:
and this way a whole Stand of sage ale is very speedily made. The like is to bee done with the oyle of Mace or Nutmegs. But if you will make a right gossips cup that shall farre exceed all the Ale that euer mother Bunch made in her life time, then in the bottling vp of your best Ale, tunne halfe a pinte of white Ipocras that is newly made, and after the best re∣ceipt, with a pottle of Ale, stoppe your bottle close, and drinke it when it is stale: Some commend the hanging of roasted Orenges prickt full of Cloues in the vessell of Ale till you find the taste ther∣of sufficiētly graced to your own liking. 33. How to make wormewood wine verie speedily and in great quantity. TAke small Rochell or Coniake wine, put a few droopes of the
extracted oile of wormwood ther∣in, brewe it togither (as before is set down in bottle ale) out of one pot into an other, and you shall haue a more neate and wholesom wine for your body, thē that which is solde at the Stillyard for right wormwood wine. 34. Rosewaer and Roseuinegar of the co∣lour of the Rose, and of the Cowslep, and violet vinegar. IF you woulde make your Rose∣water and Rose vinegar of a Ru∣bie color, then make choise of the crimson veluet coloured leaues, clipping away the whites with a paire of sheeres, & being through dryed, put a good large handful of them into a pinte of Damaske or red rosewater, stop your glasse wel & set it in the sun, til you see that the leaues haue lost their colour. Or for more expedition you may pecforme this worke in balneo in
a few houres, and when you take out the olde leaues, you may put in fresh till you finde the color to please you. Keep this Rosewater in glasses very well stopt, the ful∣ler the better. What I haue said of Rosewater, the same may also be intended of Rose vinegar, violet, marigolde, and cowslep vinegar, but the whiter vinegar you chuse for this purpose, the colour ther∣of will be the brighter, and there∣fore distilled Vinegar is best for this purpose, so as the same bee warily distilled with a true diuisi∣on of parts, according to the ma∣ner expressed in this booke in the distillation of vinegar. 35. To keepe the iuice of Oranges and Lemmons al the yeare for sauce, Iu∣leps and other purposes. EXpresse their iuyce, and passe it through an Ipocrasse bagge to clarifie it from his impurities,
then fill your glasse almost to the top, couer it closely, and let it stand so till it haue done boyling; then fill vp your glasse with good sallet oyle, and set it in a coole closet or butterie where no Sun commeth; the aptest glasses for this purpose are straight vpright ones, like to our long beere glas∣ses, which would bee made with little round holes within two in∣ches of the bottome to receiue apt fawcets, & so the grounds or lees would settle to the bottome, and the oyle would sinke downe with the iuice so closely that all putrefaction would be auoyded: or in steede of holes if there were glasse pipes it were the better & readyer way, because you shall hardly fasten a fawcet well in the hole. You may also in this manner preserue many iuyces of hearbes and flowers. And because that profite and skill vnited do grace each other,
if (curteous Ladies) you will lend eares and followe my direction; I will heere furnish a great number of you (I woulde I coulde furnish you all) with the iuice of the best ciuill Orenges at an easie price, About Alhallontide or soone af∣ter you may buy the inward pulpe of ciuill Orēges wherin the iuice resteth, of the comfetmakers for a small matter, who doe onely or principally respect their rindes to preserue and make Orengeadoes with all, this iuice you may pre∣paire and reserue as before. 36. Howe to purifie and giue an ex∣cellent smell and taste vnto sallet oyle. PVt sallet Oyle in a Vessell of wood or earth, hauing a hole in the bottom, to euery 4 quartes of water adde one quarte of oyle, and with a woodden spoone or
spattle beate them well togither for a quarter of an houre, then let out the water, preuenting the oyle from issuing by stopping of the hole, repeate this worke two or three times, and at the last you shall finde your oile wel clensed or clarified. In this maner you may also clarifie capons grease, being first melted, and workinge with warm vvater. All this is borrowed of M. Bartholomaeus Scapius the Mai∣ster Cook of Pope Pius Quintus his priuie kitchen. I thinke if the last agitation were made in Rosewa∣ter, wherin also cloues or Nut∣megs had been macerated, that so the oyle woulde bee yet more pleasing. Or if you set a Iar glasse in bal∣neo full of sweete oyle with some store of bruised cloues, and rinds of ciuil Oranges or Lemmons al∣so therein, and so continue your fire for tvvo or three houres, and then letting the Clouès & rindes
remain in the oile til both the sent & taste do please you: I think ma¦ny men which at this day do loath oile (as I my selfe did not long since) woulde be easily drawen to a sufficient liking thereof. 37. How to clarifie without any distil∣laion both white and & claret wine vinegar for gellies or sauces. TO euerie sixe pintes of good wine vinegar, put the whites of tvvo new laid Egges wel beatē, then put all into a nevve leaden pipkin, & cause the same to boyle a little ouer a gentle fire, then let it run through a course gelly bag twise or thrise, and it vvill be ve∣ry clear, and keep good one whole yeare. 38. To make a most delicate white salte for the table. FIrst calcine or burn your white
salt, thē dissolue it in cleare con∣duit water, let the water stād with∣out stirring, fortie eight houres, then carefully drawe away all the cleare water only, filter it, & after euaporate the filtred liquor, re∣seruing the salt. Some leaue out calcination. 39. A delicate Candle for a Ladies Table. CAuse your Dutch Candles to be dipped in Virgin wax, so as their last coate may be meerly waxe, and by this meanes, you may carrie them in your hande without melting, and the sent of the tallow will not break through to giue offence, but if you would haue them to resemble yellovve waxe candles, then first let the tal∣low be colored with Turmericke boyled therein, and strayned, and after your Candles haue beene dipped therein to a sufficient
greatnesse, let them take their last coate from yellow waxe, this may be done in a great round Cane of tinne plate, hauing a bottome, & being somewhat deeper then the length of your candles: & as the wax spendeth, you may still sup∣ply it with more. 40. How to hang your candles in the aire without candlesticke. THis will make a strange shewe to the beholders that knowe not the conceite, it is done in this manner: Let a fine Virginall wier be conueied, in the midst of eue∣rie weeke and left of some length aboue the Candle to fasten the same to the postes in the roofe of your house, and if the roome be any thing high roofed, it will be hardly discerned, and the flame though it consume the tallow, yet it will not melt the wier.
41. Rose Vinegar made in a new manner. MAcerate or steepe Rose-leaues in faire water, let them lye therein, til they wax soure in smell, and then distill the water.
SWEETE Pow∣ders, oyntments, beauties, &c. 1. An excellent damask powder TAke of yreos halfe a pounde, Rose leaues 4. ounces, cloues one ounce, lignum Rhodium two ounces, Storax one ounce and a halfe, muske and ciuet of each 10 grains, beat and incorporate thē well together. 2. An excellent hand water or washing water very cheape. TAke a gallon of faire water, one handful of Lauēder flow∣ers, a few cloues, and some orace
powder, and foure ounces of Bē∣iamin; distill the water in an or∣dinarie leaden still: You may di∣still a second water by a newe in∣fusion of water vpon the feces, a little of this will sweeten a bason of faire water for your table. 3. A ball to take out staines from linnen. TAke foure ounces of white hard Soape, beate it in a mor∣tar with two small Lemmons sli∣ced, and as much roche allome as an hafell Nut, roll it vp in a ball, rub the staine therewith, and after fetch it out with warme water if neede be. 4. A swéete and delicate Pomander. TAke two ounces of Labdanū, of Beniamin and Storax one ounce, muske sixe graines, ciuet
sixe graines, Amber greece sixe graines, of Calamus Aromaticus and Lignum Aloes, of each the waight of a groat, beat all these in a hote mortar, and with an hote pestell till they come to paste, thē wet your hand with rose water, & roll vp the paste sodainly. 5. To take staines out of ones hands presently. THis is done with the iuyce of Sorrell, washing the stained place therein. 6. To take away spots and freckles frō the face or hands. THe sappe that issueth out of a Birch tree in great aboun∣dance, being opened in March or Aprill, with a receiuer of glasse set vnder the boring thereof to re∣ceiue the same, doth perform the
same most excellently & maketh the skin very cleare. This sap will dissolue pearl, a secret not known vnto many. 7. A white fucus or beauty for the face. THe iawe bones of a Hogge or Sow well burnt, beaten, and searced through a fine searce, and after grounde vpon a porphire or serpentine stone is an excellent fucus, being laid on with the oyle of white poppey. 8. A delicate washing ball. TAke three ounces of Orace, halfe an ounce of Cypres, two ounces of Calamus Aromaticus, one ounce of Rose leaues, two ounces of lauender flowers, beat all these together in a mortar, sear∣cing them through a fine searce,
then scrape some castill sope, and dissolue it with some Rosewater, then incorporat all your powders therewith by labouring of them well in a mortar. 9. Damaske powder. TAke fiue ounces of orace, two ounces of Cipres, two ounces of Calamus; halfe an ounce of Cloues, one ounce of Beniamin, one ounce of Rose leaues, one ounce of Storax calamitum, halfe an ounce of Spike flowers, mixe them well together. 10. To keepe the teeth both white and sound. TAke a quart of hony, as much Vinegar, and halfe so much white wine, boyle them together and wash your teeth therwith now and then.
11. To delay heat, and cleare the face. TAke three pintes of conduit water, boyle therein two oun∣ces of French barly, change your water, and put in the barly again: repeate this so long, till your wa∣ter purchase no colour from the Barley, but become verie cleare: boyle the last three pintes to a quart, then mixe halfe a pinte of white wine therein, and when it is cold, wring the iuyce of two or three good Lemmons therein, & vse the same for the Morphewe, heate of the face or hands, and to cleere the skinne. 12. Skinne kept white and cleare. VVAsh the face and body of a sucking child with breast milke, or Cowe milke, or mixed
with water, euerie night, and the childes skinne will wax faire and cleare, and resist sunburning. 13. An excellent Pomatum to clear the skinne. WAsh Barrowes grease often times in May dewe that hath bin clarified in the sun, till it bee exceeding white, then take Marsh mallow rootes scraping off the outsides, then make thin sli∣ces of them and mixe them, set them to macerate in a seething balneo, and scumme it well till it bee throughly clarified and will come to roap, then straine it, and put now and then a spoonesull of May-dewe therein, bearing it till it be through cold in often chāge of May-dew, then throw away that dewe, and put it in a glasse coue∣ing it with May-dewe, and so re∣serue it to your vse. Let the mal∣lowe
rootes be two or three daies dryed in the shade before you vse them. This I had of a great profes sour of Arte, and for a rare and dainty secret, as the best fucus this day in vse. 14. Another minerall ficussor the face. INcorporate vvith a woodden pestle and in a woodden mortar with great labour foure ounces of sublimate, and one ounce of crude Mercury at the least sixe or eight houres (you cannot bestowe too much labor herein) then with often change of colde water by ablution in a glasse, take awaie the salts from the sublimate, change your water twise euery day at the I-ast, and in seauen or eight daies (the more the better) it will bee culcified, and then it is prepared. Lay it on with the oyle of white poppey.
15. To take away chilblanes out of the hands or feete. BOyle halfe a pecke of Oates in a quart of water, till they waxe drie, then hauing first annointed your handes with some good Po∣matum & well chafed them, hold them within the oates as hotte as you may well suffer them, coue∣ring the bowle wherein you put your handes with a double cloth to keep in the steame of the oats. Do this three or foure times, and you shal finde the effect. The same Oates wil serue to bee sodden with freshe water three or foure times. 16. To helpe a fae that is red or pimpled. DIssolue common salte in the iuice of Lemmons, and with a
linnen cloth, pat the patients face that is full of heate or pimples. It cureth in a few dressings. 17. Aliter. TAke of those little whelkes or shels which some do call giny money, wash fiue or sixe of thē, & beate them to fine powder, and infuse the iuyce of Lemmons vp∣on them, & it will presently boyl: but if it offer to boyle out of your glasse, then stop the mouth ther∣of with your finger, or blow into it. This will in a short time bee like an ointment, with which you must anoint the heate or pimples of the face often times in a daye till you find helpe. As the ointmēt dryeth put more iuyce of Lem∣mons to it I his of an outlandish Gentlewoman, and it is an asiured remedy if the heate bee not very extreme. Some haue found by ex∣perience,
that bathing of the face with hote vinegar euery night when they go to bed doth migh∣tily repell the humour. 18. Aliter. QVilt baye salte well dryed and powdered, in double linnen sockes of a prettie bignesse, let the patient weare them in wide hose and shooes day and night, by the space of fourteene dayes, or till he be well: euery morning and eue∣ning let him drie his sockes by the fire and put them on againe. This helped M. Foster an Essex mā and an Atturney of the Common pleas within these few yeares, but now deceased, whse face was for many yeares together of an ex∣ceedinge highe and firye colour, of my owne knowledge, and had spent much money in Physicke without anie successe at all, vntill
he obtained his remedie. The pa∣tient must not take any wet of his feete during the cure. 19. Aliter & optime. TAke halfe a pound of white di∣stilled vinegar, two newe laid Egges with their shelles, two spoonfuls of the flowers of brim∣stone, let these macerate in the vinegar by the space of three dayes: then take out the Egges, and pricke them ful of holes with a needle, but not too deepe, least any of the yolke shoulde happen also to issue, let that liquor al∣so mixe with the vinegar, then straine all through a fine cloath, and tye vp the brimstone in the cloth like a little ball, dippe this ball in the strained liquor, when you vse it, and pat it on the place three or foure times euerie daye,
and this will cure any red face in twelue or fourteene dayes. Some do also commende the same for an approued remedie against the morphew; the brimstone bal must be kept in some close thing from the ayre. 20. How to take away any pimple from the face. BRimstone ground with the oyl of Turpentine, and applied to any pimple one houre, maketh the flesh to rise spungeous, which being annointed with the thicke oyle of butter that ariseth in the morning from new milke sodden a little ouer night, will heale and scale away in a fewe daies, leauing a faire skinne behinde. This is a good skinning salue.
21. To helpe any Morphew, sunbur∣ning, itch, or red face. STeepe two sliced Lemmons be∣ing large and faire in a pinte of Condu it water, leaue them foure or fiue daies in infusion couering the water, then straine the water, and dissolue therein the quantitie of a hasell nut of sublimate (some hold a dramme a good proportion to a pinte of water) finely pow∣dered: let the patient wet a cloth therein, and rub the place where the griefe is euery morninge and euening a little, till the hew doe please hee: you may make the same stronger or weaker accor∣ding to good discretion. 22. For the Morphew. TAke a pinte of distilled vine∣gar, laie therein two newe laid
egges whole with their shelles, three yellowe Docke rootes pic∣ked and sliced, two spoonefulls of the flowers of brimstone, and so let all rest three daies, and then vse this liquour with a cloth, rub∣bing the place three or 4. times euerie daye, and in three or foure dayes it commonly helpeth: put some bran in your cloth before you moisten your cloth therein, binding it vp in forme of a little ball. This of Maister Rich of Lee, who helped himselfe and a gallant Ladie therewith in a few dayes. 23. To take away the freckles in the face. WAsh your face in the wane of the moon with a spunge, morninge and euening with the distilled water of elder leaues, lettinge the same drie into the skinne. Your water must bee di∣stilled
in Maie. This is of a Tra∣uailer, who hath cured himselfe thereby. 24. To cure any extreame bruise vpon a sire fall, on the face, or any other mē∣ber of the body. PResently after the fall make a greate fire, and applie hote cloathes one after another with∣out intermission, the patient stā∣ding neere the fire for one houre and a halfe, or till the swelling be cleane abated. This I knewe pro∣ued with good successe in a maid that fell downe a paire of staires, whereby all her face was extreme∣ly dis figured. Some holde opini∣on that the same may bee per∣fourmed with clothes wet in hote water and wroonge out againe before application. Then to take away the chaungeable colours, which doe accustomablie followe all bruises, shred the roote of a
greene or growing flower deluce, beate it with red rose water, and grinde it till it come to a salue, apply the same, & in a fewe houres it taketh away all the colours: but if it lie too long it will rayse pim∣ples, and therefore so soone as the colours be vanished, immediately remooue the salue. 25. How to keepe the teeth cleane. CAlcine the tops and branches of Rosemarie into ashes, and to one part there of, put one part of burnt allome, mixe them well together, and with thy finger first moistened a little with thy spettle, rubbe all thy teeth ouer a prettie while euerie morning till they▪ be cleane, but not to galling of thy gums, then sup vp some fair water or white wine, gargling the sāe vp & down thy mouth a while, & thē
drie thy mouth with a towel. This of an honest Gentleman and a painefull gatherer of physicall re∣ceits. 26. Sweet and delicate dentifrices or Rubbers for the teeth. DIssolue in foure ounces of warme water, three or foure drammes of gumme Dragagant, and in one night this will become a thicke substance like gellie, mingle the same with the powder of Alablaster finely grounde and fearced, then make vp this sub∣stance into little round rolles, of the bignesse of a childes arrowe, & foure or fiue inches in length. Also if you temper Roset or some other colour (that is not hurtful) with them, they will shew ful of pleasing veines. These you may sweeten either with Rosewater, Ciuet, or muske. But if your teeth
be verie scaly, let some exper barbar first take off the scales with his instrument, and then you may keepe them cleane by rubbing them with the aforesaide rolles. And heere, by those miserable ex∣periences that I haue seene in some of my neerest friendes, I am inforced to admonish all Gentled women to be carefull howe they suffer their teeth to bee cleansed and made white with anie Aqua fortis, which is the Barbars vsuall water: for vnlesse the same be both well delayed, and carefullie appli∣ed, shee may happen within a fewe dressings to be forced to borrow a ranke of teeth to eate her din∣ner, vnlesse her gums do helpe her the better. 27. A delicate stoue to sweat in. I Know that many Gentlewomen as well for the clearing o their
skins as cleansing of their bodies, do now and then delight to sweat. For the which purpose I haue set downe this manner following, as the best that euer I obserued. Put into a brasse pot of some good content, such proportion of sweet hearbes, and of such kind as shall bee most appropriate for your in∣firmitie, with some reasonable quantitie of water, close the same with an apt couer, and well luted with some paste made of flower and whites of Egges: at some parte of the couer you must let in a leaden pipe (the entraunce whereof must also bee well luted) this pipe must bee conueyed tho∣rough the side of the Chimney, where the pot standeth in a thicke hollow stake, of a bathing tubb crossed with hoopes according to the vsual manner in the top, which you may couer with a sheete at your pleasure. Nowe the steame of the pot passing thorough the
pipe vnder the false bottome of the bathing tub, which must bee boared full of bigge boles, will breath so sweete and warme a va∣pour vpon your bodie, as that (re∣ceiuing aire by holding your head without the tub as you fit therin) you shall sweat most temperately, and continue the same a longe time without fainting. And this is performed with a small charcoale fire maintained vnder the pot for this purpose. Note that the room would be close wherein you place your bathing tub, least any sodain cold should happen to offend you whilest your bodie is made open and porous to the aire. 28. Diuers sorts of sweet or hand waters made sodainly or extempore, with the extracted oyles of spices. FIrst you shall vnderstande that whensoeuer you shall drawe
any of the aforesaid oyles of Cina∣mon, Cloues, Mace, Nutmegs or such like, that you shall haue also a pottle, or a gallon more or lesse, according to the quantity which you drawe at once, of excellent sweete washing water for your ta∣ble, yea some do keepe the same for their broths, wherein other∣wise they should vse some of the same kind of spice. But if you take three or foure drops onely of the oyle of Cloues, Mace, or Nut∣megs (for Cinamon oyle is too costly to spend this way) and min∣gle the same with a pinte of faire water, making agitation of them a prettie while together in a glasse hauing a narrowe mouth, till they haue in some measure incorpora∣ted themselues together, you shall find a verie pleasing and delight∣full water to wash with, and so you may alwayes furnish your selfe of sweete water of seuerall kindes, be∣fore such time as your guests shal
bee readie to sit downe. I speak not here of the oile of spike, which will extend verie farre this waye, both because euerie gentlewoman doth not like so stronge a sent, and for that the same is elswhere alrea∣dy commended by another Au∣thor. Yet I must needes acknowe∣ledge it to be the cheaper way, for that I assure my selfe there may be fiue or six gallons of sweete wa∣ter made with one ounce of the oile, which you may buy ordina∣rily for a groate at the most. 29. An excellent sweet water for a ca∣sting bottle. TAke three drams of oile of Spike, one dramme of oyle of Thyme, one dram of oyle of Lem∣mons, one dram of oile of cloues, then take one graine of Ciuet, and three graines of the aforesaid composition well wrought toge∣ther.
Temper them well in a siluer spoone with your finger, then put the same into a siluer boll, washing it out by little and little into the boll with a little Rosewater at once, til all the oyle be washed out of the spoone into the boule, and then doe the like by washing the same out of the boule with a little Rosewater at once, till all the sent be gotten out, putting the Rose∣water still in a glasse, when you haue tempered the same in the boule sufficiently. A pinte of Rose∣water will bee sufficient to mingle with the said proportion: and if you finde the same not stronge e∣nough of the ciuet, then you may to euery pinte put one graine and a halfe, or two graines of ciuer to the weight of three graines of the aforesaide composition of oyles. 30. To colour a blacke haire presently into a Chesnut colour.
THis is done with oyle of Vitri∣oll, but you must doe it verie carefully not touching the skin. 31. A present and delicate perfume. LAy two or three droppes of li∣quid Amber vpon a glowing coale, or a peece of lignum aloes, lignum Rhodium, or storax. 32. To renew the sent of a Pomander. TAke one graine of ciuet, and two of muske, or if you dou∣ble the proportion it will bee so much the sweeter, grind them vp∣on a stone with a little Rosewater, and after wetting your hands with Rosewater, you may worke the same in your Pomander. This is a sleight to passe away an olde Po∣mander, but my intention is ho∣nest.
33. How to gather and clarifie May-dewe. VVHen there hath fallen no rain the night before, thē with a cleane and large sponge, the next morning you may gather the same frō sweet hearbs, grasse, or corne: straine your dewe, and expose it to the sunne in glasses couered with papers or parch∣ment prickt full of holes, strain it often, continuing it in the sun, and in an hote place till the same growe white and cleere, which wil require the best parte of the sum∣mer. Some commend May dewe gathered from Fennell and Ce∣landine, to be most excellent for sore eyes, & some commend the same (prepared as before) aboue Rosewater for preseruing of fruits flowers, &c.
34. Diuers excellent sentes for gloues, with their proportions and other cir∣cumstances, with the manner of perfu∣ming. THe Violet, the Orenge, the Lemmon duely proportioned with other sentes, performe this well, so likewise of Labdanum, Storax, Beniamin. &c. The manner is this. First lay your vmber vpon a few coales till it begin to cracke like lime, then let it coole of it selfe, taking away the coales, then grinde the same with some yellowe ocre, till you perceiue a right color for a gloue: with this mixture wash ouer your gloue with a little haire∣brush vpon a smooth stone in eue∣rie seame and all ouer, then hang your gloues to drie vppon a line, then with gum Dragagant dissol∣ued in some Rosewater, & ground with a little oyle de Ben, or of
sweet Almonds vpō a stone, strike ouer your gloues in euerie place with the gum and oyle so ground together, doe this with a little spoonge, but bee sure the gloues be first throughly dry, and the co∣lour well rubbed and beaten out of the gloue; then let them hange againe till they be drie, which will be in a short time. Then if you will haue your gloue to lie smooth and faire in shewe, goe ouer it againe with your spoonge, and the mix∣ture of gumme and oyle, and drie the gloue yet once againe. Then grinde vppon your stone two or three graines of good muske, with halfe a spoonefull of Rosewater, and with a verie little peece of a spoonge take vp the composition by a little and little, and so lay it vpon your gloue lying vppon the stone. Picke and straine your gum Dragagant before you vse it. Per∣fume but the one side of your gloue at once, and then hang it vp
to drie, and then finish the other side. Tenne graines of muske wil giue a sufficient perfume to eight paire of gloues. Note also that this perfume is done vpon a thin Lambes leather gloue, and if you worke vpon a kids skin or goates skin, which is vsuall leather for rich perfumes, thē you must adde more quantitie of the oyle of Ben to your gumme, and go ouer the gloue twise therewith. 35. Sweet bags to lie among linnen. FIll your bags only with lignum Rhodium finely beaten, and it will giue an excellent sent to your linnen. 36. To make haire of a faire yellowe or golden colour. THe last water that is drawne from honey being of a deepe red colour performeth the same
excellently, but the same hath a strong smell, and therefore must be sweetned with some aromatical bodie. Or else the haire beeing first cleane washed and then moistned a prettie while by a good fire in warme allum water with a spunge, you may moisten the same in a decoctiō of Turmericke, rubarb, or the barke of the Barberie tree, and so it will receiue a most faire and beautifull colour. The Dog berrie is also an excellent berrie to make a golden liquor withall for this purpose, beate your allum to powder, and when the water is ready to seeth, dissolue it ther∣in: foure ounces to a pottle of wa∣ter will be sufficient, let it boyle a while, straine it, and this is your allom licour wherewith you must first prepare the haire. 37. How to colour the head or beard in∣to a Chesnut colour in halfe an houre.
TAke one part of lead calcined with sulphur, and one parte of quicke lime, temper them some∣what thin with water, lay it vpon the haire, chafing it well in, and let it dry one quarter of an houre or thereabout, then wash the same off with faire water diuers times, and lastly, with soape and water, and it will be a verie naturall haire colour. The longer it lyeth vpon the haire the browner it groweth. This coloureth not the flesh at all, and yet it lasteth verie long in the haire. Saepius expertu. FINIS.
