21064 99836441 715
A Guide vnto godlinesse, moste worthy to bee followed of all true Christians: A TREATISE WHEREIN is set forth the folly of man in prolong∣ing the amendment of his sinful life, togither with the chiefe causes thereof, and so∣uereigne remedies againste the same. Written in Latin by Iohn Riuius: Englished by W. G. ¶ Imprinted at London by Gregorye Seton, and are to be solde at the signe of the Hedghogge at the West end of Paules.
To the right reuerend father in God, Gylbert by Gods merciful pro∣uidence Bishoppe of Bath and Welles, W. Gace wisheth peace and saluation in Christ. YOV are not ignorant, as I think (right reuerend Father) that the corruption of our age is become euen lamenta∣ble, and the enormities vvhich novve doe reigne, verye great and grieuous. For pietie nowe preuaileth with fevv, but sinne seduceth many, & the most part slepe in sense∣lesse securitie. Vertue and godlinesse are almoste quite exiled, vice and vvickednes almost vvholy embraced: mē for the most part are become not godly but godles, not vertuous but vicious, professinge one thing in vvordes performing another in works: as swift as the swallow to runne vnto vanitie, as slow as the vvorme to folow ver∣tue and pietie. If any proofe be sought hereof, we neede goe no further then to dayly experience and vsuall ex∣amples: For to confes that there be some in dede which serue the Lord with vnfeyned fear & dutiful obedience, yet vvithout all dout the greatest part do liue very leud∣ly, and are too too slacke and remisse in matters of theyr saluation. In steede of humilitie many nowe a dayes vse hautines, in steede of prayer prating in steede of fasting feasting, in steede of almes auarice, in steede of setting forth Gods glory with their tongue which was made & giuen thē especially to that end, herrible dishonouring
of his holy name by most wicked and vnlavvfull othes, in steede of chastitye adulterie, vvhich is nowe coun∣ted almost no sinne, in steede of plain dealing deepe dis∣sembling, in steede of hearty good will hatred & malice, so that there is almost no faithfull friendshippe or loyall loue left amongst vs. But I cannot stand to rehearse al, so greate is the corruption and so many folde are the vices vvhich at this day doe reigne: yea manye are so farre frō leading a life vvhich beseemeth Christians, that in ver∣tuous behauiour and liuing they are farre inferiour to many of the heathen, as in sanctitie to Socrates, in ab∣stinence to Aristides, in integrity to Phocion &c: That I may omit many other which vvere vvith sundrye ver∣tues very plentifully endued, vvho notwithstandinge had onelye the lighte of nature and rule of reason to di∣recte them. If then this age of ours be such, that all kind of vice so mightely preuaileth, vertue and godlines being litle or nothing regarded, which as I sayd by daily experience & vsual examples before our eyes is plainly proued, so that the vertuous actions of many of the Heathen may be to a greate number in these our dayes as it were lanterns of light, & patterns and examples to imitate and folow: If I say the case be thus (as vndoubtedly it is) how requisite are such remedies as may reduce men from such levvde liuing to the doing of their duetie? By consideration of the premisses (righte reuerend fa∣ther) I vvas moued to employe some time to englishe this treatise, thinking that it vvill bee verye profitable in
these our dayes, wherin sin so aboundeth, forasmuch as in the same is set forth the folly of men in prolonginge the amendmēt of their sinfull life, as also the chiefe cau∣ses which moue them so to doe, with singular and soue∣reigne remedies againste the same: whereupon I haue entituled it (and that not amisse as I thinke) A GVIDE VNTO GODLINES, for that it reclaimeth men from sinne, vvithdravveth them from vice, and shevveth vnto them the right and plaine path to pietie & vertue. Now vvhat is better for men thē to follovv such a guide? what more profitable then to vvalke in such a path? which shal plainly appeare, if we consider from vvhence they leade and vvhither they direct, namely from vice to vertue, frō sinne to godlines, from the seruitude of Satan to the li∣berty of Christ, from the snares of the deuill to the fa∣therly fauour of our most gracious God. As concerning vice or sinne from whence this Guide leadeth vs, it is vndoubtedly a thing foule and filthy, as by testimonies of the Scripture may be plainly proued. Dauid sayth: VVash me throughly from mine iniquitie, clense me frō my sinne, purge me frō my wickednes &c. Now vvhat do vve vse to wash? what to clense & purge but that which is vncleā & defiled with filthines? More∣ouer to omit how almost euery sinne is punished some vvay or other euen in this life, hovv great a discommo∣ditie is it that this vice or sinne bringeth vnto vs, in that it moueth the Lorde to vvithhold his benefits and blessings from vs? Most feruent is the loue of the Lorde God, yet the vvaters of wickednes are able to quench it:
exceeding great is his liberalitie and bountie, infinite is his clemencie and mercye, yet sinne is able to close his hand, and to cause him to detein his benefites from vs, sinne is able to make him of a gracious giuer a vvrath∣full reuenger, of a fauourable father a sharpe and seuere iudge: the like may be sayd of the rest of Gods benefits. Finally the end of sinne is eternall torments and perpe∣tuall paynes. Many thinges mighte be spoken pertinent to this purpose, some I onely briefly touch, manye moe I willingly omit, thinking these sufficient. VVhereas this Guide directeth vs to vertue & god∣lines, it is a thing assuredly of a very great importaunce. For that vvhereunto it guideth vs, farre exceedeth all vvorldlye vvelth, all terrene treasures. Noblenes of birth is a thing much esteemed, yet is it receiued of our forefathers by succession: Riches are much regarded & had in great price, yet are they subiect vnto manye ca∣sualties: Beauty is a thing much loued and liked, yet is it also very fraile and fading: Helth of the body is muche to be vvished, yet is it diuers and sundry wayes mutable: strength of the body is of many much made of, yet is it by sicknes abated, by age adminished & vvasted. How∣beit vertue or godlines commeth not by succession, but frō the speciall grace of God, the fountaine of all good∣nes: Vertue is not subiect to vvorldly changes & chan∣ces, it is not by aduersity altered, by torments abated, by enemies taken avvaye, neither by anye other worldlye meanes fayleth, vnlesse man through his owne defaulte, be the cause thereof. It remaineth as vvell with the sick
as the vvhole, vvith the old as the young. Finally as they that follovv vice and perseuer in sinne, are the seruaunts of sinne & slaues of Satan: so they that embrace and ex∣ercise true vertue and godlines, are not bonde but free, not seruants but sonnes, euen the sonnes of God, and heyres annexed vvith Christ. For true godlines doth vn∣doubtedly proceede from a sincere faith, as the fruite frō the tree, the effect from the cause. Nowe in vvhome so∣euer such a faith is, they are free from the curse of the lawe, from the tyranny of Satan, from the daunger of death, from the horror of hell: they haue God to theyr father, Christe to their brother, they shall inherite the kingdom of heauen as the word of God vvitnesseth. Forasmuch thē as the Guide vvhich vve haue spokē of, doth leade frō that vvhich is foule & filthy, vvhich kinde of things vve are vvont cōmonly to detest and loth, frō that vvhich excludeth vs from the fruition of Gods be∣nefites, from that vvhich hath so bitter and grieuous an end, euen eternall death and destruction, and not onely thys, but also directeth vs to that vvhich is so precious and profitable, whiche proceedeth from the grace of God the fountaine of all goodnes, which is not subiecte to worldy mutations, vvhich is an vndoubted fruit of a true faith, and therefore they that bee endued therewith are the sonnes of God and heyres of eternall blessednes: Forasmuch I say as this Guide doth thus leade & direct, who oughte not to be moste willing to follow the same to their no small commoditie and profit? Thus haue I (right reuerend father) bin briefe & short
in a matter wherin I might haue bin larg & long. How∣beit I thinke those things which I haue entreated of suf∣ficient to cause the Christian reader the better to loue & like, the more vvillinglye to reade and peruse this present treatise, and also to embolden me to presume to publish the same vnder the protection of your reuerend name, forasmuch as by the premisses is proued that it contey∣neth matter very good and godly, and therefore is agre∣ing to your Christian conuersation, not for any instruc∣tion vvhere right graue and greate learning aboundeth, but onely for vvell liking vvhere good vvill is not vvan∣ting, which I earnestly desire and heartelye wish, being little or nothing doubtfull thereof. And nowe to con∣clude, the Lord God graunt for his Christes sake, that af∣ter yee haue runne the race of this mortall life, ye maye reape the fruite of an vnfeyned faith euen the saluation both of body and soule. Amen. Your Lordships to commaund and vse in the Lord. W. Gace.
A Guide vnto godlines, most worthy to be folowed of all true Christians. IF they that wil be coūted Chri∣stians, did so much dreade and mislike the thing it self, as they doe at thys day detest the name and profession of Epicureās or Sadducees: they would no lesse surely refraine themselues from all euill doing, and embrace vertue and godlines, then they doe now with an obstinate mind follow vice and naughtines, and liue lewdly and vngodlily: neither woulde they any lesse keepe the commaundements of Almighty God, then they are now voyde of all feare of his diuine maiesty. But truly all of vs almost doe beare a mind not so much alienate and estraunged from the thing it selfe, whiche our life, deedes and conditions doe witnes, as we doe dread the disdayne of the worde, and vt∣terly mislike the bare name of the thinge. For what? Either can they beleeue the immortali∣ty of the soule, who liue almost like beastes: or can they be perswaded that there are rewardes
prepared in heauen for the godlye, and punish∣ments appoynted in hell for the wicked, who almoste in nothing sticke to breake the com∣maundements of God, and runne hedlong vn∣to al vice, either as though they verely thought that God is a thing vayne and fayned, or did beleeue that the soule is extinct and doth perish with the body? Now to confesse that there are some, which both feare God, and doe nothinge doubte that hee will in time to come either pu∣nish or reward euery one as he hath deserued, of which sort surely ther are very few: what one is there among a great number, whom the fear of Gods iustice doth either reuoke from sinne, & euill doing, or induce to amend and reforme his life? Wherein thou mayst worthelye la∣ment and bewayle the case of vs all, & mar∣uell at our folly, blindnes and madnesse, who in such shortnes and vncertaintie of this life doe so behaue our selues, that being nowe become euen verye olde, when as our dying day is not farre of, wee doe not so muche as thinke of amendinge our manners, much lesse goe we a∣bout to doe the same, being yet younge and in our flourishing yeeres. I oftentimes entring in
to consideration of this folly, & (as it were) do∣tage of men in deferring the amendment of their sinful life, doe thinke it good to search out the causes why in so waighty a matter (wheron dependes saluation) wee behaue our selues so slacklye and slothfullye. For these being once found out, and made manifest, it will not be af∣terward hard (as I thinke) to find some reme∣dy to cure this euill. Of the first cause vvhy men differre the amendment of their life. FIrst therefore the chiefe & principall cause hereof I thinke to be our incredulitie. For if we did beleeue those thinges which are con∣teined in ye holy scriptures, of the iudgement to come, of the voyce of the Archangell, and the trumpe of God, of the iudgement seate of the Lord before which we muste all appeare, also those thinges that are mentioned of the punish∣ments in time to come of the wicked, of the life and immortall felicitie of the godly, of the re∣surrection of the bodyes to gether with the
soules either vnto assured glorye or certaine paine: If I saye wee did beleeue these thinges not to be a vayne or fond fable, we would sure∣ly endeuour to liue farre otherwise, neither woulde wee so daily differ and prolong the a∣mendment of our life. For who liuing wickedly is not eyther striken with horror in his whole bodye, or dooth not altogither tremble in his minde and hearte as often as he remembreth the last iudgement? In which men must giue an accounte before the tribunall seate of God of all their thoughtes, purposes, sayinges and deedes, and euery one must for himselfe pleade the cause of his lyfe. O iudgement worthelye dreadfull to the wicked, the memory whereof oughte neuer to slippe out of our minde. For if the righteous shall scarcely be saued (as sayeth the Apostle) where shall the vngodly & sinner appeare? The sonne of God himselfe shall sitte the iudge of all men whiche haue bin from the creation of the world, being then seuere, sharpe and inexorable, who is now an aduocat wyth the father for them that be guiltie. All shall be called to the examination of the life which they haue led, the secretes of all heartes shall be o∣pened:
euerye mannes conscience shal accuse reproue and conuince him. In fine God wyll with iuste seueritie and rigour punish the wic∣ked, and graciously and mercifullye saue ye god∣ly, that is, he will reward euery man according to his works, as the Apostle Paule sayth. Neither shall euill deedes onely be iudged here, as adulterie, fornication, incest, sorcerye, murder, sclaundering, theft, extortion, sacri∣ledge, surfetting, riot, dronkennes, vsurie, and such like sinnes: neither onely all idle, rayling vaine, foule, filthy, light, fond, foolishe, rash, vn∣modest, presumptuous wordes, and all other whereby godly eares are iustlye offended: but also the secrete wills of mē, vngodly wishes & thoughtes, wicked affections and such as disa∣gree with the lawe of God, as wrath, hatred, contentiō, enmitie, spite, enuye, euel will, pride, couetousnes, desire of that which is an other mans and not our owne, and other of like sort. Who is there then that verelye beleueth that the last iudgement shall come, whom the remē∣braunce thereof doth not reclaime from sinning and retaine in his dutie, being otherwise ready, and prone to offende. Well sayd one of the aun∣cients:
Whether I eate (sayth he) or drinke, or doe anye thinge els, me thinkes I heare that voyce alwayes sound in mine eares: Arise yee dead and come vnto iudgement. As often as I thinke vpon the day of Iudgement, I tremble for feare in my whole heart and body &c. If therefore the fleshe stirreth vp anye man to lust and filthy pleasures, if to gluttony and sur∣feiting, if to other vices and naughtines, lette him remember the day of the last iudgemente. If prosperitie (as it often commeth to passe) doth puffe vp any, if riches do make any proud and insolent, if honour, dignitie, rule doe cause anye to bee ouer stoute and presumptuous, let such straight call to mind the iudgement seate of God. If wrath stirre vp anye to take re∣uenge, if enuye and malice possesse anye mans minde, if auarice moue thee to fraude or extor∣tion, if the world allure any to ambition, pride, riot, if the deuill prouoke anye to blaspheme God, and to other sinnes and wicked dedes, let him thinke vpon the voyce of the Archangell, let him beleeue that he shall plead his cause be∣fore the iudgement seat of God, let him earnest∣ly dread the sentence of the iudge that condem∣neth
the wicked to eternall fire. I would to God, I would to God I say this day of iudgemente did neuer slippe out of the mindes of men, then would we all endeuour to doe our duety. Princes would procure the pro∣speritie and se to the safetie of the people, which God hath committed vnto ihem, they woulde defende and preserue their libertie, they would establishe and maintaine good and wholesome lawes in their common wealth. Againe the people would shewe themselues obedient and loyall to their princes, they woulde not grudge at their rule and aucthoritie, they would not re∣fuse to pay tribute & custome, they woulde giue vnto them due feare and honour. Euerye man would loue his wyfe as himselfe. Wiues would reuerence their husbandes, and be subiect vnto them as vnto their head. Parents would bring vp their children in the discipline and nurture of the Lord, as the Apostle Paule teacheth. Children on the otherside would obey their pa∣rents in the Lorde, and giue vnto them due re∣uerence and honour. Seruaunts woulde obeye them that are their maisters according to the fleshe, with feare and trembling and singlenes
of their hearts as vnto Christe, as the Apostle Paul admonisheth. Masters would deale more gently & curteously with their seruants, know∣ing that they themselues also haue a maister in heauen. Pastors would haue that care of the Lordes flocke which they oughte. Rich men would relieue the penurie of the poore wt their substaunce. Widowes would giue themselues day and night vnto prayer. Poore men woulde suffer their pouertie patientlye, seeing it plea∣seth the Lorde they shall liue in that state. He that hath a wife would be as thoughe he hadde none. He yt is single woulde haue care of those thinges that pertaine to the Lorde. What shoulde I make manye wordes? Euerye one would doe his duety from his heart, if that day of the last iudgemente did neuer departe out of our mindes, when as God wil require of vs an account of our whole life and all our actions, and will reward and punishe euerye one accor∣ding to his desert. We see in the time of a great plage or sicknes whē death is daily before our eyes, how careful all are to reforme and amende their life, at the least such as doe not falsely vsurpe the name of
Christians. What then? Oughte we not at all times, at all houres, yea and almost euery mo∣ment to thinke of the amendment of our lyfe, to be touched with vnfained and bitter greefe of mind for our sinnes, and to pacifie gods wrathe with earnest and harty repentaunce, seeing that by reason of the vncertaine chaunces which be incident vnto vs in this life death is dayly im∣minent, & wee ought to be verely perswaded yt almost euery houre it is present and doth hang ouer our heads? Let him that is wise therefore endeuour (as I haue sayde) so to leade his life, as men for the most parte are wont in the time of some great plague or sicknesse, at whiche time they being as it were wakened oute of sleepe, beginne to haue some minde and care to amende their life, to auoyde and detest sinne, to loue and embrace vertue and godlines, briefely are wont by true repētance to pacifie God beīg iustli offended at their sinnes. Let euery one thē continue such a one being nowe deliuered from feare of ye plague, as he purposed with himselfe to be when ye plague most reigned and raged. There is none but he doth confesse, that the houre of death is vncertaine, albeit it be moste
certaine that we shall at one time or other dye: Now, how foolish a thing is it to feare death hanging ouer our heads euery moment, and in the meane season to thinke nothinge of amen∣ding of our life? But thus it is. In aduersitie, as in the time of a great plague, in the time of fa∣mine, warre, earthquakes, in the time of some greeeueous and daungerous disease of the bo∣dy, we acknowledge Gods moste iust wrath & indignation against sinne: sinne: But when we haue the worlde at will, & thinges are on euery side prosperous: we sticke not to abuse his bountie and goodnes, neither doe wee then remember death yt hangeth ouer our heades euery houre, neither the last iudgemente, neither ye voyce of the Archangell, whereof Paule speaketh, wri∣ting to the Thessalonians, neither the sounde of the trumpe of God, neither of hell or eter∣nal punishment, neither the fire that shal neuer goe out, neither that darkenes where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The memorie of which thinges ought neuer to depart out of our minde, neyther when we rise in ye morning nor when we goe to bed at night, whether wee dyne or sup, whether we are occupyed aboute
any earnest matter, or recreate our mind with some honest pastime. But all these things seme fables to ye wicked, namely the last iudgement, the tribunal seate of the lord, yt voice of yt Arch∣angel, ye trumpe of God, the eternall paines of hell fire. And as the heathen did in time past thinke those thinges false, wc the Poets were wont to speake of, concerning hel, the riuer in hel yt alwayes burneth, the iudges Minos and Rhadamanthus, the place, abode & punishmēt of the wicked, wherupon came that saying of Seneca: The poets deluded vs (saith he) and put vs in vaine feare: so many count for trifles and fables, & vtterly contēne as vayne threats those thinges which at this day are read in the holy Scriptures, of hel, of eternal death, of the fiery lake, wher shalbe weeping & gnashing of teeth, also of ye resurrectiō of the soule & bodye either to euerlasting paines or eternal glorye. Whē as al these things wtout doubt strike hor¦ror into thē yt be godly in deede, & do feare god aright, & as one saith, they are almost afraid to heare thē once named or spoken of. Thus hast thou the chiefe & principall cause, as I thinke why all of vs almost do so prolong the amend∣ment of our life.
Of the second cause vvhy man differreth to amende his lyfe. LEt vs nowe come to the second, whiche is hope of Gods pardon and fauour: a hope great in deede, but surelye false and altogether vncertaine. With this hope the continuall ene∣my of mankind the Deuil holdeth man in sinne and by dayly setting before him Gods lenitie and gentlenes, keepeth him from fearing his iustice. But as God doth easily pardon the pe∣nitent, and fatherly forgeiueth such as returne vnto goodnes: so he leaueth not vnpunished, neither suffereth vnreuenged, suche as with an obstinate mind perseuer in wickednes. In vain therefore doe they hope for pardon, who do not hartely repent for their sinnes committed. The deuil notwithstanding by setting this hope be∣fore man, bringeth to passe that he sinneth se∣curely, and neuer hath any earnest cogitation of amending his lyfe, but despiseth the riches of Gods bountifulnes, patience, and long suffe∣rance, not knowing that the bountifulnesse of God leadeth him to repentaunce, that I maye
vse the wordes of the Apostle Paul writing to the Romans. Let man here call to minde that which our sauiour sayth in the gospell of Mat∣thew. Repent, (saith he) your former life, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand. And that which the Lord saith in Esay: Which of them shall I then regarde? Euē him that is poore & of a lowly troubled spirite, and standeth in awe of my words. Christ saith moreouer in the gos∣pel of Luke: Ʋnlesse ye repent, ye shal al like∣wise perish. And Peter in the Acts sayth: Re∣pente ye therefore and conuert, yt your sinnes may be put away. I omit sixe hundred other places in the Scriptures which tende to the same ende, that is, which teache that none can hope and trust for pardon of his sinnes, but he that repenteth. For in vaine (as I haue sayde) doth he hope to haue remission and forgiuenes whose hearte is not touched with true repen∣tance. Now albeit no repentaunce be to late be∣fore God, which the example of the theese men∣tioned in the gospell doth declare, for God de∣sireth not the destruction of sinners, but rather that they repent and liue: Who notwithstan∣ding
seeth not how daungerous a thing it is to differre the amendment of our life? Well was it sayd of one, that none hath euer had God so fauourable vnto him, yt he coulde promise him∣selfe to liue till the morowe. Death oftentimes cōmeth vpon men vnawares, so yt they haue no time so much as to thinke of repenting and a∣mendinge their life. I will not here rehearse those thinges whiche Plinie declareth in hys natural history of sodain deathes, farasmuch as nothing almost is more common & vsual euen at this time also. It is not many yeeres since there were two olde men in this country both inhabitants of one and the same citie, who the same night they dyd lye with the strumpets to whō they vsed to resort, yt one lost his life by an Apoplexie, the other was stabbed in wt a dag∣ger, so both of them died sodenly, wt how great peril of their soules let euerye one thinke with himselfe. I confesse it in dede to be true, yt it is cōmon to the godly as wel as to ye wicked, to die soden∣ly, & that yt is true also wt the wiseman saith, yt the righteous man wt what death so euer he be preuented shalbe in rest: How dreadful a thing
is it notwtstanding that the impenitent person should sodenly be ouertaken wt death after such a sort? Of how many haue we heard oftētimes who euen when they were tipling and making god chere, falling vnto strife & brawling amōg themselues, haue bin thrust through one of an other? Of howe many, who being taken in a∣dultery, haue by the sword lost their liues: Of howe many, who playing at the dice, haue bin slayne of them that played with them? That I may say nothing of them who falling frō their horse haue brokē theyr neckes, who haue peri∣shed sodenly in the sea by shipwracke, finally, who either byfalling of houses, or by some o∣ther chance haue died a sodain death. Although then y• God doth desire rather the repentaunce then death of a sinner, as in deede he doth, it is notwithstanding a very perilous thing by rea¦son of the vncertaine chaunces which be incident vnto vs, to differre the amendment of our life vppon hope of Gods mercy. Thou must repent in time, while thou doost yet liue, and art in good health. But thus standeth the case: A younge man takethe hys pastime and pleasure, geueth himselfe
to banketting and riotous liuing, promiseth himselfe to liue manye yeeres, and therefore thinketh nothing of reforming his life, but dif∣ferreth this thing vntill olde age, whereunto notwithstanding it is vncertaine whether he shall euer come. For what one among manye thousandes liueth vntill olde age? Nowe what doth he that is become verye olde, and is as it were euen at deathes dore? To morrowe saith he it shall be done, and againe, it shall be done to morrow: so he willingly deceiueth & vayn∣ly flattereth himselfe, seeing, as I haue sayde, no man can promise himselfe to liue till the morrow, no no man knoweth whether he shall liue vntil the euening. In ye meane season mē so dayly differring & prolonging ye amendmēt of their life, death of∣tentimes commeth vppon them vnawares, as we may see almost euerye day: and yet can not other mens harms make vs to beware, so doth the deuill alwayes drawe vs on and allure vs with a vayne hope of Gods pardon, and of a long life. Now although it neither ought, nor by any meanes may be denyed, that the penitēt obtaine gods grace and fauour at all times,
neither may it be sayde that he who is nowe a∣bout to yeeld vp the ghost, & in yt very agonye of death, should despeire of pardon: who not∣withstanding is so vnwise, that he doth not ra∣ther desire that which is safe and boyde of all danger, then that which is ioyned with excee∣dinge greate perill? Wherefore rather then there shoulde be any scruple or doubte, let vs thinke in time of amending our life, let vs not differre it from day to day, especially seeinge it is vncertaine whether wee shall liue vntil to morowe. As concerning the clemencie & gen∣tlenes of God, let that alwaies remaine in our mind, which Cyprian sayth in a certaine place: As fauourable, (saith he) & gracious as God alwayes is by the loue of a father, so much is he to be feared by the maiesty of a iudge. So shall it come to passe that the feare of Gods punishmente wil reclaime vs from sinning, & hope of Gods pardon will not lull vs a sleepe in ouer much securitie. It is too much to say howe Priestes in the papacie doe flatter themselues with this hope of Gods clemency, who al their life time kepe concubines, and vnder a pretence of single life
company wt harlots freely & without punish∣ment, neuer thinking of reforming their life, or putting their concubines away. And in the meane season knowing themselues guiltie of this dishonestie, & vnclean and wicked life, they doe notwithstanding almoste euerye day cele∣brate diuine seruice, and come to the misticall and holy table, feeding vnworthely of y• breade of the Lord, & vnworthely drinking of his ho∣ly cuppe. Now how horrible a thing is it, and how ful of peril and danger, alwais to liue in yt state, in which if death come vpon thee, there is no hope at all of thy saluation? In vaine therfore do they flatter themselues wt hope of gods mercy who so kepe cōcubines, & do wt an obstinate mynd perseuer in wickednes, neither euer go about to put away their strumpets, or to amend their life, neither do repent truely & from their heart, neither wt weeping & sighes craue pardon of God for their wickednes cō∣mitted. But (will some mā say) they aske par∣don of God oftentimes, they often beseech his clemency to forgiue them. For in ye end of their euening prayer they say almost dayly: Conuert vs O God, and turne thine anger away from
vs. Also in the end of morning prayer: Thou O Lord, say they, haue mercy vpon vs. So at other times also they often pray, that God wil haue mercy on them, that he will be fauoura∣ble vnto them & forgiue them. I heare it: nei∣ther doe I here stand to decide with howe ear∣nest attention of mind, with what zeale & fer∣ueney of spirite they doe that. But be it yt they pray with a mind ardent & lifted vp vnto God, and with a most serious and earnest affection: what then? What doth this auaile if they put not away their concubines with intent neuer to receiue them againe, and do persist in a set∣led purpose and determination to liue chastly afterward, doe also perseuer in endeuouring to amend their life, and in continuall repentance for their wickednes committed? Now because they doe not this, as the thinge it selfe plainly sheweth, who can doubt, but they either beleue those things to be a fable, wt the holy scriptures tech of ye last iudgemēt, or els do too much flat∣ter thēselues wt a vain and false hope of Gods pardō? O horible face of y• popish church. They which oughte to ouersee, guide, gouerne and teach others, and yt as wel by example as word
they behaue themselues so, that others are meruelously offended by them. When the lai∣ty come to the Lordes table, with what reue∣rence, with what feare & trembling, with howe deuout loue and godlines doe they the same? Howe doe they prepare themselues to con∣fesse their sinnes, and to aske pardon of God? How doe they endeuour to their vttermoste, yt no scruple or doubt remayne in their minde & conscience? how certainely and firmely do they determine with them selues to amende theyr maners and reforme their life? Now what doe the Popish Priestes? These forsooth (as one of their owne profession sayth) make hast from the wicked company of their concubines to go to the alter, and this they doe very often vnpu∣nished without all shame. They haue no care to amend their life, they thinke not of putting away their harlots, finally they are touched with no greefe in their mindes by considering their sinne: and not to vse many woordes, they seeme christians in name onely and word, but in very deede are plain heathen. Howe many occasions haue they to repente and turne vnto goodnes: they visite such as are
afflicted with greeuous diseases, they heare thē confesse their sinnes, they cōfort thē & giue them wholesome exhortations, and are often∣times present with them when they yeelde vp the ghoste. Moreouer they celebrate their fu∣nerals & exequies, and with great ceremony burie them & commit their bodyes to ye earth: they walking in the temple oftentimes reade Epitaphs and verses grauen vpon tombes & sepulchers: they oftentimes heare and reade of the comming of the lord, of the resurrection at the last day, of the voyce of the Archangell, of the trumpe of God &c. So yt by these meanes they may remember not onely the dead, but e∣uen death it selfe hanging ouer their heades e∣uery houre, they may remember also the laste iudgement, the tribunall seate of the Lord, and many other thinges which mighte moue them to amend. But seeing by all these they are not brought to repent, one of these two must nedes be true, eyther that they count a fable those things which they reade in the holy scriptures of the iudgement to come, and are with the E∣picureans perswaded that the soule is extincte and dooth perishe with the body: or els (as I
haue said yt they flatter themselues with a vai and false hope and trust of Gods mercy. Of the third cause why men driue of to reforme their life. THe third cause why we prolong ye amend∣ment of our life, is the custome of sinning, which hath now almost the force of nature. Now as it is very hard for euery one to ouer∣come his owne nature, so the force of custome also is almost inuincible, which men truely say to be as it were another nature. Neither is it said amisse of one yt those vices are hardlye cut of which do as it were grow vp wt vs. Howe tenderly & gently parents bring vp their chil∣dren frō their infancie, we al do know. From their tender age they are accustomed to de∣lights & pleasures. They abstaine not frō foule & silthy words, and suche as are wicked & blas∣phemous against God: they weare sumptuous & gorgeous apparel: they do al things stoutly, boldly, & impudently, nothing modestly or re∣uerently. They honour not their parents, they reuerence not old folkes, they disdaine their e∣quales: briefly what soeuer they list, they think is lawful for thē to doe. They are reclaimed frō naughtines neither wt shame of men, nor
with feare of God. They haue no care of reli∣gion & pietie toward God, much lesse of vertue & honesty among men. What should I vse ma¦ny wordes? Parents doe at this day by their owne example marre & corrupt their children, yt they can wt no aucthoritie correcte their ma∣ners. Whereas in dede it becōmeth parentes neither to say any thing before their children wt is vnsemely to be spoken, neither to doe any thinge which may seeme vnhonest to be done: but rather so honestly & vertuously to lead their life, yt children may set their example before thē to folowe, & looking into all their maners and life, into all their sayings & deedes as it were into a glasse, may learn euen from their tender age, what things are to be don, & what to be a∣uoided. For he yt by his maners teacheth those things which he detesteth in his childrē, while he blameth & rebuketh thē, reproueth his own faults. With what face can he find fault wt his children when they offend who marreth them by his owne example? With what grauitie can he disalowe that in them which another maye reprehende in him with like seueritie? Let parents therefore remember that it is ne∣cessary for them to liue vertuously & honestly:
that they must necessarily prouide, that no ble∣mish or dishonesty appeare in their life, where∣by they may with greater aucthoritie correcte the manners of their children, lest that those faultes which they blame in them, be found in themselues, and their rebuking of them be to no purpose, and so by their owne faulte they make their aucthoritie to be despised and light ly set by of them. Herevnto pertayneth yt say∣ing of the Poet: How of a father vvilt thou beare the countenance, and vse The libertie, vvhen thou in age thy selfe doost vvorse abuse? Also that saying in an other Poet of Nausi∣strata reprouing her husband, who was angry with his sonne because of his louer, he know∣ing himselfe guilty of a more greuous offence: With what countenance (saith she) wilt thou blame him? And that which Artemona sayth in Plautus, Is it meete that a father shoulde thus nurture his children? art thou not asha∣med hereof? But let vs here what y• younge man alleageth for himselfe, who accuseth hys
father of extreme folly. My riot, (sayth he) I will impute to my father, I was vnder no se∣uere discipline and correction, I was vnder no lawe of a well ordered house, which mighte frame a right a young mans manners, & with∣draw him from vices which be incident to his age. I was after a sort procured of my father to riot and naughty liuing. &c. So did not that Tobias a man vertuous and beloued of God, who (as his history declareth) both taught his sonne euen from his childhoode to feare God, and abstaine from all sinne, and also set him∣selfe before him as an example of godlines to imitate & followe. After this sort ought parēts to bring vp their children, teaching them frō their tender yeeres the feare of the Lorde, and by their owne good example mouing them for∣ward to all vertue and godlines. For if contra∣riwise they giue them ouermuch libertye, and suffer them to accustome themselues to sin∣ning while they be yet young, they shall hard∣ly or neuer afterwarde be reclaymed to good∣nes. It is not like that he will liue honestly be∣ing now olde, who liued dishonestly & wicked∣ly when he was younge, neither that he who
was ill broughte vp being a childe, will take good instructions whē he is growen in yeres. So great a thing is it to be accustomed to any thing from tender age, as it is sayd of one, and as another sayth: It is long ere the mind for∣getteth that which it was long in learning. From whence ae at this day so many adulte∣rers, so many ruffians, so manye retchles and prodigall persons, so many disers and other wicked & vngodly liuers, but euen as it were out of this fountaine of euill education and in∣struction of children? Seing then it doth much concerne the common wealth, that children be godlily instructed & vertuouslye broughte vp, there is great diligence to be geuen of parents and maisters in this behalfe. For if this were done, vice would not so preuaile as it hath don, which can by no lawes otherwise be sufficient∣ly anoyded. And whereas lawes punish offen∣ces and naughtines already committed, but good bringinge vp prouideth that nothing be committed worthy of punishment, and wheras lawes doe reforme vices, but good bringing vp doth quite remoue thē, it manifestly appeareth of howe much more importance this is to the
commoditie of the common welth thē y• other. That I may not adde hereunto yt they whiche are ill brought vp, do afterward cast of al feare & reuerence of lawes, whereby punishment is appointed to vice & naughtines. Wherefore y• chiefe care of wise gouernors of cities hath alwayes bin, not how they should punish wic∣ked and naughty persons, but by what meanes they mighte best bringe to passe, that the Citi∣zens would commit nothing worthy of punish∣ment. Now because they trusted they could at the last bring this to passe, if youthe were ver∣tuously trained vp from their childhoode, and parents did godlily bringe vp & instruct their children, they thoughte it was their dutye to haue an especiall care hereof. But let vs nowe proceede and goe forward to the rest. Of the fourth cause vvhy man differreth the amendment of his lyfe. THe fourth cause of differring the amend∣ment of our life, is welth and prosperitie, which oftentimes maketh men, being as it were drunken with prosperous fortune, so se∣cure, that they verye seldome remember God, ney, her thinke of amending theyr sinfull
life. Whereupon one of the auncients sayde well: Of prosperitie (sayth he) commeth riot, & of riot, as all vices, so impietie toward God. And Seneca affirmeth that mens mindes are luld a sleepe with ouermuch felicitie as it were with a continuall dronkennes. Hereunto per∣taineth that saying of Paule vnto Timothee, where he biddeth him charge them that are rich in this worlde that they be not high min∣ded, and that they trust not in vncertain riches but in the liuing God, that they doe good, and be rich in good workes &c. If that saying of Publius be true, that fortune maketh him foo∣lish whom shee ouer much fauoureth, it appea∣reth surely howe greate the securitie of men is in prosperitie, and when thinges fal out accor∣ding to their desire, which securitie afterwarde bringeth forth all kind of wickednes, For here∣by it commeth to passe that wee feele not the wrathe of God against sinnes, which in deede we ought to feare euē euery hour, also yt a cer∣taine senslesnes and drousines possesseth mens mindes, so that neyther the feare of Gods pu∣nishmente dooth reclaime them from sinning, neither doe they scarce remember either death
or the last iudgement. Our Sauiour in the gospell accordinge to Luke hath in a goodly similitude set forth this securitie of men in prosperitie, where that rich man whose ground had brought foorth fruites plenteously, thinking not of amendinge hys life, or repenting for his sinne, neither of rele∣uing and succouring the poore, but being care∣full of building his barnes greater, and lay∣ing vp his fruites, thought thus with himselfe: I will gather all my fruites and goods toge∣ther, and will saye to my soule: Soule thou hast muche goodes layde vp for many yeeres, liue at ease, eate, drinke, and take thy pastime. But in this securitie and as it were dreaming of long prosperitie, what dooth God saye vnto him? O foole, this night will they fetche away thy soule from thee. Dost thou not see, yt while the rich man dreameth that he shall enioy a se∣cure and quiet life, deintie dinners, and sump∣tuous suppers, costly and delicate bankets, the ioyes and plesures of this world, and thinketh now all things safe and sure, doost thou not see I say that while he vainely looketh to enioye all these thinges, sodaine destruction is ready
to fall vpon him, according as ye Apostle Paul saith? The holye Scripture therefore biddeth vs watch alwayes, biddeth vs be prepared at all times for the comming of the Lorde: an ex∣cellent admonition assuredly, if we did not cō∣temne it. But as in ye time of Noe, when they were eating, drinking, marrying, the flood so∣denly destroyed them all, & as when Lot was departed out of Sodom, they al perished soden∣ly by fire frō heauen: so doth y• last day of euery mans life come sodenly & vnawares vpō him. S. Iames going about to shake of this se∣curitie y• of rich & welthy of the worlde, what doth he say? euen as foloweth: Go to nowe, yee rich men, saith he, weepe and howle for your miseries that shall come vpon you. Your ri∣ches are corrupt, your garments are moth ea∣ten: your gold and siluer is tankred. Ye haue liued in pleasure on the earth & in wantonnes, and haue merely kept continual feastes & ban∣kets. Let here that rich man mentioned in the Gospell come into thy mind, who was clothed with purple and fine silke, and fared delicious∣ly euery day, but at the laste leauing this life, he is continually tormented in hell. Surely
ouermuch welth and prosperitie suffered him not to thinke of amending his life. Hereunto pertaineth that saying of our Sauiour in the Gospell of Matthew: It is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of hea∣uen. And againe: It is easier for a Camell to goe through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God. This our Sauior as it were interpreting in ye Gos∣pell of Marke. Howe hard is it, (sayth he) for them that put their trust in riches, to enter in∣to the kingdome of God? Hereunto tendeth that whereas Christ calleth riches & delightes of this life, thornes which choke that leede of the worde of God, yt it can not springe vp, and bring forth fruite. This therefore is the cause why God sometime sendeth aduersitie, & cha∣steneth them whō he loueth as y• apostle saith, euen vnto this end, yt he may shake of our secu∣rity, & stirre vs vp to feare him & cal vpō him, whō for ye most part in prosperitie wee doe too much forget, also yt he may pricke vs forwarde to acknowledge our sinnes, and hartely to re∣pent for the same, moreouer that he may moue vs to desire after heauenly thinges, and to
despise those that be humaine and earthly. For in them who haue the world at will, mer∣uelously raigneth that carnall securitie, which is counted amonge the moste heynous sinnes, and sloth & sluggishnes, yea & as it were a cer∣tain senslesnes & drousines with a contempt of diuine thinges possesseth their mindes: briefe∣ly in godly & vertuous actions they are faint, remisse, slothfull, and without all courage and spirite. By all these wordes and many moe I can scarce sufficiently expresse that which I thinke, such is the greatnes of this sinne. Now the Scripture declareth that in prosperitie and abundance of welth men are made not only se∣cure, but also almost blind, and oftentimes vn∣godly & wicked. Whereupon is that saying of Moses: He was well fedde, growne thicke, and laden with fatnes: so he forsooke God his maker, and regarded not the rocke of his sal∣nation. They prouoke him to anger wt strange Gods &c. So Dauid when his enemies were on euery side subdued, being secure & thinking all things to be safe, falleth into adultery, and defileth himselfe with the slaughter of an inno∣cent man. He that before when Saule perse∣cuted
him, had behaued himselfe very well, in prosperitie became vtterly vnlike himselfe: so much doth it concerne him that standeth, again and again to take heede least he fall. Nowe after he had committed these sinnes, in howe great securitie did he liue a long time? For as though there had bin no daunger, because God is mercifull, he went to the tabernacle, he ce∣lebrated Sabbats and festiuall dayes, he was present at sacrifices and offered them, like as others did: and not to vse many wordes he ly∣ued with a secure mynd. But when God by the Prophet Nathan denounceth vnto him pu∣nishment and vengeaunce, and putteth him in feare and terror, then at the last he returning to himselfe, perceiueth what he had committed, weyeth with himselfe the grieuousnes of his offence, and conceiueth greate greefe by re∣knowledging his sinne, openly confesseth the same, humbly craueth the mercy of God, desi∣reth to be washed from his iniquitie, to be clen∣sed from his sinne, and to haue the filthines of his offence wiped away: neither doth he in the meane season refuse the punishment which god had threatned against him, neyther seeketh to
auoyde that scourge which he had deserued. I would to God there were not like security in vs, who for the most part liue with such a se∣cure minde, as thoughe all thinges were well, neyther doe we acknowledge our offences, ne∣ther feare the seuere iudgement, and grieuous and heauy wrath of God againste sinne. So arre is it of that howe great sinnes we cōmit, so greatly we doe also lament the same, as the most holy martyr of Christ S. Cyprian saith. But that I may returne to our former matter, and knit vp all in fewe wordes: No man can be saued, but he whose sinnes are forgiuen, and none hath his sinnes forgeuen but hee that as∣keth pardon of God: nowe none asketh pardō of God, but he that desireth to returne into Gods fauour: neither doth any desire this from his heart, but he that is throughly grieued for his sinnes: and none is grieued for his sinnes, but he that acknowledgeth them, and feeleth the wrathe of God againste sinnes. This he doth not who is secure, and touched with no care of his saluation: but for the moste parte he is suche a one with whom all thinges goe prosperously forward, and who is, as it is said
of one, drunke with sweete and prosperous fortune. It is therefore manifest hereby, that prosperitie and fortunate affaires doe cause that men seldome thinke of amendinge theyr life. Of the fift cause vvhy man prolong∣geth the reforming of his life. THe fift cause of differring the amendment of our maners from day to day, is hope of long life. For although there be none, albeit he be but young, who knoweth assuredly, as he saith in Cicero, that he shall liue til ye euening: Notwtstāding there is almost none so old, but he thinketh he may liue yet one yere more. An old man crieth out in a certaine comicall Po∣et, sayinge, shall I beeing threescore and fiue yeres of age become a newe maried man, and marye an olde criple to my wyfe, doe yet perswade me vnto thys? But at this day olde men being almost four score yeeres of age ma∣ry wenches that be scarce yet fiftene yeres old:
So doe they hope no lesse then striplings or yong men, that they shall yet liue a long while but how wisely y• thing it selfe is able to shewe. And perhaps to some it may seme a thing foo∣lish and fond, to be woers being so olde, as for vs wee determine thereof neyther way: onely this I know well, that they which mary Ʋir∣gins at that age, albeit they be nowe olde and euen very criples, are notwithstanding caried with hope of liuing yet longer. This hope therefore is the cause, why almoste no man dooth earnestly thinke of reforming his man∣ners, or of rendring an accounte to that highe iudge of the life which he hath led. All differre and put of from daye to day, as muche as they can, so profitable and necessary a thing. Howe greatly doe I feare least the very heathen shal in the last iudgement vpbraid vs wt this sloth∣fulnes, who doe so late or almoste neuer at all thinke of reforming our maners & amendinge our life. Whereas not a fewe of the Heathen in time paste were wonte dayly to vse this cu∣stome, before they gaue themselues to sleepe, to consider with themselues, according to Pytha∣goras precepte, what they had done that daye
eyther well or ill. Which the Poet Ʋirgill, speaking of a good & wise man, hath declared in manner as followeth:HE doth not close his eyes to take the sweete and pleasant sleepe, Till all things done the day he weyes vvith cogitation deepe. Thinking, vvhat did I pretermit? vvhat haue I done in season? VVhat not? why was this naughtly done? and why that vvithout reason? VVhy did that mynde preuaile with me, which altred had bin best? VVhy vvhen I had the poore releud, did greefe possesse my brest? VVherefore did I that thing desire, vvhich good is to deny? VVhy did I gaine preferre before vertue and honesty? Hath any man by me bin hurt by vvord or deede this day? VVhy doth nature then discipline vvith me beare greater sway? Thus weying thinges both sayd and done from morning vntill night, That which is euill doth vvorke him greefe, but good doth him delight.
Of this custome Seneca also saieth some∣what, which I can not but adde and annexe hereunto. He therefore speaking in a certaine place of calling the minde dayly to giue an ac∣counte: Sextius did thys, (saith he) the day being ended when he went to his nightly rest, he demaunded of his minde in this sort: what euill of thine haste thou reformed this day? What vice hast thou resisted? in what respect art thou better? And a little after he addeth: What, saith he, is more goodlye then thys custome to examine ye whole day? What sleepe foloweth after such examinatiō of a mans selfe, how quiet is it, how sound & free, when ye mind is either praysed or admonished, & the viewer and graue censor thereof doth knowe of ye con∣ditiōs of it? I vse this custome & do dayly exa∣mine my selfe. When ye night is nowe come I cōsider what I haue don ye whole day, I cal to mind & wey my deedes and wordes. I hide no∣thing from my selfe. I passe nothing ouer. For why should I feare any of mine errors, whē I can say: se thou do this no more, I do now par∣don thee. In such a disputatiō thou didst speak too carnestly: doe not, hereafter deale with the
vnskilfull. Thou didst admonishe suche a one more freely then thou oughtest, and therefore didst thou not amēd him but offend him. Here∣after take heede, not onely whether that be true which thou saiest, but also whether he to whom thou speakest will suffer the truth to bee spoken vnto him. These thinges saith Seneca and many other concerning the same matter, which I would to God we did throughly print in our mindes, & set them before our selues to imitate & folow, yea & did cause our childrē al∣so to vse this custome. Surely if we did this, ei∣ther I am verie much deceiued, or els we wold endeuor to lead a life more agreable to a chri∣stian professiō. But now what do we? we meri∣ly banket & feast togither, we haue tables fur∣nished wt dainty delicates, wee giue our selues to immoderate eating & drinking: we do scarce once in a yere require an account of our selues of our life past, ether aske pardō for our sinnes, or determine to return into Gods fauour. So farre is it of yt daily before wee giue our selues to slepe, euery one examineth his own cōsciēce, & cōsidereth wt himselfe what life he doth lead: or being wholy displeased wt himselfe doth wt weping
and mourninge and knocking his breste pro∣strate on the grounde aske God forgiuenesse, promiseth to liue better hereafter by Gods helpe and assistance, and endeuoreth to perse∣uer in his purposed determination to leade a godly life. And albeit we doe not these thinges, yet in that state yt wee are, we dare be bolde to take sleepe, yea and to sleepe very soundly: in which state if soden death shoulde come vppon vs (as there is none who certenlye knoweth, whether he shall in the morning rise safe out of his bedde or no) there were no hope left of our saluation. But none of these thinges come into our minde, so muche doe wee flatter our selues with hope to liue longe: which hope not∣withstanding, when we see it often∣times deceiue others, how childish are we, or rather howe vnwise who thinke our selues ex∣empt out of ye number of such, as it were by a certaine special pri∣uiledge?
Of the sixte cause why many that are blinded vvith popishe superstition driue of to amende and reforme their lyfe. NOw remayneth the sixt cause why ma∣ny in the papacie prolonge the amend∣ment of their life, but especially such as are of the richer and welthier sort: and this is not on∣ly that trust which is conceiued of pardon and remission of sinnes by popish bulles and indul∣gences, but also a certaine vain and false hope of deliuerance from the paines of purgatorye, by yeerely sacrifices and masses, and by the helpes and meanes of Priestes and Monkes: also by the almes deedes and good workes of their freendes that are aliue, as fastings, prai∣ers, vigils, pilgrimages, and other such like. For some of thē both affirme that by indulgē∣ces may be obtained remission of sinnes, and are not ashamed to say that the soule which is tormented in the fire of purgatory, doth flie vn∣to heauen euen at the verye same instant that y• mony is throwne into y• bason: & also do think that the departed are holpen by other mens
workes and merites, which both the scripture it selfe & the auncient fathers do vtterly deny, affirming that in this present world one maye helpe another either by prayer or good coun∣sell, but that when wee come before the iudge∣mente seate of Christe euery one muste beare his owne burden: and not to vse many words, as death fyndeth euerie man, so is he iudged of GOD. Howe execrable then is that sluggishnes of men, who liue with so secure a minde in sinne and wickednes? For if they were touched with any care of their saluation, they would surelye keepe some measure in sinning, and thinke of the last day of their life: as for example (that I may speake particularly) he that is at en∣mitie with his neighbour, would endeuour ac∣cordinge to the commandement in the Gospell to be reconciled: whoremongers and adulte∣rers woulde remember that God will iudge them, as the author to the Hebrewes sayth: murderers, sorcerers and all lyers woulde ne∣uer forget that lake which burneth with fire & brimstone, where Iohn in his reuelation wri∣teth, that their portion shal bee: couetous per∣sons,
drunkardes raylers, woulde alwayes haue in memorye, that they shall not inherite the kingdome of GOD, as y• Apostle Paul witnesseth writing to the Corinthians and E∣phesians: rich men woulde neuer suffer to slip our of theyr mynde, that our Sauiour sayth it is harde for them that truste in riches, to en∣ter into the kingdome of GOD: briefly all of vs in generall woulde without doubte be myndfull of that vnquenchable: and eternall fire which Christe threatneth in the Gospell to the wicked and vngodly, and euery one woulde for him selfe feare that aunswere which was made to the foolish Ʋirgins: I know yee not: also that saying concerning y• slothful seruant: Caste that vnprofitable seruaunte into vtter darkenesse, where shal be weeping & gnashing of teeth: Moreouer that of the man which had not on a wedding garment, Binde him hande and foote and caste him into vtter darkenesse. &c. Finallye that sayinge of our Sauiour to the wycked, Departe from me yee cursed, into euerlastinge fyre. O too too stubburne and obstinate ones, whom these thinges doe nothinge moue: O Epicureans whiche be∣beleeue
not these thinges: O wicked and vn∣godly persons which laugh and scorne at these thinges: O mad men and vnmindefull of their saluation who neglect these thinges. But they neglecte them who thinke they shall obteyne pardon and remission of sinnes, by bulles and indulgences of the Pope, and trusting in thys perswasion driue of from day to day the amēd∣ment of their life. Now there is another cause also which make many thus prolong and differre, namely for yt they are perswaded yt because of a goodly wor∣ship which they giue to S. Barbarie, they shall not dye but being verye contrite, and ha∣uing first receiued the Lords supper. For thys superstition of worshipping S Barbarie hath possessed the mindes almost of all in the papa∣cie. Whereupō they haue appointed a fast vnto her to be obserued euery yeere: and painters set her forth holding the holy cuppe and breade in her hand. Moreouer this is an other cause also for that they haue prouided long before, that when their dying day is come, they may be ad∣mitted into the familie of S. Fraunces, and being deade may be buried in S. Fraunces
habit. For this opiniō also is fixed in ye minds almost of all, that the deuill hath no power o∣uer them who attaine to this, forasmuch as the Monks haue together with their habit impar∣ted vnto them their merites and good workes, which are done in their whole order, as mas∣ses, diuine offices, prayers, preachinges, stu∣dyes, fastinges, abstinence, vigils, labors, and other such like. For hereupon the Monks, lea∣uing alwayes that which is sufficient for thē∣selues to obtaine saluation, if there be anye o∣uerplus, as alwayes there is some, are wonte not to impart the same freely vnto others, but to fell it vnto them for money. This therefore is a cause also, as I haue saide, why they ne∣uer thinke of amending their life, who haue so bought with mony the participation of monks merites and deedes. But it shall be needelesse here to ref and confute this manifest error of popish indulgences, and this very fond and vaine superstition of worshipping of Saintes, seeing that both others before vs, and we also haue often done the same in sundrye places. Thus hast thou (gentle Reader) the chiefe causes, as I thinke, why we doe eyther neg∣lect
or differre ye amendment of our life. There be also other as it were seconde causes hee∣of▪ s dayly company, societie, and conuer∣sation with the vngodly and wicked, who are touched with no feare of God, muche lesse follow vertue and goodnes, or liue holilye and vprightly. Now the familiaritie and company of suche men is with all diligence to be auoy∣ded of them, who haue care of their soules helth. Euill wordes, as it is most truly sayde of one, corrupt good manners: and another saith, by keeping company and liuing together with the wicked, thou thy selfe also dost become wic∣ked. Here lette parentes remember that they must haue an especiall care that they suf∣fer no naughty and leud person to haue anye familiaritie with their children, and that they see and marke, what youth it is and with what maners they be endued, which are much or dai∣ly in their company, doe liue familiarly wyth them, or seeke to insinuate into their frendship and fauoure. For euery man doth almoste be∣come such a one as they are whose companye he vseth. And truely in deede is it sayde of one, yt he which toucheth pitch is defiled there∣with. But let vs heare what another sayeth
who cannot away with our religion: Maners sayth he, are taken of them with whom we be conuersant, and as certaine diseases passe frō the bodye to them that touch it, so doth ye mind also insert them that be next it with the euills thereof: The drunkard bringeth his compani∣ons to oue well wine: the vnchast person ma∣keth the stout and valiant, if it may be, effemi∣nate and wanton: couetousnesse poureth her poyson into them that bee next it: The same may be sayd on the other side of vertues, &c. He therefore that desireth to liue vertuouslye and godly, and to keepe himselfe pure & cleane from wickednes, which all Christians oughte to desyre, let him shunne and auoide the com∣panye of the wicked. For they that giue them∣selues wholy to theyr companye, and are daily conuersant, feaste, eate and drinke, be merye and make good cheere wt them, they I say doe hardly euer thinke of amending their life, nei∣ther can they easily seuer themselues frō y• ple∣sant cōpany of their cōpanions. Wherfore not∣wtstanding they frequent godly sermōs, are ad∣monished of good men and suche as haue au∣thoritye, and they themselues being moued with feare of Gods punishmente, doe desyre &
that vnfainedly to reforme their maners, yet for all this I can not tell howe they alwayes differre and driue of from day to day, neyther can they for the moste parte euer either truelye repent or turne to the right way. In the meane season deathe oftentimes sodenly & vnawares commeth vpon them being thus secure & care∣lesse. For as euery mans death is certaine, so is the houre thereof most vncertaine. And ther∣fore are we commaunded in the Scripture to watch and be alwayes prepared vnto the laste day of our life, accordinge to the saying of our Sauiour Christ in the gospell of Luke: Be ye prepared (saith he) for the Sonne of man will come at an houre when ye thinke not. There is also another cause at this day why many of the common sort prolonge and driue of the amendment of their life. For ther be cer∣taine and those verye deuoure felowes, for we must suspect no other of thē, howbeit not very wise and wary, who in sundry places preache much of the grace of God, of forgiuenesse of sinnes, and of other thinges that pertaine to saluation, and doe very diligently and wyth greate earnestnesse handle the same: but they
say either nothing at all or els verye little of a newe life in Christ, of the sanctifying & quick∣ning of the holy ghost. But he that will be coū∣ted a true Christian in deede, must, accordinge to the doctrine of Paule, dye to sinne, and liue vnto righteousnesse, must put of the olde man, with his woorkes, put on the newe man and liue as it becommeth the Gospell of Christe: must not commit adultery or whoredome, must not be at enmitie with his neighbour, must not be couetous, an vserer, enuious, muste not be proude and high minded. And the holy ghost is giuen of God to them that beleeue and cal vp∣on him, that he may stirre vp newe motions in the heart, and as it were regenerate the will of man, & moue him forward to all duties of god∣lines, to all vertues worthy of a christian man, and vnto a life agreable to the profession of the Gospell, where of we haue elswhere spoken more at large. Now how much dost thou think are the mindes of the ignoraunt offended by these or such like sayings of some? If thou bee an adulterer (say they) if a whoremonger, if a couetous person, or defiled with any other sinne and wickednes, beleeue onely, and thou
shalt be safe. There is no cause why thou shoul dest feare the Lawe: for this Christe hath ful∣filled and made satisfaction for the sinnes of mankinde. These sayings doe without doubte grieuously offend godly eares, and minister oc∣casion to leade a wicked life, and are cause that men thinke nothing of reforming their man∣ners, but obstinately perseuer in sinne and vn∣godlines, yea they doe encourage them vnto al wickednes, & as it were cut of such meanes as might moue thē to repent & amend. How much better did Paule, who as Luke mentioneth in the Acts, not onely preached of yt faith which is in Christ, vnto Felix and Drusilla his wife, but entreated also diligently of righteousnes, and temperance, & of the iudgement to come: so that Felix was striken with terror while Paule disputed. The same Paule also witnes∣seth moreouer in the Acts, that he did not on∣ly preache to the Gentiles that they should re∣pente and turne vnto God, but admonish them also that they shoulde doe workes worthye of them that had repented. Thus hast thou gen∣tle Reader the causes which commonly moue vs to prolonge and differre the amendment
of our lyfe: it remayneth nowe that we briefly shewe what remedye may be founde for this euell, although we haue done the same part∣ly alreadye. Remedies against the causes aforesayd, and first against mans incredulitie which was sayde to be the firste cause vvhy he differreth the a∣mendement of hys lyfe. AGainst our incredulitie then concerninge the iudgement to come, the punishment of the wicked, the immortall felicitie of the god∣lye, very much vndoubtedly (vnles wee had rather seeme then be Christians in deede) will preuaile the aucthoritye of our God and Lord Iesus Christe, if wee haue in remembraunce, and alwayes as it were before the eyes of our mynde hys sayinges whiche are in sundrye places of the Scripture concerninge these thinges, as is that in the Gospel of Iohn (that of manye I maye rehearse onelye a fewe) The houre shall come (sayeth he) in the which all that are in the graues shall heare
his voice: and they shall come forth, that haue done good, vnto ye resurrection of life: but they that haue done euell vnto the resurrection of condemnation. &c. This is the will saith he in another place, of him that sent me, that euerye man which seeth the Sonne and beleeueth in him, should haue euerlasting life: and I wyll raise him vp at the laste day. Moreouer in the Gospell of Matthew speaking of ye last iudge∣ment, amonge other thinges he sheweth what sentence he shal pronoūce of the godly: Come, saith he, ye blessed of my father: inherit ye the kingdome prepared for you from the foundati∣ons of the world. And contrariwise of the wic∣ked: Depart from me, saith he, yee cursed in∣to euerlastinge fyre, which is prepared for the deuill and his angels. And a little after: and these shall goe into euerlastinge paine, but the righteous into lyfe eternall. O dreadful voice of the iudge that condemneth the wicked to e∣uerlasting fyre. If feare of Iudges on ye earth doth astonish the guilty, howe ought that hea∣uenly iudge to make them afraid? or what ter∣ror ought he to strike into the wicked through remorce of conscience for sinne? If thou dost
so feare a Iudge on the earth, from whom not withstanding thou maist appeale vnto others, how much more oughtest thou to feare the sen∣tence of that Iudge, from whom there is no appealing? Depart, saith he, from me, ye cur∣sed. Howe dreadfull a thinge will it be to be seperate from God himselfe, who is the chiefe and soueraigne good: to be driuen from the company of the godly and holy spirites: to be excluded from the eternall blessednes of the he∣uenly kingdome, which is so great, that it can neither in words be expressed, neither in mynd comprehended, nor by any cogitation of man conceiued: & not only this, but also to be cōmit∣ted to extreme & euerlasting paines in hel, & to be condemned to fire yt shal neuer go out, in re∣spect whereof our fire is mere yse, finally to be wt the deuils an infinite time & for euermore, without any expectatiō or hope of better state? What? thinkest thou, if these thinges came into mens mindes, they would liue so leudlye? Howbeit they thinke not of that which Peter witnesseth in the Acts of the Apostles, that Christ is ordeyned of God a iudge of quicke & dead: whereof Paule maketh mention writing
to Timothee. And the same Paule in his se∣cond Epistle to the Corinthians saith: for we must all appeare before the iudgemente seate of Christe, that euerye man may receiue the things which are don in his body, accordinge to that he hath don, whether it be good or euil. In this iudgement (as the same Paule testifi∣eth) shalbe reuealed and made open before all whatsoeuer is now hidde in the depth of mans hart, and as it were obscured with darknesse. Which thing how dreadfull it will bee to the wicked, it neither can be sufficiently expressed, neither well conceiued. If in this life he, whose deedes, being in euery respect filthy, and very sinfull and wicked, shoulde be made manifeste in the company & assembly of all sorts of men, had rather the earth should swalow him vppe, then to haue so manye witnesses of his sinnes and wickednes: how doe we think shall we be affected, when the hearts of the wicked being opened, all our thoughts purposes and deedes shalbe brought to light before the whole world, before the angels of god, before all the saints? If we count it here a miserable & wretched thing, to be caried to prison, what a thing will
it be to be cast into eternall torments? If it be a dreadfull thing here to be punished with ex∣ile or death, what a thing will it be to be exiled and banished from that heauenly countrye for euermore, and for the body with the soule to be tormented with continual death? If it shall be most pleasaunt to the godly to heare when the Sonne of God shall bidde them inherite the kingdome prepared for them from the founda∣tions of the world: howe dreadfull and terrible to the wicked thinke we shall that voyce of the Iudge be, condemning them to euerlastinge fire prepared for the deuil & his angls? If wee beleeue these thinges concerning the iudge∣ment to come, the reward of ye godly, and deser∣ued punishment of the wicked: Why doe we, so liue as thoughe there were neither heauen nor hel? If we do not beleeue them, why will we be counted and called Christians? Let vs therfore shake of this securitie which possesseth our minds, & y• sluggishnes & slothful¦nes, yt dulnes & drousines which is come vpon vs. For we haue not to doe wt trifling matters but with such as concerne the saluation of our soules y• inheriting of the kingdome of Hea∣uen, the life blessed and immortall. Now, now
therefore I say, while we liue and are in helth, while there is yet time for pardon, while we haue him an aduocate in heauen, whom here∣after wee shall haue a iudge, let vs endeuour to amend our life, and not differre so long, till sinnes rather forsake vs then we them. Ney∣ther let vs euer be vnmindfull of the daye of Iudgemente, and the dreadefull voice of the Iudge bidding the wicked departe from him, neither of the pains of hell and that euerlasting fire. Let vs haue alwayes in mind the shortnes of our life, the certaintie of Death & the vncer∣taintie of the houre thereof, which is such, that no man can promise to him selfe that he shall liue till to morowe, no not so much as one mo∣ment longer. Whereupon well surely sayth Seneca: it is vncertaine, saith he, in what place death looketh for thee, & therefore looke thou for it in euery place. Wherefore the lesse certaine and continuing that the life of men is, so much more, while they maye, oughte they to thinke of repen∣tance.
Remedies againste the second cause for which men driue of to amend their life, vvhich was sayde to be hope of Gods mercy & pardon. WHereas vpon hope and truste of Gods goodnes and clemency thou prolongest the amendment of thy life (that we may nowe speake some thing againste the seconde cause) thou oughtest in no wise to be moued thereby so to do. Christ when he came called sinners in deede, but to repentance of their former lyfe, not vnto libertie and licence to sinne. As God is mercifull, so dooth he graciouslye forgiue, howbeit them that repente, not such as obsti∣nately perseuer in wickednes. Christ bare our sinnes in his body on the tee, saith S. Peter. I graunt it, but what addeth he? that we be∣ing deliuered from sinne, should liue vnto righ∣teousnes. Christe gaue himselfe for vs, sayth Paul writing to Titus: There is none that denyeth that, but what foloweth in the same place? that he might redeeme vs from all ini∣quitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people vnto himselfe, zealous of good works. Christ hath washed vs from our sinnes in his bloude,
as Iohn saieth in hys Reuelation. I con∣fesse it, but not to this ende, that we should a∣gaine defyle our selues wyth the filthinesse of sinne and wickednesse. We haue Christe an aduocate with the Father, howebeit, if wee repente our former lyfe, and so flye vnto him. I will, thou wilt say, hereafter lament mine euill life. But how knowest thou whether thou shalt liue one momente longer, much lesse so long while thou bewaile thy sinnes and amend thy life? Call to mind what God saith to that riche man mencioned in the Gospell who in great prosperitie promised himselfe to liue yet manye yeeres: Thou foole, sayeth God, this night will thy fetch away thy soule from thee. Thou haste cause to feare leaste the same hap∣pen vnto thee. I hope (thou wilt say) it will be better with me then so. But what if this hope deceiue thee? for here one may worthely crye, O vayne and deceitful hope. Nowe if thys come to passe (whiche I woulde in no wyse shoulde) thou shalt perishe for euer, and willinglye caste thy selfe into euerlastinge de∣struction. And thou canst not denye but it maye
come to passe in so greate vncertaintye of thy lyfe. What follye is it then to bringe thy saluation in doubte, by differring and pro∣longinge that thinge, whereby thou mayst presently prouide for the same. Why dooste thou not therefore foorthwith amende thy lyfe rather then with so greate perill of thy saluation nourishe such vaine and deceitfull hope. God is mercifull, thou wilt saye. True it is, but he is also iuste. Whereas then thou trusteth in hys mercy, why doost thou not also feare his iustice? I haue no pleasure in the death of a sinner, saieth the Lorde by the Pro∣phet. It is true, but what dooth he adde by & by after? But that he turne from hys waye and lyue. Turne then vnto the Lorde, as Ioel exhorteth, wyth all thine heart, wyth fasting, weepinge, and mourninge. Turne thee to the Lord thy God, for he is gracious and mer∣cifull, flowe to anger and of greate good∣nesse, as the same Prophet sayeth. Hereun∣to maketh that sayinge of Ezechiell: If the vngodly wyll turne away from all hys sinnes
that he hath done and kepe all my statuts, and doe the thing that is iudgemente and righte, doubtlesse he shall liue and not dye. And a lit∣tle after: Haue I any pleasure in the death of a sinner, saith the Lorde God, shall he not liue if he returne from his wayes? To the same effect tendeth that saying of Esai: Let the vngodly man forsake his owne wayes, and the vnrigh∣teous his owne imaginations, and turne a∣gaine vnto the lord, so shal he be merciful vnto him, and to our God, for he is verye ready to forgiue. The Prophet declareth that God is gentle and mercifull, but to such as repente & acknowledge their sinnes. Doe thou therefore first repent, returne vnto goodnes, aske pardon of thy sinnes with wee∣ping and mourninge, be sorye euen from thy heart for thy offences committed, forsake thine owne way, and turne vnto the Lord thy God: and then conceiue sure truste of thy saluation, neither despeire of pardon, neither doubte of Gods goodnes and clemencye. In the meane season remember that which our sauiour saith in the Gospell: that there is ioy in heauen for one sinner that repenteth and turneth vnto
God, more then for ninetie and nine iust men, which neede none amendment of life. Yea let this thing greatly stirre thee vp to repent, cō∣sidering with thy selfe howe desirous the An∣gels are of thy saluation, and how they reioyce and be gladde at thy repentaunce. But that doth singularly wel please thee which is in the booke of Psalmes: The Lorde is good & gra∣cious and of great mercy. But heare againe what is also in the same booke: Thou hatest all that worke iniquitie: and again: The coun∣tenaunce of the Lord is against them that doe euill. Iohn (will some man alleage) sayth in this wise: He that beleueth in the Sonne hath eternall lyfe. But what doth the same Iohn say moreouer? He that committeth sinne is of the deuill, and he that saith he knoweth God, and keepeth not his commaundements, is a lyer. Iohn Baptist beareth witnesse of Christ: Behold saith he, the Lambe of God, which ta∣keth away the sinne of the worlde. But what saith he in another place? Repent and bringe forth fruites worthy amendment of life. Peter as Luke mentioneth in the Acts saith in this sort: We beleeue through the grace of y• Lord
Iesus Christ to be saued. But what doth the same Peter say also in another place of ye same boke? Amend your liues therefore & turn, that your sinnes may be put away. Christ himselfe saith in the Gospel of Iohn: God so loued the world yt he hath giuen his only begottē sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, shoulde not perishe but haue euerlasting life. But what dooth he also saye in the Gospell of Matthew: Not euery one that saith vnto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into ye kingdome of heauen, but he yt doth the will of my father which is in heauen. Thou beleeuest that which Paule saieth, that Christ Iesus came into the worlde to saue sin∣ners. Beleeue then the same Paule also, when he affirmeth that sorcerers, adulterers, whore∣mongers, murderers, theeues, extorsioners, couetous men, proude persons, drunkards, slaunderers, such as be enuious and malicious shall not inherite the kingdome of God. For if thou be verelye perswaded yt Paul doth speake truely here, or rather the holy Ghoste by the mouth of Paule, thou then plainely seest, that thou canst cōceiue no trust of Gods mercy, ne∣ther hope for saluation frō him, as long as thou
liuest wickedly and vngodlily. For faith as it learneth out of ye Gospel yt God is gracious & merciful to them yt repent, so doth it also learn that he is angry & oftended wt them that obsti∣nately perseuer in sinne. There is no cause thē, that thou shouldest vpon hope & truste of Gods fauour & pardon, prolong the amendment of thy life, & so deceiue thy selfe. Repent first, & re∣turn into ye right way, & thē be bold to promise to thy selfe largely of Gods elemency & mercy. Now as none can well repent, but he yt hopeth for pardon, as Ambrose hath truely said: so he can not hope for any pardon, who doth not vn∣feinedly repent. I wil moreouer adde hereunto somewhat out of ye booke of Iesus the sonne of Sirach before I procede any further: Say not, saith he, I haue sinned, & what euill hath come vnto me? For ye Almighty is a pacient rewar∣der, but he wil not leaue thee vnpunished. Be∣cause thy sinne is forgiuen, be not wtout feare to heape sinne vpon sinne: neither say, ye mercy of God is great, he will forgiue my manifold sinnes. For like as he is mercifull, so goeth wrath from him also, and his indignation com∣meth down vpon sinners. Make no tarying to
turne vnto the Lord and put not of from daye to day. For suddenly shall the wrath of ye Lord breake forth, and in time of vengeance he will destroy thee. Thus much saith Iesus the sonne of Syrach. Remedies against the third cause for which we prolonge the reforming of our life, which vvas sayde to be the custome of sinninge. BƲt the custome of sinning doth hinder thee that thou causte not returne vnto goodnes and amend. For most commonly it commeth to passe that thou shalt euen againste thy will doe those things whereunto thou hast accusto∣med thy selfe from thy tender yeeres. For as Cyprian saith, it is not suddenly and quicklye left, which hauing bin long vsed hath in conti∣nuaunce of time much increased. When doth he learne to spare and spende moderatlye, who hath bin longe accustomed to sumptuous sup∣pers and deintie delicates? And when doth he frame himselfe to weare common and simple apparell, who hath of a longe time bin clothed with gorgeous garmentes, glittering with
gold and other precious ornaments? It muste needes be, that according to the custome, drun∣kennes do with forcible prouokements allure, pryde puffe vp, wrath inflame, extorsion dis∣quiet, crueltie pricke forwarde, ambition de∣light, lust cary headlong. &c. So that it semeth very hard by any meanes to ouercome the cu∣stome of sinning, which is nowe almost turned into nature. Howbeit thou muste notwithstanding ende∣deuour to doe it, if thou haste anye care of thy saluation. But by what meanes thou wilt de∣maunde? If by little and little good custome shaketh of yt which euill custome hath brought in: If that which euill custome hath as it were ingraffed, by good custome thou doe endeuor to plucke vp. Now nothing is so difficulte and hard as Seneca saith, which the minde of man can not ouercome. That therefore thou mayste ouer come the force of custome which is almost inuincible, there is more neede of a certaine willingnes of mind then of striuing and labor: although thou must add these also, if thou wilt weaken, plucke vp, and as it were quite roote out that whiche hath taken deepe roote and is
firmely fixed. Goe to therefore with a good courage, begin and doe thine endeuour with a good hope, trusting especially to the assistance of God, & thou shalt haue prosperous successe. At ye first perhaps when thou doost begin, that long continued custome of sinning will seeme vnto thee euen inuincible: but when thou com∣mest to the tryall, thou shalt soone perceiue, that that which was supposed coulde not bee done without great difficultie, is not a matter so troublesome or hard as thou hadst thoughte. So doth it fall out oftentimes, that in doinge we finde that light and easye, which in the be∣ginning seemed heauie and harde. Brieflye whereas that excellent Poet sayde of the com∣panions of Mestheus. They prosper wel: they able are because they so do seme Trust without all doubtinge that it shalbe so with thee also. Onely (as I haue sayde) go to with a good courage, and an assured hope of prosperous successe, and the endeuour and care to liue godlily will daylye more and more like and delight thee, and vertue will meruelouslye allure thee to loue it, then which (as one truely saith) there is nothing more fayre, nothinge
more beautiful, nothing more amiable. Final∣lye thou wilt neuer cease to reioyce on thine owne behalte, for tht thou haste begun to re∣forme and amend thy maners: so greate plea∣sure wilt thou take hereof, and dailye more fruite and more. And thou wilt without doubte nowe confesse that to be true which our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christe saieth in the Gos∣pell of Matthew: My yoke is casye, and my burden is lighte. Hereunto maketh that whiche Ierome saieth in a certaine place: O∣uermuche custome of sinning, saieth he, ma∣keth the waye to vertue harde and grieuous, but if this custome bee contrariwise altered, the waye to godlinesse is founde playne and pleasaunt. Thus saieth he no lesse truely then elegantly. If so be yt Stilpho the philosopher, as Cicero witnesseth, whē he was enclined both to drun∣kennes & lechery, did so not withstandinge by learning, bridle and represse his vicious na∣ture, that no man euer saw hym drunken, no man euer sawe anye appearaunce of vn∣lawfull luste in hym: why mayste not thou through Gods helpe and assistance by litle and
little subdue, and at the last quite shake of (that I may so speake) an euill custome, although it hath continued euen a long time? An heathen man ouer came nature, shall not a Christian o∣uercome custome? especially if he earnestlye endeuour to doe the same, if he haue greate re∣garde to himselfe, if he doe after a sorte force himselfe, and nothing at all fauour or further his pronenesse to euill: if in respect of his im∣becillitie and weakenes, he doth with ardent prayer craue Gods helpe and assistaunce: if he desire that the holye Ghoste may be giuen vnto him, which may stirre vp newe motions in his heart, and assiste and further his studye and care which he hath to liue well. But let vs nowe proceede to the rest. Remedies againste the fourth cause for vvhich mē differre to amend and repent, vvhich vvas sayde to be vvelth and prosperitie. LEt them whome welthe and prosperitie maketh secure (for this was ye fourth cause of differring repentaunce) call often to minde that dreadful saying which is in the Gospel of Luke: Woe be to you that are rich: for yee
haue receiued your consolation. Wo be to you that are full; for ye shal hunger. Wo be to you that nowe laugh: for ye shall wayle and wepe. Neither lette that departe out of their mynde which is sayde to the riche man in the Gospel: Thou foole, this night wyll they fetche awaye thy soule from thee. Let them remember also those thinges which we haue spoken of before, concerning them whom the flood suddenly de∣stroyed when they looked for nothing lesse: of them which perished in Sodom by fyre from heauen: of the rich men whom the seruaunt of God S. Iames biddeth weepe and houle for the miseries that shall come vpon them: also of the rich man mencioned in Luke, which was clothed in purple and fared deliciously euerye day, who being dead is tormented in hell fyre. Let vs then shake of all carnall securitie: Let vs not forget God in our prosperitie: Let vs feare the wrath of the eternall Iudge, before whose tribunall seate we must all stand, and e∣uery one for himselfe pleade his owne cause, his conscience accusing him, being witnesse of all things that he hath done either well or ill. It most commonly commeth to passe, that
prosperitie puffeth vp mens mindes, that such as flow in welth wax insolent and proude, that riches make men stoute and stately. Let vs therefore alwayes suspecte and mistruste our good fortune and prosperitie: let vs againe & again take hede that temporall telicitie be not cause vnto vs of eternall misery and destructi∣on. What must we then doe? Paule in fewe words declareth in his firste epistle to the Co∣rinthians: It remaineth saith he, brethren, that they which haue wiues be, as though they had none, and they yt weepe, as thoughe they wept not: and they yt reioyce, as though they reioiced not: and they that buy, as thoughe they posses∣sed not: & they that vse this world as thoughe they vsed it not: for ye fashion of this world go∣eth away. The Apostle sheweth here, yt there ought to be none or very litle care of wiues, of prosperitie or aduersity, of welth & riches, final∣ly of all terrene and earthlye thinges: but our chiefe and almost onely care oughte to be of e∣ternall & heauenly things. Not without cause doth Paul bid Timothee charge them that be rich, that they be not high minded, and yt they trust not in vncertain riches but in the liuinge
God. And Dauid in ye booke of psalmes saith. If riches increase, set not your hart theron. Ri∣ches are not condenmed, which euen the godly haue often possessed, but truste which is repo∣sed in riches, & stoutnes & insolēcy which com∣meth by them. For riches and prosperitie are wont for ye most part to make men stout & lofty whereupon is yt saying in a certain commody, because they haue gotten a litle mony they are become high minded. Let him therefore yt is welthy & rich, and who in all his affaires hath prosperous successe, both giue thāks vnto god, & take good heede yt he become not insolēt and proud: let him put no truste or affiance in his fortunate estate: let him haue an especiall care, lest yt a certain securitie creping vpon him (as it commonly cōmeth to passe) he forget God: let him beware that he become not voide of all sense of Gods wrath againste sinne, so that a carnal carelesues possesse his minde, & he wax altogether slothful and sluggishe. Ʋnlesse he take diligent heede of these thinges, it is to be feared assuredly, least that, resting in hys present prosperitie, he be caried awaye with a false and vayne ioye: and least flatteringe
himselfe with hope that his good fortune shall long continue, and hauing cast of the feare of God, death come vppon him in the meane sea∣son in this his securitie: for the laste daye of mans life is then most commōly wont to come when it is least looked for. Let alwayes therefore this sayinge of the A∣postle be before the eyes of our minde: When they shall say, peace and safetie, then shall sud∣den destruction come vpon them. Wherefore let vs not sleepe, as Paul admonisheth, but let vs be vigilant and sober. Let vs not say, Wee shall haue peace, and no euill shall come vnto vs: neither let vs say as they whom the Pro∣phet Esay speaketh of: We haue made a co∣uenaunt with death, and with hell are we at a∣greement: and thoughe there goe forth a sore plague, it shall not come vnto vs. Many testi∣monies of Gods wrath againste sinne may be founde here and there in the writinges of the Prophets and Apostles, manye examples of the punishment of the wicked, which euerye one reading to his own cōmoditie, may be mo∣ned thereby to shake of that ouermuch security which is commonly incident to men in ye time
of prosperitie. I mynde not here to rehearse them all, least I shoulde be too long and tedi∣ous. Let vs alwayes haue before our eyes those thinges which Moses mentioneth came to passe in the former ages of the world, con∣cerninge the destruction of mankinde by the flood, concerning the cities of Sodom & Go∣morthe howe they were consumed to ashes by fire from heauen: also those thinges which hi∣stories both sacred and prophane declare of the most grieuous and often calamities of the people of Israell, how they were often caried captiue of Barbarous nations, for the neglect of pietie and godlines: Finally those thinges whiche wee reade of the vtter destruction and ruine of the citie of Ierusalem. For all these thinges are written (as Paule saieth to the Corinthians) to admonish vs vpon whom the ends of the world are come. Now how God hath often punished all sortes of men for sinne, it woulde be longe as I haue sayd and neede∣lesse to rehearse: I will speake onely of one for examples sake. When that noble king Dauid, whom God dearely loued, at suche time as being secure &
idle he liued in great prosperitie, had fallen in∣to adulterye, and had encreased the same of∣fence by the murder of an innocent man, wyth what miseries, and calamities was he not af∣flicted of God, euen after that hauing acknow∣ledged his sinne and repented, he was restored to Gods accustomed grace and fauour? For God punished him with the death of his sonne newly borne, with the conspiracie of the sonne against the father, with his sorrowfull flighte out of the citie of Ierusalem, with the for∣cing of his concubines by hys owne Sonne, with the reuolting of the people from him, fi∣nally with greate mortalitie and death of hys citizens. So great and horrible is the wrath of God againste sinne. If a man so holy dyd not scape vnpunished for his sinne committed, no not when hee had obteyned pardon, and was reconciled into Gods fauour, as in the hystorye of the Kinges is declared: Howe thinkest thou will it fall out with others, who are nothinge at all greeued and troubled in minde for their sinnes, but doe securelye of∣fende and heape one sinne vppon another, fi∣nallye who wyth an obstinate mynde perseuer,
in wickednes? Let vs therfore shake of sloth∣fulnes, & that carnal & carelesse security which commonly commeth vpon vs in ye time of pros∣peritie: Let vs liue in the feare of the Lord, and with feare and tremblinge procure our salua∣tion: let vs not suffer our selues to be entan∣gled with the allurements of the fleshe: let vs by continual praier resist satans tētations. And thus much shal suffize concerning this poynt. Remedies against the fift cause for which man prolongeth the amend∣ment of his lyfe. NOw to speake of such as being led with hope of long life, do differre the amend∣ment of their maners, these doe willingly de∣ceiue themselues: and of that which they exce∣dingly desire they haue a vain hope, and doe fondly dreame, and so they wittingly and wil∣lingly perish, being aliue and beholding their state they be in, then which no folly can be said to be greater. If these be nothing moued with those things, which wise mē, yet no professors of Christian religion, haue commited to writinge concerninge the shortnesse and vn∣certaintie of thys lyfe, as is that of one who
sayde that man a is buble, and of another who calleth him a dreame of a shadowe: at the least let y• man beloued of God, holy Iob I meane, moue them, who sayth that man hath here but a shorte time to liue: Let the seruaunt of God S. Iames moue them, who sayth that mans life is as a vapour, that appeareth for a little time and then vanisheth away: Let him that cannot lye, the Sonne of God, our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ, moue them, who bid∣deth vs watch, because we knowe neither the daye nor the houre: Finally let experience it selfe moue them, if thou thinke that to be more certaine. Thou sittest often with thy friends, being sicke or diseased, and lying without hope of recouery, thou art sometimes presente with them that giue vp the ghoste, thou hearest the groninges of them that dye, thou seest the dead caried forth, thou also dost accompany them to burying, thou seest the bodyes committed to the earth, thou hearest men lament the death of their freendes, thou readest Epitaphs and in∣scriptions of tombes, thou meetest them that weare mourninge apparell: all which thinges ought worthely to stir vp in thee a remēbrance
of the shortnes of this life, and of death that is dayly imminent. If the death of strangers doe nothing moue vs, yet let the death of our familiers & neigh∣bours moue vs: let our owne perils in whiche we often are, & the grieuous diseases that we fall into moue vs: and where as wee consider not our infirmitie by the example of others, let vs at the lest by our own weakenesse acknow∣ledge the imbecilitie and frailtie of mankind, and of our common nature, Which if we shall do, we shal then perceiue that there is no cause why we should flatter our selues with a vaine and false hope of long life. But, will some man say, I may in olde age amende my life and re∣pent: in the meane season I will take my plea∣sure. I heare this: but who certenlye knoweth that he shall liue vntill olde age? Dooste thou thinke that it wilbe in thy power to repente when thou wilt, who nowe neglectest and pre∣termittest the time and occasion of the same being offered? Thou art deceiued truly, thou art deceiued I say, if thou so doost thinke. God of his goodnes whereby he desireth rather the amendment then destruction of a sinner, when
it seemeth good vnto him, calleth thee to repē∣taunce, and (as he sayth in the reuelation) he standeth at the dore & knocketh: open thou to him knocking, heare him calling thee, and whi∣ther he calleth followe thou: despise not the ri∣ches of his bountifulnes and lenitie, least after thine hardnes and heart that can not repente, thou heape vnto thy selfe wrath againste the day of wrath, as Paul saith writing to the Ro∣manes. Remember what the same Paule sayth to the Corinthians: We beseeche you (saith he) that ye receiue not the grace of God in vaine. For he sayth: I haue heard thee in a time accepted, and in y• day of saluation haue I succoured thee: behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of saluation. The Apostle sheweth here, yt the time of repentinge being offered of God, is not to be neglected, & that the like occasion is not alwayes giuen. Here∣unto pertaineth that sayinge to the Galathi∣ans: While we haue time, let vs worke that which is good. And one of the auncients sayde not amisse: He yt hath promised pardon to the penitent, hath not graunted so much as ye mor∣row to him that dissembleth. Take hede there∣fore,
leaste by prolonginge the amendment of thy maners, and that vpon hope of long lyfe, thou do wittingly & willingly tempt the Lord whose goodnes inuiteth thee vnto repētance: which we are forbidden to do by ye commande∣ment of God, as is declared in Deuteronomie. It doth not seldome happen, that in the time of contending & brawling, of playing, of drin∣king and tipling some is suddenly slaine, so that he can not repent for his sinne, when as wee in the meane season by the singular bene∣fite of God haue time and space graunted to returne vnto goodnes. Let vs not then abuse this so greate goodnes of our moste gracious God, who doth as it were looke for occasion to take pitie vpon vs. Let vs amende our lyfe, lest that being suddenly preuented wt the day of death, we seeke space to repent, & can not fynde the same. And truly he yt hath promised pardō to ye penitent (as I sayd euen now, but it must be eftsones repeted) hath not granted so much as the morow to him that continueth in sinne. But yt sinner, wil some man say, may repent & flie vnto God for mercy, when he lieth nowe visited wt sicknes. In dede it is not to be denied
that this may be: but marke howe manye im∣pediments be heare, which can scarce be ouer∣come. For to omit the regarde which he ought to haue to make his last will and testamente, the care of his wife and children, the griefe of his sicknes, and such like, which seeme per∣haps of small importance: Howe will Satan at that time besturre himselfe, what meanes will he not attempte, that he may driue mise∣rable man to despeyre of his saluation be∣cause of his innumerable sinnes committed? For then especially, if euer, he putteth in thy mind what soeuer euil thou hast throughe thy whole life from thy childhood either thought, willed, sayd, or done, and those offences that be otherwise greeuous of themselues, he en∣creaseth and amplifieth: Finallye he goeth a∣bout by all meanes to take from man all hope of pardon, and to driue him to despeire of hys saluation because of the multitude and great∣nes of his sinne. Hereunto may be added the remorse of a guilty conscience, the great feare of death being nowe before mans eyes, the sor∣rowfull and bitter cogitation of the tribunall seate of the Lord, yt terror of Gods iudgement
which doe sore amaze and astonish, the horror of hell fire: but who can rehearse all the impe∣diments, and all the causes which will hinder thee that thou canst not thinke of repenting? Doe not therefore, doe not I say, if thou bee wise, differre the amendment of thy lyfe vntill the last day thereof. For this is a thing full of perill and daunger. That I may not adde here vnto, that such repentance, forasmuch as it is vrged by necessitie, & forced with feare of hell, rather then proceding from a ready willing∣nes of mind, shal little preuaile vnto saluation. But there is no repētance to late before God. I confesse it is true in deede: for in what hour so euer a sinner repenteth, God will no more remember any of his iniquities: and (as the Prophet saith in another place) The Lord de∣sireth the repentaunce of a sinner, rather then his death and destruction. But what if sudden death come vppon thee vnawares, that thou shalt haue no time to lament thy sinne, or to thinke of repenting? For that whiche maye chance to all, is to be looked for of all. Call to mynde the sudden destruction of them who pe∣rished by the fall of the tower in Siloam, as
it is in Luke. What it thou be suddenly taken with such a disease or sicknesse, that thou shalt lose thy right vnderstandinge and fall into ra∣uing and madnes, which we haue seene often∣times to haue come to passe? Nowe if this chaunce (as vndoubtedly it may) that hope to repent which the sinner had in prolonging the amendment of his life, is then vtterly frustrate and vayne. That which may come to others, may also come to thee: thinke not thy selfe ex∣empt from that which is common to all. For true is that saying of Publius: It may chance to euery one that may chaunce to any. Cast of therfore hope of long life, then which nothing assuredly is more vaine and deceitfull: doe not dreame that thou shalte haue opportu∣nitie, neither appoint the time when thou wilt repent: Finally doe not with this so vayne hope further thy folly or rather madnes in dif∣ferring the amendment of thy life. If thou be wise, repent at that time when thou canst yet sinne. For if thou purpose then to repent, when thou canst now sinne no more, surely thou hast not forsaken sinne, but sinne hath forsaken thee. Moreouer it is to be feared, lest that thou
which wilt not repent when thou mayst, shalte not be able, when thou wouldest. For the iudg∣ments of the omnipotent God are vnsearcha∣ble in punishing the sinnes of men. As God of his goodnes and clemencye, is wont to giue space to repent, to them that be willing there∣vnto, and ready and fit to receiue mercy, and in the meane season to suffer sinners with much patience and leuitie, til they returne vn∣to goodnes: so whē he seeth one desperatly dis∣solut and naught, deluding Gods long suffe∣rance, and nowe worthy of destruction, he cea∣seth any more to kepe him from falling into vo¦luntary perdition and (as the Scripture spea∣keth) he blindeth the desperate, and bardneth the obstinate: neither looketh he any more for his conuersion, neither giueth to the condem∣ned time to repent or occasion to amend. For God hath appointed euery one his day & mea∣sure, beyond which neither can man procede in sinning, neither wil God any longer differ the punishment of sinne. Which thing surly ought worthely to stirre vp al without delay to repēt, and to endeuor to receiue yt grace offered vnto them. But seeing we haue spoken sufficiently
hereof, we will nowe proceede to speake of o∣ther matters. Remedies against the sixt cause for vvhich many in the Papacie differre and neglecte the reforming of their life. SƲch as differre the amendment of their life vpon confidence in popish pardons and in∣dulgences, doe, as the prouerbe is, truste to a broken staffe, and leane to a ruinous wall: as also they that worship S. Barbarie, and they that prouide that they may bee buried in S. Fraunces habit. For what is there any where in the whole Scripture concerninge these try∣fles? What in the volumes of the olde Testa∣ment? What in the bookes of the Prophets? What in the doctrine of the Gospell? What in the writings of ye Apostles? Finally which of these thinges was eyther in the Primatiue Church obserued, or by the true general iudg∣ment and consent of the Churche at all times receiued and allowed as profitable to saluatiō, much lesse as necessary? He therefore that la∣menteth not his sinne before his death, can not obtaine saluation albeit he be furnished euen
with a thousande popishe pardons and bulles. Wherefore vnlesse thou wilt bring thy salua∣tion in doubt, omitting these trifles, repent thy euill life: reknowledge thy sinne, and be harte∣lye sorye and greatlye greeued for the same, with earnest prayer and teares craue mercye of God, and flye for succour and refuge to the onely merites of Christ, with a firme faith and assured hope to obtaine Gods grace and fauor for Christ his sake, whom the father hath giuen to death for vs: So will it come to passe that God will take pitie vppon thee, forgiue thy sinnes, and receiue thee into fauour for hys sonnes sake. For he is our aduocate with god, who maketh intercessiō for vs, and reconcileth and pacifieth our heauenly father being offen∣ded at our sinne and wickednes, as Iohn in his first Epistle generall teacheth. East of therefore all regard of popishe in∣dulgences, of that superstitious worship of S. Barbarie, and of the habit and clothing of S. Fraunces, by which thinges no man can haue any hope to obtain saluation. Flie vnto Christ himselfe, who is our mediator and aduocate, as I haue sayd, the throne, of grace, the recon∣ciliation
for the sinnes of ye worlde, the Lambe which was slaine from the beginning of the world: briefly our righteousnes, sanctification, and redemption, as the Apostle saieth to the Corinthians. Doe not then (that I may returne to my purpose) doe not I saye, prolong the amend∣ment and reformation of thy maners trustinge to indulgences and other such trifles, especial∣lye, in such shortnes of this life, the houre of most certain death being so vncertain. Which death forasmuch as it is dayly imminent, by reason of the vncertaine chaunces, which be incident vnto vs, may euen at this very instant come vpon thee vnlooked for: surely by reason of the shortnes of our life as it is saide of one it can neuer be farre of. Howe daungerous a thing is it then to liue in that state, in which if sudden death ouertake thee, there is no more hope of thy saluation? That thou mayst auoid this daunger, see thou alwayes liue godlily, acknowledge thy sinnes, flie humbly to God for mercy, aske pardon and forgiuenes, and throughe Christe hope and looke for saluation from God. Resort also often to the ministers
of Gods word, and aske of them godly instruc∣tions and spirituall comforte. And that thou mayst be stirred vp to remember the promises concerning remission of sinne, and be more & more confirmed concerning the good wyll of God towarde vs, come often to the Lordes table, and as Christe hath instituted, feede of that body which was once offered for ye sinnes of mankinde, and drinke that blood which was shed for the remission of our sinnes: and so be∣ing mindfull of the Lords death, giue heartye thanks to God for so great benefites, and sing hymnes and prayses vnto him both priuatly with thy selfe at home, and publikely in the as∣sembly of the faithfull abroade. A most fruitful admonition to a∣uoid euill company. NOw (that I may goe forward to other matters) endeuor as much as thou may alwayes to seuer thy selfe from the companye of the wicked, and to associate thy selfe as neere as can be wyth the vertuous and god∣lye. And (as one admonisheth) bee con∣uersaunt with suche as may make thee better,
admit such into thy companye as thou mayste amende. It is a matter of no smal importance whose familiaritie thou vsest, and with whom thou daily liuest. For as we are infected with ye company of ye wicked, as with a certen conta∣gion: so by dayly liuing together with the ver∣tuous and such as feare God, we are almoste reformed and amended. Be therefore familier and a frend with these latter: as for the other thinke thou oughtest to haue nothinge to doe with them. The same doth Salomon com∣maund in his Prouerbs. Paule also writing to the Corinthians, doth so earnestly dehort from the companye and societie of the wicked in all thinges, that he will not haue vs so muche as to resort to the table with them: If anye that is called a brother be a fornicatour, or coue∣tous, or a worshipper of Idoles, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extorsioner: with him that is such see that yee eate not. There be in deede o∣ther causes, I graunt, why he will haue such to be auoyded, either lest we shoulde seeme to al∣lowe their lewdnes and wickednes, or that such, when they see all men shunne their com∣panye, may be ashamed and amende: but surely
this is not one of the smallest causes, least the contagion of their vices shoulde infect others, if any haue familiaritie with them. For as a little leuen leueneth a greate lumpe of dough, so oftentimes the example of one dooth marre and infect a great number. Nowe althoughe it be in deede difficult and hard to forsake the aquaintance and familiari∣tie of them, with whō thou hast long liued de∣lightfully and pleasantly, thou must notwyth∣standing with might and maine attempte the same, and verye diligentlye endeuour to seque∣ster and seuer thy selfe from the companye of such. Onely be willing and earnest in the mat∣ter, and without doubte it wil goe better for∣ward then thou lookest for. And because accor∣ding to the greeke prouerbe, the beginning is halfe of the whole, and again, as Horace saith, he that hath well begunne, hath halfe done: see in any case thou doe beginne, and doubt not of the successe by considering the difficultie. If (as it commonly falleth out) thou doe eftsones thinke vppon the feastes, mery meetings, and such other vaine and fond delights which thou hast had with them: if thou often euen against
thy will remember thy mery mates and com∣panions, see thou doe then forthwith call to mynde the shortnesse of this lyfe, death that hangeth ouer our heads euery houre, the laste iudgement, the tribunall seate of the Lord, hell fire and eternall condemnation: and so (as the saying is) driue out one nayle with another. If thou call to mind these thinges, and do thus speake with thy selfe: Thy felowes & pleasaunt companions inuite thee vnto them, suppers, dinners and mery meetings allure thee, what doe I? If thou doe earnestly say this with thy selfe, what doe I? then reason after a sort ga∣thering her strength, will subdue thy desire, and thy will wyll yeelde to reason exhorting to that which is best. Take therfore time (as I haue sayde) to thinke vpon these thinges, and deale aduisedly in them when any such thinge come into thy minde by the suggestion of Sa∣tan, cast of all remissenes of mynd, neither doe straighte giue place to thy desire, nor runne whither the deuill would driue thee. Doe the companyons inuite thee to drinke and make mery with them: See thou then cal to mynde that which our Sauior saith in a certen place:
Take heede (saith he) that your heartes be not ouercome with surfetting & drunkennes. Also that which Paule saieth: Be not drunke with wine wherein is excesse: and again drun∣kerds and gluttons shal not inherite the king∣dome of heauen. Also that which Peter saieth: Be sober and vigilant: moreouer that saying of Esayas: Woe be vnto them that rise vp ear∣ly to folow drunkennes. Remember that thou must obey the authoritie of God and his Apo∣stles, rather then follow the will of wicked mē: and that thou must yeld vnto reason exhorting vnto that which is best, rather then consent to the deuill mouing thee to that which is worst: finally that thou muste rather resist that euill spirite, then grieue the holy spirite of God. Do not therefore, doe not (I saye) runne to thy ru∣ine and destruction for the pleasant companye of thy companions, but to the vttermost of thy power, sequester thy selfe from them, and let eternall saluation be more deere and pre∣tious vnto thee, then a shorte de∣lighte of worldly ioye and pleasure.
A right pithie and profitable exhor∣tation to forsake vice and im∣brace vertue. AGaine and againe thinke thus with thy selfe, (that I may nowe come to the laste poynt) that he doth not truely repent, neyther is, or may be counted a Christian, who conti∣nueth in sinne and wickednes, neither that there is anye true faith in him, who sinneth a∣gainst his conscience, and committeth an hey∣nous offence. Let vs not therefore be Christi∣ans in name onely, being farre of from ye thing it selfe: neither let vs boast of faith in wordes alone, but let vs truly and vnfeynedly repente, let vs turne to God with all our heart: let vs, not trusting to our owne strength, but to the helpe and assistance of God, endeuour to re∣forme vice by vertue, alwayes to liue godlily, iustly, innocently, vprightly, holily, chastly, so∣berly, temperately, profitably to the Churche of God, friendly to the life of man, and (as Paule saith) as it becommeth the Gospell of Christe. Let vs moreouer dayly desire of our heauēly
father by our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ, that he will giue vnto vs his holy spirite, who may gouern, guide, teach, sanctisie, rayse vp, comfort and quicken vs: for Christe in the gos∣pell hath promised that his heauenlye father will giue the same spirite vnto vs if we by har∣ty prayer aske it of him. And let vs not resiste the holy Ghost, by yeelding to our wicked de∣sires against our conscience, neither let vs ex∣pell or greeue him, that I may vse the word of the Apostle Paul. Let vs walke in newenesse of life, let vs not serue sinne, let vs giue vp our bodyes a liuing sacrifice, holy, acceptable vnto God: let vs mortefie the fleshe with the affecti∣ons and lustes thereof, let vs keepe our selues vnspotted of the world: let vs be renued in the spirite of our minde, and put on the newe man, which after God is created in righteousnesse and true holines: let vs be followers of God as deere children: let vs walke worthye of the Lord, and as it becommeth saints, forbearing one another through loue, endeuoring to kepe the vnitie of the spirite in the bonde of peace: let vs be gentle & louing one towards another, let vs loue our enemies, let vs blesse them that
curse vs, let vs doe well to them that hate vs, let vs praye for them that hurt and trouble vs, let vs giue meate to the hungrye, drinke to the thirstie, releefe to the needye, let vs harbour straungers, cloth the naked, visite the sicke, admonish him that is out of the way, instructe the ignoraunte, helpe the perplexed with our counsaill, comfort the afflicted, reconcile suche as be at discorde and variance, despise worldly honours, contemne vayne glorye, brieflye let vs not seeke after welth and riches, lett vs endeuour alwayes to subdue and represse our naturall corruption and wicked affections: and let vs not onely take heede least our hearts be at anye time ouercome with surfettinge and drunkennes, but let vs also by fasting and due abstinence prepare our selues to prayer: and among so many deceites and inuasions of Sa∣tan, the world, and the flesh, let vs with ardent prayer aske helpe of God: Let vs not be proud in prosperitie, or discouraged in aduersitie: whatsoeuer we doe, let vs doe all things to the glorye of God: let vs not regarde onely our owne matters but rather, those which are o∣ther mens. Moreouer let vs so behaue our
selues that none be offended by vs, but that we may by our good example bring other to ver∣tue and godlines: finally let vs pray dayly and without intermission, in all things let vs giue thanks, let v lwaies aspire to heauēly things let vs contemne humane and earthly. These things are hard, thou wilt say. I cōfesse it: yet are they agreable to a christian professi∣on, & needeful to saluation. Let vs then do our diligence, that we may cast of al remissenes of mind, let vs not ouermuch fauor our selues nor yeeld to our own infirmitie, or euer willingly be cause that the grace of God bee in vaine in vs. Let vs not only not fall into sinne witting∣ly, but let vs also valiauntly resist ye assaults of Satan, neuer yeeldinge vnto him through co∣wardise or sluggishnes. Nowe what is not to be iudged light, whereby thou mayst come to yt life which aboundeth with all good things, & to those eternal ioyes? Not without cause saith the Apostle Paul: I count that the afflictions of this present time are not worthye of the glorie which shall be shewed vnto vs. Here∣unto maketh that which is sayde in another place: The eye hath not seene, the eare hath
not heard, neither haue entred into the hearte of man the thinges which God hath prepared for them that loue him. For how great a thing is it (which can neither by force of words bee expressed, nor by thought of man conceiued of what sorte it is) to be a citizen and inhabitour of heauen, to be an heyre of God, an heyre an∣nexed with Christe, to possesse the kingdome prepared for the godly before the beginning of the worlde, without end to beholde that soue∣raigne good, to enioy the most comfortable cō∣templation of the countenaunce of God, to be conuersant in the company of Angels, to haue societie with the blessed spirits, to be in the as∣sembly of the righteous: together with the an∣gels, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apo∣stles, the Martyrs, finally with all the godly enioying blessed immortalitie and life euer∣lasting, together I saye, with all these to cele∣brate with hymnes and prayses the eternall God the fountaine of all glory? What? are not al the miseryes and molesta∣tions of this lyfe to be counted light, if thou looke vnto the glory to come, so yt we oughte worthelye to be ashamed of our sluggishnesse
and remissenes? who when he remembreth these thinges, namely the kingdom of heauen, the life immortal, euerlasting blessednes, ioies exceeding great and infinite, the companye of Angels, finally the societie of all who after their life led godlily vpon the earth, shall enioy a life moste blessed and eternall: who I saye, when he remembreth these thinges, is willing to cary on the earth, and doth not rather with Paule desire to be dissolued, and deliuered out of the prison of this body: Let vs not therefore count these things heard, after which so greate commodities do ensue, especially seeing on the other side, they that keepe not the commande∣ments of God that are needefull to saluation, shall not onely be excluded from that felicitie whereof we haue spoken, but also be cast head∣long into hell fire and eternal death: throwne into vtter darkenes, where shalbe weeping & gnashing of teeth: afflicted with most greuous paines and continual torments, in the compa∣nie and societie of the deuils and the wicked, without any hope of better state, that is, being alwaies in extreme and vtter desperation, then which there can be no torment more greeuous
or greate. Whom would not all these thinges greatly feare from sinning, namely the horror of hell, the paines that neuer shall haue ende or mea∣sure, eternall death, the fire that shall neuer go out, vnspeakeable torments, the companye of the deuils, the societie of the reprobate, and wicked, feare, anguishe, tremblinge euerla∣stinge and infinite, and suche as the minde of man can not comprehende, nor any words ex∣presse. Whom, I saye, will not that daye of wrath terrifie, as both the Prophet and Paule to the Romans calleth it, a daye of affliction and anguish, a day of calamitie, and miserye, a darke & glomie day, a cloudy and blacke day, when God will reward euery mā according to his workes. I woulde to God the cogitation and remembraunce of these thinges were al∣wayes before the eyes of our minde. Truely if they were, either I am much deceiued, or men would more diligently obserue the commaun∣dements of Almighty God, they would more refrain themselues from sinne and euel doing, they would embrace vertue and godlines, and endeuour to liue holily and vprightly.
What? ought that also nothinge to moue vs, that vertue is sometimes rewarded here on the earth, as vice & wickednes is plagued and pu∣nished? And yt I may omit to say any thing of the conscience wherof we haue spoken in other bookes, we wil entreate of those things which thou mayst almost handle wt thy handes much more be hold with thine eyes. For that I may speake of a moste common vice, what inconue∣niences & euils ensue of surfettinge & drunken∣nesse? hereof (as one saith in his historye of the worlde) commeth palenes of colour, hanginge cheekes, sore eyes, trembling handes, trouble∣some sleepe, & vnquiet rest in the night: hereof commeth stinking breth, ache of ye hed, a weak memorie, a dul wit: hereof come oftentimes greuous diseases, as great ach of ye ioynts, the gout, apoplexies, as both ye phisitions affirme, and almost dayly examples do teach. As for le∣cherye, howe often doe we see it in our age pu∣nished with the french pocks, as also immode∣rate carnall pleasure wyth the palseye, blered∣nesse of the eyes, tremblinge of the sinewes? What shall I saye of prodigalitye and ry∣otte, hath it not broughte many to pouerty
and penurie? What of Adultery, is it not som∣times a present punishment, and is cause of in∣famie alwayes after? Moreouer whō hath not his wrath often hurt? vnto whom hath not prid procured hatred? What shoulde I speake of enuie? is it not a punishment vnto it selfe? and doth gnaw and consume it selfe? so that it was sayd rightly of one: The tyrannes of Sicilie found no greater torment then enuie, and of an other also: An enuious man doth pine at the prosperitie of another. Now concerning coue∣tousnes, is not he whose hearte it possesseth disquieted with a desire alwayes to encrease his substance, and afflicted with feare to lose that he hath? For a couetous man is not con∣tent with that which he hath, and he feareth al∣so least he shall not still retaine the same. Dost thou not plainly by the premisses see that euen here vpon earth vice & wickednes oftentimes escapeth not vnpunished? Nowe if this little moue vs, yet those eternall torments in hell which the Scripture threatneth to the wicked ought worthely to moue all, and greatly to stir vs vp and pricke vs forward without all delay to amend our life, if we count not those things
a fable which the holy Scriptures teach of the life immortall of the godlye, and of the paines eternall of the wicked. I will rehearse what is wont, mightelye to moue me, and as it were inflame me to liue godlily, if perhaps the same may minister oc∣casion to other to amend their life. Thus doe I often thinke with my selfe: What, I say, Ri∣uius, if at this very instant thou shouldest de∣part out of this life, what thinkest thou would become of thee? Thinkest thou thy selfe suf∣ficiently prepared to dye? For althoughe thou reposest thy trust, as thou oughtest in deede, in the infinite clemency and goodnes of GOD, thinkest thou notwithstanding that thou hast no cause to feare his iustice? How many thou∣sand christians are committed to euerlastinge paines, howe many young men, old men, men of midle age, women, folks maried, vnmaried, finally howe many of euerye state, age and sex, whose sinnes were both farre fewer and much lighter then thine? O dreadfull iudgement of God, yet righteous and iust. How many Iews are there in hell, how many idolaters are tor∣mented with continuall paynes? Who if they
had bin conuerted to the faith of Christ, as by Gods goodnes and grace we are, they would perhaps haue liued farre better on the earth then we at this daye doe, and also would haue auoyded those eternall torments: O execra∣ble ingratitude of ours, O senselesnesse of mans heart. What, I say, if thou shouldest heare that which was spoken of the Prophet vnto Ezechias: Prepare thy selfe, for thou must dye and shalt not escape: what wouldest thou doe in this case? Thou wouldest wyshe I thinke, a tyme to liue, wherein thou migh∣test bewayle thy sinnes, vnfeynedly repente, and aske mercye of God. Why then dooste thou not that daylye, and throughe thy whole lyfe which thou wouldest then do in a moment of time? By thinking of these things I am wont (as I haue sayde) to be much stirred vp and infla∣med to liue godlily, also hereby am I terrified from sinning, & moued to craue mercy of god. Let therefore such as thinke good, set the same before their eyes. There is scarce any mā who purposeth not to forgiue his enemies before he go hence, let him then forgiue him now. There
is scarce anye who desireth not to returne into Gods fauour, let him returne therefore nowe: There is scarce anye who thinketh not to a∣mend his life, let him amend it therefore now. Brieflye whatsoeuer thou wouldest doe at the poynte of death, doe the same through Gods helpe and assistance, while thou liuest and arte in helth: that is, that I may speake particular∣ly, repent continuasly, feare God vnfeynedly, loue him wyth thy whole heart and most enti∣rely, repose all thy trust and confidence in him alone, call vpon him in aduersitie, giue him thanks in prosperitie, prayse, extoll, & confesse him at al times, singe willinglye hymnes vnto him, remember him alwayes in thy prayers, wishes and desires: committe thy selfe to hys goodnes, and submit thy selfe to hys wyll: set his example before thee, and imitate the same in deseruing well of men: finally endeuour to be like vnto him in louing thine ennemies. Moreouer be patient in aduersitie, humble in prosperitie, diligent in thy dutie, temperate in thy liuing, comely in thine apparel, iust toward thy neighbor, liberal toward ye poore, gentle & curteous in ye company of mē, patient to suffer
iniuries, a furtherer of peace & concord, chast, shamefast, sober, to conclude in all thinges vp∣right & entire. And forasmuch as thou art not a¦ble to performe these things by ye only strēgth of nature, flie vnto God for helpe & assistance, acknowledge thine infirmitie and weaknes: pray dayly vnto God humbly and hartely, that he will giue thee his holy spirit, which Christe hath promised in the gospell that he will giue vnto vs if we aske it of him. If thereforr thou desire that the same spirit may be shed on thee abundantly through Iesus Christe, then those thinges that could not be done by the strength and power of nature, shall by his ayde & helpe be accomplished. Onely let there be no faulte in thy selfe, neither yeelde thou willinglye to thine euill desires, but haue an especiall care to shake of all remissenes of mynd. For the holye ghost doth not helpe suche as bee slothfull and sluggishe, and sit idle with their handes folded together, but such as are doing, and put to all their strength and endeuour: and counteth thē worthy of his helpe, which labour to represse and subdue their naturall corruption, and haue a continuall combat and fight with the euil af∣fections
of their minde. Let vs not doe then as that contriman did whiche is mentioned in a certen fable, who when the carte that he draue stucke fast in the myre, called to God for helpe he himselfe in the meane season standing idle and doing nothing. Moreouer let the presence of God in euerye place, which thou canst by no meanes auoyde, greatly feare thee from sinning, and stirre thee vp to liue holilye and vertuouslye, seing thou must nedes haue God a witnes & be holder of al thine actions. If so be thou wouldest not haue a man to come in vnto thee, when thou commit∣test any vnsemely or dishoneste thinge: howe muche more oughte that reuerence and shame which shoulde be in thee for that God behol∣deth thee, reuoke thee from sinne and wicked∣nes? Thou fearest to haue man know of thy sinne: darest thou then attempt any thinge the Lord God beholding thee, which thou durste not commit in the sight of man? especially see∣ing that whom thou haste nowe a witnes and beholder of all thy doings, him thou shalt haue in time to come thy censor and iudge. One of the heathen admonisheth, that we must so liue
as though we liued in the sight of men: that we must so thinke, as though men might alwaies see into the depth of our heart. And againe the same heathen man saith: So, saith he, doe all thinges, as though some man behelde thee. It is profitable vndoubtedlye for thee to sette a keeper ouer thy selfe, and to haue one whom thou mayste beholde, and whom thou mayste thinke to be priuie to all thy cogitations. A greate parte of sinne is taken awaye, if there be a witnes present wyth him that is aboute to sinne. These thinges saieth that heathen man, whiche let euerye one thinke spoken to himselfe. If thou therefore purpose to doe any dishonest or vngodlye thinge, before thou at∣tempte the same thinke thus with thy selfe: What doe I? Shall I enterprise to doe that GOD beinge witnesse thereof, and behol∣dinge me, whiche I durste not doe in the sight of a mortall man? Shall I by this deede pro∣cure the displeasure of the Lord GOD, when I woulde not willinglye lose the fauour of a man that is my friende? Shall I greeue the holye Spirite of GOD, that that wicked spirite maye reioyce ouer me? Hath Christe
therefore redeemed me with his blood, that I shoulde voluntarilye yeelde my selfe to the seruitude of Satan? hath he therefore deliue∣red mee from sinne that I shoulde wittinglye and willingly fall into the same againe? Hath hee therefore made me an heyre of the king∣dome of heauen, that I shoulde throughe myne owne defaulte depriue my selfe of suche an inheritance? Where is nowe that ardent loue towardes GOD? Where is reuerend feare and honest shamefastnesse? Where is pietye and fayth? Doe I thus thanke God for his innumerable benefytes? Doe I thus thanke Christe for my saluation purchased? Doe I thus geue my selfe to bee guided of the holye Ghoste? Doe I come wyth these deedes to the table of the Lorde. Do I thus looke for the comminge of Christe? Shall death fynde me in thys wise occupied? Shall I thus come to the iudgemente seate of God? Doe I so muche fauour my selfe that euell desyres preuayle againste me, the infirmitie of the fleshe ouercommeth mee, and synne reigneth in my bodye? Am I so voyde of all vigour and vallour, that lyke
an effeminate person I resiste not these moti∣ons of the mind? Doe I so see that that is bet∣ter and follow that which is worse? of these & other like thinges (for who can rehearse all) if thou dayly thinke with thy selfe, thou shalte not easily commit any thing which is vnseme∣ly or dishonest. To conclude then, what soeuer thou art about to doe, be verily perswaded that God is present (as he is in deede) and doth be∣hold all thinges that thou doest, him see thou feare, let the reuerence which thou oughtest to giue vnto him who is in euerye place, keepe thee from doing any euill. For as one sayeth. He vvitnes is and arbiter, he all thinkes doth behold and see, VVhich in mans minde conceiued are: before him all shall iudged be. This also may moue thee much to liue well, if thou continually consider that in thy spiritu∣al regeneration thou wast made the sonne and heyre of God, and which is the greatest digni∣tye, the brother of Christ, and an heire annexed with him. For who is not greatly inflamed vn∣to godlines, who dooth not with a certaine re∣uerend
feare and shame fastnes detest sinne and wickednes, when he calleth to minde that hee hath God to his father? Doe not therefore, do not I saye, euer forget this benefite: he that hath adopted thee to be his sonne, se thou loue, reuerence and honour, and not offende in anye thinge whatsoeuer: Submit thy selfe to hys wyll, follow his commaundements, obeye hys precepts: Thinke that not onely the participa∣tion of his inheritance, but also the imitation of his goodnes and vertue doth pertaine vnto thee: so that albeit thou canst not by imitating attain to the excellencie of the goodnes which is in this thy heauenly father, yet must thou in will come as neere as may be, and count it a most vnsemely thing to degenerate therfrom. If thou doe any thing vnawares that may dis∣please this thy father (as the frailty & weake∣nes of mankind is greate) let the same strike such greefe into thy mind, that thou wilt thinke thy selfe worthy of any punishment, who haste offended so gracious a father: and be not quiet in mynd, before thou hast by true and heartye repentance pacified him. So farre is it of that thou shouldest euer wittingly sinne, or commit
any offence against thy conscience. And sure∣ly he that remembreth that he is the sonne and heyre of God, the brother of Christ, and heyre annexed wt him, is terrified frō sinne & wicked∣nes, not so much with drede of ye last iudgemēt, of eternall torments, of the fire that shall neuer goe out, as with feare of offending his heauen∣ly father: and endeuoureth to liue godlilye, to hurte no man, to deserue well of all after the example of his father, being moued thereunto not so much with hope of an heauenly reward and euerlasting ioye, as with a certeine excee∣ding and vnspeakable loue towarde God hys father. He that beleeueth Paule, that his body is the temple of the holy ghost that dwelleth in vs, doth easily absteine from sinne, and defileth not himselfe with unlawfull luste. Finally he that doubteth not that he is admitted into the number of the Saints, omitteth not to fol∣lowe also the vertues of the Saints, as pietie toward God, and loue towardes our neigh∣bour.
Of the cause why purposing many times to liue godlily, we persist not in our good pur∣pose, and vvhat meanes may be founde to remedye the same. BVt what is the cause (wil some man saye) that whereas we sometime thinke and pur∣pose to liue vertuouslye, godlilye, chastly, and soberlye, yet wee doe not constantlye continue in the faythfull fulfillinge of that whyche wee haue so well determined? That I maye aun∣sweare in fewe wordes, the chiefe and princi∣pall cause hereof is the naturall naughtinesse and corruption which is in vs, and that prone∣nesse to sinne whyche sticketh as it were in our verye bowells and marowe: that is, the verye fleshe which we beare about, where∣with the inwarde man hath a sore and grie∣uous fighte, and almost a continuall combat, as Paule dooth witnesse. This therefore wee must alwayes resiste when it prouoketh vs to vnlawfull luste and filthye pleasures, to glut∣tonie and surfettinge, to lasciuiousnesse and
lecherye, finally to anye other filthye factes or dishonest behauiour, and with godly studies, exercises, abstinence and fastings bridle and bring vnder the force thereof, and with conti∣nuall fobrietie and temperance of life represse and subdue the same. For thys cause our Sauiour commaundeth that our harts be not oppressed with surfetting and drunkennes: & Paul forbiddeth vs to be drunken with wine, prohibiteth gluttonie and excessiue drinking, and willeth vs to be vigilant and sober. Here∣unto must be added dayly prayer and callinge for Gods helpe and assistance, without whiche all the endeuour that we bestowe in bridlinge the fleshe and repressing the force thereof, is frustrate and in vaine. But the motions of the flesh being after a sort subdued, ther is moreouer the world & the deuil our deadly enemies, wherwith we haue a cōti∣nual fightifor nether wil these suffer vs to pre∣sist in our purpose & determinatiō to liue god∣lily & wel. For ye world prouoketh to ambition, pryd, riot, to wrath, hatred, enuie, impatiencie, sclaunderinge: and ministreth occasions to o∣ther sinnes which no man can rehearse, more∣ouer
it marreth men with euill examples, and corrupteth them with sundrye offences. The deuill ceaseth not to induce and moue mā to y• neglect of Gods word, to incredulitie and diffidence, to a false perswasion of himselfe, to an obstinate persisting in euill, to blaspheme the Lord God, to impugne the knowne truth, to hypocrisie, superstection, idolatrie, and other infinite and innumerable sinnes, and offences. What is then to be don, thou wilt say in this case? Surely we must valiantly resist our ene∣mies, we must cast of all remissines of minde and faintnes of courage, and with ardent and earneste prayer craue Gods ayde and helpe, and trustinge there unto not despeire of the vic∣torye. But let vs here what Paule saith con∣cerning this matter writing to the Ephesians: Finally, my Brethren (saith he) be strong in the Lorde and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be a∣ble to stand againste the assaults of the deuill. For we wrestle not againste fleshe and bloud, but against principalities, againste powers, a∣gainst worldly gouernours, the princes of the darkenesse of thys worlde, againste spirituall
wickednesses, which are in the hie places. A little after rehearsinge by name the armour of Christians, he willeth them to stand with their loines girt about with veritie, hauing on the brest plate of righteousnes, taking the shielde of faith, whereby they may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: he willeth them moreouer to take the helmet of saluation & the sworde of the spirite, which is the word of God, and ex∣horteth them to pray alwayes. Thus hast thou the armour wherewith thou must fight against our aduersary the deuill, who neuer omitteth day, no not an houre, nay scarce one moment but he alwais assaileth vs, & like a roring lyon goeth about, seeking whom he may deuoure, as the Apostle Peter saith. Let vs therefore being fenced and furni∣shed with this armour whiche Paule prescri∣beth, valiantly resist him, and he will flye from vs, as sayth the Apostle Iames. Let vs daylye desyre Gods ayde and helpe: Let vs praye vnto God that he will not leade vs into tenta∣tion: Let vs beseeche him that for Christes sake he will deliuer vs from that wicked fende, which is the continuall enemie of mankinde.
Howbeit let vs take speciall hede, that we fall not wittingly into sinne, whether ye deuil wold driue vs, and into voluntarye destruction, ney∣ther that we yeeld to our own imbecillity, but with a stout courage resist Satan, and desire of the eternall God, the father of our Lorde Ie∣sus Christ, that he wil helpe our infirmitie and weakenes. And because the deuil doth not al∣wayes set vpon vs with open force, but assay∣leth vs also priuily and by secrete meanes, and (as one saith) flattereth that he may deceiue, smileth that he may hurt, allureth that he may slay and kill: let vs doe our endeuour, that we may wisely and warely auoyde the snares that he layeth for vs, and that wee may giue hym no occasion to assaile and oppresse vs of a sud∣den and vnawares. Hede may be more easily taken, saith Cypri∣an, where feare is manifest. Let vs therefore shake of sluggishnes and ouermuch securitie in our life, and feare that vnder euery stone as ye saying is, there is a scorpion, and let vs not be quiet & secure as though al things were safe & sure. None is soner ouertaken (as a certen hea then mau saith) then he that feareth nothing:
and securitie is very often the beginning of ca∣lamitie. Doe not then, if thou haste once ouer∣come thine enemie, looke by and by for peace, as though thou were alreadye pae all perill. Thou must alwayes stande in the battell, and as it were prepared and ready to fight, so that Cyprian said well, that in the worlde there is nothinge but continuall conflictes wyth the deuill, and dayly fighting againste his assaults and inuasions. We encounter saith he, with couetousnes, with vncleannes, with wrath, with ambition: we haue a dayly and grieuous fighte with carnall vices and worldlye allure∣ments: the mynde of man being as it were besieged and on euery side compassed with the inuasions of the deuill, doth scarce withstande euerye one, doth scarce resist them. If coue∣tousnes be conquered, luste riseth vp: if lust be repressed, ambition succeedeth: if ambition be contemned, wrath doth exasperat, pryde puffeth vp, drunkennes inuiteth, enuie brea∣keth concorde, zeale dissolueth friendship. &c. Nowe as wee oughte not to be proude or pre∣sumptuous being once victors, so neither ought we straighte to be discouraged or caste awaye
our weapons when we are ouercome. What must we do thē? To take away the former ig∣nomie, let vs more fiercely assaile the enemie & put away the shame before receiued by newe vallour and valiantnes: no otherwise then that champion mentioned in a certain Poet, when he had fallen heauily to the earth, being no∣thing terrified with the fall. He commeth fiercer to the fight, ire doth his courage moue again: Shame stirres his strength and vallour which he in himselfe knew to remaine. HOwbeit we must encounter with the ene∣mie, trusting not somuch to our own pow∣er & prowesse, as to Gods helpe & assistaunce. Thus hast thou y• cause why for the most parte we persist not in our purposed determinatiō to liue vertuously & according to Gods wil. For the cause as I haue sayde, is our naturall cor∣ruption and pronenesse to sinne: also the world offering daily inumerable occasions & meanes to all kind of wickednes: finally the deuill, al∣wayes thinking of our destruction, and omit∣ting not scarce one moment of time, eyther
with open force, or by priuie and secret means to assaile vs. God the father of our Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christ, vouchsafe with his ayde and as∣sistance to helpe vs, and with his holye spirite to confirme and strengthen vs, hauing suche a sore and continuall conflict with so manye ene∣mies, whom we are very weake to resiste, that by his helpe we may represse the motions of the flesh, and not be caried awaye with the al∣lurements thereof, that we may subdue our vi∣cious nature, and be able valiantly to resist the world alwaies ministring occasions & means to infinite sinnes, and the deuil on euerye side assailinge vs, and attemptinge all meanes to destroye vs: and that not onely a seruile feare, which the law bringeth, namely of Gods ven∣geaunce and eternall punishment, may reuoke vs from sinne, and wickednes, being terrified with Gods wrath and iudgement, and striken with dread and horror of hel: but much rather yea specially a free feare with a certen honeste shamefastnes and vertuous reuerence toward GOD maye moue vs not easilye to commit any thinge, whiche may displease our moste
gracious and fauourable father: and may also make vs of our owne accorde to auoyde vice and embrace vertue, and by loue and charitie keepe vs in doing our duty, so that if we com∣mit anye offence vnawares, as the imbecilitie of man is great, the same may bring so greate griefe and disquietnesse of mynde vnto vs, that we shall take no ioye of our lyfe, for that wee haue offended so louinge and mercifull a fa∣ther, vntill wee haue by heartye repentance pacified him againe. Finallye the eternall God for his sonne our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christes sake graunte, that in suche shortnesse of thys lyfe, in suche vncertaintye of the houre of death, we may not prolonge and dryue of from daye to daye the amende∣ment of our manners: but that acknowledg∣ing our sinnes, wee may withoute all delaye endeuour to returne vnto goodnesse, truelye and heartelye repente, and by vnfeyned re∣pentance of our sinnes, pacifye our heauen∣lye Father: Moreouer wyth the Publican mencioned in the Gospell, humblye and wyth knockinge our breaste implore Gods fauour and mercye: Fynallye that wee
may be willing & carefull to doe those thinges onelye which are acceptable to God, that wee may reforme vice with vertu and that through Gods assistance wee may by all meanes ende∣uour to leade the rest of our lyfe hereafter god∣lily, holily, innocently, chastly, soberly, tempe∣ratly, profitably to the church of God, friendly to the life of men, agreeable to a christian pro∣fession, and also perseuer in this our good pur∣pose and determination. The Conclusion. THus much I thoughte good to write con∣cerning the folly of men in prolonging the amendment of their life. The verye matter it selfe whiche I tooke in hande to entreate of, hath enforced me to speake of such thinges as to the vertuous and them that loue God, are very pleasant and delectable, but to suche as will seeme Christians, when they are no∣thing lesse, very vnpleasant and grieuous. We haue spoken many things, yea and haue so ear∣nestly repeated the same, that we may seeme almost tedious to the reader, concerninge the
shortnes and vncertainty of thys lyfe, concer∣ning death which by reason of the vncertaine chaunces that be incident vnto vs, is dayly im∣minent, and doth oftentimes come vppon men suddenly and vnawares, which the godlye doe hartely desire, and willingly suffer when it so pleaseth God, but the wicked doe wonderfully dread and feare. We haue spoken of the ge∣nerall resurrection, of the comming of ye Lord, of the last iudgement, when all shall be called to the examination of the life which they haue led, the daye whereof being dreadfull to the wicked, the godly thinke shalbe to them ioyfull and happy. For then approcheth their redēp∣tion, then commeth the time of comforte and refreshing, as the Apostle in the Acts sayeth, and as Tertulian sayeth, then is the daye of Christian reioycing. We haue spoken moreouer, what rewardes are appointed after death for the godly, and what punishments for the wicked. For the godly shall ascende vnto God, and in heauen enioye a life most blessed and euerlasting. For what great felicitie is it, alwayes to beholde God, to be exhilarated with a perpetuall and
most pleasant contemplation of his cositenance to see him as he is, whom we now see through a glasse darkely, as the Apostle Paule saieth: finally to abound with all good thinges, to be partakers of so great delights and ioyes as no man is able sufficiently either in cogitation to comprehend, or in words to expresse? Contra∣riwise the wicked shalbe thrown hedlong into hell, there to be tormented with most grieuous & euerlasting paines. For there is no eloquēce of any man so great, which is able in words to vtter, nether ye wit of anye so sharp, yt it is able in cogitation to conceiue ye lest parte of those torments which ye wicked shal suffer in hel, be¦ing condemned by ye iust iudgement of God to eternall fire. Finally, we haue spoken of sundry other things, which, as I haue said, shalbe very pleasant to ye godly, but to the wicked very vn∣pleasant & grieuous: as of the sense of Gods wrath against sinne, of shaking of securitie in the time of prosperitie, of repenting vnfeyned∣ly, of the amendment of our manners, of the reforming of our life, of a dayly fight with our aduersaries, the world, the flesh, and the deuill, and of other such like thinges, which it is not
here needefull to repeate. These things are in deede hard & vnpleasant, but, as I hope whole∣some & profitable. For phisitions, as one wel witnesseth, do cure grieuous diseases wt sharpe remedies, and as Cicero saith vnto Octauius, No remedies which are laid vnto wounds do so procure griefe, as they that are wholesome. The eternal God, the father of our Lord and redeemer Iesus Christ, graunt that in this so corrupt and wretched age, this our treatise (howbeit if anye will earnestlye peruse the same) may somewhat conteine ye godly in their dutie, and confirme them in the best part: and may giue some occasion to the wicked, I mean such as be not past hope, to returne vnto good∣nes: finally that this sharpe medicine whiche is giuen yt health maye be recouered thereby, may haue force and power to helpe and heale them that be as it were sicke and almost despe∣rate. Which he, without whose helpe al the en∣deuour of men is frustrate & in vaine, euen the Lord God almighty graunt: To whom be praise, honor, and glory for euer. Finis.
¶ IMPRINTED at London by Gregory Seton, and are to be solde at the signe of the Hedgehogge at the West end of Paules. Anno. 1579.
