24905 99855865 21373
ERRATA. PAg 1. read Rhapsody for Ropsody. p 1. r. Schismatical for Shismaticall. p. 1. r. which for with are &c. p. 4. r. dilemma for delemma. p. 4. r. peculiar for perculiar. p. 17. r. reference for reuerence. p. 19. r. euill for ewill. p. 20. r. genu for genus. p. 20. r. flectitur for flectiter. p. 21. r. concilii for conilii p. 21. r. Emmanuel for Emmavel. p. 21, r. and for annd. p. 26. r. literally for litterally. p. 28. r. vt ei coelestia for coelestia &c. p. 39. r. reference for reverence. p. 53. r. interpreters for interpreter. p. 54. r. come for ome. p. 59. humility for humity. p. 62. r. poplite for polite p. 65. r. Orosius for Orotius p. 73. r. must not for must not. p. 80. termino for ter∣mino. CErtaine others  hath admonished me, which I correct thus  Docter Willets Cent6. Read Caluin at the  but not at the 10.p.16. SEing that he is  in mine eie. When he hath  of his owne eie, 6. texts of scri∣ appeares by my
A MEDITATION VPON THE XXIIth Chapter of GENESIS. By H. W. IN this wonderfull Piece of Sacred Story, Behold the Father of the Be∣leevers, at ex∣treame Age surprized (as it should seeme by the Circumstances of the Text) in his Bedd by a Comman∣dement from God, to sacrifice his
onely Sonne; In which case All the Powers of his Minde being so∣denly shaken with an infinite combat betweene Faith and Nature; wee may vpon the whole matter conceiue Him to haue broken foorth into some such Discourse with Himself, as followeth. WHat? Could this possi∣bly bee the voice of God which I heard? Or haue not rather some strange Impressi∣ons of the Night deluded my Fan∣cie? Yea, Thy voice It was (My God) It was Thy voice. How can Thy humble Servant de∣nie it? with whom seven times be∣fore descending from the Throne of Thy Glory, Thou hast vouch∣safed
even to commune in this Vale of Teares. When Thou didst first call me out of the darkenesse of my Fathers House into Thy saving Light; When Thou didst often cherish and encourage mee in the Stepps of my Pilgrimage; When Thou didst furnish mee with Plenty, and Crowne me with Uic∣torie in a strange Land; When lastly Thou didst even overlade my feeble Age with Ioy in a rightfull Heire of mine owne Body; was I forward at all these times to ac∣knowledge Thee the God of my Support and Comfort? And shal I now question Thy Uoice, when Thou demandest but a part of thine owne Benefits? No, (My
deare Isaac) although the Heavens know how much I love Thee: yet, if Thou wert, or couldst be Millions of times more precious in the eyes of Thy trembling Father: I would summon together all the Strength of mine aged Lymnes to render Thee vnto that gracious God from whom I had Thee. Alas (poore Boye) how sweetly Thou slumbrest, And in Thy harmeles Bed doest little thinke what change is towards Thee. But I must disturbe Thy Rest. Isaac arise, and call vp my Servants; Bidd thē prepare for a Iourney which we are to make vnto the Mount Mo∣riah, And lett some Wood bee carried for the burning of a Sacri∣fice. Meane while I will walke
out a little by my selfe to contemplat the declining Starres, and approch of the Morning. O yee Ornaments of the Skie, who when all the World is silent o∣bey your Maker in the determinat Order of your Motions. Can Man behold his owne dutie in a fai∣rer Volumne? Why then stand I gazing heere, and doe not ra∣ther goe my Selfe to hasten my Ser∣uants, that I may execute his will? But stay: His Will? VVhy? Is His Will contrary to the Exam∣ple of his owne Iustice? Did He not heavily punish Caine even at the beginning of the first VVorld for killing but a Brother? And can I slay my Childe and imbrue
my hands in mine owne Bowels without offence of His Immortall Maiestie? Yes? VVhy not. The Act of Caine was the Act of his owne sinnefull malice: But I have received an immediate Com∣mand from God himselfe. A Command? VVhy? Is his Command against his Law? Shal the Fountaine of all Truth be ser∣ued with Contradictions? Did not the same God streight after the vniversall Deluge (as our Fathers haue told vs) denounce this Iudge∣ment; That VVho so sheddeth Mans Bloud, His Bloud shall be shedde? How then can I herein obey my God, But I must withall disobey Him?
O my weeke Soule; what poore Arguments doest thou search to cover thine owne rebellious Affe∣ctions. Is there any VVar∣rant higher then His VVill? Or any better Interpreter of His VVill then Himselfe? If the Princes of the Earth (who are but mortall Types of His invisi∣ble Glory) can alter their E∣dicts at pleasure; Shall not the Lord of the whole (whom Angells and Men adore) have leaue to dispence with His owne Prohibitions? Yes surely: But then how shall the Blessing that my Good God hath determined vpon my Seede, and euen vpon this very Childe be accomplished, if I destroy the Roote? O Lord, was not
Thy Divine Goodnesse pleased in the depth of Thy Mercie to accept my Beleefe for Righteousnesse? And shall I now frustrate Thy Promises with my Obedience? But what? Am I fallen againe into a new Reluctation? Haue I before contested with Thy Iu∣stice? And shall I now dispute Thy Power? Didst Thou not create the Light before the Sunne? And the Effect before the Cause? And shall I binde Thee to the Pas∣sions of a naturall Agent? Didst Thou not make this All of No∣thing euen by Thy word (which was Thy Wisdome) And foment All that Thou hast made, by Thy Spirit (which is Thy Love?) And shall I doubt but Thou canst
raise innumerable Nations out of the very Ashes of my poore Isaac? Nay, Did I not even at first re∣ceive Him in a manner from a dead VVombe? And art not Thou still the same Almighty and ever∣living God? Mercifull Fa∣ther, full of all tendernesse and compassion, That seest from Hea∣ven whereof we are made; Par∣don my Discourses, and forget my Delaies. I am now going to per∣forme Thy good Pleasure. And yet there is remaining one humble Suite: which refuse not (O my God) though it proceede from the weakenesse of Thine vnworthy Creature. Take my Child, and All that is Mine. I haue resigned Him with my whole Heart vnto
Thy VVill. Hee is already Thine, and Mine no longer; And I glory that He shall Die vpon Thy Holy Altar. But yet I feare withall, That these my shaking Hands and fainting Limbes will be seazed with Horror. Be not ther∣fore (Deere Lord) displeased, if I vse my Servants in the Execution. How now (My Soule) Doest Thou shrinke in the last Act of Thy Loy∣altie? Can I yet walke vp and down about vile and ordinary Fun∣ctions? And when my God is to be serued, do my Ioints and Mem∣bers faile me? Have I humbled my desires to his VVill? And shall I denie Him the choice of His own Instrument? Or if His in∣dulgent Mercy would permit it,
shall I suffer another to anticipate the cheerfulnes of my Obedience? O Thou great God of Life and Death! Who mightest have made Mee an insensible Plant, A Dead Stone, Or a Poisonous Serpent And yet even in That likewise I should have conduced to the varietie of Thy glorious VVisdome: But hast vouchsafed to endue vs with the forme of Man, and to breath into our first Parent that sparke of Thy Divine Light which we call Rea∣son, to comprehend and acknow∣ledge therewith Thy High and in∣disputable Soueraignty over all Nature, Thou then (Eternall Maker and Mover, whose VVill is the First of Causes, and whose Glory is the Last of Endes) direct
my Feete to the Place which Thou hast appointed, Strengthen there these poore Hands to accomplish Thy Pleasure, And let Heaven and Earth obey Thee. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for George Baker, 1631.
