4020 99842494 7153
ITINERARIVM TOTIVS SACRAE SCRIPTVRAE. OR, The Trauels of the holy Pa∣triarchs, Prophets, Iudges, Kings, our Sauiour Christ, and his Apostles, as they are related in the Old and New TESTAMENTS. With a description of the Townes and Places to which they trauelled, and how many English miles they stood from IERVSALEM. Also a short Treatise of the Weights, Monies, and Measures mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced to our English valuations, quantitie, and weight. Collected out of the Works of HENRY BVNTING, and done into English by R.B. LONDON, Printed by ADAM ISLIP, 1636.
TO THE RIGHT HONOV∣RABLE, SIR HENRY MOVNTAGVE Knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of the Kings Majesties BENCH. IT is a true saying of the Philosopher (Right Honourable, and my very good Lord) that there is nothing wherin there is life, but it hath either motion or acti∣on; and such is the condition of man, that a greater measure of both is impo∣sed vpon him, to humble him, than vpon many other crea∣tures: The whole course of his life being compared vnto a Pilgrimage, in which state a man can presume vpon no certaine continuance. For as a Traueller that intendeth to finish his journey, staies not in his Inne, but desires more to be vpon his way, than in his bed: so it is with man, who cannot possesse himselfe in rest, from the time of his birth vntill his death, and oftentimes is troubled with needlesse, and vnprofitable Labours, to attaine vnto his ends; which got, both they and he, perish. Let Alexander that great Em∣perour, be a president of this; who with much Labour, hauing got a great estate, enjoyed it but a short time: and you may reade in this Treatise, with what intollerable paines Antigonus Epiphanes endeauoured to establish his
kingdome to him; and yet in the end purchased little but a lamentable death. There is none of the Patriarchs, Prin∣ces, Iudges, Kings. Prophets, Apostles, or others mentioned in the Scriptures, that could make euident in the whole course of their life, any better than a laborious and tedious Pilgrimage. With what paines did Abraham wander from Chaldaea, into the land of Canaan? How was Moses tormen∣ted in the Wildernesse? almost to the losse of his soule; but absolutely neuer to come into the promised land. And for Dauid, how miserably liued hee, when he could not trust his owne friends? this is the state of man, and to say truth, he differs in little (beside reason) from other crea∣tures; and that either lockt vp in silence, or not exprest in some memorable action, makes him so much the more capable of misery: being onely able to distinguish of joy and feare. And that these things may be the more apparant, I haue endeauoured to collect out of the Works of others, this Treatise, wherein is briefly described the Trauels of all the Prophets, Princes, &c. together with the condition of Cities, Countries, Islands and other memorable places, as they are mentioned in the Old and New Testaments. All which, that I might expresse that dutie which hath a long time lien concealed, I haue wholly dedicated to your LL. seruice: humbly intreating your fauourable acceptance of my paines; that so being shrouded vnder your Ho. prote∣ction, they may the better withstand the aduerse opinions of such as please to censure them. At your Hon. seruice, R.B.
The Preface to the Reader. IT hath alwaies beene held a matter worth note (gentle Reader) euen to the best Diuines, to haue the Typographicall descripti∣on of the townes and places, as they are mentioned in the Scrip∣tures; and so much the rather, because by comparing the acti∣ons of men with the beginnings and endings of Cities, they might the better vnderstand the Prophets, and perceiue the wonderfull prouidence of God; who by his omnipotencie so disposeth of Estates, that such Cities and Nations which haue beene mightie and ruled vpon the earth, with great power, notwithstanding on a sudden, and by vnexpected euents, haue beene vtterly subuerted and ouerthrowne. Now that these things might be more apparant, I haue in as good and briefe a method as I can, gathered out of sundry Authors, the particular description of the Cities, Townes, and places, as they are mentioned in the Scriptures; where they stood, vnder whose command, at what time they grew mightie, and how lost and decayed. To this also I haue added a particular narration of the Trauels of all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Princes, Iudges, Kings, Emperours, our blessed Sauiour, and his Apostles: to what townes they trauelled, what memorable actions they did in those places; with a short Chronologie of the times: that so by comparing this dis∣course with any text of Scripture, you may perceiue the time when those accidents happened. All which things (I am perswaded) will proue no lesse pleasant than profitable, and will giue a great light to the vnderstanding of the Bible. But if you question with me, How it is possible that I should come to the knowledge of those things, considering that Babylon, Niniuey, Ierusalem, and most of the Cities of the Holy Land, are long since wasted and decaied? to this I answer; therein consists the greatnesse of the Trauell, because I haue beene constrained to vse the helpe of many Authors, who amongst other long and learned discourses, haue here and there glanced at the actions that were done in the land of Iudaea: amongst which are Strabo, Ierome, de Locis Hebraicis, Plinie, Liuie, Plutarch, and many others, who haue described in the actions of the Persians, Chaldaeans, Graecians, and Ro∣mans, the state of the Iewes as it stood in those times, with the Description of the Cities, and townes. And Saint Ierome, who liued in that countrie, tooke a great
deale of paines to rectifie these imperfect discourses which more obscure authors haue laboured in, and left to future ages; that so those which would, might by their dilligence, and care make them vsefull to informe their vnderstanding, both concer∣ning the state of the Iewes, and the obscure meaning of some of the prophesies. Also the scituation and destruction of Ierusalem, a thing pleasant and profita∣ble to know, and no whit vnworthie your consideration. How all or the most part of the Townes, Cities, Countries, Nations, Islands, Seas, Desarts, Mountaines, and most memorable places, are scituated from it; how many miles English they stand distant, what memorable actions haue beene done in them, and for the most part where they stood, and how they are at this day. Besides (to make this a perfect worke) you shall finde after the end the old Te∣stament, and before the beglnning of the new; a discourse concerning the weights, measures, and monies which are mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced vnto our valuation, how they were currant among the Iewes, how with other people, nations, and countries: by which meanes that necessitie of commutatiue Iustice, for which monies were principally inuented, will be apparent; and by this meanes you shall perceiue what equalitie there is and hath beene vsed amongst Nations, for the or∣daining of measures and monies: by which you may perceiue, that this vniuerse being compared together, seemeth but one large and spacious Empire, howsoeuer vnder diuers gouernments. Againe, the perigrination of our Sauiour, the manner of his wonderfull natiui∣tie, his long and tedious journies, the condition of his estate whiles he was vpon the earth, and (as neere as can be guest) at what time he did most of his miracles; how he behaued himselfe when he was betraied, with a description of the manner of his death: and the Trauels of Peter, Paul, and many other of his Apostles after his death. All which things I haue with much labour compiled together for your profit, and expect nothing in recompence for my paines, but your loue. And so I commit you to God Yours, R.B.
A BRIEF DECLARATION of Geometricall Measures. A Degree of the Heauens is 15 Germane or Dutch miles; one minute is one quarter of a Dutch mile: so that foure minutes makes a Dutch mile. A Dutch mile is foure thousand paces:Diuersitie of Miles. the Spanish miles be very neer so long as the Dutch. A French mile is two thousand paces: a Walloon or Italian mile is a thousand paces; so that foure Walloon miles make a Dutch mile. The word mile is deriued from the Latine word Mille; for one thousand paces make a Wallon mile, as Gualtherus H. Reuius wri∣teth. Of Stades or Furlongs, THis word Stadium in Latine, in English a Furlong, is a mea∣sure of ground, whereof there be three sorts, Italicum, Olympi∣cum, Pythicum. That of Italy contained 625 feet, which is 125 pa∣ces, halfe a quarter of an Italian mile. The second sort was of the hill Olympus in Greece, where was a game or prise kept by the Princes and Cities of Greece euery fifth yeare, in the honour of Hercules, who first began it. This measure of ground Stadium O∣lympicum contained 600 feet, that is, 120 paces. The third kind of stade or furlong contained 1000 feet, which is 200 paces; wher∣of haply arose the difference of Pliny and Diodorus Siculus in de∣scribing Sicily. Fifteen Dutch miles make a Degree,What a Fur∣long is. and a Degree of the hea∣uens answereth to 480 furlongs vpon earth; whereby it is mani∣fest that 32 furlongs is a German or common Dutch mile.
One minute equalleth eight Furlongs, which make an Italian or Wallon mile, the fourth part of a Dutch mile. Two minutes of the heauens or sixteen furlongs make a Dutch mile. Four half of a Dutch mile. Three minutes equall 24 stades or Furlongs, which make three quarters of a Dutch mile. Four minutes equal 32 furlongs, that is to say, a German or Dutch mile. The holy Evangelists, S. Luke, ca. 24. ver. 13. and S. Iohn, ca. 11. ver. 8. reckon the way by Furlongs. S. Luke saith the Towne E∣maus was distant from Ierusalem sixty Furlongs: and Saint Iohn saith Bethania was 15 Furlongs distant from Ierusalem. Whence it appeareth, that Emaus was distant from Ierusalem almost two Dutch miles, seuen Wallon miles and a halfe; and Bethania al∣most halfe a Dutch mile, which is a mile, a half, & half a quarter. Iosephus writeth, That Mount Olivet was distant from Ierusa∣lem fiue Furlongs, that is a little more than halfe a quarter of a Dutch mile, which is half an Italian mile and half a quarter. The same Iosephus saith, That the circuit of the city of Ierusalem was 33 Furlongs, a Dutch mile and halfe a quarter. Others say it was foure miles in compasse, which beeing vnderstood of Italian or Walloon miles, make little or no difference, seeing it is but the halfe of a halfe quarter of a Dutch mile. Strabo writeth, That the city of Babylon was 380 Furlongs in circuit, that is twelue Dutch miles. The circuit of Samaria was twenty furlongs, that is halfe a Dutch and halfe a quarter, which is two Italian miles and a halfe. How the Romans measured their miles. THe Romans measured their miles by paces, which they call Passus, and that kind of measuring is done after this maner; Foure barley cornes laid long-waies one by the other make the bredth of a finger, foure fingers broad make the bredth of an hand, foure hands broad make the length of a foot, which mea∣sure is now extant; fiue feet make a Geometricall or great pace; one hundred twenty fiue such paces are a Furlong; eight Fur∣longs are one thousand paces or Wallon mile; two thousand pa∣ces are a French mile.
Ex granis quatuor formabitur vnus. Est quater in palmo digitus, quater in pede palmus, Quinque pedes passum faciunt, passus quoque centum Viginti quinque stadium dant: Sed milliare Octo dabunt stadia; duplicatum sit tibi Leuca. Four thousand paces are a Dutch mile, I mean a common Dutch mile, whereof fifteen are reckoned to a degree of the heauens; for the Switfer miles are commonly a quarter of a Dutch mile lon∣ger than common Dutch miles. But through this book by miles we vnderstand common Dutch miles, whereof four thousand pa∣ces make a mile. Whosoeuer will vnderstand S. Ierom wel, de locis Haebraicis, must mark whether he reckons by miles or by stones: the miles speci∣fied by him are Wallon miles, whereof four make a Dutch mile as aforesaid: the stone whereof he writeth (wherby also they did measure and diuide the way) are reckoned six to a Dutch mile. To the end that all men that haue any little vnderstanding in Geometry and Cosmography may make the Tables, and cast them, and at their pleasure inlarge or diminish them; I haue here for their direction set downe the longitude and latitude of the most principal towns: the former number shew the degrees and minutes of the longitude, the later numbers declare the degrees and minutes of the latitude.   Long. Latit. SIdon 67.51 33.0 Tyrus 67.00 33.23 Zarepta 67.10 33.28 Kedes 67.14 33.00 Chabul 67.04 33.04 Rechob 67.13 33.14 Abela Betha macha 67.20 32.59 Senim Vallis 97.01 32.58 Carmel 66 35 32.50 Cana maior 67.13 33.24 Cana minor 67.52 32.48 Nazereth 66 56 32.42 Tabor 66.45 32.38 Capernaum 66 53 32.29 Bethsaida 66.51 32.29 Corazim 66.53 32.29 Tyberias 66.4 32.27 Magdalum 66.48 32.28 Dora 66.25 32.08 Caesarea Sratonis 66.19 32.25 Lydda 65.43 32.06 Ioppen 65.40 32.05 Messada castellum 66.21 31.47 Maetum lacus 66.36 32.25 Sunem 66.33 32.33 Naim 66 35 32.33 Napthalis 6.06 32.57 Bethoron superior 66 00 32.14 Bethoron inferior 65.54 32.00 Gazar 66.10 32.20 Bethsan 66 41 32.23 Endor 66.26 32.27 Megiddo 66.02 32.32 Thebetz 66.30 32.25 Aphec 6 .28 32 32 Gilim 66.25 32 22
Alexandrium 66.23 32.11 Thirzo 66.20 32.13 Zilo 65.58 31.58 Beseck 66 34 32.24 Michmas 66.06 32.04 Samaria 66.22 32.19 Nobe 65.45 32.03 Gazeron 65.45 31.59 Emmahus 65.54 31.59 Iericho 66.10 32.01 Aialon 65.56 31.56 Anathot 66.01 31.57 Gibea Saulis 66.57 31.55 Kiriath-jearim 65.58 31.55 Ierusalem 66.00 31.55 Bahurim 66.03 31.56 Ephraim 66.08 32.00 Gilgal 66.12 32.01 Esthaol 65.36 31.54 Timnah 65.48 32.03 Zarea 65.51 31.55 Gedor 65.44 31.59 Modin 65.45 32.01 Bethania 66.01 31.54 Bethlehem 65.55 31.51 Debir 66.10 31.58 Iarmouth 65.37 31.51 Azecha 65.51 31.54 Lachis 65.51 31.49 Eglon 65.50 31.48 Makeda 65.49 31.52 Libna 95.49 31.50 Debir 65.32 31.46 Bethsur 65.47 31.48 Kechila 65.38 31.47 Maresa 65 42 31.54 Maon 65.38 31.41 Carmel 65.40 31.44 Ziph 65.38 31 43 Arah 65.45 31.37 Hebron 65.33 31.45 Gerer 65.37 31.42 Kades barnea 65.22 31.29 Adar 65.12 31.32 Carcaha 65.06 31.30 Hasmona 65.00 31.30 Bethsemes 65.55 31.55 Beersabah 65.31 31.40 Siclag 65.15 31.37 Ecron 65 0 31.58 Azotus 65.35 31.00 Astalon 65.24 31.52 Gath 65.23 31.48 Gaza 65.11 31.40 The townes lying on this side of the riuer Iordan. Dan 67 25 33.08 Ior ons 67 31 33 07 Caesarea Philippi 67 30 33.05 Seleucia 67.17 32.50 Eruptio fluvij ex Samachoniri∣de palude 67.11 32.44 Capernaum 66.53 31.29 Eruptio fluvij è mare Geneza∣reth 66 43 32.21 Ephion 66.42 32.20 Ennon 66.40 32.16 Gamala 66.55 32.25 Salem 66.37 32.18 Chrit torrens 66.16 31.57 Ostia Iordanis 66.17 31.54 Engedi 66.22 31.43 Zoar vel Sagor 66.17 31.38 Eruptio Zered 66.19 31.34 Townes standing beyond Jordan. Mirba 66.50 32.20 Astharoth 67.00 32.26 Astaroth 66.57 32.23 Gadara 66.48 32.23 Machanaim 66.44 32.19 Iaczar 66.39 32.12 Hesbon 66.28 32.05 Iabes 66.55 32.21 Ramah 66.51 32.20 Nobach 66.38 32.16 Iachsa 66.28 32 02 Aroer 66.30 32.00 Macherus 66.23 31.56 Minith 66.36 32.66 Midian 66.30 31.55 Didon 66.32 32.06 Punuel 66.39 31.18 Edrei 66.15 32.21 Abela Vinearum 67.00 32.23 Philadelphia 67.10 32.22 Pella 67.03 32.20 Phiala fons 67.43 33.05 Betharan 67.30 32.08 Pisgamons 66 26 32.01 Abarim montes 66.29 31.58 Townes in Egypt. Memphis 61.50 29.50 Heliopolis 62.15 29.59 Tanis 63.30 29.50 Taphnis 62 30 31.00 Ony 60.30 30.10
Alaxandria 60.30 31.00 Mercurij ciuitas magna 61.40 28.55 Mercurij ciuitas parua 61.00 30.50 Delta magnum 62.00 30 00 Xois 62.30 30.45 Busitis 62.30 30.15 Hsinoe 63.20 29.10 Solis fons 58.15 28.00 Journies out of Aegypt. Raemses 63.00 30.05 Pihachiroth 62.50 29.40 Mara 63.35 29.50 Elim 63.45 29.50 Iuxta mare 63.55 29.45 Paran promontorium 65.00 29.00 Daphea 64.14 29.46 Alus 64.30 29.46 Raphiddim 64.40 29.53 Sinai mons 65.00 30.00 Hazeroth 65.50 30.14 Zephor mons 65.54 30.50 Mozeroth 64.18 39.04 Hasmona 65.09 31.30 Gidgad mons 65.30 30.20 Iothabatha 65.30 26.40 Habrona 65.30 29.40 Hesion Gaber 65.30 29.20 Sin 66.00 29.56 Hor mons 66.00 30.25 Salmona 66.25 30.40 Phunon 66.30 30.54 Oboth 66 50 31.04 Ieabarim 67.00 31.18 Zered rorrens & vallis 66.44 31.20 Didon Gad 66.48 31.32 Almon diblathaim 66.48 31.24 Chedemoth solitudo 66.56 32.00 Beer puteus 66.50 23.00 Marthana Solitudo 66.49 23 00 Nathaleel 66.40 00.23 Bamoth vallie 66.30 32.00 Townes in Arabia Petraea. Petra 65.40 31.18 Paran 94.30 30.04 Midian 65.30 29.15 Hesion gebar 65 35 29.00 Elana villa harla velelath 95.35 29.15 Ostia Nili. Canopicum 66.50 31.05 Bolbithinum 61.30 31.05 Sbenniticum 61.45 31.05 Pathmiticum 91.35 31.10 Mendesium 62.45 31.10 Pelusiacum 63.15 31.15 Thon 63.00 31.30 Sirbonis lacus eruptio 65.45 31.50 Sirbonis lacus 63.30 31.10 Idem 63.45 31.10 Ciuitas Pelusium 36.25 31.20 Rhinocorura 94.40 31.10 Some other great Townes. Babilon 76.00 35.00 Antiochia 60 30 33.35 Damascus 68.55 33.00 Palmira 72.40 35.10 Vr chaldeorum 78.00 39.40 Ecbathana 88.00 37.45 Rages in Media 93.40 36.04 Sula in Persia 83.00 34.15 Persepolis 91.00 33.20 Heccatompilon in Parthia 96.0 37.50 Zaba in Arabia foelix 97.00 13.00 Meroe 61.30 16.25 Haram in Mesopotania 75 15 36.10 Hircania 98.30 40.00 Ciraenae 50.00 31.20
The description of the Citie of Ierusalem, as it was before Titus Vespasian destroyed it. THe most holy and beautiful city of Ierusalem, was twice destroyed; first by Nebuchadnezzar, the most puissant King of Babylon, who did vtterly beat downe and ouerthrow the Citie, burning the costly Temple, which King Solomon had built. After that, Zorobabel and the high Priest Ioshua, when they returned from the captiuitie of Babylon, re-edified and built againe both the Citie and the Temple, in the yeare be∣fore the birth of Christ, 535. But the second temple which was built after their returne, was neither so faire, nor so great as the first; for it was twentyCubitus, is a foot, and an halfe, six hand bredths, foure and twentie fingers broad, being in for∣mer times the fourth part of the height of a man: Cubitus, a cubando, the arme tbat men vse to leane vpon, from the elbow to the hand. Victru: lib. 3. Cal. Lexicon. Cubits lower than the former. After that, King Herod, 17 yeares before the birth of Christ, caused the said Temple to be broken downe againe (as Iosephus saith) and erected another new Temple in place thereof, which neuerthe∣lesse was not like the first temple that Solomon builded, as touch∣ing the greatnesse; but it was exceeding fairely decked and ador∣ned with gold and siluer, so that in regard of the beautifulnesse thereof, it was a wonder vnto all that came to Ierusalem. Which Temple (40 yeares after Christs death and Ascension) was also vtterly destroyed by Titus, the sonne of Flavius Vespasian the Em∣perour. I will describe the forme of the Citie Ierusalem, as it was be∣fore it was defaced by Titus, the sonne of Vespasian; and therewith∣all I will shew, how the costly Ornaments, which Solomon placed therein, stood: for, seeing that the two brasen Pillars and the great Molten sea, were not therin, when our Lord Iesus Christ li∣ued vpon earth, being broken downe by Nabuchadnezzars soldiers,
it is therefore necessary and very requisite to bee knowne how they stood, and to the end that the Reader may be fully satisfied, I will also first declare the citie of Ierusalem as it was in those dayes, with the chiefest Places, Walls, Towers, Gates, Houses, Castles, Fountaines, Hills, Vallies, and all the principall things therein. How the Citie Ierusalem is scituate, and standeth distant from Germany. THe Towne of Neurenberch is scituate in the middle of Ger∣manie, or neere thereabouts, and Ierusalem is distant from Neurenberch fiue hundredWhich make 2000 miles English. miles: but if you will trauell to Ve∣nice, and from thence to Ierusalem, it is fiue hundred and fiftieWhich make 2200 miles. miles. The scituation of Ierusalem. IErusalem was foure square,Of the scitua∣tion of the Mountaines whereon Ieru∣salem stood. and scituated vpon foure moun∣taines, viz. Mount Sion, Mount Moriah, Mount Acra, and Moun Bezetha. Mount Sion was the highest of all, and lay within the citie of Ierusalem towards the South, whereon stood King Dauids house or the castle of Sion, and the vppermost towne. Mount Moriah, whereon the Temple stood, with other excel∣lent buildings and Towers, was on the East side of the city, with∣in the Walls. Mount Acra, whereon the lower towne was built, stood West∣ward in the citie, where Annas, Caiphas, Pilot, Herod Agrippa, Ber∣nice, Helena, and other Kings and great Princes dwelt. The holy Citie of Ierusalem may in this manner be briefely described. THe most holy and beautifull Citie of Ierusalem (if any would consider the three principall parts of the World,The descripti∣on of Ierusa∣lem. Europe, Asia, and Affrica) stood in the middest of the World,
vpon most high mountaines and rockes, like an earthly Paradise, a liuely figure of the euerlasting Citie of God. This Citie, being the metropolitan or principallest Citie of the Iewes, stood in the Tribe of Benjamin; at the first it was called Salem, that is, Peace∣able: when Melchisedech, the Priest of God, raigned therein, which hee also built after the Deluge (as Iosephus and Egisippus write.) But at that time, it was not very great; for it stood onely vpon Mount Sion. Mount Moriah, where Abraham would haue offered his sonne Isaac, stood without the Citie, and after that they tooke it into the Citie, as when time serueth it shall be de∣clared. After the death of Melchisedech, vnto whom Abraham payd the Tythes of all his goods, the Iebusites dwelt in the Citie of Ie∣rusalem, and had the dominion of it, and all the land thereabouts in their subjection, called the City Iebus, after their name; which name was held a long time, as we reade in Iosuah the 10. Iud. 10. & 2. Samuel, 1. But at the last Ioab, King Dauids Generall of his Ar∣mie, woon it, & draue the Iebusites out of it, and called it Ierusa∣lem, that is, a sight or vision of Peace. It hath also other names in the holy Scripture, for in Esay 29. it is called Ariel, that is, Gods Lyon, and mount Libanus.Because it was made of the Ceder trees which came ut of Mount Libanus. The Prophet Ezechiel 23. calleth it Ahaliba, my fixed Pauillion or Tent, that is, a Citie wherein God had placed his owne habitation. The circuit and bignesse of the City Ierusalem. THe City of Ierusalem was foure square, and in circumference three and thirtieWhich make foure English miles and one furlong. furlongs, as Iosephus writeth, which three and thirty Furlongs make somewhat more than a Dutch mile. Some write that it was foure miles compasse about, yet these were not Dutch miles, but Wallon or Italian miles: for foure such Italian miles are a Dutch mile. Of mount Sion the higher Citie. MOunt Syon stood Northwards in the Citie Ierusalem, and was much higher than all the other Hills that were therein,
therefore it was called Sion, that is, a watch Tower▪ because from thence one might see the Holy land, and all the countries there∣about: vpon this Hill, the vpper Citie was built, which in the Scripture is called the City of Dauid, because Dauid wan it from the Iebusites, and beautified it with many goodly houses, & faire and costly buildings: but especially with his house of Cedar wood, which hee termed the castle of Sion, which stood West∣wards at the corner of the Hill, looking into Bethlehem South∣wards. In that house Dauid dwelt, and therein committed adul∣terie with Berseba the wife of Vriah the Hittite; whose house also with the place of diuers priuie Councellers and officers, stood vpon the said Hill, not farre from the Kings Pallace, as Iosephus writeth. Beneath King Dauids house, vpon Mount Sion, within a Rocke, there was to be seene the sepulchre or vault wherein King Dauid, Solomon his son, and other succeeding Kings of Iuda, were entombed and buried. Vpon mount Syon also (towards the East) King Herod had a Garden of pleasure, not farre from the Fountaine called Silo, Ne∣miah 3. and there also stood the Tower of Silo, whereof Luke in the 13 chapter maketh mention. Iosephus (in the warres of the Iewes, his first book, and sixteenth chapter) saith, That King Herod vnder whom Christ Iesus was borne, had two faire and strong houses or Towers, which hee set and made in the vpper part of the City Ierusalem, vpon mount Syon, which were in a manner comparable with the Temple for beautifulnesse, which he called after the name of his friends; the one Caesarea, for Caesar the Emperors sake; and the other Agrippa, according to the name of the noble Roman Marcus Agrippa, that married the daughter of Augustus Caesar. This may suffice to declare the scituation of the vpper Citie, which stood vpon mount Sion, and conteyned in circuit fifteene furlongs, which is about halfe a mile. This vppermost Citie, in the sacred Scripture is called the Citie of Dauid, it was also cal-Millo, that is, fulnesse or plenty, for in it there was no want, but aboundance of all things.
Of the steps which descended downe from the citie of Dauid vnto the lower Citie. MOunt Sion, whereon the vpper citie of Ierusalem did stand, was such a high hard hill, and so steepe, that no man could climbe or ascend vnto it by any way or meanes but only one, that is, by steps; for in the middle thereof there was a great paire of staires made, which descended from Dauids Citie vnto the lower Citie,That is, 26 yards in height. into the valley or dale of gates, called Thyroreion, which staires were 780 foot * high, as Iohannes Heydonius writeth; and beneath in the valley of Thyroreion, ouer against the valley of Ce∣dron, at the foot of the staires stood a gate, which was called the gate of Sion; and they which went vp to mount Sion must passe through that gate, and so vp those staires: but it is thought neuer∣thelesse, that in some other part of the hill there was some win∣ding or other oblique way made, by which, horses and chariots by little and little might ascend. Allegoricall or Spirituall significations of mount Sion. SIon in Hebrew signifieth a sure hold or goodly aspect; for that from the top thereof a man might haue seen all the land lying thereabouts; and was a type of the highest heauens, or habitati∣on of Almighty God, from whence he beholdeth all things vp∣on earth; from which throne and heauenly habitation he descen∣ded into this lower Ierusalem, and became our Redeemer & Sa∣uiour, that so we being purged by his bloud, from all our sinnes and imperfections, he might bring vs into that heauenly Ierusa∣lem which is eternall glorie. Of Mount Moriah on which the Temple stood. MOunt Moriah stood Eastward within Ierusalem, which was a most hard stony hill, from whence towards the rising of the Sunne, men by staires might easily descend; but round about on the other three sides it was steepe and vnapprochable, like a
stone wall: yet it was not so high as Mount Sion, howbeit it was exceeding high, extending and reaching 600 foot in height: and on the top thereof was a very faire plaine, like vnto that of Mount Sion, whereon in times past Abraham builded an Altar, and would haue offered his sonne Isaac for a Sacrifice, Gen. 22. At which time, when Abraham obeyed the commandement of God, intending to haue offered his sonne Isaac vpon the Hill, and thereon had made an Altar, then the said Hill lay without the Citie: but long time after, about the space of 850 yeres, when King Dauid had conquered Ierusalem, and driuen thence the Ie∣busites; to enlarge the Citie, he compassed in Mount Moriah and Mount Acra with a wall, vpon which there stood many goodly buildings. And amongst other things worthy obseruation, vpon this Mount stood the Barne or Threshing floore ofOr Arauna. Arafna the Iebusite, wherein King Dauid built an Altar, offered burnt Offe∣rings, & besought the Lord that the Angell of God (whose hand was stretched ouer Ierusalem, holding a bloodie sword, and had smitten the Citie with the pestilence) might cease from puni∣shing the same, and the plague ceased. On the same place where the Barne of Arafna the Iebusite stood, King Solomon also did build the Temple, 1. Paral. 23. 24. Ioseph. Antiq. Iud. lib. 23. 24. An Allegoricall or Spirituall interpretation of Mount Moriah. MOriah is as much to say, as The Lords Mirrhe, and signifi∣eth our Lord Iesus Christ, which is the true Mirrhe & sweet smelling Sacrifice vnto God; a stedfast Rocke, an immoueable Foundation, whereon Gods Church and the members thereof are built, Esay 28. Matt. 16. Vpon this Rocke will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. Moriah is also ex∣pounded to be Cultus & timor Domini, the worship and feare of God; and that in the same place the figuratiue seruice of God should begin and continue vntill the comming of Christ. The description of the Temple of Ierusalem. THe Temple stood vpon Mount Moriah, was fairely built, & artificially contriued, of white Marble stones, which were
so well conjoyned or closed together, that a man could not see or perceiue the junctures or crests of them: and the inner Walls of it were made all of Cedar wood, carued with the similitude of Angels, Cherubins, roots of Palme trees, and with floures of di∣uers kindes, gilt all ouer with pure gold, and set with pretious stones; insomuch that all parts of the vpper roofe within the Temple, did shine with the lustre of it. The pauement thereof also was plated all ouer with fine Gold; so that all the Temple within, both aboue, vnder foot, and on euery side and corner thereof, was gilt cleane ouer: but without it was of smooth po∣lisht white marble stone, excellently beautifull, and faire to the eye,That is, a hun∣dred cubits, which make fiftie yards English; so that the Tem∣ple was fiftie yards long, fif∣tie broad, and sixtie high. much resembling the colour of any Pearle, Vnit or Marga∣ret. It was in length a hundred ells, in breadth a hundred ells, and in height a hundred and twenty ells, as Iosephus writeth in the old acts and warres of the Iewes, in his fifteenth booke and four∣teenth chapter. The roofe thereof was made of thin planks of Oliue wood, all couered ouer with plates of gold: it was adorned with sharp and plaine spikes of gold, lest birds should defile it with their doung. When any man trauelled to Ierusalem, and saw the temple farre off when the Sunne shined thereon, the white marble stones and the golden roofe therof; did cast such a light and reflexing bright∣nesse from them, that it did make the beholders eyes darke and blind with looking vpon it. Within the Temple there was the most sacred Quire, which stood at the West end therof, the which Quire was formed foure square, that is, twenty ells broad, long, and high. This Quire was called the Holy of Holiest, wherein it was lawfull for no man to en∣ter, but the high Priest, and he also but once in a yeare, which was on the Feast day of the Propitiatory Sacrifice, to appease Gods wrath. In the middle part of the Quire there stood two Cheru∣bins, made of Oliue wood, couered all ouer with fine gold, whose Faces and Formes were like vnto young Children; the height of them was ten ells; each of them had two wings, which were fiue els broad; they stood one right against the other, so that with the innermost wings they touched together, and the vttermost sides of the wings touched the sides of the Quire: their faces loo∣ked
wards the East: in the middle vnder the wings of the Cherubins was placed the Arke of the Couenant; but after the Babylonian captiuity the Ark of the Couenant stood no more there; for then the Holy of holiest was empty, and nothing seene in the second Temple but the two Cherubims, as is aforesaid. The wall of this Quire was of pure gold, excellent faire and curiously grauen: In this wal of the most holy quire there was a gate made all of gold which had two leaues or little dores that opened & shut, very cu∣riously embossed; through which dores men went into the most holy Quire, where the Lord did answer by Vrim and Thummim; there the Cherubims stood, and before that gate there did hang a rich Vaile or Curtain which was made of fine silke, wouen very artificially, wherein there was wrought the picture of the Cheru∣bims, with Needle-worke of diuers colours. This was the same Vaile which at the passion of Christ did rent in sunder from the top to the bottom; to shew that then Aarons Leuiticall Sacrifi∣ces were abolished, and now euery man may freely approch (tho∣row the mercy of his dearly beloued Sonne) vnto the presence of Gods heauenly Throne. Before the most sacred Quire there was builded towards the East a place within the Temple containing forty Ells in length, twenty in bredth and thirty in height, closed vp on both sides with golden walls, which was called the Holy place or Sanctua∣rie of the Temple, wherein no man might enter but onely the Priest, when hee offered Incense, and prayed vnto God. In the middle of that Holy place there stood an Altar, couered with plates of gold; neere vnto which the Angel Gabriel appeared vn∣to Zacharias, and brought him the glad tydings, That Elizabeth his wife should beare him sonne whose name should be Iohn, who should prepare the way of Christ. At the South end of this Al∣tar vpon the one side stood the holy Candlestickes, and at the o∣ther end on the other side stood a golden Table whereupon the Shew bread was set. And in this holy place there stood ten Ta∣bles more for the meat Offerings, and ten golden Candlestickes more, which were beautified with Lamps, Lillies, and other faire floures. The opening doores whereby men went into the Holy place were also very rich and costly, made of gold, with carued
Cherubims, Palm trees, and broad flours thereupon. And before those dores also there were hanging vailes or curtaines, very curi∣ously wrought. On both sides of the Temple there were certain Walks or Galleries, which were three stories high one aboue an other, and on the right side there stood a paire of turning staires, by the which men went vp to the Chamber of the Temple, and there all the small Vessels and other things belonging to the Temple were kept. The roofes of these Galleries were all plated ouer with gold, but that part was somewhat lower than the prin∣cipall part of the Temple. The Windowes of the Temple were wide within and narrow without. The gates of the Temple were made of pure gold, fiue and twenty Ells high, and sixteene Ells broad; but especially the gate that stood Eastward in the Tem∣ple was exceeding high, which in the second Booke of Kings, cap. 25. is called the High gate: and as Iosephus saith, the sayd gate was 90 Ells high, the doores whereof were forty Ells long and twenty Ells broad, gilt all ouer, and richly embossed, beauti∣fied with Cherubims and pretious stones. The wall before this gate towards the East was pure gold, embost and curiously ingra∣uen in maner of Vines, with great golden leaues as big as the sta∣ture of a man, whereon there did hang the picture and forme of grapes, which were made of fine Crystall. Within that high gate also there did hang a Vaile or Curtaine as long and broad as the gate within: This Vaile was made of a piece of Babylonian Ta∣pistry, wonderfully wrought, and made of Silke, beautified with diuers colours, of Scarlet, Purple, and Velvet; and as Iosephus wri∣teth, the Sphere of the heauens was wrought therein, but the twelue Signes were not, and when the winde blew, the Vaile did moue like a Vane. Of the Porches or open Courts of the Temple. BEfore the high gate of the Temple towards the East there were three Porches or Courts open without roofes, which were made all of polisht stone with fair marble pillars, beau∣tified with all kind of colours, in which Porches men praised and serued God.
The first was called the vpper Porch, where none but the priest might enter when he offered and serued God; which porch stood next vnto the high Quire. The second was called Solomons Hall or Porch; there the people vsed to pray, and in that court our Sa∣uior Christ preached, Iohn 10. The third porch King Herod built, adding that therto for the heathen people which also came vnto Ierusalem to pray. These three porches went foure square round about the Tem∣ple, as the Temple it selfe was, and betweene these porches there were also spaces left, supported with pillars of marble, and close aboue the head for men to walke vnder when it rained, which were all made of Cedar and Cypresse wood, and of marble stone beautified with gold. But towards the East, right ouer against the high Quire of the Temple, there the Porches were broadest and greatest. Here gentle Reader you must note, that as often as in the De∣scription of the Temple I speake of certain Ells, you must not vn∣derstand such Ells as we vse here in our Countrey, but only of the Geometrical ells or elbowes, which are called Cubits, being the length of one foot and a halfe or six hands in bredth, and two such Ells or Cubits doe containe three foot, which make a yard of our measure. The first Temple, which King Solomon built, had but two Por∣ches, as also the second Temple which Zorobabel & Ioshuah or Iesu the son of Iozedeck made after the captiuitie in Babylon; but that was twenty cubits lower, and inclosed about with two porches al∣so. But King Herod Ascalonita the great King of the Iewes, son of Antipater Idumaeus, 16 yeares before the birth of Christ pulled down that Temple, and built a new Temple vp from the ground, which was like to Solomons Temple, but that it had three porches: for Herod built the third Porch to the intent that the heathen people might pray therein, as a sanctuarie for pilgrims and stran∣gers, as Iosephus writeth, Antiq. Iud lib. 21, ca. 14. & de Bello Iudaeo, lib. 6. ca. 6. Item Egesippus, lib. 1. cap. 35, 36. But some do thinke, which is more likely, that the said Herod did but repaire and add buildings to the second Temple. And where Iosephus, lib. 2. contra Appionem, writeth of four Por∣ches,
whereas principally there were but three; it is to be vnder∣stood that Solomons Portch was made with a wall in the middle thereof, wherein on the North side the Iewish women that were vnspotted or vndefiled vsed to pray; and on the other side (being South) the Iewish women who also according to the Law were vnspotted, prayed; as Iosephus saith, lib. 6. cap. 6. de Bello Iudaeo. A particular description of the three seuerall Porches or Courts belonging to the Temple. IN the vpper Porch which stood right ouer against the high Quire in the Temple, there was an Altar of brrasse proportio∣ned foure square, consisting of twenty cubits in length, & twen∣ty cubits in bredth, extending to ten cubits in height, beautified with golden hornes, whereon they vsed to offer burnt sacrifices of Oxen, Sheepe, Turtle Doues, Calues, and other things. Also in times past there stood the great molten Sea made by King Solo∣mon, and the two brasen Pillars which were made with knobbes, Pomegranats, and Lillies, very costly and most artificially done; and ten Kettles vpon Treuets; but those kettles and pillars with knobs and pomegranats, and the great molten Sea made by King Solomon, were carried away by Nabuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and broken in pieces; after which captiuity they were neuer seen more in the Temple, for there were no more made. But the Altar of Brasse with the great hornes, whereon they offered oxen, sheep and Doues, was made againe and stood there, as I said before, by which there stood diuers Tables whereon they killed their Offe∣rings. In this Court also there was a goodly Fountaine, with the Water whereof they vsed to wash the bloud of the beasts out of the Temple. For there were certaine holes and gutters between the marble stones, whereby the water ranne vnder the earth, and through the earth was conueyed in a pipe into the Lake Kidron. In this Court Zacharias the sonne of Barrachias was killed, be∣tweene the Temple and the Altar, Mat. 23. And Zacharias the high priest the sonne of Ioiadah was stoned to death, 2 Chron. 24. It was compassed about with a great wall made of Marble stone of diuers colours, wherein there were diuers doores to goe out
out and in, decked with lofty towers and pleasant walks made of Cedar wood, resembling our antient Cloisters. But principally toward the East it had a great gate of seuenty Ells or cubits high and twenty fiue broad, all couered ouer with gold (as Iosephus writeth) standing alwayes open, without any doores to shut, that euery man might looke into it when the Priest serued God. If any man offered any thing, he brought it to the Priest before the gate, but might not go in himselfe. Ieremy, Chap. 26 and 36, cal∣leth it the New gate. Here also was the Chappel of Gemaria the sonne of Saphan, in which Chappell Baruch read the booke of the Prophet Ieremy to the people, Ieremy 36. And when the Sunne was in Capricorne it shone right in at that gate, and through the high Quire of the Temple to the Holy of Holiest (as Iosephus writeth. Of the second or middle Court called Solomons Porch. THis Court was something lower than the other, for from it to the vppermost they went by certaine steps, and in the tenth of Iohn is called Solomons Porch; which (as Iosephus writeth) was parted in the middle with a Wall, wherein on the North side the Iewish women that were clean and vndefiled vsed to pray, and on the South the men, according to the LawMasculi enim ab austria mu∣liere a septen∣trione dominū innocarunt.: But no vnclean person, or stranger, or heathen, might enter therein; for on the East side thereof, before the steps whereon men ascended into the said porch, there stood a portall curiously made of mar∣ble stone, and between it stood pillars of marble, whereon was in∣grauen in Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, and Idumaean Tongues, this sentence, Omnis alienigena accidens ad habitaculum Domini moriatur; That is, If any stranger go into the house of God he shall surely die. And Herod also caused to be hanged ouer the Easterne gate by which they came into this Court, a golden Sword, with this Inscription, Peregrinus si fuerit ingressus moriatur; That is, If a Stranger be so bold to enter, let him die. So as no Stranger or Heathen might goe into Solomons Porch vpon danger of his life. Here Simeon tooke the childe Iesus in his armes and sayd, Lord let now thy seruant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes
haue seen thy saluation, &c. At the same time also the Prophetesse Anna the daughter of Phaneul, of the tribe of Ashur, made a nota∣ble prophesie of the child Iesus to all the people of Israel, Luk. 2. and after Iesus was baptised, in this place he taught, wrought mi∣racles, and did many worthy and memorable actions. The Apo∣stles also commonly met together in this court, & here the holy-Ghost descended vpon them. Here stood the Treasury which He∣liodorus thought to haue robbed, but was preuented by the Angel of God, 2 Mac. 3. This was the same Treasury wherein the poore widow cast the two mites, whom Christ commended for the same as appeares Mark 12. Vpon which S. Ambrose saith, Deny not to cast two mites into this Treasury, that is, Faith and Grace, sith by them thou shalt be made capable of a celestial kingdom; neither flatter thy self with thy riches, because thou canst giue more than the poore, for God respects not how much, but with what deuo∣tion thou giuest thy reward, Amb. li. de Viduo, & Epist. li. 9. Ep. 76. And here Christ absolued the Adulteresse that was accused to him, being sory for her offence; saying, I came not to condemne, but to saue sinners that repent. Vpon which S. Chrysostom saith, Although thou art a publican, yet thou maist be made an Evangelist; though a persecuter of the Church, yet an Apostle; though a theef, yet of the city of Paradise; though a Magitian, yet thou mayst worship God: for there is no sin so dangerous but repentance may obtain pardon. Not far from this Treasury there stood certain galleries curiously adorned with marble pillars, the root whereof was plai∣ted with siluer and gold, and was close aboue the head, that when it rained, men might walke vnder them dry, and indeed did much resemble our antient Monasteries. The dores of these walks were couered ouer with gold and siluer; so also was that high gate whereby men went Eastward into Solomons porch, and was 50 cu∣bits high, and the dores forty, as Iosephus writeth. Of the third Court or porch, wherein the heathens vsed to pray, com∣monly called the Hall of the Gentiles, or outward Court. THis court was not built by the kings of Israel, but by Herod, when the rest of the Temple was re-edified, some sixteene
yeares before the birth of Christ, and about six and forty before he began to preach, Iohn 4. It was so spatious and sumptuously built that it amased the beholders, containing an hundred cubits in bredth, and seuen hundred and twenty cubits in length, lying Eastward towards the brooke Kidron: the pauement was of mar∣ble of diuers colours, like the other Courts, the walls with the marble pillars were fiue and twenty cubits high, and the Walkes about it very curiously made were thirty cubits broad. This was called Vestabulum Gentium, where the heathens as well as the Iews might enter and pray. Out of this place Christ draue the Buyers and Sellers, ouerthrew the tables of the Money changers, and the seats of those that sold Doues, Io. 2. Mat. 21. And it stood some∣thing lower than Solomons Porch. All these three Courts were inclosed within high walls and walks, resembling our Cloisters, where round about the Temple, at euery corner of which stood very high Towers, whereon when the Sabbath day came, one of the Priests ouer might went and sounded a Trumpet, to signifie that the next day was the Sab∣bath (for then there were no bells.) The wall of this vttermost Court (as Iosephus writeth) was in height (reckoning from the bottom to the Valley of Kidron) foure hundred cubits, and ador∣ned with goodly Towers, vpon the Pinnacles of which were built Summer houses and faire Walkes, from whence men might see into the Temple, and cleane ouer the Towne. These were called the Pinnacles of the Temple, and were so high, that when one looked down from them into the valley, their eies dazled in such maner that they could not see, as Iosep. writeth, li. Antiq. 15. ca. 14. Vpon one of these Pinnacles the Diuel caried our Sauior Christ saying, If thou be the Sonne of God cast thy selfe downe, &c. Mat. 4. And Iames the sonne of Alphaeus, by the commandement of An∣nas the high Priest, was from thence thrown into the vally of Ce∣dron, and falling vpon a Fullers instrument died, Ios. Ant. 20, ca. 8. &c. The gate towards the East was thirty cubits high, and had dores opening two wayes, 15 cubits broad (as Ios. writeth) made of pure brasse that shone like gold & siluer, artificially made, and cunningly imbossed, insomuch as it was called the beautiful gate of the temple: as Pet. & Io. was going into the temple by this gate
they healed a man that had beene borne lame from his mothers wombe, Acts 3. When a man went Eastward the Gates were one higher than another. The first gate or the gate of the Heathens Court was thirty Cubits high. The second that entred into Solomons Porch was 50 cubits: the third which went into the highest & last court was 70 cubits: and the great high gate of the temple was ninety Cubits high, so that euery gate of the Temple was twenty Cubits one higher than another: And in these gates there were benches made for men to sit on. There were many other Gates and doores on both sides, some sixty, some twenty Cubits broad, all almost made of pure gold, and of such weightinesse, that (as Iosephus writeth in his second booke to Appius) two hundred men could scarce open and shut them. Egisippus writeth, That Vespasian comming before the Temple to assault it, commanded his Souldiors to burne one of the golden Gates (which then was shut) that so he might ouercome the same, and with strong hand carry away a most glorious Victorie. For it was wonderfully for∣tified both by Nature and Art; it had deepe Ditches, loftie Towers like vnto Castles of defence; and moreouer, compassed about with Bulwarkes and strong walls, insomuch that it was not possible to be won but with extreme difficultie and great labour. When the Gate was fired, the gold that ran from it was in great aboundance: and by this meanes the Conquest was made easie. This shall suffice to haue spoken of the Buildings of the Tem∣ple. The Allegoricall or Spirituall meaning of the Temple. THe terrestriall Temple built by Solomon was partly a Figure of our Sauiour Christ, and partly of his Church. For when the Sonne of God suffered the Temple of his holy body to be destroyed, and was risen again from the dead, Iohn 2. Then hee raised vp to vs the Christian Church, which is the true spirituall house and Temple wherein God dwelleth, 1 Cor. 6.
The mysterie of the white Marble. CHrist is the right white Marble stone which is without spot, And there is no deceit found in his mouth, Esay 53. Ioh. 8. this stone the Builders refused, but God chose it out as most pretious, and made it the head of the corner, that wee like liuing stones might bee built vpon it, Esay 21.8. 1 Pet. 2. The mysterie of the Gold. THe Gold and pretious stones in the Temple signified the Deity of Christ; for in him dwelt the fulnesse of the Deity , wholly and absolutely; and in him was contained the Fountaine and treasure of all wisedome and knowledge, Col. 2. The mysterie of the Cedar wood. AS the Cedar, Cypres, and Olive wood was neither subiect to putrifaction, nor possible to be deuoured with wormes; so the humane nature of Christ was subiect to no corruption, no putrifaction, Psal. 16. The mysterie of the Cherubims. THe Temple also is a figure of the heauenly glory, & of euer∣lasting life to come, where the Angels and Cherubims bee∣ing ingrauen and pictured to the image of man, do represent the congregation of the blessed Angels and Saints, who in presence of the Lord sing a continuall Te Deum laudamus, Apoc. 4. The two Cherubims placed vpon the Mercy seat in the holy Quire, signi∣fie the old and new Testament, which containes the Doctrine of Christ: and as their wings touched one another, so the old & new Testament were ioined together, the end of the one, the begin∣ning of the other: the one continued to the end of the first world, the other shall continue to the end of the second; both had rela∣tion to Christ, to whom the ministerie of God was committed.
The mysterie of the golden Dore of the Temple. CHrist is the dore of life by which we must enter into eternall happines, Ioh. 10.14. the two dores signifie a twofold know∣ledge before we can enter into this gate; that is, of his Person and Office. What the Vaile of the Temple signified. THe Son of God our Lord Iesus Christ hanging vpon the al∣tar of the Crosse, is the true Vaile that is put betweene God and vs, shadowing with his wounds and pretious bloud the mul∣titude of our offences, that so we may be made acceptable to his Father, Heb. 10. The mysterie of the Arke of the Couenant. THe Arke of God made of Sittim wood, wherin was kept the pot of Manna, Aarons Rod, and the Tables of the Comman∣dements, Exod. 25. Heb. 9. represent as well our Sauior Christ, as the hearts of the Faithfull: for as in Christs breast was contained the doctrine both of the Law and Gospell, so likewise is it in the Faithfull, though not in that measure. Hee was the true Manna that descended from heauen to giue light vnto the world, Iohn 6. The Tables of the Law moue vs to mutuall loue and new obedi∣ence. Aarons Rod flourishing with blossomes signifies the sweet∣nesse of the Gospel, and the glory of our high Priest Iesus Christ of whom Aaron was a Type. The mysterie of the golden Altar. THe sacrificing altar in the Sanctuarie of the Temple, wher∣on were foure golden hornes, beeing made partly of Sittim wood, and partly of Gold, compassed about with a Crowne of gold, represent the vnitie of the Humanitie and Deity in our Sa∣uiour. For as the wood, naturally incorruptible, was beautified with refulgent gold; so the Humanity of Christ, not capable of any putrifaction, Psalme 16. being adorned with Celestial glorie of the Deity, personally vnited to the Diuine Nature, ascended vp into the Heauens, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Fa∣ther,
crowned with a crown of majesty in eternal happines, Psa. 8. The mysterie of the golden Candlesticks. THe golden Candlestick with six branches and seuen lights, signifies Christ and the Ministers of the church. Christ the foundation is the chiefe Priest and Light of the world, illumina∣ting vs to eternal life, Ioh. 1. The Doctors and Teachers of the church are the branches by whom Christ inlightneth his church with the sound and vncorruptible doctrine of the Gospel, Apoc. 1. Neither ought they to be separated from Christ, but by the light of their doctrine and sincere conuersation be a lanthorn vnto our feet, Psal. 119. that so their works may return to his glory and the good of his church. And as all the branches were vnited into the body of the Candlestick, so euery Minister and faithfull child of God ought to be vnited into the body of Christ, without any schismaticall dissention or separation. The floures and lillies de∣note the ornaments and graces of the holy Spirit, which Christ hath bountifully bestowed vpon his Ministers. The Lights and lamps do admonish all godly Ministers to a diligent care, lest the light of Gods diuine word should either by mens traditions, or carnal and philosophical opinions, be either diminished, or by little and little abolished: but as often as such things happen, with the sincere doctrine of the Gospel to be purged and preser∣ued. The mysterie of the golden Table. THe golden Table wheron the Shew bread stood, being com∣passed about with a pretious crown, signifies the ministerie of the Gospell. For the bread that is set before vs is Christ that Bread of Life which descended out of heauen, Iohn 6. and hee by the ministry of the twelve Apostles is mystically offered vnto vs in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that whosoeuer eateth thereof as they ought might haue eternal life. The Frankincense that stood by the bread admonisheth vs, that earnest prayers and godly actions are to be vsed in the time of the administring of the Lords supper. For as Macarius saith, If the diuel was as strong
as mountaines, yet at the prayers of the Saints he melteth as wax before the fire. And S. Cyril saith, That Christ is the Table vpon which the bread of life is set, whereby all the Faithfull are nouri∣shed vnto eternall life. And the Crowne about this Table is the goodnesse and mercy of God, wherby we are crowned & brought to eternal happinesse. S. Ierom saith, That this Table was a figure of the table and the supper in the kingdome of God, Luk. 2. The Shew-bread vpon the table is the Son of God, which giueth life vnto the world, Iohn 6. The mysterie of the golden Vine and the Crystall grapes. THe Vine in the East part of the temple made of shining gold, fitly resembles our Sauiour Christ, who compared himselfe vnto a Vine, and the Faithfull vnto the branches, saying, I am the true Vine, and whosoeuer is ingraffed into me shal haue eternall life, Io. 15. The Crystall grapes do denote the doctrine of the Gospell, and the works of the Faithfull, which are faith, loue, hope, charity, pa∣tience, prayer, and workes of grace, all which do inhere vnto such as beleeue. The mysterie of Oblations and Sacrifices. ALl the Oblations and Sacrifices of the old Testament were Types and figures of our Sauiour, That as they were slaine for the performance of the ceremonial law; so Christ for the sal∣uation of man was slain and made a free-will Offering; by whose bloud and mediation the sin of man is pardoned, and he made ca∣pable of eternall life, Esay 53. Iohn 10. Heb. 9, &c. The mysterie of the vpper Court. THe vpper Court was a figure of the spirituall Priesthood of Iesus Christ, who hath made vs all Priests and Kings, and hath beautified vs with his guiltlesse death, 1 Pet. 2
The mysterie of the Fountaine and molten Sea standing vpon twelue Oxen in the vppermost Court. THe molten Sea and Fountain was a figure of Baptisme and that liuing water issuing from the wounds of Christ, where∣by we are washed from all our sinnes; the Lavor of regeneration, whereby we are made capable of eternall life; that Well of wa∣ter, whereof if we drinke we shall neuer thirst. The twelue Oxen represent the twelue Apostles, whose voice haue gon through the world (according to that in the Corinthians) and haue carried the sea of Grace through all the parts of the earth. Of which Water (saith S. Augustine) if thou drinkest but one drop, it is more effe∣ctuall to quench the thirst of worldly and insatiable desires, than an Ocean of earthly waters. The mysterie of the middle Court. SOlomons Court, wherein Christ taught, and in which the Iewes vsed commonly to pray, was a figure of that Church which should be gathered from amongst the Iewes. For from thence he indeauoured first to assemble and gather together a Christian congregation, according to that which he spake to the Canaani∣tish woman, Mat. 15. I am sent only to the lost Sheep of the house of Is∣rael. Of the outward Court of the Gentiles. THis Court signified, That the Gentiles also should partake of the sheepfold and congregation of Christ, and be mem∣bers of his holy Church; according to that of Iohn 10. I haue yet other Sheepe which I must also bring hither, that so there might be one sheepfold, one Pastor, &c. Of the rest of the memorable Buildings standing vpon mount Moriah. HAuing thus described the temple, together with the seueral courts & ornaments, al which did typically represent Christ & his church, I wil now proceed to the rest of the buildings stan∣ding vpon mount Moriah. The first and most memorable was
the house of Solomon, which stood iust against the Temple vpon the South: it shined so with gold and siluer, & was so stately and sumptuously built, that when queene Saba came to Ierusalem she stood amased to see it. There belonged to it diuers Courts and Walkes, in one of which the Prophet Ieremy was prisoner, Ier. 37. Ouer against this he made the Iudgement hall, in which hee pla∣ced the Ivory Chaire spoken of 1 Kin. 10. He built by that ano∣ther house for his Queen, she that was daughter of Pharaoh, 1 Kin. 7. But when Nebuchadnezzar conquered Ierusalem, all these to∣gether with the Temple were burnt and vtterly defaced. Of the Poole of Bethesda. VPon the North lay that sheepfold o sequestred place called Bethesda, Ioh. 5. which hath fiue porches or Xenodochius, as some would haue it: here Cattell came to drinke, and the Priests vsed to wash their Sacrifices; because no vncleane beast might come within the Temple, nor any thing that was foule or spotted be offered vpon the Altar. The water was of reddish colour, and ran into that place in great aboundance, and therefore it was cal∣led the house of effusion or pouring out. This was the place into which the Angel of God sometimes descended and troubled the water, after which whosoeuer stepped in was presently cured: and heere our Sauiour Christ healed the man that had beene diseased 38 years, Ioh. 5. This place was made by King Hezekiah, who cau∣sed the water of the vppermost poole, which was called Gihon, not far from mount Calvary, to be conueied by pipes & passages through the earth, into the lower city called Acra, and so fel into this place, for which cause it was called the lower poole. The Al∣legorie or mysterie hereof is, That euery one of Christs Sheepe ought to be washed in the poole of his bloud, before they can be made fit sacrifices to enter into his Temple or church, 1 Io. 1. Of the tower or castle called Antonia. THis castle, as Iosep. hath it, lib. 6. de Bell. cap. 6. stood betweene two Courts of the Temple at the North-West corner; at first built by the Machabees, and called by the name of Baris:
but after, King Herod taking affection to that place, bestowed great cost vpon it, walled it about, built vp sumptuous towers, & made it very strong; then gaue it the name of Antonia, in fauor of Antonius that noble Roman; which Augustus a long time sustained after their decease. Of the Hall called Coenaculum Anguli. THis house stood vpon an angle or cantle of the hill, and was therefore called Coenaculum Anguli: it was very large & spa∣tious, and within had a great hall, whereof Nehem. cap. 3. maketh mention: and here, as some thinke, our Sauior Christ ate the Pas∣chal Lambe with his Disciples; but I rather thinke it was in the suburbs. Of the Tower Ophel or the darke Tower. NEere to the valley of Cedron toward the East, not farre from the Temple, and neere the castle Antonia, there was builded a lofty and strong tower or palace called Ophel, that is, a place of darknesse: it was a very sumptuous thing. Of Hamea, or the Tower of the Centurions. IN the town wall betweene the sheepe gate and the dung gate, stood this castle Hamea or Centurion, taking the name à Cen∣tenario numero, i. the number of an hundred, and was vpon the East side of the city, neere to the sheepfold or poole Bethesda, Neh. 3.12. Here the Centurions commonly kept watch. Of Mount Acra and the buildings vpon it. MOunt Acra (as is aforesaid) stood vpon the West side of Ie∣rusalem; it was a very high mountain, and tooke that name from the Greeke word Acra, a sharpe or high hill. It was much higher than mount Moriah in times past, till Simon, Iudas Ma∣chabeus brother, caused it to be cut lower, to make it equall in height with mount Moriah. Between these two hils lay the vally Cedron, which was in profunditie 400 cubits. Vpon this Moun∣tain another part of the city was builded, beeing strongly fortifi∣ed and richly adorned with sumptuous houses, of which Dauid
and Solomon were the principal founders; and was called the lower city, or the daughter of Sion. It was so beautiful, that some hold (of which number are Egesippus and Eusebius) that it exceeded the rest of the city. Here stood the house of Helena Queen of the A∣diabenors, neer about the midst of it, as Iosep. obserueth, Li. Bell. 7. cap. 13. which Queene beeing conuerted to the Iewish Religion, built her an house in this City, that shee might pray in the Tem∣ple. Here stood the houses of her sonnes Monobazius and Grapta: here stood the houses of the high priests Annas and Caiaphas, not far from the valley Tyropae; King Herod also that wicked man, who caused the innocent Children to be put to death, built him an house heere, neere about the place where the Machabees in times past had a Castle; (for they built two, one in mount Mo∣riah, another in this Mount.) That in mount Moriah was after called the Castle of Antonia, and stood right against the Tem∣ple, as is aforesaid. And this being very sumptuously built, and a Royall seat, was after the death of this Herod a Palace for his Successors Archilaus and Herod Agrippa. Not farre off he cau∣sed two faire Theatres to be also built; the one in honour of the Emperour Augustus; and this on the one side joined to a tower called Acropolis (which was built by Antigonus Epiphanes, on a purpose to place a Garrison in, to keepe the Iewes in bondage; which Iudas Machabeus afterwards made leuel with the ground) and on the other side towards his owne Pallace. It resembled a semi-Circle, made all of white Marble fairely polished, the buil∣ding somewhat low; within full of high bankes one rising aboue another like Scaffolds, so that the whole multitude might easily heare or see whatsoeuer was said or done. It was curiously beau∣tified with gold, siluer, and many goodly pictures; but amongst the rest, the battailes which the Emperour Augustus had woon a∣gainst his people were liuely pourtrayed. To this place as well Iews as Gentiles resorted to see Interludes and Playes acted. The other was an Amphitheatre, and stood vpon the South side of the house: it was built round in a whole circle, compassed about with high walls large and spatious. Here they vsed to fence and to fight both on horse-backe and in Waggons. And in the fifth yere, in honor of Augustus, the circensian games, according to the
Rites of the Gentiles, were very sumptuously performed. On the South side of this Amphitheater, stood queen Bernice house, Si∣ster to Agrippa junior: it was a very faire and sumptuous Building little inferiour to King Herods. This stood in the market place, and so all along were very sumptuous and stately Pillars. Heere Agrippa himselfe had also an house, and ouer against that vpon the North stood the Iudgement hall, where the Sanhedrim or the Councell of the seuenty Elders vsed to meet, to heare and deter∣mine of mens causes. To this place Christ was brought when they asked him if he was Christ, Luke 22. Here were the Apostles whipt, Acts 5. and close by this stood the house of Pilat the Pre∣tor, fairely glistering with gold, in which house all the Romane Pretors and Presidents for the most part had their residence: and here our Sauiour Christ was whipt, crowned with Thornes, and spit vpon. Not far off from this Pretors house stood the Chan∣cerie, or rather as we terme it the Treasury, a stately and magnifi∣cent house, curiously built, and appointed onely to lay Records and common Chronologies in. Heere also the Officers of the towne gaue in their accounts, and Creditors entred their debts. This was vtterly destroyed by Vespasian. Thus much for the Buil∣dings on this Mount. Next, the market place was a thing very memorable, and was so large and spatious, that in the time of the Warres many great battels were fought there, as Iosephus saith. In this market place, close by Pilats house stood a high seat or Tribunal made of faire stone curiously wrought, and for the eminence of it called in the Chaldaean tongue Gabatha; and because it was built of stone the Grecians called it : the Latines, Lapidanium; and with vs it might be termed an heape of stones * (for so the word signifi∣eth) Here Pilat taking water washed his hands before the people,Or a well wrought stone and said, I am innocent of this mans bloud: At which they cried, His bloud be vpon vs and our children. And after by Gods appointment, according to their own wish fel vpon them; for in the same place and close by the same Seat it hapned that Herod wanting money, demanded of the Iewes so much out of their Treasurie (which they called Corban) as would pay for the making of a Water∣course (for he assayed to bring water into the City from a Foun∣taine,
some two hundred furlongs off it) but the Iewes supposing it a needlesse worke, not onely denied him, but gaue many outra∣gious and spitefull speeches, tumultuously flocked about him, and with great clamors prest vpon him euen as he was in his seat: wherfore perceiuing the danger, and to preuent mischief, he sent to his souldiers to apparell themselues like Citisens, and vnder their gownes to bring with them a dagger or ponyard, and min∣gle themselues among the multitude; which they did, obseruing who they were that made the greatest vprore; and when Herod gaue the signe, fel vpon them with their ponyards, killing a great multitude. The rest seeing this massacre, suspecting treason a∣mongst themselues, fell one vpon another; and many for feare of losse, or to auoid future danger, killed themselues. In this very place also, Florus Generall of the common souldiers, within few yeares after, vpon a small occasion, made another cruell massacre and much more barbarous than the former: for hee spared none, the best of them he caused to be whipt to death, or else crucified and put to the sword; and for the Vulgar spared neither woman nor childe. So that within the compasse of one day there died of this obstinate and wicked Nation aboue seuen hundred and thirty. This outrage was so cruell, that all strangers which inha∣bited within the town pitied their misery; but especially Queen Bernice, who being partly frighted with their shreeks, partly mo∣ued to commiseration through the extremitie of their affliction, indangered her life to present her selfe before Florus, and vpon her knees besought him to take some mercy and pitty of them, and withdraw his hand of vengeance from the bloud of the guilt∣lesse. But the fury of the Roman souldiers was so fierce, and the resolution of Florus so vnremoueable, that neither her teares nor the present calamities could persuade him. But as in such Vp∣rores it commonly happeneth, she with the rest was in danger of her safety, and was constrained the next night, for the preseruati∣on of her estate to keep a strong watch, lest the Roman souldiers should haue done her some violence. Thus we may see a iust re∣uenge of a periured and stif necked people, and that in the place where the offence was committed, though at least eight and thir∣t yeares after.
In this market place Agrippa had built a Gallery all of marble, from his own house to the Iudgment hall; it was couered aboue, and made with diuers and sundry roomes for men to walke in, all burnished with gold, and called by the name of Xiston, as Iosephus hath it. Here Agrippa after this cruell massacre made an Orati∣on to the people (Queene Bernice standing by him) to this effect; That they should forbear to raise any more commotions against the Romans, and to banish the Seditious out of the city, for that they saw their cruelty; Iosep. lib. de Bell. 2. Egesip. lib. 2. cap. 8. To this Gallery there ioyned a bridge which past ouer the valley of Cedron to the Temple. And amongst many other faire and sumptuous Buildings that were vpon this place, there were the Colledges of the Pharisees, Sadduces, and the Synagogues and Schooles for the instruction of Youth, which were dispersed here and there among other stately buildings; and this was called the lower Towne. Of the Valley of Cedron. BEtweene ths lower City and the Temple there was a deepe Valley, extending it selfe from the gate of Benjamin through the middle of the City, to the gate of Sion. From this Valley they ascended into either mountaines, (that is, Mount Acra, and Mount Moriah) by certaine steppes or staires. These two hills (as is before said) were ioyned together with a bridge; and this Valley passing betweene them, was called by Zephaniah, cap. 1. Machten. In which place aboue all the rest of the Cities dwelt Merchants, and such as vsed commerce and trade, as appeareth in the eleuenth verse of his prophecie; Howle yee Inhabitants of the low place, for the company of the Merchants is destroyed: all they that ex∣change for siluer are cut off. Vpon which place of Scripture the Chaldaean Paraphrase reades it thus Howle yee inhabitants of the valley Cedron. Iosephus, in tit. Bell. 6. cap. 6. & libr. 6. cap. 7 calleth this valley by two names; one Machten, from the profunditie; the other Cedron, from the obscurity: for so the name signifieth; and whosoeuer looked downe into it from the Temple, fogs and
mists seemed to lie in the bottome of it, like a cloud of darknesse, such was the depth of it. There was another valley which lay be∣tweene mount Sion and these mountaines, called by the name of Tyrexdon. Of the Mountaine Bezetha. THis place lay Northward in Ierusalem, and betweene it and the former hils were deep ditches cast; it had two Townes standing vpon it, diuided with two walls, and was common∣ly called the Suburbs; the name of the one, which lay neerest to mount Moriah, was called the second city; the other that lay vp∣on the North, was called Neapolis or the new towne. In the se∣cond dwelt Hulda the Prophetesse, and Zacharias the father of S. Iohn Baptist, 2 Kin. 22.2. 2 Chr. 34. Nehem. 3. Ioseph. li. 10. c. 5. It was adorned with many faire and sumptuous buldings, among which was that princely house of Herod Ascalonites that great and mighty King of the Iewes, in whose time our Sauior Christ was born. This house was sumptuously built, supported and adorned with pillars of polisht marble, and so spatious, that in one room thereof there might stand a hundred tables. The hall also was ve∣ry great, and richly gilded with refined gold intermixt with sil∣uer: about it were many pleasant and delectable walls, goodly gardens and fountains for pleasure: it was compast with a wal of polisht marble 30 cubits high. And (as Valerius writeth) in that house Herod caused Christ to be mocked, put a long white gar∣ment vpon him in contempt, and so sent him to Pilat. Here also was a prison, in which Peter was kept when the Angel of the Lord deliuered him, Acts 12. Of the towne Neapolis, or the New City. THis lay without the wals of the city, and became inhabited by reason of the great concourse of people that flocked thi∣ther (for in times past there were no inhabitants) and stood vpon the North side of the hil. Here dwelt the Christians and o∣ther laborers & strangers: and by all likelihood it seems that the house of Mary the mother of Iohn syrnamed Marke stood here, which because of the continuall resort of the Apostles thither, was called the house of the Church. Hither Peter resorted when
he was deliuered from the hands of Herod, by the Angell: for thus saith the Text, Acts 12.9. That when Peter had past the first and second watch he came to the Iron gate which led into the Citie, and loe it opened of it selfe. And from thence he went to the house of Mary the mother of Iohn, surnamed Marke. Here also (in my opinion) Christ celebrated the last Paschall Lambe, because after supper hee went into the mount of Oliues, for this lying vnwalled, lay open for them to goe and come at their pleasure. But afterward in Herod Agrippa's time, it was begunne to be compassed in with a wall, and before it could be fully finished, the Angell of the Lord strucke him, and he died miserably. Here also stood the Monu∣ments of Iohn Hircanus the high Priest, and of Alexander, King of the Iewes, as it appeareth in Iosephus, libr. de Bello, 6. cap. 6. The tops of the houses in the Citie of Ierusalem were flat, and coue∣red with faire and plaine roofes, compassed about with battle∣ments; vpon which they vsed to leape, dance and banquet, and such recreations as they obserued vpon their festiuall daies were there celebrated. And thus much shall serue to haue spoken of the mountaines or hills whereon Ierusalem stood. Of the Walls that compassed the Citie. THis Citie of Ierusalem was so strongly fortified by nature on euery side, except the North, (for it stood vpon high rockes and cliffes) that it seemed to be inuincible. And that that side might be the better strengthened, they compassed it in with three walls, and these so strong, that when Vespasian the Emperor and his armie inuaded the citie they had much adoe to conquer them. The first of these walls was that which Agrippa built, and it compassed in Neapolis, otherwise called the new towne. At the Northwest end of which Wall, was built an exceeding high Tower of very faire Marble stone; so high, that standing on the top thereof, a man might see from thence to the Sea, and into Arabia, and the vttermost bounds of Iudaea. This Tower was called Psephina. The second wall was that which diuided the two Suburbes, wherein there stood 14 towers and gates. This King Hezkiah
built, 2. Chr. 32. in a corner of which, betweene the West gate and the Valley gate, there stood a high Tower, wherein all the night great fire was made, which cast a light a great way off round a∣bout; so that trauellers passing towards Ierusalem, where guided by it in their way. Of this light we reade in Nehem. cap. 3. The third wall compassed in the Temple and all the lower ci∣tie; in it was sixtie Towers, but the chiefe of them stood in the East Angle, betweene the dung gate and the gate of the valley, which was called Hananiel, and signifieth, The grace and gift of God. This is much spoken of in the Scripture: vpon this wall King Herod the Ascalonite built three faire Towers; one betweene the Garden gate and the old gate, which hee called Hippicum, in ho∣nour of his father Hippicus; the other Phaselum, in honour of his brother Phasilus; and the third Mariamne, after his wiues name, who notwithstanding hee caused innocently to be put to death. These three gates were built of polisht Marble. Pliny and Strabo saith, That this was the fairest and most spacious city of the East; and for the munition and fortification almost inuincible. The wals of it were all of white polisht marble, some 25 or 30 cubits high: the stones were 20 cubits long, 20 broad, and 5 thicke, so closely joyned that the junctures could scarce be perceiued. Ma∣ny of the Towers also were made of such stones; but those of the Temple exceeded the rest; for they were 25 cubits long, 12 broad, and 8 thicke, as Iosephus witnesseth, lib. Ant. 15. ca. 14. & de Bel. Iud. li. 6. ca. 6. which things being rightly considered, we may ea∣sily perceiue that these walls were very difficult to be destroyed: Neither were the ditches of lesse strength that went about the Towne; for they were cut out of hard stones, at least forty cubits deepe, and two hundred and fifty cubits broad, which were vn∣possible to haue beene woon, if God had not holpen and assisted the Romans, filling vp those ditches with the bodies of those that died of the plague and famine within the towne. Of the gates of Ierusalem. IT had twelue gates to goe out and in: Vpon the East side lay fiue, the first of which was the Fountaine gate, which was so called of the Fountaine Siloah. And this stood close by the gate
of mount Sion. In which Fountain, the man that was borne blind washt himselfe at the commandement of our Sauiour, and had his sight restored, Ioh. 9. and at this gate Christ came riding in vp∣on an Asse, when he came from Bethania, on Palme Sunday. 2 The Sheepe-gate, which was so called of the multitude of sheepe that were driuen in by it, to be offered in the Temple (for it stood hard by the temple.) Right before this gate stood mount Oliuet, some halfe an English mile and a furlong from Ierusalem, Eastward. By it stood the Garden called Gethsemane, where Christ was taken, and led into the citie through this gate; to be offered vp like an innocent sheepe, for the sinnes of the whole World. 3 The Dung-gate: this tooke the name from a dung-hill, because the raine water comming with great power through the Citie, washed nway the filth, and with great violence, carried it through this gate into the poole Cedron. Not far from this gate was the water gate, and stood a little within it. 4 The Valley-gate, which tooke the name of the valley Ieho∣saphat, and lay not farre from the other gate. Hereabouts also stood the Dragon gate. 5 The Horse-gate, and stood just in the joyning of the East and North part of the Citie: it tooke the name from the Kings horses, as appeareth, Ier. 31. Neh. 3. The gates vpon the North. 6 The corner gate which stood Northwest, 2. K. 14. 1. Ch. 26. Ier. 31. Zach. 14. 7 The Benjamin-gate, so called because men by this gate went to the borders of Benjamin: in this gate the Prophet Ieremy was prisoner, Ier. 37. 8 The Ephraim gate, by which they went to the borders of Ephraim. The gates vpon the West. 9 The Raine-gate, so called because the raine water clensing the streets, carried away all the filth, and so past through this gate toward the West, and there thrust it out of the Citie, Neh. 12. 10 The Garden-gate, before which the garden stood where∣in Christ was buried.
11 The old gate: before this, Mount Caluarie stood, where∣on Christ was crucified. 12 The fish gate, so called because of the Sea fish that came in by it: it was also called the Bricke gate. Here the Prophet Ie∣remy broke an earthen pitcher, Ieremy 19. and out of this gate they went to Bethlehem. But on the South side there were no gates, for there mount Sion stood, which was so high and steepe that no man could goe vp vpon it. Of the gates within the Citie. THe gate of Sion, the water gate; of which two I haue already spoken. The middle gate, whereof Ieremie speaketh, cap. 19. and it is thought it stood in the middle of the citie, in the valley Cedron, not farre from the Tower called Mariamne. The Iron gate, which opened of it selfe, when the Angell led Peter out of prison, Acts 12. this stood in the City walls, passing from one sub∣urbe into another: all these gates stood within the city. And thus much shall suffice to haue spoken of the portraiture of it. Of the Springs, Valleys, Fountaines, and other memorable places as they were scituated neere to the Citie, and how to the foure parts of the World. IN the next place it resteth to shew what things worthy memo∣rie were about, and stood neere to the City: the first of which was the brooke Cedron, which sprung out of a hill not farre from it vpon the South, and with great swiftnesse ran through the East part of the citie, and so between Ierusalem & the mount of Oliues, to the valley gate of Iehosaphat: thence passing through the cliffes of mount Oliuet, it ran directly East till it came to the dead Sea; which brooke in the Summer time was most common∣ly dry. The water of it was something blacke, which colour the valley Iehosaphat (which was very fertile) gaue it; & from thence it was called Nigrescens torrens, a blackish streame. This is mystical∣ly spoken of, in 2. Sam. and Psa. 100. where it is said, He (that is, our Sauiour Christ) shall drink of the brook in the way: which he fulfilled when he made satisfaction for our sinnes by his death & passion,
as it appeareth in the 69 Psal. Saue me ô God, &c. Into this brooke ran the water of Silo, and that which came out of the temple. Of the mount of Oliues and Bethania, which signifies a house of mourning. THese two, the one lay vpon the East, the other Southwest, about halfe an English mile and a furlong from Ierusalem. Of Bethania you may reade in Nehemia. Of the hill Gihon. GIhon stood before Ierusalem on the West side, right against the fish gate and the old gate, 2. Chr. 22. Here King Solomon was crowned, 1. Kin. 1. Not farre from this stood the mount Gol∣gatha, where Christ was crucified. From whence may be obser∣ued, That as Solomon vpon that hill was crowned King, so Christ vpon this was crucified; our Sauiour and the true Solomon, that made euerlasting peace betweene God and vs. From this mount Gihon sprung the Fountaine Gihon, and thereabouts also was the Fullers field, 2. King. 18. 2. Chron. 33. In which place Senacharib and other the Princes and Embassadors of the King of Assyria, spake blasphemous words against the Lord, wherefore he slew 185 thousand of them, as appeareth in the 2. King. 19. Of the valley of the sonne of Hinnon. THis valley lieth behind the city of Ierusalem Southward on the left hand as they went from Ierusalem to Bethelem. In this valley the Iewes set vp an Idoll of copper like a King, which they called Moloch, that is, a King of Idols. This Copper Idoll stood with the arms stretching out, and vnder it there was a great fire, whereby the Image shewed fire-redde: and besides that, the more to honour it, they made a great fire betweene two walls, which burnt for his sake: and through this fire the Idolatrous Priests cast liuing children into Molochs burning armes, which he with his armes red hot burnt to death. And in this manner the Iewes offered their owne children to the Idoll Moloch: and when they did it, they made a great noise & crie, and beat vpon a drum, that the fathers when their children were offered, should not
here them crie, by reason of the great noise of Drums. This val∣ley was called the valley of Tophet; for Tophet signifies a Drum. This was a most grosse and fearefull Idolatry, & therefore Christ likened this valley of Hinnon to hell fire; for he called it Gehenna, Mat. 5. That the Iewes should keepe themselues from this mon∣strous Idolatrie, God made a law, That if any man were taken committing this kind of Idolatry, he should forthwith be stoned to death, and not suffered to liue, Leuit. 18. & 20. The valley of Gehennon is oftentimes named in the holy Scriptures, Iosh. 15. Nehem. 11.2. Paral. 28.33. Ier. 7. Ierom writeth, that here by this Idol Moloch in the valley of Hinnon, there was a Wood; for the water ran out of the Fountaine Siloah along by it, and made the valley moist. Of the field of bloud, called Hakeldama. THis field of bloud, which was bought for thirty siluer pence, for the which Iudas betraied our Sauiour Christ, lay not farre from the valley of Hinnon, Southward by the city of Ierusalem, as Ierom writeth. Of the hill Hameskita, or offence and stander. THis hill lay Southeast, not farre from Ierusalem, something wide of mount Oliuet; so that there was but one Valley be∣tweene them, and was not altogether so high as it. Also vpon this hill King Solomon in his old age suffered his wiues or concubines to make Idolatrous Temples, wherein he and his wiues worship∣ped Idols. Of the destruction of this famous Citie of Ierusalem by TITVS VESPASIAN. THus haue I briefly set forth the dignitie, scituation, & curi∣osity of the buildings of Ierusalem; together with the rich∣nesse of the Temple, and sumptuousnesse of the houses: now it rests to describe vnto you, the manner and meanes how this fa∣mous Citie was destroyed; surely a thing worthy wonder (ac∣cording to that in Ieremy) Whosoeuer shall heare of it his eares shall tingle. And that it might be the more famous, and the Christians
within it might take notice of the neer approaching desolation, there were diuers strange accidents hapned, and visions seene. As first, about some foure yeares before, the riuer Iordan was turned out of her course, and was brought into the Citie Pella: a while after that, for a yeare together, there hung a Comet like a flaming sword ouer the City: And in the night there was seene a light in the Temple: And in the day when they were at sacrifice, a Calfe brought forth a Lambe. Then about the middle of the night, the Easterne gates of the Temple opened of their owne accord. In the skies were seene armies of men fighting, and Horses and Chariots running too and againe. And at last there was heard a terrible voice in the temple, vttering these words, Migremus hinc; that is, Let vs goe hence. And that there might be a generall Pro∣clamation of this sad and cruell desolation, through the whole citie, one Ananias the sonne of Iesus, a man poore and impotent, vpon the Feast of the Tabernacles, ran through all the streets of the Citie, and crying, O, a voice from the East, and a voice from the West, a voice from the foure windes, a voice ouer Ierusalem and the Tem∣ple, a voice ouer the Bridegroome and the Bride, and a voice ouer the whole multitude of this Citie. And although he was whipt, and im∣prisoned, and cruelly handled, yet so long as he liued, hee would not cease to vtter these words, which by some were judg'd to fore∣tel the horrible desolation which after hapned. For Titus Caesar sonne of Flavius the Emperor, about seuentie yeares after the Natiuitie of our Lord, and about eight and thirty after his ascension, vtterly ouerthrew it euen to the ground, about the first day of the moneth of Aprill, and within a yeare after these signes. For he taking aduantage of the three factions which at this time swaied in Ierusalem: One of Eleazer the Priest the sonne of Simon; the other of Zilotus the chiefe Prince which held the Temple; and the third of Iohannes Giscalenus a cruell fellow, which had the command of the inferiour Citie; besieged it, and made this a fit opportunitie to further his enterprises, whiles the seditious and factious people, little regarding their owne safetie, gaue way by their euill and intestine warrs, to what he intended, weakning themselues much more by their continued slaughters, than the enemy by his inuasion. Insomuch as the whole citie, and
Temple was filled with dead bodies; common insolencies, and publique rapines were ordinarily amongst them: some set fire of the City, others dispoiling the Temple, a third sort killing the Priests euen as they were at sacrifice, al places ful of dead bodies; and to this, to adde a greater measure of miserie (without any re∣gard at all to their future defence) set fire of the store-house, wherein the corne lay for the sustentation of the Citie, and con∣sumed that in one day which had been long a gathering: by this meanes it came to passe, that they were sorely afflicted with the pestilence through the corruption of the aire, and with famine, for want of Corne. All these things notwithstanding (such was the crueltie, obstinacie, and peruersenesse of this people) could not restraine them from violating the most sacred and holy things of the Temple: insomuch as Iohannes Giscalenus had a full determination to haue destroyed it, but that he was preuented by the Romans. About this time was the feast of the Passeouer, and it fell vpon the fourteenth day of Aprill, being the Sabboth; to the celebra∣tion whereof, there resorted to Ierusalem, about three hundred thousand Iewes. These the enemy gaue way to enter into the Ci∣tie; but considering their present necessitie for want of victuals, vpon a suddain drew vp their forces, and so straightly beleagered them that all this huge multitude was (as it were) imprisoned within the wals, where partaking of the former misery, they either died by the plague or famin. Whence may be perceiued the mar∣uellous prouidence of God, that euen on the same day, and in the very same place, where but eight and thirtie yeares before our Sauiour Christ suffered, the authors of such crueltie suffered a most just and seuere reuenge, Now as the army of the Romans lay vpon the North of the Citie, Titus drew out a band of six hundred horse to ride about, to behold and view the walls of the Towne: but as he was in this manner wondring at the sumptu∣ousnesse of the Citie, the Iewes in great multitudes slipt out at a posterne gate, and set vpon him so fiercely, that they endangered his person, being without armour; and had he not with great dif∣ficultie broke through them, and recouered the Tower of the Ro∣mans, hee had beene there slaine. But presently vpon this see∣ing
the danger, hee besieged the Citie in three parts; himselfe as the Emperour of the armie, built a castle about some two fur∣longs from the Citie, iust against the Tower Psephina. Thc other part of the army was intrenched right against the Tower Hip∣picus not farre from the Garden of the resurrection. And the third part had their Castle in the Mount of Oliues, some fiue fur∣longs or thereabouts from the Citie. Then did hee build Bul∣warkes, make Engines, and wonderfull deuises, for the battering of the Walls; and combining himselfe with some of the Iewes, vpon the seuenth day of the second moneth, which answereth to the moneth of May, with great difficultie and much labour en∣tred the first Wall which lay vpon the North, and woon Mount Bezitha and Neapolie. Vpon the twelfth of the same moneth (which was the Sabboth day) hee entred the second wall, which diuided the suburbs: but this was againe the same day recouered by the vertue of the Iewes, so that the Iewes were constrained to fight vpon the Sabboth day, according to the prophecie of our Sauiour Christ, Matt. 24. But after vpon the sixteenth of this moneth of May, the Romans againe recouered this wall and kept it in their owne custody. Within a while after in the month of Iune (about this time the famine growing intollerable within the towne) Titus in the space of three daies, compassed in the whole citie of Ierusalem with a Wall, and vpon that set Towers and Castles, lest any of the Iewes should flye to saue themselues. Thus was the prophecie of our Sauiour Christ fulfilled, Thy enemies shall compasse thee about and hem thee in on euery side. Iosephus was now in the Citie, and wal∣king vpon the Walls, earnestly intreated the Iewes to desist, and no longer to oppose the Romans, but this was so hatefull a speech to many, that they began to fling darts at him. And although at this time the extremitie of the famine was so sore, that many dyed for want of sustenance, yet all perswasions were in vaine; and such was the calamitie, that as well those as went out, as those that continued in the Citie, were in like danger of their liues; for they were either slaine by the enemy, or els by the pestilence and famine; common injuries, and vnmercifull outrages still atten∣ding vpon warre.
Their misery did rather increase, then at all lesson it selfe; for the jealousie of treason, the hope of riches, and the madnes of the seditious, distracted the mindes of the Citizens with continuall feares, and filled the streets full of murther and daily spectacles of lamentable tragedies: The markets were vnfrequented with Corne, the victuals, with violence consumed and taken from the true owners. And if it chanced that some one had more than would serue his turne, though he dwelt in a faire and stately buil∣ding, yet the remotest roome and most vnfrequented he made his tabernacle, and that little which was left, with great parcimonie he consumed, together with his life, till both were ended. Those that were Fathers and Senats of the people (though before ser∣ued and attended with reuerenced and great state) in this consu∣sion was glad of a small morsell, though with much contention. The wife was not ashamed to take away the meate from her hus∣band, nor the children from their parents, nor the mothers from their infants: And if it hapned that in any house the seditious seemed to smell food, with violence they tooke it, ransackt the roomes round about, whiles the master therof was made a laugh∣ing stocke and mournfull spectator of those mischiefes. But ac∣cording to the condition of souldiers, whose naturall disposition is to be violent, without any regard either of sex or kindred, com∣mitted daily outrages. So that here you might haue seene the mothers weeping ouer their dying infants, whiles their husbands were massacred in the streets by the seditious. The increase of daies were the increase of torments, and the daily want of such as were in power being vnaccustomed to such euils, caused them to inuent new meanes to satisfie their desire, and practise vnusuall torments, for no other purpose but to finde out sustenance: yea, such was their insatiable thirst of bloud, that they spared not him whom but now gaue them all hee had, and least he should liue to cumber the city, either hang him vp by the heeles till he died, or else pulled out his entrailes with a sharpe yron. Those that went out in the night time when the Romans were asleepe, to gather herbes, the seditious would meet and with violence take what they had got from them: and though with teares and lamentations, and prayers vpon their knees, they
intreated but for one part, a small moitie of that which a little be∣fore they had got with danger of their liues, yet they would not giue it them, and scap't fairely if they went away with life. These insolencies were committed by the common souldiers, vpon such as were of the meaner sort of people. But for the rest that were either honorable or rich, they became a prey to the Captains and Commanders, some accused as traitors, and that they would haue betraied the Citie to the Romans; others as fugitiues, that they would forsake the Citie; most vnder pretence of one crime or other, dispoiled of that they had. And they whom Iohn had thus oppressed, were entertained of Simon, and whom Simon had inju∣ried, they were entertained by Iohn; both drunke the bloud of the miserable Citizens like water: So that the desire of rule was the cause of their dissention, the concord of their euill and cruell actions. There was an infinite number that perished in this citie by fa∣mine, insomuch as houses were filled with the bodies of infants and children. The Angle gate was thrust full of dead corpes. The young men that remained, walked vp and downe the Citie like Images of death. The old men were destroyed by the pesti∣lence, the contagion of which disease taking away their senses, they became madde. And of such as died among the seditious, their wiues or kindred had not roome nor time to bury them, but as they were putting them into the graue they also dyed. Yet for all this, amongst this miserable societie, there was no weeping, no complaining, no deploring of their necessities, for the violence of the famin hauing dried vp their radical moisture, the feare of griefe was taken from them: and such as had most cause to lament, and were most pricked with the sting of sorrow, before they could vtter their griefe died, the beholders not shed∣ding a tear: so that through the whole city there was a still silence, and a thicke mist of death, and destruction did fully possesse the same. But the seditious were much more cruell than these were op∣pressed with calamitie and sorrow; for some opened the graues of the dead, and taking out their bodies thrust them thorow with their swords. Others to trie the sharpenesse of the edge of their
weapons would fall vpon those that were yet aliue, and when they had slaine them, goe away laughing at their pleasure. So that as Iosephus saith, there was scarce any mischiefe vnder the Sunne, but was both practised and tollerated in this Citie. To conclude, by sedition the Romans conquered the Citie, and sedition con∣quered the Romans. All loue and modestie, through this extreme and intollerable famine, became vtterly extinct, and the deerest friends would kill one another for a crust of bread; the fairest Lady commit open adultery for a little sustinance. Their food was extraordinary, and such as men did loath and hate: Some would feed vpon snailes and wormes, others of old hay chopt small; many ate corne ei∣ther vnground or made into bread: some pluckt the meat from the spit raw, others with their teeth gnaud off the leather off their shields: And that very mouth which cried, Crucifie him, crucifie him, let his bloud be vpon vs and our children, was constrained to feed vpon three sorts of dung, that is to say, Doues dung, Oxens dung, and Mans dung. Moreouer, many were constrained for meere necessitie, to feed vpon the dead bodies of such, as a little before dyed, partly by famine, partly by the pestilence. And to conclude, for very madnesse eat vp their gold: for some of them being taken as they were flying for their safety by the Romans, in their excrement was found gold, of which the souldiers hearing, and supposing that all the Iewes had beene full of gold, thorow couetousnesse of that gaine, in one night killed 2000 of them, and ript vp their bellies; And had not Titus Caesar by a seuere Edict, forbidden these cruell and vnheard of slaughters, there had beene many more slaine. To make an end of this vnheard of famine, I will repeat one memorable example our of Iosephus, of an outrage which a mo∣ther committed euen vpon her owne sonne. There was a woman of the inhabitants beyond Iordan, whose name was Marie, of the stocke of Eliazer, and of the Towne Bethezor, which signifies the house of Hissop; shee was of a noble and rich family, and a∣mongst others, went to Ierusalem in hope of safety, where she was likewise oppressed with the miserie of this siege; for as soone as she had brought all her riches and substance into the City, which
she had before beyond Iordan, this famine growing greater and greater vpon the inhabitants. The seditious perceiuing that this woman was well furnished both with riches and sustinance, on a suddain set vpon her house, dispoiled her of her substance, tooke away her sustinance, and vtterly depriued her of all meanes to liue. Shee beeing pricked with the misery and calamitie of the times, saw it little preuailed to striue, wherefore with teares, vpon her knees she intreated that shee might haue but some small part of that they had taken from her, to maintain her selfe and her son with life; but the seditious gaue little eare to her intreaties: wher∣fore being mooued to extreme anger she daily cursed with con∣tumelious words those barbarous villains, that had thus rob'd her of all her means: but when shee saw that neither anger nor intrea∣tie could procure mercie, and through the Towne not one mor∣sell of food was to be found, partly prest with an extreame neces∣sitie, partly with a furious rage, beyond all nature and compassi∣on, laid violent hands vpon her owne sonne, and accounted an vn∣timely death more honourable, than that he should liue to bee a prey to the seditious, or a slaue to the Romans. The body of this infant shee rosted and eat: the soldiers of the Towne beeing prest with hunger, smelling the meat, supposing that as in former times, they should haue found plenty, with vio∣lence broke in vpon her, and looke what she had prouided greedi∣ly consumed, and compelled her to fetch the rest; which shee did, and when they were well satisfied, she shewed them the head and feet of her sonne: which they perceiuing, loathing the inhumani∣tie of the fact, with dejected countenance departed. This famine was so extreame, that one measure of graine was worth a talent, that is, 600 crownes. But the Romans all this while did abound with plenty of all things, and to vex the Iewes they shewed them the great aboundance of their store, for the neighboring prouin∣ces sent them supplies. After this famine, there followed an extreme plague, procured partly through the stanch of the bodies that lay vnburied, partly by the multitude of the massacres that daily hapned, that (as Egi∣sippus writeth) within the compasse of eleuen weekes, there were carried out by one gate of the Citie, 111000 dead bodies; yet
could they not emptie the Citie, but that they were constrained either to bury them at the publike charge, or else cast them ouer the wals into the ditches of the citie: which when Titus saw, and that the putrifaction of the bodies swam vpon the brim of the ditch (for it was full with dead carkasses) fetching a deepe sigh, and lifting vp his hands to heauen, he said, God is my witnes, this is not my fault, but the punishment of God vpon them. The city being thus pestired with sedition, famine, pestilence, and warre, was made now a ready prey to the Enemy: and that they might make a finall end of their miseries, Titus caused the engines of batterie to be brought against the walls; and vpon the first day of the fourth month (whicn answers to our Iune) he took the third wall which lay vpon the North. Vpon the fourth of Iune after, though with great labour, he tooke the Tower of An∣tonia, and in it placed a Garrison. Vpon the seuenteenth day of the fourth moneth, which was a fast to the Iewes, Iosephus going vp to the top of that Tower, made an Oration to Giscalinus and the rest, to disswade them from their rebellion, & cease to oppose the Romans, but this little preuailed. Vpon the twentieth day of Iuly, the Iewes burnt a part of the Porch of the Temple towards the North, not far from the Tower of Antonia, lest that the Ro∣mans hauing got that Hold, should with the greater facilitie haue conquered the Temple also. Two daies after, the Romans de∣stroyed the whole Porch with fire, and the Iewes helpt to pull it downe with their hands: this was none of the three Porches but a bulwarke of the Temple. Vpon the 25 day of Iuly the Iewes filled the Porch toward the West with pitch and betume, and then made as though they meant to fly and leaue the citie, which some of the Romans perceiuing, without any command of their Captaines, put scaling ladders to the Tower, and began to assault it, but when they were most busie, the Iewes of a sudden put fire to the pitch, and burnt them most miserably; insomuch as Titus pittied them to see their extremitie, although they were such as did contrary to his command. Vpon the last day of this moneth they tooke the North gate, which lay towards the rising of the Sunne, and close by the brooke Cedron; rhis they burnt downe with fire. Vpon the third of August, Titus commanded to fire the
gate of the Temple, that was all couered ouer with gold & siluer, by this gate the Romans made a breach into the Temple, which ere this had beene prophaned by the Iewes: whiles this gate was a burning, the Iewes stood astonished, and not one of them resisted the Romans. Caesar and all his army labored three daies to quench this fire, after which hee called a councell to determine what he should do with the temple, it was so rich and sumptuous, that he would faine haue left it as an ornament for the Roman Empire. But the Iewes hauing got a little breathing, made new incursions vpon the Romans, by which meanes they could not determine thereof. The 6 of August, the souldiers of Titus, without com∣mand of their Captaines, fired the Temple, just vpon that day which Nebuchadnezzar before time had destroyed it, as Iosephus witnesseth, li. de Bell. 6. c. 26.27. Caesar would faine haue saued this Temple for the sumptuousnesse of it, and beckoned to his soul∣diers to haue quencht the fire, but they, partly prest on with a de∣sire of wealth, partly being prickt on with a fury and madnesse, gaue no eare to his speeches, but committed most cruell massa∣cres, without either regard of age or sex: So that the cries of the slaughterd, the sound of the Roman trumpets, the fierce resistance of the seditious, and the fire furiously burning, represented a most horrible spectacle: The ground below was couered with dead bodies, many in desperation threw themselues into the fire, 6000 were burnt in the same gate, whither they fled for refuge, and the priests most cruelly massacred as they were in the Temple. This was the end of the Temple of Ierusalem, the mirror of the world, being consumed and spoiled with fire and sword. After these things, vpon the bridge that passeth from the tem∣ple ouer the valley into the lower towne, Titus made a speech by an interpreter, to the two seditious Captaines, gently intrea∣ting them to leaue off their rebellion, and he would spare the Ci∣tie and commit no more outrages, and such further requests as they desired should according to reason be granted them; but if they would not embrace mercy and cease their violent resistance, they must expect no manner of compassion, but the very law of Armes. This they contemned and made but a mocke of Caesar for all his offers; whereupon in a great rage hee gaue the signall
to his souldiers, and they went through all the City and set it on fire. The next day they woon the lower Citie, and with fire and sword consumed the place where the records lay, the Court and all the Princely buildings, vntill they came to that stately house of Helena, which stood in the midst of Acra, all the houses neere being filled with the bodies of the dead, and the streets horribly defiled with the bloud of those that were slaine. Within a short while after, Iohannes Giscalinus was taken aliue and committed to prison. The inferiour Citie being thus taken and destroyed, about the 16 day of August, Caesar began to build his engines, and batter the walls of the vpper citie, which within the space of 18 daies after with extreme labour and skill, hee laid flat with the ground, (as Iosephus saith.) And vpon the 7 of September, with great facilitie hee conquered the citie, the Iewes of their owne accord descen∣ding from the Towers: and the Romanes set vpon the walls their ensignes, with a great acclamation, and wasted all the citie with fire and sword, sparing neither men, women, nor children. The 8 day of the moneth of September, the whole Citie was destroyed, and not a stone left vpon a stone but laid leuell with the ground, onely the three Towers that were built by Herod, which were of shining Marble (viz. Hippicus, Phaselus, and Ma∣riamne) that future ages seeing the excellencie of those buildings they might iudge of the statelines of the rest. But these also were after destroyed by Adrianus Caesar. There died by the famine and pestilence an innumerable num∣ber, by fire and sword ten hundred thousand: 2000 were found that either killed themselues, or one killed another, 7900 were taken captiues; of these, all the seditious theeues that accused one another, were slaine by Frontonius Caesar, Titus freed many, 7000 were sent into Aegypt, with extreme labour to consume and die, the properest and most able were reserued for triumph, many were distributed through the prouinces, some were slaine by the sword, and by beasts for publike spectacles, and those that were 16 yeares of age and vnder, together with many other, Caesar sold vnder the crowne, at thirty for a siluer penny; that as Christ was sold for thirty pence, so thirty of them should be sold for a penny,
With the riches of this towne Caesar triumphed, rode into Rome with two golden Chariots, built the Temple of Peace, and there put all the plate which he found in the temple of Ierusalem. Af∣ter all this, for a full determination of those euils, the two sediti∣ous captaines Iohannes Giscalenus and Simon the son of Giora, were put to most cruell deaths. Thus may we see the grieuous punish∣ment of the obstinat and ambitious, which God permitted to fall vpon them for their vnthankfulnesse and cruell tyranny. How the city of Ierusalem after this destruction by Titus Vespas. was vtterly beaten downe and defaced by Aelius Adr. Caesar, which he re-edifying, called it after his own name Aelia. THe city of Ierusalem being thus laid leuel with the ground, for the space of sixty yeares lay desolate, a receptacle for theeues and murtherers, a fit place for Wolues and wilde beasts, which resorted thither to feed vpon the dead bodies. And now time consuming their flesh, left their bones and skuls to lye vpon the earth as in a Charnell house. Thus it continued vntill one Benchochab (which signifies the Son of the Stars) born in the towne of Bethcoron not farre from Emaus, professed himselfe to be the Messiah or Christ. The Iewes supposing this to be true, because of that saying of Numb. 24. There shall a Starre rise vp out of Iacob) assembled themselues to the number of many thousands and followed him, with great tyranny and crueltie spoyling the Holy Land, and through all the countrey of Iudaea committing many outrages and massacres. Thus they continued for the space of eighteene yeares, at the end of which time Adrianus Ae∣lianus the Emperor hearing of those insolencies, leuied an Army and sent them into Iudea, vnder the gouernment of Iulius Seuerus, who in a pitcht field neere to Bethcoron and not far from Emaus conquered this Benchochab or Pseudo-Messiah, and with him slew fiue hundred thousand Iewes that were deceiued by his per∣suasion. Now when they went to seeke for the body of this De∣ceiuer amongst the Dead (as saith Talmudista) hee was found lying with an horrible Serpent about his necke; intimating how
God reiected him that would seem to imitate his Son; for euen as the Serpent deceiued our first Parents, so this Benchochab de∣ceiued the Iews, and for this cause they called him Bencozba, that is, The Son of Lying. The number of the Iewes which in the time of this war were slaine amounted to 500000 men, besides many others that perished by pestilence and famin. This warre hapned 64 yeares after the destruction of Ierusalem. After this second desolation of the Iewes, at the command of the Emperor (that there might be a final extirpation of the anti∣ent city of Ierusalem, and that the words of our Sauior might be fulfilled, Lo, there shall not be a stone left vpon a stone, Mat. 24) the ru∣ines and foundations thereof were digged vp, the stones broken in pieces, the ground left desolate, and the mountains are now be∣come barren and ouergrown with brambles: And that the name thereof might vtterly be forgotten, and as it were rooted out of the earth, hee set vp a new towne not far from the hill Gihon and Golgotha where Christ was crucified; which after he had ador∣ned with many goodly buildings, he called it by his owne name, Aelia. In the place of the Temple he set vp a Church in the ho∣nour of Iupiter and Venus. Iust in the place where the holy Altar stood, he erected his own image vpon a marble pillar, which con∣tinued vntill Saint Hieroms time. At Bethlehem he erected the Image of Adonis, and to that he consecrated at Church. Vpon the gates of the City he cut Hogs in marble, in contempt of the Iewes. Then did hee abiure them, That they should not come within the walls of the City, nor set foot vpon the ground neere Ierusalem. This being done, (as Dion saith) he dedicated it to the honour of Iupiter Capitolinus; and only made it free for Chri∣stians and such like to be in it. This town at this day we call Ie∣rusalem, although it be scituated in another place, and called by another name. Future Ages calling the actions of precedent times into que∣stion, puld a great contempt vpon this Towne, and so much the rather, because Infidelitie and other heathenish prophanesse was cherisht within this city. So that that which a little before was set vp in honour of the Emperour Aelianus, is now growne into contempt. Wherfore Helena the mother of Constantine the Great
hauing command of that Empire, to giue some satisfaction to the vniuersalitie, caused those prophane Temples and Idols to be abolished, and in their places erected others. Vpon mount Gol∣gotha the church called Golgothanus; vpon the mount of Olives one in the place of the ascention of Christ: and Constantine her son richly adorned the Sepulchre, and ouer it built a stately Temple all of polisht marble, richly gilt with gold, so that to this day it remaines as the chiefe ornament of the town. In this mans time the Iewes with great boldnesse indeauoured to rebuild the Tem∣ple iust in the place where it stood before: but at the commande∣ment of the Emperour they were repelled, and in recompence of their presumption had their eares cut off and their noses slit, be∣cause they had eares and would not heare, neither obey the com∣mandement of our Sauior. But as the Emperor was religious, and endeauored to support Christianitie, so his successor Iulianus was as full of impietie and prophanenesse; who that he might frustrat the prophecie of our Sauior, That Ierusalem should neuer be built again, in contempt caused the Iewes to assemble together, and with all expedition restore it to its former glory, giuing the vttermost of his helpe to their endeauours. But as they were seriously labouring in this work, of a sudden there came a great earthquake, and looke what they had built was by that quite ouerturned; then fire came out of the earth and from heauen, which destroied both the matter and the Workemen. And that the Iewes nor any Philosophers might impute it to a natural cause, there was seen in the heauens a bloudy crosse, and vpon their cloathes crosses shining like stars, which the Iewes could by no means wipe off. Yet this little pre∣uailed: a second time they attempted, & as before, a second earth∣quake hapned, with a storme of winde, which came with such ex∣treme violence, that all the stuffe which they had heaped toge∣ther for this purpose was vtterly blown away and destroyed. So that of force they were constrained to leaue off, & acknowledge, That Christ, whom their Forefathers had crucified, was the true Messiah. Greg. Nazianzen and Hierome report, That neuerthelesse the Iewes euen to this day, although it cost them much money, come yearely to the place where Ierusalem stood, and vpon the
day of the destruction thereof weep ouer it. Such was their affe∣ction vnto this City. But these euils were purged with a sudden inuasion (for no crying iniuries nor prophane insolencies against God passe vn∣punished, but that then or soone after a iust reuenge falls vpon them) for Cosroës Emperor of the Persians, whose impudencie and impietie was so great that hee would be worshipped as a god, a∣bout the yeare of our Lord 615, besieged this town, tooke it, and put to death 90000. Christians, carried the Patriarch thereof, to∣gether with many others away captiue. But Heraclius the Empe∣ror to punish him for his pride and crueltie set vpon Persia, and with fire and sword destroied the country not far from Nineueh, conquered his chiefe captain Razetis in a set battell, won the city of Nineueh, and went away with an honorable victorie. Seroës al∣so, the only begotten sonne of Cosroës, but a little before inuading the kingdom, kild his father in prison, restored the Patriarch and the rest of the Captiues which his father had taken, to Heraclius: and about the seuenth yeare after hee had warred vpon Persia, hee returned to Aelia with great pompe. Not long after, in the yeare 637, Haumar the chiefe Prince of the Saracens, which was the third from Mahomet, with a great Ar∣my afflicted Syria and Iudaea, conquered these Countries, and in his victories vsed great tyrannie and crueltie. Within two yeares after, he won Aelia, which had maintained a long and sharp siege; neither would Zacharias the Patriarch giue it vp, til he was com∣pelled thereto by extreme famin, and soon after died with griefe. Thus this towne continued for the space of 450 yeares in the hands of the Saracens. Then in the yere 1012, Caliphas Sultan of Egypt won it, beat downe the walls, destroied the Temple which the Emperor Constantine had built, and made havock of al things. Presently vpon this, the Turkes that came out of Scythia by the Caspian mountains, won the city, & draue thence the Saracens. Thus we may see that the Saracens and Turks, though they were both of one religion, yet for the country of the Iewes fought one against another, and compelled the Christians to pay them Tri∣bute for the fourth part of the city, wherein the Sepulchre of our Lord stood, being againe restored by the Emperor Constantine af∣ter the destruction of Caliphas.
The Christians being weary of this tribute, and of the oppres∣sion of the Infidels, became sutors to Pope Vrban the second of that name, for their deliuery; who in the yeare 1094 assembled a Councel at Clearemont in France, and by the instigation of one Peter the hermit, stirred vp the hearts of diuers Christian princes and great Lords to make a croysado; so that 10000 braue & well mounted souldiers went into the Holy land, and for a token of their war bore red crosses vpon their armes. In the same yeare there was a great blasing starre seene in the West, and after that followed a great plague for the space of two yeares through the world: this neuerthelesse hindred them not in their designes, but that they went their intended journy, won the City of Aelia from the Saracens, deliuered the Christians from their bondage and tax, and chose Godfrey of Lorrain Earle of Bul∣lion King thereof, whom they anointed in the Temple of the ho∣ly Sepulchre; but hee refused to be crowned with a Crowne of gold, saying, That it ill beseemed him to be called King of Ieru∣salem, (the true King whereof was Christ) or to sit crowned with gold, in the place where he was crowned with thorns that was the Son of the euer-liuing God: and then chose Arnolphus of Rhodes Patriarch. In the moneth of October the same yeare, a blasing Starre of maruellous bignesse appeared towards the South: it seemed to be like a wauing sword, foreshewing no doubt the destruction of all those that went about to re-establish this earthly Ierusalem. Immediatly after the Feast of the Natiuitie of Christ, all the Christians of the East countries vpon Candlemas day came out of Syria, but especially out of Antiochia, to Ierusalem, & in the Temple of the holy Sepulchre consecrated their Bishops and Chorasters, and with one consent sung Illuminare Ierusalem. They tooke also all the Cities, Castles, and Villages, and ouer them set Bishops; created foure Principalities, one at Ierusalem, another at Antiochia, a third at Edissa, a fourth at Tripoly. Also certain Earledomes and Baronies, as at Brito, Zidon, Caesarea, Galilee, Ioppa, and Ascalon. All these were appointed to pay tribute to the King of Ierusalem. All this was done in the yere of our Lord, 1099.
No sooner were these newes published to the world, but there was an vniuersall croysado through all Christendom, for the con∣quering and winning of the rest of the holy land, but before they could get thither, they were either slaine by the Grecians and other nations, or els died through famin & thirst: so that in them was fulfilled the prophecie of Zacharias, cap. 12.3. where it is said, It shall happen that I will make Ierusalem an heauy stone for all people all they that lift it vp shal be torn, though all the people of the earth be gathe∣red together against it. And verse 9, And in that day I will seeke to de∣stroy all the nations that come against Ierusalem. This yeare 1100 died Godfrey King of Ierusalem, of a feuer, vp∣on the 8 day of Iuly, when he had reigned scarce a yere, and was buried in the temple of mount Calvarie. After him succeeded his brother Baldovin the first of that name, & second King of Ierusalem. This man reigned 18 years in Ierusalem, and being ouercome by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt, af∣ter the losse of thirteene thousand Christians, he had much adoe to escape with life. Within a short time after hee died without issue. Baldwin the second succeeded his vncle, and was the third king of Ierusalem. He began his reign Anno 1118. This man ouercame the Turks: and the King of Damascus had issue only one daugh∣ter, named Milesent, whom he maried to the Earle of Angiers, and gaue with her the kingdom of Ierusalem, and died without heire male, in the yeare 1131. Fulco in right of his wife succeeded his father in law, & was the fourth King of Ierusalem. This Fulco was brother to the King of England, he reigned 13 years, fought many worthy battels against the Turkes, put 3000 of their men to the sword, tooke many of them prisoners and caried them to Ierusalem. After that, as hee was hunting the Hare by Acon, riding speedily, hee fell from his horse and was sorely brused, whereof he died, and left two sonnes called Baldwin and Almerick. Baldwin the third was the fifth King of Ierusalem, and succee∣ded his father. He won the city of Ascalon, he rebuilt the towne of Boza, (which had beene destroyed) placed there certaine Knights Templers, he lost the City of Edissa to the Saracens,
where many Christians were cruelly slain. And hauing reigned 19 yeares he died without issue. After him succeeded his brother Almerick, as was the sixt king of Ierusalem. In the time of this king the Sultan of Egypt gaue a great ouerthrow to the Knights Templers; which he seeking to reuenge, inuaded Egypt with a great army, besieged the great ci∣ty of Alcaire, but to small purpose; wherefore returning back to Ierusalem, he shortly after died, when he had reigned 12 years: he left behinde him three children, a sonne called Baldwin, and two daughters, Sibilla and Isabella. Baldwin the fourth succeeded his father, and was the seuenth king of Ierusalem; who abusing his gouernment was struck with leprosie, with the contagion of which disease he died miserably, in the 25 yere of his age, hauing reigned 13 years. Baldwin the fift of that name, the onely begotten son of his sister Sibil, by his con∣sent was chosen his successor, a youth of 9 yeares old, his fathers name was William Mountferrat, earle of March, who dying, his mo∣ther married one Guy Earle of Lusignan, to whom Baldwin com∣mitted the protection of the kingdome and of his yong kinsman till he came to mans estate. But this yong man within 7 years af∣ter the death of his vncle, died sitting at his table, not without su∣spition of poison. Guy his protector, by the persuasion of his wife, and at the instigation of the Ierosolimits, took vpon him the go∣uernment: but Raimond Earle of Tripoli was his great aduersa∣ry, for that Baldwin 4. for his exceeding pride, at the instigation of that Guy had displaced him of all his Offices and titles in the commonwealth. These two striuing for the kingdom, it hapned that Guy was charged with his kinsmans death, vnder which pre∣tence Raimond made war against him. During these troubles, Sa∣ladine Sultan of Egypt taking aduantage of this opportunitie, made war vpon them both, and with great facility conquered the kingdome and destroied Ierusalem. In this yeare 1187, there happened so great an Eclipse of the Sunne, that at noone day the Starres were plainely to bee seene. Soone after this, Raimond and Guy were both taken prisoners, and thirty thousand Christians cruelly put to the sword. After this, the Saracens sacked the Towne, threw the Bells out of the Stee∣ples,
made stables of the Churches; only the Temple on Mount Golgotha stood vntoucht: for the Turkes and Saracens honour Christ as a great Prophet. And thus the new kingdome of the Christians in Ierusalem ended, which was vpon the second day of October, in the yeare 1187, after it had continued in their possession 88 yeares. Du∣ring the continuance of this kingdome there were many horrible visions and strange Signes and Wonders seene both in Heauen, on earth, and in the ayre; foreshewing (no doubt) that God was not well pleased with their actions which sought to restore that kingdom of Ierusalem. For, My kingdome (saith Christ) is not of this world. And although after that, there were many Kings that by all possible means endeauored to recouer and restore the same, and for that purpose haue leauied many great Armies, and vnderta∣ken many tedious journies; yet all their counsels and determina∣tions came to nothing, for that God so often as they vndertooke any such expedition, either stayed their Armies, oppressed them with war, or else plagued them with famine, in such an extreame measure, that with very hunger they haue bin constrained to eat their Horses. Frederick Barbarossus may be an example of these calamities; who with a great army making an expedition to Ierusalem, as he was trauelling through Asia minor, his horse started and flung him into the riuer, where he died miserably ere he could be saued. Ma∣ny other Princes, besides in the like enterprise came to the like ends; for they were either destroied by the Barbarians, with the losse of thousands of their men cruelly slain, or vtterly destroied with vnnatural diseases or vntimely deaths. Now when the Emperour Fredericke the second of that name had beseeged and brought to great miserie the Sultan of Egypt, and the Knights Templers had done the like to Damieta; Corderio the Sultans son beat downe the walls of Ierusalem, and had it not bin for the great lamentations and ernest entreaties of the Chri∣stians, he would haue destroied the city; but for their sakes he left standing Solomons Temple, and the Temple of the holy Sepul∣chre; for at this time Christians inhabit in them.
Within a while after, about the yeare 1228, Fredericke the se∣cond of that name, Emperor of Rome, went to the holy land with a great army, and came to Ptolomais, otherwise called Acon, where staying a while, he made a league with the Sultan of Egipt for ten years, regained Ierusalem without drawing sword, & was there crowned in the yeare 1229, keeping at that time in Ierusa∣lem a royal Easter. This man fortified the Christians with a gar∣rison, rebuilt Nazareth and Ioppa, and so returned into Italy. In the yeare 1246, Cassanus King of the Tartars being persua∣ded by the Sultan, with a great army inuaded Iudaea, won Ieru∣salem, caused the Christians to be cruelly slaine, beat downe the holy Sepulchre euen to small pieces, and left but little standing. It was after this destroyed by Tamerlaine King of the Tartars, and by Mahomet the second of that name, Emperour of the Turkes. But the Monkes had leaue to build vp the holy Sepulcre againe, for the which they payed to the Sultan or his Deputy a yearely tribute. In the yeare of our Lord 1516, Selymus Emperor of the Turks, about the twenty fourth day of August, neere to Damascus ouer∣came Campson Gaurus Sultan of Egypt in a cruell Warre, and put to death many thousands of his men; and the Sultan himselfe seeking to saue his life by flight was miserably slaine. This Se∣lymus conquered the Holy Land, Syria, Damascus, and all the Countries thereabouts; and as he went through Iudaea, leauing his Army at Gaza, with a few of his Souldiers he went to Ieru∣salem, that he might see with his eyes that place which was made so famous by the antient Writers, and was so often mentioned in the Old and New Testament. But when he came he found no∣thing but a ruinate and waste place, barren and rude to looke vp∣on, inhabited by a few poore Christians, and they also held in great contempt and bondage, paying a great tribute to the Sul∣tan of Egypt, for their liberty and the holy Sepulchre, as P. Iouius writeth. But after that Selymus in that place had done his Offe∣rings and Sacrifices to his god Mahomet, seeing the Priests and Christians prest with extreme pouertie, out of his singular mercy and compassion gaue them a large and sumptuous gift, when hee had stayed but one day and one night in the Towne. The next
morning before day he went with all expedition to his Army at Gaza, & from thence into Egypt, where he besieged the great and famous city Alcaire, and in the yeare 1517 took it, conquered all the country, vtterly extirpated the Sultan, and went away with an honorable victory and rich booty. From this yeare euen till now, the towne of Aelia or Ierusalem is vnder the jurisdiction of the Turks. Thus may we see how often, and with what miserable ca∣lamities this city hath bin afflicted, euen since the first destructi∣on by Vespasian; which makes euident the great iudgment of God not only vpon the Iews, but also vpon the earth where they inha∣bited, for their infidelitie and vnmercifull cruelty. The description of Ierusalem and the scituation thereof as it is now in these times. THe former incursions and common desolations leauing this town ruined and spoiled for want of inhabitants, it became a desart and forsaken place; onely some few Christians, ei∣ther out of the zeale of religion, or for vulgar ostentation, to shew that there had bin a town, dwelt there: and thus it continued vn∣till the yeare 1542. at which time Solyman the great Turk, either in respect of the strength of the place, or in hope of profit, or else to get himselfe a name, with great cost and labor re-edified it, set vp many stately buildings and sumptuous houses, beautified it with two costly Temples, the one the Temple of Solomon, and the other the holy Sepulchre; inlarged the extent thereof, and seated it vpon high hils. After all this, compast it about with a spatious and thicke wall, and vpon that placed many strong and stately towers, wherein there stands eight gates, viz. the fish gate, the Old gate, S. Stephens gate (so called because they say S. Ste∣phen went out by that gate when hee was stoned) the Angle gate, the Dung gate, the Sheep gate, the Golden and Fountaine gates. Thus the antient city, and that which the Emperor Adrian built, being both destroied, in another place is set vp again. So that be∣tween both, this new city standeth, and the first city begins to be again inhabited.
Of the Temple of the holy Sepulchre. THis Temple lieth vpon the West within this new towne, at first fairely built by the Emperor Constantine, but destroyed by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt: then by the Emperours of Con∣stantinople rebuilt, which continueth to this day. It is round in the proportion, adorned with 79 pillars 30 foot long; the wide∣nes by the Diameter (besides the pillars) is 73 feet, leaded aboue, and vpon the top of the roofe standeth a Lanthorn, by which the light commeth in: this Lanthorne is very curiously glased. In the middle standeth the holy Sepulchre. To this ioyneth the Church in mount Golgotha, and serueth in stead of a Quire. It standeth something lower, but all vnder one roofe. The place where the holy Sepulchre standeth is four square, eight foot long and eight broad, hewne out of a rocke, and couered with marble; there is a little doore in the East part of it, very low, by which men go into it, and within that the Sepulchre it self standeth vp∣on the North side, made of gray marble, three handfuls high, and eight foot long. There are no windowes for light to come to it, but ouer there hangeth continually nine lamps burning, wherby it receiueth light. The vault of this Sepulchre is diuided with a wall; the outward is both of the same proportion and length as the inward, but that which is without seemeth to be an entrie to the inner caue where Christ was buried: and there (as some say) euen to this day is found a piece of the stone which the Angell rolled from the graue before the resurrection; the other part of the stone (howsoeuer it came there) lyes vpon mount Sion. But some thinke that the Armenians carried it thither, because vpon it they haue built an Altar. In this inner caue there hangs nine lamps to giue light vnto them that enter in by the East; so that in the inner and outer Vault there standeth eighteene Lamps. The Mount whereon Christ was crucified seemeth to stand vpon a rocke of stone, whitish and somthing blushing. It is distant from the holy Sepulcre 130 foot. The place where the Crosse stood was an hard rocke, eighteene steps in the ascent, and answereth to nine and twenty feet. The hole where the Crosse stood is about
the roundnesse of a mans head in latitude; and if a man might beleeue the Monkes thereabouts, they say also that in that place is to be seene the colour of our Sauiours bloud euen to this day. Vpon the left hand of this there stands an Altar made of marble, and ouer that a sumptuous Chappel paued and couered with po∣lisht marble, gilt and adorned with refulgent gold, the wals wher∣of are very curiously wrought and gilded. In the Church vpon mount Golgotha they also shew part of a pillar naturally blacke, spect with red spots, where they say Christ was whipt, and make the Vulgar beleeue that these specks are the drops of bloud that fell from him. The other part of this Colume was caried to Con∣stantinople, as it was thought. In this church Godfrey first Christi∣an King of Ierusalem, and the rest of his successors lie buried. Of the Temple of Solomon as it is at this day. THis Temple lieth towards the East, and was built by the Christians iust in the same place where the former Temple stood at the time when this City was rebuilt and inlarged. The body thereof is very high and spatious, and built of polisht mar∣ble, adorned with most exquisit and curious workemanship, very artificiall and glorious both within and without, insomuch that the polished stones cast a singular beautifull and resplendant lu∣stre. Aboue it is couered with lead, and was built vp at the cost and labor of the Grecians; in the roofe whereof the Turks place an halfe moone, as they vsually doe in all such churches wherein they come and haue authority. The Turkes and Saracens haue this Temple in great reuerence and deuotion, they adorne it (ac∣cording to their custome) with diuers artificial pictures and em∣blems. They will suffer no Christians to enter into it, nor any Iewes vpon paine of death. And if it happens that at any time they go into it, they first wash themselues with water very clean, then put off their hose and shoos, and so go bare foot. This Tem∣ple they call the holy Rocke, and in the body thereof there han∣geth 700 lamps which burne night and day. In the midst hereof there standeth a certaine little rocke euery where indented with yron, neere to which not any of the Saracens or Infidels dare to approach or touch, although there come many very farre to vi∣sit
it: for they beleeue that there were many memorable & wor∣thy things done in that rock: they think that Melchisedeck the first Priest of the great God offered bread and wine vpon it, Genes. 14. and that here the Patriarch Iacob saw the Ladder which reached from heauen to earth, Gen. 28. which indeed hapned not in Ieru∣salem, but in Bethel, as the Scriptures witnesse. Further they be∣leeue, that vpon this stone Dauid saw the Angel of the Lord stan∣ding with a shaken sword when he strook the city with the pesti∣lence, 2 Sam. 24. and that the Priests of the old Testament offe∣red vpon this stone their sacrifices to the Lord, which were de∣uoured with fire from heauen. All which things do vtterly differ from holy Scripture. The Iewes also are of opinion, That the prophet Ieremy about the time of the captiuity of Babylon, in this stone hid the Ark of the Couenant, vntill such time as the Lord brought the people backe again from the captiuitie. Which is contrarie also to the books of the holy Scripture; for, 2 Mach. 2. it is said, it was hid in the mount Nebo, where Moses stood when he saw the whole land of Canaan. Also the Turkes say that Christ sate vpon this stone when Simeon tooke him in his armes and blessed him. Here also he sate in the midst of the Doctors when he was but twelue yeares of age, Luk. 2. which also differeth from the Scripture; for this was not the body of the Temple, but in the middle court or Solomons porch, which sometimes was taken for the Temple, be∣cause it ioyned to it. And diuers circumstances of the Scripture do seeme to make this euident, because heere Christ taught, and here the people vsually met together, as appeareth, Iosh. 10. and Psal. 72. About the Temple of Ierusalem there is a fair Plain much re∣sembling our Church yards, all paued with marble stone. To this there is adioyning a faire Church couered with lead, & was som∣times called Solomons porch; but after the Christians had woon Ierusalem they gaue it the name of S. Maries. The Turke keepes burning in this daily 800 lamps, and it is much greater than that of Solomons Temple. The Sultan of Egypt also about an hundred yeares before, built a little Church or Moscho close by Solomons Temple, wherein are continually burning 88 Lampes. There
is a vault vnder the Temple of the blessed Virgin Mary, of such an extraordinary greatnesse that 600 horse may easily be placed in it. And thus we may see the Temple of Solomon and city of Ie∣rusalem not only to be in the power of the Turkes, but also pro∣phaned with the blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet. And also we may here behold the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place where somtime was the Ark of the Couenant, Dan. 9. Mat. 24. and the prophecie of Ieremy is fully finished, ca. 19. This place shall be vnclean like vnto the place of Tophet, where they did sacri∣fice to the Host of heauen, and vnto other strange gods. Of other buildings within the city of Aelia, which is now called Ierusalem. MOunt Sion is placed toward the South of Ierusalem, where euen at this day the Monks vndertake to shew the ruines of Dauids Tower, the sepulchres of the Kings of Israel, and many o∣ther holy places. But P. Orosius and other Historians write, How in the time of Adrian Caesar there happened a great earthquake in such a terrible maner, that the mountain of Sion with the sepul∣chre of Dauid fel down and were vtterly defaced. Further all true Historians do write, That Adrian the Emperour did so much de∣face the City, that hee left not a stone standing vpon a stone, nay not a whole stone, but all were broken into small pieces; and yet notwithstanding pilgrims are so mad and blind, that they go thi∣ther with great pains to seeke those holy places, where when they come, with the expence of a great deale of time, in recompence of their pains are made a laughing stocke to the Kings of Ierusa∣lem, and find nothing but feigned and supposed holy places and buildings: since the words of our Sauior manifest, That there shall not be a stone left vpon a stone which shall not be broken to pieces. And Borchardus the Monk saith, That the Romans caused the Temple and other princely buildings, together with the mountains, to be thrown downe and cast into the vallies, with which being filled, there remaineth not so much as an Emblem of the old Citie. From whence may euidently appeare, That those places which are now shewen to Pilgrims by the Monkes of Ierusalem, are
meerly suborned and feigned, on purpose to deceiue them & get their mony. They are very simple therefore that go to Ierusalem seeke their saluation in such places. And as for the Sepulchre (as is aforesaid) the Tartars beat it all in pieces; so that this monu∣ment of our Lord is not to be found vpon the earth. Wherefore our Sauiour Christ is no more to be sought among the dead, but in the sacred monument of his holy word, for there he hath pro∣mised to make euident his divine presence, &c. Of the Sects that are in and about the Temple of the holy Sepulchre. IN and about the church which is built ouer the holy sepulcre vpon mount Calvarie, there are at this day many of diuers nations and countries which inhabit, of diuers opinions and Reli∣gions. And although they differ in material points of their faith, yet would they be al Christians: of which number there are some Latines, Greekes, Abissines, Armenians, Gregorians, Nestorians, Surians, and Iacobins. The Latines for the most part are such as wee call Franciscan Monks, Obseruants, or Friers.Latines. These haue the keeping of the holy Sepulchre, and looke to it very diligently; where somtimes they make a certain number of Knights of the noble Order of S. Iohns Templers, with many ceremonies and great solemnities. These Knights are girt with a sword all gilt, hanging in a red velvet gir∣dle; a chain of gold is put vpon them worth about 100 Hunga∣rian duckets, at the end whereof there hangs a Ierusalem Crosse of gold. This kind of crosse also they are permitted to weare vp∣on their armes and clothes; then haue they a paire of gilt spurres with velvet tyings. But before they are admitted into this order, they must sweare vpon the holy Sepulchre to maintain & defend the doctrine of the Pope. The Grecians that are there be also Monkes,Grecians. and doe inhabit within the Temple of the holy Sepulchre; but they haue the kee∣ping of the place where our Sauior Christ was crucified, and dif∣fer from the Romanists. For they beleeue first, That the holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father and not the Sonne. Secondly,
they giue the Sacraments in both kinds; thirdly, they hold not the Pope to be head of the Church; fourthly, they deny Purga∣tory and prayer for the dead; fiftly, they sing Masse in their own language that euery man may vnderstand it, but they obserue se∣uen Sacraments as the Romanists do. They teach men to pray to and call vpon Saints, they yearly obserue two strict fasting daies, and eat no flesh vpon Saturdaies. The rest of the Grecians that are through the East parts leaue mariage free, as well for the Clergy as Laity, and condemne the Latine Priests because they marry not. They allow no grauen images in their Churches, but in some places of their Churches they haue faire painted pictures hanging. They approue not the Pope, but haue a Patriarch for their high Bishop, which Patriark is greatly reuerenced, and much honored in Constantinople. Abissines.The Abissins be such as are of Prester Iohns gouernment: their complexion is browne, their habitation is in the Temple vpon mount Calvary, on the East side of the Church dore: They also approue not the Pope, but allow Priests to mary, and giue the sa∣crament in both kinds; yet there are many sects and opinions a∣mong them, forbearing those meats forbidden in the old Testa∣ment: they circumcise both male and female, which the Iews do not; they obserue our Saturday for their Sabbath; they baptise their children with fire, of which I will speake more hereafter, in the description of the towne of Saba. Armenians.The Armenians are Christians, and come out of Armenia; their dwelling is in a Chappell vpon mount Sion neere to Saint Iames his church; they deny the Pope to be head of the Church: they minister the Sacraments in both kinds; their Priests marry; they forbeare the meats forbidden in the old Testament. They haue a kinde of custome, to whine and cry by the graues of the dead; vpon Twelfth day they keep a great feast, and the next day begins their Lent, which they keep strictly, and eat neither eggs nor fish, nor any liuing thing during that time: They obserue Wednesdayes and Fridayes; they preach, sing and say their Ser∣uice in their own tongue; they deny prayer for the dead, and Pur∣gatory; they all weare hats with blew hat-bands. Gregorians.The Gregorians are Christians that dwell by the great city of
Trapezunta vpon the Euxinian Sea. Their Priests marrie, but if their wiues die they must not marrie againe. They dwell in Ieru∣salem, in the Church vpon mount Caluarie, where Christ after his resurrection shewed himselfe like a Gardner vnto Marie Magdalen. The Nestorian heretickes,Nestorians. who now are found in great num∣bers in Niniuie, which at this day is called Mossell, and in other places thereabout; doe yet hold the heresie of Nestorias there master, and teach, That Christ had two natures, and that he hath two persons, and that Marie was not the mother of God, but that she bare Christ who was man onely: about their Hats they were flesh coloured hatbands. Some of their Priests are found to dwell in the Temple of mount Caluarie. The Surians follow the Graecian Christians,Surians. touching the most of their opinions; they respect not much their religion; for in re∣gard of their pouertie they are forced to worke for day wages vn∣der the Turks. Some of them also dwell in Ierusalem in a church called S. Marks, which standeth in the place of the house where Iohn Marke dwelt, where the Apostle Peter knockt when the An∣gell led him out of prison. The Sect of the Iacobins are resident in a Chappell which stan∣deth behind the Sepulchre.Iacobins. They take that name of Iacob the He∣reticke, who was a Disciple of the Patriarch of Alexandria; they are wauering and vnconstant among themselues, and are here and there found in Iudaea, Aegypt, and Barbarie, diuided into many Sects; for some of them hold with Eutichus and Macharus, who ascribe one nature to Christ, which is the Godhead, and denie the manhood. Some of them circumcise their children, some baptise them with fire, and make a crosse vpon their faces. Of this fierie baptisme you shall reade more hereafter in the description of the Citie of Saba. Hereby you may note, how the temple of the holy Sepulchre in Ierusalem is filled with many Sects, who altogether giue and pay tribute to the Emperour of the Turkes; whereby you may see that Christ will be no more sought in the holy Sepulchre, but rather in the holy Euangelists, where he suffereth himselfe to be found by all those that seeke him with a pure heart.
Of the Sects of the Iewes. IN these our times the Iewes do inhabite in Ierusalem, and are diuided into many sects, that is to say, Pharises, Saduces, Essaes, Genisteis, Morboneis, and Meristeis. The Pharises tooke that name from the interpretation of the law, and is deriued from the Hebrew word Parasch, which signifies to expound: so that Phara∣sei is as much to say as Doctor or expounder of the law: they ap∣proue of Moses and the Prophets; they hold the immortalitie of the soule: but of Christ and the principall parts of his Doctrine, of the law, of sinne, and of ceremonies, they haue many vngodly opinions and expositions. They faine that the law was institu∣ted by God for outward discipline; that sinne is onely outward transgression & the violating of mens traditions: they hold there is no originall sinne, but that men may performe the Law, and merit euerlasting life; besides many other things, as washings, fa∣stings, offering gifts in the Temple, and such like ceremonies; of which there is no commandement extant in the Scripture. Reade Mat. 3.59.12.5. &c. Mar. 2.3.7. &c. Ioh. 3.7.8. &c. Acts 15.23. &c. The Saduces giue themselues an honorable title, being deriued from Zedukim or Zeddikim, calling themselues just, from the word Zadok, He was just, and by Amphetresim is not vnproperly deriued from Dicaioo, or Dicaios, signifying justus: and by Prothesin in La∣tine, Iudex a Iudge. So that Zaddik or Zadducaeus signifies a just Iudge, which would judge all others, but they themselues were without offence: Thus the worst men got the best names. They onely allow the fiue bookes of Moses; they dreame the Messias should be an earthly king; they beleeue the soules of men to bee mortall, and to perish with their bodies; they doe not beleeue the resurrection, nor that there are either Angels, Spirits, or Diuels. The Essaes had rather be called Studients, taking their name from Asa, vnder which title they would seeme to reprehend, and amongst other things auoid the profane liberty of the Saduces and approue not the arrogant dissimulation of the Pharises; but that they teach more diuine and profitable precepts. These liue Monastical life, vnmarried; their goods are common; for the most part they practise physicke: in their assemblies, the ancientest o them read some part of Moses law, or some of the Prophets; all
of them both yong and old at certaine times of the day, say pray∣ers. They haue no new kinde of doctrine, but imbrace the Priest∣hood of Moses: They dwell in the desarts and vtmost parts of Iu∣daea neere to the lake Asphaltites, and in the garden of Balm neer Iericho, where the antient Prophets Elias and Eliseus had their schools, whose disciples were called the children of the prophets. These three sects began in Iudas Macchabeus time Ioseph. l. 3. c. 18. The Genisteis are said to be those that do certainly affirm, that they are of the posteritie of Abraham, although they haue lost their genealogies, & cannot proue it. These call themselues great and noble, and are of the stocke of those that in the captiuitie of Babylon married the wiues of other nations: of which you may reade in Nehem. So that they are halfe Gentiles, halfe Iewes, and account themselues to be of the Nobilitie. The Morboneis very solemnly obserue the Saboth, which ma∣ny others that are flatterers of the Turkes and Saracens doe not: there are a great company of these; for almost all the Iewes doe very superstitiously celebrate the Saboth: and therfore they take their name partly from a Multitude, and parly from Vsurie; for Merebech in Hebrew signifies a multitude, and Tarebah Vsurie. Meristeis are those Iewes that diuide the Scripture, and say the Prophets spoke not all with one spirit; and what they list they make Scripture, and what they list they leaue out: and therefore the Grecians call them Meristein, which signifies to diuide. There are also others in these our times that are Iewes too, but they are called Samaritanes, which onely approue of the Mosai∣call law, and reject the rest of the Scriptures and Prophets. These are so called from Keeping: for this word Schamar properly sig∣nifies to preserue or keepe a speech in heart, and hath therefore a certaine congruitie and consonance with the Latine word Sermo: so that Schamar in Hebrew, and Sermo in Latine, are much what of one signification. But all the Iewes, except the Saduces haue one faith; they thinke they may fulfill the commandements, and by their owne workes be iustified and purchase eternall life. They deny the Tri∣nitie and Christ, and do beleeue that their Messias is yet to come, and shall bring them backe againe into the land of Promise.
Of the Saracens and Turkes which inhabit in Ierusalem: of their faith and religion. THe Saracens are a people of Arabia the stony; of the poste∣ritie of Ishmael the son of Abraham, which he begat of Ha∣gar. From whence they are rightly called Agarins, notwithstan∣ding they had rather bee called Saracens. Others call them Saracens, à Saraca, which is a part of Arabia the stony. It seemeth therefore that these people tooke their name from a principality; for Sarar in Hebrew is the same that Principatum gessit is in La∣tine, or if you will, Principatum obtinuit, which signifies (to obtaine Principalitie.) And therefore the Saracens, or Sarazens, may be said Princes or Captaines, whose Principalitie extends it selfe far and neere: but Agarins signifies Peregrinators; for Gor or Gar is as much to say as a Pilgrim. These people combined themselues with Mahomet that false Prophet, borne of obscure parentage: his fathers name was Abdiminech, of his wife that was of the family of Ishmael, or of the Saracens, borne in Arabia the stony, (and as it is exprest in their Alcaron) vpon the xxj. day of September, according to our ac∣count, about the yeare of Christ 570. he tooke his name from a tumultuous confusion: for hamah signifies tumultuatus est, he hath beene tumultuous; And Hamam, tumultuando disturbauit, He diui∣ded by contention. From hence Maimo signifies tumultuor, A contender, and Maiomai, concitor, a rebell. From whence may be gathered, That Mahomet is an ominous & seditious name. Whiles he was in his infancie hee liued with his father; after, being of a prompt wit, he serued one Abdomoneplis a Merchant, in whose ser∣uice conuersing with Christians and Iewes, he got a smattering knowledge of the old and new Testament, and many acquain∣tance; amongst which was one Sergius an Arian Monke, a man very well affected of this Abdomoneplis. Abdomoneplis died, and by the persuasion of this Monke, Mahomet married Cadican his wife, although she was fiftie yeares of age, and by her had great riches: shee soone after also died, and left Mahomet all that shee had. He on a sudden, being lift vp to this height of substance, grew very ambitious (for he was naturally proud, wrathfull, a theefe, a whoremaster, a most impudent adulterer, and whersoeuer he came
made hauocke of all things. (This man by the helpe of the Sara∣zens and others, affected the kingdome of Arabia, which within short time after he obtained, entring Mecha the chiefe city ther∣of, vpon Thursday the fifteenth of Iuly, Anno Dom. 622. and by the helpe of two Iewes and this Sergius, wrote that blasphemous Law of the Alcoron, falsly professing himselfe to be a Prophet, and began cruelly to oppose himselfe against all neighbouring nations and cities. The Alcaron taketh the name from Splendor or Brightnesse; for Al in the Arabicke, is as much as Karan in the Hebrew, and that signifies to shine or cast forth a brightnesse. This Alcaron containes a blasphemous and detestable law, written in the Arabian tongue without any order or colour of knowledge, teaching manifest lyes, and execrable blasphemies against God; and for the most part, the pleasures and delights of this world: for he doth deny that there is one eternall essence of the Deitie, and the holy Tri∣nitie; our Sauiour Christ they one while call the Sonne of God, and another while, the Soule or Spirit of God. They deny his Deitie, but say, that he was a holy man, borne without a father, of the chast and incorruptible Virgin Marie. And although he was before all beginning, yet they beleeue that he was not begotten, but created before all other essentiall creatures, by the eternall God. Also they say hee was not crucified, but some other in his place; and therefore the saluation of man not to consist in the merits of Christ, but in our owne proper workes. And that the Iewes might embrace the Alcaron, they retaine Circumcision, which is commonly done when the children are thirteene yeares of age; about which time, Ishmael was circumcised. They forbeare the meates forbidden in the Law; they haue many wiues at one time; they tollerate a bil of Diuorce, and affirme that after the re∣surrection men may haue many wiues, and with them banquet, surfet, and vse pleasant recreations, with diuers such errours and vaine trifles, which for breuities sake I omit. That hee might the better perswade men to embrace and be∣leeue these his lies, and blasphemous doctrines, he very cunning∣ly seemed to confirme them with many false and fained miracles:
and amongst the rest this was one: Hauing taught a white Doue to fetch corne in his eare, whiles he was preaching to the people, it chanced she came and sat vpon his shoulder, and putting her bill into his eare according to her accustomed manner, he persua∣ded the people that it was the spirit of God, which deliuered him the words of the Law. A Bull also, taught after the same manner, at his voice came before him, and kneeling downe did him reue∣rence, with the Alcaron tied vpon his hornes; which he affirmed was come from heauen and brought that new Law. Then did hee make diuers hornes of gold and siluer, and filling them full of milke hid them in the earth: after which, in a great assembly he caused the same places to be opened, and told the people that these signified plenty and abundance, to all such as kept and ob∣serued that Law: But the violaters thereof should be punished with death. Together with many other such like idle and foolish miracles, (which would be too tedious to recite) that he might make the people beleeue that it came from God. And being afflicted with the falling sickenesse, gaue it out, that then the An∣gell Gabriel told him the Law, making this likewife a meanes to further his designes: but after, viz. vpon the eighth of Iune, Anno Dom. 632. and in the sixtie one yeare of his age, he died miserably of this disease, after he had raigned in Mecha ten yeres; and En∣bubizer or Abubachar his father in law succeeded him in the go∣uernement, who built in his honour a Church, and in that put his sepulchre, both stately and sumptuous. The Turkes also embrace this doctrine, and joyned their forces with the Saracens: They extended their Empire vnder Mahomet the third, into Asia, Europe, and Affrica. They deriue their name (as I suppose) from Crueltie; for Turca signifieth A cruell destroyer, or an armed enemie, being deriued from the He∣brew word Tarach, that is, to effect his purpose. From whence they are not improperly called of the Graecians  to vex and make wearie; or else from the Hebrew word Tachaera, which sig∣nifies a shield; and from the Greeke word  and , to put on a shield, and to arme themselues: for the Turkes are armed enemies, and destroyers of the whole world: And by Ezechiel are
called Gog and Magog, cap. 38. & 39. of Magog which was the son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. and as some thinke inhabited the North parts of the world. Pliny places them in Bospherus, Cimmerius, Scy∣thia, &c. which lieth toward the East. But indeed they haue of∣ten changed their residence, and haue come into Persia, Armenia, Syria, Palestina, Arabia, & cruelly destroyed them, vntil they had conquered Constantinople, and got a great part of Europe; and haue infected the mindes of al the inhabitants in those parts with their manners, slaughters, and rapines, according to that blasphe∣mous Law of the Alcaron. They first afflicted those parts about the yeare of our Lord 760. Constantius Copronius, being then the Emperour of Rome; since which time they haue conquered a great part of the World.
A Relation of the Trauells and Peregrinations of the Saints and holy Patriarchs, as they are seuerally men∣tioned in the first Booke of MOSES. And first of the first man, ADAM. ADAM the first man, tooke his name from A∣damah, which signifies redde earth, because he was made of the redde slime of the earth. Therefore the Latines deriue Homo from Hu∣mo; also the Graecians from , which sig∣nifies the earth. But when man was layed open to all calamities, miseries, yea & death, the Hebrews called him Enosh, which signifies, a mortall and mise∣rable man: for this attribute to man agreeth with the word Nosch, which signifies to be sicke of a deadly disease. There are some that thinke that man was made in Syria neere to Damascus, because there is found much redde earth. Others say neere to Hebron a citie in the Tribe of Iuda, and there also lies buried; for in a caue neere that place, lies much redde earth, which the inhabitants e∣uen to this day shew vnto Pilgrims: but this is nothing to the pur∣pose, since we know that man was first created, and then brought into Paradise, Gen. 1. and 2. Of Paradise. PAradise, which in Greeke is , and in Hebrew Pardes, signifies a pleasant Garden plentifully furnished with fruit∣full trees, but principally Myrtle trees, which beareth a kinde of berrie of a very delectable taste: for this Hebrew word seemeth to
be a compound, that is, of Parah, which signifies to fructifie, and Hadas, a mirtle; of the fruit of which tree, there is made a certaine wine called mirtle or mulberrie wine: the mysterie hereof is, that Christ is that tree of life, that fruitful and pleasant mirtle, wherby we are raised vp vnto eternall life, Gen. 2. Apoc. 22. Mat. 11. Luther calleth Paradise in his discourse of Germany, a pleasant Garden, Eccl. 2. Munster, an Orchard: and in the Bible it is called Eden, a place plentifully furnished with al things necessary for the pro∣curing of pleasure & delight. The Grecians call it Hedone, which signifies an extraordinary delectable and pleasant place; for in it there was great aboundance of all things, as well of trees, fruits, herbes, and sweet smelling floures, as of beasts and fowles of the heauen. Into this place God put man, to dresse it and keep it: But where it stood, and whether it be now vpon the earth, there are diuers opinions: the Romanists hold, that it is placed in the East without the Tropicks: others would haue it vnder the Aequator, because it is a very temperate region: but experience tells vs, that there it is very hot and scorching: others think it stands vpon the top of a high mountain, free from all the violent motions and im∣pressions of the ayre, in which place they hold Aenoch and Eliah are yet liuing: there are others that assigne the whole East part to be Paradise, and that there were some peculiar places most fruit∣full, of which they thinke was Syria, Damascus, Arabia Foelix, E∣gipt and Iudaea, in which part man was put. They also say, that the tree of Knowledge stood vpon Mount Caluary, neere about that place where Christ was crucified, so that he made satisfaction for sinne in the same place where sinne was first committed. And this I hold to be the better opinion; and that it remained till the de∣luge, kept in the custody of Angells, at Gods appointment, and by the floud, together with other creatures, was abolished. And for that saying of our Sauior to the theefe vpon the crosse, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, is not to be vnderstood of the earthly Paradise, but of the heauenly, the place of the blessed angels and saints, where God with his diuine majesty filleth them with the light of righteousnesse, and quickneth them with eter∣nall life. This place Paul cals the third heauen, and that heauenly Paradise of which the earthly Paradise is a type, 2. Cor. 12.
Of the foure Riuers that watered Paradise. THe foure Flouds of Paradise, were, Pison, Gihon, Hidekel, and Euphrates, Gen. 2. There was but one Fountaine of all these floods, and this was in Paradise it selfe, which in those times was diuided into foure streames. But as by the Flood all the face of the earth was changed, so likewise were these riuers, and their Fountains and Channells altered from the places where at first they were; notwithstanding, in memory of them, there remaines some reliques, though perhaps not in the same place, nor spring∣ing out of one and the same Fountaine, as they did before. And as the Mediterranean sea, the gulph of Arabia, and many other Meeres and Lakes, before the Flood, were not, but (by the gene∣rall consent of all learned men) hapned by that huge inundation; the same may be said of these Riuers. The head, or beginning of the Riuer Pischon or Pison, is 4800 miles Eastward from Ierusalem, and is like vnto an arme of the Sea, some 12 or 16 miles ouer, and for that cause it taketh the name from Posch, that is, increasing, or, of an extraordinary greatnes: from hence the Grecians cal it Phuson, because it diuides it selfe into diuers Riuolets or Streames. It compasseth in Hauilah, it di∣uideth that part of the world which wee call India, into the out∣ward and inward: and there is called Ganges, taking that name from an Aethiopian King called Gange, as Swydas saith. Some say it is vnknowne where it first riseth: others say it riseth in Scythia, and watereth all the neighbour countries as it passeth along, as Nylus doth, and so being dispersed into 30 channels, diuideth India with one of them: the narrowest place of Ganges is 8 miles ouer, and the shallowest 100 foot deepe, it bringeth forth Dol∣phins, Crocodiles, and diuers other creatures. Solinus and Strabo saith, That the Riuer Tygris riseth in Armenia, a very faire and cleare Fountaine; it is distant from Ierusalem six hundred miles towards the North: it runneth with such an exceeding swiftnesse, that fishes cannot swimme a∣gainst it, and passeth through the lake of Arthusia, without once mingling it selfe with the water: and for this cause it is called
Tigris, which signifies, a dart, and a beast of extraordinary swift∣nesse and cruelty. This Riuer running from towards the North and the rising of the Sunne, it compasseth in Mesopotamia, and passeth by the borders of Media and Assiria, and after that of Chaldaea and Arabia, it there receiueth in the Riuer Hydaspis, and so joyning with Euphrates, falls into the lake of Persia. The Hebrews called this Riuer Chidikill from Chadad, which signifies acute, and Kalal, light, for it is a swift running streame: from hence the Graecians call it ; the Latines, Celer; the Germans, Ein Zelter, which signifies with vs, a horse swiftly running; for it passeth away swifter than an arrow out of a bow. Going towards the East, some 36 miles from the ancient Babylon, it runneth through a towne called Bagedeth, bordering vpon Turkie and Persia, and from thence towards the latitude, to a towne called Argentaratus, where it changeth the name to Tigris; in that place it runneth so extreme swift, that it will make a mans head dizzie to looke vpon it. Strabo saith, the Riuer Euphrates riseth out of a mountaine in Armenia, called Nipha, some 300 miles from the Citie of Ieru∣salem towards the North, watering Mesopotamia and Chaldaea, and passing through the midst of that flourishing Citie Baby∣lon, diuides it into two parts; and after passing through, and fru∣ctifying Arabia, it joyneth with the Flood Tigris, and falls into the Persian gulfe. Semiramis Queene of the Assyrians and of Babylon, built a bridge ouer the narrowest place of this Riuer, be∣ing some three quarters of a mile ouer. The Hebrewes call this Riuer, Parah, because it fructifieth; and from thence the Grecians call it , or , to beare fruit; the Germans, Fruchter, which in English is, fruitfull or pleasant: And therefore Saint Ambrose saith, it is deriued from Euphranein, that is, from rejoycing; For that ouerflowing the Fields, it causeth them the next yeare to flourish with all kinde of fruit and pleasant floures. The water of this riuer is very foule and dirty, so that it is vnfit to drinke: according to that of Ieremy, cap. 2. What auaileth it thee to goe into Assyria, that thou mightest drinke of the water of Euphrates? If a man takes this water in a vessel, & let it stand but two houres, the dirt and sand will lie at the bottom therof two inches thicke.
Therefore the inhabitants neere about it, are wont to take a great pot that holdeth a good quantity, whereinto putting water, they let it stand till all the filth be sunke to the bottome, and so they cleare water to drinke. Nilus taketh the beginning from a certaine mountain in Mau∣ritania the lower, not far from the Ocean, and issues from a Lake which they call Nidiles, and partly from other Lakes, and is in∣creased with the snow waters falling from the mountaines of the Moone in Affrica, 3200 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Some thinke it tooke the name from Nileus a certaine King therabouts. Others, from the soile which it yerely brought downe in the streame, whereby all Aegypt is made fruitfull; from whence some thinke it was called Seruious Nilus, for that it bringeth downe new mud with it. The Hebrewes call it Gihon, because it breaketh out of the earth with great violence. This Riuer comes through the desarts of Aethiopia, and so with great violence comes into Aegypt, where it is diuided into seuen streames, and in times past had seuen gates, the names of which were, Canopicus, or Heraclioticus, Bolbitinus, Sebiniticus, Pharmiticus, Mendesius, Taniticus, and Palusinus. The two out∣ward gates of which, viz. Canopicus, and Palusiacus, were 160 miles a sunder. Appianus saith, There are two other gates called Tineptimicus, and Diolcus: This ninth gate is diuided at a citie and place called Delta, taking the name from the likenesse that it hath to the Greeke letter so called. So that Nilus is diuided into nine gates, by which nine gates it falls into the Mediterranean Sea. There are many that thinke, that Paradise was only in Ae∣gypt, and that then it had onely but foure streams, and that at the Floud it was confused into nine, and they would seeme to proue their opinion out of the 31 chapter of Ezekiel, where hee calleth Egypt a garden of pleasure. But this differeth from the descrip∣tion of Moses, for it is not scituate in the East, but rather the South from Ierusalem, and farre distant from the two Easterne Riuers, Euphrates and Hiddikel, by which the holy Scriptures do prin∣cipally denote Paradise. Wherefore it may be concluded, that Aegypt was onely a part of Paradise, not Paradise it selfe: And that this Riuer was one of the Riuers, not all, the streames of
which Riuer at some times of the yeare, viz. in the Summer Sol∣stice, when the Sunne is neere the Dogge-starre, begins to swell and ouerflow the bankes, by reason of the melting of the snow which lies vpon the mountaines of the Moone, and so drowne all the places neere vnto it, through the land of Aegypt, leauing behind it certaine slime and mudde, by which it comes to passe, that the Countrey is very fruitfull, and serues them in steed of raine, at which time of the yeare (for this happens once euery yeare) the people and inhabitants of the Countrey retire them∣selues to their Towns, Cities, and Castles, scituated vpon Rocks, Mountains, and high grounds, from whence it hapneth, that they sustaine very little discommoditie or losse, by any such inundati∣on. They also keepe little boates, whereby they passe from one place to another, because all their passages and foot paths are then drowned with waters. There are many pretty obseruations which the people of Aegypt were wont to take notice of in the rising of this water, for they had certain staues wherby they mea∣sured the deapth of it, if it rose but to twelue cubits (which is six yards in height, they then stood in feare of great famine, so also if it was but thirteene, for then the water was not deepe enough to make the ground fertill: but if it rose to fourteene or fifteene, then they were in great hope, and did not doubt of a fruitfull yeare: and if to sixteene, they then greatly rejoyced at their prosperity, and kept banquets and feasts, and were assured that the succeeding yeare would be very plentifull: but if it rose aboue, they laid a side all signes of joy, and liued very sparingly, and with great sorrow; this great inundation of waters foreshew∣ing scarcitie, and want, and famine, and pestilence, and death. And thus Nilus yearely, euery yeare is to them in stead of raine, for Aegypt is without raine. In Autumne, at such time as the Sunne going out of the last face of Libra, entreth into Scorpio, the waters of Nilus by little and little retire themselues into their bankes, and the earth be∣comes quite vncouered of water: about which time, the Coun∣try being exceeding hot, the earth is presently made drie in all those places, so that in the moneth of October, they may both till and sow their Land. In this riuer the Crocodile and the
Ichneumo breed, of the nature of which two, you may sufficient∣ly reade in Gesner. There also breeds the Pellican, of which Saint Ierom saith, there are two kinds, one that liues vpon the water, an other that liues vpon the land: these birds as some affirme; kill their young ones vpon their beake, and then leaue them lying in their neast for three daies; at the end of which time, the female grieuously wounds her selfe vpon the breast, and pouring her bloud vpon her young ones, reuiues them againe. This bird may very well be a type and figure of our blessed Sauiour, who shed∣ding his pretious bloud vpon the crosse for our sinnes, after the third day rose againe, and that he might restore vs to life that be dead in sinne, poureth out his bloud vpon vs, whereby we are made capable of eternall life. Of the place where Adam and Eua dwelt after the breaking of the commandement, Gen. 3. ADam and Eua, being driuen out of Paradise, dwelt at Damas∣cus, 160 miles from Ierusalem, as Munster and others write: the Townes-men of Damascus, at this day shew the place where Cain slew his brother Abel, and it is well to be beleeued that this Citie receiues her name thereby, for Damascus signifies bloud-shedding or a place which hath drunke vp bloud. Of the place where Cain dwelt. CAin after he had slaine his brother Abel, dwelt in the land of Nod, a land of feare and disquiet, in the Towne of Hanoch, and as some thinke, it was the same place where Babylon (after Noes Floud) was built, being foure hundred and eightie miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Of the place where Noah dwelt. NOah signifying quiet and rest, dwelt in Armenia, six hundred miles from Ierusalem Northward, hard by Mount Ararat, vpon which Mount, the Arke, (after the Floud) staied it selfe,
Gen. 8. Ptolomeus nameth These high Hills in Armenia Gordes, which are alwaies couered with snow, and no man may get vpon them. Sem. SEm who in the holy Scriptures is called Melchisedeck, that is, a King of righteousnesse, dwelt in the Citie of Ierusalem, which as then was called Salem, that is, a Citie of peace. Nimroth. NImroth was the first Prince and regent vpon earth, and built Babylon, which is six hundred and eighty miles from Ieru∣salem Eastward. Strabo writeth, That in Babylon there was an old foure square Tower built of bricke, foure hundred and sixteene ells highThat is, 200 yards high., and each side thereof foure hundred and sixteene ells broad: This without doubt was a piece of the Tower of Ba∣bylon, the toppe whereof should haue reached vp to Heauen, Gen. 22. Babel or Babylon signifieth a confusion, because in that place God confounded the workemens tongues, when they built the Tower of Babylon. The Trauels of Abraham. 1 ABraham went out of his owne Countrey of Vhr in Chaldaea, to the Citie of Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 376 miles. 2 Erom Haran, by Gods commandement hee went to Si∣chem, which is foure hundred miles. 3 From Sichem he went to the Plaine and wood of Mamre to the Hill betweene Bethel and Hay, which is 28 miles. 4 From thence he went into Aegypt, trauelling Southward 240 miles. 5 Out of Aegypt he went againe into Canaan, to the hill that lyeth betweene Bethel and Hay, which is 240 miles, Gen. 13.
6 From thence hee went to the Plaine of Mamre neere He∣bron, 32 miles. 7 From the plaine of Mamre, hee went to Dan, which is 124 miles and there ouerthrew the foure Kings which had taken Lot prisoner, Gen. 14. 8 Then he pursued the enemie for the space of 80 miles to Hobam in Phoenicia, which lyeth in the left side of Damasco, Gen. 14. 9 From Phoenicia, hee went to Sodom, wnere Melchisedech met him, which are 160 miles, Gen. 14. 10 From Sodom, he went backe again to the plaine of Mam∣re, which are 40 miles. 11 From the Plaine of Mamre, he went to Gerer, which is six miles, where his sonne Isaac was borne, Gen. 20.21. 12 From Gerar, he went to Beersaba, which is 12 miles, where he tooke an oath of King Abimilech. 13 From Beersaba, he went to mount Moriah, which is 40 miles, where he would haue offered his sonne Isaac, Gen. 22. 14 From mount Moriah, hee returned againe to Beersaba, which is 40 miles. 15 From Beersaba, he and his wife went to the plaine of Mamre by Hebron, which is 16 miles, and there they died and were buried, Gen. 23. and 25. So that all the Trauels of the Patriarch Abraham, were 1794 miles. Now followeth the description of the Townes and places. THe Towne of Vhr in Chaldaea, where Abraham was borne at this day is called Orchae, (as Petrus Appianus writeth) and is distant from Ierusalem 624 miles Eastward. It seemeth, it ei∣ther tooke that name from light or fire, or else from diuine wor∣ship, for there they vsed to offer many burnt offerings, but at that time they committed idolatry, for which cause Abraham went from thence, perceiuing that the Chaldeans tooke the fire for their god, because fire came downe from Heauen and consumed their offerings. Learned men therefore are of opinion, that the Chaldaeans in the town of Vhr, worshipped the fire for their god.
Haran or Charan, that is, Wrath. HAran is the chiefe city in Mesopotamia, where Abraham for a time dwelt with his father Thara. There the rich Ro∣man Crassus with his army was ouerthrowne by the Parthians, and is distant from Ierusalem 440 miles North-Eastward, taking its name from the water Charan which runneth through it. But at this day the city is called Ophra, lying eleuen daies journy from Mossel or Nineueh, as D. Leonard Ronwolfe writeth, who in Anno 1575, vpon the thirtieth of Ianuary was in that towne. Ophra or Haran is a faire city well inhabited, and indifferent great, com∣passed about with walls and towers, richly furnished with mer∣chandise, but especially with faire couerlets of diuers colors, that are made therein. There is likewise great trade and trafique for diuers kindes of wares brought thither by Caravans, which are great numbers of camels, horses, & other beasts, that cary great burdens, with many men to conduct them, which traffique and trauell from one city to another. This city in times past belonged to the Parthians, euen then when Crassus the rich Roman, fifty three years before the birth of Christ, robbed the temple of Ierusalem, and of those holy relicks bare away to the value of six tuns of gold. For which God puni∣shed him openly; for vpon the sixt of Iune after, hee was by the Parthians ouerthrown hard by Haran in Mesopotamia, and there taken and slaine. The Parthians pouring molten gold into his mouth, said, Drinke now thy sill (thou greedy Wretch) of that which thou so long hast thirsted after, for with this thou mayst fill thy greedy throat. In this ouerthrow were slaine thirty thousand Romans, and by that meanes the city of Haran returned againe vnder the Parthi∣ans. After that, the Persians took it; but now it is vnder the Turk. In this city of Haran at this day there is to be seene a Well of very cleare water, at which Rebecca gaue drinke to Eleazer Abra∣hams seruant, and to his Camels, Genes. 24.19. This Well by the
townsmen is called Abrahams wel: there also Rachel, Labans daugh∣ter, first spake with the holy Patriark Iacob, who turning the stone off from the Wel, gaue her sheep of the water to drinke. This water hath a very pleasant taste, and is a notable Type of holy Baptisme; for like as the holy Fathers tooke their wiues by this wel, so Christ receiueth his holy congregation by the Well of Baptisme, in his Word and holy Sacrament. This is the right Wel of Israel, which floweth into euerlasting life. The city of Haran (now called Ophra) lieth from Nineueh 232 miles Westward. Sichem, a Shoulder. SIchem is a town in Samaria on the borders of Ephraim, lying on mount Garizim, 36 miles from Ierusalem Northward. It takes the name (as Phil. Melancthon writeth) from the place wher∣on it standeth, like a shoulder; for Sichem signifies a shoulder. Of this town I will speak more at large in the new Testament, for that by it Christ spake with the Samaritan woman, Ioh. 4. In this town Dina Iacobs daughter was rauished, Gen. 34. and there the bones of the Patriarch Ioseph were buried, Ios. 24. Abimelech for spight & vpon no occasion vtterly destroied the town, and hauing razed it to the ground, sowed it with salt, Iudg. 9 But Ieroboam King of Ierusalem built it vp again and dwelt ther∣in, 1 Kin. 12. It was a free town, whither a man-slayer might resort that had killed any man by chance, and saue himselfe, Ios. 20. Mount Garizim, wheron the town of Sichem stood, was a piece of mount Ephraim. Tanis, in Hebrew Zoan; an Inne or house of Harbor. TAnis or Zoan was the chiefe city in Egypt, where Pharaoh in Abrahams time kept his court, as we reade in the thir∣teenth Chapter and fourth book of Moses, and Psal. 58. and lyeth 232, miles from Ierusalem Southeastward: four miles from Tanis stood the kingly towne of Memphis, which was likewise built
before Abrahams time; but at that time it was not so famous as Tanis, for there is not one word spoken of Memphis in the books of Moses. But when time serues I will speake more of these two places. Of the Mount between Bethel and Hay. THis hil is 4 miles from Ierusalem vpon the North, lying be∣tween the 2 towns of Bethel & Hay, and is called mount E∣phraim; wher Abraham at his return out of Egipt the second time set vp his Tabernacle, of purpose to be conuersant with Melchise∣deck who dwelt in Ierusalem; and with him gaue thanks to God for the singular fauors that he had shewed toward him, in deliue∣ring his wife Sara from the hands of Abimelech King of Egypt, who would haue rauished her, & as he feared, indangered his life. In this place Lot separated himselfe from Abraham, and went to dwell in Sodom. Of the Plaine or Oke of Mamre. THe Plain of Mamre stood a mile from Hebron towards the East, and distant from Ierusalem 22 miles South-eastward. In this yally there was a faire and pleasant wood, where a certain yong man called Mamre dwelt. This man was brother to Escal and Aner, mentioned by Moses, Genes. 14. who according to the custome of gentlemen with vs in these times, built vp his house neere to a pleasant Wood or bottome, which as some thinke was called after his name Mamre. Others, (of which opinion is Ierom) of Aelon, which signifies a valley or tree (an Oke tree, saith hee.) But Ioseph & Aegesippus call it a Terebinth tree, which both sum∣mer and winter beareth greene leaues like a Palme tree, the sap or juice whereof is very good for medicine. Abraham dwelling neere to this tree, beeing entertained by the three Brothers as a stranger, grew into such fauour and familiaritie with them, that hee conuerted them from Paganisme, and taught them to know the true and euer-liuing God. To gratifie which great fauor, they aided him in his Warre against the foure Kings that had taken
Lot prisoner, and gaue him free libertie to inhabit in, and vse the Plain thereabouts for his cattel: before whose dore (as some Authors affirm) this Terebinth or oke tree stood, and so continu∣ed from the beginning of the world, till the time of Constantine the Great, it being lawfull for none to cut a bough of it, or touch it with a hatchet, because it was in those daies accounted a holy tree, and visited by diuers strangers: and then Helena caused a fair church to be built in that place; and so much the rather, for that Abraham sitting vnder that tree, the three Angels appeared vnto him in the similitude or likenesse of men, Gen. 8.1, 2. And some are of opinion, That because of this, the Iewes offered Incense to their gods, and committed idolatry vpon high mountaines and vnder green trees, Ezek. 16. There was also a double Caue made of white marble, which as Iosephus saith, was very faire and beau∣tifull to the eye, and curiously wrought and polished; wherein A∣braham, Isaac, and Iacob, with their Wiues Sarah, Rebecca, and Leah were buried: and as some thinke was that caue which he purcha∣sed of the Hittites, Gen. 23.34. But that Adam and Evah lie bu∣ried in the same place, seeing there is no warrant for it in the ho∣ly Scriptures, I let it passe; because whatsoeuer hath not authori∣tie of Scripture to proue it, may as easily be contemned as allow∣ed. But Abrahams sepulchre in Ieroms time was to be seen, being old and decayed. Of Hebron. THis City was not onely a Kings Seat, but a Priests also, be∣ing built not long after the Floud, and some seuen years be∣fore that City of the Egyptians called Zoan or Tanis, Numb. 13. and was placed vpon a goodly high mountaine very pleasant and delectable. It taketh the name from Chabar, which signifieth to accompany; and from thence, Chebron, or Hebron, A pleasant and delectable society. It was a metropolitan city in the tribe of Iuda, and after called Kiriatharba, as it appeareth in Ioshuah, 14. taking that name from Arba the chiefe Gouernour of that Citie. This man was one of the Anakims, and a very mighty Prince.
Others there are that say, the city being diuided into foure parts was thereof called : for Arba signifies a quaternion, from the Rote Raba foure square. It was first built by Heth, the sonne of that cursed Canaan, whose posterity (the Hittites) inhabited in it; and such was their hospitalitie, that they entertained Abraham, being a stranger and traueller. These people dweltHere also dwelt Sisai, Abiman, and Thalmas the sons of Anak. there vntill Ioshuahs time; and then one Hoham was King thereof, who with other Kings opposing the Children of Israell, was by them slain, and had their country wasted and destroyed. This town was after made a towne of refuge, and belonged to the inheritance of Caleb, and was together with Mamre in the tribe of Iuda, Ios. 20. Heere Dauid was first anointed King, and reigned therein for the space of 7 yeares, 2 Sam. 5. But this town by the iniury of time and op∣pression of the enemy is now become desolate, only some few old reliques are to be seen, to shew there had bin a town there. Neuer∣thelesse there is a town not far from it which retaineth the name, placed in a very fruitfull valley called Mamre to this day. Heere while it was vnder the jurisdiction of the Christians, stood a Ca∣thedral church, and a Bishops See; but the Turks haue turned it into a Mosko, or one of their churches. Into this place they wil not suffer any Christian to enter. The inhabitants take vpon them to shew vnto strangers many things, as the vault or caue wherein Abraham was buried, the place where Cain killed Abel, the Well where Adam and Eva wept seuen years for the death of their son; with many such like fables which are to no purpose, seeing they are not warrantable by Scripture. Some bows shoot Eastward from this place is the field of Da∣mascus, where the red earth lieth whereof they feigne man to be made. It is naturally tough, & may be wrought like wax or pitch. There is also that is white of the same kind, and this is conueyed to many places by the Saracens, and sold at deare rates. They vse it either for the teering of Sepulchres, or to mingle with salves and vnguents.
Of Gerar. GErar is the vttermost towne in the land of Canaan, and lieth between the desarts of Sur and Cades, Gen. 20. Here King Abimelech kept his court at such time as Abraham came thither; & here Isaac was born, Gen. 21. It takes the name from Gor, which signifies a Pilgrim or Traueller, and did well agree with the con∣dition of the antient patriarchs that somtime liued there, because for the most part they were like Pilgrimes and wayfaring men, Gen. 47. It lay six miles from Hebron Southwest, and from Ieru∣salem 30, vpon the territories of the tribe of Iuda. Of Beerazaba. BEerazaba is a towne scituated vpon the vtmost bounds of the Holy land, forty miles from Ierusalem Southwestward, and is deriued from Berr and Shebuah, and signifieth the Wel of coue∣nant: for Abraham hauing digged a Wel neere to this place, Abi∣melech King of Gerar entred into league with him, and his poste∣ritie Isaac also renued this league in this place, as appears, Gen. 21. It is now called Gallim or Giblin by the Iewes. In S. Hieromes time it was a great towne. Of Moriah. VPon this Mount Abraham would haue offered his son Isaac, and stood not far from Salem or mount Sion, where Melchi∣sedech dwelt. They were so neere, that Melchisedech vpon the tower of Sion might easily see the Angell that spake with Abraham, when he renewed the couenant with him concerning his seed and posteritie: and is deriued from Mor or Marar, which signifies bit∣ter Myrrh, because, as Gregorius saith, the Church is euer subiect to affliction, For all they that will serue God and liue religiously must suffer persecution, Mat. 16. 2 Tim. 3. and Iarr, which signi∣fies to feare.
How Abraham may be typically apprehended. ABraham signifies The father of a multitude, from Ab, pater, a Father; Ram, excelsus, Mighty; and Hamon, multitudinis, Of a multitude. Not in regard of the Iewes only, but all those that in succeeding times shall be ingraffed into the Church, and partake of euerlasting life through the mediation of Christ Iesus the promised seed, Gal. 3. Ephes. 1. Acts 3. and is a Type and figure of God the Father; for as that Abraham was the father of many, yet had but only one son; so although God be the father of all nati∣ons, yet had but one only son, Iesus Christ, begotten of his owne essence from before the beginning of the world. And as Abraham so loued God, that for his sake he would not haue spared his only son; so God so loued Abraham and the World, that hee gaue his only begotten son to die for the saluation of their soules. The Trauels of Lot. LOt trauelled with Abraham from Vr in Chaldaea, to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 336 miles, Gen. 12. 2 From Haran they trauelled to Sichem in the land of Canaan, being 400 miles. 3 From Sichem they trauelled through Morae, to the hil ly∣ing between Bethel and Hay, which is 24 miles. 4 From the hill between Bethel and Hay, they went into E∣gypt, which is 240 miles, Gen. 13. 5 From Egypt they went into the land of Canaan, to the hil lying between Bethel and Hay, where Abraham had dwelt before, which is 240 miles, Gen. 13. 6 From the hil between Bethel and Hay Lot separated him∣selfe from Abraham, and went to the towne of Sodom Eastward, which is 28 miles, Gen. 13. 7 In the town of Sodom Lot was taken prisoner, hee and all his houshold, and led away to the town of Dan, which is 32 miles Gen. 14.
8 And when Abraham had deliuered him out of the hands of his enemies, & pursued them, he returned with him from Dan to Hobam in Phoenicia, lying on the left side of Damascus, be∣ing 80 miles. 9 From Phoenicia Abraham came again with Lot to Sodom, which is 160 miles. 10 Lastly, when the Lord had determined to raine fire and brimstone on Sodom, Lot according to his commandement went thence to Zoar a little town neere adioyning, where being drunk with Wine hee committed incest with both his daughters; but after comming to the knowledge of his offence, he was so sore af∣flicted in his conscience, that with extreme grief he died. Luther saith that Abraham tooke him to Hebron with him to comfort him, and that there he died. Hebron is 36 miles from Sodom. So all the trauels of the Patriarch Lot were 1652 miles. The Description of the Townes and places where he trauelled. And first of Sodom. THe cities that were destroyed with fire and brimstone from heauen were foure in number, that is, Sodom, Gomorah, Adama, and Zeboim, lying 24 miles from Ierusalem South-east∣ward, where now the dead sea runs. The fift was the city Bela, cal∣led also Zoar, which was spared for Lots sake, & distant from So∣dom two miles. This, Lot accounted but a little City; but there are that say it was a very spatious and princely place, neere to which his wife for her disobedience was turned into a pillar of salt, and not far off he committed incest with his two daughters. And although Luther be of opinion, that that also within a while after was burnt, yet this cannot bee certainly prooued, especially because it remaineth euen to this day, scituated both in the anti∣ent place, and called by the antient name; vnlesse some new City hath beene lately built in the same place, and is now called after that name, which I cannot thinke to be true. Sodamah signifieth a Mysterie; Gomorah, a Faggot of Thornes; Adamah, Red earth; Zeboim, Fertile and Pleasant; Zoar, The burning of Baela; for
in antient times it was called Baela. It is the receiued opinion, that the country wherein these fiue rich and opulent cities stood was called Pentapolis. Of the Lake or dead Sea, called Asphaltides. IN the very same place where these Cities were burnt and de∣stroyed, there is at this day to be seene a Lake about 36 miles long, and in some places six, in others eight and 12 miles ouer. It boileth with pitch and brimstone, and in some places passeth by the name of the salt sea, and in others, the dead sea, because of the noisome and venomous aire that riseth out of it, insomuch as the very birds that fly ouer it fall down dead, and if a beast doe but drink of it mixt with water, it makes him incurably sick. It is of a wonderfull nature, for whatsoeuer heauy thing you fling into it will not sinke, but swim vpon the top, be it either iron, lead, cop∣per, or any other weighty matter. Of which Vespasian the emperor hauing notice, to make experience of what he had heard, made a journy of purpose to see it, and with him tooke certain condem∣ned men who for their offences had deserued death; these he ma∣nacled, and where he thought it to be deepest caused them to bee thrown in; but they rose vp againe with such violence as if some storm or tempest had sent them vp. The water thereof changeth three times a day, and shineth against the sun with diuers colors, casting out fire and great cakes of pitch much resembling Bulls without heads, and of that quantity. This pitch is good for diuers things, as to calk ships, to lay vpon cables, and to vse in medicins; wherefore such as come to this sea and know the nature of it, haue certain Skifs and instruments wherewith they draw these cakes of pitch to their ships, to which it cleaueth so fast, it being natu∣rally tough, that being brought to land they cannot get it off a∣gain but by the help of vrine. Vpon the banks thereof grow trees that beare fruit of diuers kinds, as apples and such like; which are faire and pleasant to the eie, but if you either touch or open them you shall finde nothing but dust.
Brittenbacchus saith, In this place the Serpent Tyrus (whereof they vse to make treacle) is found. It is a little serpent about half a cubit long, and a finger thick, being of diuers colours, and is so venomous, that where it biteth there is no remedy, vnlesse by cut∣ting off the member. The head of it is rough and hairy, and there seemeth to lie vpon the tongue of it, if it be angry, a fiery flame. The same Author saith, That a little from Zoar, betweene this Lake and the mountaines of Engedi, the pillar whereinto Lots wife was turned, is yet to be seen shining like salt. The furthest part of this sea Northward lies 14 miles from Ierusalem: toward the East the riuer Iordan runneth into it. The trauell of the two Angels that led Lot out of Sodom. THese two Angels hauing spoken with Abraham in the valley of Mamre neere Hebron, forthwith went to Sodom some 40 miles distant from that place, where Lot hauing entertained them into his house, by their helpe was deliuered, together with his wife and two daughters, from that miserable desolation of the Sodomits. Of Lots two Daughters. LOt escaping this desolation, and seeing a president of Gods iudgement fallen vpon his wife for her disobedience, fearing that he should not continue safe in Zoar, left that & turned aside into the wildernesse, and continued there among the mountains, although the Lord had promised him safety in this town: wher∣fore continuing in a Caue in the Wildernesse, the eldest of his daughters losing her husband in this destruction, supposing that all men had beene destroyed from off the earth, counselled her sister to commit incest with her father. Lot being now oppressed with care, by reason of the former calamities, gaue himself at the inticement of his daughters, to drinke Wine, insomuch as with the excesse he became drunke: at which time not being himselfe he begat by his two daughters two sonnes: the eldest had a sonne whom shee called Moab, which signifies The begotten of his Fa∣ther; whereby the impudencie of this woman is laid open to the World, in that she was not ashamed of her sinne. Of him came
the Moabites, and dwelt vpon the North side of the lake Asphal∣tides, some 32 miles from Ierusalem. The yongest daughter had a son, which she called Ben-ammy, that is, The son of my people; for although she bare him with great shame, yet she dwelt among the people of God. Of him came the Ammonites that dwelt be∣yond mount Gilead, threescore miles from Ierusalem Northeast∣ward. Of the foure Kings that tooke LOT prisoner. THe first of them was called Amraphel King of Shinear or Ba∣bylon, the son of Ninus and Semiramis, as some thinke, and is called somtime by the name of Berosus, sometime Ninus. He kept his court at Babylon in Chaldea, which is 680 miles from Ieru∣salem Eastward. This Ninus is called Amraphel, because of the no∣table victories that he won, and the number of countries and pro∣uinces he conquered. The second was Arioch or Arius his sonne. He was thus called because of his courage and crueltie in war; for Arioch signifies A mighty roaring Lion; Arius, Mars. This man during the life of his father was created king of Lassir, that is, Assiria, for so it is cal∣led in the Chaldaean tongue; the chiefe city whereof is Nineueh, and lies from Ierusalem Northeastward six hundred eighty foure miles. The third was Keder-laomer King of the Elamites in Persia, 1200 miles from Ierusalem toward the East. This Prince had a great command in that country. Keder signifies an Ornament or Crowne; Laomer, Well deseruing. The fourth was Thideall King of the Nations. Hee kept his court in Damascus, the Metropolis of Assyria, some 160 miles from Ierusalem Northward. Thideal signifieth An exalted Lord; of Alah, that is, To be lifted vp. These foure kings were confederats, and bent their expedition principally against Astaroth and Kiriathaim, which they tooke, and spoyled all the Countrey round about with fire and sword: and their Armies being retyred from the spoyle, met in the vally of Siddim (where now the dead Sea runneth) and there pitched
their tents. In this place after a cruel and sharp war, they conque∣red the fiue Kings of that beautifull and pleasant soile of Pen∣tapolis, (for so it was called because of those fiue cities that were in it) where among others they tooke Lot captiue with all his sub∣stance. Of Astoroth. AStoroth seemes to be the city of Venus, because the citisens thereof worshipped her: for Astoroth is a goddesse of the Si∣donians, and is compounded of Ash, which signifies a company of stars, and Tor, placed in order. The Syrians call Venus Ashtoroth. This towne lay in the land of Gilead, and belonged to the halfe tribe of Manasse beyond Iordan, 56 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward. In this city the foure Kings of the East conquered the gyants of Karnaim, that were mighty princes and commanders there, when they made war against that and Kiriathaim. Not far from hence also in the land of Ham there dwelt certaine Gyants called Zusim, of Zus and Hamah, which signifies to stir vp commo∣tion. These were very great strong and stately people, and had the command of all the Countries thereabouts, which they held in great feare, and were conquered by the foure Kings. Of Kiriathaim. KIriathaim was a City in the tribe of Reubin beyond Iorden, Ios. 13. 22 miles from Ierusalem toward the East, and so cal∣led because it was diuided into many parts and diuisions. The heathens corruptly cal it Carthage. The Hebrews deriue it from Kiriath, which signifies a city, and Emah, Terror. Here dwelt the Emims, a graue and fearfull people; for so their name signifies. Of Hazezon Thamar. THis Citie tooke the name from a Palme tree, or a Palme banke. Of this kinde of wood the Israelites made their ar∣rowes, and therefore deriue it from Charar, which signifieth to shoot; and Thamar, a Palme Tree. This City standeth vpon the banke of the dead sea, twenty miles from Ierusalem North-East,
vpon a very fruitfull soile, where was found plenty of Palm trees and pretious balsam: and by some called Engedi, or the Lambes Well; being deriued from Ein and Gedi, which signifieth Fontem haeduli lactantis, that is, The Wel of a sucking lambe or goat. Not far from hence stood the Caue where Dauid cut off the outward lap of King Sauls garment, 1 Sam. 24. Of the plentifull valley Siddim. THis valley stood there where now the dead sea runneth, and took that name from the fertilitie of the soile, and seems to haue some affinity with the Hebrew word Sadel, which signifies a field, partly arable, partly pasture and medow, furnished with trees, herbs, and orchards. In this place stood diuers Wels of Bi∣tume, from whence the inhabitants fetcht caement to build their houses with; but after for their wickednes (which was so great, as it appeareth in Gen. 18. that the cry thereof ascended into heauen) the Lord did grieuously punish them, first with war, by which the in∣habitants were destroied: and after that, with fire and brimstone from heauen; so that (as is aforesaid) this goodly vally is nothing but a stinking lake. The Trauels of the Egyptian maid Hagar. AFter Sara had preferred Hagar to that high grace as to make her equal with her selfe, shee growing proud thereof, con∣temned her Mistresse, and in recompence of that fauour carried her selfe very presumptuously towards her; which Sarah seeking to restraine, offered to her sonne hard measure; which Abraham (vpon her complaint) winked at: Whereupon Hagar, partly op∣prest with griefe, partly with enuy, priuily stole away from her mistresse, and went from the valley of Mamre neer Hebron, to the Well of life sixteene miles Southward, Genesis 16. and it is to be thought that her journey tended towards Egypt, which was her natiue countrey. For this Well lay directly in the way as they went downe into Egypt. This flight of Hagar without doubt did greatly trouble Abrahams house, and put him and his wife into a
great sorrow and feare, lest she should destroy her self and the in∣fant, or fall into some other danger. Wherefore that God might make euident the exceeding care he had of them, he sent an angel vnto Hagar, and willed her to returne vnto her master: which An∣gel some think was the son of God, for he was called by the name of Iehovah, Gen. 16. which name was not communicated to any created Angell. Whereupon Hagar, according to his commade∣ment, went backe againe to her mistresse Sarah into the valley of Mamre, 16 miles, Gen. 16. From Hebron Hagar went with her mistresse to that kingly ci∣ty Gerar, 6 miles, Gen. 20. At Gerar she and her sonne Ismael were put out of her masters house, and going in the way that leadeth into Egypt, they lost themselues in the wildernes of Beersaba, after they had trauelled 12 miles from Gerar: where opprest with want both of water and other necessaries, she feinted and her son also; wherefore she layd him vnder a tree, and about a bowes shoot off sate down and wept, expecting nothing but death. As shee was in this miserie, God heard the voice of the childe, and sent an Angell vnto her saying, Feare not, for I will make of thy childe a great Nation. And God opened her eies, and lo, close by her there was a Well, so she went and filled her bot∣tle, and gaue her boy drinke. At this time Ismael was 15 yeres of age; So God blessed the child, and he became an Archer, and liued in the wildernesse. From thence she and her son went into the wildernes of Pha∣ran, 80 miles, where Ismael maried an Egyptian, Gen. 21. So all the trauels of Hagar the Egyptian maid were 132 miles. Of the Fountaine of Hagar, which is also called the Well of Life. THis Wel lieth betweene Bared and Kades-Bernea, 10 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Some call it the Well of the Liuing and Seeing, because God did there look merciful∣ly vpon Hagar when shee fled from her mistresse. Here Isaac dwelt and had his two sonnes Esau and Iacob, Genesis 26. Afterwards it was called the Well of the liuing God, and seemeth mystically
to represent Baptisme, the lavor of grace and regeneration by the operation and special working of the Spirit: for the Church (like Hagar with her son Ismael) trauelling through the wildernesse of this world, is prest with a multitude of sins; and seeing her owne miserie, finds no remedie but by faith in Christ Iesus, to be deli∣uered from so heauy a burthen: wherefore they ioyning together in praier, craue the mercifull audience and gratious assistance of God, That it would please him of his goodnesse to refresh them with the water of life, the doctrine of grace, that so they may bee made capable of eternal glory. For Hagar signifies a Pilgrim, and Ismael, a godly and good man whom the Lord heareth: Who tra∣uelling together with his mother the Church in this world, figh∣teth against the enemies thereof, and shooteth the arrows of faith against all infernal and cruell beasts. For Schamah signifies, Hee hath heard; and El, The almighty God, who mercifully heareth the feruent prayers and petitions of the Iust; according to that of S. Iames, cap. 5.15. Ismael was born An. mundi 2035. Abraham being then 86 years of age. He was circumcised at 13, he went from his father at 15; he was at Abrahams funeral being 89 yeares of age: he died when he was 137 yeares of age, fifty yeares after the death of Abraham, and left behinde him twelue sonnes as Iacob did, which were the Princes of their families, as was his. Of which the Apostle Paul hath an excellent Allegorie; Abraham had two sons, one by the bond-woman, another by the free-woman: he that was of the bond woman was according to the flesh, but he that was of the free wo∣man was by promise. By which things another thing is meant; for the one, which is Agar of mount Sinai, gendereth vnto bon∣dage: for Agar or Sinai is a mountaine in Arabia, and answereth to Ierusalem that now is; and shee is in bondage with her Chil∣dren: but Ierusalem which is aboue is free, for it is written, Re∣ioyce thou Barren, &c. Wherefore we are no more of the bond wo∣man (which is the Law) but of the Free, not by our owne works or righteousnesse, but by fairh in Christ, who maketh vs heirs of that heauenly Ierusalem.
Where Ishmael dwelt. PAran a city of Arabia the Stony, stood 104 miles from Ieru∣salem Southward, and taketh the name from fertilitie; for Pu∣rah with the Hebrews signifies a fruitfull root. From this Metro∣politan towne, the desart of Arabia the stony neere Cades taketh name: of which mention is made, Num. 13 & 14. Deut. 1. Gen. 14.21. Abac. 3. and is called the desart of Pharan. Here Ishmael that excellent Archer and hunter dwelt, after with great power and strength he had conquered all the neighboring princes and peo∣ple thereabout. His posteritie also inhabited these parts, and af∣ter his name were called Ismaelites, some eighty miles from Ie∣rusalem toward the South. These people were excellent soldiers, and of noble courage; their principal delight was shooting, and therein they exceeded others; liuing for the most part by hun∣ting and pillage, and so they continue to this day. The Saracens who likewise had their abiding in those parts were deriued from that family, though they had rather take their name from Sara, and from thence Saracens: These are of the opinion of the Turks. The Trauels of Eleazer the seruant of Abraham. AFter Eleazer had sworne to his master to take a wife for his son Isaac of the generation of his fathers, he went from the valley of Mamre neere Hebron, to Haran a City of Meso∣potamia, 468 miles off, and there made a Contract with Rebecc the daughter of Bethuel, and sister of Laban, whom he tooke along with him and returned to his master. So that his journey to and againe was 944 miles. These things hapned in the yeare of the world 2089, and before Christ 1879, Isaac then being forty yeres of age. This Eleazer was Steward of Abrahams house, and borne at Damascus the chiefe City of Syria. Hee was so called, because God was his helpe: Eleazer being a compound word of El and
Ezaer, which signifies Almighty God the helper. From whence we may perceiue that God is the keeper of the poore, and a ready helper in time of tribulation; according to that in the Psalmes, All they that know thee trust in thee; because thou, O Lord, hearest their prayers, and bringest them out of trouble. Rebeccha, as it should seeme, tooke her name from the expecta∣tion of Eternall life▪ for Rebechan in Hebrew doth denote such a woman, which expecteth a free deliuerie frrom all calamitie, and an in∣heritance of eternall life. Therefore Rebeccha is a notable type of the Church of God, which is the Spouse of Christ, shadowed in Isaac; as shall hereafter be more plainely manifested. The Trauels of the Patriarch Isaac. ISaac being young, went with his father Abra∣ham from Berzeba to mount Moriah, where his father would haue offered him vnto God, as the Lord commanded him, which is fortie miles, Gens. 22. 2 From thence with his father hee returned againe to Berzeba, which is forty miles. 3 From Berzeba he trauelled with his father to Hebron, by the plaine of Mamre, which is 16 miles. 4 From the plaine of Mamre Isaac trauelled Southward, to the fountain of life, which is 16 miles, & there he dwelt, Gen. 24. 5 From thence he returned backe again to his fathers burial, who was laid in that double caue in Mamre, which is 16 miles. 6 From thence he returned backe againe to the Well of life, where he dwelt; 16 miles. 7 From the Fountaine of life, hee went to Gerar, which is 8 miles; where Abimelech seeing the beauty of his wife Rebeccha, would haue rauisht her, and for feare she told him that she was his sister, Gen. 26. 8 From Gerar Isaac went Westward to the valley of Gerar which is 8 miles, and there he caused the Well to be digged vp
againe, which the inhabitants had stopped vp, Gen. 26. 9 From thence he went to Beersaba, which is foure miles; where the same night the Lord appeared vnto him, and said, I am the God of thy father Abraham, feare not, for I am with thee and will blesse and multiply thy seed for my seruant Abrahams sake, Gen. 26. 10 From Beersaba he returned againe to Hebron by the plain of Mamre, which is 16 miles: here Abraham, Sarah, and Rebeccha, died, and were buried, Gen. 35. So all the trauels of the Patriarch Isaac, were one hundred forty eight miles. The typicall signification of Isaac. THe name of Isaac is deriued from laughter: for Zakah in Hebrew is as much as quod risit is in Latine, which signifi∣eth that he laughed; and from hence Zechock signifies a Laughter, and Isaac, mirth, or one that reioyceth with mirth. This name was giuen to him by God before his natiuitie, Gen. 17.18. There were seuen that were named by God before their natiuitie, viz. Ishmael Gen. 16. Isaac, Gen. 17. Cores or Cyrus King of the Persians, Esa 44. Sampson, Iudg. 13. Iosia King of Iuda, 1. Kings 13. Iohn Baptist, and Iesus Christ the sonne of God, Luke 1. of whom Isaae was a nota∣ble type. For Christ is our true rejoicing, the laughter, mirth, and delight of the whole Church of God. Abraham vpon the day of the natiuitie of Isaac made a great feast, to which, no doubt, he cal∣led many godly men, and perhaps some of the Patriarchs: for there was then liuing Sarag, Arphaxad, Salah, Heber, Thamar, and Sem, the sonne of Noah, who also had a certaine knowledge of Gods promise to Abraham, and that of the seed of Isaac should come the Sauiour of the world. And as Abraham when hee would haue offered his sonne vnto the Lord, carried the fire and the sword; but Isaac the wood vp∣on which he should be slaine and burned (O miserable sight, espe∣cially to a father, to see his onely sonne and heire, which was mi∣raculously begotten, euen then when he was without hope of is¦sue, burnt to ashes before his face? this was on mount Moria a little from Salem or Ierusalem) euen so our Sauiour Christ, fo the sinnes that man commits and carries about him, bore vpon his shoulders the woodden crosse whereupon he was offered an
acceptable sacrifice to his father, that so by his mediation and sa∣tisfaction we might receiue pardon for them: And this was like∣wise done vpon mount Caluarie, a little from Ierusalem. And as the Lord prouided another sacrifice for Abraham, that so hee might saue his sonne, which was, a Ramme tied and intangled in thornes: so God prouided a sacrifice for the saluation of the world euen Iesus Christ our mediatour, who is that immaculate and pretious Lambe of God; whose head being crowned with thornes, and hanging vpon the crosse, by his precious death ope∣ned vnto vs the doore of eternall life, and made vs capable of e∣uerlasting happinesse, Iohn 19. 1 Peter 1. Such was the loue of A∣braham, a father vnto God; such the loue of God, a father vnto man: that they spared not their only sonnes, the one typically to represent the other. The other, that is, the only begotten sonne of God, to dye effectually for Abraham, Isaac, and all mankinde, Ioh. 3. Gen. 22. The Trauels of the Patriarch Iacob. FRom Beersaba Iacob went to Bethel, which is 48 miles and there hee saw a Ladder that reached downe from heauen, whereby the Angels ascended and descended Genes. 28. 2 From Bethel he went to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 432 miles; where he married Leah and Raehel, Gen. 28. 3 From Haran in Mesopotamia hee went to mount Gilead, which is 380 miles: and when Laban pursued him (at the com∣mandement of the Lord) he made a league with him, Gen. 31. 4 From mount Gilead hee went to Mahanaim, which is 16 miles, and there he met with the Angels of God, Gen. 31. 5 From Mahanaim he passed the water and went to Penuel, which is foure miles, and there wrestled with the Angel of God, Gen. 32. 6 From Penuel hee went to Succoth, where hee pitched his Tents, 2 miles, Gen. 33.
7 From Succoth hee passed the riuer of Iordan, and went to Sichem, not far from Salem (about eight miles) where his daugh∣ter Dinah was rauished, Gen. 33. 8 From thence he went to Bethel, which is eight and twen∣ty miles, Gen. 31. 9 From Bethel he went to Bethlehem Euphrata, which is twelue miles; in which way Rachel died, and was buried not farre from Bethlehem; then Iacob went forward, and set vp his Tents neere to the Tower of Eder, a mile from Bethlehem towards the South, Gen. 35. 10 From Bethlehem Euphrata and the Tower of Eder, he re∣turned againe to the valley of Mamre neere Hebron, to his father Isaac, which is 20 miles, Gen. 35. 11 From Hebron hee went to Beersaba, which is 16 miles, Gen. 38. 12 From Beersaba, he went to the Towne of Ony a little off Aegypt in the land of Gossen, which is 168 miles, where Ioseph his sonne gaue him honourable entertainement, Gen. 46. 13 From Ony he went to the citieThis was the chiefe Citie of Aegypt. Zoan, which is also called Tanis, 28 miles, where he was presented to K. Pharaoh, Gen. 47. 14 From Tanis he returned to Ony, which is 28 miles, and there he dwelt and dyed in the land of Gossen, Gen. 49. The Description of the Townes and places to which Iacob trauelled. Of Bethel. BEthel was a Towne in the Tribe of Benjamin, eight miles from Ierusalem toward the North, and signifies The house of God. In times past it was called Luz: but Iacob seeing in that place the vision of the Ladder, with the Angells ascending and descending vpon it, and because there the Lord renued the coue∣nant with him concerning his seed, and the comming of Christ; he therefore called it Bethel. Afterward, Ieroboam hauing vnlawfully vsurpt the kingdome of Rehoboham, caused a calfe to be set vp there: for which cause it was then called Bethauen, which signifieth the house of
sinne and abhominable offence. Vatablus is of opinion, that there are two Bethels, one in the tribe of Benjamin, the other in the tribe of Ephraim, both not far from Hay: but if this should be granted, then these two townes should stand within two miles one of the other, which seemeth very absurd; therefore I dare boldly af∣firme, that there was but one Bethel, which stood vpon the bor∣ders of Benjamin and Ephraim, both tribes bordering vpon the South side of the towne of Luz, Iosh. 16. & 18. This towne of Bethel was at first in the Suburbs of Lue, vntill the diuision of the tribes; for then both these Tribes of Ephraim and Benjamin, ending in that place, so much increased this town, that they became both one city, and so were called Bethel, Ie. 28. & 35. Iosh. 7. & 18. From hence there is a two-fold mistery to be apprehended: the first, of Iacob, whose sleeping in this place vpon a stone, caused this Citie or Towne to be built, and to retaine the name of Be∣thel, that is, The house of God. So whosoeuer seekes to haue eter∣nall life, must rest vpon that corner stone Christ Iesus, the sonne of the euerliuing God, and by faith bee incorporated into the Church, which is the house of God, of which Christ (the An∣nointed of the Lord) is both King and Priest for euer. Secondly, as Iacob resting vpon this corner stone, saw the Angels ascending and descending from heauen vnto earth; so by this incorporation into the body of the Church (of which Christ is the head) by Faith and Baptisme, our soules are made capable to ascend into that heauenly Tabernacle, which he hath prepared for all those that beleeue: according to that in Iohn 14. I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man commeth vnto the father but by me only. And who∣soeuer is assured of this ladder (that reacheth from heauen vnto earth) may well say with Iacob, surely the Lord Iesus Christ is in this place; here is nothing but the house of God, and here is the gate of heauen; as Christ himselfe testifieth in the tenth of Iohn, I am the doore, and whosoeuer entreth not by me, &c. So that Christ is the head of his Church, the ladder that ascendeth into heauen, and the doore whereby we may enter into eternall life.
Of Gilead. THis land of Gilead was a country that lay betweene Iordan and the mountaine of Gilead, or rather betweene the sea of Galilee and the mount Gilead, sixtie miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the Southeast: for the mountaines of Gilead, beginning at mount Gilead, extended thence vnto Arabia the stony, and sepe∣rated the countrey of Israel beyond Iordan, from the countrey of the Amonites. But that part which lyeth betweene the Sea of Galilee and Ammon, is properly called Gilead; for when Iacob and Laban made a couenant either with other, in the mount Gile∣ad, they gathered a heape of stones, and making a banquet eat to∣gether vpon it, Gen. 13. and from thence, that mountain and all the countrey thereabouts tooke the name, For Laban in the Syrian tongue is called IEGAR SAHADVTA, the heap of couenant. But Iacob in the Hebrew language called that mountain together with all the Countrie thereabouts, Galeed or Galaad; the heape of testi∣monie: for Gal signifieth a heape or graue, and Galal, He rolled, or hee thrust into a round heape. From whence the Greeke word , to roule, and , a circle, is deriued: Also Edah signifies testomonie with the Hebrewes, being deriued from Id which signifies testae∣tus est, that is, he beareth witnesse; and from hence amongst the Grecians is deriued, which signifieth, a witnesse. This land of Gi∣lead was very fertile and pleasant, being adorned with many Ca∣stles and strong Cities: And in this countrey the Prophet Eliah was taken vp into heauen in a fierie Chariot, 1 Reg. 17.2 Reg. 2. The Graecians call this, Decapolin, from ten cities that are strong∣ly built in that countrey, Marc. 7. Of Machanaim. MAchanaim was a Citie of the Leuites in the Tribe of Gad, neere to the floud of Iordan and Iaboch, fortie foure miles from Ierusalem toward the Southeast, and scituate in the land of Gilead beyond Iordan; being so called of the Patriarch Ia∣cob, because there he saw the Tents and Armie of Angels, which he vnderstood to be his assistants against his brother Esau, whom hee feared, Genesis 31. For Chana signifieth Castrametatus est,
that is, the Tents are measured out▪ from whence Machanaim is the proper name of a place, being deriued from two Tents of Angels which appeared to Iacob, That they might defend him in his jour∣ney; For the Angels of God compasseth them about that feare him, Psal. 33. and therefore Iacob with great joy brake out and said, The tents of God are here, and called it Machanaim. This was assigned to the Leuits, Iosh. 21. and here Dauid was receiued when he fled from his sonne Absalon, 2 Sam. 17. Here Iacob wrastles with the Angell, Gen. 32. Of Pnuel or Penuel. THis Towne was vpon the East side of Iordan, close by the mouth of the riuer Iaboch, in the tribe of Gad▪ fortie miles from Ierusalem towards the Southeast; and is deriued from Pa∣nah and El, which signifies, He beheld the Almighty God face to face, and for that cause he called it Penuel or Pnuel, which is, the face of God, Gen. 32. The Tower of this Towne was destroied in Gedeons time, Iudg. 8. Of Succoth. THis is a towne beyond Iordan, not farre from Penuel, in the tribe of Gad, 40 miles from Ierusalem towards the South∣east. Here Iacob set vp his tabernacles and continued for a while; from whence it borrowes the name. For Sachach, signifies A coue∣ring, and from thence it is called Succha, and  with the Greeks, which signifies, A shield, couering, defence, or tabernacle: Of this towne there is mention in Iosh. 13.2 Chr. 4. Gedeon caused the Citizens of this towne of Succoth to be torne to pieces with thornes, Iudg. 8. Of Salem. SAlem is a town of the Sichamites, lying towards the East side of the riuer Iordan, and in the midst of the tribe of Manasses, fortie miles from Ierusalem towards the North, not farre from Sichem, where Dinah, Iocobs daughter was rauished, Gen. 33. & 34. in Aenon neere to this place Iohn Baptist baptised, and signifies, A Citie of Peace and integritie.
Of Bethlem Euphrata. THis town was distant from Ierusalem towards the South, six miles; it was scituated in a pleasant and fruitfull countrey, and from thence tooke the name: for Bethlachem, is called The house of bread; Euphrata signifies, fruitfull, being deriued from Pa∣rah, that is, to fructifie; and Baith signifieth a house, from the affinitie that it hath to Banah, that is, to build: so that Baithlaechem doth denote vnto vs The house of bread, and other fruits and meats that are fit to be eaten. Here was Christ the sonne of God borne, that bread of life, of which whosoeuer eateth shall liue eternally, Io. 6. And here Dauid was the second time annointed King, 1 Sam. 16. Of this towne you may reade more in the second of Luke. Of Rachels graue. ABout a mile from Bethlem towards the North, Rachel the wife of Iacob was buried, ouer whom hee set a stately sepul∣chre made of twelue marble stones, or Pyramides: these stones are seene to this day vpon the right hand of the way, as you goe from Bethlem to Ierusalem: and from thence all the land there∣abouts is called the land of Rachel. For when Herod killed the innocent children, all the inhabitants thereabouts wept, and would not be comforted, Matth. 2. Ierem. 31 Of the Towne of Aeder. THis was a watch Tower of the Bethlamites, about a mile from Bethlem towards the South, and was so called from the flockes of Sheepe that resorted thither: for Migdal signi∣fies a Tower, and Aeder a flocke or heard: for thereabouts were ve∣ry fertile pastures. Here the Angels told the sheepheards of the natiuitie of Christ, lying at Bethlem in a manger: and in the place of that tower there was a Church built, which in Ieroms time was called Angelus ad Pastores, because the Angels there appeared to the sheepe-heards. Here Iacob dwelt for a time, and in this place Reuben lay with Billah his wife, Gen. 36.
Of Gosen and Ony. GOsen was a very delectable and fruitfull country in the land of Aegypt, the Metropolitane whereof was Ony, two hun∣dred miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest: in this Citie Iacob dwelt. The typicall signification of the Patriarch Iacob. IAcob signifies, a supplanter, and was a type of Christ, who is that supplanter of Sathan, and by his death hath broken his head in pieces. Againe, he is the type of a Christian man: For as he wrestling with the Angell, obtained a blessing; so euery good man continually striuing with perseuerance in prayer, shall at length obtaine an euerlasting blessing: for, for this cause was Iacob called Israel, that is, the Prince of God, in that he preuailed with God: so all those that beleeue in Christ, are called Princes of the kingdome of heauen: because by his mediation they haue preuailed with God, and are made partakers of eternall life. Iacob had two wiues, Leah and Rachel; Leah signifies, wearied, and was a type of the old Mosaicall Church: for that was op∣pressed and wearied with the lawes of Moses, and brought forth Priests, Leuites, Kings, and warlike Princes, by which the people of the Iewes became oppressed and wearied by extreame labors, and at length were miserably extinguished: for as it is in the 15 of the Acts of the Apostles, The law of Moses was an intollerable and troublesome burthen. But Rachel signifies a Sheepe, and is a type and signe of the Church of God in the New Testament, as Christ himselfe speaketh in the tenth of Iohn, My sheepe heare my voice and follow me, and I will giue them eternall life. Sheepe are naturally patient and peaceable; so all such as are of Christs Church, seeke after patience and peace. Leah was nothing so faire, but much more fruitfull: Rachel was nothing so fruitfull, but a great deale fairer. Leah was the mother of Benja∣min which signifieth sorrow: Rachel of Ioseph, who was a type of Christ.
Of the Trauels of Esau. ESau trauelled from mount Sier in Mesopotamia, to the towne of Pnuell or Penuell, eightie miles to meet his brother Iacob: where the singular ciuilitie and humili∣tie of Iacob towards him, is worthy obseruation. For hee first sent to meet him, then hee did him obedience to the ground seuen seuerall times, and so saluted him, saying, Loe, these are the children which God of his grace haue giuing his seruant. From whence it may be gathered, That it becommeth euery man (if it be possible) to win his enemy to peace and concord rather by humanitie and humilitie, than by force: for Esau seeing this kind of reuerence, though before he had a full determination to doe him violence, yet now he comes to meet him, embraces him, takes him about the necke, beginnes to weepe, and kisses him, yea such was their loue, that they both wept with joy, Gen. 35. After, Esau returning, went home to Sier backe againe, eightie miles: these things hapned in the yeare of the World 2206; when both brethren were about 89 yeares of age, and in the yeare before Christ 1762. Of mount Sier. MOunt Sier where Esau and his posteritie dwelt, is forty miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and was so called of Sier, the King or Lord thereof, of whom came the Horrites; who being driuen thence by the fourteene sonnes of Esau, into Arabia the stony, where they continued, Gen. 36. It was called Edom of Esau, and then, Idumaea, Gen. 25. and the inhabitants thereof Edo∣mites, or Idumaeans. The typicall meaning of Esau. ESau signifies a Factor, and was so called from rednes: The ene∣mies of the church colouring themselues red with the blood of the godly: For as Rebecca had in her wombe two sonnes, that
is, Esau and Iacob; one elected, the other reprobated: so in the Church there are found two sorts of people, good and euill; some are wicked and impious, contemners of Gods word, and persecu∣ters of the Church; as after, the posterity of Esau was. But there are others that are the faithfull children of God, that hope through the mediation of our blessed Sauiour, to be made heires of euerlasting happinesse, and be crowned with him in his king∣dome with the crowne of Glory. So that here the saying of our Sauiour may be verified; the first shall be last, and the last shall be first. for Esau was the eldest, yet lost his birthwrite; and Iacob was the youngest, yet got the blessing. Of the Trauels of the Patriarch Iuda. IVda trauelled from Sichem, where Iacob dwelt, and went to the towne of Odulla, some forty and foure miles, where he was married to the daughter of one Chananei whose name was Schuah which signi∣nifies, A happy Sauiour, by her he had two children in that place, viz. Ger and Onan. From thence hee went to Timnah to sheare his sheepe, six miles: and as hee turned aside out of the way, hee committed in∣cest with his daughter in law, Thamer, when shee was about 26 yeares of age. Afterward hee went twice with his brethren into Aegypt, to buy corne at Zoan, where Ioseph at that time was; for the famine was very great round about. So that reckoning his journey twice two and againe, it amounted to eight hundred twentie and two miles; for Zoan was 208 miles from Hebron where Iacob and his sonnes dwelt. Lastly, he returned againe with his father and his brother into Aegypt, two hundred and eight miles. These things happened in the yeare of the world 1239. and before Christ 1729.
The description of the Townes and places to which the Patriarch Iuda trauelled. Of Odullam. THis was a towne in the tribe of Iuda, eight miles from Ieru∣salem towards the South-west, and signifies The testimonie of the poore: being deriued of Ed, which signifies a testimonie, and Dallimo, such as are called poore. Here Dauid hid himselfe from the furie of Saul in a caue, 1 Sam. 22. Ierom knew this towne, and saith that it was a village. This was a type of the faithful, who be∣ing still subject to the calamities and miseries of this world, and persecuted for righteousnesse sake, are glad with Dauid to seeke holes and caues to defend them from their wicked persecuters. Of Thimnah. THimnah is a Citie in the borders of the Tribe of Iudah, and Dan, scituated in mount Ephraim, six miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest, and signifieth a perfect and fully finished Citie; being deriued from Thamam, that is, fully and absolutely fini∣shed; for it was adorned with many very faire and spacious buil∣dings, set vp by Iosuah: for in his time it was a faire and large Ci∣tie, and at such time as the children of Israel invaded Canaan, he had much adoe to win it: Therefore the children of Israel for his great valour, and to manifest their thankefulnesse towards him, they gaue it to him and to his posterity for euer; and here he lyeth bured, Iosuah 24. Here Sampson married his wife, and by the way killed the Lion, mentioned in the 14 of Iudges. This is  type of the Church, wherein Christ Iesus the true Iosuah is the head, illuminating the same by the bright shining beames of his Gospell, the lustre whereof hath gone throughout the whole World.
Of the Trauels of the Patriarch Ioseph. WHen Ioseph was sent from Hebron by his father Iacob, hee went to Sichem to seeke his brothers, 60 miles, Gen. 37. 2 From thence he went to Dothan, foure miles, where by his brothers he was throwne into a Pit, and after sold to the Ishmalites, Gen. 37. 3 From Dothan hee was carried to Tanis in Aegypt, and there sold to Potipher, Pharaohs chiefe steward, 272 miles. 4 From Tanis he went to meet his father in the land of Go∣sen, which is 28 miles, Gen. 46. 5 From thence he turned backe againe to Tanis, and presen∣ted his father and brethren vnto Pharaoh, Gen. 47. which is 28 miles. 6 From thence hee went backe to Ony to see his father, who now was sick vnto the death, there receiuing his blessing, he clo∣sed his eies, which was 28 miles. 7 From thence he returned backe againe to Tanis, which is 28 miles. 8 From Tanis he went backe to Ony, with a great company of horses and chariots, preparing an honourable funerall for his father, Gen. 15. being 28 miles. 9 From Ony he went to Atad which lies vpon the further side of Iordan toward the East; which is 240 miles, where hee made a great lamentation for the death of his father 7 daies, Gen. 50. The reason why Ioseph went thus far about, was, because hee went with such a company towards Hebron, that the Idumaeans, through whose countrey he should haue gone, would not suffer him to passe that way, standing in feare of his power. 10 From Atad he went to Hebron the Metropolis of the tribe of Iudah, neere to which stood the double caue in the vaile of Mamre, where Iacob was buried, which was 40 miles, Gen. 50. 11 From thence to Heliopolis, a city of the Aegyptians, where
Ioseph set vp a stately Academy for all Aegypt, which was accoun∣ted 200 miles. 12 From thence he went to Tanis or Zoan, which was the chiefe defence and Metropolitan citie of all Aegypt, being ac∣counted 6 miles. So all the Trauels of the Patriarch Ioseph was 1962 miles. A description of the places and cities through which Ioseph trauelled. Of Dothan. DOthan was a Citie in the tribe of Manasseth, fortie and foure miles from Ierusalem towards the North, & distant six miles from Tiberias towards the West, and signifies A commandement, being deriued from Dothor Dathath, that is, he commandeth or ordai∣neth. Here Ioseph was thrust into an emptie ditch, and sold to the Ismaelites, Gen. 37. Here Elias the Prophet being besieged by the Syrians, shewed to his seruant the host of Angels that defen∣ded him with the Chariots of fire, &c. 2 Kings 16. Here Holipher∣nes was slaine, who had pitched his tents against Bethulia: for Dothan is a Citie which at this day remaineth at the foot of the Mount of Bethuell, beeing scituated in a fertile and pleasant place, compassed about with faire vines, oliues, and pleasant me∣dows, where the inhabitants do shew that ancient ditch wherein Ioseph was cast, when his brothers sold him to the Ishmaelites, ac∣cording to that of Solomon, One generation passeth, and another com∣meth, but the earth indureth for euer. Of Heliopolis, or the Citie of the Sunne. THis City is called by the Prophet Esay Ca. 19. Irheri, which signifies The Citie of the Sunne, and is deriued of Ir and Che∣res which signifies The brighnesse of the Sunne, and is distant from Ierusalem 224 miles towards the Southwest, six miles and a halfe from Zoan or Tanis. This was a goodly Citie, and in times past the Kings of Aegypt haue in that place kept their Courts and places of residence. Here was a flourishing Academie, wherein was taught Astronomie, Cosmographie, and many other liberall
arts and sciences, with great care and diligence, but principally diuinitie (as Munster saith) being adorned with many benefits and priuiledges: for it was thought that the Patriarch Ioseph was the first founder of it, and taught there, Gen. 47. Here dwelt Dionisius the Areopagit, a studient of Athens, who at such time as our Sa∣uiour Christ was crucified, at noone day (the Moone then being in the full) seeing the Sunne totally darkened, said to this master Apollophan, Either the God of nature suffereth, or the fabricke of the world is dissolued. The said Dionisius was afterward conuerted by the Apostle Paul, in the citie of Athens. Of Goraen Atad. THis towne or corne floore was beyond Iordan, not far from Bethabara, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southeast, (Here Ioseph and the rest of the Aegiptians, bewailed the death of Iacob) and tooke the name from thornes and briers that compas∣sed it euery where about. The interpretation or allegorie of the Patriarch Ioseph, and of his life. IOseph was a type of Christ diuers waies: for as Iosephs coat be∣ing of diuers colours, was dipped in the bloud of Goates, so Christ being very God, taking vpon him the humane nature, and sprinkled with the bloud of his stripes and wounds (being the lambe of God slaine for the sinnes of the world) was also made changeable and of diuers colours. Againe, as Ioseph was sent by Iacob to seeke his brethren: so Christ was sent by God his father to seeke the lost sheepe of Israel, which according to the flesh, were his brethren, Mat. 15. And as the brethren of Ioseph were so great enemies to him, that it was not possible for them to dissem∣ble their hatred towards him, but that both in words and deeds, they must needs expresse their bitternesse, (enuie being the com∣mon companion of vertue) so the Iewes, the brethen of Christ, to whom the knees of all things both in heauen, in hell, and in earth bow, persecuting him with taunts, mockes, and stripes, yea, vnto death, because he professed himselfe to be a good man, and the sonne of the euerliuing God.
And as the Ismalites and Midianites, to whom Ioseph was sold by Iudah, was of the stocke of Ioseph, the one being deriued from Ismael the sonne of Abraham by his maid Hagar, the other of Mi∣dian the sonne of his second wife Keturah: So Christ was sold by Iudas his disciple, to the Iewes his kindred according to the flesh, if you respect the nation. The difference was in the price; Ioseph the type being sold but for twenty pieces of siluer, Christ the substance sold at thirtie. The end of the booke of Genesis. Of the Trauels of the Prophet Moses, and the chil∣dren of Israel out of Aegypt. IN the yeare of the world, 2412, and before Christ, 1554, Moses (being then about forty yeares old) fled out of Aegypt into the land of Midian, 180 miles, where he married Ziporah, the daughter of Riuel, Exod. 3. 2 From thence he went to Mount Sinai or Horeb, 64 miles, Exod. 3.7. 3 From mount Horeb, he returned to Midian to his brother, 65 miles, Ex. 4. 4 From Midian he went to Thanis in Aegypt, 180 miles Ex. 12.13. 5 From thence he went with the children of Israel to Raem∣ses, 48 miles, Ex. 12. 6 From Raemses, he went to Succoth, 8 miles, Ex. 13. Num. 3 7 From Succoth he went to the wildernesse of Etham, eigh miles. 8 From Etham hee came to Hahiroth, which lyeth right a∣gainst Baal-zephon, 16 miles, Num. 3. 9 From Hahiroth, they passed through the middle of the red sea, and trauelled three daies through the wildernesse of Etham resting themselues at Morah, which is 40 miles: There Mose threw a piece of wood into the water being bitter, and presently
it became sweet as soone as the wood was throwne in. Exod. 15. Num. 33. 10 From Marah he went to Elim, where there stood 12 wels of water, and 70 palm trees, which is 8 miles, Ex. 16. Nu. 33. 11 From Elim they went toward the South, 6 miles, and re∣sted themselues by the red sea, Num. 33. 12 From the red sea they went to the wildernes of Zin, where it rained Manna from heauen, which is 16 miles, Num. 32. 13 From the wildernesse of Zin they went to Daphca, which is 12 miles, Num. 33. 14 From Daphca they went to Alus, which is twelue miles, Num. 33- 15 From Alus they went to Raphidim, being 8 miles: there Moses strook the rock, and presently water issued forth, Ex. 27. 16 From Raphidim they went to mount Sina, which is eight miles: there God gaue the Commandements, Ex. 19 & 20. 17 From Sina they went to the Graves of Concupiscence, because there the children of Israell murmured against God for flesh, & lo it rained Quails into the camp: which is 8 miles, Nu. 11 18 From the Graues of Concupiscence they went to Haze∣roth, which is 8 miles, there Miriam (Moses sister) was strook with leprosie, Num. 12. 19 From thence they went to Rithma, which is eight miles, Num. 33. 20 From Rithma they went to Rimon-Parets, which is sixe miles, Num. 33. 21 From Rimon-Parets they went to Libanon, which is sixe miles. 22 From Libanon they went to Rissa, which is 6 miles, Nu. 33 23 From Rissa they went to Kehelatha, 6 miles, Num. 33. 24 From Kehelatha they went to the hil of Sephar, which is 4 miles. 25 From the hill of Sephar they went to Harada, four miles and a halfe, Num. 33. 26 From Harada they went to Maceheloth, 4 miles, Nu. 33. 27 From Maceheloth they went to Thahath, 4 miles, Nu. 33. 28 From Thahath they went to Thara, 4 miles, Nu. 33.
29 From Thara they went to Mithka, 4 miles, Num. 33. 30 From Mithka they went to Casmona, 8 miles, Nu. 33. 31 From Casmona they went to Moseroth, 32 miles, Nu. 33 32 From Moseroth they went to Bneiaëcon, 24 miles. 33 From Bneiaëcon they went to mount Gidgad, twentie miles. 34 From mount Gidgad they went to Iotbatha, 24 miles, Num. 33. 35 From Iotbotha they went to Ebrona, 20 miles, Nu. 33. 36 From Ebrona they went to Eziongaber, 28 miles. 37 From Eziongaber they went to the Wildernesse of Zin-Kades, 48 miles. 38 From Zin-Kades they went to mount Hor, as God com∣manded, 48 miles, where Aaron died. 39 From mount Hor they went to Salmona, 28 miles. 40 From Salmona they went to the town of Phunon, twenty miles. 41 From Phunon they went to Oboth, 24 miles. 42 From Oboth they went to Igim vpon the hill Abarim, 16 miles. 43 From Igim they went to Dibon Gad, 16 miles, there is the water Sarum, Num. 31.33. 44 From Dibon Gad they went to Almon Diblathaim, 16 miles, Num. 33. 45 From Almon Diblathaim they went to the hill Abarim, 16 miles. 46 From the hill Abarim they went downward ouer the Ri∣uer Arnon, to the field of the Moabites, to the town of Iachra, 16 miles, where Moses ouercame Sehon King of the Ammorites, with all his camp. Num. 21. Deut. 2. 47 From Iacra they went to Hesbon, 4 miles, which Towne Moses won from the King of the Ammorites, Num. 21. Deut. 2. 48 From Hesbon they went to the towne of Iaëzer, which Moses won, 8 miles, Num. 21. Deut. 2. 49 From Iaëzer they went to Edrei, 12 miles: there Moses ouerthrew King Og with all his army at Basan, Num. 21. Deut. 3. 50 From Edrei they went to mount Libanus, 56 miles, which
Moses won. Num. 21. Deut. 3. 51 From mount Libanus they returned backe againe to the field of the Moabites, 40 miles, by which field lieth the high hill Pisga, where Moses died, Deut. 34. So all the trauels of the Patriarch Moses were 1424 miles. The description of the townes and places by which Moses trauelled with the children of Israel. Of Midian. MIdian was a metropolitan city of the Midianites, neer to the Red sea, some 160 miles from Ierusalem toward the South, and signifies a measure, being deriued of Madad, which signifies, He hath measured. Here Iethro (Moses father in law) dwelt. In this town the Kings of Idumaea kept their court, 1 Reg. 11. There was also another city of the same name, that stood neere to Arnon, some 24 miles from Ierusalem toward the East; so that the Mi∣dianites had their seat partly neere the red sea in Arabia Paetrea, and partly vpon the confines of the Moabites, taking their begin∣ning from Midian the sonne of Abraham which he had by his wife Kethura, Gen. 25. Of Horeb. HOreb is a mount of the Midianites, and is sometimes called by the name of Sina. It lieth 420 miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the South. In this place God appeared to Moses in a flame of fire, Ex. 3. And as Bernard Britenbach saith, In this place there is a chappel built, called the Church of S. Mary in the bush. In this Chappel there is a place shewed where God spake with Mo∣ses, Ex. 3. but how true that I leaue, because there are many Chur∣ches built by Monks, for no other purpose but to deceiue trauel∣lers and pilgrims of their mony. Of Raemsis. THis is one of the strong cities which the Israelites built for Pharaoh, and is a metropolitan city in the land of Gossen,
174 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest, & signifies Ioy and delight, being deriued of Raam and Sus, that is, To leape for joy. Of Pihachiroth. THis was a certain Plain lying between two hils neere to the Red sea, and was called Pinaehiroth, which signifies, a mouth cut or carued out; where the Children of Israel pitched their tents. Here Pharaoh inuaded them when they went out of Egypt, taking opportunitie of the place: for they hauing on either side of them an high mountaine, before them the red sea, and behinde them a cruell and mighty tyrant, to the iudgment of man had no means to escape. But the Lord to expresse the mightines of his power, and that the Children of Israell might know who it was that deliuered them, made them a passage, & led them vnder the conduct of Moses through the red sea; in that very place drowning their enemies, which had thought to make a prey of them. A lit∣tle from this place the temple of the idol Baalzephon is to be seen Of the Red sea. THe Red sea is 160 miles from Ierusalem Southward, betwixt Arabia and Aegypt, and as some are of opinion, it taketh the name of the red scales that grow therein, wherefore in Scripture it is also called the Scaly sea. Some say it taketh the name from red sand that lies on the shore, cast vp by the sea. Others say, tha the rednesse thereof hapneth because of the shadow cast into the water by the mountaines thereabout. The vulgar are of opinion, that it is naturally red by reason of the water; but it is not so, be∣cause it is like the water of the Ocean, cleare and salt. Strabo, li. 16 obserueth, that this sea was so called from Erithraea, and thence Mare Arithraeum; because the word Erithraeum in Greek signifieth red or purple: the Latines call it Mare rubrum, and we, the red sea▪ This Erithrae was sonne to Perseus and Andromada, who sometime dwelt in the Island of that sea. It is also called the Arabian gulf running from the South to the West; and by the Hebrewes, Iam¦suph, a scaly sea: all which names are at this day vsed: at the vtmos
bounds hereof are seene the admirable workes of Pharaoh Meco, who would haue brought this Sea to the riuer Nilus, that so he might haue sailed thence into the Mediterranian Sea: But this worke he could not finish, being opposed by the wise men of Ae∣gypt. Here also growes certaine trees that are as red as Brasill wood. Of the misterie of the red Sea. AS Moses led the children of Israel through the red Sea, and deliuered them from the bondage and captiuitie of the Kings of Aegypt; So Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, by his preci∣ous bloud, hath deliuered vs from the house of bondage, and the tyranny of Sathan: and as Pharaoh and all his host was there drow∣ned; so the sinne of Adam, Death, and the Diuell, in that sea of Christs bloud is vtterly drowned, and we deliuered from the pit of hell. Of Baal-Zephon. THis was an Idol erected by the Aegyptians neer to the shore of the Red Sea, and is called Baal-zephon, that is, the Lord of defence and watchfulnesse, because as they thought, hee resisted fu∣gitiue seruants, as Fagius and other Hebrewes obserue: being de∣riued from Baal, which signifies, a Lord, and Zapha, that is, That hath seene, or, to behold and see. The temple of this Idol stood close by the shore of the Red sea, vpon a high hill, very curiously wrought, so that the children of Israel going through the same, could not chuse but see it, yet neuerthelesse they went securely, when Pharaoh and all his host were drowned, notwithstanding, that their God of defence was so neere them. Of Marah. THis is a place in the Desart, which took the name of bitter∣nesse, distant from Ierusalem 160 miles towards the South∣west. Here Moses made the water sweet by throwing in wood: The misterie whereof is, when Adam and Euah had eaten of the forbidden fruit, they brought bitternesse through all the World, yea, the bitternesse of sin and death: but God shewed vnto Moses another tree, that is, our Lord Iesus Christ, who being throwne into the waters of bitternesse, afflictions calamities, miseries, yea,
and the death of the Crosse, for our sakes and sins vnderwent the curse of the Law; that so taking away the bitternes, we might be made capable of that sweet and delectable place of eternall life. Of Elim. THis was the sixt resting place of the Israelites in the desart, 120 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest; and is de∣riued from Aial, which signifies a Hart, a strong and swift Crea∣ture, of which it seems there were great multitudes which resor∣ted to this place to drink: and from thence it is called Elim. Here stood 12 fountains and 70 Palme trees. Of Sin. THis was a thorny place in the desart, 156 miles from Ieru∣salem toward the Southwest. Here it rained down Quailes and Manna from heauen; being a type of our Sauior Iesus Christ that heauenly Manna which raiseth vs vp vnto eternall life, Ioh. 6. and is deriued of Manah, which signifies to distribute; and there∣fore Man or Mannah signifies a distributiue gift, or meat fallen from heauen distributiuely. Sin signifieth a thorny place, from Zemeh, which signifies a bush: for Christ flourisheth in the midst of his enemies as a Lilly amongst thornes, Can. 2. Psal. 10. Of Raphadim. RAphadim was a place where the children of Israell pitched their tents in the desart, not far from mount Sinai, 132 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest; and signifieth a Grasse bench strewed with sweet herbs and floures: being deriued from Raphad, which is as much to say in our Language, as To make a bed or place for one to lie down on. Here Moses strook the rock, out of which water issued, Exod. 17. which was a type of that spi∣rituall Rock Christ Iesus, 1 Cor. 10. who being strooke with the staffe of the curse of the Law, out of his pretious wounds and side sent forth that Water of life which runneth into eternall happi∣nesse. In this place the children of Israel fought against the A∣malekites, and ouercame them, Ex. 17. and here Iethro came vnto Moses, where according to his counsell there were seuenty Elders
chosen ouer the people, Ex. 18. This was a fruitfull and pleasant place. Of Mount Sinai. SInai is 120 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and be∣cause in that place there are many bushes and thorns, it is cal∣led Sinai: for Senaëh signifies a Bush. Here the Law (which wee call the ten Commandements) was giuen; & not vnfitly, because like thornes they prick and vex the hearts and consciences of wic∣ked men. It is also called Horeb, or Chareb, which signifies a place made dry. Bernard Breitenbacchus and many others in the moneth of September 1483, went purposely to see this mountaine, and with great labor ascended to the top thereof; for (as he saith) it is a great mountain, and of an extraordinary height; in the lower part round, in the vpper part diuided into two tops or mountains, one standing toward the West, the other toward the East. That toward the West is called Horeb, that to the East, Sinai. And from these two it is somtimes called Horeb, somtimes Sinai, be∣ing both one hill of the base. Between these there lies a faire and spatious Plain, in the middle whereof (and as it may be thought in the midst of the mountain) there stands a monasterie, neere to which there is adioyning a very pleasant Garden and Orchard, plentifully furnished with Date trees, Fig trees, and many others very profitable and pleasant; where in antient times were many Monks that continued there. But it hapned that a certain num∣ber of Pagans, in hope to find some booty, came from a hauen of the red sea, called Thor, and vpon a sudden broke in vpon them, and put forty of them to the sword; from whence it was euer af∣ter called the Abby of the forty Martyrs. Now it remains deso∣late, few or none inhabiting there, onely two Monks of S. Katha∣rines Order, and these are also grieuously troubled with the incur∣sions of the Arabians. The orchard also is destroyed with locusts and the ground become barren. In this orchard there stands a lit∣tle chappell, in which there is a caue where S. Onuphrius the An∣chorist liued.
At the foot of Mount Sina vpon the North, standeth the mo∣nasterie of Saint Katherin, of which the Emperour Iustinian was the first founder: it is compassed about with a wall; close by it standeth a goodly Orchard furnished with diuers trees, of fruit pleasant and delightfull; in that there standeth a goodly fountain which watereth all about it. In this place there are a great num∣ber of poore Monkes, which get their liuing by their hands, in the desart thereabouts. They say that here stood the golden calfe spoken of in the 32 of Exodus. And they shew a round stone ly∣ing there, where they say Moses broke the two Tables that were giuen him by God. To pilgrims also they shew the tomb of Saint Katherine, standing vpon the right side of the Quire, with certain other reliques of hers. Vpon the left side of the quire, there stands a little doore by which you enter into a place called the Chap∣pell of Saint Marie of the Bush, where they shew the place of the Bush in which God appeared vnto Moses: And to giue grace vnto their superstitions, there may none enter into that place, but hee must put off his hose and shooes. There is another place, where they say God commanded Moses to bring vp Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu with him, and the seuenty Elders; with many other super∣stitious chappels, which would be too tedious & friuolous to re∣cite. Not far from this there standeth also a Mosko of the Sara∣zens, ful as faire and spacious as that of Saint Katherines, to which there is adjoyned a certaine Turret: hither the Arabians and Sa∣razens do also often come to visit Saint Katherine. At the ascent of the Mount Horeb, neere to the Monastery of saint Katherine, there standeth a fountaine of very cleare water, in the likenesse of a bow, made of stone, reaching from the one side of it to the other; and standeth like vnto an arch or gate. A little aboue that, at the foot of Mount Horeb, is to be seene the caue where Eliah rested when the Lord spake vnto him, 1 Reg. 19. Some∣thing aboue that, the cliffe of the rocke where Moses stood by Gods appointment, when he past by, and he saw his backe parts, Ex. 33. A little beyond that, is the top of Mount Horeb, where is built a little chappell that hath an iron doore, the keyes of which are in the Monkes custody of the Abbie of saint Katherine. In this place they say Moses receiued the two tables of stone, wherin the
ten Commandements were written by the finger of God. Ex. 34. There is none that enters into this Chappel but with great reue∣rence, bare foot and bare legged, and casting themselues vpon the earth, kisse it. About fifteene paces from this, they shew the Caue wherein Moses fasted fortie daies and fortie nights, Exod. 24.34. A little aboue that, there is a Moske, to which there dai∣ly resorts Arabians and Saracens in honour of Moses, whom they reuerence as a Prophet. Betweene these there lyeth a Well of cold wholesome water, which is called Moses Well. Here seemeth in times past to haue beene some Monastery; for there are di∣uers ruins of walkes and buildings to be seene. This mountain is round, and difficult to ascend: it is 7000 steps to the top, & from thence the red sea & the arme therof (where Pharaoh was drowned when he followed the children of Israel) may easily be discerned. Mount Sina is much higher than this, and lyeth two daies journey from the Red sea: Vpon the top whereof are many rocks and great stones. From thence you may see sundry places, as, a mountain lying in Thebaidaes, the great hauen of the red Sea, the Desart of Elim and Sur, with many others. The desarts round about take the name from the height thereof; and are called, The desarts of Sina. Of the Graues of Concupiscence. THese Graues are 112 miles towards the South from Ierusa∣lem, where the children of Israel lusting after meat, were fed by the Lord with Quailes; and for their disobedience died mise∣rably. It was also called Tabarah, which signifies an inflammati∣on; being deriued from Baar, to burne, because here the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and he strooke the vttermost parts of their Tents with fire from heauen, and consumed them, Numb. 11. Of Hazeroth. THis is a place in the desart, some 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, the name thereof being deriued from Chazer, which signifieth, a Caue, about the mouth whereof there groweth long Grasse: And therefore from hence Chazer
is also taken for Grasse. Here Miriam the sister of Moses and Aaron was strooke with leprosie. Of Rithmah. RIthmah takes name from Iuniper; for Rothaem in Hebrew sig∣nifies Iuniper. It is distant from Ierusalem 112 miles toward the Southeast. Heere the children of Israel pitched their Tents, Num. 33. and here it is very likely the Angell of the Lord appea∣red to the prophet Eliah, and brought him meat and drinke. Of Rimmon Parez. IN this place the children of Israel the 16 remoue made their abiding, being 108 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-East. Here it is thought the children of Israell found great store of Pomegranats, whereof diuision was made amongst them. For Rimmon is as much as a grained apple or a Pomegranat; & Parez, He hath diuided. Of Libnah. LIbnah is the 17 place where the children of Israel stayed, and was so called of the aboundance of Frankincence that was found there; for Libnah signifies white Frankincense. This is 104 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest. Of Rissa. HEere the children of Israel pitcht their Tents, being about 100 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southeast; it took the name from the fruitfulnesse and aboundance of floures & herbes that grow there; and is deriued from Rasa, which signifies to make moist, for there were vsually exceeding pleasant and sweet dewes Of Chehelah. CHehelah was the nineteenth place where the children of Is∣rael made their abiding in the desart, being 92 miles from Ie∣rusalem toward the Southwest, Num. 33. and signifies a Congre∣gation or Church, being deriued from Rahal, that is, He hath as∣sembled. This was a type of the Church, where all the Elect and
faithful people of God trauel through the wildernes of this wic∣ked world. Of Saphar. SAphar is a mountaine in the desart of Arabia Petraea, 88 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest. This was the twentieth Remoue; the name of the place beeing so called partly of their tents, partly of the roundnesse of the mountains. Of Harada. HArada was full of wilde beasts, which strook the people into a mighty feare; so called as beeing deriued from Charada, which signifies terror or trembling. Here the children of Israell stayed the 21 time, it being 80 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest. Of Thahath. THis is a certain valley 68 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest, and is deriued from Tachath, which signifieth a ceriain Plaine or low place. Of Maceheloth. THis was the 22 abiding of the Israelites, beeing 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest. Here a congregati∣on of the tribes of Israel was called; for Maccheloth signifieth a congregation or meeting together. Somtimes it is taken for the Church, being deriued from Rahal, i. He assembleth together. Of Tharah. THis was a memorable place in the Wildernesse, where the Is∣raelites had a breathing time: for now growing neere to the borders of the land of Canaan, after so many journies they began to rest themselues, because of the warres they were shortly to vn∣dertake. And it is deriued of Roah and Tarah, which signifieth a breathing time. Here was the 24 mansion of the Israelites. Of Mithca. HEre was the 25 mansion of the Israelites, being but 56 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest, in the vtmost borders
of the land of Canaan, and no doubt tooke the name from the delightfull and pleasant taste of Grapes: For Mitka signifies the same that Mithetk, that is to say, sweetnesse and pleasantnesse. Of Cades Barnea. CAdes Barnea a citie of the Idumaeans (being deriued of Ka∣das and Barah, that is, A holy place) is fortie miles from Ieru∣salem towards the South: from this place Moses sent spies into the land of Canaan, who brought of the fruit of the Land, but all of them discouraged the people, onely Caleb: wherefore they murmured, and the Lord was angry, and would not suffer them to enter into the land of Promise: So turning their journey, they went to Exeongaber, 148 miles, so that they trauelled in the de∣sart 40 yeares, before they could enter into the land of Promise. Of this you may reade, Gen. 14.16.20. Num. 13.27.33.34. Deut. 1. Psal. 29. Ezech. 47. Of Chasmona. IN this place the children of Israel set vp their tents, a little be∣fore they sent spies into the land of Canaan: it is not far from Cades Barnea towards the South. For the twelue Spies were not sent from the Citie of Cades Barnea, but from their Tents; and of this still distribution, or sending, (for one out of euery Tribe was chosen) it tooke the name. For Casmona signifies, a still distribution, being deriued of Chasca and Manah, hee stilly distri∣buted. Of Moseroth. MOseroth was the 27 mansion of the children of Israel in the wildernesse, and distant from Ierusalem 72 miles towards the South, where the Lord caused them to returne backe for their murmuring, towards the South, that so they might liue just forty yeares in the wildernesse, Num. 14.33. This place seemeth to take the name therof from Traditions, for there Moses repeated to the Israelites the Law of the Lord: and for this cause their tents were called Moseroth, which signifies Traditions, and is deriued of Ma∣sar, that is, to Preach.
Of Benei Iaacon. THis was the 28 mansion of the Israelites, so called because there their tents were fairly set vp, with pleasant walkes and places about them: for Benei Iaaecon signifieth a Building or faire walk; being deriued of Bana and Akah, that is, Hee hath set vp an house: and was 96 miles from Ierusalem Southward, Num. 33. Of Hor Gidgad. AT this mountaine the children of Israel staied a while, be∣cause it was a fertill and pleasant place, as Moses himselfe witnesseth. It is 112 miles from Ierusalem toward the South; be∣ing deriued of Harar, a Mountain, and Glebam, a Plough, Plin. l. 20 cp. 20. Of Iotbatha. THis was the 30 mansion of the Israelites in the wildernesse, being 132 miles from Ierusalem toward the South, & took the name from the pleasantnesse and fertilitie of the wildernesse; being deriued of Iatab & Batha, A certain good and pleasant wast or wildernesse. Of Arbona. THis place being very discommodious and no whit profita∣ble, the children of Israel were constrained to remoue their tents with great weeping and lamentation: for Arbona being de∣riued from Abar and Naha, signifies partly to remoue, and partly to weep. Of Aezion Gaber. THis was a town of the Idumaeans, neer the red sea, 148 miles from Kades Barnea, and 174 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Here the Israelites set vp their tents, and here Solomon made his Navy which he sent to Ophir to fetch gold, 1 Kings, 9. This city no doubt took the name of the strength and multitude of trees, whereof these ships were built; for they were very faire ships, and of excellent workmanship. Aezion Gaber signifieth A strong tree; beeing deriued of Ez and Gaber, that is, A Tree of strength.
Of Zin-Kades. THis was a great Wildernesse lying betweene Ezion-Gaber and Kades-Barnea, being 184 miles in length, abounding with thorns and high mountaines. Vpon the North side thereof lay mount Seir, and Kades-Barnea, and towards the South the red sea. It was called Paran and Zin, of the aboundance of thorns that grew there; for Zin, of Zanan, signifies a sharp thorne; Zin∣nim, full of thorns; and Kadesh, Sanctity or holinesse. Here Moses and Aaron hauing strooke the rocke twice, at length it brought forth water: but for their murmuring & incredulity God would not suffer them to goe into the land of Canaan. This lay 120 miles from Ierusalem toward the South. Of the mountaine Hor. HOr is a mountain of the Idumaeans, 88 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southeast, and is deriued of Harar, which signifi∣eth a great mountain: here Aaron died. The King of the Canaa∣nites which dwelt toward the South, in a town called Arad, vpon the borders of Iudaea and Arabia Petraea, hearing that Aaron was dead, inuaded the Iews with a great army, discomfited them, and tooke some of them captiues. But after, the Israelites to reuenge this iniury, tooke and destroyed diuers cities which belonged to the Canaanites, and put the citisens to the sword. This countrey is called Chormah, which signifieth a curse or desolation. Of Zalmona. THis was a place in the desart of Zin-Kades, where the Israe∣lites pitcht their tents, being 80 miles from Ierusalem to the Southeast; and took the name from shades or little sheds vn∣der which the Israelites dwelt: for Zalmona seems a compound of Zel and Mun, which signifies a shady place, and seemes to haue affinitie with Manah, to distribute here and there. Of Phunon. THis was a city of the Idumaeans, scituated in the wildernes of Arabia Petraea, 64 miles from Ierusalem towards the
Southeast; and takes the name from a faire and flourishing city. For Panan in Hebrew signifieth an high pinnacle, from whence one might see all parts of the world. Here Moses set vp the brasen Serpent. Of Oboth. THis was the 37 mansion of the Israelites in the wildernesse, & was 56 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southeast, and signifies a serpent called Python. Here the Arabians receiued an answer from the Diuell by way of conjuration. Of Igim. THis was the 38 Mansion of the Israelites; so called because of the multitude which were assembled neer to a mountain called Abarim, 52 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southeast; for Igim signifieth a Congregation. Of Dibon Gad. THis was the 39 station of the Israelites in the desart, beeing 52 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southeast, neere to the floud Zared, bordering vpon the Idumaeans and Moabites, run∣ning from thence into the red sea, and as it seemes taketh name from descending into a strong place. Of Almon Diblathaim. THis place stands beyond the red sea, some 40 miles from Ie∣rusalem toward the East; and taketh name from a Fraile of dried figs; from Alam signifieth, he hath hidden; and Debeleth, A Fraile of dried figs. Here was the 40 mansion of the Israelites, and lay close by the riuer Arnon, Num. 21. & 23. Of the mountaines Abarim. THese mountaines lay 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, and taketh the name from Passing along; for Abar is as much to say as He went along. Between these mountains and the lake Asphaltites, neere to the Easterne riuer of the Dead sea, the Moabites inhabited.
Of Iahza. THis was a city of the Levits the sons of Merar, in the Tribe of Benjamin, 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, Ios. 21. here Moses ouercame the King of the Ammonites, and put them to death, Num. 21. Of Chezbon. THis was the Metropolis of Sehon King of the Ammorites, who held the country beyond Iordan; and because he would not suffer the children of Israel to passe through his Dominions, therefore Moses made warre vpon him, put him to death, and gaue all his country to the tribes of Reuben and Gad. This was a faire towne, and after fell to the Levits, Num. 21.33. Deut. 1.2. &c. and tooke its name from Cheschebon, which signifies An artificiall vn∣derstanding: for Chaschaf is as much as excogitavit, that is, he hath found out; and Cheschaef is, An artificiall and ingenious Worke. Of Iaezir. IAezir was a city of the Priests in the Tribe of Gad, 36 miles from Ierusalem toward the East, and in Ieroms time was a smal village, and signifies, The Lord is my help; being deriued of Iah, that is, The Lord God; and Ezaer, The helper. Of Edrie. THis is a city in the countrey of Gilead, beyond Iordan and the Galilean sea, 32 miles from Ierusalem South-Eastward neere the lake of Gaderin; where Og the King of Basan was ouer∣come by Moses; and after fel to the Tribe of Manasses, Num. 21. Ios. 13. Deut. 13. S. Ierom saith, That in his time this towne wa called Adar. Og signifieth a Cooke, or one that baketh bread vp¦on coles. Aedriae signifies an heap of bright clouds; being deriue of Adar and Hi, that is, a cleare heape. Of Astoroth. THis was a metropolitan City of Basan, foure miles distan from Edri, and 56 from Ierusalem toward the Southeast. I stood beyond Iordan, and belonged to the half tribe of Manasses of which you may reade before in the trauels of Lot.
Of Pisgah. THis was a high mountaine in the plaine of the Moabites, a∣gainst Iericho, 240 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. It took the name from the cities Pisgah and Nebo, and therefore is cal∣led somtimes Pisgah, somtimes Nebo. Here Moses died. Nebo sig∣nifies a city of the Prophets: Pisgah, The top of a hill. The Trauels of the Prophet Balaam. THere are many which thinke that this Prophet Balaam was of the posteritie of Nahor the brother of Abraham, and an in∣habitant of the city of Charan in Mesopotamia, Gen. 11. Io∣sephus saith he dwelt neere to Euphrates: and S. Ierom, in a Citie called Phatura, of which there is mention, Num. 22. and signifies an obscure Prophet, or oracle which interpreteth. For Pathar with the Hebrewes, is the same that He hath interpreted, is with vs. Wherefore this Prophet trauelled from Pithora or Phatura in Mesopotamia, to Abel or the plaine of Vines, where his Asse spake, Num. 22. which is 400 miles. From thence he went to the land of the Moabites, 40 miles; where in the mount of Peor he blessed the children of Israel. So all the trauels of this Prophet were 440 miles. Of the Plain of the Vines. THere is often mention of this place in the Scripture; & for the fertilitie of the countrey, and plenty of sweet Wines, there was a beautifull city built, called Abel, of the Vines; some 56 miles from Ierusalem South-Eastward; and was placed iust in the way as they went from Mesopotamia into the country of the Moabites. Whereby it appeareth, that neere to this place the Asse spake to Balaam, Numb. 22. In S. Ieroms time there was
found a little Village so called, where there was great plenty of Vines. Here Ieptha ouercame the Ammorites, and made a great slaughter, Iud. 11. The Trauels of that noble Captaine IOSHVAH. IOSHVAH and Caleb trauelled with Moses from Raemsis out of Aegypt through the Red sea, and came to Kades-Barnea, 26 miles. From Cades-Barnea they were sent forth with other Spie to the land of Canaan, Num. 13. and went out of the wilderness of Zin and Paran, and came to the towne of Rechob in Galile 140 miles. From thence they went to the towne of Hamath in Syria which was after called Antiochia, 188 miles. From Hamath or Antiochia they returned againe to Hebron 304 miles, where vpon the side of the riuer Escol they cut off bunch of grapes, with the stalke, which was as much as both the could beare vpon their shoulders, Num. 13. From Hebron they returned againe to Kades-Barnea, twent miles. There all the people murmured against Moses, Num. 1 Heereby it is to be seene, that the Spies in forty dayes trauelle 648 miles in the land of Canaan, that is, euery day 16 miles and little more. After that, Ioshuah and Caleb trauelled with Moses and the chi¦dren of Israel to Ezeon-Gabir, and from thence to the towne o Iahza, 464 miles. From Iahza they past through two kingdoms to mount Lib¦nus, 80 miles. From mount Libanus they returned againe into the Land o Sittim, that lay by the hill Pisgah in the field of the Moabite 80 miles. From the land of Sittim they past through the riuer of Iord
and came to Gilgal, 6 miles, where Ioshuah pitched his Campe, Num. 21. Ios. 4.5. From Gilgal he went to Iericho, 2 miles: there he assailed the towne with the sound of basons, and won it, Ios. 6. From Iericho he went to Ai, being 4 miles, and took and burnt the whole towne, Ios. 7.8. From Ai he returned to Gilgal, 4 miles, and there vpon the hil of Ebal he built an altar vnto the Lord, and there were the bles∣sings and cursings pronounced, Ios. 8. Deut. 27. From Gilgal hee went to Gibeon, twelue miles. There the Sunne stood still during the battaile against the three Kings, Io∣shuah 10. From Gibeon he went to Ajalon, 2 miles, here the Moon stood still, Ios. 10. From Ajalon he went to Aseka, 4 miles: there it hailed vpon the enemies that fled before Israel, Ios. 10. From Aseka Ioshuah returned againe into the Camp at Gilgal, 20 miles, Ios. 10. From Gilgal hee went to Makeda, where hee hanged the fiue Kings, Ios. 10. From Makeda he went to Libna, 2 miles, and tooke the towne, Ios. 10. From Libna he went to Lachis, 8 miles. From Lachis he went to Eglon, 8 miles. From Eglon he went to Hebron, which is sixteene miles, Io∣shuah 10. From Hebron he went to Debir, a mile, Ios. 10. After that, Ioshuah with one continued War won all that part of Iudaea which lay towards the South, bordering Eastward vpon the Dead Sea, Southward vpon Cades-Barnea, Westward vpon Asdod and Gaza, and Northward vpon Gibeon and Gilgal: This circuit of land containeth about one hundred fifty and sixe miles. From Gilgal Ioshuah went out with his army about 22 miles, to the riuer of Merom, where he slew the rest of the Kings of the Canaanites in a memorable battell, Ios. 11.
From the riuer of Merom Ioshuah chased his enemies and fol∣lowed them to Sidon, which was 612 miles, Ios. 11. From Sidon he went again to Hazor, 32 miles, which town he burnt, Ios. 11. After that, Ioshuah at one time won all the townes in the Holy land which lay Northward in the lands of Samaria and Galilea, from Gibeon to mount Libanus, and from the riuer of Iordan to the great sea, called Mare Mediterranean; which countries in cir∣cuit contain 280 miles. After that, Ioshuah returned again to his camp at Gilgal, which lay 72 miles from the towne of Hazor, where he made a diuision of the land amongst the children of Israel, Ios. 14, 15. From Gilgal he went to Shilo, 12 miles, where he made an end of diuiding the land, Ios. 18. From Shilo he went to Timnah Sera, eight miles, and there he dwelt; for the children of Israel gaue him that town for his own inheritance, Ios. 19. From Timnah Sera, Ioshuah not long before hee died came to Sichem, forty miles. There he assembled all the tribes of Israel, Ios. 24. From Sichem he returned againe to Timnah Sera, 40 miles, where he died and was buried, Ios. 24. So all the trauels of Prince Ioshuah were 2392 miles. The description of the seuerall townes and places to which Ioshuah trauelled. ¶ Of Rechob. THis was a city of the Levits in the tribe of Ashur, 100 miles from Ierusalem toward the North, Num. 13. and signifieth a broad street, being deriued from Radhab, that is, To extend out in length.
Of Haemah or Chaemah. THis was a city of the Levits in the Tribe of Nepthaly, and was 100 miles from Ierusalem, vpon the vtmost bounds of the holy land, at the foot of Antilibanus, Num. 11.34. Ios. 19. de∣riued from Chamah, that is, furious, or burning with anger. Of Gilgal. THis was a town between Iordan & the city Iericho, 12 miles from Ierusalem Southeastward; where the children of Israel hauing past the riuer of Iordan, first made war vpon all the Nati∣ons of the land of Canaan. Here they solemnised the first paschal Lambe. After they came into this land, Manna ceased, because they then ate the fruits of the countrey. Here Ioshuah taking 12 stones out of Iordan, pitcht them vp for a memorial. Here the ta∣bernacle of God stayed for a time, which was the reason that af∣terward the Israelites committed idolatry in this place, Ios. 4.5. Hos. 2.4.9. Amos 5. Neere to this place, Ehud the third Iudge of the Children of Israel receiued gifts of them to carry to Eglon King of the Moabites dwelling at Iericho, where hee killed him with a knife. Here Saul was the second time confirmed King of Israel, 2 Sam. 10. and as it seemes taketh name of Roundnesse, Io∣shuah at this time building his tent in a circular fashion: for Galal signifies a round wheele or Tent, compassed about with Ditches and bulwarks. Of Iericho. THis is a city in the tribe of Benjamin, two miles from Ior∣dan & six from Ierusalem Southeastward. Ioshuah ouercame this with the sound of horns or trumpets, Ios. 26. Heb. 11. Heere Christ restored the blind man to sight, Mat. 6. conuerted Zachaeus Luke 19. and was called the city of Palms, by reason of the great plenty of Palmes that grew there. You may reade more of this hereafter. Of Hai or Ai. HAi is a Towne in the tribe of Benjamin neere to Bethel, to∣ward the East, where Abraham dwelt, Gen. 12. Ioshuah won this
towne, Ios. 7.8. it was so called of a Prophet that dwelt there, and signifieth, To be placed vpon a heape: for Ai signifies A heape, lying partly equally, partly vnequally. The ruines of this towne were scarce to be found in S. Ieroms time. Of Gibeon. THis was a Metropolitan city in the Tribe of Benjamin, the inhabitants wherof became petitioners to Ioshuah for peace Ios. 9.10.18. 2 Sam. 21. Afterward it was giuen to the Priests. It is deriued of Gibeah or Gibeon, which signifies a curled hill. It was scituated on a mountain foure miles from Ierusalem toward the North. Here stood the tabernacle of the Couenant, & the brasen Altar. Here Saul was first made King of Israel. Here hee put the sons of Abimilech the priest to death, 1 Sam. 12. Here Ioshuah o∣uercame the fiue Kings of the Ammorites. Here the Sunne stood still. Of this you may reade more hereafter. Of Ajalon. THis was a city of the Priests in the tribe of Dan, four miles from Ierusalem toward the Southeast, and taketh the name from a Hinde; for Aialah signifieth an Hinde, a beast very strong and swift. Here the Moon stood still. Here Ionathan tasted hony, contrary to his fathers command, for which he was iudged to dy, 1 Sam. 14. Of Azeka. AZeka was a city of the Ammorits in the tribe of Iuda, eight miles from Ierusalem toward the West, neer to Odullam, where Dauid killed Goliah; and as it seems taketh the name from Munition, or a place compassed about with an hedge; being deri∣ued from Itsek, he hedged about. This was a faire city in Saint Ie∣roms time. Of the valley of Achor. THis valley is distant from Ierusalem 12 miles, and not farre from Iericho and Gilgall towards the North, taking name (as it seemeth) of Achon that Theefe mentioned in Ioshuah, who was stoned there; from whence it is called Achor, which signifi∣nifieth
Trouble, because of the terrible words that Ioshuah spake vnto him there. You may reade of this, Hos. 2. Esay 25. Ios. 11.15. Of Makedah. BEtween Elewtheropolin and Bethlehem this town stood, be∣ing in the tribe of Iudah, some 8 miles from Ierusalem, to∣wards the West, and taketh the name of a floure that hangs down the head, being deriued of Kadad, which signifieth to hang down. Here Ioshuah hanged the fiue kings of the Ammorites, which he had formerly conquered, Ios. 10. Of Libna. LIbna is a city belonging to the Levites in the tribe of Iudah, and is scituated between Eglon and Makeda, ten miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest, where the 14 King that Ioshuah conquered kept his court; and taketh the name from the aboun∣dance of frankincense that is found there: for Libonah signifieth white frankincense. Zenacharib besieged this city. Some say it ta∣keth the name from the Hebrew Laba, which signifieth White Bricks; because there is found much matter whereof such kind of bricks are made. Of Lachis. LAchis is a city in the tribe of Iudah, and lieth betweene Eleu∣theropolin and Hebron, 20 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest, and 2 miles from Rechila toward the North, Ios. 15. 2 Chr. 11. and taketh the name from Walking; beeing deriued from Ialach, which signifieth, He hath walked. Ioshuah tooke the King of this City and put him to death: and Zenacharib King of the Assyrians besieged it, but to little purpose. Of Eglon. EGlon was a city in the tribe of Iuda, 12 miles from Ierusalem Southward. Ioshuah took the king of this city & hanged him. It taketh the name from Aecael, signifying a Calfe. Of Debir. DEbir was a city of the Levites, 22 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the South, and almost halfe a mile from Hebron to∣wards
the Northwest. Athniel the brother of Caleb won this town, wherefore he gaue him his daughter Archsa to wife. Formerly it was called Kiriath-Sepher, i. A city of Scribes and Students; for it was consecrated to learning. From hence it was called Debir, which signifies an oracle, or an holy altar; because the Lord there by his priests that were assigned for that purpose, did foretell and prophecie of things to come: being deriued from Debar, that is, He hath spoken. Of Asdod or Azotes. THis was a city of the Philistines, scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterranean sea, in the tribe of Dan, and 22 miles from Ierusalem towards the West. This town was conquered by Ioshuah, Ios. 11. 1 Reg. 5. it was also taken by Psamniticus King of Egypt, in Manasses time, as Herodotus saith, it is now a little town, and is called Azotus. In times past it was a faire city, and tooke name from the fire of loue; being deriued of Esh, which signifies a fire: and Dod, beloued. Of Gaza. GAza was a faire city of the Philistims, vpon the shore of the red sea, some 24 miles from Ierusalem towards the South∣west, and signifieth a strong town, being deriued from Gazez, To confirme. Sampson being inclosed within this towne, tooke away the gates and barres thereof, and laid them at the foot of mount Hebron, Iudg. 16. Of the riuer Merom. THis was a lake not far from Dotham, some 4 miles from Ti∣berias Westward, and 44 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and is so called from the deepnesse of it, being deriued of Rom, which signifies it was high, & Marab, bitter; whence Merom, a high bitter water. Here Ioshuah ouerthrew the Kings of the Ca∣naanites, Ios. 11. Of Sidon. SIdon takes the name of Zod, which signifies, Hee hath hunted, and was a famous mart town in Phoenicea, being a place scitu∣ated at the foot of that high hill Antelibanus, neere to the shore of the Mediterranean, 16 miles from Ierusalem Northward.
Of Libanus. THis is a mountaine of an extraordinary height, some 104 miles from Ierusalem Northward, looking into Syria and Phoenicia. From thence the riuer Iordan taketh the beginning, being so called of two springs or wels, that is, Ior, and Dan, rising from the bottom of this hill. It seems to take the name from the aboundance of floures and varietie of sweet smels or dewes that are there; and also of frankincense or gum Olibanum found vpon it: it is a very fruitfull place, ful of springs and wholsome herbs, so that no serpent will abide in it: it is diuided into two parts, the one lieth neere Sidon Westward, called Antelibanus; the other toward Damascus vpon the East, and is only called Libanus. It is so high that it serues for a sea marke, and so much the more re∣markable, for that (as some say) snow lieth continually vpon the top of it, so that a far off it seemeth white. Of the riuer Iordan. IOrdan is a pleasant sweet riuer watering the holy land (where∣of you may read before.) It is named Iorden at Caesarea Phi∣lippi, a little from the foot of Antelibanus, 104 miles from Ieru∣salem Northward: it passeth through the lake Samachoniten, and diuiding it into two equall parts; from thence running tho∣row a great part of Galilee, it falls into the sea Tyberias, & there as it were diuideth it into two parts, it watereth that part of Iu∣daea called Samaria; and about Easter, which is the beginning of that haruest, it floweth ouer the banks, and fructifies many coun∣tries lying neere it: at length it falleth into the lake Asphaltites and there endeth, about 14 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. So that from the first beginning of this Riuer, to the end of it, is 92 miles. It is called Palah by the Hebrewes, which signifieth swift and hidden; because it riseth from a certain wel or pit called Phi∣ala, which is alwaies full of water, but from whence it springeth is vnknown. Ioshuah about Easter passed vpon dry ground through this riuer, euen then when it was fullest of water, Ios. 3. So did E∣liah & Elisha, 2 Reg. Here Naaman the leper washt himself, 2 Reg. 5 Here Christ was baptised by S. Iohn Baptist, Mat. 3. Luke 3.
Of Hazor. THis was a town in the vpper Galilee, belonging to the tribe of Nepthali: it was the chiefe Hold and city of the king of the Canaanites, being distant from Ierusalem 80 miles towards the North. This Ioshuah destroyed with fire and sword. Deborah also the Prophetesse besieged it, tooke it, and put Iabin the King thereof to death. In times past it was a very strong city, as the ruines thereof testifie. Of Siloh. SIloh the city and house of God, was scituate on a high moun∣tain in the tribe of Ephraim, 4 miles and somwhat better from Ierusalem towards the North. Here the Arke of the Couenant continued from the time that the Israelites first entred into the land of Canaan, till Eli the Priest fetcht it thence; in whose time it was taken by the Philistims, and he for very griefe therefore fel downe and brake his necke against a stone, 1 Sam. 4. The inhabi∣tants hereabouts shew the ruines of a certaine sepulchre standing vpon the top of this mount, where they say Samuel was buried: but that canot be true, for he was buried at Ramath, which now is cal∣led Arimathea. Therefore it seems to be either the ruins of Elies sepulchre, who died miserably in that place; or else of the House of the Lord, which many yeares past stood there. Schiloh signifies Happy and peaceable, being deriued from Schalah, that is, to liue at ease and in peace. Of Timnah. Of this you may reade in the Trauels of IVDAH. The type and mysterie of IOSHVAH. IOshuah and Iesus is all one in signification, that is, Sauour, or a Defender; and did typically represent our Sauior Christ; that as this Ioshuah brought the children of Israel through Iordan in∣to the land of Canaan, so Iesus Christ the true Ioshuah and Saui∣our of the world; through that Iordan of Baptisme bringeth vs in∣to that place of Promise, Eternall life.
Where the one and thirty Kings dwelt, ouercome and slain by IOSHVAH, Ios. 10. AS the Prophet Moses won all the land vpon the one side of Iordan, so Ioshuah won all the Countrey on the other, from the towne of Baalgadan, beginning at mount Libanus, not farre from Mount Hebron, till you come to the town of Caesarea Phi∣lippi, and to the hill Seir, where somtime Esau dwelt: all which is 160 miles long, and 28 or 32 miles broad. The first King that Ioshuah ouercame, dwelt in Iericho. The second King held his court in Ai. The third King dwelt in Ierusalem, and was called Adoni-Ze∣bec, that is, a Lord of Righteousnesse. This King Ioshuah hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10. The fourth King, called Hoham, dwelt at Hebron, and was like∣wise hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10. The fift King, called Percam, dwelt at Iarmouth in the tribe of Iuda, 20 miles from Ierusalem Westward. The 6 King, called Iaphia, dwelt at Lachis, 2 miles from Iar∣mouth Southward. He was also hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10. The seuenth King dwelt at Eglon, called Debir, and was also hanged at Makeda. The 8 King was called Horam, and held his princely seat in the tribe of Dan, in the town of Gezer, 16 miles from Ierusalem west∣ward: whom Ioshuah slew with all his men, Ios. 10. The ninth King dwelt at Debir. The tenth King held his court at Gerar in the tribe of Iudah, 14 miles from Ierusalem Westward. The 11 King dwelt at Harma in the Tribe of Iudah, which is vpon the borders of Arabia deserta not far from Ziclag, 40 miles from Ierusalem Southwestward: this town in times past was cal∣led Zephal, that is, a watch-tower, because it stood vpon a hill. But when the children of Iuda had ouerthrowne the whole army of the Canaanites, they called it Haram, a Curse, Iud. 1. The 12 King dwelt at Arat, 22 miles from Ierusalem South∣ward, which was a towne of the Ammorites, and tooke the name
from the Asses that were in great troups within the woods there∣about. It lay in the tribe of Iuda. The 13 King dwelt at Libnah in the tribe of Iuda. The 14 King dwelt at Odullam. The 15 King dwelt at Makeda. In this towne Ioshuah hanged fiue Kings, Ios. 10. The 16 King dwelt at Bethel. The 17 King dwelt at Tapnah, not far from Iordan & Iericho, 12 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. The 18 King dwelt at Hepher, 6 miles from Ierusalem North∣ward; part of this towne was allotted to the tribe of Zabulon. Io∣nas the Prophet was borne in this towne, 2 Reg. 14. and is 4 miles distant from the town of Nazareth Southward. The 19 King dwelt at Apheck, 44 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and 2 miles from Iesreel. There also the Arke of the Lord was taken, and there also the sons of Eli the high priest were slain, 1 Sam. 4. This town was in the halfe tribe of Manasses. The 20 King dwelt at Lazaron, 18 miles and a half from Ieru∣salem Northwestward, not far from Ioppen and Lidda. The 21 king dwelt at Nadan, 14 miles from Ierusalem North∣westward. The 22 King dwelt at Hazor. The 23 King dwelt at Simron, which town was allotted to the tribe of Zabulon, Ioshuah 14. It lieth sixty eight miles from Ie∣rusalem Northward, not farre from the town of Nazareth in Ga∣lilee. The 24 king dwelt at Achsap, 88 miles from Ierusalem North∣ward; which town was allotted to the tribe of Aser. The 25 King dwelt at Tanaach, 44 miles from Ierusalem: this town belonged to the Levits, and stood in the tribe of Manasses, 6 miles from Iesreel Southward, Ios. 21. The 26 King dwelt at Megiddo, 44 miles from Ierusalem Northward, scarce 4 miles from Taanach. By this towne of Me∣giddo Iosias King of Iuda was ouerthrown by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, 2 Reg. 23. In the trauels of Iosiah King of Iuda I will speake of this town more at large.
The 27 King dwelt at Kades, Ios. 19.21. The 28 King dwelt at Iaknedam, 27 miles from Ierusalem Northward, being vpon the Mediterranean sea. This towne was alotted to the Tribe of Zabulon, and giuen to the Levits, Ios. 21. The 29 King dwelt at Naphet Dor, which towne lay vpon the sea coast between the hill Carmel and the town of Cesarea Stra∣tonis, 48 miles from Ierusalem Northward. The 30 King dwelt at Gilgal, between Iericho and the Riuer Iordan, and was the first King that Iosuah ouercame and slew al his host. The 31 King dwelt at Thirtza, in the Tribe of Manasses, 24 miles from Ierusalem. In this towne Ieroboam, and after him all the Kings of Israel kept their courts, before Samaria was built. THE BOOKE OF IVDGES. The Trauels of Caleb and Athniel. CAleb and Athniel with all the Children of Iuda, went from Iuda to Beseck, 44 miles, where they tooke King Adoni-Beseck prisoner, and cut off his fingers and toes, Iudg. 1. From Beseck they went to Ierusalem, 44 miles, which they tooke by force and burnt it, Iudg. 1. From Ierusalem they went to Hebron, 22 miles, which they tooke, and slew the Gyants that inhabited therein, Iudg. 1. Not far from Hebron lay the towne of Debir, which Athniel won, and therefore Caleb gaue him his daughter Achsa for his wife Iudg. 1. From Debir they went to Zephat, 16 miles, which town they won, Iudg. 1. From Zephat they went to Gaza, 4 miles.
From Gaza they went to Ascalon, 6 miles, Iudg. 1. From Ascalon the went to Hebron, 14 miles. From Hebron they went backe again to Debir, where Athniel dwelt, 12 miles. So all the trauels of Caleb and Athniel were 132 miles. The Description of the Townes and places to which they trauelled. Of Beseck. BEseck was a metropolitan city of the Canaanites, neere to the water Merom, where Adoni-Beseck kept his Court, 44 miles from Ierusalem toward the North, and tooke the name of Desaeck, or Beseck, which signifies lightning. Of this King you may reade, Iudg. 1. Of Zephah. THis was a town vpon the borders of the tribes of Iudah and Simeon, not far from Siclag, Ios. 15. It takes the name from Zaphah, which signifies a watch-tower: and was also called by the sons of Iuda, (who destroyed all the country) Chorma, which signi∣fies a Curse, or a desolat place. To the citisens hereof Dauid sent gifts, 1 Sam. 36. Of Gaza. OF this town you may reade more hereafter in the Trauels of the Arke of the Couenant. The typicall signification of CALEB. CALEB signifieth An hearty man, or, A man after Gods owne heart, louing his Neighbour with all his heart. For Col is as much as Omnis, which signifies All; and Cala, Hee forgiueth all; and Leb or Lebbah signifieth an Heart, the seat and fountain of all life. So that Caleb seems to take his name from a singular heartie affection, whereby he forgiueth his neighbour. For as this man being of a noble resolution and courage, in the 29 yeare of his
age won Hebron a strong City, and put to death the three sons of Anak, terrible Gyants: so Christ the Son of God, that so loued the world that he gaue himselfe for it, with a more than humane resolution conquered hell, and those three mighty Gyants inci∣dent vnto it, the sons of Sathan, Sin, the World, and Death. Of Athniel. IN the yeare of the World 1503, and before Christ, 2565, Io∣shuah died: after whose death, Caleb and Athniel iudged Israel; about which time the Israelites committed idolatry, and wor∣shipped Baal and Asteroth: wherefore the Lord suffered them to fall into the hands of Chushan Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia. But because of their oppression they cried vnto the Lord, and hee stirred vp Othniel the yonger brother of Caleb, who in the yeare of the world 2512 conquered Chushan, deliuered the people, and go∣uerned Israel 40 years, Iudg. 3. Athniel or Othniel signifies the god of time, being deriued of Aeth, that is, an Age: and is a Type of Christ, who is the God of time; and in his due time conquered the world, and Sathan the prince thereof, thereby deliuering the poore afflicted members of his Church out of his miserable ser∣uitude and bondage: for which cause God hath made him judge ouer it, and giuen him fell power and authority to rule and go∣uern it. The Trauels of Ehud the third Iudge of Israel. EHud was the sonne of Gira of the Tribe of Iuda, and dwelt in the City of Iericho or of the Palmes. Hee was a vali∣ant and resolute man, lame of his right hand, Iudg. 3. and to the iudgement of man not fit to bee a Captaine, beeing so in∣firme. Yet it happened that this man growing in fauor with Eg∣lon King of the Moabites, who at this time kept his Court in Ie∣richo (which towne he had but eighteene yeares before conque∣red) tooke opportunitie by the Children of Israels comming to Gilgal (for they came thither to offer to the Idoll, and to bring
gifts of the king) to present these presents vnto him; and because of his former familiaritie, was admitted to speake in priuat with him in his summer parlour; where as he was talking with him, he thrust him into the belly with a short knife: and locking the dore he fled back to Seirah, and told the children of Israell what he had done. From thence they presently went to Ephraim, there blew the trumpet, and set vpon the Moabits and put them to the sword, Iudg. 3. The Trauels of Ehud. EHud went from Iericho to Gilgal, 2 miles. From Gilgal he went to Iericho, 2 miles. From Iericho he went to mount Ephraim, 6 miles. From Mount Ephraim he went to Iorden, 4 miles, where hee ouerthrew 10000 Moabites. So all the trauels of Ehud were 14 miles. Of Mount Ephraim. THis mountain is about 8 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and extends it selfe in longitude to the city neer the Mediterranean sea, called Ioppa, which is distant from Ierusalem 20 miles toward the Northwest. The Trauels of the sonnes of Hobab the Kenite. THe sons of Hobab the Kenite (Moses brother in law) were from Iericho to Arad a City in the tribe of Iuda, scituated in the desart toward the South, Num. 10. Iudg. 1. 44 miles. Of Arad. ARad is a city in the Tribe of Iuda, 22 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, taking the name of a multitude of asses that were found thereabouts in the desart, and is deriued from A∣rod, which signifies a wilde Asse, a rude creature.
The Trauels of Iael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, who killed Sisera the Captaine. FRom Arad shee and her husband went to the plaine of Zaaenaim, and dwelt there, neere to a Towne called Kades, a Towne of refuge of the Leuites, in the Tribe of Nephthali, 166 miles, there she killed Sisera. This towne lieth 92 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Of Deborah and Barak. DEborah was the wife of Lapidoth, and dwelt vnder a palme tree between Bethel and Ramath, in mount Ephraim, eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North: the inhabitants thereabouts shew this tree euen to this day. Barak the sonne of Abineam a noble Captaine, liued in her time at Kades, a citie of refuge be∣longing to the Leuites. She succeeded Ehud, in An. man. 2632, and before Christ, 1336, yeares. The Trauels of Deborah and Barak. BArak went first from Kades Naphtaly to the Palme tree, where Deborah dwelt, which are 84 miles, From thence he went with Deborah backe againe to Kades, which are 84 miles. From Kades with 10000 men, they went to the hill Thabor, 36 miles. Here (as Iosephus writeth, lib. antiq. 4.) there fell such a shoure of raine and haile vpon the enemies of the Israelites, that through the extreme violence thereof, they were dispersed: and Sisera their captaine constrained to leaue his chariot, and to saue himselfe by flight, neuer staying till he came to the Tabernacle of Iael, the wife of Hebar the Kenite, scituated in the valley of Za∣aenaim, 36 miles from the foot of the mountaine Thabor: where being asleep, by reason of his great journey, Iael strooke a naile in∣to the temple of his head, so he died.
From thench Barak pursued the enemies with great slaughter, to Haraseth of the Gentiles, a Citie in the vpper Galile, neere to the lake of Samachoniten, 28 miles. This citie is 80 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, Ioseph. Ant. lib. 5. From Haraseth, he went to the plaine of Zaaenaim, where hee found Sisera slain in the tabernacle of Iael, as Deborah the prophe∣tesse had told him. From thence Barak with all his armie went to Hazor, where Iabin king of the Canaanites kept his court, and of a sudden con∣quered the citie, and put to death all the inhabitants, Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 5. Of Thabor. THabor is a round & high hill, scituated vpon the borders of the tribes of Issacher and Zabulon, 56 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and extendeth it selfe to the riuer Kison towards the South, and taketh the name of light or a pure aire, be∣ing deriued of Bo, To goe and come; Tebuah, To bring forth fruit, and To giue light. For this mountaine Thabor, by reason of the puri∣tie of the aire, is wonderfull fertile and fruitfull: There was also a towne at the foot of it called by the same name. Here the king of the Midianites, Zeba and Zalmuna were slaine by Gideon. Of Hazor. THis is a great citie in the tribe of Nepthali, 80 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, which Ioshuah destroyed with fire and sword; so did Barak also: The ruines of this citie is to be seene to this day. The Mistery of Deborah. THe word Deborah signifies, a Bee, and is a memorable type of the Church. For as a Bee in all her actions soundeth pleasantly; so the members of Gods Church in all their actions sing and sound forth the praises of God, or by continuall pray∣ers implore his ayde and assistants; with the Bee sucking from the floures of the holy Scriptures, the sweet and acceptable
doctrine of faith, by which the hope of euerlasting life is strength∣ned in vs, with the sting of Gods word repulsing all vaine delusi∣ons and idle imaginations, (the temptations of the Diuel) and those waspish affections of cruell and wicked men; according to that of Ecclesiasticus, The Bee is but small, yet bringeth forth most plea∣sant fruit, and presenteth vnto man many memorable instructions. And as Plato saith, The King of Bees, although without a sting, yet ruleth and gouerneth his Commonwealth with great seueritie and justice. So Christ the head of the Church, though he be a delectable Saui∣our of soules, and without any sting of bitternesse, yet doth hee rule and gouerne it with singular justice and sinceritie. Of Barak. AFter Deborah was appointed Iudge of Israel, shee ordained Barak for her chiefe Commander or Captaine. He taketh his name from Thunder and Lightning; typically representing the glory of Christ Iesus, as chiefe Captaine of the Church, who with the thunder of the Law, and the bright shining glory of the Gospell, destroyed the enemies thereof; and by the hosts of An∣gels and Saints at the end of the World, will cast them downe with thunder and lightning into that bottomlesse pit, there to remaine for euer. Of the trauels GIDEON. DEborah being dead, Zaeba and Zalmuna (Kings of the Me∣dianites) cruelly inuaded the Land of Iudaea; but the Lord taking compassion vpon his People, sent them a helper, one GIDEON the sonne of Ioas, of the family of Abiezer, who was borne at Ophra or Ephron, a Citie in the Tribe of Manasses, not far from Mahanaim on the East side of Iordan, some foure and forty miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East; and signifieth, a Rooter out; from GADA, That is,
Hee hath rooted out. This man at the appointment of the Lord, tooke vpon him the charge of the people, and at Ophra, which signifies, Dust, he destroied the Idol Baal, pitching vp in that place an Alter to the Lord: wherefore he was after called Ieru-Baal, ta∣king that name from Reuenge, because he had destroied the Idol. He began to rule in Israel in the yeare of the World, 2672, and before Christ 1296. From Ophra Gideon went to Harad, which standeth in the halfe Tribe of Manasseth, where he blew the Trumpet. From this place he sent back 22000 of his army, because the Lord had so appoin∣ted. But the Midianites hearing of this preparation, prouided a great host, and pitched in the valley of the hill Moreh: so Gideon taking onely 300 with him, went ouer Iordan, and came to the towne of Iesrael, (for Iosephus saith) 16 miles from Harod, where he gaue the Midianites a wonderfull ouerthrow, Iudg. 7. hee also tooke there two princes, Oreb and Zeb, and returned to the riuer Iordan, where he put them to death. From thence he went to Succoth with his army in expectation to haue refreshed themselues, but the inhabitants shut him out of the towne, and gaue him many despightfull words. This towne lay close by Iordan, and here Iacob sometime pitched his Tent. From thence he went to Penuel, which is two miles; there also they vsed him vnkindly and gaue him bad language. From thence he went to Nobach with his army, which is two miles. From thence he went to Iagbetha, which is 4 miles, where he conquered Zaeba and Zalmuna, Kings of the Midianites, who thin∣king themselues secure, made no preparation for warre, till they were besieged. This was a memorable battell, and here the two Kings were put to death. From thence he followed the enemy with a great slaughter to Carkor which is foure miles. From thence he went backe to Succoth, which is 8 miles: here he put the inhabitants of this Towne to the sword, and all the El∣ders and Princes he tore to pieces with thornes, because they had formerly denied him entrance into the citie.
From thence hee went to the Castle of Penuel, which is two miles, and vtterly destroied it, euen to the ground, and put all the inhabitants to death because of their mocks. From thence he went to Ophra, foure miles, where gathering together all the gold which hee had taken from the Midianites, he made a rich Ephod, Iudg. 8. From Ophra hee went to Sichem, where his sonne Abimalech was borne, which is 10 miles. From thence he returned backe to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there he died, after he had judged Israel 10 yeares. So all the trauels of Gedion were 82 miles. The Description of the Townes and places to which GEDION trauelled. Of Iesreel. IEsreel was a faire Citie scituated vpon a hill, neere to the flood Kison, bordering vpon the Tribe of Isacher, 48 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the North; and signifieth the seed of God, being deriued from El and Dara, the seed of the Almighty God. There was another of this name in the tribe of Iuda, Ios. 15. In times past this was onely the seat and chiefe abiding place of the Kings of Israel. For Ahab and Iesabel kept their Court there, and Ioram their sonne, whom Iehu ouercame: and here Iesabel was eaten vp of dogs. At this day this faire citie hath in it but thirtie houses; and is called by the inhabitants of the holy land Sanatham, be∣ing scituated at the foot of the mountaine Gilboah Westward: in it there is a Watch tower, vpon the top whereof you may see through all Galile to Carmel, and the mountaines of Phaenicia, also to mount Thabor, and the mountaines beyond Iordan called Gilead. Of this Towne you may reade, Ios. 17.19. 2 Sam. 2. Of Nobach. THis was a citie beyond Iordan, and stood in the halfe Tribe of Manasses, 38 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. In times past it was called Kenah, but after, Nobach Prince of the halfe Tribe of Manasseh had conquered it, he called it Nobach,
Num. 23. and signifieth, a Prophet, being deriued of Nabah, or Na∣bach, he hath prophesied, or cryed out. Of Iogbeha. THis towne was built by the children of Gad, and lies beyond Iordan, 34 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, and taketh the name from the height of the place where it standeth; being deriued from Gabah, which signifieth, it excelleth in height. Of this you may reade, Iudg. 8. Numb. 32. Of Karkor. KArkor is a citie in the halfe Tribe of Manasseh, and is scitua∣ted beyond Iordan, some forty miles distant from Ierusalem Northeastward; and taketh the name from Kir, which signifies he hath destroyed, or subuerted the walls, for here the two Kings Ze∣ba and Zalmuna were taken. Saint Ierom saith in his booke de lo∣cis Hebraicis, That in his time it was a faire Towne. The typicall signification of GEDION. THis Gedion (whose name signifieth to root out) destroied and subuerted the enemies of the Iewes: so Christ hath destroied the kingdome of Sathan, and daily rooteth out all his impious and wicked members, which are enemies to his Church. The Trauels of Abimalech the sixt Iudge of Israel. GEDION being dead, Abimalech his sonne went from Ophra to Sichem, which is ten miles, and there was chosen by the citizens to succeed his father in the go∣uernment. From thence he went backe to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there put to death his 70 brethren, all sonnes of Gedion, but by di∣uers concubins; for God permitted Bigamie, but did not com∣mand it. From Ophra he went ten miles into the land of Sichem, and there was chosen King, about the yeare of the World 2712.
From Sichem (which was the seat of the kingdome) he went to Ophra being ten miles; there he iudged Israel three yeares. After that, hee went the third time backe to the Sichemites, which is 10 miles; but they breaking promise with him, for very madnesse he caused the citie to be destroied, and salt to be sowne in the place, that so euer after it might become barren, accur∣sed, and vnhabitable. From Sichem hee went with his hoast to Thebets or Tebez, which is two miles, where he was mortally wounded by a woman that flang a stone vpon him at the siege of that towne, wherof he died, Iudg. 9. So all the Trauels of Abimelech were 52 miles, Of Thebez. THis was distant from Sichem two miles Northward, and from Ierusalem 38, it tooke the name from Bitzah, which signifieth, a deepe pond. Abimelech tooke his name from an hereditary kingdome, or rather because he obtained the kingdome ouer Israel, after his father; and is as much to say, as, My father is a King; because good Prin∣ces differ little from good fathers: for Maelaech with the Hebrews signifieth a King; Malechah, a Queene, and Malchech, a kingdome. So that this name Abimelech properly signifieth, a King, or one that is a father of his people. Of the flight of Iotham which was the brother of Abimelech. IOtham signifieth, a perfect and swift man, being deriued from Ia∣tham, that is, perfect and swift. This man at such time as Abimi∣lech put to death the rest of his brethren, to saue his life fled to Mount Carizin, where hee propounded the riddle mentioned, Iudg. 9. And after, from thence he went to Beerah, where he hid himselfe from the fury of Abimelech. All this was, 44 miles. Of Mount Gerizim. GErizim or Garizim was a mountaine in the kingdome of the Samaritans, and extended it selfe in the longitude as farre as
Iericho neere to mount Hebal. In these two mountains the bles∣sings and the cursings were recited, of which more shall be said hereafter; and it taketh the name from the felling down of trees, being deriued from Garaz, which signifieth, to cut or to fel down: here Christ spoke with the Samaritan, Iohn 4. Of Beerah. BEerah was a Towne in the Tribe of Iudah, ten miles from Ie∣rusalem Westward. Neere to this Citie Iudas Machabeus fought a memorable battell against Bacchides and others, whom he conquered. It taketh the name from a cleere Well, being deri∣ued of Beer, that is, he hath made cleere. Of Thola the seuenth Iudge of Israel. In the 3 yeare of this mans rule, Hercules king of the Argiues, (fa∣mous for his twelue labors) began to raign Macrob. lib. 1.THola takes his name from a red worme, or purple colour, which colour is proper to Princes. Hee succeeded Abimelech in the gouernment of the Iewes, and began to rule An. mun. 2715. and 1253 yeares before Christ. His fathers name was Puah of the Tribe of Issacher. He dwelt in Samir a citie of Mount Ephraim, not far from Iericho, twelue miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and there he was buried, as you may see, Iosh. 15. Of Iair the eighth Iudge of Israel. In the 10 yeare of this Iudge, An. mun. 2747 and before Christ 1221, Hercules died and Priamus king of Troy began his raigne, which he lost fortie yeares after.IAir succeeded Thola, & began his gouerment in the yere of the world, 2738, and 1230 yeares before Christ. He took his name from the singular worth and noble disposition that was in him. This Iair was one of the tribe of Manasseh, he was lame of both his feet, and was a man of great estimation among the Iewes, for there were thirty Castles and Townes that were called after his name, Iudg. 10. Num. 32. Deut. 3. Ios. 13. 1 Chr. 1. Hee dwelt at Kamon a towne in the Tribe of Gilead, some 48 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the North-East.
The trauels of Ieptha. IEptha was borne at Mizpah in the Land of Giliad, and being driuen into exile by his brothers, hee fled into the Land of Tob, 48 miles from Ierusa∣lem, Iudg. 11. From thence he returned to Mizpah, 48 miles, and there was chosen Prince, and began his gouernment Anno mundi, 2760, and before Christ, 1208 yeares, Iudg. 11. From Mizpah hee went with is army against the Ammonites to the Citie of Aroer, where he put them to flight, which is 26 miles, Iudg. 11. From Aroer he pursued the enemies to Minneth, which is 8 miles, Iudg. 11. From Minneth he went to the plaine of the Vines, which is 24 miles, Iudg. 11. From Abel or the Plaine of the Vines hee went to Mizpah, where he offered his daughter for a sacrifice to rhe Lord, Iudg. 11. At that time he and the Ephramites got a memorable battell, in which were slaine 22000, Iudg. 12. So all the Trauels of Ieptha were 322 miles. Of the Cities and places mentioned in his Trauels. Of Thob or Tob. THob or Tob to which Ieptha fled, is in the halfe tribe of Ma∣nasses beyond Iordan, not far from the mountain of Antili∣banus, 104 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward: this was a very faire and plentifull countrey, and therefore called Thob, being deriued from Thobah which signifieth, Good and Rare. Of Mizpah. MIzpha was a Citie in land of Gilead in the halfe Tribe of Manasses, 18 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, and sig∣nifieth
a Watch-tower, of Zaphah, to looke out. In this towne Gideon dwelt, and after him, Samuel. It was afterward destroied by Iudas Macchabeus: you may reade more of it, 1 Sam. 7.10. Ier. 40.41. Iosh. 8. 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr, 6. Nehem. 3. Of Aroer. THis was a citie of the Moabites, beyond Iordan, neere the riuer Arnon, and fell to the tribe of Gad, Iosh. 12.13. Deut. 2. and takes the name from Turpentine, being deriued from Arar, that is, He hath destroied and rooted out; and was so called, because Iep∣tha woon a memorable battell neere to this place, Iud. 11. This is often mentioned in the Scriptures. There was another towne of this name close by Damascus. Of Minueth. IN S. Ieroms time (40 yeres after Christ) this towne was called Menneth of Mercury, which the Syrians call Meni, from Manah to distribute; being a towne of Merchants which disperse their commodities here and there; and stood beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Reuben, 32 miles from Ierusalem toward the East. Of the Plaine of Vines. Of this you may reade more in the Trauels of Balaam. Of the death of Ieptha. THis Ieptha was a famous Captaine, and from thence took his name; for Iepthach signifieth, To make him an open way with the sword, being deriued of Patach, To open; and after hee had iudged Israel six yeares, died: the manner of whose death is diuersly re∣ported; some say, that because hee performed not his vow effe∣ctually, therefore God strooke him with a grieuous vlcer, so that as he was passing from citie to citie, in euery place he left a mem∣ber. Others say, that he died in the citie of the Gileadites, and that in memorie of his singular actions and noble exploits, which by Gods especiall ayd he atchieued, his body was cut into pieces, and into euery citie of Gilead a member sent, and there buried; which, as I take it, is the better opinion.
Of Ebzan. EBzan was the tenth Iudge of Israel, and succeeded Iepthah; he began his gouernment in Anno mundi 2666, and before Christ 1402. He was a Bethlamite of the Tribe of Iudah; and as the Hebrews thinke, Boez, the grandfather of King Dauid. he had thirtie sonnes and thirty daughters, and liued to see them all married, and tooke them home vnto him into his own family, (which doubtlesse was a great blessing of God) and from thence tooke his name; for Ibsan, or Abezan, signifieth, the father of a flocke, or multitude. He liued, dwelt, and was buried in Bethlem Iuda, Iudg. 12. Of Elom. IN the yeare of the world 2773, and before Christ 1195.In the 5 yeare of this mans rule the Tro∣jan warre be∣gan, Ann. mun∣di 2777, before Christ 1190. Elon the eleuenth Iudge of Israel began to rule, and dwelt in Aialon in the Tribe of Zabulon, who after he had gouerned ten yeares dyed, and was buried in the same towne. There was another citie of the same name in the Tribe of Dan, some foure miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the West; where at the prayer of Ioshua the Sunne stood still. Of Abdon. ABdon the twelfth Iudge of Israel succeeded Elon;In the 5 yeare of this mans rule Troy was taken. and began to rule Anno mundi 2782, and before Christ 1185. Hee dwelt in the Tribe of Ephraim in a mountaine of the Ama∣lakites, 16 miles from Ierusalem Northwards. He ruled full eight yeares and then died, and was buried in Pirithon. Abdon signi∣fieth, a seruant: for hee was a good Prince, but that in obeying others he lost himselfe. This Abdon was a great man, had fortie sonnes, thirtie of which he saw married; and for his greater ho∣nour, had his Chariot drawne with 70 Asses: for they vsed them as we doe Horses.
The trauels of Sampson. SAmpson was borne in the city of Zarea, & brought vp in the Tents of Dan and Estahol, Iud. 13. From thence hee went to Timnah, which is twelue miles; there he fell in loue with Iudah the daugh∣ter of a Philistine, Iudg. 14. From Timnah hee went backe to his father to Zarea, and reuealed his affection; which is 12 miles. He and his father went back again to Timnah to see the maid, and by the way as he went hee killed a Lyon; which is twelue miles, Iudg. 14. From thence he returned back again, which is 12 miles, Iud. 14. Within a while after, Sampson and his friends went againe to Timnah, and by the way he found Hony in the Lyon that he had slaine, and gaue it to his friends to eat; and when he came to the Philistines house he propounded the Riddle, whereof you may reade, Iudg. 14. These things hapned in Anno mundi 2791, and be∣fore Christ 1176, at which time he succeeded Abdon in the rule of the Iewes. From thence he went to Ascalon a citie of the Philistines, and killed thirtie of their men, and tooke away their garments; which is 24 miles. From thence he returned backe againe to Timnah, and deliue∣red the Philistines which had vnfolded the Riddle, those change of garments, Iudg. 14. From thence (being angry that his wife had disclosed the rid∣dle) he returned to Zarea to his friends; which is 12 miles, Iud. 14. Within a while after, when his anger was ouer, hee returned backe to his wife to Timnah, which is 12 miles, it being then wheat haruest, and carried with him a Goat, that so hee might be merrie, and be reconciled to her: but her father shut him out of doores (because he had married his wife to another man,) where∣fore he tooke a company of Foxes, and tying them taile to taile, put fire-brands to their tailes, and turned them into the wheat of
the Philistines, and they set fire of all the Wheat and Vines, and Oliues thereabout, Iudg. 15. From thence he went to a caue in the rock Eta, and there dwelt, which is 12 miles, Iudg. 15. At the rocke Eta Sampson was bound with two new cords, by the Israelites, and from thence led to Ra∣mah Lehi, which is six miles, where hee killed 1000 Philistines with the jaw bone of an Asse, that he found in the way. From thence he went to Gaza a citie of the Philistins, which is 42 miles: here he carried away the gates of the citie. From Gaza he carried these gates with the posts to the top of a hill neere Hebron, which is 20 miles, Iudg. 16. From Hebron he went to the riuer Sorecke, where hee dwelt with Dalilah the Harlot, and by her was deceiued and taken of the Philistines, which are 12 miles. Being taken of the Philistines he put out both his eies, and bound him in chains, and led him from thence to Gaza, which is 32 miles: there they brought him into the house of their god Da∣gon, to make them sport; but he pulled downe the house, & a mul∣titude of them were slaine, where he also died, and was buried in the Sepulchre of Manoah his father, betweene Zerea and Esthaol, 28 miles from Gaza, and almost 20 from Ierusalem towards the West. This was in the yeare of the World 1811, and before Christ, 1157. So all the Trauels of Sampson were 240 miles. The description of the seuerall Townes and places to which SAMPSON trauelled. Of Zarea. THis is a city in the tribes of Iuda and Dan, neere the riuer So∣reck, and taketh the name from a Cole or Leprosie; being de∣riued of Sarag, that is, He was Leaprous: it stood 18 miles from Ierusalem Westward. Of Esthaol. THis was a Towne in the Tribe of Dan, two miles from Zarea, and stood neere the Riuer Sorecke, some 20 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the West; and taketh the name from a Woman, and
Fortitude; for Isca signifieth a woman, and El, or Ol, strong, or pow∣erfull. Here Sampson was brought vp. In S. Ieroms time this was called Asto, not farre from whence Sampson lieth buried. Of Timnah. You may reade of this in the trauels of Iudah. Of Ascalon. THis was a citie of the Philistines, scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterranean sea, some 30 miles from Ierusalem Westward, and to this day retaineth the figure of halfe a circle: it taketh the name from an ignominious fire, being deriued of Esh and Kalon, an ignominious light. Of Gaza. Of this Towne you may reade in the trauels of Ioshuah. Of the Riuer Sorek. THis was a very pleasant riuer, vpon the banke whereof grew great plentie of Vines and Palmes, from whence it seemeth to haue taken the name; for Sorek in Hebrew signifieth, a Myrtle branch, which bringeth forth a pleasant berrie whereof excellent Wine is made. It takes the beginning at a fountaine in the tribe of Iuda, some 12 miles from Ierusalem towards the West, where there is a very fertile valley, in which Dalilah that betraied Samp∣son dwelt: and from thence it runneth through the land of the Philistines, and falleth into the Mediterranean sea. Of the rocke Eta. IN this rocke there was a caue wherein Sampson dwelt, as in a strong tower: it stood in the Tribe of Iuda, neere to the riuer Sorecke, 12 miles from Ierusalem toward the West, and seemeth to take the name from Fowles; for before that Sampson inhabited there, a multitude of fowles bred vpon it, and therefore it was cal∣led Eta; for Aith signifies, a Fowle. This rocke growing to decay, was repaired againe by Ierobaham that idolatrous King of Israel.
Of Sampson. SAmpson, or Schimpson, according to the Hebrew text, taketh his name from the Sunne: for Schaemaes in Hebrew signifieth the Sunne, and seemeth to haue some affinity with Hercules, which signifieth, The glory of the aire, for what can be said to be the glory of the aire, but the Light of the Sunne, without which it would become exceeding darke? wherefore as some thinke, this Sampson was the true Hercules; and those noble exploits that hee did, the Graecians attributed to their Hercules. The typicall signification of SAMPSON. HE typically representeth Christ diuers waies; first, in his per∣son, hee was a mightie man; secondly, in his profession, hee was a Nazarite; thirdly, in his calling, he was a Prince and Iudge; fourthly, in his manner of liuing, for he went from place to place, to reuenge himselfe vpon the enemies of Gods people the chil∣dren of Israel; and in his death: euen so our Sauiour Christ is that strong man, who being mightier than the Diuel, hath dispos∣sest him of his tyrannicall jurisdiction ouer the soules of man∣kinde; hath taken away those gates of death, by his mercy ope∣ning vnto vs the dore of life, that so being set at liberty from that hellish imprisonment, we may be made partakers of euerlasting happinesse: he was also a Nazarite euen from his mothers womb, borne and bred there, tying himselfe to a vow of bondage, that we might be made free: he is a Prince for euer, and a Priest after the order of Melchisadeck: during the continuance of his life in this vaile of misery, his chiefest actions were to go from place to place, to teach, to doe good, and to rescue and relieue the poore distressed members of the Church, who lay miserably afflicted vnder the hands of Sathan; healing some, relieuing others, and bringing a third sort into the state of grace: so that as Sampson de∣liuered the Israelites from the bondage of the Philistins; Christ our Prince and Iudge deliuereth his from the slauerie of Sathan: by his death sauing more soules, than in his life. And therby pul∣ling down the strong buildings (the temptations of Sathan) hath laid them leuel with the ground, that they shall neuer be restored
againe. And lastly, after this life ended, he shall be our Prince and Iudge, and bring vs to that place of promise prepared for vs in his euerlasting kingdome. The trauels of the Spies of the Danites. SHortly after the death of Sampson, the Spies of the Da∣nites went from Zarea and Eastaol to mount Ephraim, to the house of Michah, which is 24 miles, Iudg. 18. From thence they went to Lais, which is a hundred and foure miles, Iudg. 18. From thence they returned to Zarea and Esthaol, which is 126 miles, Iudg. 18. So all their trauels were 244 miles. Of Lais. LAis was a citie scituated at the foot of mount Libanus, some 104 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and was some∣times called Belenus: this, because it stood so farre from aid, was quickly conquered by the Danites, and by them vtterly destroy∣ed: it signifieth, a roring or deuouring Lion. But after being re∣built by the Danites, they called it Dan, and the Canaanites l∣sem Dan: being deriued of Laeschaem, which signifieth, a Lion. The trauels of the Danites. THe army of the Danites went from Zarea and Est∣haol to Kiriathiearim, and there pitched their tents, which is 16 miles, Iudg. 15. From thence they went to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micha, and tooke his carued Image and his Leuite from him, which was eight miles, Iudges 15. From thence they went to Lais, 104 miles. So all the Trauels were 128 miles.
Of Kiriath-jearim. KIriath-jearim was a city of the Levits in the tribe of Iuda, vp∣on the borders of the tribe of Benjamin, about a mile from Ierusalem Westward. It somtime belonged to the Gibeonites, Ios. 9. and signifies a city of the desart or woods; beeing deriued from Kiriah, which signifies a city, and Iaar, a wood or Forrest. Here stood the arke of the Couenant, after it had bin in the land of the Philistines seuen moneths, and stood in the house of Abi∣nadab, whose son Eliazer (because he was of the family of the Le∣uites) by consent of the children of Israel was consecrated priest thereof to attend and keep it: here it remained 48 yeares, till Da∣uid fetched it thence with great ioy, 1 Sam. 7. & 2 Sam. 6. 1 Chr. 14. Here Saul was anointed King by Samuel: here the company of the Prophets (that is, the scolers of the Wise) came downe from the more eminent places where the arke of God was, with holy songs and instruments of musick, and the Spirit of the Lord came vpon Saul, and he sung and praised God with them. They called this the Hill of God, because the Arke of the Couenant stood in it, 1 Sam, 10. Here Ionathan the sonne of Saul thrust out a garrison of the Philistimes, which held this towne in subiection, 1 Sam. 14. Neere to this place was the valley Rephaim or of the Gyants; where Dauid won a memorable battel against the Philistims, and pursued them with great slaughter euen to the plain of Perizim, 2 Sam. 15. The Trauels of the Leuite, whose Concubine the Inhabitants of Gibeon most wickedly abused. THis Leuite dwelt in Ramath in mount Ephraim, from whence he went to Bethlehem Iuda, which is 16 miles, to fetch back his concubine, or rather his wife; which was the daughter of a certain ci∣tizen in Bethlehem; but a bond seruant not free; such they called concubines, because they had neither the honor to be mistresse of the house, neither could their
posteritie inherit in lands or goods of their father, although be∣fore God they were lawfull wiues, Iudg. 19. From Bethlehem they returned back again on foot to Ierusa∣lem, which then was called Iebus, because the Iebusits inhabited there. Which is 6 miles, Iudg. 19. From thence they went to Gibeah, not far distant from the ci∣ty Gibeon, where after Saul kept his Royall seat, 1 Sam. 22. Here the Gibeonites abused the Levits concubine. Which was almost 4 miles. From thence he went home to his own city Ramath in Mount Ephraim, and there cut the dead body of his wife in 12 parts, and sent them throughout all the tribes of Israel. Which is 8 miles. So all his trauels were 34 miles. Of Ramath. THis was a city in Mount Ephraim, some 8 miles from Ieru∣salem toward the North, and signifieth a high and lofty Ci∣tie; being deriued of Rom, that is, It was high. This towne Baësa King of Israel would haue fortified and repaired, after it had bin decayed; but hee was hindred by Benhadad King of the Syrians, that he could not finish what hee had begun. There were many townes and Cities of this name; as Ramoth where Ahab dwelt, 1 Reg. 22. Ramathaim Sophim, or Arimathia, where the prophet Samuel dwelt, 1 Sam. 1. and there where the Ark of God stood, not far from Gibeah, was called Ramah also, Iudg. 19. There was ano∣ther Ramath in the tribe of Nepthali, Ios. 19. all of them being so called because they stood vpon very high mountains. The Trauels of the Children of Israel when they fought against the Benjamites. FRom Mizpah in the land of Gilead, where they appointed to meet (for in the enemies land they could not assemble them∣selues) the whole army of the Israelites went to the Arke of God in Shilo, which was about 48 miles.
From thence they went with their army to Gibeah, where they lost 22000 of their men, which is 2 miles. From thence they returned to Shilo, and intreated God for aid which was two miles, Iudg. 20. From thence they went the second time to Gibeah, and entred battell againe with the enemy; but because they trusted in their own strength, therefore in this second expedition there were slain 18000 of their men. Which was two miles, Iudg. 20. From thence the whole Army of the Israelites returned backe again, and before the Lord in Shilo lamented the ouerthrow they had twice sustained, and with earnest prayers implored his ayd, that they might obtain the victorie. Which was 2 miles, Iud. 20. From thence they returned the third time to Gibeah, & there with great expedition renued the war; & because they trusted in God, and not to their own strength, they put to the sword 25000 of the Benjamits, and won a notable victorie, Iudg. 20. which was 2 miles. Hauing taken and burnt the city of Gibeah with fire, they re∣turned backe vnto the town of Shilo, which is two miles: & there before the Lord they began to lament the calamitie of the tribe of Benjamin, saying, Wherefore hath this thing hapned, that one of the Tribes should be rooted out before thee, Iudg. 21. From thence they went to Iabes in Gilead, and besieged and tooke it, and destroyed it to the ground, which is 52 miles. From thence they returned back again to Shilo, & with them brought 400 maids, which they gaue to the Benjamites to bee their wiues, Iudg. 21. Which was 52 miles. So all the trauels of the children of Israel were 164 miles. Of Iabes. THis was a city in the land of Gilead, 52 miles from Ierusa∣lem toward the Northeast; the inhabitants whereof buried the bones of Saul and Ionathan his son, 1 Sam. 31. it is deriued of Iabesh, which signifieth a dry city. Here endeth the booke of IVDGES.
The trauels of ELIMELECH, and his wife NAOMI. ELIMELECK and his wife went from Bethlehem Iuda, into the Land of the Moabites, where he died, which is 40 miles. From thence she returned with her daughter in law Ruth, to Bethlehem Iuda, where Boez married Ruth, which was fortie miles. So their Trauels were 80 miles. The first Booke of SAMVEL. The Trauels of HANNA, the mother of the Prophet SAMVEL. HEr husband Elkana and she went from Ramathaim Sophim in mount Ephraim, to Shilo, the house of the Lord, which was 12 miles; where by earnest prayers she obtained of the Lord a sonne, 1 Sam. 1. From thence shee returned backe againe to Ramathaim So∣phim, and there Samuel was borne, 1 Sam. 1. which was 12 miles. From thence she went to Shilo, to present her sonne before the Lord, and hee remained therewith Eli to serue God all his life, 1 Sam. 1. which is 12. miles. From Shilo she returned backe againe to her house, and bare Elkana a sonne and two daughters more, which is 12 miles. So all her trauels were 48 miles. Of Ramathaim Sophim. THis Citie stood in mount Ephraim not far from Lidda and Ioppa, some 16 miles distant from Ierusalem Northeastward; and was sometimes called Ramah. Here Ioseph (whose additi∣on was Arimathia) dwelt, that demanded the body of our Sa∣uiour
to bury in his own sepulchre. It seemeth to be called Rama∣thaim Sophim (which signifies, the high places of the prophets) because there was an Academy or publique schoole of Prophets which serued for the whole land, in this city. At this day it is cal∣led by the name of Ramath, hauing some affinitie to the antient name Ramah. How the Arke of God was borne from place to place, after it was won from the children of Israel by the Phili∣stines, 1 Sam. 4.5.6. THe two sons of Eli the Priest, Hophney and Phineas, carried the Arke of the Lord to Ebenezer, which signifies, the stone of my help; which was 42 miles, and is not far from Aphec, some 48 miles from Ierusalem Northward. Here the Arke of God was taken, and Hophney and Phineas died: old Eli also broke his necke at this time, about the 98 yeare of his age, and the fortieth of his rule; for hee ruled from the time of Sampson vntill then, 1 Sam. 4. This hapned Anno mundi 2850, and before Christ 1117. The pro∣phet Samuel succeeded him in the gouernment of the church, and ruled 40 yeares. From Aphecke the Philistines carried it to Asdod or Azotus, and set it in the temple of their god Dagon, but the Idol fel down in the night, & was broken to pieces before the Ark of the Lord, 1 Sam. 4. which was 160 miles. From thence to the city Gath, which was 4 miles. From Gath to the sea town Gaza, 12 miles. From Gaza to Ekron, 32 miles. From Ekron, they placing it vpon a new cart drawne with two new milch Kine, it was brought back again to Bethsemes, which was 12 miles. From thence it was caried to Kiriath jearim, and placed in the house of Abinadab, where it was kept vntill Dauids time, who fet∣ched it thence to Ierusalem with great joy, about the yere of the world 2900, and before Christ 1068, which was two miles. So all the while the Arke was from Shilo, it was caried hither and thither some 276 miles.
¶ Of the Townes and places to which the Arke of the Lord was carried Of Aphek. THis was a city of Samaria, alotted to the halfe tribe of Ma∣nasses, some halfe a mile from Israel toward the South, and 44 miles from Ierusalem Northward. It signifieth an impetuous or violent act; being deriued of Aphak, which is as much as, Hee worketh violently, or offereth violence. In this city Benhadad king of the Syrians going from one place to another to hide himselfe, was at length constrained to fly to Ahab King of Israel, to saue his life and craue his aid, 1 Reg. 20. Of Asdod, Ascalon, and Gaza, you may reade before. Of Gath. THis was a hauen town scituated vpon the bankes of the Me∣diterranian sea, distant from Ierusalem 34 miles toward the West. It seemeth to take the name of the aboundance of Vines that grow thereabouts; for Gath signifieth a presse, or such an in∣strument wherwith grapes are pressed. This was Goliahs country. Here Achis, to whom Dauid fled, gouerned, 1 Sam. 21.27. and it is very like that all the Kings of this city were called Achis, as som∣time the Emperors of Rome were called Caesars. There were other Kings of the Philistines that were also called by this name. Of Ekron. THis also was a city of the Philistins not far from the Medi∣terranian sea, and neere to Asdod, some 16 miles from Ieru∣salem Westward. At this day it is but a smal town, and called by the name of Accaron, hauing some affinity with the antient name Ekron. The inhabitants of this towne worshipped Baalzebub for their god. It taketh the name from Extirpation, or such a towne as Penitus distruit, Hath rooted out euen the foundation; being deriued of Akar, which signifieth, To extirpate.
Of Bethsemes. THis was a city of the Levits in the tribe of Iuda, Ios. 15.21. 4 miles from Ierusalem Westward; and signifies, the house of the Sun. Of this you may reade more, before. The Trauels of the Prophet Samuel. SAmuels mother brought him from Arimathia to Shilo, being 12 miles, where he was to serue the Lord God all his life. From Shilo Samuel went to Mizpa in the land of Gilead; 48 miles. Here Samuel called a congregation, and made a solemn sacrifice vnto the Lord, of a sucking lambe; and the Lord at the same time thundred from heauen, and dispersed the army of the Philistines, so that they fled, 1 Sam. 7. From Mizpa he went to Arimathia, 56 miles: There he dwelt, and built an altar vnto the Lord, 1 Sam. 7. From thence he went yearely to Bethel, 16 miles, 1 Sam. 7. From Bethel he went to Gilgal, 2 miles, 1 Sam. 7. From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the land of Gilead, 36 miles 1 Sam. 7. From Mizpa he went again to Arimathia, 56 miles. Thither came vnto him the Elders of the children of Israel, desiring him to chuse them a King, 1 Sam. 8. Therefore he went out of the towne of Arimathia, about 16 miles, to Ramath, which lieth in the land of Ziph not far from Bethlehem Euphrata, and there Samuel anointed Saul the son of Kish to be their King, 1 Sam. 10. From Ramath he went to Gilgal, 16 miles. There he offered, and shewed Saul what he should do, 1 Sam. 10. From Gilgal hee went to Mizpah in the land of Gilead, 36 miles: there Saul by casting of lots was chosen King, 1 Sam. 10. From Mizpa he returned to Arimathia, 56 miles, 1 Sam. 10. From Arimathia he went to Beseck, about 44 miles, where A∣doni-Beseck
was taken, whose fingers and toes the children of Israel cut off. There Samuel and Saul caused an army of men to issue out against the children of Ammon, 1 Sam. 11. From Besecke, Samuel and Saul passed ouer Iordan to Iabes in Gilead, 16 miles, and there ouerthrew Nahas King of the Ammo∣nites, and all his host; which done, Samuel said vnto the souldiers, Let vs now go vnto Gilgal, and there renew the Kingdome. From Iabes in Gilead he went to Gilgal, 36 miles. There Saul was placed in his Throne royal, 1 Sam. 11. From Gilgal Samuel went to Arimathia, which is 20 miles. From Arimathia he went again to Gilgal, 20 miles, and there he sharply rebuked King Saul, because he had offered a Sacrifice contrary to his command, 1 Sam. 13. From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, 12 miles, 1 Sam. 13. From Gibeon he went to Arimathia, 12 miles. From Arimathia he went to Gilgal, 20 miles; there rebuked king Saul, because he did not wholly destroy the Amalekites; and Samuel himselfe hewed the body of Agag King of the Amalekites in pieces, 1 Sam. 16. From Gilgal he went to Arimathia, 20 miles. From Arimathia he went to Bethlehem, 16 miles, and there he anointed Dauid King, 1 Sam. 16. Then he returned again to Arimathia, 16 miles, where he died and was buried, 1 Sam. 28. So all the trauels of the Prophet Samuel were 364 miles. Of Arimathia, Mizpa, Ramath, and rhe rest of the townes men∣tioned in his Trauels, you may reade before. The Typicall signification of Samuel. SAmuel is deriued of Shemuel, that is, desired of God. And was a Type of God the Father: for as Samuel anointed Dauid, so God anointed his beloued Son with the oile of Gladnesse and of the Spirit, Psal. 45. Esay 61.
The Trauels of King SAVL. SAVL went from the town of Gibeon to mount Ephraim, four miles, to seek his fathers Asses, in An. Mundi 2870, and before Christ 1908. From mount Ephraim he passed through the land of Salisa, to the borders of the town of Salem, 12 miles. From Salem he went to the land of Gemini in the tribe of Ben∣jamin, 16 miles. From the land of Iemini he went to Rama, 4 miles; there by Samuel he was anointed King, 1 Sam. 10. This town lay not farre from Bethlehem, and close by it lay Rachels graue. There certaine men met with Saul in the borders of Benjamin at Zelach, and shewed him that his fathers Asses were found, which was about a mile from Ierusalem. From thence Saul went about two miles to Zilzah; there three men met him (that trauelled to Bethel) and gaue him two loaues of bread, 1 Sam. 10. Then he came to the mount of God, which is the town of Ki∣riath-jearim; there a company of Prophets met him and prophe∣cied; then the spirit of God came vpon Saul, and he began to pro∣phecie: which was about six miles from Bethlehem. From Kiriath-jearim he went again to Gibeon, which is foure miles, 1 Sam. 10. Then he went again from Gibeon to Gilgal, and there he offe∣red, and Samuel shewed him what he should do: which is 12 miles, 1 Sam. 10. From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the land of Gilead, 36 miles where he was chosen King. From Mizpa he went again to Gibeon, 48 miles. From Gibeon he went to Beseck, 40 miles; there he gathered certain soldiers and led them against Nahas King of the Ammo∣nites, 1 Sam. 11. From Beseck he went with his army to Iabes, 16 miles; there he ouerthrew Nahas with all his host.
From Iabes in Giliad he went to Gilgal, 36 miles. There he was placed in his princely seat, 1 Sam. 11. From Gilgal he went to Michmas, 4 miles: there he sent 3000 men out of Israel, to his son Ionathan to Gibeon. From Michmas hee went to Gilgal with his army, 4 miles. There he offered, for which Samuel rebuked him, 1 Sam. 13. From Gilgal hee went to Mount Benjamin, about 12 miles, not far from Gibeon. From Gibeon hee went to Michmas, 8 miles. There Ionathan ouercame the army of the Philistines, 1 Sam. 14. From Michmas Saul followed the enemy to Ajalon, 12 miles. There he would haue slain his son Ionathan because he had eaten a little hony, 1 Sam. 14. From Ajalon he went to Gibeon, 4 miles, where he kept court From Gibeon he went to the land of the Moabites, 28 miles; which he ouercame, 1 Sam. 14. From the land of the Moabites hee went into the countrey of Ammonites, 40 miles; which country he ouercame, and tooke in all their towns. From the land of the Ammonits he went to Gibeon, 60 miles, 1 Sam. 15. From Gibeon hee went into the land of Edom, or Idumaea (as it is commonly called) 40 miles, and ouercame all the countrey. From Idumaea he returned again to Gibeon, 40 miles. From Gibeon he went with an army about 600 miles, to Zoba in Armenia, which he ouercame, 1 Sam. 14. From the kingdome of Zoba hee returned to Gibeon, 600 miles. After that, he went out against the Philistines, 12 miles, and as the historie sheweth, Saul had wars with the Philistins during his life, 1 Sam. 14. From the Philistins he returned again to Gibeon vnto his pa∣lace, 12 miles. From Gibeon he went into the wildernesse of Sur, 160 miles; there he ouercame the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 15. Also he ouercame the whole country, from the town of Pelu∣so to the red sea, which is 92 miles.
From thence he went again into Iury, to the town of Carmel, 140 miles, 1 Sam. 15. And from thence he went vnto Gilgal, 32 miles. There the Prophet Samuel rebuked him, because he did not wholly destroy and consume the Amalekites: and there Samuel hewed the body of Agag King of the Amalekites into small pieces, 1 Sam. 15. From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, 12 miles. In the 11 yeare of Saul, An. M. 2881, and before Christ 1807, Dauid being then about 20 yeares of age, was anointed King by Samuel. Within a while after, Saul was vexed with an euill spirit: then Dauid played vnto him vpon the harpe, by which he was ea∣sed. Soon after he went forth with his Army towards Socho and Asecha, which was some 8 miles distant from Gibeah. There Da∣uid killed that famous champion Goliah, 1 Sam. 15. From thence the Israelites followed the chase of the Philistins to the vally and riuer Soreck, 4 miles; and thence vnto the gates of their cities, that is, to Ekron, which is eight miles; to Ascalon, 20 miles;From the place where Dauid killed Goliah. and to Gath, which was 24 miles, all the way putting the Philistins to the sword. So that there died in this fight 30000 of them, 1 Sam. 17. Then they returned back again, and spoiled and burnt the Phi∣listines tents, where they found great riches. 24 miles. From Socho and Aseka he returned again to Gibeon, 8 miles: there the women came out of all places in the town dancing, and with loud voices singing, Saul hath slain a thousand, but Dauid ten thousand, 1 Sam. 18. From Gibeon he went to Arimathia, 2 miles, minding to kill Dauid; and came to Naioth in Ramoth, where Samuel and Dauid were: but the spirit of God came vpon Saul, and he prophecied, falling downe vpon the ground before Samuel and Dauid, all that day and the nightensuing, 1 Sam. 19. From thence he returned again to Gibeon, 12 miles: there he thought to haue killed his son Ionathan with a speare, because he excused Dauid. There also he caused 85 priests to be put to death because the high priest Abimilech at Nob had giuen Dauid of the Shew bread to eat, and had deliuered him Goliahs sword, 1 Sam. 21.22.
From Gibeon he went to the Leviticall towne Nob, 12 miles, where he spared neither man nor woman, yong nor old, no not the innocent children, but put them all to the sword, and wholly de∣stroyed the town, 1 Sam. 12. From the town of Nob he returned to Gibeon, 12 miles. From Gibeon he went to the wildernes of Moan Southward, 20 miles. From the wildernesse of Moan hee returned again to Gibeon, 1 Sam. 23. which was 24 miles. From Gibeon he went to Engedi, where Dauid in a caue cut off a piece of his garment, which was 24 miles, 1 Sam. 24. From thence he teturned again to Gibeon, 24 miles. From Gibeon he went to Ziph, 22 miles, and as he lay asleepe vpon the hill Hachila, Dauid came secretly into the Campe, and took his cup and his speare from his head, and would not kil him, 1 Sam. 26. From the hill Hachila he returned vnto Gibea, 22 miles. From thence hee went to fight with the Philistines at mount Gilboa, 40 miles. From mount Gilboa, hauing changed his apparell, he went to Endor, which was 4 miles: There he asked counsel of a witch, and the Diuel appeared vnto him in the likenesse of Samuel, 1 Sam. 28 From thence he returned again to mount Gilboa to the camp 4 miles, and the next day he fought against the Enemy, in which battel his three sonnes were slaine, and hee himselfe put to flight, 1 Sam. 31. 1 Chr. 11. From mount Gilboa he fled 8 miles to Bethsan, where he kild himselfe, 1 Sam. 31. 1 Chr. 11. From thence the body of Saul was brought to Iabes in Gilead, where it was buried, 2 Sam. 31. 1 Chr. 11. So all the trauels of Saul were 2428 miles.
The description of the townes and places to which he trauelled. OF Gibea, Salem, Ramath, and Iabes, you may read before, be∣ing memorable places to which Abraham, Ioshuah, and the children of Israel trauelled. Of Bethsaliza. THe land of Salisa, with the city Bethsaliza, was scituated in mount Ephraim 8 miles from Ierusalem toward the North∣west. This was also called Baalsalisa, 2. King. 4. and signifieth the Trinity, being deriued of Schillesch, to make threefold. Of Michmas. THis was a citie in mount Ephraim, in the borders of the tribes of Beniamin and Manasses, not far from Iericho, some ten miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Neere to this Ci∣tie, Ionathan and his armor bearer put the armie of the Philistins to flight, 1. Sam. 14. you may read of this towne in Esd. 2. Isa. 10. This was a strong citie of the Moabites, and seemeth to take the name of Kemosch, or Chamos, which was a god which they wor∣shipped in their banquets & meetings for mirth: as Bacchus som∣time was amongst the Romans. To this Idol Solomon built a tem∣ple, 1. Reg. 11. Ier. 48. Of Zoba. THe Kingdome of Zoba, which Iosephus calleth Sophenam, was in Armenia, neer to the mountains Antitaurus and Ma∣sius, 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, extending it selfe on both sides of the Riuer Euphrates. It was a very large fruitfull and pleasant country, wherein inhabited many Kings. This place Saul conquered, & Dauid retained it, 1 Sam. 14. 2 Sam. 8. And signifies An aspiring Kingdom; being deriued of Zabah, He hath aspired.
Of Carmel. CArmel was a City in the tribe of Iudah, scituated in a fertile mountaine some eight miles from Hebron toward the East, but twelue miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest, in the wildernesse of Moan, where that foolish and couetous fellow Na∣bal dwelt. There is likewise another Towne called by the same name in the tribe of Issacher, not farre from Ptolomais, which is vpon the shore of the Mediteranian sea, 64 miles from Ierusalem toward the North, standing vpon a promontory which extendeth it selfe into the Ocean; of which you may reade, Ios. 19. Ier. 46. In this city the Prophets Elias and Elizeus dwelt, who put the Priests of Baal to death in that place, 1 Reg. 18. 2 Reg. 4. Carmel signifieth Spike, or a fertil field bringing forth Vines, herbs, and diuers kinds of floures and fruits; and is oft times vsed for a plea∣sant place, Esay 29.32.37. Ier. 24. There are a sect of Monks that of this mountain are called Carmelits, who built for themselues an Abby there close by the Church of S. Maries, about the yeare of the world 5170, and in the yeare of our Lord 1170. Of Azekah. AZekah and Socho were two townes in the Tribe of Iudah, eight miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west. Of these you may reade before. Of Nobe or Nob. THis was a Citie of the Priests in the Tribe of Benjamin, where Abimelech High-Priest of the Israelites dwelt. Who at such time as Dauid fled from Saul, he gaue him of the Shew∣bread, and the Sword that he tooke from Goliah. For the which cause Saul commanded fourescore and fiue Priests to bee slaine, and the City with all the Inhabitants thereof to bee put to the sword, 1 Sam. cap. 22. At this day (as Bernard Brittenbacchus saith) it is called Bethenopolis, and is in the way betweene Ieru∣salem (from whence it is distant some sixteen miles towards the
Northeast) & Dyospolim. It taketh the name from Naba, which signifieth, He hath prophecied. Of this you may read, 1 Sam. 20.21, 22. and Esay 10. Of Maon. THis was a town in the wildernesse of Iudaea, some 24 miles from Ierusalem Southward, neere Ziph and Carmel, where Saul had besieged Dauid and all his men, and would haue either put them to the sword, or taken them captiues. But the Philistins on a sudden inuaded the land, so that Saul was constrained to leaue the siege to oppose their incursions. It taketh the name from a fruitfull habitation and a firm and safe mansion, 2 Sam. 23 Ios. 15. Of Engedi. THis was a castle or town scituated in a mountain neere to the shore of the Dead sea, a little beyond Sodom, six miles from Ierusalem toward the Northeast, and in the tribe of Iudah, Ios. 15. In times past it was a fruitfull place both of vines & other fruits: there also grew a kinde of balsam. But Cleopatra in the time of Mark Anthony brought the roots of it into Egypt, and there made a pleasant garden, where now Christians inhabit. There are yet some small stalks here and there of this Balsam to be found vpon this hill Engedi, but the Saracens do not regard it, neither dwell any Christians neere to dresse it, so that it groweth to decay. En∣gedi signifieth the fountaine or well of a Goat or Lambe. These mountains are very high, and of a wonderfull nature; in some pla∣ces great ragged rocks appearing, in others plain and fruitful val∣lies: insomuch as they are fearefull and horrible to strangers that behold them. Of Ziph. THis was a Towne in the Desart of Ziph, placed in a certaine mountaine not farre from Hebron, in the Tribe of Iudah, some 22 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast, Iosh. 15. Vnto this desart (neere to this city) Dauid oft times resorted, and at last was betrayed by the inhabitants of this towne. It seemeth that the Towne and Wildernesse tooke that name of the aboun∣dance
of pitch that was found in it; for Zaephaeth in Hebrew signi∣fieth Pitch. Of Gilboa. THis was a mountain in the tribe of Manasse, neere to Sichem and Apheck, 40 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; it extendeth 8 miles to the city Bethsan, and two miles towards the North to mount Hermon. It seems to take the name from the bubling forth or springing vp of water: for the riuer Kison begins at the foot of this mountain, and diuides it self into diuers parts vntill it commeth to the hill Hermon, and then it runs into two principal streams, the one passeth toward the East into the sea of Galilee; the other to the West towards Carmel, and so into the Mediterranian sea. There be some that are of opinion, that nei∣ther raine nor dew falls vpon this hil, because when Saul was slain Dauid cursed these mountains, saying, Let neither rain nor dew fal vpon you, ô yee mountaines of Gilboa, because the strong men of Israel were slaine there, 2 Sam. 1. But this was but a figuratiue speech, wherby Dauid would expresse the greatnesse of his sorrow: for Borchardus the Monke speaking of this mountain, saith, That as he was ascen∣ding vpon it, there was such a violent showre fell, that he was wet through his clothes, and the waters in great aboundance ran into the vallies. And in the yeare of our Lord 1283, sleeping vpon this hill on the Eve of All Saints, there was a great dew fell vpon his clothes: onely some parts of it were very stony and barren, as are many other mountains in that country. Of Endor. THis was a town in the tribe of Manasses, neere the riuer Ki∣son, Ios. 17. where Saul asked counsell of a witch, 1 Sam. 28. It seemes to take the name from a fountaine of durance; for Dor signifies he hath made sure. It is distant from Ierusalem 44 miles toward the North. In S. Ieroms time this was but a smal village. Of Bethsan. THis was a city in the Tribe of Manasses, betweene Bethulia and the sea of Galile, some 44 miles from Ierusalem toward
the North, Iosh. 17. It taketh the name from a Church-yard, or a place of rest: for Beth signifieth, a house; and Iaschan, he hath slept. Here Saul killed himselfe, and the Philistines cut off his head and set it vpon the wall of this citie. Afterward, about S. Ieroms time, Ptolomie called this Scythopolis. You may reade in the se∣cond booke of the Macchabes, how it was the towne of the Scythi∣ans; for the Scythians which dwelt some 800 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North, came with a great army into the Holy land, and by force woon this citie, and dwelt there: of whom it was called the Scythian towne. Ioseph. in lib. 2. de Bell. Iud. cap. 18. remembreth a strange accident that hapned neere this towne; for the Iewes besieging it, there were of their own nation that dwelt within the city, who (that they might make a priuate gaine) took wages of the Scythians, to oppose their brethren and countrey∣men: by which meanes the Scythians got the better. But after a while, the Scythians considering that the number of the Iewes were great, and fearing some sudden insurrection or innouation, gaue them warning to depart and leaue the towne: they, though with great griefe, as being prest with a two-fold necessity, (their owne wants and the hatred of their kindred) did so, relying meerely vpon the courtesie of strangers. But about some two dayes after, in the night time the inhabitants of Scythopolis breaking out of the citie vnawarres, fell vpon them, and in recom∣pence of their kindnesse put to the sword some thirteen thou∣sand: many slaine vnawares, some as they were eating, and most in their sleepe. After they had committed this massacre, they compassed about the wood where they were, took away all their substance, and suffered not a man to depart aliue. Wherefore one Simon the soone of a certaine ancient and noble Citizen, called Saul, perceiuing their present miserie, and that there was no hope to escape iminent death and vtter ruine, in a cruell and desperate maner, breakes out into these words: O miserable wretch that I am, that against my owne conscience haue lift vp these impious hands against my countrey, committing daily massacres to plea∣sure them, who at this day lay violent hands vpon all wee haue; die therefore, thou that art thus profane, and with thine owne hands make an end of thy wretched life, since thou doest not de∣serue
to die honourably in the face of the enemy, but wretchedly in a corner, and for thine owne offence. So soone as he had ended these words, he turned him about with a fierce countenance, and falling vpon his father, mother, wife, and children, put them all to the sword; after, burnt his goods; and to make an end of the tra∣gedy, ran himselfe vpon his owne weapon. These things hap∣ned but a little before Vespasian came into the land of Iudaea. At this day this Citie Sythopolis is called after the antient name Bethsan. The typicall representation of SAVL. SAul if it be properly taken, doth sometime signifie, a Graue or Sepulchre, and sometimes Hell; being deriued from Scheuol, which may be taken for both. As therefore Saul persecuted inno∣cent Dauid, with an inueterate malice, euen vnto the death; so the sonnes of Sathan (euil and wicked men) persecute Christ and his members, with an immoueable malice, sparing neither Prophets nor Apostles, neither such as are religious, no nor Christ himself; but with cruell torments put them to lingering deaths, till they be vtterly exryrpate (as they thinke:) and then wanting objects to satisfie their sauage mindes, they follow their owne diuellish councels, till with Saul they come to desperate ends. Schaul, or Saul, if it be taken in the better part, signifieth, He hath desired, or called. The Philistines trauels from their Campe to Michmas. THe Philistines incamped themselues at Michmas, vpon Mount Ephraim, some ten miles from Ierusalem North∣ward: and out of the Philistines campe there issued three armies to spoile the countrey. The one marched towards Ophra, and went from Michmas to Salem, 28 miles. From thence they went to Ophra, 4 miles. The second went from Michmas to Bethoron, 8 miles. The third went from Michmas to the valley of Zeboim, eight miles. So all the Trauels of the Philistines were 58 miles.
Of Zoboim. THis valley is not farre from Ierusalem in the Tribe of Ben∣jamin, Nehem. 11. The trauels of Ionathan, Sauls sonne. IOnathan went from Gibeah to Kiriath-jearim, which was two miles, where hee draue the Philistines out of their campe, 1 Sam. 13. From thence he went backe againe, two miles. From thence he went to Michmas, which is 8 miles, and there by the helpe of his Armor-bearer he gaue the Philistines a great ouerthrow, 1 Sam. 14. From thence hee followed the enemy to Aialon, wich is 12 miles; there his father would haue put him to death because he had tasted a little hony, 1 Sam. 14. From Aialon Saul and his sonne Ionathan returned to Gibeah his owne citie, which was two miles. From Gibeah hee went with his father to Socho and Asecha, which was 8 miles: where after Dauid had slaine Goliah (for that singular vertue and heroicall spirit which Ionathan saw in him) he loued him as he did his owne soule, and preferred him before his owne life and honour, 1 Sam. 18. From thence he went with his father to Gibeah, some 8 miles, where women with great mirth & joy met him, saying, Saul hath slaine his thousand, and Dauid his ten thousand: for which cause Saul out of meere enuie (for then he did not know that he had been an∣nointed by Samuel) would haue slaine him and his sonne Ionathan also for excusing him, 1 Sam. 18.19. From Gibeah Ionathan went into the desart of Ziph, some 22 miles, to comfort Dauid: there they swore a solemne oath of mu∣tuall friendship, to continue as long as they liued, 1 Sam. 23. From thence Ionathan returned, which was 22 miles, 1 Sam. 23. At last he went to the wars with his father to mount Gilboah, 40 miles: there he, his father, his brothers Abinadab & Melchisuah were slaine. So all the trauels of Ionathan were 126 miles.
The trauels of Abiather, Abimelechs sonne. WHen Doeg the Idumaean, at the command of Saul, had slaine the Priests of the Lord, this Abiather the son of Abimelech the high Priest, fled to the Wood Hareth, not farre from Kegilah, some 20 miles, and came and told Dauid of all that had hapned, 1. Sam. 22.23. Of Kegilah. THis was a Citie in the Tribe of Iuda 4 miles from Hebron towards the East, & 20 from Ierusalem toward the South∣west. From which towne Dauid droue away the Philistines that had besieged it, 1 Sam. 23. You may reade of it, Iosh. 23. Ne∣hem. 3. In S. Ieroms time it was but a small towne, where the inha∣bitants shew to strangers the Sepulchre of Abacuck the Prophet. Not farre off toward the West lieth Hareth, that wood when Dauid was when Abiather came to him. Kegila in Hebrew signifi∣eth, a Tent. The trauels of King Dauid. DAuid was annointed King by Samuel, when he was 20 yeres old, Anno mundi 2881, and before Christ 1807. Within a while after, he was sent by his father Isay or Iesse, to Gibea, of Saul, which was eight miles; there he played to Saul vpon the Harpe, 1 Sam. 16. When Saul went out with his Armie against the Philistins, Da∣uid returned backe to Bethlehem his owne countrey, which was about eight miles. There he fed his fathers sheep, 1 Sam. 17. From thence he went to Socho and Asecha, and killed Goliah, which was foure miles. From thence he carried the head of Goliah to Ierusalem, which was 8 miles.
From thence hee went with king Saul to Gibeah, which was 4 miles. From Gibeah he went 12 miles into the land of the Philistins: and to perform the promise which he had made, put to the sword 200 of them. From thence he returned and brought their forskins vnto Saul, in recompence of which noble exploit he was married to Sauls daughter, which was 12 miles. A while after he made an incursion vpon the land of the Phi∣listines, and in a sharp and cruell war got a famous victorie, and returned with glory to Gibeah, which was at the least 24 miles. But when Dauid perceiued that Saul went about to take away his life, and that (he was so narrowly pursued) he had no way to escape, but to be let down by a cord through a window: he made hast and went from Gibeah to Arimathea, where he complained vnto Samuel of the injuries of Saul, and layd before him in what a miserable condition he was, and to what straits brought. Where∣fore Samuel to comfort him brought him to Naioth; which see∣meth to be so called, of the faire scituation and pleasantnesse of the place: for Mabah signifies, a laudable and comely place: this was a Colledge of such as were professors of that sacred study of diuinity. Now Saul hearing that Dauid was in this place, came with some of his seruants on purpose to make him captiue. But at the sight of Samuel he began to sing Psalmes and Hymnes after the manner of the Prophets. From thence Dauid returned back vnto Gibeah, some 12 miles, where at the stone of Ezel (not farre from Gibeah toward the South) Ionathan went to Dauid, & counselled him to depart with all speed, for that his father meant euill towards him. So they tooke leaue either of other with teares, 1 Sam. 20. Ezel signifies an Angle, as was a stone full of angles or corners. From thence he went to Nob, which was 12 miles. From thence he went to Gath a citie of the Philistines, where he faigned himselfe mad, because of Achis whom hee feared, 1 Sam. 21. which was 24 miles. From thence hee went to the caue of Odullam, which was 24 miles, and thither resorted vnto him many of his kindred, and
such as were indebted and in danger, to the number of 40 per∣sons. In this place he wrote the 57 and 142 Psalmes, as may ap∣peare by their titles. From thence he went to Mizpah, in the land of the Moabites, where at this time the King kept his court; and there he carefully commanded his friends and followers to his safe protection, till such time as the fury of Saul was asswaged, 1 Sam. 22. From thence by the councell of the Prophet Gad he returned by the wildernesse of Hareth, to Kegila, and rescued it, 40 miles. Here Abiather the Priest came to him, 1 Sam. 23. From thence fearing the comming of Saul, hee went into the wildernesse of Ziph, whither Ionathan came to him, 1 Sam. 22. which was 4 miles. From thence he went to the towne of Moan, which was foure miles. From thence he went to the hold of Engedi, which were 36 miles. From thence hee went six miles to Carmel in Iudaea, where hee determined to haue destroyed Nabal for his churlishnesse, 1 Sam. 25. From thence he went to Hackilah, 2 miles. From Hackilah he went to Gath, where Achis king of the Phi∣listines kept his court, which was 16 miles. This Achis was very courteous and bountifull minded, he entertained Dauid, and gaue him freely the city of Ziclag to inhabit in, 1 Sam. 27. Wherefore Dauid went thence to the towne of Ziclag, which was 12 miles, 1 Sam. 27. and there inhabited one yeare and seuen moneths. From thence Dauid went often towards the South, and made incursions vpon the Amalekites, wasting and destroying their land which lay in the Desart of Sur, about 80 miles distant from Ziclag, and a hundred and twenty miles from Ierusalem towards the South-west From the Desart of Sur he returned backe againe vnto Ziclag which was 80 miles, and sent part of the prey which he had got∣ten, to the King of the Philistines; of which you may reade more 1 Sam. 27.
From Ziclag Dauid went with the army of the Philistines to fight against Saul, 88 miles, euen to Sunem: for the Philistines pitched betweene Iezreel and Sunem, 1 Sam. 28.29. But because the Princes of the Philistines durst not trust him, therefore by the consent of Achis their King hee returned backe to Ziclag, 88 miles, 1 Sam. 29. Whiles Dauid was gone with the Philistines to fight against Israel, the Amalekites inuaded Ziclag, tooke it and burnt it with fire, and carried away Ahinoam and Abigal (Dauids wiues) cap∣tiues. Wherefore when Dauid came to Ziclag and perceiued what had hapned, with all speed pursued the enemy; and in the way as hee went he found an Aegyptian, who a little before, the Amalekits had left there, because he was vnable to follow them. This Aegyptian guided Dauid to the tents of the Amalekits, who suspecting no such euill, were making merry with the booty that they had taken. But Dauid with the rest of his company so man∣fully behaued themselues, that they gaue the Amalekites a sud∣den ouerthrow: and as it often hapneth to such as are negligent and carelesse, he tooke away from them their former bootie, and put most of them to the sword. This battell was fought some 8 or 12 miles from Ziclag, as by the circumstance of the history may appeare. From this slaughter he returned backe to Ziclag, which is 12 miles, and repaired it; to euery neighbouring citie sending a part of the prey. Here hee had certaine intelligence of the successe of the Israelites in their wars against the Philistins, and of the death of Saul and Ionathan, which hee bitterly lamented, 1 Sam. 30. 2 Sam. 1. These things hapned in the 10 yeare after Samuel had an∣nointed Dauid King. From Ziclag he went to Hebron a metropolitane Citie of the tribe of Iuda, being a towne of refuge belonging to the Leuites, which was 16 miles. At this time Dauid was about the age of thirtie yeares, and was annointed King by the Tribe of Iudah, in the yeare of the World 2891, and before Christ 1077. Here he kept his Court seuen yeares and six moneths. From hence also he sent messen∣gers to Iabes in Gilead, 44 miles, to signifie his gracious accep∣tance
of that fauour which they shewed vnto Saul, in burying of his body there, 2 Sam. 1. 1 Chr. 12. From Hebron Dauid went to Ierusalem, 22 miles, which then was called Iebus, being possessed of the Iebusites; but he woon it with strong hand, and thrust them out of it; and in mount Sion set vp the city Millo, which was after called the city of Dauid, and signifies, A place of plenty. He began his raigne in Ierusalem in the 38 yere of his age, and 7 of his raigne. In this place also he set vp his house made of Cedar wood, of which Hyram King of Ty∣rus sent him great plenty from Mount Libanus, distant from thence, 104 miles, 2 Sam. 5. 1 Chr. 12. From thence he went to the valley of Rephaim, some 3 miles from Ierusalem in the way that leadeth to the citie of Bethlem, where he fought a memorable fight against the Philistines, and ouercame them; for which cause it was also called Baal-Peri∣zim, because by the helpe and assistance of God he had conquered the army of the Philistines, 1 Sam. 5. After he had dispersed the enemies, hee returned to Ierusalem which is 4 miles. The Philistines came the same yeare into the valley of Repha∣im againe, and pitched their tents within three miles and a halfe of Ierusalem: and the Lord gaue Dauid a signe, that when he heard a noyse in the mulberry trees, hee should set vpon the enemy; so Dauid went forth, and close by the towne of Gaeba and Kiriath-jearim, about two miles from Ierusalem Westward, he set vpon the enemie and gaue them the second ouerthrow, 2 Sam. 5. 1 Chr. 15. From thence Dauid followed the enemy to Gaza, which was 18 miles, 2 Sam. 5. In the 10 yeare of his raigne from his first be∣ginning in Hebron. Dauid assembled all the Princes, Priests, and chiefe men of Israel, to the number of 30000, which inhabited from Sechor till you come to Chaemah, a citie of Nepthalie, at the foot of mount Libanus, euen 163 miles off. These men assem∣bled themselues in the citie of Ierusalem, and from thence they with Dauid went to Kiriath-jearim, which was about a mile, to fetch the Arke of the Couenant from thence into the city of Da∣uid. 1 Sam. 6. 1 Chr. 14.
From Kiriath-jearim Dauid and all his traine returned backe again to Ierusalem, which was about a mile; and they placed the Arke of the Lord in a new cart, and caused it to be drawne with Oxen, which turned out of the way to the threshing floure of Nachon, where Vza rashly and inconsiderately touching the Arke of God, contrary to the Diuine Law, was presently slaine by the Lord in the way, and that place was called Paeri-Vza, that is, The breach of Vza. For he was not of the Tribe of Aaron, to whom it was only lawfull to touch the Arke, & therfore the Lord strooke him that he died miserably: wherefore Dauid being terrified by this example of Gods seueritie, would not that day bring the ark of the Lord into Ierusalem, but carried it to the house of a cer∣taine Nobleman called Obed-Aedom a Gittite, who dwelt not far from Ierusalem; but when it was told Dauid, that the Lord bles∣sed the house of Obed-Aedom and all his family, because the arke was there; Dauid went from Ierusalem with a great multitude of people, to the house of Obed-Aedom, who (as is said before) dwelt not farre from Ierusalem, (yet there are some that say he was an excellent musitian in Ierusalem, and dwelt in Mount Acra, that is in the lower citie) and from thence Dauid fetcht the Arke of the Lord into the vpper citie, which stood vpon mount Sion; but I hold the other opinion to be the more probable. When the Arke was carried by the Priests, Dauid girt himself with a linnen Ephod, (which kinde of garment the Priests of the inferior order vsed to weare) and danced before it, singing Psalms and hymnes to the praise and glory of God, and with great state brought it to the citie of Ierusalem with the sound of Trumpets and instruments of musick, and placed it in the middle of the Ta∣bernacle, which they had curiously erected in Mount Sion in the vpper citie, which was also called the citie of Dauid. This hapned in the tenth yere of his raigne; at which time, Michal, Sauls daugh∣ter despised him in her heart, and laughed at him: but God gaue her a due recompence, as you may reade, 2 Sam. 6. and him a just reward; for he promised by the Prophet Nathan, That of his po∣steritie and bloud, the King of Kings, and Sauiour of the world should be borne. In the yere following, Dauid inuaded the land of the Philistins;
and the citie of Gath, which with strong hand he woon: this was 34 miles from Ierusalem. From thence he returned backe to Ierusalem, 34 miles. In the twelfth yere of his raigne he afflicted the Moabits with cruel war, and destroyed two of their armies with the sword, and the rest of the multitude made tributarie; which was 24 miles, 2 Sam. 8. 1 Chr. 19. He returned thence to Ierusalem with great triumph and joy, 24 miles. In the 13 yeare of his raigne, Anno mundi, 2903, and before Christ, 1065, he made an expedition vnto Zoba, which Iosephus calleth Sophenam, and is in Armenia, neere to Masia or Mount Taurus, 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, of which you may reade before. Dauid in this place woon a memorable battell against Hadad-Ezer the King thereof, neere to the riuer Euphrates; he tooke 700 horse and 20000 foot, burnt their cha∣riots, tooke 100 castles, conquered all the Townes and Countrey round about, and went away with a great bootie, as well of Gold as siluer, brasse, and other things; which brasse for the excellen∣cie thereof was like vnto gold, and (as Iosephus saith) afterwards Solomon made the molten sea of it. When Gadarezer King of the Syrians (he that built that famous citie of Damascus) heard of the ouerthrow of Hadad-Ezer, hee sent a great army to his aid; which King Dauid neere to the riuer Euphrates smote with the sword, so that 20000 of them were slaine, and he carried away a glorious victorie, extending his gouernment from Ierusalem 600 miles towards the North, that is, into Armenia, and beyond the riuer Euphrates, and made these two nations tributary vnto him, 2 Sam. 8. 1 Chr. 19. After Dauid had woon these 2 memorable victories neere Eu∣phrates, he went thence with all his army towards the South, and inuaded the land of Syria; in which journey Ioram the sonne of Tohi King of Antiochia (which citie at this time was called He∣math) met Dauid with gifts and presents in the name of his Fa∣ther, returning him many thankes because he had destroied the common enemy Hadad-Ezer, and by strong hand subdued and quelled the furie of that mighty tyrant, who was also a trouble
and vexation to the Kingdome of Antiochia. Dauid entertained this message kindly, & thankfully receiued his gifts, (which was of gold, siluer and fine brasse) and so gaue Ioram an acceptable di∣spatch, and from thence with his army went to Damascus, the Metropolitan citie of Syria, where in the valley of salt he got a great victory, in which 18000 Syrians were slaine, and soon after the Citie of Damascus taken; in which Dauid placed a garrison, and compelled them to pay tribute, 2 Sam. 8. This was distant from the kingdome of Soba 520 miles. From Damascus he went with his army into the land of the Ammonites, 100 miles in the way that leadeth out of Syria to Ierusalem, all which he conquered, and all the cities and townes thereabouts, and compelled them to pay tribute, 2 Sam. 8. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was 60 miles, and all the bootie that he had gotten in his journey he dedicated vnto the Lord, 2 Sam. 8. A while after, hee with his army made an incursion into the land of Idumaea, and compelled the inhabitants to pay tribute. Moreouer, he destroied the citie of Midian the Metropolitane of that countrey, of which you may reade before: it was distant from Ierusalem 160 miles towards the South. So that the extent of Dauids kingdome from the North to the South, was 800 miles, euen from the kingdome of Soba to the Red sea: and from the East to the West 120 miles; from Tyrus and Sydon reaching to Damascus. Thus by the singular blessing of God he obtained a spacious and powerfull Empire, 1 Sam. 8. 1 Reg. 11. 1 Chr. 19. He made his expedition into Idumaea about the 14 yeare of his raigne. From Midian in Idumaea, hee returned with great glory and praise to Ierusalem, which was 160 miles. In the 14 yere of his raigne, and in the yere of the world 2904, and before Christ 1064, Nahas King of the Ammonites died, and Haron his sonne succeeded him: this man contemptuously abu∣sed the messengers of Dauid, 2 Sam. 10. and to justifie that injury he gathered an army out of Soba, Siria, and Mesopotamia, euen a mighty Host, to oppose Dauid; who in the 15 yeare of his go∣uernment met him with his Armie at Helam, some twenty miles
from Ierusalem where he obtained a notable victorie, and destroi∣ed 700 chariots, and 40000 horse, 1 Chr. 20. Dauid after this, with great applause of the people was enter∣tained into Ierusalem, which was 20 miles distant, where being puft vp with prosperity, he forgat his former pietie and sanctitie, and by degrees fell into vnlawfull actions and vnjust desires: whence it hapned that soone after he committed adulterie with Bathseba: & after that, to hide his fault, caused her husband to be slaine. This was kept secret, till the Lord by Nathan sharply repre∣hends him, laies before him what hee was and what his present estate is, from whence that came, and then concludes, that he is most vnthankfull, carelesse, and negligent towards God and man, in committing those insolencies; neither left he there, but told him that God would seuerely punish him for his offence, which after hapned as you may reade, 1 Sa. 11.12.14.17. Dauid being nipt in his conscience with this sharpe reprehension, fell into great lamentation, the extremitie of whose passions may very well appeare in the poenitentiall Psalmes which at this time and soone after hee wrot, and left to future ages. After this, about the end of Summer he gathered an army, and went into the land of the Ammonites, some 64 miles, where hee took the Metropolitan citie, (which at that time was called Rab∣ba, because of the multitude of citizens that were in it; but after being restored by Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Aegypt, hee cal∣led it after his own, Philadelphia) & there took the crowne from the head of the king of the Ammonites, which weighed a Ta∣lent ofHow much this was you may read after in the quanti∣tie of weights. gold, being (as Iosephus saith) richly adorned with faire Sardonicke stones, of which you may reade in 2 Sam. 12. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, which is 64 miles, where hee married Bathseba, and by her had foure sonnes, Simeon, Sobab, Nathan, and Solomon, 1 Chr. 3. Soone after this, Ammon defloured his sister Thamar: not long after that, his son Absalon killed his brother Ammon, beeing then about 18 yeares of age; which Dauid tooke so hainously, that he would not suffer him to come into his sight for three yeares, 1 Sam. 13. Then Ioab by the subtiltie of the woman of Tekoa, reconciled him to the king his father: yet neuerthelesse, he came not to his court of two yeares
after. This Absolon was a goodly man, affable, for which cause enen at that time the people began to affect him. Afterward in the yeare of the world 2950, and before Christ 1408, Absolon being then about 25 yeares of age, moued sedi∣tion against his father. A matter remarkeable, that although he had slaine his owne brother, being disgraced and absent from the Court almost fiue yeres, yet within short time after, he so strong∣ly vnited the affection of the people to him, that he constrained Dauid (standing in feare of his greatnesse, all his former acts and worthy victories notwithstanding) to forsake his owne citie, and for safety to fly to the mount of Oliues, beeing three quarters of a mile from the citie. There he staied a while to see the condition of the tumult, but necessitie constrained him to take his way to Bahuzim. And as he was going, Zimri the sonne of Gesa of the house of Saul, cursed him, euery mans enemy then making himselfe apparant when he is in aduersitie, and his best friends commonly forsake him. From thence hee went to Iordan, 14 miles, where the Priests Ionathan and Ahinaaz brought him certaine intelligence of that wicked and peruerse councell of Achitophel, a man in those times famous for his wisdome, but perfidious in his actions, as com∣monly such are that hope after honours, or seeke to benefit them∣selues by innouation and change. After he had intelligence hereof, hee went ouer Iordan with those few men that he had, & with all possible speed went to Be∣thabara, some 16 miles from Ierusalem toward the North-East. At this place Ioshuah led the children of Israel through Iordan on drie ground, Ios. 3.4. and here Iohn the Baptist taught, and bap∣tised Christ. Mat. 1. & Luke 3. From thence hee went to Makanaim, which is twentie eight miles, where hee sent forth his army by bands against Absolon, who at this time had assembled a great host neere the Wood Ephra∣im, not far from that place where Ioshuah woon a memorable bat∣tell against the Canaanites: and that the place might bee made more famous, Dauids men, though few in number, gaue Absalon and his host as great. Thus Absalon being left in danger, to saue himself fled: but in his flight the haire of his head being long, and
blowne with the wind, tooke hold of the branch of a tree, by which he hanged betweene heauen and earth, as vnworthy of ei∣ther: and Ioab, who but a little before was his friend, in that very place with three darts put him to death, a just end for so vnjust a man. 1 Sam. 18. Dauid notwithstanding tooke the death of Absolon maruellous heauily, till by Ioab he was recalled from that griefe; and then in the company of Barzillai, and of his sonne Chimea, of Mephibo∣seth the sonne of Ionathan, and Zeba his seruant, Shimei also that before curst him, (who to leaue a memorable token of a base Si∣cophant) after this victory came first downe to craue pardon for his offence, with many others, went along with him from Maka∣naim to Bethabara, which was 28 miles. To this place there came a great multitude of people to meet Dauid, 2 Sam. 19. This Barzillai was one of the eighteene that held the principalitie of the citie of the Giliadites, and had a sonne called Chimea, whom Dauid tooke with him to Ierusalem, that he might make euident his thankefulnesse towards him for that courtesie which he had receiued of his father. From Bethabara Dauid passed Iordan, and went backe to Gil∣gal, which was 4 miles, 2 Sam. 19. From thence he went to Ierusalem, which was 12 miles, in the same yeare that he was exiled by his sonne, which was about the 13 yeare of his raigne. The next yere Saba the sonne of Bicri, ta∣king example of Absolon, and obseruing the mutabilitie of the peoples affections, moued a sedition against Dauid, but Ioab his captain ouercame him, 2 Sam. 20. After this, there followed three yeares of famine. About the end of the third yeare of famine, and in the 34 yeare of his raigne, Dauid went to Iabes Gilead, which was 52 miles, to fetch the bones of Saul and Ionathan, to bury them in the sepulchre of his fathers, 2 Sam. 21. From Iabes in Gilead, Dauid brought the bones and relickes of King Saul and Ionathan his sonne, to Gibeah of Saul, which was 52 miles, and there he honourably buried them in the Sepulchre of his father Kish. 2 Sam. 21. From thence Dauid returned to Ierusalem, which was 4 miles. In the 35 yere of his raigne he went forth to fight against the
Philistines, neer to the Leuiticall towne of Nob, or Nobe, which is 12 miles from Ierusalem, vpon the borders of the countries of the Philistines, in the tribe of Dan. From thence he returned backe againe to Ierusalem, which is 12 miles. So all the Trauels of Dauid were 3904 miles. The Description of the places to which Dauid trauelled. OF the cities of Socho, Asekah, Gibeon, Gibeah of Saul, Nob, Ziph, Moan, Engaedi, Arimathea, Gath, the Caue of Odul∣lam, Kegila, Paran, Apheck, and Makanaim, you may reade before in the trauels of Saul, and the Iudges of Israel. Of Ziclag. ZIclag was a towne in the kingdome of Iuda, neere to the ri∣uer Besor, 40 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest; not far from Gaza, a citie of the Philistines. In Saint Ieroms time it was but a small towne, 1 Sam. 27. Of Sur. SVr is a desart in the wildernesse of Arabia Petraea, extending it selfe from the vtmost borders of Iudaea, to the Red Sea, euen vnto Aegypt: and signifieth, a Bulwarke, or place of defence; and is deriued of Schor, which signifies, To see, or contemplate: be∣cause from Bulwarks men may see into neighbouring countries. This was a place of defence of the Aegyptians, Gen. 16.20.25. Ex. 15. 1 Sam. 15.17. Of Sunem. THis was a city in the tribe of Issacher, 48 miles from Ierusa∣lem towards the North, not farre from Naim, where Christ raised the widowes sonne to life, Luke 7. So did Elizaeus the Pro∣phet also, 2 Kings 4. And seemeth to take the name of a Purple or Scarlet colour; being deriued of Schanah, which signifies, He hath changed and interated a colour.
Of Gazer. GAzer is a towne lying vpon the borders of the Philistines, not farre from Ekron, 16 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Of this you may reade before. Of Sichor. THe riuer of Sichor was in the desart of Sur not far from Rhi∣nocura (of which it tooke the name) and runneth thence into the Mediterraneam Sea: from whence also it is called the riuer of Aegypt, 1 Chron. 13. It is 72 miles from Ierusalem Southwest∣ward. Of the Hebrewes it is called Schichor, or Siohor, because of the blacknesse of the water. Of Bahurim. BAhurim was a town in the tribe of Benjamin, a mile and some∣thing more from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. To this place Phaltiel followed his wife Michael, 2 Sam. 3. Here also Shi∣mei cursed Dauid, 2 Sam. 16. At this time it is a faire castle strong∣ly fortified, standing in a high place. Neere vnto it in the valley just in the Kings way, there is a stone called Bohen, taking that name of Bohen the sonne of Reuben, and is of an extraordinary greatnesse, shining like vnto marble of this you may reade in the 15 of Ioshuah, Bahurim or Bachurim, signifies, A citie of electors, being deriued of Bachar, To elect or chuse. Of Dauids name. DAuid is as much to say as, my deere, my beloued, my chosen one: be∣ing deriued of Dod, which signifies, a friend, or beloued. For which cause, he was said to be a man after Gods owne heart. How Dauid was a type of Christ. DAuid represented Christ diuers waies, First, in his name, (he was beloued) so God testifies of Christ, This is my beloued sonne in whom I am well pleased. Secondly, in the place of his birth, he was borne at Bethlem, so was Christ. Thirdly, in his imploy∣ment,
he was a shepheard; so was Christ: I am the true Shepheard; for a good Shepheard giueth his life for his Sheepe, &c. Fourthly, in his musicke; Dauid was cunning vpon the harp, and by that comfor∣ted the afflicted spirit of Saul: so Christ by the musick and har∣monie of his doctrine (the glad tydings of saluation) comforteth the afflicted members of his Church. Fiftly, Dauid got his glory and preferment by the death of Goliah: so Christ was glorified by conquering Death and the Diuell. Sixtly, Dauid was persecuted by Saul, and pursued from one place to another, so that he had not where to hide his head with safety; so Christ was persecuted by his own countrymen the Iews, shut out from the society of man; and as he said, Mat. 8. The Foxes haue holes, and the Birds haue nests; but the Son of man hath not where to hide his head. Seuenthly, in the dangers that Dauid sustained, by Gods prouidence he was merci∣fully deliuered: so Christ was inclosed and in danger of the Iews at Nazareth, Luke 4. in Ierusalem; in the Temple also. Ioh. 8. but he escaped them al, because then his time was not come, Io. 7.8. Eight∣ly, as Absolon rebelled against Dauid, being his father; so the Iews rebelled against Christ, although hee was their Creator: accor∣ding to that of Esay 61. I haue fed and brought vp children, but they haue forsaken me. Ninthly, as Dauid fled to Mount Olivet for re∣fuge, being brought to a streight; so Christ vpon Mount Olivet (his heart being prest with an intollerable agonie) fled to his Fa∣ther by praier, for comfort in that extremitie. Tenthly, as all the friends and familiars of Dauid forsooke him at such time as Abso∣lon rebelled against him, and followed him with persecutions, mocks and taunts; so Christ at such time as Iudas betrayed him into the hands of the Iewes, was forsaken of all his followers, and many of those which a little before he had done good vnto, moc∣ked and derided him as he was vpon the Crosse. Lastly, as Dauid was restored, notwithstanding the former miseries and troubles, to his antient glory and eminencie; so Christ after he had suffe∣red the due punishment for sin, death, and (before that) extteame miserie; yet at length conquered both, and by his diuine power restored himselfe to his former estate, eternall glory.
The Trauels of ABNER, one of Sauls Captaines. HEe went with King Saul from Gibeah to the Wildernes of Ziph, which was 22 miles. Here he was rebuked by Dauid for his negligence. From thence he returned to Gibeah, 22 miles, 1 Sam. 31. From thence he trauelled to the hill Gilboa, where Saul killed himselfe, 40 miles. From thence he went to Machanaim, where he made Ishbosheth (Sauls son) King, who kept his court there seuen years; 16 miles. 2 Sam. 2. From thence hee went to Gibeon, where hee slew Asahel, Ioabs brother, in battell. Which was 44 miles, 2 Sam. 2. From thence he went ouer Iordan to Bythron, 28 miles. From thence he went backe to Machanaim, 16 miles, 2 Sam. 2 Lastly, he went thence to Hebron to Dauid, and made a Coue∣nant with him; where he was treacherously slain by Ioab: & was 68 miles. So all the trauels of Abner were 256 miles. Of Bithron. BIthron or Betharan was a town beyond Iordan in the tribe of Gad, some 28 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, lying between Dibon and Iordan. It taketh the name from a House of singing; beeing deriued of Baith, which signifieth a House; and Ron, He sung ioyfully. The Trauels of IOAB. IOAB Dauids Captain was the son of Zerviah, Dauids sister: for he had two, Zerviah and Abogale; Zerviah had Ioab, Abishas, and Asael. Abigal had onely Amasa, all which were great men in King Dauids time. Now when Ioab heard that Abner had brought downe his army to Gibeon, hee went from Hebron thi∣ther, which was 24 miles: and there his brother Asahel was slain, 2 Sam. 2.
From thence he went to Bethlehem, 16 miles, where he buried his brother, 2 Sam. 2. From thence he returned to Hebron, 20 miles. Here vnder the gates of the city he traiterously killed Abner, 2 Sam. 3. From thence he went with Dauid to Ierusalem, where he won Sion, and draue thence the blinde and the lame, being 82 miles. From thence he went with his Army against the Ammonites and Syrians, whom he conquered in a cruel fight, 60 miles, 1 Sam. cap. 10. From thence he returned backe to Ierusalem, 60 miles. From thence he went with Dauid into Idumea, 160 miles from Ierusalem Southward; there he won the towne of Midian, & con∣quered the Idumaeans or Edomites, 2 Sam. 8. From thence he returned to Ierusalem with his Army, beeing 160 miles. From thence hee went and besieged Rabba the metropolitan city of the Ammonites, beeing 64 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward. Here Vriah was slain, 2 Sam. 11. From thence he returned to Ierusalem with K. Dauid, 64 miles From thence he went into the kingdom of Gesur, which lieth beyond Iordan vpon Mount Libanus, by the towne of Caesarea Philippi, some 80 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. This countrey was called Trachonites. From this land Ioab brought Absolon again to Ierusalem, 2 Sam. 14. From thence he returned backe againe with Absolon to Ierusa∣lem, 88 miles. From thence he went with Dauid (when he fled from his sonne Absolon) to Machanaim, being 44 miles. Not far from hence he slew Absolon, 2 Sam. 18. From thence he came again with King Dauid to Ierusalem, 44 miles, 2 Sam. 10. From thence he went to Gibeah, where he killed Amasa, which was 4 miles. From thence he went to the town of Abel-Bethmaacha in the tribe of Nepthali, being about 88 miles. This town he straightly besieged. From thence he went again to Ierusalem, 88 miles.
Afterward he went, as Dauid commanded him, to number the people at Aroer a towne beyond Iordan, which was 24 miles, 2 Sam. 24. From thence he went to Iaezer, which is 16 miles. From thence going through the land of Gilead, and passing by the territories of the lower countrey of Hadsi, hee came to the town of Dan, neere to the place where the fountains of Iordan are which is accounted 116 miles. From thence he went to that famous mart town Sidon, which was 24 miles. From that great towne Sidon he went to the walls of Tyre, to which place great multitudes of ships resorted; which was sixe∣teene miles. From thence he went toward the South til he came to the city Beersaba, which was the vtmost bounds of the Holy land South∣westward, and was reckoned 132 miles. From thence he returned backe to Ierusalem where he deliue∣red to Dauid the number of those that were chosen souldiers, 2. Sam. 24. but the Lord strooke the country and city of Ierusalem with a great plague, because hee did contrary to his command, 2 Sam. 24. So all the trauels of Ioab were 1348 miles. The description of the places to which he trauelled. MAny of those cities mentioned in the trauels of Ioab, are al∣ready described and set forth; therefore I account it need∣lesse in this place againe to repeat them, but only such townes as yet haue not bin mentioned. Of Gesur. GEsur was a country neere to Caesarea Philippi, in the land of Basan beyond Iordan, neere Libanus, in the Tetrarchie Tra∣chonitides, 88 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. With the King of this country Absolon remained in banishment for 3 yeres space, after he had slain his brother Ammon; and with vs may be termed the vally of Oxen, 2 Sam. 13.
Of Hadsi. THe lower country of Hadsi stood neere to the city Corazin in the halfe tribe of Manasses, 52 miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the Northeast, and signifies a new land; beeing deriued of Chadasch, that is, New. Of the fountaine Rogel. THis was neere Ierusalem Eastward; to which place Ionathan and Ahimaas (Dauids intelligencers) brought him newes of Absalons counsels and intentions, 2 Sam. 17. It seemeth that tra∣uellers vsually washed their feet in it, from whence it was called the Wel of feet; beeing deriued from Raegael, signifying a Foot. Neere to this place was the stone Zochaeleth, where Adoniah (at such time as he affected the kingdome, contrary to his fathers li∣king) called an assembly and made a great feast, 1 Reg. 1. The Trauels of Baena and Rechab. THese two went out of the tribe of Benjamin ouer Iordan to Machanaim, 40 miles. There they murthered their master king Ishbosheth in his chamber as he lay vpon his bed, and af∣ter cut off his head. The head they brought to King Dauid to Hebron, 68 miles. But Dauid was not pleased with their treacherie, wherefore hee caused them both to be put to death. So their trauels were 108 miles. The Trauels of Absalon. ABsalon was borne in Hebron, and went with his father to Ie∣rusalem, 22 miles, 2 Sam. 13. From thence he went to Baalhazor, 8 miles, where hee caused his brother Ammon to be slain. From thence for feare of his father he fled into the land of Ge∣sur, 88 miles, 2 Sam. 14.
From thence he came backe with Ioab to Ierusalem, which was 88 miles, 2 Sam. 14. From thence he went to Hebron, 22 miles, and made himselfe King, and rebelled against his father. From thence he went backe againe to Ierusalem, which is 22 miles. There he lay with his fathers Concubines, 2 Sam. 16. From thence he pursued his father to Machanaim, 40 miles, & there was hanged by the haire in an oke tree, where Ioab put him to death, 2 Sam. 18. So all the trauels of Absolon were 290 miles. Of Baal-hazor. IN this city Absolon made a great feast for his sheepe-sherers, and inuited all his brothers to it, where he caused Ammon to be slain, because he had abused his sister Thamar. It lieth in the way some 8 miles from Ierusalem toward the North-East, as you go to Iericho, neere to mount Ephraim, 2 Sam. 13. and is deriued of Baal, which signifies a Lord or husband; and Chazir, a Den or caue. Of the name ABSOLON. ABSOLON signifieth a Father of peace, although he was the author of all discord and sedition against his father. The Trauels of the wise woman of Thecoa. THis woman went from Thecoa to Ierusalem, 8 miles; and spake with King Dauid; and with her sweet words shee per∣suaded him that he would recall his sonne out of exile, who then remained in Gesur, 2 Sam. 14. Of Thecoa. THecoa was a city in the tribe of Iuda, some 8 miles from Ie∣rusalem toward the Southeast: neere this city Iosaphat by praier and the sound of Trumpets, without drawing sword, got a memorable victory; and for that cause it signifieth the sound of a
Trumpet. In this place the prophet Amos dwelt, and there lieth buried; whose sepulchre was to be seene 400 yeares after Christ, as S. Ierom obserueth. It was from Bethlem Iuda 6 miles. Neere to Techoa was the lake Aspher, where Ionathan and Simon (Iudas Machabeus brothers) pitcht their tents, 1 Mach. 9. Of this city you may reade, Ier. 6. Am. 1. 2 Chr. 11. Of ACHITOPHEL. THis perfideous and wicked man was borne in the towne of Gilo, not far from Hebron and Debir in the tribe of Iudah, Ios. 15. 2 Sam. 15. 20 miles from Ierusalem Southeastward; who when his counsell would not take place, he went home to his own house, and there desperatly hanged himselfe. The Trauels of wicked Shimei, SHimei went from Bahurim (where he cursed King Dauid) to Bathabara vpon the riuer Iordan, which was 18 miles; where he got pardon of Dauid, 2 Sam. 19. From thence he went backe with King Dauid to Gilgall, foure miles, 2 Sam. 19. From thence he went with King Dauid to Ierusalem, 12 miles, 2 Sam. 19. From thence he went to Bahurim, 3 miles. From Bahurim King Solomon sent for him again to Ierusalem, 3 miles. There he was constrained to build him an house, and not to depart thence vpon pain of death, 1 Reg. 2. But Shimei transgressing this commandment of the king, went to Gath a city of the Philistims, 12 miles. From thence hee returned back againe to Ierusalem, 12 miles, where he was slain by the command of King Solomon, in the third yeare of his reign, 1 Reg. 2. So all the trauels of Shimei were 104 miles.
The Books of Kings and Chronicles. Of ABISHAG the Virgin that lay with Dauid. THis Maid was accounted the fairest in all Israel, for which cause she was brought to Ierusalem for King Dauid, that she might lie with him in his old age to procure heat: she was born at Sunem, a town some 44 miles from Ierusalem, 1 Reg. 1. Of Sunem you may read before in the trauels of Dauid & Saul. The Trauels of King Solomon. SOlomon the son of Dauid King of Israel entred vpon the full gouernment of the kingdome of Israel, An. mundi 2931. and before Christ 1037. when he was about 20 yeares old. Af∣ter, he went from Ierusalem to Gilgal, 4 miles, and there offered vpon the altar which Moses had made, 1000 burnt offerings, 1 Reg. 3. 2 Chr. 1. From thence he went backe to Ierusalem, which was 4 miles, and built a Temple to the Lord in mount Moriah, 1 Reg. 6. This was begun about the fourth yere of his reign, and 480 yeres after the children of Israel came out of Egypt, in the moneth Ziph, which answereth to our May. So that the Temple began to bee built in Anno mundi 2934. and before Christ 1034. To the buil∣ding whereof Hiram King of Tyre sent Cedar trees from Mount Libanus, 120 miles, to Ierusalem, 1 Reg. 5. 2 Chr. 2. This Temple Solomon within plaited ouer with pure gold, and set with preti∣ous stones, and finished it in the month of Nouember, about the eleuenth yeare of his reigne, 1 Reg. 6. The dedication whereof was about the twelfth yeare of his reigne, and in the 32 yeare of his age, Anno Mundi, 2942, and before Christ, 1026. The
Temple being finished, he began to build his owne house, which was 13 yeares a building, and was finished about the 44 yeare of his age, and in the 24 of his reign, 1 Reg. 7.8. After 20 years, in which time he had finished the house of the Lord, and his own house in Mount Sion; that he might manifest his thankfulnesse to the King of Tyre, he went to Cabul a city in the tribe of Ashur, some 80 miles Northward, where hee gaue to the aforesaid Hiram 20 towns or cities, with al the country round about: wherefore King Hiram called this Cabul, that is, Displea∣sant and dirty, 2 Reg. 9. You may reade of Cabul, Ios. 19. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, 88 miles. From thence he went to Hazor, and restored the city, which was 44 miles. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles. From thence he went to Megiddo, which is not farre from Ies∣reel in the tribe of Manasses, 44 miles from Ierusalem toward the North. This city Solomon fortified, 1 Reg. 9. and Iosiah King of Iuda a long time after was there wounded to death, 2 Reg. 9. From Megiddo he returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles. After that Pharaoh King of Egypt had conquered Gaser, and destroyed it with fire, hee gaue it to his Daughter the Wife of Solomon, who rebuilt it. This towne was scituated in the tribe of Ephraim, 28 miles from Ierusalem Northward, 1 Reg. 9. From Gaser Solomon returned backe again to Ierusalem, being 28 miles. From thence he went to the higher Bethoron, which he forti∣fied; and stood twenty eight miles from Ierusalem Northward; 2 Chr. 8. From thence he went to the lower Bethoron, 16 miles from the vpper toward the South, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8. From the lower Bethoron hee went to Ierusalem, which was 8 miles. After, Solomon built the city Belath, which was 12 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8. From thence he returned back to Ierusalem, 12 miles, and it is very like that Solomon often visited those towns that he had built and restored.
From Ierusalem he went to Hemath (afterward called Antio∣chia) which was 320 miles, and compassed it about with a wall, fortified it, and afterward constrained all the kingdomes therea∣bout to be obedient to his gouernment, 2 Chr. 8. From thence he went with great state into the kingdom of Zo∣ba, which is 600 miles, and fortified all the great cities & castles of that country, that with the greater facility they might oppose the inuasions of neighbouring countries. From thence hee returned to that famous city Thamar, which was also called the city of the Palmes, 400 miles: this he rebuilt and fortified, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8. From thence he went to Ierusalem, which is 388 miles. From thence hee went to Ezeongaber neere the Red sea in the countrey of Idumaea, where he built a company of stately ships, and sent them to India to fetch gold, which was 176 miles from Ierusalem Southward, 1 Reg. 9. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which is 176 miles. But of his great prosperitie and aboundance of riches he grew proud, (for he excelled all the Kings neere him) and gaue himselfe to vnlawfull pleasures; he tooke vnto him 300 Concubines, and 70 wiues, by whose persuasion he began to worship the gods of the Gentiles, which idolatry was euill in the sight of the Lord. And after he had reigned forty yeares (which was about the sixtieth of his age) he died, and was buried by his father Dauid in Mount Sion the city of Dauid, An. mundi 2770, and before Christ 998. So all the trauels of Solomon were 2544 miles. The description of the places to which he trauelled. Of Gazer you may reade before in the trauels of Dauid. Of Bethoron. THe vpper and the lower Bethoron were two Cities in the tribe of Ephraim, built by Saaerah the daughter of Ephraim, 1 Chron. 7. The inferiour Bethoron was not farre from the Castle
of Emmaus, 8 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest. The superior was 20 miles distant toward the North. These towns So∣lomon repaired. Neere to the lower Bethoron the Lord put the enemies of Ioshuah to flight with thunder and haile, Ios. 10. Here also Iudas Machabeus ouercame the army of Antiochus 1 Mac. 3. Here also he put Nicanor to death, 1 Mac. 7. and signifieth A white house; being deriued of Beth, which signifies an house; and Chor, he hath made white. Of Baaelath. THis is a city twelue miles from Ierusalem Northwestward, in the tribe of Dan. This city Solomon repaired at such time as he fell in loue with many women: from whence it seemeth to take his name: for Baaeleth signifieth, his beloued Lady. Of Thamar. THamar, Tadmor, or Palmira, stood partly in the desart of Si∣ria, and partly in a fruitfull soile; being compassed about on the one side with a Wood, on the other with faire and pleasant fields. It was the Metropolitan city of all Syria, not farre from Euphrates, some 388 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward; and as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 25. Although it lay betwixt two mighty Empires, Rome and Parthia, yet it was subiect to neither; fairely scituated, a free city, adorned with fair and sumptuous buildings, and contented with their own gouernment. The wildernesses cal∣led after this towns name, Palmarnae, or the desarts of the Palms, extend themselues to Petra the metropolitan city of Arabia Pe∣traea, and to the borders of Arabia foelix, one daies journey from Euphrates, two from the vpper part of Syria, and six from Baby∣lon, as Iosephus obserueth, Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 5. This city Solomon made tributary to him, and fortified it with strong walls, 1 Reg. 9. Of Ezeongaber you may reade before. The Typicall signification of Solomon. SOLOMON is as much as Frederick in high-Dutch, which signifieth a Peace-maker; being deriued of the Hebrew word
Schelomoh, or Schalom, to bring glad tydings of peace. Typically representing Christ the Prince of peace, who hath reconciled vs with his heauenly Father, and merited an eternall place of peace and happinesse for all such as trust in him, Esay 9. And as Solomon built vp the Temple of the Lord with great majestie and glorie; so Christ hath built vp that heauenly Temple the Church of God, and adorned it with the gifts and graces of his holy Spirit, in this world, that so it might be capable of eternall glory in the world to come, 2 Cor. 6. The Trauels of Solomons Ships. THis Navy of Solomons went vnto Ophir, that is India, which was accounted from the Mart town 4800 miles. From India they returned backe again, 4800 miles: so all their trauels were 9600 miles. This journy was finished in 3 yeares to and again; so that eue∣rie yeare they went 3200 miles, and brought home plenty of gold siluer, pretious stones, Ebony, &c. Of India. MOses called this country Havilah, Gen. 2. and Ios. li. Antiq. 8. c. 7. Ophir: which name (saith he) it took of two brothers so called, which inhabited and gouerned that country all along the riuer Ganges. But more modern writers deriue it from Indus a ri∣uer passing through it. It is a spatious and fruitfull country, plea∣sant to inhabit; and as Pomponius saith, hath in it 5000 cities, be∣ing diuided into two parts, the outward and inward. The Trauels of the Queene of Saba. FRom Saba in Ethiopia she came to Ierusalem, 964 miles. From Ierusalem she returned backe again, which was 964 miles. So all her trauels were 1928 miles.
Of Aethiopia. THis Countrey by the Hebrewes is called Chus, of Chus the son of Cham, who was the son of Noah: and after, Aethiopia, (ab astu torrida) because of the great heate wherewith oftentimes the habitable land and people, as also the wildernesse were sorely scorched and burned: for it is scituated in the third part of the world called Africa, lying vnder the torrid Zone, and the Aequa∣tor, which two by common experience are found to bee extreme hot. Of Saba. SAba is a metropolitan city in Ethiopia, lying beyond Egypt, 846 miles from Ierusalem towards the South: and tooke the name from a certain pretious stone called Achates, wherin might plainly be discerned in certain distinct colors, the rising of foun∣tains, the chanels of riuers, high mountains, and somtimes of cha∣riots and horses drawing them. It is reported, That Pyrrhus King of the Epirots had one of them, wherein was liuely represented the nine Muses, and Apollo playing on the Viol, portrayed by na∣turall staines and colours, so artificially, as if they had bin don by some curious workman. Of this stone you may reade more in Pli∣ny, li. 37. ca. 1.10. It was first found in Achates a riuer of Sicilia, whence it tooke the name. Afterward in India and Phrygia, and of the Hebrewes was called Schaeba or Saba. In this city that Queen dwelt who came to heare Solomons wisedom, and gaue him for a present 120 talents of pure gold, which at 3 pounds an ounce comes to 270000 pounds sterling. Afterwards Cambyses King of Persia ouercame it and all the country round about it, and after his sisters name called it Meroës. It is a stately city to this day, scituated in a plain country, and compassed about with the riuer Nilus like an Island, being now called Elsaba, hauing some affi∣nitie to the antient name Saba. The Inhabitants of this towne goe naked, all but their priuy parts, which they couer either with Silke, Cotton, or some more costly matter; and are of a blacke colour, which as some thinke,
hapneth by reason of the extreme heat. The land also is maruel∣lously scortched, and turned in many places to sand and dust. So that the country is thereby wonderfull barren. About Meroes or Saba, which is made fruitful by the inunda∣tion of Nilus, there is found plenty of salt, brasse, yron, and some pretious stones. Their sheep, goats, oxen, and other cattell are of lesse stature than in other Countries. Their dogs are very fierce and cruell. In times past there were mighty princes that had the gouerne∣ment and command of it, and the Country round about it. But after (as Pliny saith, lib. 6. cap. 29.) it was in the jurisdiction and gouernment of Queenes, who for their noble resolutions & cou∣rage were called Candaces. One of which name in Tiberius the Emperours time was famous, both for the extent of her domini∣ons (in which she exceeded all the rest of her predecessors) as al∣so in regard of her manly presence and noble spirit. The Eunuch which Philip baptised, Acts 8. was Treasurer or Chamberlain to this Queene: and it is to be thought, By him the doctrine of the Gospell of Christ was first made knowne in Saba, and in the countrey of Aethiopia; which afterwards was more largely pro∣pagated and dispersed by the Evangelist S. Mathew, who taught there. This city lieth to the longitude of 61 degrees and 30 scruples, & in the eleuation of the Pole Artick to the latitude 16 degrees and 25 scruples. So that it seemes the inhabitants haue two win∣ters & two summers, or rather a continual summer, because their winter is much hotter than our summer. But when the Sunne at∣taineth to the 15 degree of Taurus and Leo, and in the Dog daies, it then lies perpendicular ouer that country, and neither their bo∣dies nor houses giue any shadowes. In the 61 of Esay it is said, They shall come from Saba, and bring gold & frankincense to praise the Lord. From whence some some haue concluded, That those wise men which came vnto the childe Ie∣sus, and brought Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, were Aethiopi∣ans, and came thence. But this agreeth not well with the words of Mathew, ca. 2. where it is written, That the wise men came out of the East, that is, from the rising of the Sun, to Ierusalem. For
Saba, according to our Sauiors words, Mat. 12. lieth towards the South; for he saith, The Queen of the South (that is, of Saba) shall come forth in the day of Iudgement against this generation, and condemne it, for she came from the end of the world to heare the wisedome of Solo∣mon, &c. But if Saba lie vpon the South, as here it plainely ap∣peareth, then it must needs follow they came not thence, but ra∣ther from Persia, which from Ierusalem lies Eastward. For at Su∣sa the metropolis of that country, there was an Academy for the whole kingdom; in which were chiefly studied Diuinity, the Ma∣thematickes, and History. So that it is likely, by their Art they might attain to the knowledge of this diuine Mysterie, and from thence come to Ierusalem, which was 520 miles Eastward. Ther∣fore this place of the Prophet Esay is rather to be referred to the propagation of the church through the whole world, where some of euery nation shall bring presents vnto the Lord. There is also another Saba in Arabia Foelix, so called from Zaeba the son of Chus, the son of Cham, the sonne of Noah; and it is distant from Ierusalem 1248 miles toward the Southeast. In He∣brew it signifies the city of Drunkennesse, or of Mirth; but with the Syrians, Antiquitie. Some would haue it in the Arabian tongue to signifie a Mysterie. But S. Ierom interprets it, To sound their conuersion. It is the metropolitan City of Arabia Foelix, and by Strabo, lib. 6. called Meriaba, being scituated in a high and pleasant mountain full of fruitfull trees. There inhabiteth in it the King of that countrey (a mightie Prince) his Gouernors, and most of such as haue authority vnder him. The land is called the Kingdome of the Sabaeans, but gene∣rally, Arabia Foelix, because of the fertilitie of the place; for it yeeldeth twice euery yeare great plenty of Frankincense, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Balsam, and other odoriferous herbs. The tree out of which this Myrrh commeth is fiue cubits high, hairy, and full of prickles, and when you cut the barke there commeth forth a bit∣ter gumme, wherewith if you anoint a dead body, it will conti∣nue long without rotting. The frankincense also that is found there, droppeth from Cedar trees like a glewie substance, and so congealeth into a Gum. This happeneth twice euery yeare, and
according vnto the season it changeth colour: in the Spring it is red, in the Summer white. This is the best Frankincense in all A∣rabia Foelix. Through the whole country there is a very delecta∣ble smell, by reason of the Myrrh, Frankincense and Cinnamon that is found in it; insomuch that if the winde blowes amongst the trees it carrieth the smell vnto the red sea, and they that saile can easily discerne the sweetnesse of the aire. There is gold also found there, very fine and pure, insomuch as for the goodnesse of it, it is called Arabian gold. The Phoenix is found there, of which there is but one in the world. Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 35. describes her to be as big as an Eagle, with a list of feathers like gold about her necke, the rest are of a purple colour; therefore from Phoenicea and the purple colour of her wings shee is called Phoenix. Shee hath a tuft of feathers vpon her head like vnto a crowne. Shee li∣ueth 660 yeares, at the end of which time she buildeth her a nest of Cassia, Cinnamon, Calamus, and other pretious Gummes and herbs, which the Sun by the extremitie of the heate and the wa∣uing of her wings fires; and she taking delight in the sweetnesse of the sauor, houers so long ouer it, that she burnes her selfe in her owne nest. Within a while after, out of the marrow of her bones, and the ashes of her body, there groweth a worme, which by lit∣tle and little increaseth to some bignesse, and after to a purple bird. Then her wings extend themselues to a full greatnesse, till such time as she commeth to be a perfect Phoenix. This Bird doth liuely represent our Sauiour Christ, who only and alone is the true Messiah, and through whom we must expect euerlasting life, who in the fulnesse of time offered himself a Sa∣crifice vpon the Crosse, sustaining the punishment for sin at the time of his Passion, putting on a purple robe, being all be sprink∣led with his owne bloud, Ioh. 19. And as the Phoenix is burnt in her owne nest, so likewise was hee consumed in the fire of Gods wrath, according to that in the 22 Psal. My heart is become like mel∣ting wax in the middest of my body. And as the Phoenix of it selfe begetteth another of the same kinde; so Christ by the power of his Deitie raised vp his body from the dust of the earth, and as∣cended vp into heauen a glorious body, to sit at the right hand
of his father in that euerlasting Kingdome of glory. Thus (gentle Reader) I thought fit to describe vnto you these two townes, that when you shall reade of them in the holy Scrip∣ture (the one being in Aethiopia towards the South, the other in Arabia Foelix, and called Seba) you might discerne the one from the other: of both which there is mention in the 72 Psalme, The Kings of the Sea and of the Isles shall bring presents; the Kings of Saba, and Seba, shall giue gifts. The Trauels of King Pharaoh out of Aegypt, when he ouer∣came the Towne of Gazer, 1 Reg. 9. IN the 16 yeare of King Dauid, Anno mundi, 2906, and before Christ, 1602, Chabreus King of Aegypt, began to raigne, and raigned 56 yeares, Diod. lib. 2. cap. 2. Herodotus calleth this man Chephrines, in his second booke; and Eusebius, Nepher Cherres. He went from Memphis the chiefe Citie of Aegypt, with a great ar∣mie, 268 miles, euen vnto the tribe of Ephraim, and there tooke Gazer, a Citie of the Leuites, and burned it with fire, 1 Reg. 8. Ios. 21. After he came to Ierusalem, which was 28 miles. And this city which he had thus destroied he gaue to his daughter, the wife of Solomon, 1 Reg. 9. From thence he returned to Memphis in Aegypt, 244 miles. So all the Trauels of King Pharaoh were 244 miles. Of Memphis. MEmphis is a great city in Egypt, where commonly the kings of that country keepe their Courts; and lyeth from Ierusa∣lem 244 miles South-westward. This citie was built a little be∣fore the floud, but repaired and enlarged by a king called Ogdoo, who in loue of his daughter (after her name) called it Memphis. You may reade of it in the ninth of Hosea, called there by the name of Moph; for thus he saith, The people of Israel are gone out
of the land of Ephraim, because of their Idolatrie, into Aegypt: but Ae∣gypt shall gather them vp, & Moph (that is, Memphis) shall bury them. Moph, or Mapheth in this place signifieth, A prodigious wonder: but the rest of the Prophets call it Noph, for the fertilitie & plea∣santnes of the country, as you may reade, Esa. 19. The Princes of the Zoan are become foolish, and the Princes of Noph (or of Memphis) are deceiued. See also Ierem. 2.44.46. Ezech. 30. in which places you may find it called after this name. Zoan is the citie Tanis, where Moses wrought all his miracles: But Noph, or Moph, is this Memphis; a beautifull towne, large and spacious, scituated in the strongest and profitablest place in Aegypt; diuided into two parts by the riuer Nilus, so that any kind of commodities or merchan∣dise might with ease bee brouht thither by water: for which cause the kings of that countrie (for the most part) kept their abi∣ding there. Strabo saith lib. 17. That vpon the East part of this ci∣tie there standeth a Tower or Castle called Babylon, built by certaine Babylonians, who leauing their owne countrey, by the permissions of the kings of Egipt dwelt there: in after times there was placed a garrison in it, one of the three which were for the de∣fence of Aegypt, and by Ptolomy was called Babilon, through both which, viz. Memphis and Babilon, Nilus passed; the one standing vpon the East side, the other vpon the West. Zoan or Tanis stood about some foure miles from this towne, and was a faire & spaci∣ous citie also, scituated towards the South vpon the East side of Nilus, to which the kings of that country often resorted, and He∣liopolis, anothet faire citie, stood some six miles off that towards the Northeast. All these foure townes were so wonderfully inha∣bited (by reason of their pleasant & profitable scituation) that in processe of time they become all one citie; and in this age is cal∣led Alcaire, containing in circuit 60 miles: so that it seemeth to spectators to be like a country replenished with nothing but fair houses, goodly churches, & strong towers; exceeding all the rest of the cities of Egypt, aswell for the beautifulnesse of the place, as the extent and largenesse of it. It is reported, that in the yeare of our Lord 1476, there was such an extreme pestilence in it, that there died 20000 a day, from whence may be gathered, how infi∣nitely it is peopled. Neere to this towne stood the Pyramides,
which are held to he one of the wonders of the World (as Strabo saith, lib. 17.) the height of one of them was 625 foot, and square on each side 883 foot; it was twentie yeares a building, a hun∣dred thousand workemen emploied about it: whence it may be easily gathered, how hard and difficult it was in those times to get stone (it being for the most part brought from Arabia) and at what an excessiue charge they were that set vp them. Of Gazar. This Citie is described in the Trauels of Solomon. The Trauels of Hadad King of Idumaea. WHen Dauid conquered Idumaea, Hadad the King of that country with some few of his courtiers, being then but young, fled from Midian to Paran the Metropolitan Citie of Arabia Petraea, which was 84 miles, 1 Reg. 11. But because he thought himselfe scarce safe in that place, he fled thence to Cheopes, that impious and tyrannicall King of Ae∣gypt that built the greatest of the three Pyramides at Memphis. He (hating King Dauid) gaue him kinde entertainment, assigned him a part of the Kingdome of Aegypt to dwell in, and after mar∣ried him with his sister Tachpenes, by whom he had a sonne called Genubath, who was brought vp in Pharaohs, or King Chopes court, where he continued all the life of Dauid, being 27 yeares; which was 120 miles. Dauid being dead, he returned into his own kingdome of Idu∣maea, which was 200 miles. From thence hee went to Damascus, which was 240 miles, where he was created King of the Syrians by Reson and other fu∣gitiues, which had conspired against Solomon, by which meanes he grieuously troubled that Kingdome, and became an vtter ene∣mie to the Israelites all the life of Solomon. And of him is the ori∣ginall and stocke of the Kings of Syria. So all the trauels of Ha∣dad were 644 miles.
Of Midian and Paran you may reade before: in the one dwelt Iethro, Moses father in law; in the other Ishmael, that being the chiefe city of his dominions, as you may reade, Gen. 21. Ex. 2. Of Reson, Solomons aduersarie. AFter Dauid had conquered Hadad Ezer king of Zoba, Reson his chiefe captaine gathered vp his dispersed souldiers of his army, and fled from him to Damascus, which was 120 miles, and besieged it: the Citizens whereof (when neither Dauid nor Solomon could suppresse his rebellion) entertained him for their King, which principalitie he held. The Trauels of the Kings of Israel; and first of IEROBOAM. THis man was the sonne of Nebat, and borne at a towne called Zared, not far from Bethlehem Ephrata; some eight miles from Ierusalem: from whence hee came to Solomon, who made him captaine, that he might collect the tribute of Manas∣ses and Ephraim, 1 Reg. 11. which was eight miles. From Ierusalem as he went to Shilo (which was foure miles) he met the Prophet Ahijah the Shilonite, who told him that he should be King of Israel, 1 Reg. 11. From thence he went to Memphis in Aegipt, which was 224 miles, (because Solomon sought his life) where he remained with Sesak king of Aegypt, all the life of Solomon. Eusebius calleth this King Osochores, who that same yeare succeeded Macrenius (Solo∣mons father in law) in that gouernment. From thence hee returned to the towne of Sichem in Israel, which was 280 miles, where the Israelites made him chiefe cap∣taine, against Rehoboam, Solomons sonne. Wherefore Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, began to raigne ouer Israel, An. mundi, 2971, and before Christ, 997, and raigned 22 yeares, 1 Reg. 12. His first seat was at Sichem, which he repaired and enlarged.
From Sichem (in the first yeare of his raigne) hee went to Pe∣nuell, and there set vp many faire buildings, which was twelue miles, 1 Reg. 12. From Penuel he went 24 miles to the towne of Bethel, where he caused a golden Calfe to be set vp, for the people to worship. From thence he went to Thirza, which is 16 miles. This citie he built, and there kept his court, 1 Reg. 14. From thence he went to the mount Zemaraim, which is mount Ephraim, 18 miles; where he had a great battell with Abia king of Iuda, and lost 500000 of his souldiers, all chosen men of Is∣rael, 2 Chr. 13. verse 17. Hauing lost this battell, with all possible speed that he could, went thence to Thirza, which is 18 miles: there the Lord strucke him with a grieuous disease that hee died miserably, 1 Reg. 14. 2 Chr. 13. So all the Trauels of Ieroboam first King of Israel were 623 miles. The Description of the townes and places to which IEROBOAM trauelled. Of Zemeraim. THis was a certaine Plaine in mount Ephraim, eight miles from Ierusalem towards the North, neere to the towne of Bethel in the Tribe of Manasses: for mount Ephraim is diuided into diuers parts and Tribes. It seemeth to take the name of cer∣taine trees that abound neere that place, whereon cotton wooll groweth: for Zaemaer signifieth, Wooll, which by little and little, vpon such trees doth increase and grow to perfection. Of Thirza. THis was a faire and beautifull citie, scituated in a high and pleasant mountaine, in the Tribe of Manasses, some twenty foure miles from Ierusalem towards the North. In this place, the kings of Israel vsed to keep their courts, vntill Samaria was built. It was so called because of the excellencie and delectablenesse of the place: for Thirza doth denote, An acceptable and thankfull citie; being deriued of Razah, he receiueth thankfully.
Of the yeares of the iniquitie of Israel. THe yeares of the iniquitie of Israel (mentioned in Ezek. 4.) is to be accounted from that day wherin Ieroboam first erected the golden Calues: wherefore the greatest part of the first yeare of the iniquitie, agreeth with the second yeare of Ieroboams raign. From whence may be gathered, that from that time, till the de∣struction of Ierusalem by Nabuchadnezzar, were 390 yeares full ended. Of Ieroboams wife Queene of Israel. SHee went from Thirzo to Zilo, which was about 24 miles; there she asked counsell of Ahijam the Prophet, concerning her son Abia, for he was sicke: but he told her heauie tidings, 1 Reg. 14.7. Wherefore being pensiue and troubled in her mind, she retur∣ned backe againe to her husband to Thirzo, which was 24 miles, 1 Reg. 14. So these two journies were 48 miles. The journey of the man of God which came out of Iuda. THis man of God (as Iosephus writeth, lib. Ant. 8.) came from Ierusalem to Bethel, which was eight miles; and was called by the name of Iadon, which signifieth, the Iudge of the Lord. When he came thither, he reproued Ieroboam with an extraordi∣nary spirit: of whom you may reade more, 1 Reg. 13. But being deceiued, as he was returning a Lyon met him in the way, where he was slaine, and after buried in a sepulchre in Bethel. The Trauels of NADAB, the second King of Israel. NAdab, or Bonifacias succeeded his father Ieroboam in the Kingdome of Israel, and was annointed while hee was yet liuing; a liberall and free-hearted Prince. Hee be∣gan to raigne in the second yeare of Asa King of Iuda, An∣no mundi 2992, and before Christ 977. Hee raigned during the
life of his father a yeare and somewhat more: but when hee had raigned two yeares, hee went from Thirza with a great army, to the citie of Gibithon, which was 36 miles: this towne he besie∣ged very straitly, but at length was slaine by one of his captaines called Baesa; so he lost both his life and kingdome in that place, 1 Reg. 15. Of Gibithon. THis was a citie of the Leuites in the Tribe of Dan, not farre from Ekron in the land of the Philistines, 16 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the West, and signifieth, a Royall or loftie gift. The Trauels of Baesa King of Israel. BAesa is as much to say, as, An industrous and promt man in doing any thing. This may hauing slaine his Master Nadab neere vnto Gibithon, vsurped vpon the Kingdome of Israel about the end of the third yearo of Asa King of Iuda, and began his raigne Anno mundi 2992, before Christ, 974, and raigned ouer Israel almost 24 yeares, two of which he raigned with his sonne, 1 Reg. 15. He went from Gibithon to Thirza, 36 miles, where hee vtterly rooted out the whole stocke and family of Ieroboam. Af∣ter, falling into Idolatrie he was sharply reprehended for it by Ie∣hu the Prophet the son of Hanani; of whom you may reade more, 1 Reg. 15. From Thirza he went to Ramah, which is 16 miles, this towne he built and fortified it very strongly, 2 Chr. 29. But when he heard that Benhadad King of Syria had inuaded Israel, hee left his building at Ramah, and with all possible speed that hee could went to Thirza, where hee died and was buried, 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 16. So all the Trauels of Baesa were 68 miles. Of Ramah. Of this Citie you may reade before.
Of Ella or Elah King of Israel. ELah signifies, a cruell man. This was the son of Baasha King of Israel, who was crowned King (his father yet liuing) about the beginning of the 26 yeare of Asa king of Iuda; at such time as Benhadad king of Syria inuaded and wasted Galilee. He raigned two yeares, one of them during the life of his father; the other alone in Thirza, at the end of which hee was slaine by Simri his seruant, 1 Reg. 15. 16. Of Zimri King of Israel. SImri signifieth a singer, and was a captain ouer king Elahs cha∣riots; hee raigned 7 daies in Thirza, in which time he put to death and vtterly rooted out all the posteritie of Baasha: and then Omri besieged the Citie so straitly that he had no hope to escape; wherefore he set the citie and pallace on fire, in which he also perished, 1 Reg. 15. 16. The Trauels of Omri King of Israel. OMri signifieth, a souldier, or one that deserueth his pay. He was made King by the Israelites in his tent, while he was at wars neere to Gibithon: from whence he went to Thirza, which was 36 miles, and besieged the same vpon the very day that Simri had put the posteritie of Baasha to the sword, and took it. He began to raigne in Thirza Anno mundi 3017, and before Christ, 951, and raigned ouer Israel 12 yeres, the first six of which was in Thirza, the latter six in Samaria, 1 Reg. 16. From Thirza he went to mount Semer, six miles, there Omri built Samaria, and made it the seat of his kingdome. He went thither about the seuenth yeare of his raigne, 1 Reg. 16. So these two journies were 42 miles.
Of Samaria. SAmaria the chiefe seat and Metropolis of Israel, was built by Omri in mount Semer, 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and took that name of Semer who was Lord of that moun∣taine, of whom K. Omri bought it for two talents of siluer, which amounteth to 1200 crownes. In this citie 14 Kings of Israel kept their Courts, viz. Omri who was the first founder of it, Ahab, A∣hasia, Iehoram, Iehu, Ioachas, Ioas, Ieroboam, Zacharias, Sallum, Mena∣hem, Pekahia, Pekah, and Hosea, who was the last of the Kings of Is∣rael that raigned in this citie, and lost it, together with his liber∣tie. Of all these Kings there were but fiue that died naturally, for the Lord being moued to wrath by reason of their impietie and idolatrie, either gaue them vp into the hands of forrein enemies, or by ciuill war amongst themselues they cruelly murthered one another, vntill such time as the Assirians destroied the land, and led the people captiue. Thus the Lord punished with a sharp and seuere punishment, this obstinat nation, because they contemned the admonitions and doctrines of the Prophets, amongst which Elias and Elizeus were the chiefe. So that although Samaria was a faire and beautifull city, and the country for that cause was cal∣led the prouince of Samaria; yet notwithstanding, that great God the Iudge of all things, for the iniquitie of the people caused this faire Citie to be left desolate, the inhabitants of the land to be dispersed, and the earth for want of due vsage to lie as a wilder∣nesse, 2 Reg. 17. This city in the old Testament (according to the Hebrew phrase) is called Shaemaer of Schomron, which signifies, To keepe, or a Tower of strength. You may reade of this, 1 Reg. 2. 2 Reg. 1. 7. The Greekes and Latines call it Samaria, which signi∣fieth, The castle of Iehouah, or of God. You may reade more of this in the second Volume. Of Hiel that built Iericho againe. AFter the death of Omri King of Israel, when Ahab his sonne began to raigne, Hiel a very rich man in the town of Bethel (that hee might leaue behind him an eternall memorie of his name) went to Iericho which had bin formerly destroied by
Ioshuah the son of Nun, & had lien wast for the space of 536 yeres, where contrary to the commandement of the Lord, and curse of Ioshuah, he caused the said citie to be rebuilt, (such was the impi∣ous securitie and incredulitie of this man) but the Lord was an∣gry with him, and he strooke all his children that they died. The eldest son called Abiram, at the laying of the foundation, and his yongest sonne called Segub, at the hanging on of the gates, Ios. 6. 1 Reg. 16. The Trauels of King Ahab. AHab went from Samaria to the hill Carmel, where Elias put to death the Priests of Baal, which was about 32 miles, 1 Reg. 18. From thence he went to Iezreel, which is sixteene miles, there he told his wife how Elias had put the priests of Baal to the sword, 1 Reg. 18. From Iezreel he went againe to Samaria, 18 miles, where be∣ing prest with a hard siege by Benhadad King of Syria, he broke out of the citie for his better safety, and by Gods great proui∣dence and assistance he assailed the Syrians, put a great multitude of them to the sword, the rest fled, and hee went away with a no∣ble victory, as the Prophet of the Lord had formerly told him, 1 Reg. 20. From Samaria he went with his army to Napheck, which was 14 miles, where he renewed a second battell, and therein had good successe, so that hee tooke Benhadad aliue, and put to the sword, 100000 Syrians. In this place the Prophet of the Lord reproued him for his in∣gratitude and obstinacie; wherefore Ahab being angry, he went from Apheck to Samaria, which was eight miles, 1 Reg. 20. From Samaria he went io Iesreel, 16 miles, where that perfidi∣ous Queene Iesabel caused Naboth to be put to death, and tooke possession of his Vineyard, 1 Reg. 21. From Iezreel he went to Ramoth Giliad, 24 miles; and there in a fight that hee had against the Syrians was so sore-wounded
with an arrow, that hee was constrained to leaue the battell, 1 Reg. 22. And as he went backe againe to Samaria, which was 24 miles, he dyed of his wound. Of this man you may reade more, 1 Reg. 21. 22. So all the Trauels of Ahab were 152 miles. The Description of Carmel, Apheck and Ramoth, you may reade before. Of Iesreel. IEzreel is a city in the Tribe of Issachar, scituated vpon a rising ground, some 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, where Ahab somtimes kept his court. Here Noboth the Israelite dwelt; an honest and religious man, one of good esteeme and au∣thoritie, that feared God, and would not suffer the inheritance of one Tribe, to be transferred to another; because God had com∣manded the contrary, Nu. vlt. For which cause he would not sell his vineyard to Ahab, wherefore Iezabel (that wicked woman) to satisfie the Kings desire, caused him to be stoned. Iezreel signi∣fies, The seed of God, being deriued of Sera, Seed, and El, the Al∣mighty God. Though in former times this hath bin a faire town, yet at this day, there is not past 30 houses in it, and is called Cha∣rity; standing at the foot of Mount Gilboah: they shew at this day the field of Naboth the Iesrelite, lying towards the West, as you goe into the citie, a little before you come at it: This towne standeth vpon a faire prospect; for you may see from thence, through all Galile, to Carmel, the mountaines of Phoenicia and Mount Thabor; also from Mount Gilead, by Iordan and Mount Salem [where Iohn baptised] neere by Mount Hermon, vpon the North side of Mount Gilboah, there lies a faire and plaine way to the citie Iezreel; by which Iehu came, when he made wars vp∣on Iehoram King of Israel: of which you may reade more, 2 Reg. 9. It stood not far from the riuer Kison, as you may reade, Ios. 17.19. 1 Sam. 2. 1 Reg. 4. 18.
Of Ahaziah the sonne of Ahab. AHaziah was crowned king of Israel during the life of his fa∣ther: a cruell and wicked man, he began his raigne in the 17 yeare of Iosaphat king of Iudah, Anno mundi 3049, and before Christ 919, about such time as Ahab went downe to Ramoth Gi∣lead to recouer it from the Syrians: within a while after the death of his father, hee fell through the lattice window, in his vpper chamber which was in Samaria: of which hurt he died. Of this you may reade more, 1 King. 1. The Trauels of Iehoram King of Israel. IEhoram succeeded his brother Ahazia in the kingdome of Is∣rael; who began his raigne in the 18 yeare of Iosaphat King of Iudah, and as Iosephus saith, li. Ant. 9. about the fifth yeare of his raigne, went from Samaria to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles. There he told Iosaphat how the king of Moab had rebelled against him, therefore desired him to goe along with him to the war, 2 Reg. 3. Then Iehoram and Iosaphat, and the King of Edom, went from Ierusalem, and compassed about through the wildernesse of Idumaea, by the space of seuen daies: so that they and their army for want of water, had almost perished: but at the prayers of the Prophet Elisha, they were miraculously preserued. At length they came to Petra the Metropolitan Citie of the Moa∣bites, and is distant from Ierusalem 172 miles, which they tooke, and consumed it with fire and sword, 2 Reg. 3. From the citie of Petra, Iehoram King of Israel, returned backe to Samaria, which was 104 miles: where within a while afrer, he was so sorely besieged by Benhadad, king of Syria, that the famine grew very great within the towne, insomuch as a certaine woman eate her owne childe, 2 Reg. 6. From Samaria, he went to Ramoth in Gilead, with his armie, which is 24 miles, where he was ouercome by Asahel King of the
Syrians, and wounded euen to the death, 2 Reg. 8. From the fight of Ramoth Gilead, he was carried in his cha∣riot backe to Iezreel, which was 24 miles, where he lay to be cu∣red of his hurts. But Iehu one of his chiefe Captaines, rebelled against him, and as hee was in his Charriot, shot an arrow, and wounded him the second time, whereof he died in the field of Naboth the Iezrelite, 2 Reg. 9. So all the Trauels of Iehoram were 356 miles. The Trauels of Iehu King of Israel. IEHV signifies, A constant man in himselfe, and was the sonne of Iosaphat, the sonne of Nimschi, hee was annointed King of Is∣rael in the castle at Ramoth in Gilead, by Elisha, Anno mundi, 3063, and before Christ, 905: hee raigned 28 yeares, 2 Reg. 9. From Ramoth in Gilead, in his Chariot he went to Iezreel, which was 24 miles; where in the field of Naboth the Iezrelite he killed Iehoram with an arrow. And when he came to the gates of the citie, he caused Iezabel to be throwne from a tower, whom he trampled vnder his horse feet: And after in that same place shee was eaten vp with dogs. Then hee sent messengers to Samaria, commanding the Samaritans, that they should put to death the 70 sonnes of Ahab, which they immediately did, and sent their heads vnto him in baskets, 2 Reg. 10. From Iezreel he went to Samaria, which is 16 miles. In that journey he caused to be slaine by his ministers, the 42 brothers of Ahaziah king of Iuda, neere to the well which was beside the house where sheepe was shorne. And when he came to Samaria, he caused all the posterity of Ahab to be vtterly destroied and rooted out. And to conclude the tragedy, by a cunning policie, put to death all the priests of Baal, 2 Reg. 10. So all the trauels of Iehu, were 40 miles.
Of Iehoahas King of Israel. IEhoahas was the sonne of Iehu, and succeeded his father in the Kingdome of Israel: he began his raigne in the 33 yeare of Ioas King of Iudah, in the yeare of the World, 3091, and before Christ, 876: hee raigned ouer Israel 17 yeares. God stirred vp against this wicked King, Asahel King of the Syrians, who with 10000 foot and fiue hundred horse, besieged Samaria very strong∣ly; put to the sword many of his subjects, and got many cities and townes from him, as the Prophet Elisha had before told him, 2 Reg. 8. 13. The Trauels of Ioas King of Israel. IOas succeeded his father Iehoahas, and while he was yet liuing was annointed King of Israel, in the 37 yeare of Ioas King of Iudah, and raigned two yeares with his father, after his death 15: so all the raigne of Ioas, was 17 yeares. This man was a great souldier, and went from Samaria with an army against the Citie of Apheck, which was 14 miles: there he smote the Syrians, and in three seuerall battels carried away the victory: recouering the Cities which his father Iehoahas had lost, according to the pro∣phecie of Elisha, 2 Reg. 17. From Apheck he returned to Samaria, which was foureteene miles. From thence he went with his army to Bethsemes, in the land of Iuda, where in a sharpe and cruell war, he conquered Amasia, and tooke him aliue, 2 Reg. 14. which was 32 miles. From Bethsemes, hee went to Ierusalem, and carried the King thereof with him captiue, which was 4 miles. He woon the citie, and broke downe the Walls of it, from the gate of Ephraim till you come to the Angle gate, foure hundred cubits in length, 2 Reg. 14. From the Citie of Ierusalem, Ioas the conquerer returned to
Samaria, with the spoile of the temple, and of the Kings house, with many captiues, and a great prey, which was 32 miles: where at the end of the seuenteenth yeare of his raigne, he died, and was buried. In this mans time, Elisha the Prophet died, 2 Reg. 13. 14. So all the trauels of Ioas were 96 miles. Of Bethsemes. Of this Citie you may reade before. The Trauels of Ieroboam the second of that name King of Israel. THis Ieroboam succeeded his father Ioas in the Kingdome of Israel, and began his raigne Anno mundi, 3123, and before Christ, 845, which according to the text of the Bible, happe∣ned about the 15 yeare of Amasia King of Iuda, and hee raigned 41 yeares, 2 Reg. 14. He kept his court at Samaria, where the Pro∣phet Ionas told him, that he should recouer not only the townes and cities of the land of Israel that had beene lost, but also the cities of Hemeth and Damascus: Wherefore he gathered a great army out of the citie of Samaria, and went thence vnto Hemeth or Antiochia in Syria, which was 248 miles. This Citie he con∣quered, and all the countrey thereabout; so that he recouered all the ancient Townes and Cities that belonged to Dauid and Saul, euen from Hemeth in Syria, to Soba in Armenia, with all the Cities, Townes, Castles, and Countries, neer adjoyning to them, 2 Reg. 14. From Hemeth or Antiochia, he went to Damascus, which is 140 miles. This citie he also tooke, and all the countrie of Syria round about, he made tributary to him, 2 Reg. 14. From Damascus he went to the Red sea, euen 320 miles: and also recouered all the South part, which in times past belonged vnto the kingdome of Israel, 2 Reg. 14. After this, he returned to Samaria his owne countrey, which was 192 miles: where, in the 41 yeare of his raigne, he died, and was there buried. After his death, the kingdome of Israel was
oppressed with tyranny, vntill it was destroied by forreine nati∣ons: and for the space of 12 yeares there was no King that suc∣ceeded him. In the raigne of this king (a little before his death) there hapned an horrible earthquake; of which you may reade A∣mos 1. which without doubt did foreshew some eminent changes that should happen in that kingdome, as did afterward, Zac. 41. So all the trauels of Ieroboam, (the second of that name) were 900 miles. Of Zachariah King of Israel. TWelue yeares after the death of Ieroboam, Zachariah his son began his raigne in Israel, in the 38 yeare of Azaria king of Iuda, which was Anno mundi, 3975, and before Christ, 793: he raigned six moneths, and then was miserably slaine by Sallum his friend, 2 Reg. 15. Ioseph. lib. Antiq. 9. Of Sallum King of Israel. SAllum began to raigne after he had slaine Zachariah, in the 39 yeare of Azariah King of Iuda: and when hee had raigned scarce a moneth, he was slaine by Menahem, losing his life and kingdome together, 2 Reg. 15. The Trauels of Menahem. MEnahem was borne in Thirza, in the Tribe of Iuda; who be∣gan to raigne in the same yeare that he slew Sallum: hee raigned ten yeares, 2 Reg. 10. From Thirza he went to Samaria with his army, which was six miles: where (hauing slaine Sallum his Lord and King) he vsurpt vpon the kingdome, 2 Reg. 15. From thence he went to Thipsa; which is six miles. This towne he cruelly destroied with fire and sword, and all the townes there∣about, because they refused to open their gates vnto him.
From Thipsa this cruell tyrant went backe again to Samaria, 6 miles, where he grieuously afflicted the children of Israel tenne yeares. Wherefore the Lord being offended with him for his ex∣ceeding crueltie, stirred vp Phul Belochus King of Assyria, who came from Babylon to Samaria, beeing 624 miles, and put King Menahem to such an exceeding great streight, that hee was con∣strained to buy and procure his peace withWhat this was in our money you may read after in the quanti∣ty of monies. 1000 talents: which mony being receiued, he suffered him to enioy his kingdom, and returned backe vnto Babylon with all his army, 2 Reg. 15. So all the trauels of King Menahem were 18 miles. Of Thypsa. THis was a towne neere to that kingly city Thirza, scituated in the tribe of Manasses, 24 miles from Ierusalem North∣ward. But because the inhabitants thereof denied to open their gates to this cruell tyrant Menahem, therefore he vtterly destroied it euen to the ground. Thipsa signifieth, The Paschal Lambe, or a Passeouer; being deriued of Pasach, He passed by. Of PEKAHIA King of Israel. PEkahia reigned two yeares after his fathers death; at the end of which term he was slain by Pekah the son of Remalia, who succeeded him in the gouernment. Ioseph. lib. Antiq. 9. saith, That this murther was done at a banquet. The Trauels of PEKAH King of Israel. PEkah the son of Remalia began to reig in Samaria, Anno mundi 3189, and before Christ 779. in the 52 yeare of Aza∣riah King of Iudah, and reigned ouer Israel 20 yeres, 2 Reg. 15. 16. From the city of Samaria he went with Resin King of Syria to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles, and besieged it, but could not
take it: neuerthelesse he ouercame Ahaz King of Iuda in a great battell, and put to the sword in one day aboue 12000 souldiers that bare armor. In this war were taken 200000 women, children and maids, all which hee carried Captiues to Samaria, 2 Reg. 16. 2 Chr. 28. From Ierusalem hee returned to Samaria with a great bootie, which was 32 miles, and at the command of Obed the Prophet set at libertie all his captiues. After, about the end of the 20 yeare of his reign, he was slain by Hosea his chiefe captain, who succeeded him in the gouernment, 2 Reg. 15. So all the trauels of Pekah were 64 miles. Of HOSEA the last King of Israel. HOsea began to reign in the fourth yere of Ahas king of Iuda, Anno mundi 3209, and before Christ 759. He kept Court at Samaria, and was a cruell and wicked King. Wherefore God stirred vp Salmanasser Emperour of the Assyrians, who about the end of the 7 yeare of his reigne came to Samaria and besieged it for the space of 3 yeares: at the end of the third yeare with great labor he won it and all the country round about; so that he tooke King Hosea prisoner, and led him together with a great multitude of the Iewes (amongst which were Gabriel and Raphel the friends of Toby the elder) thence to Niniveh captiues, beeing 652 miles. From Niniveh he sent them to a place called Rages in Medea, be∣ing 752 miles, and in that country peopled many towns & cities with them; so that there were many of the Israelites led into cap∣tiuitie aboue 1396 miles, for so many miles is Rages and the Ci∣ties of the Medes from Ierusalem Northeastward. This captiuitie of the ten Tribes hapned An. mundi 3227, and before Christ 741. OF the cities of Rages and Niniveh you may reade in the tra∣uels of Toby and the Angell Gabriel.
The Trauels of the People which SALMANASSER Em∣perour of the Assyrians sent to dwell in the Land of Israel. SALMANASSER after hee had carried the Children of Israel away captiue into Assyria, sent (as it is said) part of them into Media, and part of them into Persia, and so dispersed them here and there about the Countrey. But because the Land of Israel by reason of this captiuitie became desolate and with∣out inhabitants, therefore he caused those people which dwelt a∣bout the riuer Cutha in Persia, to go thence and dwell in Sama∣ria, and in all the countrey round about, to till the land and dresse the Vines, least some other people that were strangers to his go∣uernment should vsurp vpon that kingdom, it being thus without inhabitants, Ios. li. Ant. 9. You may reade of this also, 2 Reg. 7. In whose place, and neere to the said riuer of Cutha, a multitude of Iewes with great shame and griefe were constrained to dwel. He also gathered a great multitude of other people out of Babylon, Hamath, or Antiochia, some out of his own dominions of Assy∣ria, also out of Medea, and the people of Ava and Sepharuaijm; which people are mentioned, Esay 37. and sent them to inhabit in Samaria and all the cities and countries round about, because it was a fertile and pleasant country, and to defend it against the in∣cursions of strangers. From whence may be gathered, that in this behalfe the policy of this Emperor was much greater that of the Romans, for the retaining of this kingdome; but especially than that of Titus Vespasian; for hee hauing conquered the land, wasted it and destroyed it with fire and sword, put thence the inhabi∣tants, and dispersed them heere and there, left the countrey bare and naked, onely a few Garrisons were placed in the strongest ci∣ties, to keepe it to their vse. Which not beeing able enough to oppose the incursions of the Saracens, that in great Troupes brake out of the Desarts of Arabia Petraea, they soone lost all that they had gotten; and the Turks ioining with them, they haue now gained into their possession that pleasant and fruitfull Land
of Iudaea, and inhabit therein euen to this day, to the great detri∣ment and scandall of the Christians. But to return to the people sent to inhabit this kingdom, who as they were of diuers Nations, so were they of diuers religions, and euery Family had his particular god. Wherefore the Lord sent a multitude of Lions among them, which daily vexed them: from whence it hapned that Salmanasser was constrained to send backe vnto them a Levite (one of the Priests that had bin caried away captiue) to shew them the true worship of God. He came to Bethel, and there taught them the doctrine of the Lord, and the customes and ceremonies of the Mosaical Law: whereby it hap∣ned that they began to worship God and their idols, in neither obseruing their antient custome. For which cause they became so abominable vnto the Iewes, that they refused their companie and familiaritie, (as that Samaritan woman confessed to Christ at Iacobs Well, Ioh. 4.) so that when the Iewes could call a man by any ignominious or odious name, they would term him a Sa∣maritan, Ioh. 8. Do we not say rightly that thou art a Samaritane, and hast a Diuell. But of all the people which Salmanasser sent in∣to the Holy land, those that came out of the East part of Persia from Cutha (called Cutheis) dwelt in Samaria, and got the chief command and gouernment ouer the rest. The Trauels of the Kings of Syria that made warre vpon the Kings of Israel. And first of the Trauels or incursions of BENHADAD. BEnhadad King of Syria went from Damascus the chiefe city of his kingdome, and came to Samaria and streightly be∣sieged it in the time of Ahab King of Israel, 1 Reg. 20. being 132 miles. From thence (being ouercome and put to flight by Ahab) he returned backe againe to Damascus, which was 132 miles.
The second time he came from thence, and inuaded the land of Israel euen vnto the city of Apheck, 124 miles, which hee be∣sieged. But Ahab King of Israel ouercame him in a great battell, and put 100000 Syrians to the sword; and when the rest of the multitude would haue fled into the city, the ruines of a wall fell vpon them, so that there died 27000. This put King Benhadad in∣to such a feare, that hee was constrained to fly from one chamber to another to hide himselfe; but at lost was taken, and (not with∣out the great wrath and indignation of God) by that wicked king Ahab pardoned and set at liberty, 2 Reg. 20. Wherefore he went thence backe vnto Damascus, which was 124 miles. Within three years after he brought a great army against Ra∣moth in Gilead, which is 104 miles from Damascus South-east∣ward. Here he won of Ahab a great battell, in which Ahab was slain with an arrow, 1 Reg. 22. From thence he returned back to Damascus, which was about 104 miles. After that, he came again from Damascus into the land of Is∣rael with a great army, 120 miles; where he counselled with his Captains and men of war, saying, Here and there will we incamp our selues. But the Prophet Elisha discouered their purposes, 2 Reg. 6. Out of the land of Israel he returned to Damascus, which was 120 miles. From thence he returned again with his army to Samaria, be∣ing 132 miles; which the second time he besieged so straightly, that an asses head was worth 80 pieces of siluer. But yet the Lord at the feruent prayers of Elizeus the Prophet, strook such a feare and anguish among the enemies, that Benhadad and his army were constrained to fly, 2 Reg. 6. Being sore troubled because he was thus put to flight, he went to Damascus, which was 132 miles, and there within a while after died of grief, 2 Reg. 9. So all the trauels of King Benhadad were 1224 miles.
The Trauels of the Captaines which Benhadad King of Syria sent to waste and destroy the land of Baesa King of Israel. THis army went from Damascus, and came to the towne of Hion, 72 miles. From thence they went to Dan, which is 4 miles. From Dan they went to the city of Abel-Bethmaacha, twelue miles. From thence they went to the land of Chineroth, which was accounted 8 miles: there they tooke certain cities of fruit, and spoiled and destroyed them. From Chineroth in the tribe of Nepthali (when they had cru∣elly wasted & destroyed that country) they returned with a great booty to Damascus, being 88 miles, 1 Reg. 15. So all their Trauels were 184 miles. ¶ The Description of the Places to which they trauelled. Hion and Dan. HIon and Dan are two towns neere to mount Libanus and the fountains of Iordan, some 104 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward. Hion signifies A towne of the fountain, because it stan∣deth neere to the Towne or Fountaines from whence Iordan is∣sueth. Of Abel-Bethmaacha you may reade before. Of Chineroth. THis Chineroth or Cineroth was the metropolitan City of the tribe of Nepthali, 72 miles from Ierusalem Northward It was scituated in a very fruitfull and pleasant place, and for that cause was so called; for Kinroth being deriued of Kinnor, signifi∣eth Musicke or Mirth.
The Trauels of NAAMAN the Syrian. NAaman came from Damascus to Samaria, which was 132 miles, to be cured of his Leprosie by Elizeus; who com∣manded him to goe to the riuer Iordan, and wash himselfe therein 7 times, and he should be clensed. Wherfore from Samaria he went to Iordan, 26 miles, & there according to the commandement of the Prophet, he washed him∣selfe 7 times, and was clensed, 2 Reg. 5. From the riuer Iordan he returned backe againe to Elizeus the Prophet, to giue him thanks for that benefit, which was about 16 miles. From Samaria he returned backe to Damascus, 132 miles. So all the trauels of Naaman the Syrian were 296 miles. The Trauels of HASAEL King of Syria. HEe went from Damascus (where Elizeus told him that hee should succeed his Lord and Master Benhadad in the king∣dome, to Ramoth Gilead with his Army, which was 104 miles. There he ouercame Iehoram king of Israel in a great battel, 2 Reg. cap. 8. From thence he returned to Damascus, 104 miles. After he went from Damascus to the city Aroer, which was 132 miles. From thence he went through the land of Giliad into the king∣dom of Basan, vntil he came to mount Libanus, which is accoun∣ted 80 miles, and conquered all that part. 2 Reg. 10. After he returned into his own kingdom to Damascus, which is 320 miles. Within a while after, he went againe from Damascus with his army to Gath, which is reckoned 188 miles. This city he won.
From Gath he went to Ierusalem, 32 miles, which he besieged so streightly, that Ioas King of Iudah was constrained to giue him great aboundance of gold to raise his siege and be gon, 2 Reg. 12. From Ierusalem he went back to Damascus, which was about 160 miles. The last journey that he went against the Israelites, was when he besieged Samaria, at which time he won many cities & towns round about in the countrey, and made them tributaries to him, 2 Reg. 13. which was 132 miles. Hauing finished this expedition he returned back to Damas∣cus, 132 miles, and there died and was buried. So all the trauels of Hasael King of Syria were 1384 miles. The cities of Aroer and Gath are described before; therefore I shall not need to speake of them again in this place. The Trauels of BENHADAD second of that name, King of Syria. THis Benhadad was the son of Hasael, and succeeded him in the gouernment. He went from the city Damascus with a great army to Apheck, which is 104 miles. This King was three times one after another ouerthrowne by Ioab King of Israel, & lost all those cities which Hasael his father had formerly con∣quered, 2 Reg. 13. From Apheck he returned to Damascus, 104 miles, and there died. So both journies were 208 miles. The Trauels of RESIN King of Syria. RESIN King of Syria went from Damascus, and ioyning his Army with that of Pekah King of Israel, they went to Ierusalem and streightly besieged Ahab King of Iudah, 2 Reg. 16. which was 160 miles. At this time (which was in the
yeare of the world 3206, and before Christ 762, the Prophet Esay ca. 7. foretold of the birth of our Sauior Christ, saying, Behold, a Virgin being great shal bring forth a child, and shall call his name EMA∣NVEL. From thence he brought his army through Idumaea to Elath a city of the Red sea, some 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and 16 miles from Ezeongaber Northward. This city Re∣sin won, and thrust the Iewes out of it. From Elath hee went to Damascus, 280 miles, where hee was slain by Tiglath Phulasser that mighty King of the Assyrians, who carried a great multitude of the inhabitants of Damascus into the countrey of Syrene, where they endured a miserable exile, 2 Reg. 16. So all the trauels of King Resin were 600 miles. The Trauels of the Kings of Iudah which reigned in the City of Ierusalem: and first of the Trauels of REHOBOHAM. REhoboam the sonne of Solomon succeeded his father in the Kingdome, and began his reign Anno mun∣di 2971, and before Christ 977. who by reason of his extreme crueltie and threats (following the counsell of his yong Courtiers, rather than of his graue Senators) the same yeare lost 10 of the Tribes, that fell from him and rebelled against him; so that he reigned ouer Iudah and Benjamin 17 yeares, 1 Reg. 11. 14. A little after the death of Solomon he went to Sichem, 32 miles, where he was anointed and crowned King. But the people percei∣uing that hee carried himselfe very proudly and arrogantly, desi∣red him that he would ease him of the burden formerly imposed vpon them by his father: (for Solomon had set a certaine Taxe on euery man, because hee was at extraordinarie charges as long as the temple was building) but he little regarding their request
told them that his little finger should be heauier than the whole burthen of his father: wherefore they disliking his speech, fel all from him, except Benjamin and Iudah. Wherefore the King shunning the fury of the people, with all possible speed went from Sichem to Ierusalem back again, being 32 miles. Then he fortified all the chiefe cities of Iuda and Ben∣jamin, 2 Chr. 11. So all the trauels of Rehoboam were 64 miles. But he principally fortified 14 cities in the tribe of Iuda, that with the more safetie he might oppose his enemy Ieroboam King of Israel, viz. Bethlehem, Etam, Thecoa, Bethzura, Adullam, Gath Maresa, Ziph, Adoraijm, Lachis, Aseca, Zarea, Ajalon, & Hebron: most of which townes, and the memorable actions don in them, are described in the former part of this Treatise. I will therefore speake only of such townes as haue not as yet bin mentioned. Of Maresa. THis was a city in the tribe of Iuda, 16 miles from Ierusalem Westward, which Rehoboam repaired and fortified, 2 Chr. 11. where King Asa ouercame the Ethiopians in a cruel battel, 2 Chr. 14. Here Michaias and Eleazer the Prophets were born, 2 Chr. 20. Mich. 1.2. Ios. 15 Georgias also fled into this city when hee was ouercome by Iudas Machabeus, 2 Mac. 12. It was scituated on the borders of the tribes of Iuda and Dan, as S. Ierom saith, in whose time the ruins thereof were to be seene. Maresca signifies an Inhe∣ritance, being deriued of Moraschah, that is, a Possession. Of Bethzura. THis is a strong castle (often mentioned in the history of the Machabees) scituated on a mountaine some 5 furlongs from Ierusalem Southward, and fell by lot vnto the tribe of Iuda. This tower was as it were a bulwark for the city of Ierusalem, & stood in the way as you go thence to Bethlem and so to Gaza. Of Zareah. THis was a city in the tribe of Iuda, eight miles from Ierusa∣lem toward the West, which Rehoboam did also repaire and
fortifie, 2 Chr. 11. There was another city of this name, scitua∣ted vpon the border of the tribes of Iuda and Dan, 18 miles from Ierusalem Westward; of which you may reade in the trauels of Sampson. Of Adoraijm. ADoraijm or Adarah was a city in the tribe of Iuda, 44 miles from Ierusalem Southwestward; which Rehoboam the son of Solomon also fortified, 2 Chr. 11. It is scituated vpon the borders of Iudah and Arabia Petraea, betweene Cades and Casmona. It signifies a glorious City, being deriued of Adar, he was glorious. The Trauels of King Abia. ABijah or Abia signifies, The Father of the sea. Hee began to reign in the 18 yeare of Ieroboam his Aduersary, An. mun∣di 2988, before Christ 980, and reigned ouer Israel 3 yeres, 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 17. He went from Ierusalem to the mount Zemeraim, 8 miles. Af∣ter that hee went to Bethel, and conquered all the countrey from thence to Ephron, which was 36 miles. From Ephron hee returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles: there hee tooke vnto him 14 wiues, and begat 20 sonnes and 16 daughters, 2 Chron. 13. The Trauels of ASA King of Iudah. ASa signifies a Physitian. He began to reigne about the end of the 21 yeare of Ieroboam King of Israel, An. mundi 2990. before Christ 978. He gouerned Iudah with great commendati∣ons 41 yeares. He went from Ierusalem to Maresa, 16 miles, where in the val∣ley of Zephatha hee ouercame the Ethiopians in a memorable battell, 2 Chr. 14.
From thence he pursued the Ethiopians to Gerar, being 22 miles and recouered many cities which the Ethiopians dwelt in. 2 Chr. ca. 14. From Gerar he went to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles, and offered to the Lord of the spoiles that hee had taken, 700 Oxen, and 7000 sheepe, 2 Chr. 15. These trauels of King Asa make 70 miles. The journey and expedition of Saerah King of Aethiopia, whom Asa King of Iudah ouercame in the valley of Zephatha. SAerah or Saerach signifieth A noble and puissant Lord. This was a mighty and warlike Prince, who gouerned Lybia and Aethiopia; the King of which countrey at this day wee call Presbyter Iohn, or rather Petro Iohannes; who holdeth his Court in a faire and goodly city called Hamarich, the Metropolitan of all Aethiopia, and extendeth his gouernment beyond Meroes in Af∣frica. Many (though ignorantly) suppose he is a Priest, because he is called Presbyter, though indeed he is not so, but rather a puis∣sant and mighty Emperor. But to return to Saerah or Saerach, who in hope to extend his Empire into these parts, went with a great army out of Ethiopia, to the valley of Zephatha in Iuda, to fight with Asa King of Iudah, 1200 miles; but lost the day, and retur∣ned with great shame, 2 Chr. 15. It seemeth that this King was the mightiest of all his prede∣cessors, and a Prince of no vulgar estimation, because of the mul∣titude and great aboundance of soldiers which he brought in his army; for it is reported that there were 1000000 that bore armor and 300 chariots; but this great army was dispersed, and most of them died miserably: as did that great army of Xerxes, which consisted of 1700000. From whence it may be concluded, That it is not the strength of man which deliuereth him, but the Lord.
The Trauels of IEHOSAPHAT King of Iudah. IEhosaphat signifies, The Iudge of the Lord. He began his reign in the fourth yeare of Ahab, 1 Reg. 22. The greatest part ther∣fore of the first yeare of this King hapned in the yeare of the world 3033, and before Christ 935. Hee reigned ouer Israel 25 yeares, that is, from the 35 of his age, till the 60. In the 7 yeare of his reigne hee went from Ierusalem to Samaria, which was 32 miles, to visit his kinsman Ahab King of Israel: for Ioram his son some ten yeares before had maried Athaliah King Ahabs Sister, 2 Reg. 8. From Samaria hee went with Ahab to the war at Ramoth in Gilead, which was 24 miles, where Ahab was slaine, 2 Reg. 22. 2 Chr. 18. From Ramoth he went safe from the wars to Ierusalem, which was 48 miles. From Ierusalem hee went to the city of Beersaba, the vtmost bounds of his kingdome towards the South, to instruct his peo∣ple in the Law of the Lord; which was 42 miles from Ierusalem Southward. From Beersaba, passing through all his kingdome hee came to Mount Ephraim, which was 48 miles, and the vtmost bounds of his kingdome Northward, beeing some 8 miles from Ierusalem, 2 Chr. 19. From Mount Ephraim he went to Ierusalem, which was eight miles. Thus Iehosaphat went through al his dominions, to instruct his subjects in pietie and the true worship of God: In euery Ci∣tie ordaining Iudges and Gouernours, Magistrates, Procurators, and Assessors, committing to their discretion the deciding of all controuersies; saying to them, Take heed what you doe, for the office which you haue taken vpon you is not humane, but Diuine: and as you iudge, so shall you bee iudged; for the Lord is with you in iudgement. Wherefore doe all things with diligence, and in the feare of the Lord; for with the Lord there is no iniquitie, nor respect of persons, neither ta∣keth he any bribes. And he himselfe remained chiefe Iudge in Ieru∣salem,
to whom any might appeale from the inferior Iudges, that so there might be a iust end of controuersies, 2 Chr. 16. Afterward Iehosaphat went forth with his army to Tecoa, sixe miles from Ierusalem, where by feruent prayers, the sounding of trumpets and other musical instruments, he obtained a memora∣ble battell against the Moabites, Ammonites, and Idumaeans; for the Lord turned the weapons of them one against another, and they wounded one another to the death. This fight happened in a faire vally between Tecoa and Engedi. So Iehosaphat pursued the enemy for three daies with great slaughter, and returned with a mighty spoile. This was called the valley of Blessing, because of this great victorie at Tecoa, and began 8 miles from Ierusalem Southeastward, and extended it selfe to the tower of Engedi neer to the banke of the red sea, 20 miles. From Engedi (out of the valley of Blessing) Iehosaphat and his army returned to Ierusalem, 20 miles, and went into the Temple with shalmes, harpes, timbrels, and great joy, thankfully acknow∣ledging Gods mercifull fauor toward him in giuing him so great a victorie, 2 Chr. 20. But as there is nothing in this life that can be said permanent, so likewise the felicitie of Iehosaphat changed on a sudden, the froward and aduerse frowne of aduersitie seising vpon his prosperitie: for ioyning with that wicked and impious King of Israel Ahaziah, vpon condition to build a certain navy of ships at Ezeongaber, to fetch gold from Tharshish and other pla∣ces in India, he displeased the Lord; for which cause there arose a great tempest, which brake down the workes and destroyed the Navy. From Ierusalem he went with Iehoram King of Israel to war a∣gainst the Moabites, and with them went the King of Idumaea: so passing through the desarts of Edom, they came to Mount Seir, and so went to Petra the chiefe city of the King of the Moabits, distant from Ierusalem 72 miles, 2 Reg. 3. From Petra Iehosaphat returned to Ierusalem, 72 miles, where he died and was buried, 2 Reg. 22. 2 Chr. 21. So all the trauels of Iehosaphat King of Iuda were 372 miles.
The Typicall signification of IEHOSAPHAT. AS Iehosaphat by prayer, and the sound of trumpets and other instruments of musick ouercame & dispersed his enemies without drawing his sword; so Christ also by the sound of his Word and doctrine, without drawing weapon, ouercame the ene∣mies of the Church. The Trauels of IORAM King of Iudah. IOram signifies, The Exalted of the Lord. He was crowned king (his father yet liuing) at such time as he made his expedition against Mesa King of the Moabites, which hapned about the fift yere of Iehoram King of Israel, An. mundi 3055, before Christ 913. He reigned with his father Iehosaphat 2 yeares, and after his decease six. So Ioram reigned 8 yeares ouer Iudah, and when hee was forty yeares old died miserably, 2 Reg. 8. 9. About the beginning of the second yeare of this Kings reign, (which was the sixt of Iehoram King of Israel) Elias the Prophet was taken vp into heauen. About the beginning of his reigne he went from Ierusalem to Mount Seir, which was 28 miles South∣ward; where he vsed such extreme cruelty toward the Edomites, which at this time were his subiects, that of a sudden they fell from him, and chose them a King of their own, 2 Reg. 8. From the Mountain of Seir he returned to Ierusalem which is 28 miles, and there cruelly put to death his owne brothers. But God stirred vp against him the Philistines and Arabians, who broke into Iuda, and destroyed it with fire and sword. They also went to Ierusalem, and tooke thence all his substance and riches, put his children to the sword, all but Ioachas, which also called A∣haziah or Ochorias; & caried away his wiues captiue into Arabia Foelix, which is neer vnto Ethiopia, 1200 miles. Then the Lord
strooke him with an extreme paine in his bowels, of which after two yeares he died, and was buried without any funerall pomp or honorable respect, neere to the Kings tower. A man vnworthy to be buried in the sepulchre of the rest of the Kings, because hee so much degenerated from Dauid his predecessor, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 28. So all the trauels of Ioram were 56 miles. The Trauels of AHAZIAH King of Iudah. AHaziah (which also was called Iehoachas) succeeded his Fa∣ther Ioram in the gouernment of Iudah, & began his reign in the 12 yeare of Iehoram King of Israel, Ann. mundi 3062. and before Christ 906, and reigned one yeare, 1 Reg. 8. He went from Ierusalem to Ramoth in Gilead, which is accounted 48 miles: There he went to battell with Iehoram King of Israel against the Syrians, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 22. From Ramoth in Gilead he returned to Ierusalem, forty eight miles. Within a while after he went backe again to visit his kinsman Iehoram King of Israel, to Iesreel, for hee was wounded in the bat∣tell against Hasael, and lay there to be cured: which was forty and eight miles. With Iehoram he went to meet Iehu the Captaine of the Host, who shot an Arrow and wounded Iehoram, that hee died in the field of Naboth the Iesreelite. Wherefore Ahaziah to saue his life fled with all possible speed, taking his way to the Kings gar∣den that stood close by the vineyard of Naboth the Iesreelite, not farre from the City and Tower of Iezreel. But Iehu followed him so close, that he wounded him as he ascended vp vnto a place cal∣led GVR, which signifieth, A Lions Whelpe; neere vnto the Towne which is called Iiblea. Wherefore Ahaziah feeling himselfe hurt, he went to Megiddo, foure miles from Iesreel, and neere to Apheck vpon the West. There, as Iosephus saith, Lib.
Antiq. 9.) hee caused his wounds to be searched and bound vp. This citie of Megiddo is 48 miles from Ierusalem Northward. From Megiddo hee went to Samaria, which was 14 miles: there he lay hid for a while, flying from one place to another, to saue himselfe, 2 Chron. 22. But being found out he was carried backe to the citie of Me∣giddo, which was 14 miles; and at the commandement of Iehu, was there slaine, 1 Reg. 8. From Megiddo his carkasse was carried to Ierusalem, which was 48 miles, and there buried, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chron. 22. So all the Trauels of Ahaziah King of Iudah, were 224 miles. Of that Idolatrous and wicked Queene Athalia. AThalia was sister to Ahab and daughter to Omri, married to Ioram sonne of that good King Iehosaphat, when he was but 17 yeares of age: and after the death of Azahiah (who was slaine about the 23 yeres of age) she vsurped vpon the kingdome of Israel (anno mundi, 3063, before Christ, 905,) and raigned with great tyranny almost 7 yeares: So soone as she had obtained the gouernment, she cruelly and miserably put to death all the chil∣dren of Ahaziah, and all those that were next heire to the King∣dome; onely Ioas, who was saued by the policie of Iehoshabeath sister to Ahasiah, that stole him from among the rest of the Kings sonnes, and put him to nourse in her bed-chamber: and hee was with them in the house of God six yeares, all which time Athalia raigned ouer the land. And in the seuenth yeare, Iehoiada waxed bold and proclamed Ioas King, as being next heire to the crowne, and annointed him in the temple; who after Athalia was slaine succeeded in the gouernment, 2 Reg. 11. 4. 2 Chron. 22. Of Ioas King of Iudah. IOas began th raigne ouer Iudah when he was almost 7 yeres of age, and about the middle of the seuenth yeare of Iehu King of
Israel, anno mundi, 3069, and before Christ, 899, and raigned ouer Iudah 40 yeres. He did that which was acceptable in the sight of the Lord all the daies of Iehoiada the Priest, who crowned him king: but after his death he fell into euil courses, and caused that good Priest Zachariah (the sonne of Iehoiada, who was the author of all his preferment) to be stoned to death in the vpper court of the Temple; which act argued that he was very vnthankefull and tyrannicall. But the Lord (displeased with his crueltie) within a yeare after the death of Zachariah, stirred vp the Syrians, who in∣uaded Iudaea, and spoiled the citie of Ierusalem: in which warre all those that stirred vp the king to Idolatrie were cruelly slaine. To conclude, within a while after some of his courtiers conspired against him, and as he lay sicke of a grieuous disease in his bed put him to death; and buried him in Millo, the Citie of Dauid. Thus God justly punished this tyrant for his vnthankefulnesse, apostasie, and cruelty, when he had liued 47 yeares, 2 Reg. 12. The Trauels of Amasiah King of Iuda. AMasias, or Amasiah signifies, the strength of Iehouah. This man was 25 yeares of age when he was enthronised by his father, about the second yeare of Ioas King of Israel, Anno mundi, 3108, and before Christ 806. He ruled the kingdome while his father was sicke one yeare, and after his decease 28: so all the yeares of his raigne were 29. He went with an army from Ierusalem to Saelag, that is to the tower or rocke of Mount Seir, 40 miles towards the South: here in the valley of Salt he put to death a multitude of the Idumae∣ans. And although this towne was very strongly scituated; yet he woon it, and called it Ioctiel, that is, The eare of the Lord; because God in that place heard his prayers: being deriued of Iakah and El, which is, God hath heard. Neere to this Towne Amasiah commanded ten thousand Idumaeans which hee had taken in warre, to be cast downe headlong from the top of an high rocke into a deepe valley, in which fall their bones were shattered all to
pieces, and they died miserably, 2 Reg. 14. From Selag Ioctiel hee returned to Ierusalem, which was 40 miles; where hee began to worship the gods of the Idumaeans that he brought along with him, 2 Chron. 25. From Ierusalem hee went to Bethsemes, and there was ouer∣come by Ioas King of Israel, which was 4 miles, 2 Chron. 25. From Bethsemes Ioas led Amasiah backe againe to Ierusalem captiue, which was 4 miles, 2 Reg. 14. From Ierusalem he fled to the citie of Lachis, which was 20 miles, and there was slaine by his owne seruants, 2 Chron. 25. From Lachis his carkasse was carried backe againe to Ierusa∣lem 20 miles: where it was buried in the citie of Dauid, 2 Reg. 14. 2 Chron. 25. So all his trauels were 128 miles. The Trauels of Azariah, or Vzziah King of Iudah. THis man succeeded his father Amasia (in the yeare of the world 3138, and before Christ, 830) when hee was but 16 yeares of age, and raigned 52 yeares: his mothers name was Iecoliah of Ierusalem. He did those things that were vpright in the sight of the Lord, therefore the Lord blessed him. And after the death of his father, built Elah, and restored it to Iudah. He therefore went from Ierusalem to Elah, 160 miles towards the South, and rebuilt that towne (it being a famous Mart towne, scituated vpon the red sea) and fortified it, because Resin King of the Syrians in times past for want of due fortification woon it, and destroied it, 2 Chron 26. From Elah he returned to Ierusalem, 160 miles. After hee went from Ierusalem to Gath a citie of the Phili∣stines, which was accounted 34 miles: this towne he woon, beat downe the wals, and destroied the Bulwarkes thereof. From thence he went to Iabnia, which is 24 miles, and broke downe the wals thereof, 2 Chron. 26. From thence he went to Azotus or Asdod, which was 8 miles, 2 Chron. 26.
From Asdod he went againe to Ierusalem, being 22 miles. Within a while after, he gathered an armie, and went from Ie∣rusalem to Gur-Baal, that is, Gerar; where he ouercame the Ara∣bians in a great battell, which was 32 miles, 2 Chron. 26. From Gerar he returned to Ierusalem, being 32 miles. He went from Ierusalem the third time into the land of the A∣monites, 60 miles; which people he conquered, and made tribu∣tarie to him: so that he was made famous through all the coun∣tries thereabout, euen to the vtmost part of Egypt, because of his often victories and triumphs, 2 Chron. 26. Out of the land of the Ammonites he returned to Ierusalem, which was 60 miles. But now being lift vp with the prosperitie of fortune, and not content with his regall dignitie, he endeauou∣red to haue chiefe authority ouer the Priests also: for which cause he went into that part of the temple where the Altar of sweet in∣cense stood (where it was lawfull for none to goe but the Priests) and there tooke vpon him to offer sweet incense; but as he was offering the Lord strucke him with Leprosie, so that he was con∣strained to dwell in a house by himselfe, separated from the con∣gregation: And his sonne Iotham gouerned in his stead all the dayes of his life. But within a while after he died of this disease, and was buried in the Kings garden at Ierusalem, and not in the sepulchre of the Kings, 2 Reg. 15. 2 Chron. 26. So all the trauels of Azariah King of Iuda, were 592 miles. Of the places to which he trauelled. Of Elah. THis was a city scituated vpon the Red Sea, 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the South; betweene Ezion-gaber and Midian. This city, Resin King of the Syrians conquered; but A∣zariah King of Iudah droue thence the Syrians, and made it so strong, that it seemed impossible to be conquered. It tooke the name of aboundance of Oakes, which (as it seemeth) grew about that place: for Elah or Ilix, signifies, a kind of Oake tree, (of which there is great plenty in the Holy land) so called because of their strength and hardnesse.
Of Iabnia. THis was a city neere to Ioppa and Lidda, 16 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the Northwest. This city taketh the name of wisedome and prudence, being deriued of Bin, to vnderstand. Of Gur-Baal. THis towne is also called Gerar, where Abraham and Isaac sometimes trauelled; it is distant from Ierusalem 32 miles towards the Southwest, and six miles from Hebron. Here the Iewes and neighbouring Arabians afterward worshipped the I∣dol Baal: and therefore this citie which in the times of the Pa∣triarchs, was called Gerar, a Perigrination; was after called Gur-Baal, that is, the Perigrination of the idoll Baal, being deriued of Gor, which signifies, He hath trauelled. The Trauels of Iotham King of Iudah. IOtham signifies, Whole and Perfect. He succeeded his father Azariah when he was about 25 yeares of age, anno mundi 3190, and before Christ, 778. He raigned ouer Iudah 17 yeares, vn∣till the 41 yeare of his age. His mothers name was Icruscha, so called from an inheritance or possession. He began his raigne in the second yeare of Pekah King of Israel, and continued it vntill the 17 yeare of his gouernment, 2 Reg. 15. 17. When this noble Prince had rebuilded and richly adorned the porch of the house of the Lord, he went from Ierusalem and inua∣ded the countrey of the Ammonites (which was 60 miles,) con∣quered their King, and made the whole land pay him tribute, e∣uen a hundred talents of siluer of the common weight, and 10000 measure of Wheate, and 10000 of Barley yearely. This tribute continued three yeares. From the land of the Ammonites he went backe to Ierusalem, which was 60 miles; where after he had adorned the Citie and Temple with many Princely buildings, hee died, about the 41 yeare of his age, 2 Reg. 15. So all his trauels were 120 miles.
Of Ahaz King of Iudah. AHAZ signifies Apprehending, or a possessor. He began to raigne after the death of his father Iotham, about the end of the 17 yere of Pekah King of Israel, Anno mundi, 3206, before Christ, 762. He raigned wickedly 16 yeares, 2 Reg. 16. 2 Chr. 28. For hee was a notorious hypocrite, who out of a peruerse zeale worshipped many Idols, and burnt his sonne in the valley of Ge∣hinnon, as an offering vnto Moloch. Wherefore he was vnhappy in his gouernment; for God stirred vp mighty enemies against him, euen Resin king of Syria, and Pekah king of Israel, who wasted and destroied his Kingdome, and (straightly besieging Ierusa∣lem) conquered Ahaz in a great battell, and put to the sword 120000 of his men. After that, Resin returned to Elath, and tooke it: so that he lost more than his father had gotten. Where being strucke into a great feare hy reason of these aduersities, hee sent to craue the aid of Tiglasse Phulasser king of the Assirians, who at his request sent a great Army from Niniueh to Damascus, 520 miles, and there ouercame Resin, and put him to death, and tooke captiue 242000 of the people of Damascus, and sent them into Cyren a country of Africa, 2 Reg. 16. The Trauels of Ahaz. King Ahaz went from Ierusalem to Damascus, which was 160 miles, to meet Tiglath Phulasser King of the Assirians, to re∣joyce with him for his happy victory, and giue him thanks for his aid and assistance: where when he saw the Altar at Da∣mascus to be very glorious, he sent for Vrija the chiefe Priest, who tooke a patterne thereof, and carried it with him to Ierusalem, where he made an Altar like vnto it, 2 Reg. 16. From Damascus he returned backe againe 160 miles. (So his trauels were 320 miles.) But yet Ahaz continued in his peruerse impiety and idolatry,
without any regard or feare of God, therefore he stirred vp other enemies against him, viz. the Idumaeans, who tooke a great mul∣titude of them captiue; and the Philistines, who with their Army broke into the South part of the tribe of Iuda, and tooke these ci∣ties following; viz. Bethsemes, Aialon, Timnath, Socho, Gede∣roth, and Gimso, with their villages. These Cities for the most part are mentioned in the precedent treatise, except Gederoth and Gimso. Gederoth, commonly called Gederothaim, is distant from Ierusalem eight little miles towards the South-west, and stands neere to the castle of Emaus, being compassed about with a hedge, from whence it seemeth to take the name; for Gadar is as much to say as, He hath hedged about. Gimso was also in the Tribe of Iuda, but in what place it is not certainely known. Thus king Ahaz all the daies of his life did euill in the sight of the Lord, for which God punished him and all the land, and in the 16 yeare of his raigne he died, and was buried with his fathers in the Citie Dauid. The Trauels of Ezekias King of Iuda. Ezekias (which signifies, The Champion of Iehouah) was borne when his father was but thirteene yeares of age, which made many questions whether he should succeed him as his lawfull heire in his Kingdome, because they doubted whether he was lawfully begotten. For if you doe obserue the order and course of the yeares and chronologie in the Scripture, you shall finde that from the beginning of the thirteenth yeare of the age of Ahaz, to the first yeare of the raigne of this King Ezekias, make just twenty fiue yeres. Ezekias therefore began to raigne af∣ter the death of his father Ahaz, about the end of the third yeare of Hosea King of Israel, 2 Reg. 19. Anno mun. 3222, before Christ, 746, being then about 25 yeres of age, a little before Easter, as it appeareth, 2 Chron. 29. He gouerned that Kingdome with great commendations 29 yeares. The first journey that he tooke was from Ierusalem to Gaza, which was 44 miles, there he ouercame the Army of the Philistines, and recouered all those cities which
his father Ahaz had lost, according to that in the Prophet Esay, cap. 15. 2 Reg. 18. From Gaza hee returned to Ierusalem, which was 44 miles; there he broke downe the places for idolatry, and the brasen Ser∣pent made by Moses in the wildernesse, and called it Nehustan, a brasen thing that hath nothing in it selfe of a diuine nature, and could neither profit nor hurt, therefore ought not to be worship∣ped. This brasen serpent was kept in memory of that signe that God shewed vnto the children of Israel in the desart, when they were bitten and stung to death by fiery serpents, for looking vpon this brasen serpent they were healed. But now because of the a∣buse thereof by the Iewes, which turned it into idolatry, it was broken to pieces. Num. 21. 2 Reg. 18. So all the trauels of Ezechias were 88 miles. In the 14 yeare of the raigne of Ezekias, and in the 38 of his age, Senacharib (that mighty Emperour of the Assirians) hauing taken many townes and cities in the Holy land, would haue also besieged Ierusalem, and for that purpose sent from Lachis (which was 20 miles distant from Ierusalem) Thartan, Rabsarim, and Rab∣sacha, three mighty Princes, Embassadors, with a great traine to attend them. These men went about the citie, to see in what part it was most subject to batterie, and might easiest begot: so when they came to the conduit of the vpper poole, which is by the path of the Fullers field, between the Fish gate and the old gate, in that place where they might easiliest be heard, they called to the King: but Eliakim the sonne of Hilkiah (which was Hezekias Steward) Shebnah the Chancellor, and Ioab the sonne of Asaph, the Recorder, went vpon the wall: then Rabsacha vttered blasphe∣mous words against the Lord: but Ezekias when hee had heard what the enemie had said, called all the Elders of Ierusalem to∣gether, and sent for Isaiah the sonne of Amos the Prophet, and they went into the temple of the Lord and praied. Wherefore the Lord heard their prayers, and sent his Angel into the Campe of the Assirians, and loe, in one night there were slaine 185000 men as they lay in their tents before Gibeah (which at this time they besieged) being distant from Ierusalem some ten miles to∣wards the Southwest. This great deliuerance hapned in the yeare
of the world 3235, and before Christ, 733. About the end of the 38 yeare of the age of Ezekiah, he fell into a dangerous disease, which so farre forth as could be gathered by all likelihoods was the plague; (for God doth oftentimes try the patience of his Saints with sundry afflictions) but yet at his feruent prayers hee was restored to health, and his daies were lengthned 15 yeares: at which time the Sunne went backe ten degrees, according to the variation of the shadow in the Dyall of Ierusalem, 2 Reg. 20. Isa. 38. 2 Chron. 32. But at the end of the 15 yeares, which was a∣bout the 54 yeare of his age, he died, and was buried with his fa∣thers. The Trauels of Manasses. MAnasses or Manasseth signifieth, forgetting, or he hath for∣gotten. This man was 12 yeares old when hee succeeded his father Ezekiah in the Kingdome of Iudah: he began to raigne anno mundi 3251, and before Christ, 717. This King was a great Idolater, and one that put the Prophets of the Lord to death, so that it was wonderfull to see what tyranny & mischiefe he wrought in Israel: wherefore the Lord stirred vp the Assirians against him, who ouercame him in a great battell, and tooke him captiue, carrying him bound in chaines from Ierusalem to Baby∣lon, euen 680 miles. But after being humbled by his afflictions, he came to a know∣ledge of himselfe, and repented for his former euill, humbling himselfe with prayer and fasting vnder the hand of God: where∣fore the Lord tooke compassion of him, and stirred vp the minde of the King of Babylon to mercy, so that hee loosed his bands, and sent him backe againe to Ierusalem, 680 miles. From that time forward he left idolatry and worshipped the true God, a∣dorned the Temple of the Lord with many faire and beautifull buildings, and in the 55 yeare of his age he died and was buried in the Kings garden, 1 Reg. 21. 2 Chron. 33. So all the trauels of Manasses were 1360 miles.
Of Amon King of Iuda. AMon signifieth, True and faithfull: he succeeded his father Manasses when he was but 22 yeares of age, anno mundi 3307, before Christ, 661. He raigned two yeres, and then because of his exceeding idolatry the Lord cast him off when he was a∣bout 24 yeres of age, neere which time some of his seruants con∣spired against him and put him to death. The Trauels of King Iosiah. IOsiah signifies, A sacrifice of the Lord: he succeeded his father Manasses in the gouernment, when he was but 8 yeres of age, Anno mundi, 3309, hefore Christ, 659. He gouerned Israel with great commendations 32 yeares, 2 Reg. 22. his mothers name was Iedidah, and dwelt in a towne called Bozkath, but how farre this Towne stood from Ierusalem it is not set downe by any Au∣thor. This good King went from Ierusalem to Bethel, which was 8 miles; there he burnt vpon the Altar which Ieroboam built, the bones of the Priests of Baal, as the man of God that came from Iuda had told Ieroboam 350 yeres before, 1 Reg. 13. 2 Chr. 23. From Bethel he returned backe again to Ierusalem, which was 8 miles; there he celebrated the Passeouer with a solemne feast and great attendance, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chr. 35. In the last yeare of his raigne he went with his army from Ie∣rusalem to Megiddo, which was 44 miles, against Pharaoh Necho K. of Aegypt; in which battell he was slaine with an arrow, about the 39 yeare of his age, 2 Chron. 35. From Megiddo his body was carried in a chariot backe again to Ierusalem, which was 44 miles, and there with great lamenta∣tions honourably buried, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chr. 35. So all his trauels were 104 miles.
The Trauels of Iehoahas King of Iudah. IEhoahas signifies, The knowledge of God: he succeeded his father Iosiah in the 23 yeare of his age, Anno mundi, 3340, which was 628 yeares before Christ; and raigned onely three moneths, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chron. 36. Ieremy (cap. 22.) calleth this man Schallum, that is, A recompence. He went from Ierusalem to Riblah, a city in the tribe of Nep∣thaly, which is accounted 80 miles; where he was taken prisoner by Pharaoh Necho, 2 Reg. 23. From Riblah Pharaoh Necho led him captiue bound in chaines backe again to Ierusalem, which was 80 miles; and there appoin∣ted Iehoiakim, his elder brother, to raigne in his place, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chron. 36. From Ierusalem he carried Iehoahas to Memphis, the Metropo∣litan citie of Aegypt, which was 244 miles, 2 Reg. 23. So all the Trauels of Iehoahas were 404 miles. Of Iehoiakim King of Iuda. IEhoiakim was the eldest sonne of Iosiah, that good King, and succeeded his brother Iehoahas in the Kingdome Anno mundi, 3341, before Christ, 627: he gouerned Iudah 11 yeares. Pharaoh Necho made him King when he was 25 yeares of age, to whom he was constrained to pay 100 talents ofWhat this is in our money, you may reade after in the quantitie of moneys. siluer, and a talent of gold. This money being payed, he obtained the Kingdome, and continued in great impiety and idolatry; for which cause he was sharply reprehended by Ieremiah the Prophet: but he being of∣fended at his words, sought to put him to death; wherefore the Lord stirred vp Nebuchadnezzar the second of that name, Em∣perour of the Assirians and Babylonians, who in the 11 yeare of this Kings raigne came to Ierusalem, and took him captiue, tyed him in two chaines, and would haue carried him to Babylon;
but his minde changed, wherefore hee caused him to be put to death and cast out into the fields of Ierusalem for a prey to wilde beasts, Ier. 22. 2 Reg. 23. Of Iehoiachin King of Iudah. IEhoiachin signifies, the preparation of Iehouah. This man suc∣ceeded his brother Iehoiakim, and began his raigne about the end of the 3351 yere of the world, and raigned only 3 moneths and 10 daies, which was about the 8 yeare of Nabuchodonesor the great; at which time he was led captiue from Ierusalem to Baby∣lon, together with Mordochae and many other Nobles, which was 680 miles. This captiuitie hapned 617 yeares before Christ, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chron. 36. Ester 2. Ier. 52. The Trauels of Zedekiah the last King of Iudah. AFter Iehoiachin succeeded Zedekiah, which signifies, The just man of God. This was the sonne of that good King Iosiah, (yet an impious tyrant:) who, by the permission of Nabucha∣donezar the great, was suffered to be King of Iudah after his bro∣ther, when he was 21 yeares of age. He began to raigne about the beginning of the 3352 yeare of the World, and before Christ 616: he gouerned tyrannically 11 yeares, 2 Reg. 24. In the 11 yere of this king, Ierusalem was taken by Nabuchado∣nezar the great Emperour of the Babylonians: wherefore Zedeki∣ah, to escape the brunt of war, fled from Ierusalem with all possi∣ble speed to Iericho, which was 12 miles, Ier. 39.52. From the plaine neere the citie of Iericho, where he was ouer∣come by the Princes of the Chaldeans, he was led to Riblah to Nebuchadonezar, which was 68 miles. From Riblah (after the Emperour Nabuchadonezar, had caused all his children to be put to death before his face, and had put out both his eyes) he led him captiue to Babylon, which was 600 miles, where he died miserable, 2 Reg. 25. So all the Trauels of Zedekiah King of Iudah were 680 miles.
Of the destruction of Ierusalem by Nabuchadonezar. In the ninth yeare of this Zedekiah (which was the last King of Iudah) Nabuchadonezar began to besiege Ierusalem, it being then Winter, anno mundi 3860, vpon the tenth day of the tenth moneth Tebeth, which answereth to the 27 day of December, which day the Iewes till now, obserued as a fasting day. The siege continued euen till the 11 yere of this king, Ierem. 39.52. 2 Reg. 25. And vpon the 9 day of the 4 moneth Thamus, (which agreeth with the tenth day of Iuly) the City was taken, and Zedekiah was put to flight. Vpon the 7 of the 5 moneth Ab, Nabusaraden chiefe captaine of the army, was sent backe by Nabuchadonezar into Iu∣daea, where he destroied and burned the houses and buildings of the citie of Ierusalem, Ierem. 52. vpon the tenth day of the fifth Moneth, Ab, which answereth to the ninth day of Argust, being the Sabbath day, the temple of Ierusalem was set on fire, Ier. 52. de bello Iudaei, lib. 6. cap. 26. 27. This first captiuitie and destruction of the citie of Ierusalem by Nabuchadonezar that great Emperor, happened anno mundi, 3362, and before Christ, 606. Three hun∣dred and nintie yeres being then fully compleat and ended, from the first yeare of Iaroboam King of Israel, who set vp the golden calues, and caused them to be worshipped. For after the end of these yeares, according to the prophecie of Ezekiel, cap. 4. the sins of Ieroboam should be grieuously punished vpon the people of Iudah. In like manner, from the end of the 13 yere of Iosiah, wher∣in Ieremie first began to prophecie, vntill this yeare, in which the children of Israel were carried away captiue into Babylon, are numbred 40 yeares: which by Ezek. cap. 4. are called the yeares of the iniquitie of Iuda, because so long the Iewes did contemne and despise the admonition of the Prophet Ieremie. Of Babylon. HOw far this citie stood from Ierusalem, you may reade before which by the Chaldaeans is called Shinear, or Sinear, and sig∣nifies, To strike vpon the teeth, being deriued of Schen, A tooth, and Naer, To strike. It may also bee taken for that, when a man
endeauoured with all speed to execute a thing, which seemes to resemble the condition of Nimrod; for that in this place he en∣deuoured to ouercome and conquer all his neighbours: from whence this land was called Casdius, that is, The countrey of the destroyer. So changing M into L, it is called Chaldeus or Chal∣daea. The chiefe and Metropolitan citie of which countrie, was this Babylon, built some thirtie yeares after the floud by Nim∣rod, or the Babylonian Saturne, the first great commander of the world, according to Berosus lib. 4. who writeth after this man∣ner: Nimrod which was accounted the sonne of Iupiter Belus, be∣ing angry with the holy Priests of that great God Iehouah, came with his colonie and people into the field of Sinear, where hee built a citie, and laid the foundation of a great tower, 131 yeares after the floud; and raised this tower to such a height, and withall of such a hugenesse, that it seemed as if it had beene some great mountaine; because he would haue the Babylonian people ac∣counted the chiefest and greatest in the world; also their gouer∣nor the King of Kings. A little after he saith, he built this tower, but before he could finish it, dyed, in the 56 yeare aftet he began it: wherefore the citie and tower of Babylon, according to the opinion of Berosus, was begun in Anno mundi, 1788, which was 131 yeares after the flood, and before Christ, 2180. There were two causes wherefore the children of men built vp this Tower; first, that they might get them a name: secondly, that they might be safe in case there came another flood to drowne the world. It was made of bricke and bittume, least the water should loosen it. But the Lord turned their enterprises into euill, and diuided their Language, so that they could not vnderstand one another [whereby they were constrained to leaue off their building:] from whence it happened that their mindes, manners, vnderstan∣dings, studies, and principall actions were vtterly changed, and is the foundation of all discord and sedition, where the feare of God, and the true knowledge of Christ doth not preuent it. From this diuision of tongues, it is called the citie of Babylon, this is, the citie of diuision, being deriued of the word Balal, he hath con∣founded or mingled together. Of this city you may reade in Ios. lib. 1. cap. 9. where he bringeth in a saying of the Sibels, which
was, That when all nations were of one language, they built an exceeding high tower, as though they would haue ascended by it into heauen; but the Lord, with great tempest and diuiding their tongues, subuerted their en∣terprise, from whence it was called Babylon. This citie was the fai∣rest in those times of all others, scituated in a spacious plaine, vp∣on euery side whereof, there stood pleasant orchards and gardens: it was built foure square, compassed about with wals of an incre∣dible strength and greatnesse, being 50 cubits thicke, and 200 high, beautified within with goodly buildings, fair temples rich∣ly guilt with gold, and wonderfull to looke vpon. It was in com∣passe 380 furlongs, as Strabo saith, which make 48 miles. Through it ran the riuer Euphrates, by which all things necessarie were conueyed to the Citie: without it was compassed with faire ditches fil'd with water like riuers, and in the wall there stood a hundred gates. Herodotus saith, That it was 480 furlongs about, which make 60 miles English, but that is not so credible. The first founder of this citie was Nimrod, who in those times was the chiefe commander of the world. It is thought that he was the sonne of Cham, the sonne of Noah; whose name signifies, a cruell gouernor, or an vnmercifull tyrant. And that his actions might be according to the signification of his name, he is bran∣ded with most perspicuous note of cruelty, omitting no violent action whereby he might enlarge his dominions; incroching vp∣on other mens gouerments, through a thirstie and ambitious de∣sire of renowne, without either respect of equitie or humanitie. And to adde euill to euill, committed many outrages vpon such as were accounted good men, and the Priests of the great God Iehouah, from whence there grew in him a more than humane re∣solution, accounting himselfe in this world a god, and through this opinion grew into contempt of all good things; compelling such as were his subjects and vassals to do him worship and reue∣rence, as to a diuine power; which, being ingraffed into the hearts of such as followed in succeeding ages, they countenanced it with authority: from whence it came to passe, that he was inrolled into the number of their principall gods, giuing him the name of Sa∣turne, whom the Hebrewes calleth Sudormin, which elegantly imployeth Saturne.
Berosus saith, that the Babylonian Iupiter succeeded this Nim∣rod, whose authoritie I am willing to follow to auoid prolixitie. This man so much inlarged the Citie, that many in succeeding ages haue attributed the foundation thereof vnto him. He ruled ouer it sixtie and one yeares. After him succeeded Ninus, or as some will haue it Nimrod the second, who began his raigne Anno mundi, 1909, before Christ, 2061: he did many worthy acts during his life, and added to the Empire of Babylon many Prouinces; and after hee had raigned 50 yeares, dyed, and was buried in Babylon. After him succeeded Semiramis his wife, who tooke vpon her the gouernement of the Assirian Empire, her sonne Ninus be∣ing then within age; and she began her gouernment Anno mundi, 1959, before Christ, 2009. Shee was one of the manliest and re∣solute women that we reade of, and performed as many worthy and memorable actions. This Queene built her sepulchre ouer the most eminent gate of Babylon, in a publike and perspicuous place, vpon which shee caused to be written in golden letters, If there be any King of Babylon that shall come after me, and stand in need of mony, let him open this sepulchre, and whatsoeuer he wanteth hee shall finde: but before, it will not be good for him to touch it. This not∣withstanding, it continued till the raigne of Darius, who opened this monument in hope to finde what the superscription impor∣ted; but no money was there to bee had, onely within might plainely be seene engrauen other letters, to this effect: Vnlesse thou hadst beene vnsatiably couetous, thou wouldest neuer haue opened the graues of the dead in hope of gaine. This woman beautified Ba∣bylon with many goodly buildings, built vp the walles thereof, set a bridge ouer Euphrates, made a beautifull Orchard and a Garden in it, beautified it with many goodly Towers and fortifi∣cations, added vnto it many prouinces and gouernments: and af∣ter all, because of her owne lasciuious appetite (as Sallust saith) was murthered by her son Ninus, who succeeded her in the go∣uernment. There were many other memorable things within this Citie, that were built before and after her time (as Herodotus saith) as that great and mighty tower before remembred, in which stood
the temple of Baelus, and his sepulchre. Not far from that stood a chappell, wherein was the statue of Iupiter all of pure gold, worth What this was in our mony you may see after. 800 talents of gold. Without that chappell there stood an altar of pure gold, vpon which they yearely offered 100000 talents of frankincense. There was another also somwhat lesse, vpon which they vsed to offer their sacrifices; for it was not lawfull for them to offer any thing that had life vpon the greater altar: there stood also in that place another statue twelue cubits high, all of pure gold. This City was after taken by Cyrus the first Emperour of the Persians, Anno mundi 3432. before Christ 536. in the seuentieth yeare after the Captiuitie of Israel and Iudah, according to the prophecie of Ieremy; at which time the City was so great, that they which dwelt in the middle of it did not know that the Ene∣mie had entred within the walls at the further end: which might happen, because vpon that day when it was taken the Babyloni∣ans celebrated a Feast vnto Venus, in which vsing extraordinarie diligence, they were lesse mindfull of such things as hapned vnto them. Thus this City, that with great tyranny had triumphed ouer the Nations of the earth for the space of 1600 yeares (being so plentifully furnished with all things necessary for the mainte∣nance of life, that the inhabitants therof contemned al other peo∣ple) was by Gods permission, for their pride and presumption, wasted and consumed by Cyrus, as you haue heard: and shortly af∣ter vtterly destroyed by Xerxes, the fourth Emperor of the Persi∣ans, and so continueth to this day, as Strabo saith. Where then, ô world, is thy prosperitie? or Riches, thy glory? since in the one thou art consumed, in the other left desolate. Of the ruines of old Babylon that are extant at this day. BAbylon (which as you haue heard reigned ouer the Nations of the earth like a Queen) at this day hath nothing to present you withall but an heap of stones; out of the ruins whereof there was built a little towne close by where it stood, called Elugo, or
Felugo, scituated vpon the banke of the riuer Euphrates. Not far from which it seemes there is a profitable harbor for ships, where Merchants oftentimes go a shore, and trauell thence through ma∣ny Woods and desart places, vnto Seleucia, which at this day is called by the Turks Bagdeth, distant thence some 36 miles, and is the vtmost towne of the Turkish and Persian Empires towards the East, being diuided in the midst by the riuer Tygris. Some Merchants haue reported, That the place where Babylon stood is become stony, vnfruitfull, and vnpleasant, because of the ruines of the destroyed buildings which lie in the earth. Also, That there is found a tower built of a blacke stone, which to outward appea∣rance seemes to haue bin a very goodly house high and eminent; so that vpon the top thereof a man might haue seen through the whole city. This tower the Inhabitants of Felugo call the tower of Daniel, in which was the chamber where hee vsed to pray vnto the Lord three times a day, the windowes whereof looked toward Ierusalem, Dan. 6. There is also to be seene diuers arches of the bridge which Semiramis built, standing vpon the riuer Euphrates, and the foundation of the great tower whose top should haue rea∣ched to heauen; being in compasse two miles, but not very high. Within the ruines whereof are found certaine serpents very noi∣some and venomous, about the bignesse of a Lizard, hauing three heads, and spect with diuers colours, which the inhabitants call Eglones. There are such a multitude of them, that no man dares approch within halfe a mile of it at any time but in the Winter season, nor then neither but for the space of a moneth; in which time these serpents for the extremitie of the cold are constrained to keep their holes. Thus as this Tower was hatefull vnto God in the beginning, so likewise hath hee made it hurtfull vnto man euen to this day.
The Trauels of the Babylonian and Assyrian Kings and Emperours that fought against Israel and Iudah. And first of Phul Belochus King of Assyria. PHul Belochus (that is, He returned wasting) began to reign among the Babylonians An. mundi 3149. before Christ 819, and gouerned 48 yeares. This King or Emperour came from Babylon to Sa∣maria, which was 660 miles. There he so streightly besieged Me∣nahem King of Israel, that he was constrained to giue himWhat this was in our mo∣ny you may see after. 1000 talents of siluer to raise his siege and depart, 2 Reg. 15. From Samaria he returned back again to Babylon, 660 miles. So all the trauels of Phul Belochus were 1320 miles. The Trauels of TIGLAT PHVLASSER King of the Assyrians. TIglat Phulasser signifies, The Assyrian Conquerour. He was also called Tiglath Philasser, 2 Reg. 15. which name is attri∣buted to him either because he caried away the children of Israel captiue, or else because of the conquest that he had of all Galile, and ouer the tribe of Nepthali, which he carried into As∣syria. Hee succeeded his father Phul Belochus in the gouernment of the Assyrians, An. Mun. 3197. before Christ 771. and reigned 25 yeares. When Resin King of the Assyrians (ioyning his army with Pe∣kah son of Remalia King of Israel) had streightly besiege Ierusa∣lem, Ahas was constrained to craue aid of this Tiglath Phulasser, & sent him great presents, which he accepted kindly, & brought his arm from Niniveh to Damascus, 520 miles, where he put Re∣sin and the whole city to the sword, 2 Reg. 16.
From Damascus he came with his army into the land of Isra∣el, which was 120 miles, where he ouercame Pekah in a great bat∣tell, conquered all the land of Gilead and the tribe of Nepthaly, and put a great multitude of the Israelites into perpetuall exile, 2 Reg. 15. From thence he went backe to Niniueh, 640 miles. A little after this, King Tiglath Philasser went from Ninive to Ierusalem, 680 miles, where hee so streitly besieged that wicked King Ahas, that he was constrained to giue him great abundance of gold and siluer to raise his siege and be gon, 2 Chr. 28. From Ierusalem he returned back to Ninive, being 680 miles. So all his trauels were 6640 miles. OF the city Niniveh you may reade after, in the trauels of Io∣nas the Prophet. Of Kyr, which is commonly called Cyrene. KYr or Cyrene is scituated in Africa, 816 miles from Ierusa∣lem Westward. In which country Simon that bore the crosse of Christ was borne, Mat. 27. Luke 23. It signifies in Hebrew, A strong wall: and in Latine, a Heart. The Trauels of King SALMANASSER. SAlmanasser signifieth, The Assyrian Peace-maker. This man Ptolomaeus (that excellent Mathematician) calleth Nabonas∣sarus, that is, the Prophet of the Assyrians. He began to reign vpon the 26 of February, An. mundi 3221, before Christ 747, and reigned ten yeares or thereabout. This man went with his army from Ninive to Samaria, being 652 miles, where hee compelled Hosea the last King of Israel to pay him tribute, 2 Reg. 16. From thence he returned backe again with his army to Nini∣veh, 652 miles. After, when Hosea K. of Israel (conspiring with So K. of Egypt)
denied to pay him tribute, hee returned backe againe the second time to Samaria, which was 652 miles, and after 3 yeres siege he tooke and destroied it with fire and sword, and conquered all the country round about. From Samaria he returned back again to Niniveh, 652 miles. So all the trauels of Salmanasser King of the Assyrians were 2608 miles. The Trauels of SENACHARIB King of the Assyrians. SEnacharib, as Melancthon expounds it, signifieth a two edged Sword. He succeeded his father Salmanasser, Ann. M. 3231. before Christ 737. He reigned 7 years. This man, imitating his father, endeauored to cary away the rest of Gods people into captiuitie: for which purpose he brought an army from Niniveh to Lachis, which was 700 miles, which town he besieged, & sent his Princes to Ieresalem, beeing 20 miles, where hee blasphemed the Lord: of which you may reade more in the historie of King Hezekiah. From Lachis hee went to Libnah, 8 miles. This was a strong Hold, but he besieged it so narrowly, that within a while after he had begun the siege, he tooke it. While he was before this town there came newes, That Taracha a King of the Ethiopians had in∣uaded his country. Wherefore he sent the second time messen∣gers to Ierusalem. But the Lord was offended with their blasphe∣mie, wherefore hee sent his Angell, who in one night destroyed 185000 of his army. This sudden and vnexpected euill falling upon him, in a great feare he returned to Niniveh, 692 miles, where he was slain by his sons in the Temple. The same of these things was so divulged a∣broad, that Herodotus, lib. 2. makes mention of them. So these three journies make 1400 miles. Of Lachis and Libnah you may reade before.
Of Assarhaddon King of the Assyrians. ASsarhaddon (his father Senacharib being slaine) succeeded in the gouernment, An. mundi 3238, which agreeth with the 730 yeare before Christ, and reigned ten yeares in Niniveh the chiefe city of the Assyrians. Here again the mutation & change of Kingdoms may be obserued; for Merodach a Chaldaean rebel∣ling against Senacharib, continued his gouernment in Babylon 11 yeares, that is, during a part of the reign of Senacharib, and all the reign of Assarhaddon his son; in which time he conquered the As∣syrians, and made them subiect to the empire of the Babylonians Of Merodach the first Emperor of the Babylonians. MErodach signifieth, A bitter repentance. He was the sonne of Baladan Prince of Babylon, who ruled at such time as Sena∣charib had that grieuous ouerthrow in Iudah. Wherefore taking aduantage of the time, and the necessitie of that Prince, he rebel∣led against him and his son Assarhaddon, taking vpon him the ab∣solute command of the city and whole Empire. The beginning of whose reign hapned in the yeare of the world 3236, and before Christ 732. This Merodach sent to Ierusalem wise and learned men with gifts and presents to King Ezekiah, iust in that yeare when the Sun went backe ten degrees, to know the truth of this miracle. For it was a custome amongst the Nations round about Ierusalem (if any thing hapned beyond the expectation of man) to send thither to enquire the truth thereof. Such and so wise a people were the Iewes esteemed in those times, as may appeare by diuers places in holy Scripture. In the beginning of the 12 yeare of this King, Assarhaddon Emperor of the Assyrians died; after whose death he became Emperor of all Assyria & Chaldea He began to reign ouer that spatious kingdome, An. mundi 3247, before Christ 721. and reigned after that 40 yeares.
Of Ben-Merodach Emperor of Babylon. BEn-Merodach, that is, the son of Merodach, succeeded his father An. M. 3287. before Christ 681. He reigned 21 yeares. Of Nebuchadnezar first of that name, Emperor of Babylon. NEbuchadonesar or Nebuchadnesar signifieth A Divine Iudge. He was the most potent king of all the Babylonians. This man obtained the chiefe command ouer the Babylonian Empire, An. M. 3309, before Christ 659. He reigned 35 yeares, and held his Court somtime in Babylon, sometimes in Niniveh, Iud. 1. He made war with Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, of which battell you may reade, 2 Reg. 25. 2 Chr. 35. in the vally of Megid∣do, where Iosias was slain. Herod. lib. 2. doth also make mention of this battell, and calls the place by the name of Magdalum. Of which Ieremy also speaketh. But they were towns in the tribe of Manasses, scituated neere to the plaine where this battell was fought: in which country Mary Magdalen was borne. The Trauels of Nebuchadnezar the second of that name, Emperor of Babylon. NEbuchadnesar or Nebuchadonesar the Great, which Ptolomaeus calleth Nebupollasser, about the end of the third yeare of Ioachim King of Iudah (being a little before created Em∣perour, his father yet liuing) came vnto Ierusalem, which hee be∣sieged so streightly, that hee constrained Ioachim to pay him Tri∣bute for thirty seuen yeares. Berosus saith, Lib. 3. A little after, that is, Anno mundi 3344. before Christ 624, hee was sent against the Syrians, Phoeniceans, & Egyptians that rebelled. So he went with his army from Babylon to Carchemis, a City of Syria, sci∣tuated
neere the riuer Euphrates, which was 280 miles. Here he ouercame Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt in a great battel, Ier. 46. Herod. lib. 2. From Carchemis, he went to Ierusalem, which was 400 miles; here he tooke Daniel and his companions captiue, and brought them to Babylon. After, he went with his army to Pelusio, being 132, miles, which hee tooke, conquered all the land of Egypt, put to death Pharaoh Necho, and made Psammeticus his son King in his place. Ieremy the Prophet told of this war, cap. 25.26. From Pelusio he returned to Babylon, 800 miles. Within a while after, his father died, and he succeeded in the gouernment, and reigned 43 yeares. In the 11 yeare of Ioachim King of Iudah, he went again from Babylon to Ierusalem, which was 680 miles, and by policy tooke that city, and put Ioachim the king thereof to death, according to the prophecie of Ieremy, cap. 22. 2 Kin. 24. From thence (after he had made Iechonias his son King) hee re∣turned backe again to Babylon, 680 miles. About three moneths after, he went the third time back to Ie∣rusalem, 680 miles; for he feared Iechonias would rebell and re∣uenge the death of his father Ioachim, 2 Kin. 24. In the eight yeare of his reign he tooke Iechonias, Mardoche, and 3000 other Iews of the Nobilitie, and caried them captiue to Ba∣bylon, which was 680 miles, 2 Kin. 24. 2 Chr. 36. Est. 2. Nine yeares after, he came the fourth time to Ierusalem, being 680 miles, and besieged the City, because of the impietie and re∣bellion of Zedekiah King thereof. During this siege he tooke di∣uers towns, but chiefly Lachis and Aseka, Ier. 34. But when hee vnderstood that Pharaoh was comming with an army out of Egypt to rescue Zedekiah, he raised his Campe, and went about 80 miles into the countrey of Egypt: which Pharaoh hearing, was abashed, and turned backe againe. In the absence of this Emperor, Ieremy the Prophet being then within the city, ha∣uing foretold the destruction therof, would haue fled thence for his better safety, into the tribe of Benjamin: but by the way hee was taken in the gate of Benjamin, and cast into prison, Ier. 7.
Within a while after, according to the prophecie of Ieremy, Nebuchadnezar returned out of the desart of Sur, whither he went to meet the Egyptians, being 80 miles, and vtterly destroyed the city of Ierusalem, carrying thence the vessels and ornaments of the Temple to Babylon, 2 Kin. 25. 2 Chr. 36. From Ierusalem hee went to Riblah in the tribe of Nepthaly, 80 miles, where hee put out Zedekiahs eies, and kild his children, 2 Kin. 25. From Riblah he carried Zedekiah to Babylon, which was 600 miles, where he died miserably in prison, 2 Kin. 25. Afterward Nebuchadnesar went with his army from Babylon to Tyrus, which hee won, and pittifully wasted with fire and sword, according to the prophecie of Ezekiel, cap. 26. being 600 miles. From Tyrus he went to Egypt, and passed 480 miles through that kingdome, conquering all the countries and prouinces as he went a long, euen the Ammonits, the Moabits, Philistins, Idumae∣ans, and Egypt it selfe, all which countries hee made tributarie to him, Isa. 15, 16, 19. Ier. 46, 47, 48, 49. Ez. 25.29. From Egypt he returned to Babell, 960 miles. From that time till his death, hee was Emperour of all those kingdoms. In the second yeare of his Empire Daniel expounded vnto him his wonderfull dream, vnder the similitude of an image setting forth the condition of the four monarchies of the world, Dan. 2. Not long after, he caused Sidrack, Misack, and Abednego to be cast into a fiery furnace, because they refused to worship the golden image which he had set vp, Dan. 3. Also this Nebuchadne∣sar for his great pride and arrogancie, was by God strucken mad, and into a deepe melancholy, in which disease hee continued for the space of seuen yeares, tyed in bonds and chaines, running vp and downe like a beast, and feeding vpon grasse and roots; vntill he came to vnderstand, That God the Gouernour of Heauen and earth, had the disposing of Kingdoms and Gouernments, giuing them to whom he list, and againe taking them away. At the end of which time he was restored to his vnderstanding and Empire: and after beautified the city of Babylon with many goodly buil∣dings, faire orchards, and pleasant places, as Iosep. lib. Ant. 10 saith.
And when hee had reigned 43 yeares died, and was buried by his father in Babylon, An. mundi 3387. and before Christ 581. So all the trauels of Nebuchadonesar, or Nebuchadnesar, were 7892 miles. ¶ The Description of the Cities and places that haue not as yet been mentioned. Of Carchemis. THis was a city in the country of Syria neere Euphrates, 400 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and signifies A sacrificed Lambe; being deriued of Car, which signifies a Ram or Lambe, and Mosch, He hath cut in pieces. It may also be taken in the third Conjugation, for a Lambe sacrificed to the idol Chemosch or Cha∣mos, the god of meetings or nightly salutations. Of Pelusio. THis City Pelusio was built by Peleus the father of Achilles, from whence it tooke the name. It stands in Egypt, some 172 miles from Ierusalem Southwestward, neere to the gate of Nilus called Pelusiachus, where it falleth into the Mediterrani∣an sea. Not far from this city in the mountain Casius, vpon the borders of Arabia Petraea (where the Temple of Iupiter Casius stood) is to be seen the tomb of Pompey the great, beautified and adorned by Adrianus Caesar, as Capitolinus saith. At this day this city is called by the name of Damiata. You may read of it Ezek. cap. 30. Of Tyrus or Zor. TYrus signifieth Cheese, or to congeale together, as Cheese doth milk; somthing alluding to the Hebrew word Zor, sig∣nifying, to make straight, or a rocke hauing a straight and sharpe edge. It was the metropolitan city of Phoenicia, now the hauen or passage of Sur: but in antient time it was called Sarra, Aul. Gel. lib. 14. cap. 6. It was scituated vpon a very high rocke, compassed about with the Mediterranean sea, 100 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and a famous mart towne for all the Holy land. By the description of Ezekiel it seemes to haue bin like vnto Venice
both in scituation and dignitie, Ez. 72.28. Ierem. Esay 27.28. and many other Prophets prophecied against this town, saying, Out of the land of Kithim (that is, from Macedonia) the destroyer of Tyrus should come. As after hapned: for Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, besieged that town, and in the 7 moneth after tooke it; for the obtaining whereof he was constrained to fill vp the sea which compassed it about, containing 700 paces, and made it firm land for his army to passe vpon to the wals of the ci∣ty. In this country that famous Civilian Vlpian was borne, as he writeth, lib. 1. ff. de Censibus. And vpon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon Christ cured the daughter of a Canaanitish woman, of a Diuel, Mat. 15. wherefore you shall read more of it in the second Tombe. Of Evil-Merodach Emperor of the Babylonians and Assyrians. AMilinus Evil-Merodach, son of Nebuchadonesar the great, suc∣ceeded his father, An. M. 3388. before Christ 580. In the first yeare of his reign he set at liberty Iechonias King of Iuda, and attributed to him the title, dignitie, and maintenance of a King, Iechonias being then 55 yeares of age, and 37 after he had been in captiuitie, 2 Kin. vlt. Ier. vlt. Whence it is concluded by most, That this Emperor did also embrace the doctrine of Daniel, con∣cerning the true God, as did Nebuchadonesar his father; who had before by publique Edict professed it to the whole State, & cau∣sed it to be published through his dominions, and therfore shew∣ed fauor and mercy toward King Iechonias. And from thence it is thought, that those which were impious princes about him, cal∣led him Amelinus, that is, the Circumcised, being deriued of Mol, which signifies, to circumcise; and Evil, simple and foolish Mero∣dach. His wiues name was Nitocris, according to Herod. lib. 1. She was a very magnificent and wise woman, set vp many faire and goodly buildings in Babylon, and was the mother of Balthasar the last Emperor of the Assyrians, Dan. 5.
Of Niriglissoroor Emperor of Babylon. NIriglissoroor (whose syrname was Regassar) son in law to Ne∣buchadnesar the Great, hauing slain Euil-Merodach his wiues brother, reigned ouer the Babylonians and Assyrians foure yeares, as Berosus saith. Of Labassardach the last Emperor of the Babylonions. LAbassardach the son of Niriglissoroor succeeded his father. He reigned only 9 moneths, and died without heire male. Of Balthazar Nabonidus the last Emperor of the Babylonians and Assyrians. ANno mundi 3415, and before Christ 553, Balthazar Naboni∣dus, whose syrname was Labynitus, the son of Euil-Merodach and Nitocris, obtained the Empire, and reigned 17 yeares, accor∣ding to Berosus, with Iosep. cont. App. Alexand. Polyb. apud Eusebium, Praep. lib. 9. cap. 4. Alphae. hist. with Euseb. calleth this King Nabi∣nidochus. This is that Balthazar (saith Iosephus, lib. Ant. 10. ca. 13) which Daniel, cap. 5. calleth the son of Nebuchadonesar, though in∣deed he was but his sons son, as may be gathered from that of Ier. cap. 25. All nations shall serue Nebuchadonesar, and his son, and his sons son. Balthasar signifies, The Host of the Lord destroying his Ene∣mies. Labynitus signifies, a shaken Sword. This man, as he was ce∣lebrating a great feast vnto Venus (whom they call in the Assirian tongue Myleta) amongst a great multitude of his Nobility, and in that vsing extraordinary excesse and blasphemy against the Lord; In the middest of his feast and all his merriments he saw a hand, writing vpon the wall, which left these words, Mene, Mene, Tekel Vphrasin, of which you may reade more Dan. 5. Some say, That at this very time the city was taken by Cyrus Emperour of the Persians, and he put to the sword in those sports & pastimes.
But certain it is that he was slain at a banquet, lost his empire, and was the last of the Assyrian Emperors: but whether at that time, I refer it to the opinion of the Reader. ¶ The Trauels of the Kings of Aegypt that fought against of Iudah. And first of SISACK, who made war vpon Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon. THat proud and presumptuous Prince Sisack (which signifies a Garment of Silke) in the last yeare of his regne (which was the first of Rehoboam the sonne of Solomon) came with 1200 Chariots and 60000 Horse, from Memphis to Ierusalem, which was 244 miles; bringing in his Army a great multitude of people of diuers Nations, as Lybians, Ethiopians, &c. With this company he besieged Ierusalem and tooke it, wasted the ci∣ty, spoiled the Temple, and tooke thence the golden shields which Solomon had made, and destroyed that faire and beautifull house which Solomon had built. From whence that saying of his owne was verified, Eccles. That it is a great euill vpon the earth, for a man to take care to lay vp riches and treasures in this world, yet knoweth not who shall inherit it. For those things which a little before hee had with great labour and paines builded and beautified, within lesse than 20 yeares after were destroyed and made desolate by this King. From Ierusalem Sisack returned with the spoiles of the temple and city, to Memphis in Egypt, which was 244 miles: and in the yeare following he was stricken by the Lord with a grieuous dis∣ease, of which he died miserably. So these two journies were 488 miles.
The Trauels of PHARAOH NECHO King of Ae∣gypt, who made warre vpon IOSIAH King of Iudah. NEcho signifies an Enemy or Inuader. This man was one of the greatest of all the Egyptian Kings, who in the thir∣teenth yeare of his reigne made war vpon Nebuchadnezar the first, and in the valley of Megiddo, neere to Magdala, which was 244 miles from Memphis, fought a great battell, wherein Iosiah King of Iudah was wounded to the death. From the valley of Megiddo Pharaoh Necho went to the Riuer Euphrates, which was 360 miles, where he fought a second battel with Nebuchadnezar vpon a plaine neere to Carchemis, where hee lost the day and was put to flight. From Carchemis he fled to Riblah in the land of Israel, which was 320 miles; where in the land of Chaemath, neere to the lake Samachonites, he ouercame Ioachas King of Iudah, and took him prisoner. From Riblah Pharaoh Necho led Ioachas bound to Ierusalem, being 80 miles, and made Ioachim his brother King in his place. From Ierusalem he returned to Memphis, 240 miles. Within four years after he went the second time with a great army from Memphis to the riuer of Euphrates, which was 640 miles. But there he was the second time ouercome by Nebuchadnesar, and constrained to fly thence back again to Memphis in Aegypt, being 640 miles. But Nebuchadnesar followed him with an army of chosen men, and conquered all Aegypt, tooke Pharaoh Necho, and made his sonne Psammeticus King in his place, who was the second of that name. Of this battell there is mention, Ier. ca. 25, & 26. So all the trauels of Pharaoh Necho were 1524 miles.
The Trauels of the holy Prophets, and first of the Prophet ELIAH. ELiah the Prophet went from This be (which was in the land of Gilead) to Samaria, 24 miles, where he told the wicked King Ahab, that there should bee neither rain nor dew for the space of 7 years, 1 Reg. cap. 17. From Samaria he went to the riuer Kerith, 24 miles, where hee was fed by a Rauen. From Kerith hee went to Sarepta, which was 100 miles, where he sojorned with a poor widow that found him necessaries, whose sun he restored to life, 1 Reg. 17. From Sarepta he went to Mount Carmel in the land of Israel, being 60 miles; and by the way as he went he met Obediah (which signifieth, The Seruant of the Lord) and King Ahab, whom he re∣buked sharply because of his idolatry. Also vpon this mountaine he put all Baals Priests to death, and prayed vnto the Lord, who sent rain vpon the earth in great aboundance, 1 Reg. 18. From Mount Carmel he ran by King Ahabs chariot to Iesreel which was accounted 16 miles. After, when Queene Iesabel threatned his death, hee departed thence, and went to Beersaba, 84 miles, 1 Reg. 19. From Beersaba he went one daies journy into the wildernes of Paran, because hee thought to remaine there safe from the mis∣chiefe of Iesabel, which was 20 miles from Beersaba Southward. Here the Angell of the Lord brought him meat as he was sitting vnder a Iuniper tree, 1 Reg. 19. By vertue of this meat Eliah trauelled from thence to Mount Horeb or Sinai, 80 miles, and continued there 40 daies and forty nights without meat or drinke. There the Lord spake to Eliah as hee stood in the entrance of a caue, his face being couered with his mantle, 1 Reg. 19.
From the mount Sinai or Horeb he returned to Abel-Mehola, which was 156 miles, where hee called Elizeus the son of Saphas to the ministeriall function and office of a Prophet, 1 Reg. 18. From thence he went to Damascus, 124 miles, where he anoin∣ted Hasael King of Syria, 1 Reg. 19. From Damascus Elias went to Mount Carmell, where hee dwelt, which was accounted 120 miles. From mount Carmel he went to Iesreel, 16 miles: there in the vineyard of Naboth (who Iezabel caused to be stoned to death) he sharply reprehended Ahab for his impiety and idolatry, 1 Reg. 21. From Iezreel he returned back again to his own house to Car∣mel, which was 16 miles. From thence he went to Samaria, which was 32 miles, where he answered the seruants of King Ahaziah, whom he had sent to enquire of Baalzebub the idoll of Ekron, concerning his health, saying, Go and tel your master that sent you, That the God of Is∣rael saith, Because thou hast sent to aske counsel of Baalzebub the idol of Ekron, and thinkest there is no God in Israell, therefore thou shalt not rise off the bed whereon thou liest, but shalt surely die. 2 Reg. 1. Soone after, Elias returned to Mount Carmel, which was 32 miles, where the two Captaines with their Companies of fifty that were sent to take him, were consumed with fire from heauen, 1 Reg. 1. From Mount Carmel he went to Samaria with the third Cap. 32 miles, where hee prophecied of the death of King Ahaziah, 2 Reg. 1. From Samaria hee returned backe againe to Mount Carmel, 32 miles. From thence he went to Gilgal, 52 miles. From Gilgal he went with Elizeus to the towne of Bethel, be∣ing 6 miles, 2 Reg. 2. From thence to Iericho, 4 miles, 2 Reg. 2. From Iericho hee and Elizeus went to Iordan, which was sixe miles, through which riuer they went vpon dry ground. Now as they were speaking one to another, vpon the East side of the riuer
behold a fiery chariot came with fiery horses and tooke Elias vp aliue into heauen, after he had gouerned the Church 30 yeres, an. mundi, 3056, and before Christ, 912, 2 Reg. 2. So all the Trauels of Eliah the Prophet were 1033 miles. Of the Cities and places to which he trauelled. Of Thisbe. IN this towne the Prophet Eliah was borne, it being scituated in the land of Gilead beyond Iordan, 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. It taketh the name from Captiuitie; being deriued of Chabah, he hath led into captiuitie. Of Kerith. THe riuer Kerith (where the Rauens fed Elias) runneth from Mount Ephraim between Bethel and Iericho, 8 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and so passing along towards the East, falleth into the riuer Iordan, 1 Reg. 17. The Kerethites were such as garded the person of the King, which in the Prophet Da∣uids time were called mighty men; taking their name from stri∣king and cutting, being deriued of Charath, he hath smitten, or cut in sunder. Of Zarpath, or Sarepta. THis was a Citie of the Sidonians, where they found much mettall of diuers kindes; lying betweene Tyrus and Sydon, 112 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and taketh the name from Zoraph, which signifies, To trie, or burne with fire. There is at this time but eight houses in all the towne, although by the ruines it seemeth to haue beene in times past a very faire citie. The inhabitants thereof take vpon them to shew the cham∣ber wherein Elias the Prophet sometimes liued, when hee raised the widowes childe to life. Before the gate of the citie also there is shewed a certaine Chappell, where (they say) Elias first spake with the widow, 1 Reg. 17.
Of Abelmehola. THis was a towne in the tribe of Manasses, on this side Iordan in the mid-way betweene Sichem and Salem, some 38 miles from Ierusalem Northward. At this day it is called Abisena; where there are found certaine ruines of Marble pillars, by which may be gathered, that in times past it hath beene a very beauti∣full citie. It seemeth to haue taken the name from a great Lamen∣tation or Mourning: for Abel signifieth To lament and bewaile; and Machol, A company. The typicall signification of ELIAS. ELias, according to the interpretation of Saint Ierome, signifies the minister of Iehouah: but as others would haue it, Eliah is as much as my God Iehouah. He was a type of Saint Iohn Baptist, who was sent before to prepare the way of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Chirst. Of this you may reade more, Malach. 4. Matt. 11.17. Isa. 40. &c. The trauels of the Prophet Elisaeus or Elisha. ELisha followed Elias through diuers countries, and became as it were his seruant, pouring water vpon his hands, and mi∣nistring to him, 1 Reg. 19. 2 Reg. 3. Elisha went with Eliah from Gilgal to Bethel, which was six miles, 1 Reg. 19. From Bethel they both went to Iericho, which was 4 miles. From Iericho he went beyond Iordan, 6 miles; where his Ma∣ster was taken from him vp into heauen, and his spirit was dou∣bled vpon him, 2 Reg. 2. From thence he returned backe again to Iericho, which was miles, passing through the riuer Iordan vpon drie ground; by which miracle the children of the Prophets (viz. such as studied diuinitie at Iericho) did certainly know that the spirit of his ma∣ster Elias rested vpon him. Neere to this towne, he flang salt into a riuer, by which the water was made sweet, 2 Reg. 2.
From Iericho Elisha returned to Bethel, which was 4 miles: here the chldren that mockt him, saying, Come vp thou bald pate, &c. in contempt of his age and office, were deuoured by 2 Bares, 2 Reg. 2. From Bethel he walked to Mount Carmel, which was fifty six miles. From thence he went to Samaria, which was about thirtie two miles. From thence he went to the three Kings, viz. Ioram King of Is∣rael, Iehosaphat King of Ierusalem, and the King of the Idumaeans, into the desart of Arabia Petraea, which was 104 miles: here he prayed vnto the Lord, and he sent them water lest they should haue perished with thirst, 2 Reg. 3. From the Desart of Arabia Petraea hee returned backe to Sa∣maria, which was 104 miles, where he relieued a certain widdow woman that was afflicted with pouertie and want, miraculously by a Cruse of Oyle, 2 Reg. 4. Iosephus lib. Antiq. 9. supposeth this Woman to bee the widdow of Obediah the Kings, Steward, of whom you may reade before, who did hide and maintaine a certaine number of the Prophets of the Lord in a caue, 2 Reg. 18. From Samaria Elisha went oftentimes to a Towne called Su∣nem, as he returned to Samaria to Carmel, which was 16 miles distant. Here a certaine rich woman obseruing his often passage to and fro by that Towne, built him a little chamber wherein he might rest himselfe after his journey: to which place he often re∣sorted, and in recompence of this benefit (although she had been long barren) he prophecied, that within a yeare she should haue a sonne, which accordingly shee had to her great joy and comfort. 2 Reg. 4. From Sunem he went to Carmel, which was 16 miles. From thence he returned back again to Sunem to the woman where hee vsed to lie, which was 16 miles: here hee restored her sonne to life, 2 Reg. 4. From thence he went to Gilgal, which is distant from Sunem 36 miles towards the South: here he fed 100 men with 20 barlie loaues, 2 Reg. 4.
From Gilgal he went to Samaria, which is accounted 20 miles: to this place Naaman the Syrian came to him to be healed of his leprosie, 2 Reg. 5. From Samaria he went to Iordan, which was eight miles, Here he made a Hatchet of yron that fell into the water, to swimme, 2 Reg. 6. From Iordan he went to Dothan, where the children of Iacob sould their brother Ioseph to the Midianites, which was 8 miles: here the Angells of the Lord compassed him and his seruant a∣bout, lest they should haue bin taken by the armie of the Syrians, and God strooke the Syrians with blindnesse, 2 Reg. 6. From thence he led the army of the Syrians (being thus made blind) to Samaria, which was 12 miles, and deliuered them to the King of Israel, vpon condition that he should giue them meate and drinke to refresh themselues, and suffer them to depart in peace, which he did, 2 Reg. 6. From Samaria he went to Sunem, which was 16 miles: here he aduised the woman where he vsed to lie, to trauel thence to some other place, because of the famine that should follow and conti∣nue for seuen yeares, 2 Reg. 8. From Sunem hee went to Damascus, which was 132 miles: there he told Hazael, that he should succeed his Master Benhadid in the gouernment of the Syrians, 2 Reg. 8. From Damascus he returned to Samaria, which was 132 miles, where soone after he fell sicke and died; his body was buried neer to Samaria, where the Lord a long time after his death shewed a wonderfull miracle, for a dead man being throwne into his Se∣pulchre, was restored againe to life by touching of his bones, 2 Reg. 13. This man gouerned the Church of God amongst the children of Israel 60 yeares after the death of Elias. So all the Trauels of Elisha were 730 miles. Concerning the townes and places mentioned in his Trauels, you may reade before. The Typicall signification of Elisha. ELisha or Elischa signifieth, The saluation of God; being deri∣ued of El, that is, God; and Iaschag, He hath saued: from hence
Iesus, a Sauiour; because this Prophet was a notable type of our Sauiour Iesus Christ: for as Elisha was annointed Priest by the Prophet Eliah; so Christ was the annointed Priest of the father: and as Elisha did many workes of mercy and myracles, to make euident Gods power and prouidence; so our Sauiour Christ went from place to place, shewing mercy to the blind, lame, and impo∣tent, vpon them working wonderfull miracles, that thereby his Doctrine might be made euident to the World, and all such as trust in him be made capable of eternall happinesse. Tha Trauels of the Shunamite, whose sonne, Elisha had raised from death to life. FRom Sunem she went to Mount Carmel, and besought Elisha to come and raise her sonne from death to life, which was 16 miles, 2 Reg. 4. From thence she and Elisha returned backe againe to Sunem, which was 16 miles; and there hee deliuered her sonne vnto her aliue, 2 Reg. 4. From Sunem (hauing buried her husband) shee trauelled into the land of the Philistins, because of the famine that was to come suddenly after, being 56 miles, 2 Reg. 8. From the land of the Philistines, shee returned to Samaria, which was 40 miles, 2 Reg. 8. From Samaria she returned to Sunem, which was 16 miles. So all her trauels were 144 miles. Of the Prophet Isaiah or Iesaia. IEsaia, or Ieschaia, is all one in signification with Elisha, that is, a Sauiour. He was the sonne of Amos (which signifieth, strength) and by consequence Ozia King of Iudah was his cosin-german, as may appeare by this Genealogie following.
Ioas King of Iuda. Amasiah King of Iuda. Ozias King of Iuda. Iotham King of Iuda. Ahas King of Iuda. Ezekias King of Iuda. Manasses King of Iuda, who caused Isaiah to be slaine. Amos, Isaias father. Isaias had two daughters, Sear Iasub, that is, the rest remai∣ning: and was a signe of the rest of the po∣steritie of Iuda that should re∣maine and dwell there, Isa. 7. Mahez Schatal, that is, a suddē de∣struction: for this 2d daughter of I∣say did denote the immediat desola∣tion of the king∣domes of Syria and Samaria. From whence it plainely appeareth, that the Prophet Esaias was of the stocke of Dauid, and linage of Christ; for which cause in the fifth chapter of his prophecie, he calleth him his beloued. He began to teach publiquely in the yeare of the World, 3167, and before Christ 800, and gouerned the Church eighty yeares and more, vntill the time of Manasses, who caused him to be cut in pieces with a saw. In anno mundi 3190: before Christ, 778, Isay saw the Lord sit∣ting vpon a high throne in great majestie, the lower part whereof filled the Temple, and the Saraphins compassed him round a∣bout. Esa. 6. Cherubins are glorious and bright shining Angels, of a fiery nature: For Saraph signifieth, He hath turned to fire. His doctrine was two fold, that is, partly concerning the Law, partly the Gospell, as may appeare by his prophecie: in the first forty chapters whereof, the doctrine of the law is set forth with sharpe reprehensions for sinne: in the first foure of which, are grieuous accusations of sinners for breach of the first comman∣dement; the other for the most part prophecie of horrible punish∣ments, mutations, and change of gouernement; but principally, of the Iewes, Babylonians, Assirians, Syrians, and Aegyptians. From the fortieth to the end of the booke is contained the do∣ctrine of the Gospell, and of the Kingdome of our Sauiour
Iesus Christ; which hee hath set forth with such excellent elo∣quence, figures, and amplifications, that hee may be compared with the best Orator that euer wrote. The Trauels of the Prophet Ieremias. IEremias or Ieremiah, signifieth, The exalted of the Lord: he was borne in the Tribe of Benjamin, in a Citie of the Priests called Anathoth, and from thence came to Ierusalem, which was two miles, and continued there for 40 yeares, teaching and prophecy∣ing. From Ierusalem he was sent to Euphrates, where in the cliffe of a rocke he hid his girdle, Ier. 13. which was 400 miles. From the riuer Euphrates, he returned backe againe to Ierusa∣lem, 400 miles, A little after, the Lord sent him backe againe to Euphrates, (400 miles) to fetch his girdle, and loe it was putrified. From thence he returned backe againe the second time to Ie∣rusalem, 400 miles. From Ierusalem he was led captiue bound in chaines with o∣ther prisoners to Ramath, a citie in mount Ephraim, which was eight miles: there Nabusaraden the chiefe captaine caused him to be set at liberty. From Ramath he went to Mispah, which is 8 miles: where he continued a while with Gediliah Prince of the Iewes, which man had the chiefe command of certaine cities of Iudaea vnder Nabu∣chadnezzer. But in the seuenth yeare of the captiuitie of the people of Isra∣el, Ishmael that was of the stocke and progenie of Dauid (hoping to obtaine the gouernement of Iuda) made warre vpon Gediliah, and put him to death; wherefore Ieremy went from thence with Iohn the son of Kareach, Prince of the Iewes, to Bethlem Euphra∣ta, which was 8 miles, Ier. 41. Now when he had staied a while in a village neere Bethlem called Geruth Ghimeham were some∣time Chimeham the sonne of Barzillai liued, 2 Sam. 19. hee pro∣phecied,
saying, If you stay in this land you shall do well, neither shall any euill hap vnto you; but if you depart hence into Aegypt, they shall de∣uoure you with famine and with the sword, Ier. 42. But Iohn and the rest of the Princes would giue no credit to the words of Ieremy, but went into Aegypt, and compelled the Pro∣phet to goe along with them: so they went from Bethlehem to Tachpanes, which was 172 miles. Here the second time Ieremie prophecied vnto them, saying, Behold, Nabuchadnezzer shall come hither and wast and destroy all the countrey of Aegypt, beat downe the I∣mages of Bethsemes, (or Heliopolis) and carry away the Aegyptians in∣to perpetuall captiuity, Ier. 43. But the people of Israel being moued to anger because of his words, stoned him to death. So the Tra∣uels of the Prophet Ieremiah were 1786 miles. Concerning the townes and places mentioned in the Trauels of this Prophet you may reade of them before, except Geruth. Chimeham, which stood close by Bethlehem: it taketh the name from a stranger, or traueller; being deriued of Gor, which signifi∣eth, He hath trauelled; and Tachpanes, which was a Citie of Ae∣gypt, some 180 miles from Ierusalem; where the Prophet Iere∣my was stoned to death; it is oftentimes called by the name of Taphnis. The trauels of Vrijah the Prophet. VRias, or Vriah, signifies, Illuminated, or inlightned of the Lord. He was borne at Kiriath-jearim, a mile from Ierusa∣lem towards the West: from thence he came to Ierusalem, and there prophecied of the destruction of the Citie. After, when King Ioachim went about to take away his life, he fled thence into Aegypt, 160 miles. But the king sent messengers into Aegipt & fetcht Vrijah back againe to Ierusalem, 160 miles, and there cut off his head, and caused his body to be throwne into the sepulchre of a poore de∣spised man, that it might not be knowne that he had beene a Pro∣phet of the Lord. So all his trauels were 321 miles.
Of Hananias the false Prophet. HAnanias or Chanania signifieth, the grace of God. This false Prophet was a Gibeonite, and came from Gibeon to Ieru∣salem, which was foure miles; where he tooke the woodden yoakes from the necke of Ieremiah the Prophet: but Ieremiah cau∣sed yron yokes to be made in their places, and told Hananias that for his falshood, that yere he should surely die, as after he did. Of the Prophet Ezekiel. Ezekiel or Iechezkel, signifies, the strength or fortitude of God. He was carried captiue with 3000 others of the Nobility of the Iewes from Ierusalem to Babylon, which was 680 miles the same yeare that Nebuchadnezzer put King Ioachim to death: within fiue yeares after (a little before Easter) the Booke of the Law was found, 2 Chron. 3. He began to prophecie in Babylon, Anno mundi, 3356, before Christ, 612; at which time he saw his first visions, neere to the Riuer Chebar. Of the Riuer Chebar. THe riuer Chebar was neere Babylon in Chaldaea, vpon the borders of Mesopotamia, falling into Euphrates; and was of∣tentimes called Aborras, according to the opinion of many lear∣ned men. Strabo in the seuenteenth book of his Geography saith, that there is another riuer between Tygris and Euphrates, called Basilius: Aborras passeth along by the citie of Athemusia, and is a very faire streame, from whence it is called Chebar, which sig∣nifies, a swift and spacious riuer. Neere to this riuer the Prophet Ezekiel saw the Glory and Majestie of our Lord Iesus Christ in a bright shining cloud. In this place also dwelt many Iewes, to whom hee prophecied and foretold the destruction of Ierusalem by Nebuchadnezzer, and the captiuitie of Zedekiah.
The Trauels of the Prophet Daniel. DAniel signifies, The Iudge of God. In the raigne of Ioachim King of Iudah, he was carried away captiue from Ierusalem to Babylon, by Nabuchadonezar, which was 680 miles, and there with his fellowes learned the Arts and Language of the Chaldaeans, for three yeares. He was then but young, about some 19 or 20 yeares of age, and liued in exile 91 yeares, vntill the third yeare of Cyrus Emperour of the Persians; about which time he saw his last vision, and a little after died, when hee was about 110 yeares of age, as may be gathered by the circumstances of Histories and times. From Babylon he went to Susan in Persia, an. mun. 3418, before Christ, 550, being then 94 yeares of age, which was 252 miles, where neere to the flood Eulaeus, hee had a vision of a ram and a goate; which set forth the state of the second Monarchie (which was that of the Graecians.) In this vision Gabriel the Archangel, appeared to Daniel, Dan. 8. This was in the third yeare of King Balthasar. From Susan Daniel returned to Babylon, which was 252 miles; Here hee interpreted to Belthasar the meaning of these words, Men, Mene, Tekel Euphrasin, Dan. 5. From Babylon he went to the riuer Tygris of Hidekel, which was accounted 36 miles: here in the third yeare of Cyrus King of Persia, he saw his last vision, which is described in the 10, 11, and 12 chapters of his prophecie. From Tygris, he returned to his own house at Babylon, which was 36 miles. Sometimes also in his three last yeares of his life, he vsed to goe to Egbatan, the Metropolitan citie of the Medes, which was accounted 464 miles from Babylon, towards the Northeast: Here Daniel built a faire and artificiall Temple, so strongly, that it remained vnperished, and retained the ancient beautie many ages, to the great admiration of all the spectators: In it the Kings of the Medes, Persians, and Parthians, were for the most part honourably buried: the gouernement whereof was
committed to a Priest of the Iewes, as Iosephus saith, lib. Antiq. 10. cap. 4. From Egbatan, he returned backe againe to Babylon, which was 464 miles, and there died anno mun. 445, and before Christ, 533. So all the trauels of the Prophet Daniel were 2184 miles, Of the places to which he trauelled. Of Susan. SVsa or Susan, is so called from a sweet smelling floure; but chiefely a Rose or a Lillie, because it is scituated in a faire and pleasant place. It was a goodly citie, lying on both sides of the ri∣uer Eulaeus, some 200 furlongs (that is, 25 miles English) about, as Policletus saith. And of this citie all the country round about is called Susana: bordering towards the North vpon Assiria, to∣wards the West vpon Babylon, towards the South vpon the Gulph of Persia, and joyneth vpon the East part of Persia to∣wards the East. There are but two cities that are eminent in it, that is this, and another called Tariana. The aire in the Winter season is very temperate, at which time the earth bringeth forth many pleasant floures and fruits; but in the Summer it is ex∣treme hot, by which heate all things are scorched and burned a∣way, and by reason of the putrifaction of the aire (as some think) in that season there doe breed toads, lyzards, and other noysome serpents in great abundance; so that the inhabitants are constrai∣ned (partly because of the heat, partly because of the loathsome and dangerous creatures) to build their houses all of earth, long and narrow, the walls and roofes being at least a yard thicke, that so the heat might not pierce through them, or serpents breed in them, Strabo, lib. Geograph. 5. saith, that one Tython (the brother of Laomedon king of Troy) did first build this citie, about such time as Thola judged Israel. After him his sonne Nemmon beautified it with a faire and goodly castle, calling it after his own name Mem∣non. (Of this man Homer speaketh.) This castle was such a good∣ly thing, that a long time after his death, the towne was called Memnon, as Strabo obserueth: but in Hester and Daniels times, it was called Susa, and the inhabitants Susans. The Persian Empe∣rors
in those times keeping their courts there for the most part, and did greatly beautifie the citie with faire buildings. The first of these Emperours that liued here was Cyrus, who after hee had conquered Babylon, Assiria, and many other Kingdomes and countries lying neere to the citie Susa; that he might with more ease and better safety retaine them in his gouernment, remoued his court from Persepolis (which lay vp in the East part of Per∣sia) to this towne, where all the Winter season, for the most part, he liued, and in the Summer went to Egbatan the chiefe citie of Media, because there at that season, the aire was very temperate: His successors after him obseruing the same course for their bet∣ter conueniencie, and to make euident their greater magnifi∣cence, repaired the Castle of Memnon, joyned to it many faire and goodly buildings, and close by it planted a pleasant orchard of diuerse and sundry sorts of trees and hearbes. It is reported that the gate whereby they entred into this orchard, was very curiously built, supported with pillars of polished marble, imbos∣sed with siluer and gold very rare to looke vpon: ouer it was a banqueting house, beautified with liuely pictures, costly furni∣ture and beds of gold and siluer couered with rich tapestry, wrought with silke, siluer, and gold; vpon these they vsed to eate their banquets: it was paued with Porphire Marble, and Hya∣cinths, in such sort, as it greatly delighted such as beheld it. The Queene had a priuate garden to her selfe. In which were great abundance of trees of diuers kindes, and many sweet floures and herbes: In which garden Ahashueras walked to qualifie the heat of his wrath ihat he had conceiued against that wicked and perfi∣dious Hamon, who through enuie and ambition sought the destru∣ction of the whole nation of the Iewes; lest by giuing place vnto anger, he should transgresse the bounds of clemencie and justice: wherefore it becommeth euery King, Prince, and Iudge, to imi∣tate the example of this Emperor, who in the heate of his anger, would determine nothing of so wicked a man: for long and often deliberation becommeth euery wise man before he doth any thing, Est. 7. Not farre from the Emperors pallace, in a faire and pleasant Garden, there stood a colledge of the Magi, that is, such as the
Persians accounted wise and learned men: these were of such ac∣count for their knowledge and vnderstanding, amongst that peo∣ple, that some of them in succeeding ages were chosen for Kings and gouernors in that countrie. They studied for the most part the Mathematickes History, Philosophie, and Diuinitie, and as many haue thought, the Prophecies of Daniel, Ezekiel and others: wherefore as is said before, many are of opinion, That the Wise men which came into Iudaea to see Christ, were of this Colledge and towne, because it stood East from Ierusalem. It is at this day called Cusistane, as Ortelius and Sebastian Munster witnesses, and in their times was vnder the gouernment of one Caliphus Emperour of the Saracens. This Caliphus was strongly besieged by one Al∣lan the great King of Tartaria, in this Towne, Anno Dom. 1250. But because of his exceeding couetousnesse and parcimony, he lost the citie and was famished to death. Of the Riuer Eulaeo. VLai, which Stra. li. 15. calleth Eulaea, passed through the city of Susa, and as Pliny saith, lib. 6. cap. 27. tooke the beginning at Media, and so fell into a whole or cauerne of the earth, & passed vnder the ground till it came neere to the citie Susa, where it brake forth againe, and compassed about the tower of Susa, and a temple in that city dedicated to Diana. The inhabitants hold this riuer in great estimation, insomuch as the kings drink of no other water, and for that purpose carry it a great way. Strabo according to the testimony of Polycletus, saith, That there are two other Ri∣uers of good account, which passeth through Persia, viz. Choa∣spes & Tigris, but neither of them are in like estimation as this is. Of Elam. PErsia in antient times was called after this name, from Elam the sonne of Sem. But after Perseus had obtained a large and spacious gouernmnt in that country, it was after his name called Persia. Elam signifieth, a youth, or a young man.
Of Egbatana or Egbatan. THis is the metropolitan city of the Medes, and is distant from Ierusalem 1136 miles towards the Northwest, built by Dei∣oce King of the Medes, as Herod. lib. 2. saith, Here Daniel built a faire Temple, of which you may reade more in his trauels. Of this towne you may reade more in the trauels of Iudeth. The typicall signification of Daniel. DAniel signifies the Iudge of God: tipically representing Christ who is appointed by that eternall Iehouah to be Iudge of all things both quicke and dead, and rescueth his Church, which is (as a rose compassed ahout with thornes) oppressed with the ty∣ranny and cruelty of euil and wicked men, casting those false iud∣ges and mercilesse gouernors into eternall exile and the pit of de∣struction. And as the Prophet was innocently condemned, cast into the Lyons den, and had the dore sealed vpon him, and to the judgement of man, no hope of life, or meanes to escape was left him, yet by the prouidence of God was deliuered out of this danger, and came thence safe and vntoucht, Dan. 6. so our Sauior was innocently condemned, cast into the graue, sealed vp among the dead, and to common judgement left as a man out of minde; yet early in the morning at the appointed time, by the power of his Deitie he raised himselfe vp from this pit of hell (the graue) and gloriously triumphed ouer it and Death. Of the Prophet Hosea. THis Prophet Hosea was borne in a towne called Bemeloth, or Bethmeloth, (as Dorotheus sometime Bishop of Tyre saith) which was a towne in the Tribe of Issacher, not farre from Bethulia, some fiftie two miles from Ierusalem toward the North, neere to which place Holofernes afterward pitched his Tents, extending thence to the field of Esdrelon, and the towne Chelmon, from whence it seemeth this towne taketh the name.
He prophesied in Israel eight hundred yeares before Christ; his name signifieth, A Sauiour, being deriued of Hoschiag, the third conjugation of Iaschag, that is, He hath saued, Mat. 2. Of the Prophet Ioel. IOel signifies, Gods owne, as Saint Ierome expoundeth it. He prophesied eight hundred yeares before Christ, both in Israel and in Iudah. He was borne in a village which was called Bo∣thomeron, not farre from Sichem, in the tribe of Manasses, as Do∣rotheus the Bishop of Tyre sayeth. Of The Prophet Amos. THis mans father dwelt at Tekoa, a poore man, one that kept kine, and vsed to gather wilde figges, as appeareth in the first and seuenth chapters of Amos. In this towne Amos was borne, and followed the profession of his father, but the Lord called him to be a Prophet; and then he went to Bethel, which was twelue miles distant. Here he reprehended Ieroboam King of Israel, for Idolatry, and worshipping the golden Calfe; after, hee was accused by Amasia the chiefe priest of the Idols in Bethel, and bound in chaines, and at length Vria the sonne of this Amasia stroke him vpon his head with a speare, whereby he was mortally wounded. From Bethel, being sicke, hee was carryed backe to Tecoa, which was twelue miles: where a little after he died, as Saint Ie∣rome witnesseth: in whose time his monument was to be seene. Amos signifieth, A burthen, as indeed he was to the wicked Isra∣lites, he so sharpely reprehended them in his sermons of the law. He liued eight hundred yeares before Christ. So his trauels were 24 miles.
Of the Prophet Obediah. OBediah signifies, Gods obedient seruant, of Abad, he hath serued, or been obedient. He liued six hundred yeres before Christ, about the time of the captiuitie of Babylon. Saint Ierome saith, that in his time there were to be seene in the citie of Samaria, the monuments of three Prophets, that is, of Elisha, Obe∣diah, and Iohn Baptist. But some thinke that Obediah the Prophet lay not buried in Samaria, but rather it was the sepulchre of that Obediah which liued in the time of Ahab, that hid a hundred of the Lords Prophets, 50 in one caue, and 50 in another, betweene which there were 300 yeares difference. The Trauels of the Prophet Ionah. THe Prophet Ionas was borne in Gath Hepher, which was a towne in the Tribe of Zabulon, from whence to Samaria is accounted thirtie two miles: here he prophesied to Ieroboam (second of that name) King of Israel, that he should recouer He∣math and Damascus, and so to the plaine of the Red Sea, 2 Reg. 14. From Samaria to Ioppa or Iapho a port towne vpon the sea shore (to which Ionas went when he fled from the Lord) was 38 miles: But the Lord stirred vp a great winde when Ionas was vpon the sea, that the Marriners cast him our, and he was deuoured of a Whale, Ionas 1. That Whale which had deuoured Ionas, with a continuall course and great violence, in three daies and three nights swam to the Euxine sea, and there cast him vp vpon the shore, which was 600 miles, Ios. Antiq. lib. 9. From the shore of the Euxine sea, Ionas went to Niniueh, which are eight hundred miles: Here Ionas preached repentance to the Niniuites, Ion. 3.4. So all the Trauels of Ionas were 1470 miles.
Of Gath Hepher. IN this towne the Prophet Ionas was born: it was scituated in the tribe of Zebulon, sixty miles from Ierusalem Northward and foure miles from Nazareth towards the South. It seemes to take the name from aboundance of grapes; for Gath Ghephaer sig∣nifieth a Wine-presse. Of Iapho. IApho or Ioppa was a city or hauen towne scituated vpon the sea, where all such ships landed as went into Iudaea. At this day the Turks and Saracens call it Iafa, lying vpon the Mediter∣ranean sea, in the tribe of Dan, Ios. 19. in a certain mountaine 20 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. Pliny, li. 5. saith, This city was built before the Floud; and in S. Ieroms time there was to be seen the stone to which Andromeda was bound when she should haue bin deuoured by a monster of the sea. The Poets feign this woman to be the daughter of Cepheus, and deliuered by Perseus King of the Persians, whom after she maried. It is called Iapho because of the beautifull scituation. Some say it was so called of Iapheth the son of Noah, who first caused it to be built. Of Tharsis. FRom Ioppa, as is said, the Prophet Ionas descended into a ship, that he might fly vpon the sea. The Latine and Greeke texts reade it Tharsin; whence it hapned that many haue thought that Ionas fled from Tharsis a city in Cilicia, in which country Saint Paul was borne. But Luther in his Exposition of the Prophecy of Ionas doth vtterly disallow of this as false; for the Hebrew Text reades it not, To Tharsin, but In Tharsin, that is, into the Sea. For the Hebrew tongue hath two words or syllables which sig∣nifie the Sea, which are Iam and Tharsis. Iam signifieth not onely a great sea, but the meeting together of waters, or a Lake. So in Luke 5. the sea of Galile, in which Christ and his Disciples sai∣ed, is called a Lake; yet Ioh. cap. 6. and the rest of the Euange∣lists,
call it a sea. So also Moses, Gen. 1. calleth the meeting toge∣ther of the waters, Iam; which may signifie a sea and a Lake. But Tharsis, or Tarschich denoteth a great sea, and no Lake; or an high and troublesome sea, as the Mediterranean sea is. In this Paul tra∣uelled, and there standeth many Islands, as Rhodes, Cyprus, Sici∣lia and others; all which are at this day subiect to the Turks, Ve∣netians, or Spaniards. It extendeth it selfe from Ioppa and Sili∣cia, to the Streights betweene Spain and Mauritania. Into this Sea Ionas was cast when the Whale deuoured him. In like man∣ner, the Red sea and all others that are ocean seas are called Thar∣sis, as appeareth in the 72 Psalme, where it is said, The Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall bring Presents. Here, the Kings whose Empires extend themselues alongst the sea coast are vnderstood. But the city Tharsis (the countrey of the Apostle Paul) is not a kingdome, neither euer had a King, much lesse many Kings. So Solomon sent his shippes by Tharsin (that is, by sea towards the Southeast, into the Red sea and Eastern Ocean) that they might bring gold, pretious stones, and sweet gummes from Arabia. But the ships could not saile by the Red sea vnto the town of Tharsis vnlesse they would haue sailed ouer the land, which is vnpossible; because Tharsis lieth into the land from the Red sea, as all Cos∣mographers agree. So also the Psalmist saith, Thou breakest with thy strong windes the ships of Tharsis, that is, of the sea; beside many such like speeches. From whence S. Ierom concludes, that Tharsis may better signifie the sea, than the city Tharsis. Of the Euxine sea. THe Euxine Ocean is that great and troublesome sea which beginning not farre from Constantinople, runneth from Bosphorus and Thrace, towards the East and North, containing to the Longitude eight hundred miles, but to the Latitude two hundred and eighty. Towards the South it toucheth vpon Asia the lesse; towards the East vpon Calcos; towards the West, Thracia and Valachia: but towards the North it is ioyned to the poole of Maeotides. This sea in times past was called Pontus
Axenus, that is, the inhospitable country; because as Strabo, lib. 1. of his Cosmography saith, The inhabitants neere about the sea∣shore did vsually sacrifice those strangers they got, or else cast their bodies vnto dogs to he deuoured, making drinking cups of their skuls. But after, when the Ionians had built certain townes vpon the sea coast, and had restrained the incursions of certaine Scythian theeues which vsually preyed vpon Merchants that re∣sorted thither; at the command of Pontus their King, who had ob∣tained a large and spatious kingdom in that country, they called it Pontus Euxinus, which is as much to say as, the hospitable coun∣try. Ovid testifieth almost the same, concerning the originall of the name of this sea, after this manner; Frigida me cohibent Euxini littora Ponti, Dictus ab antiquis Axinus ille fuit. The chilly shores of th' Euxine sea constraines me to abide, In antient time call'd Axinus, as it along did glide. Of Ninus or Nineveh. NInus or Nineveh was a city of Assyria, where the Emperours of that country vsed to keep their courts. It was first built by Ninus that great Emperour of the first Monarchy, 300 yeares after the floud, and 2000 before Christ, about the time when the Patriarch Abraham was borne. It continued in great glory for the space almost of 1500 yeares, and was distant from Ierusalem to∣ward the Northeast 684 miles: vpon the East side ioyning to the riuer Tygris, on the North to the Caspian sea. It takes the name from the beauty of it, being deriued of Navah, which signifieth A comely place spatious and pleasant. There are many that are of opinion that in many things it exceeded Babylon; as, for the sumptuousnesse of the buildings, the strength of the Walls, and the extent. The walls were so thicke that three Chariots might haue met vpon them without any danger; and beautified with an hundred and fifty towers. Ionas being sent of God to this city,
was three daies going through it, that is (as Luther expounds it) through euery street of it; in which time he conuerted a hundred and twenty thousand to repentance. Arbaces (who was also called Arphaxad) was then Emperor. This Arbaces, Iustine lib. 2. calleth Arbactus: he was a Captaine of the Medes, who perceiuing the effeminat disposition of Sardanapalus the then Emperour, taking aduantage of the times, and this mans weaknesse, conspired with some of his companions to vsurp vpon his gouernment: and that he might make them hate and loath his loosenesse, brought them into a room where the might see him sitting amongst his harlots, tyred in womans apparell, and carding wooll. This sight greatly displeasing them, and before being encouraged by Arbactus, they seised vpon the city, and besieged Sardanapalus in his palace. But to preuent the miserie of a shameful death, after he had gathered all his riches together, he set fire on his palace, where he, his com∣panions, and treasure perished. This fire continued 15 daies, and hapned 823 yeares before Christ: about which time Arbactus succeeded Sardanapalus, began to reign, and continued his gouern∣ment 28 yeres. But the Medes held not the Assyrian Empire long; for Phul Belochus who at this time reigned in Babylon, and his successour Tiglath Philasser, are called Kings of Assyria, be∣tweene whom there hapned many great Warres, 2 Kings, 15.26. From whence may be gathered, That after the death of Arba∣ctus, these Emperours dwelt in Niniveh, and succeeded in the Empire. Thus was this city greatly defaced with continuall euills, the Lord before hand giuing them many admonitions and gentle corrections (if it had bin in them to haue conceiued it) to winne them to repentance; but they continued still in their sins, there∣fore according to their former prophecies, Cyaxares King of the Medes besieging this towne, tooke it and destroyed it euen vnto the ground, as Eusebius saith. This desolation hapned 13 yeares before the destruction of Ierusalem, in the 11 yeare of Sadyattis King of the Lyddians, who was grandfather to Croesus, An. mundi 3349, before Christ 619.
After this destruction it lay a long time desolat, but at length some part of it was restored, though with much trouble; & then when it was at the best estate, constrained to suffer many changes; and at length vtterly destroied by Tamerlane the Great the second time, An. mun. 3390. After this, the inhabitants of that countrey vpon the East side of the riuer Tygris, began the third time to build it. But whether this third restoring of this City was at the command of some Prince that had the gouernment of the Coun∣try thereabouts, or because of the scituation, or for priuat profit, it is not set down: neuerthelesse it is again repaired, standing on the borders of Armenia, beautified with goodly buildings, with faire and spatious streets, compassed about (as other cities of the East are) with walls and ditches sufficiently strengthned to op∣pose the Enemy. But in respect of the former Niniveh it seemes a small village. It hath a bridge built of ships, lying vpon the East side of it ouer the riuer Tygris; and vpon that side of the Riuer there stand many faire gardens and orchards; and the land there also is very fertil and pleasant. But vpon the West of Tygris the soile is nothing so fruitfull. At this day it is called by the name of Mossel; so that although it stands in the same place, yet doth it not retain the same name. To this towne there is a great resort of merchants, who bring vp their commodities from the Riuer Tygris hither, and from hence conuey them to Bagdeth & many other parts of the world. The inhabitants thereof are for the most part Nestorians, of whom you may reade before in the descripti∣on of the Sects remaining in Ierusalem at this day. They are had in great account and estimation among the Turkes, because it is imagined that one of this sect helpt Mahomet to compose the Al∣caron. This Nestorius liued anno Dom. 429. and taught at Constan∣tinople; but after he was condemned at Ephesus for an heretick, he was constrained to steale from Constantinople, and to flie to Thebes in Egypt; where God laid a grieuous punishment vpon him, for his tongue began to rot in his head, and to consume with vermin, of which he died miserably.
The spirituall signification of the Prophet Ionas IOnas signifieth a Dove, and typically representeth Christ in his name. For Christ was that gratious and innocent Dove, who hath made euident to man his singular mercy & clemencie, without any shew of bitternesse or wrath. Then in his affliction; for as Ionas thrust himselfe into the sea of calamity, and there was swallowed vp of a Whale; which might be well resembled to the grave: so Christ our Sauior was cast into the sea of affliction, the miserie and calamity of this world; and after that, thrust into the jawes of death, the graue, where (as Ionas did in the whales belly) he lay three daies, and then arose againe, the earth being vnable any longer to contain his body. Of the Prophet Micah. THis Prophet was born at Maresa a towne of Iudea, 16 miles from Ierusalem Westward; it signifieth a bitter field. In S. Ieroms time the ruins of the wall of this City was to be seene. Micha or Micheas signifieth humble or lowly. This man was held in great estimation, because he was the first that named the coun∣trey where our Sauior Christ should be born, viz. in Bethlehem, 800 yeares before his natiuitie. He liued an. M. 3200. Of the Prophet Nahum. NAhum signifies a Comforter. Hee was borne in a towne of Galile, called Elcosch, as he saith in the beginning of his Prophecie. This village was shewne vnto Saint Ierome, by those that trauelled with him through the holy land: in his time it was but a small village, called by the name of Elcos, and scitu∣ated (as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre saith) on the further side of Be∣thabara, sixteene miles and something more from Ierusalem to∣ward
the Northeast. This Prophet liued 750 yeres before Christ, and prophecied of the destruction of Niniveh, which after came to passe. Of the Prophet Habacuck. HAbacuck, or Chabacuck, signifies, One that embraceth, or a lo∣uer; from Chaback, He hath embraced. For as a Nurse em∣braceth and kisseth her infant; so also this Prophet embra∣ced and comforted his people with comfortable doctrine, lest by the destruction of Ierusalem (which he prophecied should after happen by the Chaldaeans) they should be driuen to desperation. Paul tooke the foundation of his Epistle to the Romanes out of this Prophet, reciting a saying of his, viz. The Iust shall liue by faith He began to preach a little before the Prophet Ieremy, 650 yeres before Christ, aboue 100 yeares before Daniel was cast into the Lions den. From whence most of the Learned conclude, that this could not be that Habacuck which brought meat to Daniel as hee was among the Lions; but they rather thinke it a fragment of a spiritual comedy, and therefore worthy to be called Apocrypha. Of the Prophet Zephania. ZEphania signifies the Secretary of the Lord; being deriued of Zaphan, He hath kept secret. He liued in Ierusalem and Iudaea in the time of Iosiah King of Iuda. He was born (as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre saith) in a towne called Sabarthaca in the tribe of Simeon. Of the Prophets Haggai and Zacharia. HAggai or Chaggai signifieth, A Priest celebrating the Feast of the Lord; being deriued of Chagag, He hath celebrated a feast. And Zacharias or Zacharia doth denote, such a man as re∣membred
the Lord; being deriued of Zachar, that is, Hee hath re∣membred or recorded. These two Prophets prophecied in Ieru∣salem in the second yeare of Darius the son of Histaspis, 519 years before Christ, an. mun. 3449. Haggai began his prophecy vpon the first day of the sixt moneth Elul, answering to the 28 of August. He sharpely reprehended the people because they neglected the house of the Lord, and built vp their own houses. In the eighth moneth Marhusuan (which for the most part an∣swereth to our Nouember) Zacharias the same yere began to pro∣phecie, and in his sermon exhorted the people to repentance, ad∣ding the promise of our Sauior, and that he would turn vnto them that would turn vnto him, Zach. 1. These two Prophets lie buried 20 miles one from the other. For as Dorothaeus Bishop of Tyre saith, Haggai lies buried in Ieru∣salem amongst the Priests. But Zacharias neere to a towne in the field of Bethania, 20 miles from Ierusalem Westward. But in the time of Theodosius the Emperor was remoued and preserued as an holy Relique. Concerning that fable and figment inserted into the history Nicephorus, I vtterly disallow. Of the Prophet Malachi. THis Prophet prophecied after the captiuity of Babylon, and dwelt in the towne of Ziph, as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre saith. Malachi signifies an Angel sent; and in Greek, a Messenger: for this Prophet preached so comfortably as if he had bin an an∣gell of God; but principally of Christ and Saint Iohn Baptist, who should goe before him, to prepare his way and make his paths straight. S. Ierom in his Epistle to Paul and Eustochius writes, that some of the Hebrewes suppose this Malachi to haue been Esdras the Scribe, who was sent by Artaxerxes Longimanus Emperour of the Persians, to restore the commonwealth of Israel, in the yeare before Christ 457.
An Instruction how the Prophets may rightly bee vnderstood. FIrst looke into the Cosmographicall Table at the beginning of this booke, and diligently obserue the countries & cities that are there set downe, and how they lie scituated from Ie∣rusalem. Toward the South of Ierusalem, the Idumeans, Ismaelites, A∣rabians, and Egyptians dwell. Toward the East, the Moabits, Ammonites, Chaldaeans, Babylo∣nians, and Persians. Toward the North, the Phoeniceans, Syrians, Assyrians, and Armenians. Toward the West lieth the Mediterranian sea, Grecia, Italy, Spain, and the Isles of the sea. Secondly this rule is to be obserued, that as often as the Pro∣phets speake of the tribes of Israel, they vse these names, viz. Is∣rael, Samaria, Ephraim, Ioseph, Iesreel, Bethel, & Bethauen: these are the names of the Kingdom of Israel: but to the kingdome of Iuda these names are attributed, viz. Iudah, Ierusalem, Benjamin, the house of Dauid. But when the Prophets ioyn these two King∣doms together they call them by the names of Iacob and Israel. Thirdly, when thou readest in the Prophets the name of any country or city which is not sufficiently knowne vnto thee, search this alphabeticall Table here following, and thou shalt finde the whole matter declared vnto thee.
An alphabeticall Table of all the Countries and Cities mentioned in the Prophets. A ABARIM, that is, a bridge or a passage ouer. It was a mountain of the Moabits where the Israelites pitched their tents, Num. 33. ACHOR, the valley of Trouble. Here Achan was sto∣ned to death for his theeuery. It stood not farre from Gilgal to∣ward the North, 12 miles from Ierusalem, Ios. 7. Isa. 6. ADAMA, Red earth. This was one of the cities that were destroi∣ed with fire and brimstone from heauen. AI, Hilly. This city Ioshuah burnt with fire. It lay 8 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ios. 8. AIATH, Idem, Esa. 10. AR, or ARI, a Lion. It was a city of the Moabits lying beyond Iordan in the tribe of Benjamin, called Ariopolis, scituated vpon the banke of the riuer Arnon, 24 miles from Ierusalem North-Eastward, Deut. 2. In Esa. 15. it is called Arar, a Destroyer. ARAM, Noble or Mighty. Armenia and Syria are so called, of Aram the son of Sem; the chiefe city of which country is Dama∣scus. Pliny, lib. 6.17. saith, The Scythians were also in antient times called Aramites. ARNON, a famous riuer of the Moabites in the tribe of Reu∣ben, which falls into the dead sea, 20 miles from Ierusalem East∣ward. In Esa. 16. it is called RANAN, he hath shouted for ioy. AROER, by vsurpation, an Ewe tree. This is a city of the Moa∣bits neere to the riuer Arnon, in the tribe of Gad beyond Iordan, 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, Ier. 40. There is another citie so called, neere to Damascus in Syria, Esa. 7. ARPAD, the light of redemption. This was a city in the land of
Damascus, Ier. 49. There is another flourishing city of that name which may compare with Antiochia for greatnesse, Esa. 10. But where it is scituated it is vncertain. ARVAD was a part of the land of Canaan, so called of Aruad the son of Canaan, Gen. 10. ASCANES, or Tuiscones, are a people descended of Ascenitz, the son of Gomer the son of Iaphet, which sometimes dwelt in Ar∣menia, but now haue their abiding in Germany, 2 Gen. 10. Esa. 51. So that of Gomer they are called Germanes, and of Ascanes, A∣scanians or Tuiscons. ASSECA, fortified round about. Neer to this town Dauid killed Goliah. It stood 8 miles from Ierusalem Westward. ASSVR or ASSYRIA, a blessed country; being so called of Assur the son of Sem. AVEN, Iniquity. Bethel was so called after Ieroboam had there set vp a golden Calfe, Hos. 10. B BABEL, Confusion. Babylon is the metropolitan city of Chal∣daea, 280 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. BATH, Domesticall. It was a town of the Moabits in the Tribe of Reuben beyond Iordan, Esa. 16. BAZRA, a grape-gathering. It was a city of the Edomites scitu∣ad vpon the banke of Iordan on the farther side, neere to Betha∣bara, 20 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, Esa. 24.36. Ier. 48. Note here, that the country of the Moabits in times past was sub∣iect to the Edomits, and then this city was in their jurisdiction; but after, the Moabits got it into their hands again and held it. It was one of the six towns of refuge mentioned, Ios. 29. BEROTHAI, a Cypres tree. This towne stood neere Hemath or Antiochia, 280 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ezek. 49. In this city Dauid King of Israel tooke Hadadesar King of Zoba or Sophena, and constrained him to giue him a great deal of Brasse (as it is thought) yearely for tribute: for neere that city were ma∣ny brasse mines. BETHAVIN, the house of iniquity. Bethel was so called, Hos. 6.
It stood 8 miles from Ierusalem Northward. BETH-CHaeREM, the house of the Vines. It was a towne not far from Ierusalem Northward. Ier. 6. BETH-DIBLATHAIM, the house of dried Figs. It was a city of the Moabits, Ier. 48. BETHIESIMOTH, the house of desolations. It was also a city of the Moabits beyond Iordan in the tribe of Reuben, Ios. 13. Ezech. 25.20 miles from Ierusalem. BETH-GAMVL, the house of Restitution. This was a city of the Moabits, Ier. 48. BETH-BAALMEON, the house of habitation for the idol Baal. It was a city of the Moabits, 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, not far from Aroer, Ezek. 25. 1 Chr. 5. BVTZ, a Castle of prey. It was a city of the Ismaelites in Ara∣bia Petraea, 80 miles from Ierusalem Southwestward, Ier. 25. BEL and NEOB, two idols of the Babylonians, Esa. 45. Bel sig∣nifieth, the god of mixture or confusion: Neob, the god of prophecie. C CALNO, his perfection. This is Seleucia, scituated vpoa Tygris beyond Babylon, 316 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. It is now called Bagdeth, Gen. 10. Esay 2. CANNE, a firme foundation. It was a city of the Syrians, Ezek. cap. 27. CAPHIHOR, a little Sphere, or around globe like vnto a Globe or pomegranat. Also Cappadocia a countrey of Asia the lesse, 600 miles from Ierusalem Northward. CARCHEMIS, a sacrificed Lambe. This was scituated too neer Euphrates in Syria, 400 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ierem. cap. 25. D DEEDAN, a city of the Idumaeans, so called of Dedan the son of Esau, Ier. 25. Isa. 21. DIBON, a mist. This was a City of the Moabites neere Hes∣bon
in the tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Ierusalem Northeast∣ward. DIBLATH, a bunch of Figs. It was a city in the tribe of Nep∣thali, neere to the lake of Samoconites, 80 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Ezek. 6. Here Zedekiah had his eies put out, 2 Kin. 25 Ier. 39.52. DIMON, Bloudy. This is a city in the tribe of Reuben, which as S. Ierom saith, is 28 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. DVMA, Silence. A city of the Israelites so called of Duma the son of Ismael. It stood in Arabia Petraea, 80 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest, Esay 25.21. E EGBATHANA, the metropolitan city of the Medes, distant from Ierusalem 1136 miles Northeastward. EDEN, Pleasure. A city of Syria scituated neer Euphrates, 400 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, Esay 7. This is thought to haue been a part of Paradice. EGLAIM, a roud Drop. It was a town of the Moabites, Esay, 15.16. ELAM, a Yong man, so called of Elem the son of Sem, Esa. 10.21 After Perseus had got in this country a great gouernment, he cal∣led it after his own name, Persia. ELEALE, the ascention of God. It was a city beyond Iordan in the tribe of Reuben, between Iacza and Hehbon, 26 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, Num. 32. ELIM, a Hart. This was a lake so called in the land of the Moa∣bits. Esa. 10. ELISA, the Lambe of God. So were the Aeolians called in Gre∣cia, of Elysa the son of Iavan the son of Iaphet, Ezek. 7. Gen. 10. ENAGLAIM, the fountaine of Calves. It was a towne or Castle neere to the Red sea, Ezek. 10. EPHA, the land of Obscuritie. It was a part of Arabia Petraea, so called of Epha, the sonne of Midian the sonne of Abraham, Gen. 25. Esa. 60.
G GEBIM, a Ditch. This was a town in the tribe of Iuda, Esa. 10. GEBAH, a hill. It was a hill in the city of Kiriath-jearim: there was a town also of the same name, standing within a little of it. This was a little more than a mile from Ierusalem Westward, Esa. 10. GEBAL, a bound or limit. It was the bounds and limits of Sy∣ria, bordering vpon the Mediteranean sea. This city Gibal or Ge∣bal was 160 miles from Ierusalem Northward, 1 Reg. 5. Psal. 82. GIBEAH, a hill. It was also called Gibeon, where Saul dwelt, foure miles from Ierusalem Northward, Esa. 10. GILGAL, a roundle, or the compasse of a hill. Here Ioshuah pitched his tents: it stood between Iericho and Iordan, 12 miles from Ie∣rusalem Northeastward. GOG. The Turks were thus called because they liued in tents, Ezek. 48. GOSAN, a land and riuer in Mesopotamia, called after that name, 2 Reg. 17. Esa. 37. H HADAD RIMMON, a Pomegranat. This was a towne neere to Megiddo, where Iosia King of Iudah was wounded to death, 46 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Zach. 12. HADRACH, the land of Gladnesse. So the Prophet Zachary cals Syria, cap. 19. HANES, an ensigne of Grace. This was a city of Egypt borde∣ring vpon Assyria, Esa. 30. HARAM, the Syrian liberty. It was the metropolitan Citie of Mesopotamia, where Abraham dwelt, Gen. 11. distant from Ieru∣salem 440 miles Northeastward. HAVERAN, a Casement. It was a City in Syria not farre from Damascus, 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East, Ezek. 47.
HAZOR-ENON, the gate of a fountain. It was a city in Syria. HAZOR-TICHON, the middle Porch. It was a town in Syria not far from Haveran, Ezek. 47. HAZOR, The land of Hay. So the Ismaelities called their coun∣trey. HEMATH, anger. So the Prophets called Antiochia the Me∣tropolitan of Assyria, distant from Ierusalem 280 miles North∣ward. HERMON, Acurst. It was a mountain beyond Iordan, neer to Libanus, 122 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northeast. There is another mountain of this name neer to Naim, and not far from Mount Tabor, 44 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, of which the Psalmist speaketh, Psal. 89. Tabor and Hermon praise thy Name. The mountain beyond Iordan is oftentimes called by the name of Mount Gilead. HESBON, an ingenious cogitation. It was a city of the Moabites in the tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. HENAH and IEVAH were two idols, Esa. 37. HEVILAH, Sandy. So India is called, and a certain part of A∣rabia Petraea, of Hevilah the son of Chus, Gen. 10. These countries are very dry and sandy. HETHLON, He hath rolled together. It was a city of Syria neere to Antiochia, Ezek. 47. HOLON, a Window. It was a town of the Moabits in the tribe of Reuben, and is also called Helon, Num. 2. Ier. 47. HORONAIM, the Syrian Liberties, two towns of the Moabits, Esa. 16. I IACHZA, the priuity of God. A city of the Moabits in the tribe of Reuben, 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. IAEZER, the help of God. A city of Refuge belonging to the Le∣uits, in the tribe of Gad beyond Iordan, 40 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward.
IAVAN GRECIA, so called of Iavan the son of Iapheth, which was distant from Ierusalem 800 miles Westward. IEZREEL, the Seed of God. This is the city where Queen Iesa∣bel was deuoured of Dogs. It standeth 48 miles from Ierusalem Northward. IRHERES, or Heliopolis, a city of the Sun. This was a City of Egypt, 224 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest. K KEDAR, Blacknesse. This was a Desart of the Ismaelites, called Sur, 80 miles from Ierusalem Southwestward. KIR PARIES, a Wall. This was Cyrene a great city in Africa, which was 816 miles from Ierusalem Westward. There was a town of this name in the land of the Moabits in the tribe of Reu∣ben, Esa. 16. KIR-HAZERETH, or Kir-Hares, a Mudwall. It was a City of the Moabits in Arabia Petraea, otherwise called Petra, 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, Esa. 16. KIRIATHAIM, a City. This town was in the tribe of Reuben, 22 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, Esa. 16. KIRIAH, or Kirieth, ibidem. KITHIM, a shining Iewel. Macedonia is so called of Kithim the son of Iavan the son of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Ier. 2. Mac. 1. For if you doe diligently obserue the deriuation of names, you shal find that of Kithim comes Maketis, and so by continuance of time, and change of words, Macedonia. It lieth 920 miles from Ierusalem North-Westward. L LACHIS, a continuall walking, or as some will haue it, A pleasant walke. This was a city in the tribe of Iuda, 20 miles from Ie∣rusalem Westward, Ier. 34. LAISA, a Lionesse. So was Caesarea Philippi somtimes called. It was also called Dan, scituated neere to the fountains of the ri∣uer Iordan, not far from Mount Libanus, 104 miles from Ierusa∣lem Northeastward. LIBNA, Frankincense. It was a town in the tribe of Iudah, 10
miles from Ierusalem towards the South-West. LVD, that is, Lydia, a country in Asia minor, so called of Lud the sonne of Sem. LVIT, greene grasse; it is also a mountaine in the Tribe of Reu∣ben, Esa. 6. M MAGOG, dwelling vnder a shed or tent. The Turks are so called, Ezech. 38. MARESA, an inheritance. In this towne the Prophet Micah was borne, Micha 1. it was scituated in the Tribe of Iuda, distant from Ierusalem 16 miles towards the West. MEDAI, a measure; the Kingdome of Media was so called, of Medai the sonne of Iaphet. Gen. 10. MEDBA, warme water: it was a city of the Moabits in the tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Esay 16. MEDEMENA, a dunghill: it was a towne in the tribe of Iudah, neere Beerseba and Gaza, 44 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest, Iosh. 15. There was also another towne of the same name in the tribe of Benjamin, not farre from Ierusalem, Iosh. 10. Ier. 48. MEGIDDO, a wholesome apple. Here Iosia King of Iuda was slain in war; it stood 46 miles from Ierusalem Northward, Zach. 12. MEPHAATH, the splendor of waters: it was a citie belonging to the Priests in the Tribe of Reuben, subject to the Moabites, 24 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Ier. 48. MESECH, the tract of sowing: so the Muscouites and Russians are called, of Mesech the sonne of Iaphet, Gen. 10. MIDIAN, a measure: a town lying vpon the red sea, 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the South; so called of Midian the son of Abraham by Keturah, Gen. 25. MISPE, a Watch. This citie stood in the land of Giliad, be∣yond Iordan, eight and fortie miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. There is another Towne of this name also not farre distant from Ierusalem in the Tribe of Benjamin, Hosea 5. Ie∣rem. 40.
MOAB, a father. The countrie of the Moabites, scituated be∣tweene the red sea and the mountaines Abarim, Ezech. 9. MEVSAL, running swiftly: it was the name of a people that tooke their beginning from Vsal the sonne of Ioktan. Gen. 19. N NABAIOTH, the countrey of the Prophets: this country begin∣neth in the Tribe of Gad beyond Iordan, and extendeth to the East part of the dead sea, and so by the land of the Moabites to the Red sea. It taketh the name of Nabaioth the sonne of Ish∣mael: for all the tract of Arabia Petraea, from the Red sea to the Gulph of Persia, of him is called the land of Nabathaea. Diodorus Siculus saith as much, and further, That it extendeth towards the East vnto the Indian sea, Gen. 25. NEBO, Prophesying. It was a city of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, neere to mount Pisga, twentie miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Ier. 48. NIMRIM, a Leopard. This was also a citie in the Tribe of Gad beyond Iordan, thirtie two miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast, Isa. 16. NO, a hinderance, so was Alexandria a citie in Aegypt in anci∣ent times called, distant from Ierusalem 288 miles towards the West, Ezek. 30. NOPH, a honey combe; so the Prophets call Memphis the Me∣tropolis of Aegypt, being distant from Ierusalem 244 miles to∣wards the Southeast, Isa. 18. Ier. 2. Ezek. 30. O ON, opulencie. So Ezech. c. 30. calleth Heliopolis, a city of Ae∣gypt, which is 224 miles distant from Ierusalem towards the Southwest. OREB, a Crow or Rauen. Neere to this place in mount Ephraim Prince Oreb was slaine: not far from Iericho, twelue miles from Ierusalem towards the North, Iudg. 7. Psal. 83. OPHIR, a pallace: it was the proper name of the sonne of Io the posteritie of Sem, of whom in times past India was called Ophir. You may reade of this, Gen. 10. 1 Reg. 9.
P. PATHROS, or PETRA, the Metropolitan citie of Arabia Pe∣traea, 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. It is a coun∣trey also of Aegypt neere Taphnis, 180 miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the Southwest, Isa. 11. Ezech. 29. PARATH, fruitfull. A name of the riuer Euphrates, Ier. 2.13. PRAZIN, a breach. It is a valley neere Ierusalem, where Dauid ouercame the Philistines, 2 Sam. 5. PHVT is Africa, so called of Phuth the sonne of Cham. Gen. 10. R RABBA, a multitude. Philadelphia the Metropolitan of the Ammonites is so called, 96 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. RAEMA, thunder: so they called Aethyopia, of Raema the sonne of Chus, Gen. 10. RAMA, high. This citie stood eight miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the North, Isa. 10. There were other cities also of the same name and signification. REZEPH, a cole; it was a citie in Syria, Isa. 37. RIBLATH, an inueterate anger. This was a citie in the Tribe of Nepthaly, neere to the lake of Samoconites, 80 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North. Antiochia also was sometimes called Riblah, 2 Reg. 25. Ier. 39.52. RIMMON, a Pomegranat. This was a citie in the Tribe of Iudah not far from Gerar, 32 miles from Ierusalem towards the South-East. S SABA, the stone Achates. This was the Metropolitan Citie of Aethyopia, called also Meroe, 960 miles ftom Ierusalem to∣wards the South. The two famous Queenes (one that came to see Solomon, the other mentioned Act. 8.) dwelt in this towne. SANIR, a cleere light. So mount Hermon beyond Iordan was called of the Ammonites: it stood 112 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the Northeast.
SARION, the Doues song. So the Edomites called Mount Her∣mon that stood beyond Iordan. SARON, a faire plaine, or a greene place. So is that plain between the sea of Galile and Mount Ephraim called, Is. 35. There are some that thinke there is a Mountaine so called. SELA, a Rocke: this is Petra a citie of Arabia, ante. SEPHARVAIM, a citie of the Scribes: it stood in Assiria, Isa. 37. SIBARIM, a citie of Syria neere to Damascus, Ezech. 47. SIBMA, a possession, a citie built by the sons of Reuben, 24 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, Num. 32. SICHOR, blacke. It is a brooke or riuer called Rhinocorurus, which falleth into the Mediterranean sea, neere to the towne Ri∣nocorura, scituated vpon the vtmost borders of the Holy land to∣wards the South, 72 miles from Ierusalem towards the South∣west. The riuer Nilus in Aegypt is also called Sichor, Ier. 2. SIMRI, Gardians. They were Arabians dwelling vpon an An∣gle of Isthumus of the red sea. SINEAR, a blow vpon the teeth. Chaldea is so called, Is. 11. SION, or SCAION, by Schin, not by Zade, tranquilitie and secu∣ritie: the Mount whereon Ierusalem stood is not so called, but Mount Hermon beyond Iordan, Deut. 4. SIENE, or SEVENE, illustrous: it was a citie in Affrica, vpon the borders of Aegypt and Aethyopia, 516 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. Iouias saith, that the inhabitants at this day call it Guagheram. T TACHPANES, or TAPHNIS, a couered or hidden ensigne. It is a city in Aegypt, 180 miles from Ierusalem Southwestward, Ierem. 2.43. THAMAR, a plaine. This towne was built by Solomon, and stood 360 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. THELASSER, a Princes tombe: it was a country vpon the bor∣ders of Assiria, Isay 37. THEMATH wonderfull: a city of Arabia Petraea, Ier. 25. so cal∣led of Thama the sonne of Ismael, Gen. 25. it stood 40 miles from Ierusalem Southward: it is called Theman, a City of the South.
THOGARMA, perfection. Tartaria was so called of Thogarma the sonne of Gomer the sonne of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Ezech. 27. THVBAL, a people bordering vpon the Muscouites, so called of Thubal the sonne of Iaphet, Gen. 10. Ezekiel, cap. 27. & 38. ma∣keth Mesech, Thubal, Gog, and Magog, all one people: from whence may be gathered, that these people dwelt towards the North, and were gouerned by one Prince. In the 38 Chapter he calls them Gog, that is, the Turke, who is Prince and gouernor in Mesech and Thubal. Therefore without doubt the people of Russia in times past were called Thubal, which people dwelt neere to Muscouia: and this opinion seemes to be more probable than theirs that imagine the Italians and Spaniards, which haue their dwellings neere vnto the riuer Iberia, to be the offspring of Thu∣bal. V VPHAR, the countrey of gold. It is called also Ophir and India. 1 Reg. 9. Ier. 10. Dan. 10. Psal. 119. Z ZEB, a Wolfe. The wine-presse of Zeb was in Mount Ephraim, not far from Iericho, 12 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, where Zeb the Prince of the Midianites was slaine. There is another towne of this name, neere to the riuer Iaboch, beyond Iordan, 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. ZEBOIM, pleasantnesse. One of the fiue cities that were burnt with fire from heauen, Gen. 14.19. Hosea 11. ZENAN, a sheepfold: it was a city in the Tribe of Iuda, Mich. 1. ZOAN, mouing. Tanis a city in Aegypt where Moses wrought al his miracles before Pharaoh, was so called: it stood 232 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest. ZOBA, presumptuous. This was also called Zophena: it is the countrey of Armenia, 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, which Dauid conquered, 2 Sam. 8. 1 Chron. 19. ZOR, a rocke. Tyrus is so called; it stood 160 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North. Thus (gentle Reader) for your better ease and vnderstanding, haue I collected a short Alphabeticall Table, and therein briefly described all those countries and cities mentioned in the Pro∣phets: that so by your diligent care and obseruation, you may the better vnderstand the meaning of such texts of Scripture wherein they are mentioned.
Of Esdras the Lawyer. ESdras signifies, a helper, of Asar, he helped. He is a type of our Lord Iesus Christ, who is our helper and Sauiour, which hath brought vs into that holy land, eternall life; and is the restorer of religion, and the Christian Common-wealth. This Esdras was sent to Ierusalem, to restore the common∣wealth of the Iewes, Anno mundi 3511, before Christ, 457, in the seuenth yeare of Artaxerxes Longimanus, that good Emperour of the Persians. So he went from Babylon to Ahaeua, a certaine riuer neere Babylon; to which place he assembled a great mul∣titude of Iewes, and from thence sent to Caspia to fetch a cer∣taine number of Leuites, (this land was in Chaldea not far from Babylon.) These being here met together, celebrated a fast vnto the Lord, and with solemne prayers besought his aide and furtherance in their enterprise: then they went thence to Ierusa∣lem, which was 680 miles, and there restored the Iudaicall gouer∣ment, instituting Ecclesiasticall officers, chiefe Priests, Princes and other gouernours. Of the land of Caspia. THe land of Caspia signifieth, the land of siluer, being deriued of Kesaeph, that is, siluer. It was so called, because they vsed to dig siluer in that place (see Lyra) it was a country neere Baby∣lon, where the priests and Leuites were in captiuitie; and stood 680 miles from Ierusalem towards the East.
Of Nehemia. IN the 20 yeare of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was anno mun. 3524, and before Christ, 444. Nehemias went from Susan to Ierusalem, which was 920 miles, there hee repaired the walls and gates in 52 daies, Nehem. 1.2.6. When he had gouerned Iudaea 12 yeares, he returned backe a∣gaine to Susan to Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was 920 miles, Nehem. 3. Afterward Artaxerxes about the end of his raigne suffered Ne∣hemia to returne backe againe to Ierusalem, which was 920 miles, Nehem. 17. So these journeyes of Nehemia make 2760 miles. Of this citie Susan you may reade before. Of the name and typicall signification of Nehemiah. NEhemiah signifies The consolation of God, being deriued of Nicham, He hath comforted. This man was a type of our Lord Iesus Christ; for as Nehemias was a comfort vnto the dispersed Iewes, in that he was sent to restore them into their own country, and to rebuild Ierusalem; so Christ our comforter was sent by his Father from that euerlasting throne of heauen, to refresh & com∣fort vs by his doctrine, and gather the dispersed members of his Church into one communion, that he might bring them into that heauenly Ierusalem which he hath built, and where he hath pre∣pared a place for vs. The Trauels of Serubabel. SErubabel carried the people of Israel from Babylon to Ierusa∣lem, which was 680 miles, in the first yeare of Cyrus Emperor of Persia, anno mundi 3433, before Christ, 535. In the 17 yeare of his gouernment he went from Ierusalem to Susan 920 miles, 3 Esd. 3.4. From Susan he went to Babylon, which was 242 miles, 3 Es. 4. From Babylon in the same yere he returned to Ierusalem, 680
miles, where the next yeare after, in the beginning of the second moneth, which answers to the 21 of May, in the 3 yere of Darius Ahasuerus, Zerubabel, and Iosua, the chiefe Priests of the Iewes, be∣gan to build the Temple, and finisht it in the sixt yere of the same King, 1 Esd. 6. So all the trauels of Zerubabel were 2280 miles. The Booke of ESTER. MOrdochius was led prisoner with Iechoniah, to Babylon, which was 680 miles. From Babylon he went to Susan, which was 252 miles; there he brought vp Ester his brothers daughter, and taught her honest discipline and the feare of God. This maid was very beau∣tifull and comely, wherefore at such time as Darius Ahasuerus (the sonne of Hystaspis) had caused all the beautifull Virgins of his Empire to be brought before him, that from amongst them he might chuse him a wife; Mordochius adorned this Virgin with goodly apparell, and she also went with them: in whose presence (by his instruction) she behaued her selfe so well, that the Empe∣ror chose her from among the rest, and made her his Queene, she being at that time but a poore maid, and of small abilitie. They were married in Susan in the second yere of his Empire, an. mun. 3454, and before Christ, 514. From whence it is euident, That preferment commeth neither from the East, nor from the West, but from the Lord. So these two journies make 932 miles. The Types and Allegories collected out of the Booke of Ester. MOrdochius, or Mordochai signifies bitter and contrite, being deriued of Marah, He was bitter, and Dachah, Sorrowfull and contrite. A fit resemblance of that true Mordochius, Christ Iesus, who for our sinnes and offences was constrained to drinke of that bitter cup of afflictions, the necessities of this world, suf∣fering in his body more than tollerable torments, as you may
reade in his passion; therefore justly called Mordochius, that is, bit∣ter and contrite. Ester and Alma haue both one signification, that is, a virgin, or one kept from the bed of man. Therefore she was a notable image of the Church, who keepeth her selfe chast and vndefiled, auoy∣ding the society of euill men; and although she seeme to be de∣solate and forsaken in this world, in respect of the wicked (who flourish like a floure, and glory in voluptuousnesse and pleasure) yet hath shee her Mordochius, her Spouse, her deerely beloued, which prouides for her, euen Iesus Christ that immaculate lambe who died for her saluation, and will clothe her in white, put into her hand a regall scepter, crowne her with glory, and set her with him in the throne of eternall happinesse. Ahasuerus signifies, a noble Captaine, and typically represents God the father: for as the Emperour had the command of 127 Prouinces, and in them did principally rule; so God our heauen∣ly father is the Emperor and gouernor of all Kingdomes, and all creatures both in heauen and in earth be obedient to his will; he sitteth in that euerlasting pallace of heauen, that place of joy, and that eternall Paradice, from whence he looketh downe to behold vs miserable and distressed creatures vpon earth; of his mercifull goodnesse electing and chusing vs to be heires of that eternall Kingdome, and purifieth vs with the graces of his holy Spirit, so that we might be made capable to sit with him in eternall fe∣licitie. The disdainfull Queene Vasthy may be a fit Type and Effigies of this world, not onely in respect of her pride, but her excesse in drinking; taking her name from Schatha, which signifies, To drinke: so this World liueth in all manner of prodigalitie and luxurie, and contemneth the Lord and King thereof, that Al∣mighty God which sitteth in the Heauens; and therefore is just∣ly throwne downe from that eternall Kingdome; whereas on the contrary, humble Ester (that is, the Church) is taken vp into dignitie, and crowned in that euerlasting Kingdome of Hea∣uen. Haman signifies, A rebellious and proud man: being deriued of HAMAN, He hath stirred vp a tumult: typically representing
the Diuel, whom God in the beginning made a good Angell, ex∣alted him in the heauens, and made him much more glorious than others; yet notwithstanding glorying in himselfe, hee con∣temned his Maker, & nothing would content him but to become like vnto him, yea he desired to be worshipped of our Lord Iesus Christ, Mat. 4. And as Haman endeauoured to ouerthrow not on∣ly all the people of the Iewes, but Queene Hester also; so the Di∣uell doth not onely endeauour to ouerthrow the whole Church, but if it were possible the head of the Church Christ Iesus. Of that holy man Iob. IOb was a holy and good man: he dwelt in the land of Vz, so called of Vz the sonne of Aram the son of Sem, as S. Ierome vp∣on Genesis obserueth. This Vz was that great man which built (as was thought) Damascus in Syria, and all the land which ex∣tendeth from Damascus to Iordan, after his name was called Vz, that is, the land of counsell, fot so Vz signifieth. There were two townes in this countrey, where Iob is said to haue dwelt; that is, Astaroth-Carnaim, and Batzra: Asteroth-Carnaim was distant from Ierusalem, 52 miles towards the Northeast, the inhabitants of which towne worshipped the goddesse Venus, and called her by the name of Astaroth, of which you may reade before. S. Ie∣rome saith, That the sepulchre of Iob was to be seene in his time in that towne; and later writers testifie as much for their times. This towne at this day is called Carnea. Batzra is mentioned in the 36 of Genesis, it signifieth a grape ga∣thering. In this towne it was thought that Iob was borne, it lay be∣yond Iordan in the tribe of Reuben, 20 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. All this countrey in those times was sub∣ject to the King of the Edomites or Idumaeans; but after it was joyned to the land of the Moabites, they hauing conquered the kings of Edom: you man reade more of it in the 6 of Isay, also Ios. 20. where is shewed, that it was one of the six cities of refuge, appointed by Ioshua. Heere Iob for the most part continued and
held this towne in great honour and reputation. He liued about the time of Baela, first king of the Edomites: and according to the opinion of Saint Ierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Philo, and Luther, was for his excellent vertue and singular piety, chosen King of that countrey, which he greatly enlarged, making all the countries and neighbouring Princes neer adjoining, tributary vn∣to him: wherfore (as Ierom saith, in locis Hebraicis) hauing obtained so large an Empire, he remoued his seat from Batzra to Astaroth Carnaim, which was a strong and well defenced citie, where in those times (as Moses witnesseth, Gen. 14.) there inhabited migh∣tie men, and noble Heroes; that so by their vertue he might with the greater facilitie suppresse and conquer other Prouinces. There are many thinke him to be of the stocke of Abraham, and of the family of Esau, because he is mentioned in the 36 of Genesis where it is said, That when Baela died, Iobab the sonne of Zerah of Boz∣ra or Betzra raigned in his stead. And Saint Ierom in his preface vp∣on the booke of Iob sheweth, that he was but fiue degrees remo∣ued from Abraham: for Abraham had Ishmael Basmath, who was the wife ef Esau, mother of Reguel, grandmother to Sarah, and great grandmother to Iob. So that by the mothers side Iob descended from Ishmael, and by the fathers side from Esau. Isaac Esau Reguel Serah Iob or Iobab, king of Idu∣maea, Gen. 36. Notwithstanding there are some that are of opinion, That he de∣scended from Nahor, Abrahams brother; and was of the family of Vz, Nahors sonne: which opinion also Saint Ierom mentioneth in his Hebraicall questions. But most of the antient fathers hold this nothing so probable. Luther vpon the 36 chapter of Genesis saith, That he was King long time before Moses carried the children of Israel out of Ae∣gypt.
For Iuda and Aser the sonnes of Iacob, had children before they went into the land of Aegypt, Gen. 46. therefore it is not im∣possible for Reguel the sonne of Esau, to haue children also, since he was married long before his brother Iacob. From hence then it may be gathered, that Iob was King of Idumaea before Iacob and his sonnes went into the land of Aegypt. For although the four∣teene sonnes of Esau gouerned the land of Edom, like so many Princes (of which number Reguel the grandfather of Iob was one) because they held it as their inheritance; yet to auoid sedition and distractions, which oftentimes happen where there is not a certaine head and principall commander, therefore they elected Bela the sonne of Beor to be their King: after whose death they chose Iob, because he was a holy man of God, and in his actions just and vpright; who without doubt raigned amongst the Edo∣mites a long time. For he liued after his afflictions (which God imposed vpon him to trie him) 140 yeares. Plato saith, he marri∣ed Dina the daughter of Iacob: but Saint Ierome, That he marri∣ed the daughter of an Arabian, by whom hee had Enon. Both these may be true; for his first wife being dead he might marrie an Arabian. After the death of Iob, the Gyants & Heroes in Asteroth Car∣naim fell againe from the Idumaeans; for when Moses brought the children of Israel out of the desart of Arabia Petraea, and that they had conquered the land beyond Iordan, the city Astaroth-Carnaim had a King called Og, who gouerned all the Kingdome of Basan. This Gyant was of a mighty stature; he had a bed of yronFoure yards & a half long, & two broad. nine cubits long, and foure broad, Deut. 3. Of Eliphaz. ELiphaz the Themanite was the brother of Reguel, Iobs grand∣father. This Eliphaz had a sonne called Theman, who built a citie, and after his owne name called it Theman, where Eli∣phaz his father dwelt with him. From whence it hapned that he was called Eliphaz the Themanite, Iob 2. It was distant from Ieru∣salem forty miles towards the South, and therefore it was called
a citie of the South: you may reade of Eliphaz in Ier. cap. 25. He had a Concubine called. Thimnah, because of her beauty & come∣ly proportion: by her he had Amaleck, of whom came the Ama∣lekites, betweene whom and the children of Israel were cruell wars, Exod. 17. The Trauels of Eliphaz the Themanite. FRom Themen hee went to Astaroth-Carnaim, where Iob dwelt, which is accounted 92 miles, to comfort his friend Iob, Iob, 2. From Astaroth-Carnaim he returned backe to his owne house, which was 92 miles. So the trauels of Eliphaz were 184 miles. Of Bildad, Iobes friend. BEyond Iordan and the sea of Galile not farre from Astaroth-Carnaim, there is at this day found a town called Suah, where (as it is thought) Bildad the friend of Iob dwelt. Neer to this towne (as Sebastian Francus obserueth in his Cosmographie) there was yerly in the Summer season a great mart kept in certain tents and tabernacles erected for that purpose, of diuers colours. Bildad signifies an antient friend, and Suah taketh the name from deso∣lation, being deriued of Scho, he hath made desolate. Of Zophar the friend of Iob. ZOphar dwelt in the citie of Naema, Iosh. 15. but how farre it stood from Ierusalem is vncertaine. Zophar, of Zaphar, sig∣nifieth, swift. Naema signifies, pleasant and delectable, of Naem, courteous and comfortable.
Of Iobs daughters. THe Lord gaue vnto Iob after his affliction, and that he had tried his faithfulnesse, three daughters, so faire, that there were none fairer to be found in all the land. The name of the first was Iemmima, that is, as faire as the day, of Iom, which signi∣fies, a day. The second Kazia, that is, such a one as giueth a plea∣sant sauor like vnto the gum Cassia. The third, because of the ex∣cellencie of her countenance was called Kaeren Hapuch, that is, ca∣sting forth rayes or beames, Iob. 42. APOCRYPHA. The Booke of IVDETH. Of Egbatana. AFter the death of Arbactus or Arphaxad, which signifies a mighty Lyon, to whom Ionas prophecied, as is said be∣fore; there succeeded in the Empire of the Medes, Mandanes, Sarsomenes, Artecarnis, Cardiceas, and Deioces; who being enthronised in that Empire, called himselfe Arphaxad or Arbactus, the second. This man built Egbatana the metropoli∣tan citie of the Medes, and beautified it with very faire buildings & goodly walls, made all of foure square stone cut and polished, 70 cubits high, and 30 broad; towers standing vpon it 100 cu∣bits in height, as well those that were for the defence of the town, as those where the gates were. The aire in that country was tem∣perate, inclining rather to cold than heate, because it lay toward the North: it stood 1136 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. Here (for the most part) this Emperor kept his court, till (as He∣rodotus saith) he was vtterly conquered by Nebuchadnezzar, Em∣peror of the Babylonians. This was that Nebuchadnezzar which
sent Holofernus with a mighty army against Iudaea, Bethulia, and many other cities and countries, and would be worshipped as a god. Iudeth. 3. Of Hydaspes. HYdaspes is a riuer that ariseth in Media, which runneth tho∣rough a part of Parthia, extendeth it selfe into India; and not farre from the citie Nisa falleth into Indus, according to the opi∣nion of Pliny, and Strabo, lib. 15. Neere this riuer Nabuchadnezzar ouercame Dieoces, otherwise called Arbactus, Iudg. 1. The description of the countries conquered by HOLOFERNES. Of Kedar. KEdar (the wildernesse of Zur was thus called:) stood in the land of the Ishmaelites, 80 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest: and tooke the name of Kedar the sonne of Ishmael, Gen. 25. Of the mountaines of Ange. THe mountaines of Ange, lay betweene Pamphilia and Cici∣lia; to the latitude of that famous country of Cilicia in Asia minor, 320 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; not farre from Anchiale a citie of Cilicia, from whence it seemeth to take the name. Of Cilicia. CIlicia is a prouince of Asia minor; so called of Cilice the kings sonne of Syria and Phoenicia: the Metropolitan Citie of which countrey was Tharsus, where the Apostle Paul was borne: it was distant from Ierusalem 304 miles towards the North. Of Mallos. MAllos a citie of Cilicia, was so called of Malo, that is, plenty of all things. Stephanus saith, that it took that name of Mollo, who first built it. It is a citie to this day, and of most of the inha∣bitants of that country called Mallo, as Gesner obserueth.
Of Gesem. GEsem signifies, fruitfull. The land of Gosen in Aegypt was so called, being deriued of Gusch, that is, a turfe: it stood 174 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest. Of Aethyopia. THis country stands beyond Aegipt, 800 miles from Ierusalem towards the South, where the Sunne is extreme hot, that it turneth the complexion of the inhabitants to blackenesse: here breed great abundance of Dragons and cruell beasts. Of Esdrelon. ESdrelon was a plaine lying betweene the mountains, Thabor, Hermon, and Gilboa, extending it selfe from the cities of Me∣giddo and Apheck, to the sea of Gennezareth or Galile. In this great field, which was called the plaine of Galile, and the field of Megiddo and Esdrelon, there were many cruell battels fought; for here Gideon ouercame the Midianites: here Saul was put to flight by the Philistins, from whence ascending into Mount Gil∣boa he killed himselfe. Iosias also, King of the Iewes, was in this place put to flight by Pharaoh Necho, and wounded vnto the death. The camp of Holofernes was so great that it tooke vp all the plain, which contained 16 miles in length. In some parts it was won∣derfull fruitfull, and brought forth wine, oyle, and many other commodities in great abundance. It stood 52 miles from Ieru∣salem towards the North, and was so called of Caeder, that is, a hid order and disposition: for Alam is as much to say as, he hath hid. Of Sobal. SObal was a countrey vpon the borders of Syria, where Sophe∣na was scituated, neere to the riuer Euphrates; which country Saul and Dauid Kings of Israel somtime conquered: it stood 600 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and signifies, an eare of corne. Of Apamea. THis was a famous citie in Tetrapolis of Syria, two hundred and eighty miles from Ierusalem towards she North, built
of Seleucus Nicanor King of Syria, and was so called of Apamea his wife. Of the city Bethulia. BEthulia was scituated within 4 miles of Dothan, and two of the Galilean sea, 44 miles from Ierusalem Northward. A∣bout four miles from this town, in a mountain a little beside Do∣than, lay the tents of Holofernes in the sight of Bethulia, Iudeth c. 7. between which & Bethulia lay the plain of Esdrelon, in the midst whereof there ran a pleasant riuer, which in times past watred it. Here Iudeth (according to the custome of the Iewes) washed her selfe. The place where Bethulia stood is to be seene at this day, the ruins of the town and many houses still remaining. It was sci∣tuated vpon a goodly high mountaine, strongly fortified by Na∣ture, and as it seemeth by art also. A man might haue seen it tho∣rough the greatest part of Galile, but aboue the rest, a certain ca∣stle in the end of the mountain, made for the defence of the city. They shew at this day, in the mountaine and field neere Dothan, the place where Holofernes camp stood, and the reliques of their tents; also the brook where Iudeth washed her selfe. Bethulia sig∣nifieth, The hand-maid of God; being deriued of Bethulah, a vir∣gin; and Iah, God. Holofernes, a prophane Captaine, of which sort are those tyrants that persecute the Church of God. The Booke of TOBIAS. The Trauels of Tobias the elder. TObias the elder was caried captiue out of the tribe of Nep∣thaly, where he was born, to Ninive the Metropolitan ci∣ty of Assiria, being 600 miles: at such time as Salmanasser King of the Assyrians caried away the tenne tribes of Israel into Assyria Captiue; in the yeare before Christ 742. 2 Kings, ca. 17. Tob. 1. From that time he continued in Ninive, being then about 27 years old, and numbred amongst the yong men that went into
exile; for he was born about such time as Romulus and Remus were born, which was An. mun. 3200. and before Christ 798, Tob. 1. About the 30 yeare of his age he went from Niniveh into Me∣dia, which was 752 miles, and there came to a city called Rages in that country, to visit the banished Israelites: at which time hee lent by Gabel by bond, 10 talents of siluer, which amounts in our mony, at v. s. vi. d. the ounce, to 2062 li. and 10 s. or thereabouts. From Rages he returned backe againe to Niniveh, 752 miles. So all his trauels were 2104 miles. The Trauels of the Angell Raphel, and yong Tobias. IN the yeare before Christ 708, the Archangell Raphel went from Niniveh to Rages in Media, with Tobias the yonger, be∣ing 752 miles. From Rages in Media they returned backe again to Niniveh, 752 miles. So these journies were 1504 miles. ¶ The description of the places mentioned in their trauels. Of Nepthaly. THis was the chiefe city of the tribe of Nepthaly, 84 miles from Ierusalem toward the North. It stood in Galile, and in times past was a strong town: here Tobias the elder was born. It is to be seene at this day (as some say) but much decayed; and is now called by the name of Sirin, scituated in a mountain so steep and strongly fortified by nature vpon the West side, that it is im∣possible to ascend vpon it. In a valley some two miles from this towne towards the South, Naason spoken of in the first Chapter of Toby is scituated. Vpon the left side whereof there stood a towne called Sophet: but now there is nothing to be seene but a Castle, where in antient times the Knights Templers kept their abiding, and at this day is in the custody of the Turks. This castle is scituated vpon a high mountaine, fortified very strongly
both by art and nature, and standeth within a mile of Nepthaly Southwestward. At such time as Iosephus that great Historiogra∣pher (who was the sonne of Matthia of Marathia, a Priest of the Iewes) was chosen chiefe Commander of the tribe of Nepthaly, he gathered an army of 100000, and fortified this castle & Nep∣thaly, and many other townes thereabouts, continuing a long and sharp war against the Romans, vntill Nepthaly was taken, and he constrained to yeeld himselfe captiue. In the taking in of which town Titus the son of Vespasian did first ascend the walls, & there made manifest his noble resolution and valor. Vid. Ios. de bell. Iud. lib. 3 & 4. Of Rages a city of the Medes. RAges is so called of a great Congregation, being deriued of Ragasch, that is, He hath assembled a great company; for it was a very populous city. It was also called (as Strab. li. 11. Cosmo∣grap. saith) Rahga: but after being rebuilt and fortified by Nica∣nor, it was by him called Europus, beeing distant from Ierusalem 1396 miles toward the Northeast. The Persians call it Arsacia. S. Ierom, de Trad. Hebr. would haue Edissa, a city of Mesopotamia (or rather as Pliny saith, of Coelosyria) to be Rages, which stands but 448 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and from Ninive 188 miles Westward. There are diuers others that haue wrot of this town of Edissa: but that this and Rages should be both one I ca∣not see how to agree with Toby; for that hee himselfe hath set it down to stand in Media, and the Cities of the Medes lie distant from Ierusalem 1396 miles. Therefore gentle Reader I referre it to thy better consideration. Of Iesus the sonne of Syrach. SYrach signifies an Illustrous Prince, being deriued of Sa∣rach, he hath shined forth: he was of that noble family of Dauid, that is, the son of Syrach the son of Iesu, & cou∣sin german to Amos Syrach, who (as Philo saith) was the
chiefe prince and captain of the children of Israel in the time of Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, & is inserted into the gene∣alogie of Christ, Luke 3. He was born 230 years before Christ, in the city Ierusalem, from whence about the 38 yeare of his age he went to Alexandria, a city of Egypt, 288 miles (Evergetes Ptolo∣mais the sonne of Philadelphus being then King of that countrey) where he gathered out of that flourishing Library (set vp at the charge of Ptolomais Philadelphus) his booke of Ecclesiasticus, as bees from diuers floures gather sweet hony. Of the great city Alexandria. ALexandria was a city of Egypt, distant from Ierusalem 288 miles Westward; in antient time called No, that is, a Hin∣derance. But Alexander the Great taking affection to this city, in the yere 330 before Christ began to build it (for by continuance of time it was much decayed) and within the space of 17 dayes made it a goodly city, much greater than it was before: to which that he might adde the greater grace, he called it after his owne name Alexandria; and there he lieth buried, after hee had gouer∣ned the empire of the Grecians 7 yeares. For although he died in Babylon the chiefe city of the Chaldaeans, yet Ptolomais (one of his chiefe Princes) remoued his body thence in a golden chariot to Memphis in Egypt, and 20 years after to Alexandria. The sci∣tuation thereof is very delectable, bordering to the North vpon the Mediterranian sea, and to the South vpon the poole of Mare∣ridis, as Strabo saith, lib. 17. It was ten miles about, strongly forti∣fied with walls, beautified with goodly buildings, scituated in a very fruitfull countrey. And to giue a greater delight vnto the inhabitants, without the Walls there stood many goodly Or∣chards and Gardens, plentifully furnished with fruits and floures of diuers kindes, as Pomecitrons, Figges, &c. During the time of Ptolomais Philadelphus it was a famous and flourishing city; for this Prince being a great louer of learning, instituted an Acade∣my, as it is thought, in it, and added thereto a stately library, wher∣in were 400000 Bookes. The same whereof beeing published
through the world, many people of diuers Nations resorted thi∣ther to see it. Then Eleazer also the high-priest of the Iews, at the request of Ptolemais sent 72 Interpreters to translate the Bible out of Hebrew into Greeke; which was (as Eusebius obserueth) in the third yeare of his reign, before Christ 268. In recompence where∣of he sent to be dedicated in the Temple of Ierusalem a table of gold, richly adorned with Carbuncles, smarages, and other preti∣ous stones; two stately cups, and 30 boules of pure gold, as appea∣reth in Iosep. lib. Antiq. 12. The Academy continued there till af∣ter Christs time, as you may reade Acts 6. But the Library was consumed 47 yeares before Christ, and the city greatly defaced. For Iulius Caesar at that time making war with Pompey the yonger, who continued with his sister Cleopatra in this City, caused the Kings navy to be set on fire, and the Library standing neer it, the flame tooke hold of it, and burnt it downe to the ground with all that was in it, and defaced also a great part of the city. Iosephus writing of this city, compares it with the fairest cities of those times, being strongly fortified both by sea and land, so that it seemed to be inuincible. But at this day it is but a smal ci∣ty, the incursions of forrein enemies hauing wasted and destroied the greater part, and left the rest to be a wonder to the world, the heaps and ruins of goodly buildings making euident lamentable destructions. Thus man with his deuices perisheth, but the Lord endu∣reth for euer. Vpon the Booke of MACHABES. The Trauels of Antiochus Epiphanes. ANtiochus Epiphanes, that is, An illustrous Aduersary, in the yeare of Christ 380, was sent out of Syria by Antiochus the Great, to Rome, which 1600 miles, where he remained as an hostage for his father and his brother Seleucus Philopater seuen∣teen yeares, 1 Mac. 1.
After the death of his father he stole secretly from Rome, and went backe again to Antiochia in Syria, which was 1600 miles; and there succeeded his brother Seleucus Philopater in the gouern∣ment. He began to reign 173 yeares before Christ. In the third yeare of his reign he went from Antiochia to Ty∣rus, 60 miles: in that journey he conquered all the lower part of Syria and Phoenicia. From thence he went aboue sixe score miles through Galilee and Iudaea, conquering al the cities and countries that lay in his way; and would also haue gon downe into Egypt; but when hee heard that his nephew Ptolomais Philometor had proclaimed an as∣sembly and parliament, and would not acknowledge him for his Protector, he sent Apolonius one of his princes, vpon the day of the meeting into Egypt, and he himselfe returned back again to Iop∣pa, 2 Mac. 4. From Ioppa hee went to Ierusalem, which was 20 miles, where Iason the high-Priest and all the people receiued him with great honour. At that time Antiochus placed a Gard in the Castle or tower of Ierusalem, which was the beginning of their intolerable seruitude. But for that yeare, which was the fourth of his reign, he retur∣ned through Phoenicia to Antiochia in Syria, 280 miles. In the fift yeare of his reign hee went from Antiochia with a great army into Cilicia, being 80 miles. There he appeased the vprores of the inhabitants of Tharsus and Mallotus, and conque∣red all Cilicia, 2 Mac. 4. From Cilicia he returned backe againe to Antiochia, eightie miles. In the sixt yeare of his reign Antiochus went with a great army both by sea and land (wherein were many Elephants) to Pelusio, 400 miles. This city he conquered, and ouercame the Alexandri∣ans in a navall battell. 2 Mac. 4. From Pelusio (hauing built a bridge ouer Nilus) he went with his army to Memphis, conquerd all the countries & strong cities as he went, about 140 miles, and brought thither a mightie and great prey: where according to the saying of the Prophet Daniel, cap. 11. He dealt subtilly with Ptolomais Philometor.
From Memphis he returned to Alexandria, where the citisens would not suffer him to enter the gates, wherefore he besieged it, but to small purpose, which was 120 miles. From Alexandria he returned to Pelusio, which was 160 miles, there he left a garrison to retaine what hee had gotten in Aegypt, 1 Mac. 4. From Pelusio he returned to Antiochia with a great prey, be∣ing 400 miles. In the mean time Ptolomais King of Egypt, & his sister Cleopatra brought in the aid of the Romanes, Livy, Decad. lib. 4. 5. In the next yeare (that is, in the seuenth yeare of Antiochus E∣piphanes) there was seen in the aire as if there had been men figh∣ting; a Comet also appeared. This happened in the yeare before Christ 167. This yeare in the spring Antiochus went the second time from Antiochia with his army into Alexandria in Egypt, which was 560 miles. So passing through Coelosyria and Iudaea, hee came into Egypt, which he inuaded with open war, endeauoring to get that by force, which hee could not get by entreaty. But the Ro∣mans sent P. Popillius with other Embassadours into Egypt, who hearing that Antiochus was come to Leusia, which was within a mile of Alexandria, the Romanes went thither to him. Where when he had welcommed them, and shewed all the courtesie hee could to P. Popillius, P. Popillius deliuered him certain tables that he had about him written. And first of all commanded him to reade them, which he did. Then he counselled with some of his friends, What was best to be done in the businesse. While he was thus in a great study, P. Popillius with a wand that hee had in his hand made a circle about him in the dust, saying, Ere thou stirre a foot out of this circle returne thy answer, that I may tell the Senate Whe-thou hadst rather haue warre or peace. This hee vttered with such a firme countenance, that it amased the King. Wherefore, after he had paused a while, quoth hee, I will doe what the Senate hath written, or shall thinke fit. So doing little or nothing in Egypt, hee returned backe againe. Iustine, Lib. 34. Decad. Lib. 4. cap. 5.
Ios. lib. 12. cap. 6. These things hapned ann. vrb. Rom. 585. L. Aemi∣lius Paulus & Caius Licinius Crassus being then Consuls: in which yeare the Moon was totally eclipsed, Aemilius ouercame Perseus King of Macedon, and reduced Macedonia into a Prouince, Lib. Dec. 4. lib. 5. From Leusia, Antiochus (fearing lest the Iewes would forsake his Empire and rebell) went to Ierusalem, which was 288 miles; but the inhabitants of the towne shut him out of the city, where∣fore he besieged it, and by the treason of Menelaus chiefe Priest, (who for that purpose conspired with the gard that was in the ca∣stle) quickly got it and entred the gates. In every place where he came hee put the Citisens to the sword, and for three daies space did little else but cruelly massacre the people. He went also with Menelaus into the Temple, where he polluted the sacred things of the Temple, and took thence the vessels of siluer & gold, or what∣soeuer he found pretious or worthy: so that the prey he tooke a∣mounted to 1800 talents, which make almost 11 tunne of pure gold; all which were partly gifts dedicated to the Temple, and partly treasure that was left there as in a safe and sure place, to the vse of poore distressed widowes and orphans. After that Antiochus had robbed the Temple of all the siluer and gold that he could finde, had banished Iason, had placed a strong garrison in the tower of Acropolis, (the captaine of which was one Philip a very cruell man) and made Menelaus high-Priest; with all this booty and some number of captiues hee returned to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. In the yeare following, that is, before Christ 166, Lu. Aemilius Paulus triumphed for the wars of Macedonia. Not long after, Antiochus misdoubting the fidelitie of the Iewes, sent Apolonius with an army of 22000 to Ierusalem, who entred the city vpon the Sabbath day, and committed many outrages. Then, Antiochus hauing spent a great part of the gold and sil∣uer which he had got from Ierusalem, about the eleuenth yeare of his reigne made his expedition from Antiochiato, Persepolis, (it was also called Elymaides) in Persia, which was 196 miles.
Here he took the temple of Diana, spoiled all that country round about, and with strong hand gathered together a great masse of gold and siluer to maintain warre against Iudas Machabeus. But a multitude of citisens disliking his sacriledge, banded themselues together, and put Antiochus and his souldiers to flight before hee could take the city of Persepolis. 1 Mach. 6. 2 Mach. 9. Wherefore being driuen from thence, he fled with his army to Egbatana, a city in Media, which was 209 miles. Here hauing certain intelligence by letters, of the noble exploits of Iudas Ma∣chabeus, and that he purged the temple of such things as were pro∣phane, he fell into an extreme griefe, and like one distracted rai∣led against the Iewes, and swore to be reuenged of them, 1 Mac. 9. In this extreme anger he went from Egbatana to Babylon with his army, which was 464 miles. But as he went, his Chariot was ouerthrown, in the fall wherof he was so extremely wounded, that they were constrained to carry him in a bed to Babylon, where he shortly after died miserably. So all his trauels were 8153 miles. Thus may we see with what difficulties and dangers this wic∣ked prince obtained his victories, and past away his life, somtime in trauel, his journies long and troublesome, somtimes in prospe∣ritie, somtimes in aduersitie, again somtimes afflicted with trou∣blesome cogitations, sometimes with extreame anger, seldome in peace, and then also his actions sauoring of violence and filthines From whence it appeareth, That the wicked with more sorowes, troubles, and vexations gaine eternall damnation; than the Iust, though they suffer many grieuous afflictions, obtain euerlasting saluation. For amongst all the Patriarchs, good Kings, and Pro∣phets, there is not found any that had so many long and tedious journies as this Antiochus, who continually oppressed his minde and conscience with vnprofitable vanities and wicked thoughts, and at length had a miserable and terrible end.
¶ Of the Cities and places mentioned in his Trauels. Of Antiochia. ANtiochia, where Antiochus Epiphanes kept his court, was an∣tiently called Chaemath, or Riblah. It was scituated in Syria, 180 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, neer to the Cities Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea, which foure Cities (as Strabo saith in the sixteenth Booke of his Geographie) was built by Seleucus Nicanor first King of Syria. This man was a mighty Prince; and obtained the name of Nicanor (which signifieth Vi∣ctorie) because he prospered in his warres, and conquered his ad∣uersaries. For when (within 13 yeares after the death of Alexan∣der the Great) hee had got the kingdome of Syria, hee became so great in the 31 yeare of his reign, that he obtained the empire of all the East; and beside (as Strabo saith) re-edified and built vp these foure cities, calling one of them Antiochia, after the name of his father, another Laodicea after the name of his mother, a third after his own name Seleucia, and the last Apamea, after the name of his wife. These foure cities, because they were all built by one man and at one time, were called Sisters. But Antiochia was much fairer than the other, and in those times was a greater city than any other called after that name, yea it was equal to A∣lexandria in Egypt, for glory and excellencie of building. It was diuided into foure parts, and those parts seperated with four wals: The first, which was antiently called Hemath (A violent anger) of Chamathai the sonne of Canaan; was after Riblath, from the multitude of the inhabitants; and the third time by Seleucus, af∣ter his fathers name, called Antiochia. In this part Seleucus to dignifie the City, kept his court, it being compassed about with goodly walls. In the second part the citisens of Syria inhabited. In the third, Seleucus Callimichus (afterward King of the Syrians) kept his court, and greatly beautified it. But in the fourth (where afterward many Christians inhabited) Antigonus Epiphanes con∣tinued, and did greatly adorn it and set it forth with goodly buil∣dings and sumptuous houses. Close by the Citie there stood a
pleasant wood watered with many cleare fountains and delight∣full springs, to which there resorted a great multitude of Fowles of diuers sorts, which sung very pleasantly among the trees, to the great content and delectation of the citisens. In the midst of this wood stood the temple of Apollo and Diana, goodly things, and ve∣ry curiously built. It was called the wood of Daphne, because it was full of Laurel trees. From this wood all the countrey therea∣bout is called Epidaphne. Not far off standeth the riuer Orontes, which beginneth in Coelosyria, and passeth vnder the earth til it comes neere to Apamea, where it riseth and watreth all Antio∣chia. So passing thence it runneth some 16 miles, and so fals into the Mediterranian sea. Heere Paul preached and kept a Synod, Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 24. 25. There was another Synod kept heere by the Arrians, Trip. lib. 4. 9. Stephanus reckons vp many other cities of this name, as Antio∣chia Lisidia, in Galatia, where Paul preached, Act. 3. and is distant from this 384 miles: Antiochia in Mesopotamia, which is also called Mygdonia, and Nisibis; in which Apollophanes the Stoicke, and Pharnuchus that wrot the Persian historie are said to be born. Antiochia between Syria and Arabia, built by Semiramis. Antio∣chia in Cilicia, scituated neere to the riuer Pyramus. Antiochia in Pieria, also called by the Syrians, Arados. There is also a city called Antiochia neere mount Taurus in the countrey of Coma∣gena. Antiochia scituated vpon the lake of Callichan. Antiochia in Scythia. There was another in Caria, called also Pithapolis. Antiochia Marigiana, built by Antiochus Soter. And many Au∣thors call Tharsus in Cilicia by the name of Antiochia. Antio∣chia signifies an Aduersarie. Of Rome. ROme stands 1528 miles from Ierusalem Westward. Of this city you may reade more in the trauels of the Apostle Paul. Tyrus, Ioppa, Memphis, Pelusio, Mallo, and Alexandria are before described.
Of Tharsus. TArsus or Tharsus signifieth aa Hyacinth stone, so called (as some thinke) of Tharsis the son of Iavan, the son of Iaphet, the son of Noah, Gen. 10. It was distant from Ierusalem 304 miles Northward. Of Persepolis. PErsepolis was the metropolitan city of Persia, distant from Ie∣rusalem 1240 miles Eastward. So called of Perseus that migh∣tie King of the Persians, who re-edified it and gaue it that name; which is as much to say as the city of the Persians, which also of him were so called. The Astronomers, because he was greatly af∣fected to such as were skilfull in that art, attributed his name and his wiues name to two constellations in the heauens, of which O∣vids fable is contriued of Pegasus and Andromache. This city of Persepolis was so fair, that it exceeded all the ci∣ties of the East, both for statelinesse and beauty, and so continued from Perseus time, vntill Alexander the Great had conquered Da∣rius: at which time this great Emperor hauing got into his hand the whole empire of the Persians, came to Persepolis in the yeare before Christ 329, and there celebrated a great feast in triumph of his victories; to which there resorted a great many women, not such as were of the better sort, but them that followed the camp, and liued dissolutely: amongst whom was that notable cur∣tesan Thais; who perceiuing the King inclined to mirth, and full with wine, began to flatter him in his cups, & among other things to commend and dignifie his noble exploits; withall giuing him to vnderstand, how acceptable it would be to the Grecians, to see that royall palace of the Persians fired, which had so often affli∣cted Grecia. No sooner had she vttered these words, but another seconded her, and then a third. After, the whole assembly cried out, Shall we reuenge the injurie of Grecians, and burn the city? with that they al rose in great fury, the king himself (being crow∣ned) beginning first to fire the palace, wherein was great aboun∣dance of Cedar, from whence it happened that suddenly the fire
spred it selfe a great way; which when the army that lay without the walls perceiued, with all speed came to the city to stay the burning of it, for which purpose many brought water with them. But when they beheld the King himselfe busie in this tragedie, laying aside their water, they also, in hope of booty, and to imi∣tate the steps of their Prince, fell to firing the city, and according to the custom of soldiers in such massacres, made a prey of what they could get; increasing the fire with dry stuffe and other com∣bustible matter, whereby it came to passe that the whole city was therewith fired, and burnt to the ground. This was the end of that mighty city which ruled ouer so many nations, where so many mighty Princes gouerned, that was the scourge of Grecia and the greatest part of the world, that sent forth a Navie of 10000 ships and an army of an infinit number; there being at this day nothing to be seen, vnlesse the riuer Araxes that ran close by it remaineth. Thus was that consumed in a fury, which the King and all his ar∣my before endeauoured to spare. But after it turned to the great shame of the Macedonians, that their King should fire so famous a city in the midst of his cups: and Alexander himselfe after hee had slept repented what he had done. You shall find in 2 Mac. cap. 6. That Antiochus Epiphanes besie∣ged a certaine City in Persia called Persepolis, from whence for his exceeding couetousnesse and sacriledge he was forced by the inhabitants dwelling about the town to raise his siege & be gon. Therefore some may gather, that this Persepolis before mentio∣ned was rebuilded, because it also stood in Persia: but if you read 1 Mac. cap. 6. you shall finde that this city so besieged by Antio∣chus was also called Elymais, wherein stood the temple of Diana, beautified with goodly ornaments, shining with the splendor of fine gold wherewith it was gilt. In which temple, as faith Iosephus lib. Ant. 12. Alexander the Great left his armor and other things. From whence may be gathered, that this towne was not the Per∣sepolis which he caused to be burnt, but rather some other towne built out of the ruines of that city (according to the opinion of Quintus Curtius) or else some village standing neere to it, which being built vp and inlarged, might of some be called new Perse∣polis,
though indeed it was antiently called Elymais, and all the East part of Persia beyond Susa, of that towne called Elematica, hauing some affinitie with Elam the antient name of Persia, so called of Elam the son of Sem, Gen. 10. Wherefore it may well be concluded, that that Persepolis burnt down by Alexander, was ne∣uer restored, but lieth waste to this day. Thus the empire of the Persians (afrer they had ruled ouer the nations of the earth 260 yeares) was conquered by the Grecians, who held it 129 yeares. At the end of which time, Demetrius Nica∣nor the last Emperour of the Grecrans in Syria and Asia, going with a great army out of Syria toward the East, Arsaces King of the Medes and Parthians, being aided by the citisens of Elymais the Persians, and Bactrians, meeting him in those parts, gaue him many sharp and cruell battels, and in the end (vnder pretence of peace) took him prisoner, in the yere before Christ 137, and from that time the Parthians gouerned Persia and Grecia, and oppo∣sed the Romans in many cruell battels. Afterward, in the yere of our Lord 226, Artaxerxes that migh∣ty Lord of Persia ouercame Artabanus King of the Parthians in a mighty battell, and took his crown from his head; the same yere entring vpon the gouernment of Persia, 548 years after the death of Alexander the Great: from which time Artaxerxes and his po∣steritie reigned in Persia for the space of 314 yeares; in the which space there succeeded 28 Kings, viz. Artaxerxes 1. Sapores Ormis∣dates Vararanes, Vararanes 2. Vararanes. 3. Narses, Misdates, Sapores 2. Artaxerxes 2. Sapores 3. Vararanes 4. Cermazat, syrnamed Isdiger∣tes, Vararanes 5. Vararanes 6. Perozes, Valens, Cavades Zambades, Ca∣vades 2. Cosroës, Hormisda, Cosroës 2. Siroes, Adhasir, Sarbaras, Borna∣rim, Hormisda 2. who was the last King of the Persians; for being ouercome by Humarus, Amiras of the Saracens, and third Empe∣ror of the Mahumetans, he was thrown out of his kingdom Anno Dom. 640. After which time it continued long in the gouerne∣ment of the Saracens and Turks.
Where that holy Priest Mattathias the father of Iudas Machabeus dwelt. MAttathias and Dorotheus haue both one signification, that is, The gift of God; being deriued of Matath, a gift, and Iah, God. This Mattathias was a holy Priest of the tribe of Levi, the son of Iohn, the son of Simon, of whom all that family was called the posteritie of Simon, of the stocke of Ioarib, of whom you may read, 1 Chr. 15. He dwelt in a town called Modin, 14 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest, scituated in a mountaine close by the way as you go to Ioppa, in the tribe of Dan. Modin signifi∣eth a measure, being deriued of Madad, he hath measured. In this place seeing the crueltie of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the insolen∣cie of his soldiers, he killed one of his captains, and afterward in the synagogue put to death an idolatrous Iew, ouerthrew the Al∣tar set vp by Antiochus: after, called forth all the inhabitants of Modin and other towns neere adioyning, to withstand the fury of this King. So they brought their goods out of the city, into the wildernesse, where they incamped themselues, and after so man∣fully opposed Antiochus, that he deliuered all the cities & towns thereabouts out of his bondage, and from idolatry. But beeing now grown old, (after he had admonished his sons to constancy in the seruice of God, and courage in defence of the countrey) he died in the yeare before Christ 164, and was buried at Modin, where afterward his sons were buried. Simon his third son, high-priest of Ierusalem, did maruellously beautifie this sepulchre; for he made a vault of white marble, compassed about with faire pil∣lars which supported an admirable curious arch, to see to as if it had been one stone. Ouer this vault in conuenient places he built seuen pyramides, in memory of his father, mother, his foure bre∣thren, and himselfe. In the circumference of this monument hee set vp faire marble pillars, vpon which he caused to be ingrauen ships, so artificially, that they which sailed vpon the sea might see them; and vpon these he placed the armes of his father and of his brethren. You may reade more of this, 1 Mach. 13. Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 9.
The Trauels of Iudas Machabeus. IVdas Machabeus succeeded his father Mattathias in the yere be∣fore Christ 164, Ann. mundi 3804. and ruled six years. Imme∣diatly after his fathers death, who as is said was buried in Modin he led his army against Apollonius chief captain of Antiochus, who at that time was in Samaria, which was 30 miles: here hee ouer∣came Apollonius and killed him with his own sword, 2 Mac. 2.3. When Seron (who was also one of Antiochus chiefe captains in Syria the lower) heard that Iudas Machabeus had ouercome Apo∣lonius and put him to death, hee was very angry and said, I will goe and conquer Iudas Machabeus and those that are with him, that so I may get my selfe a name and be famous through the whole Kingdom: so he came out of Syria, and pitched his tents neere Bethoron the lower in the tribe of Iuda, 32 miles from Samaria. But Iudas went down to him to Bethoron, where he broke into his campe, ouer∣came his whole army, and put him to the sword with 8000 of his men, but the rest fled into the land of the Philistines, 1 Mach. 3. These two victories he obtained in the first yeare of his gouerne∣ment, by which he made the name of the Machabees famous tho∣rough that Kingdome. This battell was fought 8 miles from Ie∣rusalem. Antiochus Epiphanes hauing certain intelligence of that which had happened, in the next yeare made an expedition into Persia, that he might gather money in those East parts to make an of∣fensiue Warre against the Iewes; and gaue authoritie to Lysias (whom hee made Gouernour in his absence) to suppresse this fa∣ction sprung vp amongst them. Wherefore Lysias sent 40000 foot and 7000 horse into Iury; and appointed Ptolomais, Nicanor, and Gorgias to be Generals of the whole Army. Who so soon as they had entred Iudaea after hostile manner, they pitched their Tents neere to a towne called Emaus, Ioseph. Lib. Antiq. 13. c. 10. This towne standeth sixe miles and somewhat more from Ieru∣salem;
but Iudas Macchabeus assembled his army in Mizpah, sci∣tuated in the Tribe of Benjamin not farre from Ierusalem, six miles from Bethoron, 1 Mac. 3. After Iudas Macchabeus had implored Gods assistance in his warres, and performed many religious ceremonies, he went with his army to Emaus, which was foure miles: where comming vp∣on the enemy in the night and vnexpected, he ouercame Nicanor, put him to flight, and kil'd three thousand of his men. This victo∣rie happened in the third yeare of Iudas Macchabeus his gouern∣ment, 1 Mac. 4. From Emaus he pursued the enemy to Gexeron Azotus, Asse∣rimoth, and Iamniah, vpon the borders of Idumaea, which was eight miles. After he returning backe from pursuing the enemy with his ar∣mie to Emaus, which was eight miles, that he might oppose the armie of Gorgias; but Gorgias vnderstanding of the ouerthrow of Nicanor, and burning of his tents, fled. Iudas Macchabeus obtained his fourth victory in the third yeare of his gouernment, which was 62 yeares before Christ, and in the 148 yeare of the gouernment of the Graecians in Syria, six miles from Emaus, neere to the Castle or fortresse of Bethsura, which signifies, the house of the Rocke, being a very strong place, scituated in the top of a high rock, some halfe a mile from Ierusalem, in the way which leadeth to Bethlehem. Neere to this castle Iudas Mac∣chabeus ouercame Lysias, Antiochus his chiefe generall of Syria, who had 20000 foot, and 5000 horse in his army, carrying away a great victory, and put to the sword 5000 of his men. Lysias being thus ouercome, mediated a peace with the Iewes, which was concluded vpon the fourth day of the monerh Diosceris which answereth vnto the seuenth day of our moneth of Iune, 2 Macch. 10. From Bethsura Iudas Macchabeus brought back his army to Ie∣rusalem, which was almost a mile; where he caused the Temple of the Lord to be clensed of the abhomination of the Gentiles, & broke downe the stature of Iupiter Olympus, which had continued there for the space of three yeares: and on the fifth day of the mo∣neth Caslew, wich is our December, celebrated a solemne Passe∣ouer,
and built vp a new Altar, and dedicated it vnto the Lord. In the yeare after, being the fourth yeare of his gouernment, he repaired the towne of Sion, & fortified Bethsura against the Idu∣means, which nation all this yeare made war vpon the Iewes: But after, Iudas gathered an armie and went 40 miles into Idumaea, and inuaded those that were in Arabathnes, and in the land of the sons of Bean (which people troubled the Israelites with con∣tinuall robberies) and put them to flight, so that they were con∣strained to take their castle; where he fired them and it together, 1 Macch. 5.2 Macch. 10. From Idumaea, he returned backe againe with his army to Ie∣rusalem, which was 40 miles. Afterward hee led his army against the Amonites, which lay 60 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast, 1 Macch. 5. From thence he went to Iaeser in the Tribe of Gad, which was 24 miles; which he tooke and all the castles thereabouts. This towne Moses in times past conquered, as you may reade before 1 Macch. 15. From Iaeser he returned to Ierusalem which was 40 miles. From thence he went to Ioppa, which was 20 miles; and there he burned their hauen (for Ioppa was a hauen towne) and those which scaped the fire he kild with the sword, 2 Mac. 12. From Ioppa he went to Iamnia, which was accounted 4 miles, where in the night he fired their hauen, burnt their ships, & spoi∣led their towne, insomuch as the inhabitants of Ierusalem which were 16 miles off might easily see the fire, 2 Macch. 12. From Iamnia, Iudas went with his army against Timotheus chiefe captaine of Antiochus Eupator, who continued at the citie Caspin, which was something more than a mile, where he ouercame him and 5000 Arabians, which were strengthened with 500 horse, and tooke the citie, 1 Macch. 12. Afterward Iudas Macchab. with his brother Ionathan, led an ar¦mie to Characa vnto the Iewes that were called Tubieni, which was 96 miles, against Timotheus gouernour of the Ammonites but he was gone thence and had done nothing, but left a garriso in a strong hold. Wherefore Dositheus and Sosipater (which we captaines with Macch.) went forth and slew those that Timothe
had left in the fortresse more than 10000 men: Timotheus him∣selfe also fell into their hands, but by reason of his faire speeches they suffered him to depart with life, 2 Mac. 12.1 Mac. 5. From thence he went to Bozor a faire, citie which was scitua∣ted beyond Iordan neere to Bethabara, in the Tribe of Reuben, it was also called Bazra, which was 24 miles: this towne he tooke and burned with fire, Isa. 64. 1 Mac. 5. From Bozor he went to Mizpa, where Ieptha sometime sacrifi∣ced his daughter, which was 32 miles. In that journey Iudas Mac∣chabeus rescued the castle of Datheman, draue thence Timotheus, and put to the sword 8000 of his armie. After, he went thence to Mizpa, woon the towne, burnt it with fire, and put to the sword all the male children, because the inhabitants had vexed the chil∣dren of Israel with continuall robbery. After that, hee woon many other townes and cities thereabouts, 1 Mac. 5. From Mizpa Iudas passed the riuer, and went to Astaroth-Car∣naim, which in the second of Macchabes is called Carnion, which was eight miles: here he destroyed the temple of Venus, which the inhabitants call Astaroth, and put 25000 of the inhabitants to the sword. He went also to Atargation, a towne not far off, and tooke it, and deliuered all the Israelites from the greatest to the least, which were in captiuitie amongst the Giliadites, 1 Macch. 5. 2 Macch. 22. From Astaroth-Carnaim, hee went to Ephron, which was 16 miles: this citie Iudas Macchabeus destroied, because the inhabi∣tants thereof denied him passage, and went through it ouer the dead bodies, 2 Macch. 5. Here Gideon Iudge of Israel sometime dwelt; it tooke the name from the rising vp of the dust, being de∣riued of Aphar, that is, he hath made a dust. From Ephron Iudas passed ouer Iordan into the great field of Galile, and so went to Scythopolis, which in antient time was called Bethsan, which was foure miles. From Bethsan or Scythopolis, he returned to Ierusalem, which was 44 miles, a little before Penticost, in the fourth yeare of his gouernment, in the yere 161 before Christ, 1 Macch. 5. 2 Mac∣cab. 12.
After the feast of Penticost he went from Ierusalem to Mare∣sa, which was 16 miles; here he ouercame Gorgias gouernour of Idumaea, in a great buttell, 2 Mac. 12. From Maresa hee went with his army to Odullam, which was 6 miles. Here sometime Dauid hid himselfe. From Odullam he returned to Ierusalem, which was 8 miles; 2 Mac. 12. From Ierusalem he brought his army to Hebron the Metro∣politan citie of the Idumaeans, which was 22 miles: this Towne he woon, and all the townes and castles neere adjoyning, 1 Mac∣chab. 5. From thence he went to Samaria, which was fiftie six miles, 1 Mac. 5. From Samaria he led his army against Azotus, which was 44 miles. This was a citie of the Philistins, which he destroied, broke their Altars, and burnt their idols in the fire, 1 Mac. 5. After that, he conquered two castles in Idumaea, 1 Mac. 10. After that, he returned to Ierusalem, which was accounted 22 miles, 1 Mac. 5. From Ierusalem he went to meet Timotheus, chiefe captaine of the Syrians, who came with a great army to inuade Iudaea. But when the battell waxed hot there appeared to the enemies from heauen, fiue comely men vpon horses with bridles of gold, two of which led the Iewes, and tooke Macchabeus betweene them, and couered him on euery side with their weapons, that none could hurt him; but against their enemies they shot Darts and lightnings, so that they were confounded with blindnesse, and beaten downe: whereby the Iewes obtained a great victory, and put to the sword 20500 foot, and 600 horse; the rest seeing this great slaughter, fled. So Iudas praised the Lord, and pursued the enemies to Gazara, which was 16 miles. Heere Timotheus hid himselfe in a caue; but the Iewes tooke the citie, found him out, and put him to death, together with his brother Chaerea and Pollo∣phanes, 2 Mac. 10. From Gazara Iudas Macchabeus returned to Ierusalem, which was 16 miles.
In the yere following, which was the fift of his taigne, and 160 before Christ, Iudas Maccab. besieged the tower of Sion in Ierusa∣lem, because those that were in the garrison had put to the sword some of the Iewes that were sacrificing in the Temple. But Antiochus Eupator, the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, hearing of it; at the instigation of Menelaus chiefe Priest of the Iewes, brought a great armie to their rescue, wherefore Iudas Macchabeus hearing of his comming, left the siege, and went from Ierusalem to Modin to meet him, which was 14 miles: Here he ouercame Antiochus, destroyed his Elephants, and put 4000 of his souldiers to the sword, 2 Macc. 13. When King Antiochus had felt a taste of the boldnesse of the Iewes, he went with his army through by-waies, and secret pas∣sages to the castle of Bethsura, which he besieged, whither Iudas followed him, which was 12 miles; incamping himselfe a mile from Bethsura, in a straight place called Bethzachara. Here An∣tiochus betimes in the morning (thinking to take the armie of the Iewes at an aduantage) set vpon them: But the Iewes and their leaders behaued themselues so manfully, that they put Antiochus the second time to flight, and kil'd 600 of his men. In this battell Eliazer the brother of Iudas Macchabeus was slain by an Elephant, Ios. lib. Antiq. 12. lib. 16.1. Macc. 6. From Bethzachara he returned backe to Ierusalem, which was 2 miles. And when the king had taken the town of Bethsura (for they were constrained to yeeld by reason of famine) he followed Iudas, with whom he joyned the third time in battell; but Iudas ouercame him, and put to the sword many of his army. Where∣fore hauing certaine intelligence that Philip (whom he had made ouerseer of the affaires at Antiochia) rebelled, he made a peace with Iudas Macchabeus, was appeased towards the Iewes, did sacri∣fice, adorned the Temple, and shewed great gentlenesse towards the people. So Antiochus departed out of Iudaea, and tooke Mene∣laus that seditious high Priest along with him captiue, 1 Macc. 6. 2 Mac. 13. After in the 6 yeare of his gouernment, Iudas went with his ar∣mie through all the borders of Iudaea, and executed justice vpon all such as were offenders and contemners of the true religion.
After, when Iudas had certaine intelligence that Nicanor (whom Demetrius King of Syria had sent against Ierusalem) went about by fraudulent courses, and vnder pretence of friendship, to take away his life, 2 Macc. 14. he went priuily from Ierusalem and came to Caphar-Salama, scituated 12 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Here Nicanor and he joyned battell; but Iu∣das discomfited his armie, and put to the sword about fiue thou∣sand of his men, himselfe not escaping without great danger, 1 Mac. 7. From Caphar-Salama Iudas came to Samaria, which was 28 miles: here he rested himselfe, and refreshed his armie a while, 2 Mac. 15. In the yere before Christ 128, he went from Samaria to Adar∣sa, which was 28 miles; and there (vpon the 13 day of Adar, which answereth to the 13 day of February) neere to Bethoron the lower, he gaue Nicanor a great ouerthrow, and put him with 35000 of his host to the sword, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15. From Adara and Bethoron the lower, hee followed the ene∣mies to Gaza, a Citie of the Philistines, which was 44 miles, 1 Mac. 9. From Gaza he returned to Ierusalem, which was 44 miles: there he caused the arme of Nicanor (whom a little before he had slaine at the battell of Adarsa) to be cut off, & his tongue to be cut out of his head, shred small, and giuen to the fowles of the heauen, and his head to be cut from his shoulders; because therewith he had blasphemed the Lord, and the temple, swearing desolation and destruction to it and the Iewes, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15. A little after, that is to say, almost at the end of the 6 yere of his gouernment, Iudas Macchabeus went out with 3000 chosen men in his army, and pitched his tents neere Laisa, 12 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the West: But when the Iewes perceiued the mighty armie of Bacchides (for hee had 20000 foot, and 2000 horse in his hoast) there were many of them discouraged, so that all left him but 800 men: Yet neuerthelesse Iudas constrained by necessitie withstood Bacchides, and so manfully behaued himselfe in the battaile, that hee ouercame him, and put him to flight, 1 Mac. 2.
His enemies being thus put to flight, he pursued them to the mountaines of Azotus and Gazeron, which was 6 miles; where being oppressed with the multitude, and hemmed in amongst them, was slaine. He died in the moneth Nisan, which answers to our April, Anno mundi 3810, and before Christ, 158, 1 Mac. 9. From the Mountaines of Azotus and Gazeron his dead body was carried hacke againe to Modin, which was 6 miles, and there buried. So his Trauels were 915 miles. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Mispa, Iamnia, and Laisa you may reade before. Of Caspin. THis city stood not far from Iamnia, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. This towne though it was strongly fortified, yet Iudas Macchabeus woon it, 2 Mac. 12. It is called Cas∣pin, of Keseph, which signifies, siluer. There was another city cal∣led Casphor, that is, The siluer mountaine, this stood in the land of Giliad neere Mispa, which Iudas also woon, 1 Mac. 4. Of Asseremoth, otherwise called Gazaron. GAzaron or Gazera was a citie of the Philistines neere Ecron, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the West. It is so called from the cliffe of a rocke; being deriued of Gezer, which signifies a Cliffe. Here Iudas Macchabeus was slaine, 1 Mac. 6. Of the Tubiani. TVbiani are a people that dwelt beyond Iordan, in that part of Arabia Petraea which is called Nabathea, of Nabaioth the sonne of Ishmael, neere to a Mountaine of the Gileadites, not farre distant from Abel of the Vines, where it is thought Balaams Asse spoke. This land is called Thubin, and the inha∣bitants Tubiani; because all that Countrey bringeth forth very pleasant and excellent Wine: beeing deriued of Zob, which
signifieth, good, and Iaijn, wine. In this country Iudas Macchabeus continued three daies with his army. Of Caphar-Salama. THis town stood 12 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. In Herod the greats time it was inlarged and made a very faire city, which he caused to be called Antipatridis, after the name of his father Antipater; of which you may reade more in the Tra∣uels of the Apostle Paul. Of Adarsa. THis was a towne in the tribe of Ephraim, betweene Antipa∣tridis and Bethoron the lower, twelue miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. It seemeth to be thus called from a noble gift, for it is deriued of Adar, which signifies illustrous, and Schal, a gift. The Typicall signification of Iudas Macchabeus. IVdas Macchabeus is a type and figure of our Lord Iesus Christ; and Antiochus, of that wicked Antichrist, as the interpretation of their names do euidently declare: for Iudas signifies a Con∣fessor, praysing God and glorifying his name for all his benefits; so Christ the sonne of God is the praise and glory of his father, for that in him and by him God the father praised, as is euident in the song of Simeon. In like manner our Lord Iesus Christ is worthily called Macchabeus, for Macchabeus is a syrname of the Iewes, which is written after this manner, Machabai, euery let∣ter of which signifieth a seuerall word, according to the Song of Moses in the fifteenth chapter of Exodus, where are these words, Michamocha baelim Iehouah, that is, Who is like vnto thee amongst the gods, O Lord? Thus did the children of Israel sing with Moses, when God led them out of the land of Aegypt through the Red Sea: and this sentence Iudas Macchabeus continually vsed as an Adage; and the letters at the beginning of these words being joy∣ned together into one word, make the syrname Macchabai. Therefore as he had alwaies this golden sentence in his mouth, so had he it likewise in his name, yea, in his ensignes. Wherefore
this name likewise is worthy to be attributed to Christ; for hee is that perfect image and glory of his eternall father, Heb. 1. who is called Michael, that is, Who is like vnto God? and Macchabeus, or Machabai, that is, Who is like vnto thee amongst the gods, ô Lord. Ther∣fore he saith thus, I am that great God that will deliuer you from al euil: Ecce, Deus fortis foelix, de morte resurgo: Tartareosque vnguens, Daemona ipse ligo. Behold, I am the God of might, from death to life that rose: I binde the Diuell to my will, his furies I oppose.  But Antiochus signifies an aduersarie, or an opposer, or one that figh∣teth against God. The same also doth Sathan signifie in Hebrew. He is therefore a fit type of that great opposer of God and Man, (Antichrist) who fighteth against Christ, that Iudas Macchabeus, and true Captaine of the Church. For as the one (viz. Antochus) was an aduersary against the Iewes the children of God; so the other, (that is, Antichrist) is an aduersarie and enemy against Christ and his Church, &c. The Trauels of Ionathan, the brother of Iudas Macchabeus. IOnathan or Ionathas, and Theodorus, hath but one signification, that is, The gift of God. This man the same yeare that Iudas his brother died, succeeded him in the principalitie, and gouer∣ned the Iewes 18 yeares, 1 Mac. 9. Ios. lib. antiq. 3. But vnderstand that Bacchides chiefe captaine of Demetrius King of Syria, went about to take his life by craft, hee and his brother Simon went from Modin, and pitched their tents in the wildernesse of Teco∣ah, neere to the lake of Asphar, which was 20 miles. From thence they sent their brother Iohn with certaine riches to the Nabathians, which dwelt in Medaba in Arabia (28 miles) desiring them in friendship to receiue their goods into the town,
and to keepe them for their vse: but the sonnes of Iambri and the Nabathians issued out of Medaba, and vnawares fell vpon Iohn, put him to death, tooke away all his wealth, and returned into their citie with great joy. But Ionathan and Simon tooke this injurie very heauily, and much bewailed the death of their brother: wherefore that they might bee reuenged of the inhabitants of Medaba, they went thence twenty eight miles, and hid themselues among the moun∣taines just in the way that led ftom Medaba to Canaan; for they had heard that the sonnes of Iambri and the inhabitants of Me∣daba were gone forth with great jollitie to fetch home a Bride, which was a Princes daughter of the land of Canaan. Now as they were merrie vpon the way, Ionathan and Simon his brother, with their army, went out from among the Mountaines, and put a great number of them to the sword, taking away a mighty spoyle. From Medaba they went to the riuer Iordan, which was three miles, where vpon the East side of the riuer they pitched their Tents; here he was constrained to fight a cruell battell with Bac∣chides vpon the Sabboth day; but as he was in the fight hee met Bacchides, and lift vp his hand to strike at him; but he seeing the danger, retyred. Neuerthelesse he put to the sword 1000 of his men, and after, he and his followers leapt into the riuer and swam ouer: so they all escaped without danger. In the 56 yeare of the Graecians gouernment in Syria, which was the fifth yere of the principalitie of Ionathan, Bacchides retur∣ned againe with his army into Iudaea, and besieged Ionathan and Simon in Bethbesan, otherwise called Bethgalam, some three miles distant from Iordan. Here Ionathan leauing his brother Si∣mon in the citie, stole out by a posterne, and went to all the villa∣ges neere adjoyning, from whence he gathered an army of cho∣sen men, and set vpon Bacchides: Simon also broke out of the city and set vpon him, so that they greatly oppressed him and burned his Tents, 1 Macchab. 9. Wherefore when Bacchides vnderstood that Ionathan and Simon had fortified that citie, and that the Iewes were readie to defend it, hee concluded a peace with Ionathan; the captiues of either part were redeliuered, and the Iewes liued
in peace a good while after, 1 Macchab. 9. From Bethbesan Ionathan went to Michmas, which was six miles: here he dwelt for a while and judged the people of Israel, cherishing the good and rooting out the euill from amongst them, 1 Macch. 9. From Michmas he went to Ierusalem, which was ten miles. Hither Alexander King of Syria, and sonne of Antiochus Epipha∣nes, sent him a purple robe and a golden crowne, and ordained him high Priest of the Iewes. Wherefore Ionathan on the day of the feast of the Tabernacles, which was in the yere before Christ 150, tooke vpon him the office to be high Priest, 1 Macchab. 10. The next yeare after, which was the tenth of Ionathans rule (after the death of Demetrius king of Syria, who was slaine in the warres against Alexander) there appeared a Comet of an extraordinarie greatnesse, which was of such an exceeding brightnesse, that it tooke away the darknesse of the night; and the writers of those times affirme it to equall the Sunne in greatnesse. After this Pro∣digi, the Romans began the third Punick warre against the Car∣thaginians, vide Camerar. lib. 2. de ostent. Ionathan in the eleuenth yeare of his raigne went from Ierusa∣lem to Ptolemais, which was 76 miles, to the marriage of Alexan∣der King of Syria, and Cleopatra the daughter of Ptolomeus Philo∣metor King of Aegypt, where he was entertained very honourably, 1 Mac. 10. From thence hee returned to Ierusalem, which was 76 miles, 1 Mac. 10. From Ierusalem he went to Ioppa and woon the towne, which was 20 miles. From Ioppa he went to Asdod, which was 12 miles; there he burnt the Temple of Dagon, and all that were in it. From thence he went with his armie to Ascalon, which was 12 miles; this towne willingly yeelded vnto him. From Ascalon he returned to Ierusalem, which was 38 miles, 1 Mac. 10. In the 15 yeare of his gouernment hee went to Ioppa, which was 20 miles, to meet Ptolomeus Philometer King of Aegypt, and stayed there all that night, 1 Mac. 11.
The next day he went with the King of Aegypt to the riuer of Eleutherius, which was 200 miles. From thence he returned backe again to Ierusalem, which was 200 miles. Heere he besieged the tower of Acropolis, because there were many wicked men got into it. In the sixteenth yeare of his gouernement he went from Ieru∣salem to Ptolomais, to Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria, which was 76 miles. From Ptolomais he returned backe to Ierusalem, which was 76 miles. From Ierusalem (in the seuenteenth yeare of his gouernment) he went beyond the riuer Euphrates, which was accounted 400 miles; and there gathered an army in ayd of Antiochus the youn∣ger, the sonne of Alexander, and went against Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was 400 miles. From Ierusalem hee went with his army to Ascalon, which was 30 miles. From thence he came to Gaza, which was 18 miles: this towne he besieged, and after a sharpe battell woon it. From Gaza he went to Damascus in Syria, which was about 200 miles. From thence he returned to the lake of Genesereth, which was 104 miles. Here hee opposed the Army of Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria. From thence (before day) he remoued his campe to Chazor, which was 32 miles; where, when part of his armie was put to flight by a stratagem, he tore his garments, put dust vpon his head and praied earnestly vnto the Lord for ayd and assistance: so ha∣uing recouered his strength and former courage, hee returned with those few that hee had left him to the war, where he put the army of King Demetrius to flight, and slew three thousand of his men with the sword. His enemies being thus dispersed, hee pursued them to their Tents neere Cades in Galile, which was 6 miles. From thence he returned to Ierusalem with a glorious victo∣rie, which was about some 92 miles. Here he made a league with
the Romans and Spartans, 1 Mac. 11.12. From Ierusalem he went with his armie into the countrey of Hemath, that is, Syria, to the riuer Eleutherius, which was 200 miles; here he put his enemies to flight, after they had burnt and consumed their Tents. From thence he went to Nabathia in Arabia, which was 120 miles. Here he conquered the Arabians and Zabadians, and spoi∣led their land. From thence he went through all that country, and wasted it, till he came within eighty miles of Damascus. From thence he returned home to Ierusalem, which was 160 miles. In the 18 and last yeare of his raigne he caused the wals of Ierusalem to be built, and began to fortifie many places in Iudea, 1 Macch. 12. Also the same yeare (which was the 160 yeare of the gouernment of the Graecians in Syria) the second booke of Mac∣chabees was written as appeareth, cap. 1. After, from Ierusalem hee went to Bethsan to meet Tryphon, which was 44 miles: here being deceiued by the faire speeches of Tryphon, he discharged his army all but 3000. From thence hee tooke these 3000 with him, and went with Tryphon to Ptolomais, which was 32 miles; into which towne he was no sooner entred, but Tryphon caused the citisens to shut the gates, where all his men were slaine. From Ptolomais, Tryphon brought Ionathan the High-priest to Addus vpon the borders of Iudaea, which was 68 miles: from whence he sent to Simon, the brothers of Ionathan whom he kept captiue in a castle neere adjoyning; promising to release his bro∣ther if he would send his two sonnes to be hostages, and let him haue a hundred talents of siluer, that is, 60000 crownes. So Simon sent his two sons, together with the money, to Try∣phon; but Tryphon tooke them and the money, and led them cap∣tiue with Ionathon their father, from Addus to Addor a towne in Idumaea, which was 48 miles. From thence he carried them to Baschaman in the country of the Giliadites, which was 96 miles, where in the Winter season in the yeare before Christ, 141, this cruell and perfideous tyrant put Ionathan and his sonnes to death.
From Baschamah of the Giliadites Simon remoued the bodies of Ionathan and his sonnes to Modin, which was 60 miles, where he buried them, 1 Mac. 13. So all his trauels were 3007 miles. The description of the places mentioned in his Trauels. Of Michmas and Cades you may reade before. Of Medaba. THis city is scituated beyond Iordan in the Tribe of Reuben, 28 miles from Ierusalem towards the East. It seemes to take the name from a hot bath that stood neere it: for there were ma∣ny Baths and wholesome Springs stood beyond Iordan, as Ios. lib. ant. 17. c. 9. witnesseth. The same things are also mentioned in Esa. cap. 26. For Medaba is deriued of Maijm and Doba, which sig∣nifies warme or boyling water. Of Bethbesan. THis town was scituated in the Tribe of Benjamin neere Gil∣gall, twelue miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. The castle of this towne Ionathan and Simon fortified and repai∣red, that it might be a strong place for them to retyre to from the danger of Baccides, 1 Mac. 9. Ios. li. ant. 13. c. 1. saith, that this towne was called the bouse of blushing, being deriued of Bosch, to blush, and Bethagla, a round house. Of Ptolomais. IN antient times this towne was called Acon, scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterrean sea, betweene Tyrus and Mount Carmel in the tribe of Aser, 76 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. But the Aserites could not cast out the Canaanites out of that citie, Ptolomeus King of Aegypt conquered this towne and rebuilt it, calling it after his owne name, Ptolomais, which signifieth, to make war. In times past it was a goodly city, strong∣ly fortified with towers, bulwarkes, ditches, and wals: it was built in a triangular proportion, like to a shield, two parts whereof was compassed in by the sea, and vpon the third there stood a fruitfull
plaine, wherein were corne grounds, pastures, medowes, vine∣yards, and orchards, adorned with diuers kindes of fruits. It had a very faire and spacious hauen for the preseruing of shippes: it was beautified with Arcinals, Castles, Temples, and many other buildings very stately and curious; but at this day it is vtterly de∣solate, and scarce to be perceiued where it stood. Of Eleutherius. ELeutherius was a riuer vpon the borders of Phaenicia and Sy∣ria, neere to the citie Orthosia at the foot of Mount Libanus, 200 miles from Ierusalem towards the North: of which you may reade in the history of Ionathan, 1 Macch. 11.12. There is also ano∣ther riuer of that name, betweene Tyrus and Sarepta, vpon the borders of Palestina, 108 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Of Genezereth. IT is a sea in Galile, so called from the land of Genesara which lyeth about it; here sometime Capernaum stood: it signifies a Princely garden, being deriued of Gen, that is, a garden, and Sar, a Prince: for the countrey round about it was very pleasant. You may reade more of this in the Trauels of our Sauiour Christ. Of the field Chazor. THis was a plaine neer to the towne Chazor, or Hazor; which is described in the Trauels of Ioshua. It stood in the vpper Galile; 84 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Of Zabadei. ZAbadei, were a people inhabiting Arabia Desarta, neere to the riuer Eleutherius, on the Northeast side of Syria and Da∣mascus, 200 miles from Ierusalem. Arabia is three-fold; the one part thereof is called Deserta, which extendeth it selfe towards the North, to Syria and Damascus; the other is called Petraea, in which vast wildernesse the children of Israel trauelled; the third is called Arabia Foelix, which is towards the South, extending it selfe from the East to the gulfe of Persia, and vpon the West it is shut in with the gulfe of Arabia. But the Zabadei, they inhabited
in Arabia Deserta, and were a people of a liberall and free condi∣tion: from whence it seemeth they are so called, for Zabab signi∣fieth, To endow, or bestow. Of Addus. ADdus is called by Iosephus, (lib. antiq. 13. cap. 9.) Iadah: it was a towne neer Arimathea in mount Ephraim, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest: and is so called from a congre∣gation, being deriued of Iaad, that is, He hath assembled with au∣thoritie; and Edah, a Congregation, or Synagogue. Of Ador. THis was a city of the Idumaeans, 48 miles from Ierusalem to∣wards the Southwest. Ador signifies, a beautifull city, being de∣riued of Adar, that is, famous and illustious; and Or, that is, light. Of Baschamah. BAschamah standeth in the land of Gileah beyond Iordan, 52 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast: and is so called from sweet gums, of which there is great plentie in that place. The Trauels of the high Priest SIMON, the brother of IVDAS MACCHABEVS. SImon signifies an Auditor, and one that heareth: being deriued of Schamah, He hath heard. This man did many worthy acts during the life of Iudas Macchabeus; for being sent into Galile (in which countrey there were many that rebelled) he supressed the insurrection and pursued the enemies into the citie of Pto∣lomais, which was 76 miles. From Ptolomais he brought his army to Arabath, which was 36 miles. In this place, after he had assembled all the religious Israelites thereabout, and their wiues and children, he brought them thence to Ierusalem, which was 44 miles.
After, he went with his brother Iudas to many places, and be∣haued himselfe manfully in all his enterprises, 2 Mac. 8.14. Hee went also with him to the battell fought between Azotus & Ga∣zeron, where Iudas was slain, which was 20 miles from Ierusalem Westward, 1 Mac. 9. Simon and Ionathan brought the dead body of their brother Iu∣das to Modin, 6 miles, and there buried him by his father Matta∣thias, 1 Mac. 9. Afterward Simon and his brother Ionathan went from Modin to the lake Asphar in the wildernesse of Tecoa, which was twentie miles. From the desart of Tecoa they went to Medaba, which was 28 miles. After, they returned thence to the riuer of Iordan, where vpon the East side of the riuer they pitcht their tents, 12 miles. Here they fought with Bacchides. After, they went thence to Bethbesan, 3 miles. From thence they went to Ierusalem, 12 miles, Ios. Ant. li. 18. cap. 1. From Ierusalem they went to Ioppa, 20 miles, and wonne the towne, Ios. lib. Ant. 13. ca. 6. From Ioppa they went to Asdod, 12 miles, and in the way they put the enemy to flight. From Asdod they went to Ascalon, which was 12 miles, 1 Mac. cap. 10. From Ascalon they returned to Ierusalem, which was 30 miles, 1 Mac. 10. From thence he went to Bethsura, halfe a mile: this towne he won, and placed a garrison in it, 1 Mac. 11. Also in the absence of his brother Ionathan, Simon went with his army to Ascalon, which was 30 miles from Ierusalem, 1 Mac. cap. 12. From thence he went to Ioppa, which was twenty miles. This towne the second time hee tooke, and placed a Garrison therein,  Mac. 12. From Ioppa hee returned againe to Ierusalem, which was
twenty miles, Ios. antiq. lib. 13. cap. 8. From Ierusalem in the last yeare of his brother Ionathans go∣uernment he went to the plain of Sephala, about 14 miles, where he built the Hold of Abida, 1 Mac. 12. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, 14 miles: There, after the captiuitie of his brother Ionathan (whom Tryphon by cunning had betrayed, as is before said) hee was chosen by the people of the Iewes into the principalitie. From thence hee went to Addus to meet Tryphon, 16 miles; where he would haue ransomed his brother Ionathan, 1 Machab. cap. 13. From Addus he went to a city of the Idumaeans called Ador, or Adaram, 48 miles. From Ador he returned into Iudaea with his army, 40 miles, that he might oppose the inuasion of Tryphon, and his souldiers, lest they should haue destroyed the country and got Ierusalem in his absence. Tryphon hauing put to death his brother Ionathan (which was in the yeare before Christ 140) Simon entered vpon the office of high priest the same yere, and continued in the gouernment eight yeares. In the first yeare of his gouernment he went from Ierusa∣lem to Modin, 14 miles. Here he buried the body of his brother Ionathan in his fathers sepulchre very honorably, and richly beau∣tified it. From Modin he returned to Ierusalem, 14 miles; where he ex∣ecuted his priestly function diligently, & repaired the holds and decaied towns of Iudea, compassing them about with stone wals, and fortifying them with towers and bulwarks. From thence he went to Gaza, 44 miles from Ierusalem South-westward. This town he tooke. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, which was foure and forty miles. There he repaired the tower of Acropolis, wherin he dwelt. From Ierusalem he went to Ioppa and won the towne, which was 20 miles. From Ioppa he returned to Ierusalem, which was twenty miles
where for a time hee liued very honourably, and kept a princely port, 1 Mac. 14. Lastly, he went with his two sons Iudas and Mattathias, and his wife, to visit his father in law Ptolomeus the son of Abodus, to the castle of Doch, which was neere to Iericho, some ten miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast. Here he was slain by his father in law at a banquet, in the yeare before Christ 132, in the 11 mo∣neth, which answereth to our February, 1 Mac. 16. So all his trauels were 799 miles. ¶ The description of the places mentioned in his Trauels. Of Arabath. ARrabath or Araba was a city neere to the lake or riuer Me∣rom, not farre from Dothan, 44 miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the North. It seemes to take the name from Locusts, wher∣of there are many kinds, 1 Mac. 5. for there are Locusts that liue vpon herbs and flours; others that fly in great swarms in the aire; and some also that liue in the waters, not much vnlike Crabs or Crayfishes, their tailes only excepted. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 12. reckons vp another kinde of Locusts, whereof Iohn Baptist did feed, and it was lawfull for the Iewes to eat of them: hee describes them to haue foure feet and wings, so that they can either fly or leap vpon the earth. They can be resembled to nothing more fitly than to grashoppers. These the Hebrewes call Rabae, Levit. 11. Mat. 3. be∣cause of the aboundance of them; being deriued of the verbe Ra∣bah, He hath multiplied or increased; because these kinds of Lo∣custs come in mighty great swarmes and multitudes into the East part of the world. Of these kindes of Locusts Arabath took the name, but they are not known to vs: neuerthelesse such there are, and as it appeareth in Levit. cap. 11. were permitted to be ea∣ten among the Iewes. From whence may be concluded, that Iohn Baptist liued vpon these kinde of Locusts, and not vpon Crabs or Cray-fishes, or any such kinde of Locusts, Mat. 3.
Of Sephela. SEphela is a plain compassed about with mountaines, neere the riuer Sorecke. It lieth 14 miles from Ierusalem Westward. Here Simon built the castle Adida, and fortified it very strongly. Afterward there was a city built neere to this tower, called Eleu∣theropolis. It was a free city in the tribe of Iudah, halfe way be∣tween Ierusalem and Ascalon; of which Ierome speaketh, li. de Lo∣cis Hebr. Of Doch. THis was a strong tower, the ruins wherof may be seen to this day. It was scituated neere Iericho in the field of Hiericun∣tis, ten miles from Ierusalem Northeastward; where Ptolomeus the son of Abodus perfidiously put to death his son in law Simon high Priest of the Iewes. From this tower you might haue seen all the country of the Giliadites, the two tribes of Gad and Reuben, and the halfe tribe of Manasses, with the mountains of the Moabites, Nebo, Pisga, and Abarim. vid. 1 Mac. ca. vlt. The Trauels of Iohn Hyrcanus. IOhn Hyrcanus was made Captaine ouer all the men of War by his father Simon; and went from Ierusalem to Gaza, 44 miles, where he dwelt, 1 Mac. 13. From thence he returned to Ierusalem, 44 miles, in the 5 yeare of his fathers gouernment, to let him vnderstand how Cendebius had inuaded the holy land, 1 Mac. 16. From Ierusalem, he and his brother Iudas went with their army to Modin, 14 miles, where they stayed all night. The next morning before day they gaue battell to Cendebius, not far from Modin, ouercame him and put him to flight. So he pursued the chase till he came to the fortresse of Cedron, which stood in the field of Azotus, euen 8 miles.
From the field of Azotus he and his brother Iudas returned to Ierusalem, being 22 miles. 1 Mac. 16. From Ierusalem he returned to Gaza, which is 44 miles. Now when Sorius Ptolomeus the son of Abodus (who a little before had treacherously slaine his sonne in law Simon at a banquet) heard of Iohns comming into the towne, he sent forth certain traitors and homicides to put him to death also: but Hyrcanus hauing certain intelligence of the matter, preuented the mischief, and put these traitors to the sword, 1 Mac. 16. So all his trauels were 176 miles. Concerning the towns and places mentioned in these trauels, you may reade before. ¶ Of the Kings of Syria that succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, and made war vpon the MACHABEES. And first of the Trauels of Antiochus Eupator. THis Antiochus the yonger succeeded his father Antiochus E∣piphanes, in the 149 yere of the Grecians gouernment in Sy∣ria, which was the 161 yere before Christ, and he continued King of Asia and Syria 3 yeares. Lysias the Kings Substitute for Syria, called this man by the name of Eupator, that is, a good Fa∣ther; because Kings ought to be Fathers of their countries. This Antiochus Eupator in the second yeare of his reign came with a great army from Antiochia to the town of Modin, which was 380 miles. From Modin he went to the Hold at Bethsura: this he sharply besieged; being 12 miles. From Bethsura he went to Bethsachara (almost a mile) to meet wrth Iudas Machabeus, who put him to flight, and kild 600 of his men, 1 Mac. 6. From Bethsachara hee returned to the Hold of Bethsura, and won it, which was almost a mile. From Bethsura he came to Ierusalem, which was halfe a mile.
From Ierusalem he went with his Army to Ptolomais, beeing 76 miles. From Ptolomais hee returned to Antiochia, 204 miles and a halfe. Concerning the townes and places mentioned in his Trauels you may reade before. The Trauels of Demetrius Soter the brother of Antiochus Epiphanes. IN An. mundi 3809. before Christ 159. Demetrius Soter the son of Seleucus Philopater, who was sent to Rome, brought a Navy from thence through the Mediterranian sea, and came to Tripolis in Syria, which journy was 2680 miles, and vsurped vpon the go∣uernment of Syria against young Antiochus the son of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7. From Tripolis he went to Antiochia, where the King kept his court, 88 miles. Here he caused yong Antiochus and Lysias to be slain, and after reigned in Syria 10 yeares. At length he was slain in a great battel, by Alexander the son of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7. So all his trauels were 1760 miles. Of Tripolis. THis city was scituated in Phoenicia a prouince of Syria, on the shore of the Mediterranian sea, 170 miles from Ierusa∣lem towards the North; and was so called because there dwelt in it three sorts of people, viz. Tyrians, Sydonians, and Arabians, It is a very famous City euen to this day, the Ocean sea com∣ming into euery street and principall place of it, and full as po∣pulous as Tyrus. For there inhabit Grecians, Latines, Armeni∣ans, Maronites, Nestorians, and people of many other nations of diuers conditions and customes in manner of liuing. It aboun∣deth also with great aboundance of costly Tapestrie, which is made so curiously, and with such cost, that it is very delightfull to such as looke vpon it. It is credibly reported, That there are
found within the city of Tripolis 4000 men, that do little els but weaue and make Tapestry, and such like costly hangings. The country round about where it standeth is very pleasant, & because of the great aboundance of Vines, Olives, Figgs, and other fruits and floures (which yeeld a comfortable smell, and is profitable for the maintenance of life) it is called Paradice. There is a field before the City, some two miles in length, and one in bredth, in which there are to be seene very curious gardens, and artificially contriued. About six miles from the city standeth mount Libanus, at the foot whereof riseth a goodly fountain, which with great violence runneth thence, but suddenly falling into the vallies, it ioyns with other waters, and becomes a faire and pleasant riuer, watering all the gardens of the plain between Tripolis and Libanus, but espe∣cially the mountains of the Leopards, which is not far off. In the Canticles, cap. 4. there is mention of this hill; Come with mee, my Spouse, from the dennes of the Lions, and the mountains of the Leopards. The water of this Spring is very cleare, pleasant, cold and health∣full; vpon the banks of it there stand many churches & religious houses. It is called the Fountaine of the gardens, and is diuided into three riuers or principal streams, besides many other small brooks which run thence and fall into the sea; so that the sentence Est. 9. is verified of this, A small fountaine shall increase to a great Ri∣uer, and shall be poured out against many waters. The Trauels of King Alexander son of Epiphanes, and brother to Antiochus Eupator. OF this Alexander, Iustin writes, lib. 35. where he sheweth, That he was not son to Antiochus Epiphanes, as was supposed, but had to name Prompalus, being a man of the meaner sort of people: but the Antiochians for the great tyranny of Demetrius, falling
into rebellion, gaue vnto him the name of Alexander, and withal caused it to be published abroad, that he was the son of Epiphanes, which by reason of his youth was easily beleeued. And at this time Demetrius because of his crueltie, being much hated of all sorts of people; it came to passe that most, and those of the grea∣test also, combined with this yong man, supposing him indeed to be of noble descent, and the son of a King. Wherefore Alexander or Prompatus being thus encouraged, tooke vpon him to bee the brother of Antiochus Eupator, and called himselfe the lawful heire and successor to the crowne of Syria: going from thence to Pto∣lomais, where he kept a royall court; and in the yere of the world 3818, before Christ 150, by the help of the Antiochians & other the inhabitants of Syria, hee tooke vpon him the gouernment of that country, and reigned fiue yeares. This man suffered many varieties and changes of fortune: at first was put to flight by De∣metrius; after hee put Demetrius to flight, and at length put him to death and vsurpt vpon his gouernment. In the third yere of his reign he maried Cleopatra the daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Egypt, by whom he had his son Antiochus. To this mar∣riage Ionathan was inuited. In the last yeare of his gouernment hee went from Ptolomais to Antiochia, which was 200 miles, where hee opposed himselfe against Demetrius Nicanor the sonne of Demetrius Soter, 1 Machab. cap. 10. From Antiochia he went to Cilicia, which was 120 miles, to suppresse the rebellion of his subiects: but when hee heard that Ptolomeus Philometor his father in law had taken vp armes against him, conquered Syria, and giuen his wife to Demetrius Nicanor, which had been maried vnto him two yeares before, hee gathered all his forces hee could, and with all expedition made good the war against Ptolomeus: but hee was ouercome, and fled into that part of Arabia which bordereth vpon the mountaine Amanus for refuge; where Zabdiel the gouernor of that countrey, fearing lest he should fall into the displeasure of Ptolomeus, caused his ser∣uants to cut off his head, and sent it to him into Syria. Within
three daies after which sight he died, being mortally wounded in the former battell, Ios. li. Ant. 13. c. 17. So all his trauels were 320 miles. Of Amanus. AManus was a mountain between Syria and Cilicia, which extendeth it selfe to the riuer Euphrates. Between this A∣manus and Euphrates, Arabia deserta is scituated, 400 miles from Ierusalem Northward, and signifies The mountain of truth; from Aman, True and faithfull. The Trauels of Demetrius Nicanor, the sonne of Demetrius Soter. IN the 165 yeare of the gouernment of the Grecians in Syria, which was 141 yeares before Christ, Demetrius, syrnamed Nicanor, which signifies Victorre, sailed out of Creet into Cili∣cia, which was 600 miles, Ios. Ant. 13. c. 6. 1 Mac. 10. Out of Cilicia he came into Syria the lower, 160 miles, where ioyning with Apolonius he tooke vpon him the crowne and King∣dom of Syria. Afterward Apolonius went into Iudaea with a great army, and besieged Iamnia. Ptolomeus Philometor also assisted the proceedings of Demetrius, seeing Alexander his son in law begin∣ning to decline; and the better to strengthen their allyance, mat∣ched him to Cleopatra his daughter, which before had bin wife to Alexander; by which policie he added to the kingdom of Egypt all Asia, ouer which he ruled 2 yeares, 1 Mac. 11. After, Demetrius Nicanor came out of Siria the lower, with Pto∣lomeus Philometor, to Antiochia, which was 80 miles, 1 Mac. 11. From Antiochia they went with their army to a plain neer the mountain Amanus, 120 miles; where in a sharpe war they ouer∣came Alexander and put him out of his kingdom, Ios. Ant. li. 3. c. 7. Now after the death of Ptolomeus Philometor, Demetrius Nicanor
Nicanor returned to Antiochia, 120 miles, where he gouerned the kingdome of Syria two yeares. From Antiochia he went to Ptolomais, which was 200 miles; to which place Ionathan the high priest came to meet him, where he gaue to him many presents and great gifts to win his fauour, 1 Mac. 11. From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, 200 miles. There his soldiers and the city of Antiochia rebelled against him. For which cause Ionathan the high-priest sent him 3000 men, which deliuered the King out of danger, put to the sword 100000 of the seditious, and burnt the city of Antiochia, 1 Mac. 11. But af∣ter Demetrius shewed himselfe vnthankfull, hee was driuen out of his kingdome by Tryphon and yong Antiochus the sonne of King Alexander, who was also called Theos, which signifies God. In the 172 yeare of the reigne of the Grecians in Syria, which was 138 before Christ, Nicanor hauing slaine Antiochus the son of Alexander, he would haue reigned alone in Syria: wherefore De∣metrius, who was the lawfull King of Syria, being 3 yeares before driuen thence, went 1200 miles into Media to craue aid against Tryphon: but Arsaces king of the Medes, Parthians, and Persians, sent the chiefe captain of his host against Demetrius, who burned his tents, tooke him prisoner, and caried him back to his master, to Hecatompylon the chiefe city of his kingdome, distant from Syria 1220 miles toward the East, Iustin. lib. 36. 38. From Hecatompylon Arsaces sent him to Hyrcania the Me∣tropolitan city of that countrey, which was 176 miles; where al∣though Arsaces kept him as a prisoner, yet he allowed him royall attendance, and after maried him to his daughter, Iust. lib. 38. After the death of Arsaces, with singular industry and policie he got out of captiuitie, after he had beene 12 yeares prisoner in Hyrcania, and came into Syria, which was 14 miles, where he re∣couered his kingdome, and reigned foure yeares. So all his Tra∣uels were 4156 miles.
¶ Of the Places to which he trauelled. Of Creta, now called Candia. THis is an Island of the Mediterranian sea, distant from Ieru∣salem 600 miles Westward, very fruitfull and pleasant, in which there growes great plenty of Cypresse trees, and grapes of diuers kindes, but principally such whereof Malmsey and Sacke are made. Here Tytus, Pauls Disciple, was Bishop; wherefore you shall reade more of it after. Of Seleucia. SEleucia is a famous city of Syria, scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterranian sea, 280 miles from Ierusalem Northward, neere to which the riuer Orantes runneth, and the mountaine Ca∣sius standeth, which is 4 miles high, Plin. l. 5. c. 22. You may read more of this in the trauels of S. Paul. Of Syria. SYria was sometimes called of the Hebrewes Aram, of Aram the sonne of Sem, of whom all Armenia tooke the name. A∣ram signifies, A man of great spirit and dignity, being deriued of Rom, that is, lifted vp; for he was a man of an excellent spirit, Gen. cap. 10. Syria signifieth a great tract of land, and is diuided into two parts, the vpper and the lower. In the vpper Syria are these cities, Antiochia, Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea: in the lower Syria are Sydon, Tyrus, Berytus, Tripolis, and Orthosia. This Countrey is scituated in a very temperat Zone; from whence it happeneth that it is neither oppressed with too much cold nor heate. There are that diuide Syria into foure parts, that is, into Syria, Assyria, Leucosyria, and Coelosyria. Also Pliny, Lib. 5. Cap. 12. attributeth Mesopotamia and Babylonia to Syria. But it is euident that these were distinct Countries from them, in the which there reigned Emperours and Kings which had large and spatious Dominions. For Syria is scituated betweene the Medi∣terranian sea and Euphrates; but Mesopotamia (which is so cal∣led because it is scituated in the middle of waters) is separated
from Syria and Assyria, with the riuers Euphrates & Tygris: and Arabia is separated from Syria and Babylon with many vast wil∣dernesses. Therefore these countries cannot properly passe vnder the denomination of Syria. Of Parthia. PArthia is a spatious country full of mountains and desarts, ly∣ing vpon the borders of Media Westward; the Metropolis whereof is Hecatompylon, taking the name of 100 gates where∣with it is fortified. It lieth (as Stephanus saith) 1512 miles from Ierusalem Eastward. Here Arsaces that mighty King of the Par∣thians kept his court, who had vnder his gouernment Media, Par∣thia, Persia, Hircania, and the greatest part of all the countries to∣ward the East. It is called Parthia because of the fruitfulnesse of the soile, being deriued of Parah, To fructifie. Of Hyrcania. HYrcania is a fruitfull and pleasant countrey bordering vpon Media and the Caspian sea, for the most part plain & cham∣pian, beautified with many faire Cities, the chiefe of which are, Hyrcania (the Metropolis of the whole kingdome) Talebrota, Samariana, Carta, and Tape. It was so fat and fruitfull, that the inhabitants vse not to till and dresse the ground, as they doe in o∣ther places, but the seed that falleth from the huske vpon the earth, springeth vp and bringeth forth great plenty and increase, without further labour. The Dewes also falling vpon the trees, there droppeth from them oile and honey in great plenty. It ta∣keth the name (as it is thought) from a Wood called Hyrcania. In like manner the Caspian sea which bordereth vpon it, of this country is called Hyrcanum. Many cruel beasts are found there∣in, as the Panther, the Tyger, and the Leopard. The Panther is of a whitish colour inclining something to yellow, spotted all ouer with round shining spots; in like manner are their eies. She is a friend almost to all kinde of creatures, except the Aspe and Dra∣gon, and (as Oppianus saith) neuer taken but when shee is drunke, or in her sleepe. She is the female to the Leopard. The Leopard is of the same colour, and of the nature of a Wolfe, being full, hee
hurteth nothing; but if empty he preyeth vpon euery thing, yea, euen vpon men: his breath is very sweet, with which many other creatures being delighted, he often preyes vpon them; but beeing full, he sleepeth somtimes three daies together. The Tyger also is a very swift and cruell creature, from whence he is so called; his skin is yellow and full of black spots round and shining. If shee chance to lose her yong, she neuer leaues seeking till shee findes them out. The Trauels of Tryphon, that put Antiochus to death. IN An. mundi 3826. before Christ 142. Tryphon, somtime chief Captain to Alexander King of Syria, who was slain in Arabia, went to Emalcuel Prince of Arabia deserta, with whom Antio∣chus the son of Alexander was brought vp; where he so wrought with him, that he got the boy from him, and brought him thence into Syria, 160 miles; and within a while after besieged Antio∣chia, tooke the towne, droue thence Demetrius Nicanor, and crow∣ned yong Antiochus King of Assyria. This journy to and again was 320 miles, 1 Mac. 11. In the second yeare of the reign of young Antiochus, Tryphon went from Antiochia to Bethsan, where he perfidiously betrayed Ionathan the brother of Iudas Machabeus, 1 Mac. 12. being thirtie six miles. From Bethsan he went to Ptolomais, 32 miles. From Ptolomais he went to Addus a towne vpon the borders of Iudea, 68 miles, 1 Mac. 13. To Addus Simon sent his brothers Children and his ransome, which was 60 talents of siluer: but after hee had receiued the mo∣ny, he broke his word, and went thence with Ionathan and his sons to Ador, 48 miles. From Ador hee went to Bascharnan in the land of Gilead, 96 miles. Here he put to death Ionathan and his sonnes. From the country of the Gileadites he returned to Antiochia
which was 240 miles: here he put to death yong Antiochus, being but a boy of 7 yeares of age, and vsurped vpon the gouernment in his place. He began to reign in the 172 yeare of the Grecians go∣uernment in Syria, and reigned 3 yeares, 1 Mac. 14. Ios. li. Ant. 13. About the end of the three yeares, which was in the 174 yeare of the Grecians gouernment in Syria, Antiochus Sedetes (brother of Demetrius Nicanor) made war vpon Tryphon, and compelled him to fly from Antiochia to Dora, 240 miles from Antiochia toward the South, 1 Mac. 15. But Antiochus Sedetes followed him thither, and so streightly besieged Dora, that he was constrained to steale thence in a ship, and saile to Orthosia, which was 160 miles. Lastly, in the way as he was going thence to Apamea, which was 120 miles, he was taken and put to death. So all his trauels were 1360 miles. ¶ Of the places mentioned in his trauels, which haue been formerly recited. Of Dora. DOra was a hauen towne scituated vpon the shore of the Medi∣terranean sea, 48 miles from Ierusalem Northward, in the mid way between Carmel and Caesarea Strato. In Ioseph. cap. 17. it is called Dor, that is, à durans. Of Orthosia. THis was a city of Assiria, scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterranian sea, neere to the place where the riuer Eleu∣therius falleth into it, 200 miles from Ierusalem Northward; be∣ing so called of Diana, whom the Grecians called Orthosia, that is, Exalted or lifted vp. Hither Tryphon sailed when hee fled from Antiochus Sedetes, 1 Mac. 15. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 20. Concerning the trauels of Apolonius, Nicanor, Bacchides, and Cendebius; because they are sufficiently described in the trauels of the Machabees, I thought it vnfit to speake further of them.
The Trauels of Heliodorus. HEliodorus signifies the House of the Sun. He was Scretarie and chiefe Gouernor of Antiochia in Syria, for that migh∣tie King Seleucus Philopater, who was brother to that cruel Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes, and was sent by his Lord and master Seleucus from Antiochia to Ierusalem, which is 80 miles, to spoile the Temple of the Lord: but the Lord sent an Angel richly beautifi∣ed with armor of gold, sitting vpon a horse; who went to Heliodo∣rus, and with his horse trod him vnder his feet: and there appea∣red two other Angels full of majestie and power, that strooke He∣liodorus and beat him with whips, so that he lay vpon the floore of the Temple as a man halfe dead, and could not go forth vntil he was caried out, 2 Mac. 3. From Ierusalem he went with that good man Onias chief priest of the Iewes (at whose earnest prayers and supplications hee was made whole) to Antiochia, 280 miles; where hee told Seleucus Philopater of the wonderfull works of the Lord. So all his trauels were 580 miles. The Trauels of the high-Priests of the Iewes that ruled before the Machabees, as they are seuerally mentio∣ned in the Books of Machabees. And first of the tra∣uels of Onias the high-Priest. ONias signifies the riches of God; from On, Opulency, and Iah, God: for although he was afflicted with pouertie in this world, yet he was rich in God. He succeeded his Fa∣ther Simon the Iust, an. M. 3757. before Christ 211. Antiochus the great being King of Syria. He was high-priest 39 years vntil the
death of Seleucus Philopater: at the end of which time, one Simon, the chiefe of those that kept the temple, being ambitious of rule, fell to words with Onias, and from words to blowes; so that there were many outrages committed by the friends of Simon. Where∣fore Onias to giue place to the fury of his aduersaries, went from Ierusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. But Seleucus Phi∣lopater being dead, and Antiochus Epiphanes in the gouernment, who was a couetous and cruell prince; good Onias, partly for fear of him, and partly of his brother Iason (who had but a little be∣fore purchased the office of high priest for 360 talents of siluer, and promised to pay a yearely tribute of 80 talents) durst not re∣turn home to Ierusalem, but went to a sanctuary that stood in the wood of Daphne, which was about one mile from Antiochia, in hope of safety: to which place one Andronichus chiefe Captaine to Antiochus, came to him, and with faire speeches and flattering words allured him out of the Sanctuary, and traiterously put him to death. So his trauels were 281 miles. The Trauels of the high-Priest Iason. IAson and Iesus haue both one signification: he entred vpon the office of High priest in the first yere of Antiochus Epiphanes, which was 173 yeares before Christ. He went from Ierusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles, where after the death of Onias he payd to Antiochus for the office of high-priest almost 3 tunnes of gold, with promise to pay a yearely tribute of 48000 crowns. From Antiochia he returned to Ierusalem, 280 miles; where he began to build the tower of Acropolis in mount Acra: and that he might please that wicked King, and keep his fauour, hee built certain Theatres in Ierusalem, and caused Interludes and Playes to be acted in them, at such times and vpon such daies as the peo∣ple were wont to meet in the Temple to serue God. Also K. An∣tiochus Epiphanes in the 4 yeare of his priesthood comming to Ie∣rusalem, he gaue him royall entertainment.
The same yeare Iason was put out of his office of high-priest by the policy and cunning of his brother Menelaus, and was constrai∣ned to fly into the land of the Ammonites beyond Iordan, being 40 miles. Two yeares after, when Antiochus Epiphanes inuaded Aegypt, there was a vaine rumor that he was slain; wherefore Iason with a thousand souldiers returned to Ierusalem, which was 40 miles, and broke suddenly into the city, so that Menelaus was constrai∣ned for safety of his life to fly to the garrison of the Syrians that were in Ierusalem. But Antiochus hearing what had hapned, came out of Aegypt with a great army to Ierusalem; wherefore he fled thence backe again to the Ammonites, 40 miles; but they fearing that Antio∣chus would come thither with his army, he was accused before A∣reta King of Arabia, and constrained to fly from one city to ano∣ther for safety. Wherefore when he perceiued that he could not liue there se∣cure, he went thence into Egypt, 280 miles. From thence he went to the Lacedemonians, 600 miles, where he died in exile, being cast out vnlamented or buried. So all his trauels were 1560 miles. Of Lacedemonia, the metropolitan city of Peloponesus. LAcedemonia or Sparta was a famous city of Peloponnesus, distant from Ierusalem 600 miles toward the West; which although it had no wals, yet was it one of the fairest and most po∣pulous cities in all Grecia; and was called Sparta of Spartus, who was sometime King thereof, and rebuilt it, adorning it with faire & goodly buildings. At first it was built by one Lacedaemon, who was king thereof, and of him called Lacedemonia: and after, Me∣nelaus that mighty King of the Grecians (who had to wife Helena the fairest woman of all Grecia) kept his court there. Here also Lycurgus that famous Philosopher reigned as King, and prescri∣bed to the citisens and inhabitants excellent lawes, by the obser∣uance whereof they became famous in after-ages, and performed
many noble wars and exploits against their enemies. Ionathan and Simon held a friendly league with the Lacedemonians. The Trauels of the high-Priest Menelaus. THis Menelaus, called also Onias, was (as Iosephus saith) the third son of Simon the Iust, and brother to Iason, although, 2 Mac. 3, 4. he is said to be the brother of one Simon of the tribe of Benjamin, who was chiefe of those that kept the Temple, of whom you may reade before. This man in the fourth yere of An∣tiochus Epiphanes was sent by Iason his brother to Antiochia, being 280 miles, vpon certain busines, but principally to cary the king mony. Where he made a secret Contract with him, to pay him 30 talentsThat is, 180000 Crownes. beside all that his brother Iason had payd him, if hee would institute him to be high-Priest. The King in hope of pro∣fit gaue eare to his motion, and vnder pretence of injury & wrong offered by Iason, constrained him to leaue his office, and flie from Ierusalem into the land of the Ammonites for his safety, and so instituted Menelaus to be chiefe Priest of the Iewes; who entred vpon his gouernment in the yeare before Christ 169. Wherefore Menelaus returned from Antiochia to Ierusalem, 280 miles; where he began to gouern not as chiefe Priest, but as a cruell and wicked tyrant, 2 Mac. 4. But when in the beginning of his gouernment hee could not pay that great summe of money which he had promised, the king sent for him to Antiochia, being 280 miles, where for that time he was remoued from his office, and his brother Lysimacus ordai∣ned chiefe Priest in his roome. Wherefore Menelaus being sore troubled, vexed, and grieued in mind for that which had hapned in the first yeare of his priest∣hood, returned backe from Antiochia to Ierusalem, beeing 280 miles. But a little after, when Antiochus Epiphanes brought an Armie into Cilicia, to suppresse the rebellion of the Tharsians and Mal∣lotans,
Menelaus taking aduantage of the Kings absence, went to Andronichus (who was chief Agent for the King in Syria) to An∣tiochia, 280 miles, and there gaue him certain golden vessels and jewels that he had stolne out of the temple, to hire him to be his friend, and help him to his office of high-priesthood againe. But Onias the elder hearing of this sacriledge, greatly reprehended Menelaus for this shamefull fact; but he taking it in ill part, com∣bined with Andronichus, who by faire speeches alluring him out of the sanctuary in the wood Daphne, put him to death, after hee had bin 5 years in exile. But King Antiochus returning from An∣tiochia, accused Andronichus, of treason, and by the means of a certain Courtier receiued Menelaus into fauor. From Antiochia Menelaus returned to Ierusalem, 280 miles; where by the help of his brother Lysimachus he stole a great masse of mony out of the Temple. Which sacriledge being known to the people, they fell to vprore and killed Lysimachus close by the Treasurie. They accused Menelaus also before Antiochus, 2 Mac. cap. 4. Antiochus in the second yeare of his priesthood went to Tyrus which is 100 miles, where he so corrupted certain courtiers with mony, that he procured the fauor of Antiochus, and caused his Ac∣cusers (good and iust men) to be banished thence, as slanderers, and such as went about to defame Menelaus. From Tyrus he returned backe again to Ierusalem, 100 miles, where he fell into his old crueltie, and in the third yere of his go∣uernment receiued Antiochus Epiphanes with his army into the ci∣ty of Ierusalem, who cruelly murthered the citisens, and spoyled the Temple, 2 Mac. 5. After the death of Antiochus, who as it is said perished of a grie∣uous disease, and was buried at Babylon; his sonne Antiochus Eu∣pator came with a great Army into Iudaea in hostile manner. Wherefore Menelaus in the last yeare of his Priesthood went out to meet him. But Lysias accused him vnto the King, as one that was the onely author of all the euills that had hapned to the Iewes. Wherefore Antiochus willed Lysias to take him prisoner; who brought him to Berea a towne in Syria, distant from Ierusa∣lem 360 miles Northward; where vpon the top of a Tower fifty
cublts high, he was tied to a wheel and had all his joints broken, and through the extremity of the pain died, 2 Mac. 3. So all his trauels were 2240 miles. The Trauels of Alcimus, High-Priest of the poste∣ritie of Aaron. THis Alcimus after the death of Menelaus, which was the yere before Christ 150, went with certaine impious and wicked men to Demetrius Soter, who liued in Antiochia in Syria, be∣ing 280 miles, and there accused Iudas Machabeus and all the god∣ly Iews; vsing such flattery toward the King, that he obtained the principalitie and office of high-Priest, which he held three years, 1 Mac. 7. From Antiochia he and Bacchides returned back to Ierusalem, where hee was instituted in the office of high-priesthood, which is 280 miles. But when he saw that hee was not able to withstand the power and singular vertue of Iudas Machabeus, he returned back to Anti∣ochia, 280 miles; where after hee had accused the good men a∣mong the Iewes, he obtained aid of Demetrius, who sent Nicanor with a great army into Iudaea against Iudas, to establish Alcimus in the priesthood. So Alcimus and Nicanor returned into Iudaea, 280 miles. But Alcimus seeing familiar conference to passe between Nica∣nor and Iudas Machabeus, he went backe againe to Antiochia, 280 miles, where he told Demetrius of the perfidious dealing of Nica∣nor. Wherefore Demetrius being very angry at what had hapned, wrot a sharp letter to Nicanor, giuing him to vnderstand, That it was much against his minde that hee should make a league with Iudas: and further willed him (the said league notwithstanding) to bring him bound to Antiochia. Vpon receit of which letter he made war vpon Iudas; in which expedition Nicanor was taken and had his head cut off. All this hapned in the first yeare of the priesthood of Alcimus.
But when Demetrius heard of this ouerthrow, he sent Bacchides and Alcimus with a great army, who went to Antiochia, and came to Masloth in the country of Arbela, 192 miles, where they made incursions vpon the tribe of Nepthaly, & slew a great multitude of the Israelites, 1 Mac. 9. From Masloth they went with their army to Gilgal, 76 miles. This hapned in the second yeare of the priesthood of Alcimus. From Gilgal they came to Ierusalem, 12 miles, 1 Macchab. cap. 9. From thence they brought their army to Berea, 12 miles: here they were ouercome and put to flight by Iudas Machabeus, 1 Mac. cap. 9. From Berea they fled amongst the mountaines which are be∣tween Azotus and Gazeron, six miles. Here Iudas Machabeus was slaine. Wherefore Alcimus returned thence backe again to Ierusalem 20 miles, and caused the walls of the inner house of the Temple, and the monuments of the Priests to be taken down & destroied: but before his command was fully executed, the Lord strooke him with a dead palsie, of which he lay a time dumbe, but within a while after he died of that disease, in the second yeare of his priesthood, an. mundi 3811, and before Christ 157. Alcimus being dead, Bacchides returned back to Demetrius in Syria, 1 Mac. 9. For seuen yeares after there was no high Priest in Ierusalem, till Iona∣than the brother of Iudas Machabeus tooke vpon him that office, 1 Mac. 10. So all his trauels were 1717 miles. ¶ Of the places to which he trauelled. Of Arbela. THis was a city in the vpper Galile, belonging to the tribe of Nepthali, 96 miles from Ierusalem Northward. Of which towne all the countrey is called Arbela, being deriued of Arab, To lie hid.
Of Masloth. THis also is a towne of Nepthaly, 92 miles from Ierusalem Northward: and is deriued of Maschal, which signifies, Hee hath gouerned. Of Berea. TO this city Iotham sometime fled from the fury of his bro∣ther Abimilech Iudge of Israel, Iudg. 9. It is scituated twelue miles from Ierusalem Westward, and signifies a cleare Well. Thus by Gods prouidence haue I described the Trauells and Iournies of the holy Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets, &c. as they are seuerally mentioned in the old Testament; that so, gentle Reader, thou mightst vnderstand what difficult and tedious jour∣nies, and in them what great labour and vexation they were con∣strained to beare in this world, till God of his mercy tooke them out of this vale of misery, and placed them in euerlasting happinesse, where now with∣out doubt they remaine in peace. FINIS.
The quantities of the Monies both Siluer and Gold, as they are seuerally mentioned in the Scriptures, re∣duced to our Weights and English valuations, EVer since the time that Monies haue been allowed as cur∣rant in exchange betwixt man and man (which for that purpose as Aristotle saith was first ordained) it hath pas∣sed according to the valuation of a certaine weight, which for the most part is vniuersall, according to the worth and estimation thereof in the seuerall countries where it is to be sold & exchan∣ged; or else by Coine, which is currant according to the valuati∣on that is imposed vpon it by the consent of a State, or command of a Prince. In both which there haue bin vsed sundry distincti∣ons of greater and lesse valuations of weights and coine, accor∣ding to the necessitie and estimation thereof in seuerall King∣domes and gouernments. As amongst the Iewes they vsed weights and no coine, and these distinguished in seuerall sorts, and as is thought separated with sundry marks, that they might be known each from other. The weights that they vsed were com∣monly three, viz. the Centiner or talent, the Mina, and the Sicle; according to the opinion of Iosephus, Budaeus, Hostius, and many others. Of a Sicle. A Sicle was a kind of weight currant among the Iewes, con∣taining precisely halfe an ounce of siluer or gold, which that it might be distinguished, had a particular effigies or super∣scription; viz. vpon one side was to be seene the measure wherein they kept Manna in the Sanctuarie, with this superscription, The Sicle of Israel: and on the other the rod of Aaron flourishing, with
this inscription, Holy Ierusalem, which is ordinarily worth in Eng∣lish mony 2 s. 6 d. and in gold 15 s. and more or lesse according to the purenesse or basenesse of either. A sicle was diui∣ded into these parts Into a Drachma, i. 7 d. ob. whereof 4 make a sicle, Gen. 13.15. Exod. 21.32, &c. Halfe sicles, mentioned Exod. 30.13.15. ca. 38.26. which was the yearely tax imposed vpon euerie man toward the building of the Tabernacle, i. 15 d. Eng∣lish. Quadrans Sicli, or the fourth part of a Sicle, which was also in vse among the Iewes, 1 Sam. 8.9. which a∣mounts to a Roman peny, and in our mony to 7 d. ob. and by the Grecians were called Drachma. Gherahs, Exod. 30.13. which was the 20 part of a sicle, and was worth 1 d. ob. Of Sicles there were three sorts A common sicle, which weighed a quarter of an ounce, and was worth 15 d. The Kings sicle, which weighed 3. Drachma's, that is in our mony 22 d. ob. The sicle of the Temple, which weighed directly halfe an ounce, and was worth 2 s. 6 d. Of a Mina. Ios. li. ant. ca. 12A Mina was a pound weight among the Iewes, and were of two sorts, one of gold, which weighed 100 Drachma's, another of siluer, weighing 240 Drachma's. These were called the antient weights, but there was a later, which is said to contain 100 Dena∣ria's or Attick Drachma's,Tract. de Aug. cap. 8. which seem to be so called because of the traffick the Iews had with the Grecians, among whom it was worth 100 Attick Drachma's, i. 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. English. Of Mina's there were 3 sorts, as appears in Ezech. 45. The common Mina or pound (weighing 25 halfe ounces or sicles of the Temple) amounted to sixtie Drachma's, i. 37 s. 6 d. The Kings Mina or pound (weighing 20 half oun∣ces or sicles of the temple) amounted to 80 drachmas i. 50 s. The Mina or pound of the Temple or Sanctuarie, (which weighed 25 halfe ounces or sicles) maketh 100 Drachma's, i. 3 li. 2 s. 6 d.
Of a Talent. THe Hebrew talent ordinarily weigheth 125 pounds, which being diuided, amounteth to 3000 sicles or halfe ounces, as it plainly appeareth, Exod. 38.25, 26. where it is said that 600000 men offered so many halfe sicles, which make 300000 sicles, the 100 part of which make a talent, from whence it appeareth that 3000 sicles make a talent. Also Epiphanes obserueth, lib. 1. de Pon. That the Attick talent is equall in weight with the Hebrew; for as the Hebrew containes 3000 sicles, which make 125 li. so the Attick containes 1200 Drachma's, which make the same weight, and is worth 375 li. of English mony. But the Hebrew Talent of gold, which for the most part is vsed in euery place, is worth 4500 li. in our mony. The Iewes had three sorts of ta∣lents: The common talent (weighing 3000 quarters of an ounce, or common sicles) amounts to 6000 Drach∣ma's, which is 187 li. 10 s. The kings talent weighed 3000 of the kings sicles which amounted to 9000 Drachma's, which is 281 li. 5 s. The Talent of the Temple or Sanctuary weighed 3000 sicles of the temple, which are precisely so ma∣ny halfe ounces, which amount to three hundred se∣uenty fiue pounds. From hence then may easily be gathered, that although the Iewes had seueral weights and denominations of siluer and gold, yet only one kind was vsually obserued in traffique with other na∣tions, and that had correspondencie with their Weights, the rest being only for the common sort or particular vses; for although there were diuers Sicles, Mina's, and Talents among themselues, yet the common weight (whether it was of sicle, mina, or talent) was vsually that which they termed the talent of the temple, and that had a iust correspondencie with the Grecian Talent both in weight and worth; and this not only among them, but also by re∣lation from them to the Italians; and that nation obtaining an v∣niuersall monarchie made it common with vs also.
Of other Weights vsed among the Iews. THey had also other weights which they vsed, passing vnder seuerall denominations and differing value; as Keseph, a sil∣uerling or Nummus; which name is very often vsed for a Sicle, as appeareth, Gen. 20.16. & 23.16.43.21. 2 Sam. 18.11, 12. The Caldaeans called this Silga, & the Hebrews Shekel, being precise∣ly halfe an ounce, and worth 2. s. 6 d. For 30 of these Siluerlings of the Sanctuarie our Sauior Christ wns sold, Mat. 26. which a∣mounteth to 3 li. 15 s. English. There was also another kinde of Siluerling or Nummus vsed, which was called Siclus, but it was the common or vulgar Sicle, which was but a quarter of an ounce, and was worth but 15 d. There was another kind of siluerling or Nummus vsed, which was called Keshitah; of which you may reade in three seueral pla∣ces of Scripture, Gen. 33.19. Ios. 24.32. Iob. 42.11. and was sig∣ned with the image of a Lambe vpon it, from whence it is so cal∣led. The antient Nummus of the Arabians and Chaldaeans was like vnto this, as may be gathered by many circumstances out of the places where it is mentioned, and was of the same valuation as the Grecians was amongst the Iewes, which was 1 d. ob. But the Siluerlings mentioned Act 1.9.19. are intended to be Grecian Siluerlings or Nummus, and is worth an Attick Drach∣ma; for the Grecians reckon their summes of mony by drachmas, as the Iewes and Romans by Sicles and Sestertia's, and is worth of our mony 7 d. ob. You shall read in Mat. 17.24. of a Didrachma, which is worth in our mony 15 d. Also Mat. 17.27. of a Stater, which is a Greeke Coyne worth 2 s. 6 d. And Mat. 18.22. & 22.19, &c. of a Denarius, which was a Ro∣man Coin, as is euident Mat. 21. because the image of Caesar was vpon it, and was worth 7 d. ob. 1 Sam. cap. 2. of a Scruple, which was worth 1 d. ob. q. c. In Exod. 30. Num. 3. Eze. 45. of an Obulus, which was 1 d. q.
In Mat. 12. of a Minutus, which was ob. q. And in Mar. 12. Mat. 5. you shall reade of a coine called Qua∣drans, which was somthing more than halfe a farthing. These are briefly the weights and monies the Iewes vsed, both forreine and domestick, in their trade and commerce. Of the gold Weight among the Iewes. THe Iewes also had their particular weights for their gold, as they had for their siluer, the least of which were called Zuza or Drachma, which is worth 7 s. 6. d. and more or lesse according to the purenes or basenesse of it. It was also called Daikemonim, Esd. 2. and Nehem. 7. The Chaldaeans call it Edarchonim, Esd. 8. The common Sicle of gold weighed two Drachma's, and was worth 15 s. The Kings sicle weighed 3 drachma's, & was worth 22 s. 6. d. The sicle of the Temple weighed 4 Drachma's, being precise∣ly halfe an ounce, and was worth 30 s. The common Mina or pound of gold weighed 60 Drach∣ma's or Hungarian Ducats, which is worth 22 li. 10 s. The Kings Mina or pound 80 Drachma's or Hungarian Du∣cats, which is 30 li. English. The Mina or pound of the temple weighed 100 Drachma's or Hungarian Ducats, which was 2250 li. The common talent of gold weighed 6000 Drachma's or Hun∣garian Ducats, and was 2250 li. The Kings talent weighed 9000 Drachma's or Hungarian du∣cats, which was 3375 li. The talent of the Temple weighed 12000 Drachma's or Hun∣garian ducats, which was of our mony 45000 li. Of gold weights which were not originally the Iewes, but borrowed of other Nations, and vsed amongst them. THere are four kindes of Weights that are mentioned in the Scriptures, which were common amongst the Iewes, besides the former, viz. Zahab, of which you may reade, 2 Kings, 5.5.
2 Chr. 9.16. and is called by the name of a Nummus. The Sicle of gold, 1 Chr. 21.25. which is there also called Nummus. Both which being so called, seem to signifie a Didrachma of gold: and these two were properly belonging to the Iewes. The other that follow belonged not to them, but they receiued them from other nations; as the Stater, Drachmon, and Adarchon. The Stater was an antient piece of gold common amongst the Persians, Grecians, Romans, and other great gouernments, being distinguished by the superscription of the Kings or Countries where they were made or coined; as the Stater Philippici, Dari∣ci, Alexandrei, Romani, &c. They were pure fine gold, some of which were as much in value as a double ducat, others as 4 Hun∣garian ducats, and some as Portagues. The Drachmon (of which you may reade, Ezra 8.27, &c.) is a Persian coin as it seems, for the Grecian interpreters cal it Drach∣men, which is as much more as the Attick Drachma, and in our mony is worth 7 s. 6 d. Adarcon also seemes to be a Persian coine, and doth imply the name of a prince, or Daricum signifies the gold of the Persians: For Darius the son of Hystaspis then reigned, when these Nummus of gold thus called, were dedidated to the building of the Tem∣ple; and this man for the most part coined singular good gold, as Herodotus saith:Herod. in Melp. Plut. in Artax. wherfore they were either called Darici, because they were coined by the Persian kings; or els, as Plutarch obserues, because the image of Darius stood vpon one part of it. And was worth of our mony 7 s. 6 d. Thus you may perceiue what diuersities of weights were vsed amongst the Iewes; being crept in amongst them partly because of their captiuitie, and partly because of their commerce & trade with other Nations. It is therefore worthy of obseruation, that if at any time you reade of any weight of mony, brasse, or the like in the holy Scripture, to consider of what sort of weight it is, viz. whether a Weight of the Iewes, or some forreine and strange Weight. If of the Iewes, Whether it be a common Sicle, the Kings sicle, or the sicle of the Temple. But if these may bee discerned, you shall for the most part finde the Addition, which may easily distinguish them. But if there be no addition, that is,
the Kings sicle, or the sicle of the Temple, then you may presume that it is the common sicle. And so for other weights & monies. ¶ That these things may appeare the plainer vnto you, I haue here added the principall summes of mony, reduced to our English valuations, as they are seuerally mentioned in the most places of Scripture. And first out of Genesis. Genesis. ABimilech King of Gerar said to Sara,Cap. 20. I haue giuen your Bro∣ther 100 siluerlings, which were common sicles, 62 li. 16 s. Abraham bought a burying place for his wife Sara,Cap. 24. v. 22. for 400 si∣cles of siluer, which are common sicles, that is, 25 li. Abrahams seruant gaue Rebecca halfe a sicle of gold,Cap. 15. v. 16. and two bracelets vpon her hands weighing ten sicles, which are intended to be common sicles, because there is no addition, which was 4 li. 2 s. 6. d. Ioseph was sould by his brothers for 20 siluerlings,Cap. 27. v. 28. that is com∣mon sicles, according to the 70 Interpreters, 1 li. 5 s. but the sil∣uerlings our Sauior was sold for were as great again, being sicles of the Temple, which were precisely halfe ounces. Exodus. THe mulct that was prescribed by the Lord to pay by him who had an Ox that gored or hurt another mans seruant,Cap. 21. v. 32. was 30 common sicles, that is, 3 li. 15 s. When the people were numbred,Cap. 30. v. 31. each man was to giue halfe a sicle of the Temple, i. 1 s. 3 d. The seuen Lamps in the Temple,Cap. 37. v. 24. with their snuffers and snuf∣fing dishes, were made of a talent of fine gold, after the weight of the Temple, and were worth 4500 li. All the gold that was occupied in all the worke wrought for he holy place, which was the gold of the offring, was 26 talents,Cap. 38. v. 2.
and 370 sicles according to the sicle of the sanctuary, which was 130596 li. 5 s. Cap. 38. v. 25.But the siluer of them that were numbred in the congregation was 100 talents, and 1775 sicles after the weight of the Temple; which was 37721 li. 18 s. 6 d. Cap. 38. v. 27.Moreouer, there were 100 talents of siluer to cast the sockets of the sanctuarie and the sockets of the vaile, 100 sockets of 100 talents, a talent for a socket, which was 375 li. a socket, and in the whole, 37500 li. Leviticus. Cap. 17. v. 2.3.15.6.7.IF any man shall make a vow of a person vnto the Lord by thy estimation, then thy estimation shall be thus; a male from 20 yeares old vnto sixty years old shal be by thy estimation at 50 si∣cles of siluer after the sicle of the Sanctuary, which is 6 li. 5. s. Ver. 3.But a female, then but 30 sicles of siluer, i. 3 li. 15 s. 4And from 5 yeares old to 20 yeares old thy valuation shall be, for the male 20 sicles of siluer, i. 50 s. and for the female 10 sicles of siluer, i. 25 s. 5But from a moneth old to 5 yeares old thy price of the Male shalbe 5 sicles of siluer, i. 12 s. 6 d. and for the female three sicles of siluer,6 which was 37 s. 6 d. And from 60 yeares old and aboue, if he be a male, then 15 Si∣cles, i. 37 s. 6 d. Numbers. Cap. 3 46.47.FOr the redeeming of the 273 which were more than the Levits of the first born of the children of Israel, there shall be taken 5 sicles a man, after the weight of the Temple, i. 12 s. 6 d. a man; and for the whole 170 li. 12 s. 6 d. Cap. 7.13.The Princes of Israel being 12 in number, offered vnto God each of them a siluer Charger of 130 sicles weight, and a siluer bowle of 70 sicles after the sicle of the sanctuary, i. 25 li. a prince, and amounted in the whole to 300 li. and an Incense Cup of gold of 10 sicles, for euery prince, which was 7 li. 10 s. a man, which in the whole amounted to 90 li.
Deuteronomy. IF any man take a wife, & when he hath lien with her hate her,Cap. 22. v. 19. and lay slanderous things to her charge, and shee prooue not guilty of the fact, hee shall be condemned in 100 common sicles of siluer, i. 6 li. 5 s. If a man lie with a maid he shall pay vnto her father 50 sicles,Cap. 22. v. 29. viz. common sicles, i. 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. Ioshuah. ANd Achan answered Ioshuah and said,Cap. 7: v. 20. Indeed I haue sinned against the Lord; for I saw amongst the spoiles a goodly Babylonish garment, and 200 sicles of siluer (i. 12 li. 10 s.) and a wedge of gold of 50 sicles, i. 37 li. 10 s. English. Iudges. GIdeon gathered of the spoiles of the Midianites for a present 1700 sicles of gold,Cap. 8. v. 26. i. 1275 li. The princes of the Philistims promised the harlot Dalilah,Cap. 16.5. if she could betray Sampson, to giue her 1100 siluerlings, i. common sicles, which was 68 li. 15 s. The body of the image in the house of Micah in mount Ephra∣im weighed 200 siluerlings, i. common sicles,Cap. 17. v. 4. which is 12 li. 10 s. And the sum of mony which Micah's mother missed was 1100 common sicles of siluer, for which she cursed; i. 68 li. 15 s. To the Levit that serued Micah she gaue yearly a suit of appa∣rel, tenths, and ten siluerlings or sicles of the sanctuary, forwith that kind of mony the Levits were rewarded, i. 1 li. 5 s. I Samuel. ANd all that remain of the house of Ely shall come and bow down vnto him for a piece of siluer; in Hebrew it is A∣orah,Cap. 2. v. 36. which Forestarius and Avenarius interpret Scrupulo Ar∣genti,
which was 1 d. ob. q. But if you take the ancient interpreters it was Obulum, that is, 1 d. q. Cap. 9. v. 8.When Saul sought his fathers asses, his seruant had about him the fourth part of a common sicle of siluer, that is, 3 d. ob. q. Cap. 17. v. 5.The Brigandine of the great gyant Goliah weighed 5000 sicles of brasse, which at 16 ounces in the pound, comes to 78 pounds and 2 ounces: and the head of his speare weighed 60 sicles, that is after the same weight, 9 pound quarter and halfe of iron. II Samuel. Cap. 12. v. 30. 1 Chr. 21.2.ANd Dauid won the town of Rabba, & took the kings crown from his head and set it vpon his own head; which weighed a talent of gold, and was (according to our common interpreters in these times) a common talent of the Iewes, i. 46 li. 14 ounces, worth 2250 li. English. But other writers, considering that if it had bin so heauy the King could not haue worn it, therefore they thinke it to be a talent according to the Syrian weight, which is not aboue a quarter of an Hebrew talent, and was of our weight 11 pound 4 ounces, that is 551 li. And the reason of their opini∣on was, because Rabbah and the whole countrey of the Children of Ammon lay in the land of Syria, and therefore it must necessa∣rily follow that their weight was Syrian weight; the king of Rab∣bah neuer wearing this crowne but when hee made some solemne feast or triumph. There are others that value it according to the worth of the crowne, not of the weight; and for that it was made of fine gold, set with pretious stones and other jewels, therefore it weighed a talent, that is, it was worth a talent: according to that of Zach. ca. 1. So they weighed for my wages as much as I am valued, i. 30 siluerlings. Thus haue I set before you three interpretations, follow which you like. Cap. 18. v. 11:And Ioab spake vnto the man that brought him word that Ab∣solon was hanging vpon an Oke tree, saying, If thou hadst smote him to the ground I would haue giuen thee ten sicles of siluer, or ten siluerlings, which was 12 s. 6 d. The man answered him and said, If you had laid 1000 siluerlings (that is, 62 li. 10 s.) in my hand, yet I would not haue laid my hand vpon the Kings son.
When the Angell of God stretched forth his hand ouer Ieru∣salem, and strooke the people with the pestilence;p. 25. v. 25. at the com∣mandement of Gad the Prophet, Dauid went to Araunah the Ie∣busite and bought his threshing flore for fiftie sicles of siluer of the common weight. Some say that euery tribe gaue fifty sicles, which was 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. a Tribe; and in the whole amounted to 37 li. 10 s. I. Kings. THe Queene of Saba gaue vnto King Solomon 120 Centiners or Talents of gold; which was 265000 pounds English:Cap. 5. v. 28. this was pure Arabia gold, and therefore according to the worth of gold in these daies, much more than is set downe. King Solomon had brought into his Kingdome in one yeare 666 Talents or Centiners of fiue Arabian gold;Cap. 10. v. 14. which at 4500 pound the talent, is 2997000 li. viz. two millions nine hundred ninetie seuen thousand pounds English. But the siluer that Solo∣mon had, was not to be numbred. And King Solomon caused 200 targuets to be made,Cap. 10. v. 16. of the fi∣nest gold, each targuet weighing 200 sicles of gold, that is, 600 Hungarians ducats; and was worth 225 li. a targuet: which in the whole amounteth to 45000 li. English. There came and went vp out of Aegypt a chariot worth 600 sicles of siluer, which is 37 li. 10 s. and a horse worth 150, li. that 9 li. 7 s. 6 d. II. Kings. NAaman general of the King of Syrias host,Cap. 5. v. 5. when he trauelled to Samaria to be healed of his leprosie, tooke with him 10 talents of siluer, that were of the common weight, each talent worth 187 li. 10 s. being in the whole 1875 l. But if you account it after the Syrians talent (as some would haue it) which is but the fourth part of the Hebrew; then it came to 46 li. 17 s. 6 d. the talent, and in the whole to 468 li. 15 s. He also brought 1000 Drachmas of gold, which were so many Hungarian ducats, and were worth 375 li. English. Being healed of his leprosie, he gaue to Gehazie,Cap. 5. v. 5. two talents of siluer in two bags; which if they were according to the weight of the Iewes, amounted to 375 li. and was as much as a man
could carrie. But if according to the Syrian weight, then it came but to 95 li. which he might well carry and not be discouered. Cap. 6. v. 25.Benhadad king of Syria so straightly besieged the city of Sama∣ria, that an Asses head was sold at 80 pieces of siluer, or siluer∣lings, which is 5 li. and a quarter of a cabe of Doues dung, at fiue pieces or siluerlings, that is, 5 s. 4 d. But after the Lord struck the Syrians so that they fled from their siege,Cap. 7. v. 18, and the citizens opened their gates, and rifled their tents; by which meanes there was such plentie, that two measures of Barley was sold for a sicle, that is, 15 d. and two measures of fine floure at 15 d. Cap. 15. v. 19.When Phul, king of Assiria, inuaded Menahem king of Israel, he was constrained to giue him a thousand talents of siluer, that is, 187500 li. that his helpe might be with him to establish a king∣dome in his hand, and depart: for the payment of which money, all the men of substance in Israel were constrained to pay fiftie sicles of siluer a piece, that is, 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. a man. I Chronicles. Cap. 22. v. 14.IT was said that Dauid left Solomon towards the building of the Temple 10000 talents of gold, that is, 450000000 li. foure hundred and fiftie millions of pounds. also he left him for the finishing of the same worke 1000000 Talents of siluer, which amount vnto 375000000 li. viz. three hundred seuentie fiue millions of pounds. Cap. 29. v. 4.Also Dauid dedicated to the Temple of his owne goods 3000 talents of gold, that is, 135000 li. And of siluer 7000 talents, that is, 2625000 li. viz. 2 millions 6 hundred 25 thousand li. English. The offering which Dauid gaue towards the building of the Temple, was 5000 Talents, and 10000 Adarcons or Hungarian Ducats of gold, that is, 22507500 li. viz. twentie two million fiue hundred seuen thousand fiue hundred pounds. So all tha was giuen by Dauid towards the building of the Temple was hundred 47 thousand millions, 3 hundred 82 thousand 5 hundred pounds. II Chronicles. SOlomon made 300 shields of fine gold, euery shield weighin 300 pieces of gold, that is, 112 li. 10 s. so in the whole the came to 33650 li.
Esdras. SOme of the chiefe of the Iewes,Cap. 2. v. 69. when they returned from the captiuitie of Babylon vnto Ierusalem gaue to the building of the Temple 61000 Drachma's, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold; that is, 21525 li. also fiue thousand pound of siluer, which at 37 s. 6 d. the pound commeth to 9375 li. ARTASHAST (who in some places is called Darius Artax∣erxes Longimanus) commanded his Treasurer to giue vnto Es∣dras towards the building of the Temple Ierusalem, 100 Cen∣tiners or talents of siluer, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) com∣meth to 18750 li. according to the Hebrew common weight; for as oft as there is no addition, it is to bee intended in euery place the common weight. The king of Persia and his Nobles, with all Israel,Cap. 8. v. 16.26. gaue to the building of the Temple in Ierusalem 650 Centiners of siluer of the common weight, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) commeth to 121875 li. also in siluer vessels 100 centiners or talents, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) commeth to 18750 li. also 100 Cen∣tiners or talents of gold, which (at 2250 l. the talent) in the whole commeth to 225000 li. or thereabouts: also 20 cups of Gold weighing 1000 Drachma's or Hungarian Ducats, that is. 375 li. each of which cups were worth 18 li. 15 s. Nehemiah. THe Tirshatha (or as some haue it Nehemiah) gaue to the work 1000 Drachmas of gold,Cap. 7. v. 37. which was 275 li. and some of the fathers gaue to the worke 20000 Drachma's or Hungarian Du∣cats of gold, which came to 5500000 li. also 2200 pounds of siluer, which was 4125 li. and the rest of the people gaue 20000 Drachmas or Hungarian ducats of gold, which came to 5500000 li. also 2000 pieces of siluer, which were common pounds, which commeth to 3756 li. Ester. PRoud Hammon offered 10000 Centiners or talents of siluer,Cap. 3. v. 9. to destroy the Iewes; which (at 187 li. 10 s. the talent) com∣meth to 1875000 li.
Ezekiel. Cap. 45. v. 43.A Sicle of the Temple shall be 20 Gerahs, that is, 2 s. 6 d. (for in this place he speaketh of that which belongeth to the San∣ctuary) and the Mina (that is the Kings Mina) shall be 20 sicles: and 25 sicles shall be the Mina of the Temple: and 15 sicles shall be the common Mina, of which you may reade before. Tobias. Cap. 1. v. 10.OLd Tobias willingly lent vnto the poore man Gabel in Rages, a towne in Media, ten pounds of siluer, that is, 18 li. 15 s. But if it be according to our translation, that is, ten Talents at 187 li. 10 s. the Talent is 1963 li. after the common weight. But if af∣ter the weight of the Temple, it comes to as much more. I Macchabeus. Ca. 10: v. 40. 42.DEmetrius king of Syria offered to giue yearely vnto the Iewes for the building of the Temple, 15000 sicles of siluer, of the temple weight; that is, 1000 Mina's, which (at 37 s. 6 d. the Mi∣na) comes to 1875 li. And, if they would aid him, he would also restore the money againe which his officers had kept back of the reueneues of the Temple; which was yearely 5000 sicles of the Temple, of siluer; that is, 2500 crowns English, which is, 625. li. Cap. 11. v. 28.Ionathan the high Priest of Ierusalem, wrought so wel with De∣metrius king of Syria, that he released the Iewes of their yearely tribute and made them free: for which freedome hee gaue 300 Centiners of gold or common talents; which at 2250 li. the ta∣lent, commeth to 675000 li. Ca. 13. v. 16. 19.Simon to release his brother, sent to Tryphon, the K. of Syrias General of his host, 100 centiners or talents of siluer, of the com∣mon weight; which at 187 li. 10 s. the talent amounts to 18750 li. Cap. 14. v. 14.Simon the high Priest of Ierusalem sent to the Romans a great shield of gold, weighing 1000 pounds; which is 100000 Hunga∣rian ducats, 37500 li. English. Ca. 15. v. 31.35.Antiochus, Demetrius his sonne, K. of Syria, asked of Simon the high priest of Ierusalem, for the redemption of certain towns that he had taken, fiue hundred centiners or common talents of siluers and for his charges as much more; in all, a thousand Centiners
or Talents: that is 187500 li. in English money. But Simon refu∣sed the proffer, yet neuerthelesse, that he might liue in peace, hee offered him 100 Talents of siluer, which (at 187 li. 10 s. the Ta∣lent) amounteth to 18750 li. II Macchabees. VVHen Heliodorus would haue robbed the Temple,Cap. 3. v. 11. there was in it 400 Centiners of siluer (of the weight of the Temple) which at 375 li. the talent, commeth in the whole to 150000 pounds English: also 200 Centiners of gold, which at 4500 li. the talent, amounteth to 900000 li. Iason that wicked Priest deceiued his brother Onias of the of∣fice of high Priest, and gaue to king Antiochus for it, first,Cap. 4. v. 8. & 19.2, 4. 360 Ta∣lents of siluer; then 80; after, 150: all the common Weight, which were in the whole 590 Talents, and amounted at 187 li. 10 s. The Talent, to 110625 li. The wicked Iason being high Priest, hearing that Antiochus held a great feast in Tyrus, sent 300 Drachma's of siluer, that is, 9 li. 7 s. 6. d. for a sacrifice to Hercules. But if you change these into Hungarian ducats (as there are some thinke them to be Gold) then they came to 112 li. 10 s. Menelaus being sent by Iason the high Priest to the King, he be∣haued himselfe in such cunning manner, that hee got the high priests office; promising the King 300 Centiners or Talents of siluer, more than Iason would giue; which at 187 li. 10 s. the Ta∣lent commeth to 56250 li. 10 s. But being vnable to performe his promise, he was put from his office of high Priest. Antiochus payed yearely to the Romanes 2000 talents of sil∣uer, that is,Cap. 8. v. 10. 375000 li. Antiochus tooke 1800 Centiners or Talents of siluer of the Temple of Ierusalem,Cap. 5. v. 21, which at 187 li. 10 s. the talent commeth to 3375000 li. Nicanor caused to be proclaimed, that hee would sell the cap∣tiue Iews, 19 for a centiner, that is,Cap. 8. v. 10. for euery Iew 9 li. 17 s. 4 d. q. c. Iudas Macchabeus sent 2000 Drachma's of siluer to Ierusalem for a sinne offering, that is,Cap. 12.43. 62 li. 10 s.
Now followeth the Reckonings of the monies in the NEW TESTAMENT. And first of Matthew. Cap. 5.HHe that agreeth not with his aduersarie, shall be cast into prison and not come forth (so saith our Sauiour Christ) vntill hee hath payed the vtmost farthing. The Hebrew and Latine translations haue it, Quadrans, or a fourth part, that is, a farthing in our money: but if you account according to the Ro∣man coine, it was ob. q. Cap. 10. v. 29.Doe not men buy to Sparrowes for a pennie? that is, something more than halfe a farthing. Cap. 17. v. 25.When our Sauior Christ went into Capernaum, the receiuers of tribute spake to Peter, saying, Doth not your Master pay tribute? The tribute money in the Text is called Didrachma, which was 15 d. for so much euery man payed for tribute: from whence may be gathered, that the pennie that Peter tooke out of the fishes mouth, was worth 2 s. 6 d. Cap. 18. v. 23.The kingdome of Heauen is like vnto a King that would call his seruants to account, and when he began to reckon with them the one ought him 10000 li. in Hebrew weight; which at 37 s. 6 d. the pound, commeth in the whole to 18750 li. so much was the wicked seruant in debt to his Master. And on the contrary, one of his fellow seruants ought him 100 pence: in the Hebrew text it is Centum Obulus, and one Obulus was 1 d. q. that is, 10 s. 5 d. so that the bad seruant ought his Master 30000 times more than his fellow seruant ought him. The Greeke text saith, that this fellow ought him Centum De∣rius; that is, 3 li. 2 s, 6 d. which is yet a great deale of difference; for the wicked seruant ought his master aboue 6000 times more than his fellow seruant ought him. Cap. 2. v. 5.The Lord of the Vineyard agreed with his labourers for a pen∣nie a day; in the Hebrew text it is zuza; and in Greeke Denari∣us; both which are of like value English, that is, 7 d. ob. so much each labourer had by the day. When the Pharises & Herods seruants tempting Christ, asked
him whether it was lawfull to pay tribute vnto Caesar or not: Christ answered and said, You Hypocrites, why tempt you me? shew me the tribute money, and they brought him a penny; where it is ex∣prest by the word of zuza, or Denarius that is 7 d. ob. The kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man,Mat. 25.14.15. that trauelling in∣to a farre countrey, called his seruants, and deliuered vnto them his goods; to one he gaue fiue talents; that is, 937 li. 10 s. with which he gained just as much more, that is, 937 li. 10 s. to the se∣cond hee gaue two Talents of the common weight also, which was 375 li. and he also gained just as much more, that is, 375 li. and to the third he gaue one Talent, that is, 187 li. 10 s. and hee gained nothing with it, but hid the Talent in the earth. Iudas Iscariot betraied our Sauiour Christ for thirtie pence or pieces of siluer, which were so many sicles of the Temple,Cap. 26. v. 14. each sicle being halfe an ounce, which were accounted worth 2 s. 6 d. so the whole came to 3 li. 15 s. for which our Sauiour Christ was betraied. And with it they bought a Potters field. Marke. OVr Sauiour Christ sate ouer against the treasurie,Ca. 12. v. 41, 42. and beheld how the people cast into the Treasurie: and many rich men cast in much; and there came a certaine poore widdow, and shee threw in two mites, which is a farthing, or Quadrans, which was the fourth part of an Assis, being almost a penny English. Our Sauiour Christ being at Bethanie in the house of Simon the Leaper,Cap. 14. v. 15. there came a woman hauing a boxe of oyntment of costly oyle called Spikenard, and shee broke the box and poured it vpon his head; therefore some murmured among themselues, and said, To what end is this wast of oyntment? for it might haue beene sold for more than three hundred denarios or pence, that is, 9 li. 7 s. 6 d. Luke. OVr Sauiour Christ saith, Are not fiue Sparrowes solde for two farthings? that is, Assibus duobus,Cap. 12. v. 6. which is 1 d. ob. Or what woman hauing ten pieces of siluer, that is,Cap. 15. v. 8. ten Drach∣ma's or groats, (each being worth 7 d. ob.) and lose one, will not seek til she find it, &c. So these 10 were in English mony 6 s. 3 d.
Cap. 19. v. 12.A certaine Nobleman went into a farre country to receiue for himselfe a kingdome: and he called his ten seruants, and deliue∣red them ten pieces of money, or ten pounds, or Mina's (accor∣ding to the weight of the Temple) which came to (at 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. the Mina) in the whole 31 li. 5 s. Iohn. Cap. 6. v. 5.WHen our Sauiour Christ would feed 5000 men, besides women and children, hee said vnto Philip, Where might wee buy bread that these people might eat? (which he spake to proue Philip.) Philip answered and said, That 200 pennie worth of bread will not be sufficient for them that euery man might take a little. The 200 pennie worth of bread are called Denarios, which was worth 7 d. ob. in our money, and in the whole is worth 6 li. 5 s. From whence may be gathered, that there being 5000, euery one of them should haue had no more bread than might haue bin bought with a farthing mite and halfe of our siluer. Cap. 12. v. 5.As our Sauiour Christ six daies before the Passeouer was ea∣ting in the house of Lazarus, (whom he had raised from the dead in Bethania,) Mary, Lazarus sister tooke a box, some say a pound of oyle of Spikenard, and annointed Iesus feet, and wiped them with her haire; and the whole house was filled with the sauour of the ointment. Then said one of his Disciples, euen Iudas Iscariot, Simons sonne, Why was not this ointment sold for 300 pence; that is, denarios; euery denarios being worth 7 d. ob. which amoun∣ted in the whole to 9 li. 7 s. 6 d. Cap. 19. v. 39.When Christs body was to be buried, Nicodemus came and brought Myrrh and Aloes mingled together, about 100 pound weight according to the common weight, which was 2500 halfe ounces and came to 78 pounds and eight ounces, English. Acts. IN Asia many bookes were burnt to the value of 50000 pieces of siluer, that is, Roman denarios, euery of which was 7 d. ob. the whole amounting to 1562 li. 10 s. Thus haue I briefly set forth to you the seuerall weights that
were common amongst the Iewes, both as they were originally from themselues, and as they receiued them from other Nati∣ons, comparing them with the Scriptures as they are seuerally mentioned, and reduced them to our valuations. In casting vp of which, if there shall chance to be any errour, you may with the due examination of the worth of euery piece of siluer or Gold (according as you may finde them at the beginning of this Treatise) easily reforme them, and bring them to your owne vn∣derstanding. Of the ancient Money and Coyne that was vsed amongst the Graecians and Romans. FRom what hath beene said, may be gathered, that the Iewes vsed no Coyne but Weights onely, though perhaps to put a distinction betweene those Weights, there was vsed some impression: yet that cannot properly bee said Coyne. But in all other Kingdomes (where money was currant) there was vsed Coyne; and that valued according to the will of command of the Prince or State where it was coyned: which also because of the captiuitie of the Iewes, came amongst them, and past as currant according to their worth; of which Coynes I haue already spoken. Yet because there are many other Coynes and Weights mentioned in the Epistles of the Apostles, which were partly of the Graecians, partly of the Romanes, into which gouernments most of them trauelled; I will therefore endeauor to set before you the valuation of the Graecian and Romane Coynes and Weights reduced ro our valuation and Weights, that so those monies mentioned in the New Testament, and in this Treatise omitted, may with the more facilitie be apprehen∣ded and made plaine vnto you.
Of the Graecian coine; and first of their Siluer and Brasse Nummus or Money. The Atticke Drachma.AN Atticke Drachma was a proportion for almost all the Greeke monies: for the Graecians numbred their monies by Drachma's, as the Romanes by Sestertia's. [This was the Nummus or coine amongst the Athenians] and was the eighth part of an ounce, which is worth in our money 7 d. ob. The Stater, which was also called Tetradrachma, vpon the one side whereof was the head of Minerua, vpon the other the Owle: was worth foure Atticke Drachma's, as is manifest Matth. 17.25. which is in our money 2 s. 6 d. The Didrachma, which was also amongst the Athenians, called Bos, because it was signed with the similitude of an Oxe vpon the one side of it (of this Theseus was the first author) as Plutarch re∣membreth: it was worth halfe a Stater, or two Drachma's, that is in our money 15 d. The Tridrachma, which was three Drachma's, and worth in our money 23 d. ob. The Obulus Atticus, which was the sixt part of an Atticke Drachma, was worth of our money 1 d. q. The Semiobulus, which was the least of the Greeke siluer coine, was worth ob. q. There was also a Diobulus, which was the third part of a Drach∣ma, and worth 2 d. ob. Triobulus, which was halfe a Drachma, and worth 3 d. ob. q. Tetrobulus, which contained two third parts of a Drachma, and was worth 5 d. English. The Egina Drachma.The Drachma of Aegina contained ten Atticke Obulus, and was worth 1 s. ob. English. Obulus Aeginus, was the sixt part of the Drachma of Aegina, and was worth 2 d. halfe farthing and a third part of a farthing. Triobulus Aeginaeus, was halfe an Aeginus Drachma, and of ours was worth 6 d. q. Stater Corinthius, was worth ten Obulus of Aegina, and of ours 1 s. 8 d.ob.q. Stater Macedonius, was worth in ours 2 s. 9 d.q. and three seconds of a farthing.
Of the Asiaticke siluer. THe Asiaticke money was of lesse valuations, and other de∣nominations than the rest of Greece; for the greatest of their siluer Coyne that was vsually currant, was but ten pence: and it was called by the name Siglus, which was worth seuen Atticke Obulus and a halfe, as Xenophon saith: but as Hesychius saith, it was worth eight Attick Obulus, and foure scruples, which is 10. d. in our money. Cistophorus was also Asiatick siluer, and was so called,Lucian in Ca∣ront. Suid. loi. allegat Hesych. in. because of the image that was vpon it: and was worth of our money 4 d. ob. c. Danaces, which piece of mony the Graecians vsually put into the mouth of the dead, to pay Charon for their passage to Elisium war worth ob. q. and two third parts of a farthing. They had but two sorts of brasse money,Of the Brasse money among the Graecians. that is mentioned to continue currant among them; and they were Aereolum and Minutum. Aereolum was worth the sixth part of an Atticke Obulus, ac∣cording to the opinion of Suidas and others, which in our money is q. c. and one third part of a mite. Minutum, is the seuenth part of that, which is little more than halfe a mite. Of the gold coines among the Graecians. IN the next place, is to be described the quantity and valuation of their gold coines, of which there is any mention in ancient authors: and they were among the Athenians an Atticke Sta∣ter which weighed two Drachma's, as Pollux saith, and was worth with vs 15 s. and a Daricus which was worth 15 s. A Stater was diuided into these parts, that is, A Semi Stater. which was worth 7 s. 6 d. A Tetrestater, of which Aristotle and Pollux speaketh li. 9. which was worth of our money 3 li. And the Macedonian golden Stater, coined by Philip, Alexan∣der, Lysimachus, Demetrius, and others, which succeeded in Mace∣donia, Syria, and Asia, which was worth of our money 18 s. 4. d.
Of the Asiaticke Gold. STater Daricus, which before was called Adarchon, was a Num∣mus or a piece of coine of the Persians, and worth a Didrach∣ma, hauing vpon it the similitude of a Sagitarius, according to Plutarch, in the life of Agesilaus, and was worth with vs 15 s. Xenophon lib. 1Semi Darcius, of which there is mention in Xenophon, was worth halfe a Darick Stater, and weighed an Atticke Drachma, which was worth with vs 7 s. 6 d. Cizycenus was a piece of coine so called, as may be thought of a towne called Cizycus, of which you may reade Strabo, lib. 14. and was worth 7 s. 6 d. Of the Graecian Mina and Talents. THe Atticke minas weigh one hundred Drachmas, and was equall to the Mina of the Temple amongst the Iewes, ac∣cording to the opinion of Xenophon and Plutarch, and was worth with vs 3 li. 2 s. 6 d. There were diuers kindes of Talents, according to the opini∣ons of Pollux and Varro, most of which weighed sixtie Minaes, and a Mina one hundred Drachma's, and for the most part, six thousand Drachma's (of the Countrey where the Talent was) make a Talent. The Atticke Talent contained six thousand Atticke Drach∣ma's, according to the opinion of Pollux and Festus, and is equall to the common Talent among the Iewes, worth in our money 187 li. 10 s. But according to the opinion of Liuie and Priscianus, there was an Atticke Talent worth eight thousand Drachma's, which was 250 li. The Aegyptian Talent, according to the opinion of Plinie and Varro, weighed as much, that is, 250 li. The Syrian Talent contained 1500 Atticke Drachmas, which was 46 li. 17 s. 6 d. The Eubeian Talent (according to the opinion of Pompey, and Festus) weighed foure thousand Denarios, that is, Drachma's, and was worth 125 li.
The Rhodian talent contained 4500 Attick Drachmas, worth 240 li. 12 s. 6 d. The Babylonian Talent was 7000 Attick Drachmas, worth 218 li. 15 s. The Aegina talent was 1000 Atticke Drachmas, that is 312 li. 15 s. The Alexandrian talent is 12000 Atticke Drachmas, which was as much as the talent of the Temple, which is 375 li. Eng∣lish. The ancient Talentum Siculum (according to the opinion of Pollux) was six Drachmas, which was 3 s. 9 d. English. The Neapolitan talent was as much, according to the opini∣on of Varro, that is, 3 s. 9 d. English. The ancient Talentum Siculum, and the Sicilian talent (as Varro saith) is all one, and is worth 1 s. 10 d. ob. The Regian talent was but halfe a Drachma, and is worth 3 d. ob. q. Of the Coines and Moneyes of the ancient Romans: and first of the Brasse Money. AS (as Varro saith) is as much as Aes, that is, brasse: For Aeri∣us was a coine weighing a pound weight: but after many changes that happened in the Roman State, it came to be worth the tenth part of a Romane pennie, which with vs is worth ob. q. Semissis, is as much as halfe an As: according to Varro, and was worth q.c. Triens, that is, the third part of an As, which was halfe a far∣thing. Quadrans, was the fourth part of as As. Plinie calls it Triuncis; Cicero, Triunus, because ir was a diminution of the former pound containing three ounces; and with vs worth three mites. Sextans, that is, the sixt part of an Assis, which was worth q. or two mites. Vncia, the twelfth part of an Assis, worth one might c. Semiuncia, worth halfe a mite.
Sextula, that is, the sixth part of an ounce, worth the sixth part of a mite. These are the ancient brasse moneys vsuall amongst the Romans; but there were greater vsed in later times, according to the opinion of Varro. Of the siluer mony amongst the Romans. DEnarias was so called because it was worth ten Asses; but it was not alwaies of one worth and estimation amongst the Romans, for the ancient Roman Denarius or penny, which was currant in the time of the Consuls, weighed but the seuenth part of an ounce (according to the opinion of Celsus and many other Authors) and was worth of our money 8 d. ob. c. and one seuenth part of a might. Denarius Novus, or the new pennie, was first coined in Claudius the Emperors time, and was worth (according to the opinion of Plinie and others) precisely a Drachma, that is, 7 d. ob. Bigatus and Quadrigatus, is all one with the Roman Pennie, and was so called, because these words were stamped vpon one side of it, and was worth 7 d. ob. Victoriatus, was a Coine first brought vp by the law of Clodius amongst the Romans, being so called, because the image of Vi∣ctorie was vpon it; and according to Plinie was halfe a Denarius, and is worth 3 d. ob. Sestertius is so called of Sesquitertiers, according ro Priscian, it was two Asses and a halfe, and was worth 3 ob. q. Obulus, is the sixth part of a Denarius, and worth 1 d. q. Libella, is the tenth part of a Denarius, and worth ob.q. Simbella, so called, because it was halfe a Libella, and was worth farthing and halfe. Teruntius, was the fourth part of a Denarius, and was worth two mites and a halfe. Of the gold among the Romans. THere were also gold denarius amongst the Romans; either so called because they had the same stampe; or else because they were about the same bignesse to see to, coyned in the time of the Consuls, worth in English money 17 s.ob. a piece.
The other was coined later, about the beginning of the Empe∣rours, and weighed two Drachma's; being of equall weight with our English Spur-royalls, which are worth 15 s. This was after the first fiue Emperors, much diminished in weight: Nero made it lighter by two or three graines; Galba, Nerua, Trajanus, and Ha∣drianus, by eight graines: but those that Vespasian and succeeding Emperours coined, were precisely two Drachma's. A Semissis of gold, weighed a just Drachma, and was worth 7 s. 6 d. A tremissis of gold, which was three parts of an Is, was worth 5 s. Of the gold after the seat of the Empire was translated to Byzantium or Constantinople. COnstantine the Great diminished that Coine which was a Drachma, to a Didrachma, and the seuenth part of a Drachma; and was worth of our money 8 s. 6 d. ob. And thus they continued till the time of Valentinian the Em∣perour, who caused six of them to be coined out of an ounce of gold, and therefore as Isidor saith, were called amongst the Grae∣cians , that is, Sextuala, because it was the sixt part of an ounce, and was worth 10 s. The Semissis of Valentinian gold was worth 5 s. The Triens or Tremissis, was worth 3 s. 4 d. The Scruple, which was the fourth part of a golden shilling, 2 s. 6 d. Of the siluer and brasse money of the Empire; after it was translated to Constantinople. MIliarissimum weighed two Drachma's (according to the opi∣nion of Cedrenus) and was worth 15 d. Ceratus, was a piece of Coine called also Siliqua Cornuta, be∣cause there was stamped vpon it, the Moone increasing; by which marke it was knowne to be more than the common Ceratio or Si∣liqua, and was worth 7 d. ob. The common Siliqua or Ceratio, was so called because it was
worth foure graines of gold (which is the weighs of aA silique is the fruit of a Charob tree, which carrieth certaine sweet cods or huskes about 5 inches long, and as broad as a mans thumbe; six Carobs or Carob Beane cods weighed a Drachma or Carract: Silique) and according to Iustinian was worth 5d. Follis of which there is often mention in the Historie of Euse∣bius, was a brasse, or (as Lampadius saith) an yron coine, so called because there was stampt vpon it the similitude of a leafe, and was worth farthing halfe and one third. Of the Roman summes of Money. A Sestertium (being taken in the neuter Gender) conteyneth a thousand Sestertios, and is worth 7 li. 16 s. 3 d. A pound weight containing twelue ounces of siluer, which is worth, 3 li. A talent containing, 24 Sestertias, 6000 Denarios; being of e∣qual weight & worth to the Attick talent, & is worth 187 li. 10 s. I will also adde that which is called Sportula, because it was a certaine small summe of 400 Quadrans, which maketh 10 Sester∣tios, of which you may reade in Suetonius in the life of Domitian Nero, and contained 1 s. 6 d. ob.q. The Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine Measures reduced to ours, whereby you may find the quantity of all such Measures as are mentioned in the Old and New Testament. BVt now hauing briefly and as exactly as I can, de∣scribed the Weights and valuations of the anci∣ent moneyes that were currant amongst the Iewes, Graecians, and Romanes, as well those tha are mentioned in the Scripture as others; It re¦steth (that I might make this a perfect Worke to say something of the Measures mentioned in the Scriptures which I wil (as neer as I can) reduce to the quantity of our Mea¦sures which are common amongst vs.
Of the Corne Measures. A Gomer is a gallon or thereabout with vs, according to Bu∣daeus, in Mensuris Hebr. An Attick Chenix (according to Budaeus) is the third part of a Gomer or halfe Modius, which measure is almost 3 pintes. Stater was a measure containing 3 Gomers or Simodio's, and is with vs 3 gallons and 3 pints, or thereabouts. An Epha was as much as a Medimnicus Atticus, which according to the opinion of some Authors is a pottle lesse than our bushel: but if you follow the proportion of Budaeus, it is ten Gomers or gallons or more, which is a bushell and a peck of our measure and more. A Letech is the half of a Corus, and contained 5 Epha's or At∣tick Medimnos, i. according to Budaeus, six bushels and a pecke. A Cor or Corus, following the same proportion, was two Le∣tech, i. ten Attick Medimno's; and of ours 12 bushels and halfe. Of the measures of Wine and Beere. HEmina (according to Georgius Agricola & Budaeus) was three quarters of a pinte. A Sextarius was two Hemina's, i. a pint and a halfe. A Lag was as much. A Congius contained 6 Sextario's, i. 9 pintes. A Hin was 12 Sextario's, i. 18 pintes. A Cad was 60 Sextario's, i. 45 quarts. A Bath was 72 Sextario's, i. 54 quarts. A Homer was a great measure containing 720 Sextario's, that , 67 gallons and a pottle. An Vrna, according to Capulis, contained 24 Sextario's, that is, 6 pints, which make 4 gallons and a halfe of our common mea∣re. But according to Budaeus account it comes but to 3 gallons d a halfe or thereabouts. An Amphora was a measure common amongst the Graecians, which there is mention made of three sorts, the one contey∣ning
three gallons and a pottle; the other 8 Congio's or 48 Sex∣tario's, which was 9 gallons of our measure. The third (as Pliny saith) was an Amphora, which contained 20 gallons and a halfe. A Modius contained 16 Sextario's, which was 24 pints, that is 3 gallons or thereabouts; but according to the opinion of some Authors, it is but a pecke and some small matter more. A Semimodius was 8 Sextario's, that is, a gallon and halfe. A Gomer was somwhat lesse than a Semimodius, and contai∣ned but 7 Sextario's and a fifth part of a Sextario, which is some ten pintes and a quarter and three spoonfulls. A Quartarius contained one Sextarios and a halfe, which was a quart and the fourth part of a pinte. A spoonfull. A Cyame is two spoonfuls. A Mystrus and Cyame according to the opinion of some is al one. A Cyathus containes 4 spoonfulls. An Hemila Cottila is six times so much, which is 24 spoone∣fulls, i. three quarters of a wine pinte. The Measures mentioned in the old Testament. And first of GENESIS. Cap. 18. v. 6.WHen Abraham receiued three strange men, he went to his wife Sara into the tent and said, Make ready at once thre measures of fine meale; which according to some Diuines wa 3 Zata's; according to others, 44 Sextarios, which was of our mea¦sure, at a pinte and a halfe the Sextarios, a bushel and a quart. Exodus. Cap. 16. v. 31:33.34.37.MOses said to Aaron, Take a pot of the quantitie of a Gome (which was seuen Sextario's and a fift part, and is of o measure a gallon, a quart and foure spoonfulls) to keepe for yo posteritie. In the same chapter Moses saith, That a Gomer is t tenth part of an Ephah, which, as is said, is more than our bushe▪
You shal present vpon the altar two lambs of a yeare old euery day, the one lambe in the morning, and the other in the euening;Cap. 29. v. 49. and to each lamb the tenth part of an Ephah (which was 5 quarts and halfe a pinte) of fine floure, with the fourth part of an Hin (i. 4 pintes) of wine for a drinke offering. The anointing oile of the Sanctuarie was made of the best and sweetest spices that could be gotten, viz. of Myrrh 500 sicles,Cap. 30.33. or 250 ounces; of Calamus 125 ounces, of Cinnamon 125 ounces. All this was mixed with an Hin (i. 18 pintes) of oile Olive, as the Apothecaries make it. Leviticus. HEe that sinned,Cap. 5. v. 11. and was not able to bring two Turtle Doues or two young Pigeons for an offering, he must bring the 10 part of an Ephah of fine floure, that is, ten pintes and a halfe. When the Leper was visited and found to be infected with the leprosie,Cap. 14. 19. the eight day after he was to take two he lambs of a yere old, without blemish, and an Ewe lambe of a yeare old without blemish, and three tenth parts (that is, fifteene quarts a pinte and halfe) of fine floure for a meat Offering, mingled with a Log of oile, that is, a pinte and halfe. Numbers. TO a meat offering was added the fourth part of an Hin (that is, 4 pints and a halfe) of oile, and as much wine,Cap. 15. v.  & the third part of an Hin (that is, six pints) of oile, and as much wine. Some say halfe a Hin, that is 9 pintes of oile, and as much wine. Deuteronomie. THere shall be two sorts of Epha's within thine house;Cap. 25. v. 13.14.15. which concludes there was a greater and a lesser. Iudges. WHen Gideon would set vpon the Midianites,Cap. 7. v. 16. he gaue each of his souldiers a Trumpet in one hand, and an emptie
pitcher in the other hand with lamps therin. These pitchers were called Cados minores, as some say, that is, oile Cannes, like lampes wherein they vsed to set Tedae nuptiales, or Bride candles. For such was the vsuall custome in those dayes, that the Bridegroome went to fetch his Bride by night, and then certaine Virgins were appointed to beare the wedding candles or lampes before them. Whereof our Sauior Christ made that notable similitude of the 10 virgins that went to meet the Bridegroome, Matth. Chap. 25. This difference is herein to be noted, That in the lampes of the Virgins whereof our Sauior Christ speakes there was oile, but in Gideons pitchers there was no oile, but they were empty oile Pit∣chers with thicke bellies and narrow necks, wherein stood lamps or candles, such might be called Cados minores, beeing not very great, but so light that they might easily be carried in one hand without trouble: but what their measure was is not specified. Ruth. Cap. 2. v. 31.THe yong widow Ruth the Moabite was not sloathful nor yet idle, but went into Boas field, where she gleaned so many eares of corn after the reapers in one day, that at night when shee had threshed the ears it was an Ephah, i. a bushel or thereabouts; for there were two kinds of Ephahs, as you may reade before. Cap. 3.When Ruth laid her selfe downe at the feet of Boas, and desired him that he would marry her; in the morning when Boas rose hee gaue her six measures of Gomers, i. six gallons of Barly or there∣abouts. I Samuel. Cap. 17.17.WHen Saul was gon out to fight against the Philistimes, and that Goliah daily mocked the host of the Israelites, the Lord stirred vp Ishai the father of Dauid, to send him to his brethren to the Host, with an Ephah of partched corn, that is, a bushell or thereabouts. Cap. 25. v. 28.Dauid being vpon the way, meaning to destroy the foole Nabal▪ Abigale, Nabals Wife, a very wise and discreet woman, went to
meet him, and finding Dauid shee appeased his wrath with a Pre∣sent of 200 loves of bread, two bottles of wine, fiue sheepe ready dressed, and fiue Zata's (i. 15 Gomers, which is 15 gallons and somwhat more) of fine floure, 100 frailes of Raisins, and 100 of Figs; which, laded vpon an Asse, &c. I Kings. THe molten Sea that stood vpon the 12 knops like Cucum∣bers, was very curiously made of diuers sorts of mettals,Cap. 7. v. 23.25. be∣ing ten cubits wide and 5 high: it held 2000 baths, that is, 27000 gallons English, or thereabouts; euery bath containing (accor∣ding to the opinion of Iosephus) 72 Sextario's, that is, at a pinte and a halfe the Sextarius, 13 gallons and a halfe. King Solomon caused 10 copper Kettles to be made,Cap. 7. v. 38. that stood vpon ten stoles, each kettle containing forty Baths, euery bath 72 Sextario's, which come to 13 gallons and a halfe English; so that euery kettle contained 540 gallons. When the Prophet Eliah desired the widow of Sarepta to fetch him a little water and a bit of bread, shee answered and said,Cap. 17. v. 12. 13▪ 14: As true as the Lord your God liueth I haue not any bread, but onely a hand full of floure in a Cab (which was a kinde of Vessell that held eight quarts) and a little oile in a pitcher. And Eliah said vnto her, Thy meale, &c. The Prophet Eliah being vpon mount Carmel about the time of the euening sacrifice,Ca. 18. v. 32.34. built vp an altar in the sight of the whole congregation of the people of Israel, and laid wood vpon it, and vpon the wood an Oxe cut in pieces for a sacrifice, and caused a ditch to be digged round about it, of such widenesse and depth, as might containe two Zata's, that is six Gomers and something more; about six gallons and a halfe of our measure. And there was 12 Cads (that is 175 gallons) of water cast on the sacrifice; but when Eliah called vpon the name of the Lord, fire fell from heauen and deuoured the sacrifice, dried vp the water, and burned the wood and stones of the altar to dust.
II Kings. Cap 6.25.WHen Benhadad King of Syria besieged Samaria, there was such a famine and dearth in the Citie, that they sold an Asses head for 80 siluerlings (that is, common sicles, which is 5 li. English;) but some Texts reade it, 8 siluerlings, that is, 10 s. And the fourth part of a Cab, (that is, a pinte and halfe of Pigeons doung) was sold for fiue pieces of siluer, that is, for 6 s. 3 d. When the Syrians were striken by the Lord and fled from the siege of Samaria, corne became so cheape (according to the pro∣phesie of Elisha) that vnder the gates of Samaria one Zata (which contained 24 Sextarios, that is, halfe a strike and a pottle of fine floure) was sold for 15 d. and two Zata's of Barley was sold for 15 d. II Chronicles. Cap. 2.SOlomon gaue to the Carpenters, &c. that cut and hewed downe wood in Mount Libanus, for the building of the Temple, 20000 Corus of Wheate, and 20000 of Barley; euery Corus containing ten Medimnos Atticos, which according to Budeus ac∣compt, came to 12 Bushels and a halfe English, and in the whole to 150000 Bushels. But if you accompt it according to the opi∣nion of some of our English Authors, it comes but to nine Bu∣shels and seuen gallons and a pottle the Medimna, and in the whole to 198750 Bushels. And besides, Solomon gaue them 20000 Bathes of Wine and as much oyle; euery Bath containing 13 gallons and a pottle, which amounted to in the whole, 8437 Barrels and a halfe. The Measures mentioned in the New Testament. And first of Matthew. Cap. 13.33.THe kingdome of God is like vnto piece of Leauen, which a woman taketh and putteth into three Measures or Zata's of meale, which make a Bushel.
Luke. VVHen the vniust Steward called his masters debtors to ac∣count,Cap. 16. v. 9. the first was debtor 100 Bathes of Oyle, that is 51 barrells and 18 gallons; and he bid him write downe halfe, that is, 25 barrels and a halfe. The second debtor ought 100 Corus of wheat, which at 9 bushels and 7 gallons the Corus, comes to 988 bushels, or thereabouts; and the vniust Steward willed him to set down 80 Corus, that is 790 bushels and one gallon and a halfe. So the vniust Steward deceiued his master of 25 Barrels and a halfe of Oyle, and of 198 bushels and one gallon of Wheate, and gaue it to his masters creditors. Iohn. AT the marriage at Cana in Galile our Sauior Christ chan∣ged the 6 pitchers of water into wine,Cap. 2. v. 1.11. euery pitcher contai∣ning 2 or 3 Cads, euery Cad holding 60 Sextario's, that is, 11. gallons and a quart, or thereabouts. Some say, that the first three pitchers held each three Cads or Metreta's, which if it should be so, euery of them should hold 33 gallons and 3 quarts: then say the other three held each 2 Metreta's a piece, that is, 22 gallons and a pottle a piece; then the whole that our Sauior Christ gaue vnto the Bride and Bridegroome, amounted to 168 gallons and 3 quarts or thereabouts. Revel. 6.6. I Heard a voyce saying, A Chenix (that is, 3 pints of wheat) for a Denarius (that is, 7 d. ob.) There being 85 times so much, and a quart ouer, in a bushell, it would amount vnto 51 s. 8 d. the Bushell, or thereabouts, which would be a great dearth. Here is to be obserued, that the Graecians in times past were very strict in their house keeping, & for that cause confined their seruants to certain measure; that is, to a Chenix, which was three pintes of meat; and to a Sextarius, which was a pinte and a halfe of Wine for euery day: and by this meanes the master could rea∣dily tell what his seruants meate and drinke would cost him
in a yeare, that is 365 Chenix; which in our measure at 3 pintes the Chenix, comes to 8 bushels 2 pecks and a pint; & 365 pints of wine, that is, 45 gallons a pottle and a pinte: so much did eue∣rie seruant eat and drinke in a yeare. But God fed the Israelites 40 yeares in the wildernesse with a greater quantitie; for he gaue each man daily an Omer (that is, 3 Chenixes) of Manna, i. a Gal∣lon and something more. Cicero in his 8 oration for Verres writes, that a Modius of wheat (which was a peck wanting a pint) was commonly sold in Sicilia for 3 Sestertio's, about 6 d. sterling, and so much had euery ser∣uant in Grecia dayly, and a pinte of wine to drinke. These customes, howsoeuer in these countries they might bee tolerable, in regard they liued in a hot climat; yet to vs, where it is much colder, our bodies require a greater quantity for nourish∣ment: neuerthelesse a mean and spare diet is both more healthful and profitable for the body, than excesse; because the stomacke being surcharged, it canot duly concoct that which it receiueth, whereby the body is filled with many crudities and noisome dis∣eases. And thus haue I as exactly as I can, reduced the Hebrew, Greek and Latine measures to ours: but if there be any who in casting vp these quantities of measures mentioned in the Scripture shall chance to finde any error, or would reduce them to a more neere estimation (because I haue in this treatise principally followed Budaeus) to our measures, he is then to vnderstand that there is an other course to be taken, namely by weight; four ordinary spoon∣fuls of water weigh an ounce, 12 ounces of Troy weight make a pound, eight pounds of Troy weight make a Gallon, and 32 Gal∣lons make a barrell, &c. The same course may be taken in the ac∣count of corn measures, there going 8 gallons after the same pro∣portion to a bushell. So that what I haue set down may be recti∣fied by your own industry, and made more capable to your vnder∣standing.
Examples collected out of prophane Histories, by which you may perceiue the profit that may arise by the due vse of this Treatise, to all such as reade the Gre∣cian and Roman Histories. IN the time of Claudus Emperour of Rome there was so great a famine (according to the prophecie of Agabus, Acts 1) that a Modins, that is a pecke wanting a pinte of wheat, was sold at sixe Drachma's, which at 7 d. ob. the Drachma comes to 3 s. 9 d. En∣glish. This great famin is specified by Suetonius and Dion, where they say, that but a little before the same measure of Wheat was worth but 4 Sestertia's, which was 7 d. ob. English. Of Pythius King of Lydia. Herodot. 7. PYthius King of Lydia, who entertained that mighty Emperour Xerxes and all his Army, would haue lent him 3 millions of talents of siluer towards the charge of his war; which according to the Attick talent (that is, 187 li. 10 s. the talent,) amounts to 562 millions fiue hundred pounds. And further hee would adde to it four millions of Daricons, which at 15 s. the Daricon com∣meth to three millions of pounds. But Xerxes being greatly plea∣sed with this hospitalitie and liberality, that he might make eui∣dent his noble disposition refused his offer, and gaue him by way of gratuitie 7000 Darico's, which was in our mony 5250 li. Of Croesus the mighty King of Lydia. THis King Croesus sent an Embassadour to Delphos, to aske the Idol of Apollo if he should prosper in the wars he tooke
in hand against Cyrus King of Persia; withall sending diuers rich Presents, and amongst the rest, a Lion of gold most cunningly wrought, weighing 100 Talents, euery Talent weighing 4500 li. which in the whole amounted to 450000 li. Moreouer, two cups, whereof one was fine gold cunningly wrought, weighing 8 Talents and a halfe, which at 4500 li. the Talent, commeth to 36000 li. the other cup was made by that noble workman Theo∣dorus Sanius of pure siluer, very curiously & artificially wrought containing fortie gallons; but of what valuation it was, is not set downe. For this great and rich present, King Croesus receiued of the Diuell a double and deceitfull answer, wherby he was not on∣ly prouoked to make warre against Cyrus, but by that meanes lost his kingdome; and being taken prisoner, he was set vpon a pile of wood to be burnt: but crying with a loud voice, O Solon, Solon, (thereby shewing, that wise Solon had foretold him, That no man is to be acounted happy before his end.) King Cyrus granted him his life. This recompence did the Diuell returne to Croesus for so great a Present. Such and many other the like histories by this booke may be vnderstood. The first rule for Drachma's. IF you haue any number of Drachma's, diuide them by 8, and the production will be English Crownes, according to Budaeus 100 Drachma's make a Mina, which is about 12 Crownes, or 3 li. sterling. The second rule of Mina's. THe Mina multiplied by 12, the production is Crownes: for twelue Crownes English is a Roman Mina, or a Mina of the Temple; 125 Mina's makes a Talent: so that multiplie 125 by 12, and the production will be 1500 crownes, which maketh a Talent.
The third rule of Talents. THe Talent multiplied by 12, the production is crownes. For 125 Mina's being multiplied by 12 makes 1500 crownes English which is a Talent; and 3000 crowns is two Talents, &c. by which meanes you may reduce all Drachma's and other lesse weights mentioned in the Scriptures to Mina's, and Talents; and these againe into crownes. But concerning the distinction of Talents, you may reade before. Notwithstanding obserue this, That if you chance to reade of any Talent, Mina, or Sicle in the Scripture, whereto there is not an addition of the Kings Talent, or, the Talent of the Temple (as I haue said) you may then presume that it is the common Talent. And this shall suffice for the Weights, Measures, and Monies mentioned in the Scriptures. FINIS.
A Catalogue of the principall Authors out of whom this foregoing Treatise of Weights and Measures, &c. was gathered. AMbrosius Calapinus. Aulus Gellius. Cassarus Peucerus. Athenaeus. Flavius Ioseph. Galenus. Gulihelmus Budaeus. Hesychius. Saint Ierome. Ioachim Camerarius. Iohannes Avenarius. Iohannes Fosterus. Iulius Pollux. Martin Luther. Mathew Hostius. Paulus Eberus. Philip Melancthon. Priscian Grammaticus. Sebastian Munster. Septuaginta Interpretes. Suidas. Volutius Metianus. The due proportion of Weights and Measures are also found in Myropolis.
Itinerarium Novi Testamenti. Wherein is contained the Trauels of the Vir∣gin MARY, and IOSEPH; also of the Wise-men of the East, of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and of his Apostles. BVt since I haue briefly related the Trauels of the antient Patriarchs, Iudges, Kings and Prophets, (which things I know canot be vnprofitable vnto such as are iuditious) mentioned in the old Te∣stament; that I might make a perfect end of what I haue begun, I will proceed and shew vnto you the trauels of all the holy men and women mentioned in the new Testament: where by due obseruation of this discourse you may well vnderstand, that as all the nations of the world were deriued from one man, that is, Adam; so all the Righteous and such as are to be saued are deriued from one man, that is, Christ Iesus. For as by the first Adam sin came into the world, and by sin, death and damnation; so by the second Adam that sinne is pardoned, and man made partaker of eternall happinesse. And that these things might be the more apparant vnto thee, I haue described the Townes, Cities, and places mentioned in their seuerall Trauels; both what they were in former times, and what they are at this present: That so by the due consideration of both, thou mightst obserue the mutation and change of estates; since through the revolution of times, those things which seeme most permanent, haue within the compasse of a few yeares beene subuerted, and the ruines of those Cities which haue been greatest, left to make euident lamentable examples of vast and vnheard of destructi∣ons,
from whence such as haue any small knowledg of the Spirit, may draw such comfortable resolutions, that neither pouerty can subuert them, nor riches and honor exalt them; but according to S. Iames, ca. 1. They may possesse themselues in peace; since neither the prosperitie of the world is permanent, nor the aduersitie thereof intolerable. The knowledge of both which, how soeuer to some it may seeme ridiculous, yet to such as are at all touched with the sence of worldly affaires, it cannot chuse but take a deep impres∣sion, and draw them thence to the knowledge of Christ Iesus and of his doctrine. To which end and for which purpose I haue prin∣cipally endeauored to publish this Treatise, that so comparing the estate of man in this present world with the estate of grace in the world to come, they might perceiue the impotencie of the one, and the permanencie of the other, and from both draw im∣moueable Axiomes; That there can be no saluation where there is no humilitie, nor no prosperity where there is not a knowledge of Christ Iesus in his humanitie: and thence gather, That the af∣flictions of this world, to which hee is most subiect through the whole course of his life, is the ready means to honor and immor∣tal glory. But that these things may the better appeare vnto thee, I will endeauor to lay before thee the beginning, and (so farre as the holy Scripture leads mee) the ending of our Sauiour. From whence thou mayst draw such comfortable resolutions, that in what estate soeuer thou art, whether in prosperitie or aduersitie, thou mayst therewith rest content, &c. Of Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptist. ZAcharias or Zachariahu signifies Gods remembrance. This man was the father of Iohn the Baptist, being a Priest of the Tribe of Aaron, and dwelling at a Towne called Abia, of which you may reade 1 Chr. 24. There were three famous men of this name, as Basilius saith. One that was a Prophet of the Lord, and liued 520 yeares before the birth of Christ, Zachar. 1. And another that was the sonne of Iehoiada the high-Priest, who
at the command of that ingrateful King Ioas, was stoned to death in the vpper Court of the Temple, 2 Chr. 24. And a third which was this Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptist, and son of Barachias, that is, The Blessed: who according to the opinion of Basil, was slain for no other cause but for saying that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. This man had to wife Elizabeth, of the posteritie of the high-Priest Aaron, and by her had a son called Iohn, so of the Lord, who was afterward called Iohn the Baptist. Elizabeth signifies The Rest of God, being deriued of Eli and Scabbath, that is, The Rest and Sabbath of the Lord. The inhabitants of the Ho∣ly land take vpon them euen to this day to shew the house where Zacharias & Elizabeth dwelt, in a town that standeth on the right hand of the way as you go from Emmaus to Ierusalem. But saint Luke, ca. 1. saith, That Zacharias dwelt not in a town or field, but i the city of Iudah, which was scituated in the mountain of Iudah. Risnerus and Iohannes Hedenus write, That Zacharias dwelt in Ieru∣salem, in that part of the city scituated vpon mount Bezetha, as in the first booke of the description of Ierusalem hath bin declared. And this seemeth to be verified out of Nehemia, cap. 3. Yet there are some of opinion that hee dwelt at Hebron, because that was the chiefe city of the tribe of Iuda, and a town of the Priests. The Trauels of the Virgin Mary. MAry, if it be deriued of Marah, signifieth such a person as is oppressed with carefulnesse and griefe, one that is layd open to all miserie and calamity, prest with continual vex∣ation and mourning. She was born vpon the 8 day of September 14 yeares before the birth of Christ; and in the fifteenth of her age brought forth her only begotten son, according to S. Hierome and others. Her fathers name was Eliakim, of the house of Da∣uid. Vpon the fiue and twentieth day of March in the same yeare
that our Sauior Christ was born, Mary being then 14 yeares old, and the Angel Gabriel declared vnto her the embassie of the Con∣ception of our Lord Iesus Christ. A little after, about the begin∣ning of April, an. M. 3967, she went from Nazareth in great haste ouer the hils to Ierusalem, 64 miles, to the house of Zacharias, and there saluted her cousin Elizabeth, Luk. 1. From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was 64 miles. And when the command came out from Augustus, that all the world should be taxed, then Ioseph and Mary went from Nazareth to Bethlehem, 72 miles: and there the time of Maries deleuerance drew neere; and lo, she bare the Son of the liuing God, our Lord and Sauior Christ, Luke 2. From Bethlehem Ioseph and Mary brought the childe Iesus to Ierusalem, and presented him in the Temple, which was 6 miles, Luke 2. And when they had accomplished all things according to the Law, they returned backe again to Nazareth a towne in Galilee, 64 miles. From Nazareth they went backe again to Bethlem, 72 miles, Thither the Wise men comming out of the East brought the childe Iesus Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, Mat. 2. From Bethlehem (the same night that Herod caused all the in∣fants of two yeares old and vnder to be slain) Ioseph and Mary fled with the childe Iesus to Hermopolis a city in Egypt, which was 296 miles, Mat. 2. Zozom. lib. 6. From thence they returned back again with the child Iesus to Nazareth, 368 miles: for they were greatly afraid lest Archilaus (who succeeded his father Herod in the gouerment of the Iews) would seeke the childes life, Mat. 2. From Nazareth Ioseph and Mary came euery yere to Ierusalem, which was 64 miles, to the feast of the Passeouer, and so many miles backe againe; which for ten yeares continuance came to 1280 miles. When Christ was twelue yeares of age, and at the beginning
of the thirteenth, he went with his parents from Nazareth to the feast of the Passeouer, which was 64 miles, Luke 2. And when the daies of the feast of the Passeouer were accom∣plished, they returned home againe. But the childe Iesus staied at Ierusalem, and his parents knew it not, for they thought he had beene among the company. Wherefore, when they had tra∣uelled a dayes journey (that is, twentie miles) they missed their sonne. After, they searcht through the companie, but could not finde him: wherefore they returned backe to Ierusalem being 20 miles where on the third day after they found him in the Temple, sit∣ting among the Doctors, and disputing with them. So the next three daies he returned back again with his parents to Nazereth, which was 64 miles, and was obedient to them, Luke 2. After, Iosoph and Mary went euery yeare during the life of Io∣seph, vp to Ierusalem to the Passeouer, and without all doubt took Iesus along with them. Thus they continued for the space of three yeares, about which time Ioseph died, Christ beeing then 16 yeares of age, which three yeares trauell of Nazareth to Ieru∣salem and backe againe, commeth to 384 miles. From that time forward he continued with his mother, till he was 31 yeares of age, which was the first yeare of his ministerie. Marie his mother being then 45 yeares old, was inuited to a mar∣riage in Cana, a city of Galile, which stood eight miles from Ga∣ile towards the North-west, Iohn 2. Here our Sauiour Christ wrought his first miracle, by changing water into Wine. From Cana in Galile she went with our Sauiour to Caperna∣um, a city of Galile, a little before the feast of the Paschal Lamb, which was 20 miles. From Capernaum she returned back to Nazareth, which was accounted 12 miles. In the 32 yeare of the age of our Sauiour Christ, which was he second of his ministerie, Mary went from Nazareth backe againe to Capernaum, where our Sauiour Christ cast forth a di∣uell, Matt. 12. Matke 3. which was 12 miles. From thence shee returned backe againe to Nazareth, which was 12 miles: for in this Towne shee dwelt, whiles Iesus tra∣uelled
from place to place teaching and preaching the word of God, Marke 6. And although shee oftentimes went from Nazareth with him to many places, continuing still in his company; yet then speci∣ally, when he was to sustaine the wrath of God, and punishment for the sinne of man, which was in the 34 yeare of his age. In which yeare shee would not forsake him till his death: for shee went from Galile to Ierusalem with him, which was 64 miles, a great journey for one of her age (being then 48 yeares old.) And when our Sauiour was crucified, shee stood close by the crosse with a heauie and pensiue countenance, bewailing the death of her sonne. Then was the prophecie of old Simeon accomplished, And a sword shall passe through thy soule. But after, by his glori∣ous resurrection and ascension, shee was reuiued and comforted. From the passion of Christ to the death of the blessed virgin Ma∣rie, was 12 yeares: All which time shee liued with Iohn the Euan∣gelist in Ierusalem, and then being 59 yeares of age dyed, and was buried (according to the opinion of Nicephorus and others) in the garden called Gethsamene. So all her Trauels were 3506 miles. Now followes the description of the townes and places to which she trauelled. Of Nazareth. THis was a towne almost of no estimation, scituated in a cer∣taine mountaine in Galile the lower, sixtie and foure miles and something more from Ierusalem towards the North, in the tribe of Zebulon. In this Towne our Sauiour Iesus Christ was brought vp, Luke 1.2. Some say that it was nineteene or twenty miles from Ierusalem, but they mistake themselues; yet I will not dispute thereof, but follow my authors, Iacobus Ziglerus, and Tilmanus Stella. There is not any mention made of it, that is ex∣stant in the old Testament. It hath a two fold deriuation, the one by Zain, and the other by Zade. If it bee written by Za∣ien, it may haue a twofold signification, since the exposition of this name doth depend vpon the Verbe Nazar, which sig∣nifies,
to consecrate and keepe; from hence Nezaer, a garland of floure, or a crowne set with pretious stones, &c. such as Kings and high Priests are accustomed to weare. Also from the same word Nazar, is deriued Nazir; & thence Nazaraeus, which is as much to say, he is separated from the vse of wine; and suffering his haire to bee vncut, as being dedicated to the Lord. Therefore our Sauiour Christ is justly called a Nazarite, Luke 2. For Naezer first signifies, a holy man, who hath made a holy vow vnto the Lord: Second∣ly, it doth denote a crowne or wreathe of synceritie, Exod. 29.39. Thirdly, a holy ointment wherewith Kings and Priests were annointed Leuit. 27. and fourthly, this word Nezaer, signifies a Princely crowne, 2 Sam. 1. 2 Kings 11. Psal. 89.132. So that Nazareth being deri∣ued of Nazar and Nazir, may signifie both a crowne, and a holy ci∣tie, Iudg. 13. but if Nazareth be written by Zade, it signifies a flou∣rishing plant or graffe, according to that of Isay cap. 11. But there shall come a rod forth of the stocke of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow out of his root, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest vpon him. The inha∣bitants of this Towne at this day shew certaine monuments and reliques of what had happened in preceding ages: as, two Chur∣ches, one built there where the Angell Gabriel saluted the blessed Virgin, and shee conceiued by the spirit: In which there stands three altars hewen out of a rock: and the other built (as they say) where the house of Ioseph and Marie stood, because there our Sa∣uiour Christ was brought vp. Also they shew a well where the childe Iesus drew water and ministred to his mother. They also shew the vast ruines of the sinagogue where our Sauiour Christ expounded the 61 chapter of Isay; for which cause they would haue throwne him headlong downe the hill, Luke 4. And many other things, of which you may reade in Borchardus the Monke. In Saint Ieroms time some 40 yeares before Christ, Nazareth was a small towne called Nazarah. Of the mountaines by which Mary passed when she went to visit her cosen Elizabeth. BEtweene Narareth and Ierusalem, there standeth many high hils, as Mount Gilboa, whereon King Saul killed himselfe; Mount Grisim, and Hebal, vpon which hills the blessings and
cursings were pronounced, Deut. 27. and mount Ephraim, vpon which Ehud kild Eglon king of the Moabites, Iudg. 13. Ouer this mountaine, being very great and steepe, Mary trauelled when she went to visit her cosen Elizabeth. Of Bethlehem. THere were two cities called by this name, the one Bethlem Iuda; the other Bethlem Euphrata where our sauior Christ was borne, and signifies, fruitfull, or the house of Bread: It stood vpon a hil some 6 miles from Ierusalem towards the South. The inhabitants take vpon them to shew the place where our sauiour Christ was borne, which stood vpon the East side of the Citie, close by the wall thereof; where as Eusebius sayth, Hellen the Mother of Constantine the Great, caused to bee built a faire and stately Church, three hundred and twentie yeares after the nati∣uitie of Christ. This Church was dedicated to Saint Marie, and remaineth to this day, being had in great honour both amongst the Christians, and the Turkes and Sarazins. This Church is such a stately building, that it is thought to exceede all the Churches of Christendome, for beautie and curious workemanship: It is two hundred twentie and eight foot long, and eightie seuen foot wide, beeing built all of Marble of diuers colours, and couered with lead: There are in it foure rowes of Marble pil∣lars, wonderfull to looke vpon, not onely in regard of their num∣ber, but of their greatnesse, for there is fiftie pillars in euery row. The body of this church, the pillars from the bottom to the top, the walls, and euerie part of it, is beautified with liuely pictures, adorned with diuers colours, siluer, gold, and curious workeman∣ship, so as it is wonderfull to behold. The pauement of it is of marble; polished, and of diuers colors, so cunningly set in workes, and with such variety, that it is very delightful to such as look on it. There is painted on the pillars and walls, almost all the stories of the Old Testament, till the birth of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, with such excellent cunning, and so liuely, that it is to bee admired. In the Quire of this Church there is found two Altars, one close by the Chappell of Saint Katherine, at the East end thereof; not far distant from which they shew the place
where our Sauiour was circumcised: and in the middle of the Quire there standeth another Altar, where they say the wise men left their Dromedaries, and prepared their gifts to present vnto our Sauiour, when they worshipped him. Vpon the South side of this quire towards the East, they descend by ten stone steps into the Chappell of the Natiuitie of Christ, richly beautified and curiously wrought, paued with polished Narble. This Chappell is not very great, but wonderfull faire and sumptuous. When the Holy land was ouerrun by the Gentiles, this (as many other places were in that countrey) was all polluted with filth and dirt, that they had much adoe to make it cleane a great while af∣ter. Vpon the place where they said our Lady the blessed Virgin Mary, brought forth our Sauiour into the world, there is placed a Table of white Marble, after the maner of an Altar: about some foure foot from this they shew the place where the Manger stood, a part of it yet remaining, cut out of a rocke, not of Marble but of other stone, as many other Mangers are in that countrey. Close by that there is an Altar, where they say the wise-men pre∣sented their gifts to our Sauiour Christ, and worshipped him. At the entrance into the Church there standeth a goodly building, which in times past seemed to haue been some Archbishops See, but now is called Saint Maries Church. Vpon the North side they descended by certaine stepps into the Chappell of Saint Ie∣rom, who lay a long time buried there, till his bones were remo∣ued thence to Saint Maries in Rome. About a mile from Bethlehem Southward, stood the Tower of Eder, being a watch tower of the Bethlehemites, and so called because there resorted thither many flockes of sheepe: for Ae∣der signifieth A Heard. Round about this Tower were faire and fruitfull pastures, to which many sheepheards resorted to feed their flockes; to some of which sheepheards the Angels told the glad tidings of the birth of our Sauiour, and that he was laid in a Manger at Bethlehem. For which cause, in after times there was a Church built iust in the place where the Tower stood; and in Saint Ieroms time called by the name of Angelos ad Pastores: the same Luther affirmeth, and that it is yet standing. Iacob some∣time
dwelt in that place, and buried his wife Rachel thereabouts. The monument that hee set vpon her graue remaineth to this day, which was twelue stones pitcht an end, standing about a quarter of a mile from this place, vpon the right hand as they goe to Ierusalem: of which graue, all the countrey thereabouts is called by the name of Rachel. Of the way betweene Iudaea and Aegypt. BEtweene Aegypt and Iudaea lieth Arabia Petraea: a land for the most part barren and vnfruitfull, full of sands, rockes, and mountaines, destitute of water, and subject to many dangers: being in the Summer solstice scorched with extremity of heate, the Sun being then perpendiculer ouer them (according to Mun∣ster) in the day time; and in the night, troubled with extreame windes, which blowing the sand with great violence, it casteth it vpon great heapes and mountaines, by which dust, both beasts and sometime men are suffocated and slaine. Moreouer there dwell in this Desart, a rude and dangerous people, called Saracens; who take their beginning from Ishmael, and are therefore also called Ishmaelites, being giuen to crueltie and maliciousnesse. They get their liuing for the most part, by theft and violence: and as Ishmael was an excellent Archer, so they also are very cunning in shooting and hunting, vsing to this day their ancient euill custome of robbing and spoiling all that passe that way; insomuch as Merchants are constrained to goe in great companies, lest they should be indangered by them, and by reason of the windes and sands are constrained to guide their journey by the compasse, as men doe that saile vpon the sea. Through this wildernesse did Ioseph and Marie passe, when they went with the childe Iesus out of Iudaea into Aegypt; where they were in danger of theeues, subjects to be smothered by the sands, constrained to trauell ouer high rockes and mountaines, and to rest in feare because of Lyons, Beares, and other beasts which greatly abound in that place. Besides, diuers other dis∣commodities were incident vnto them, as want of meate, drinke,
and other necessaries, there being little water to be found there, insomuch as had not the Lord by an expresse command charged him in a dreame to goe downe into Aegypt; Ioseph durst hardly haue ventured vpon so difficult and dangerous a journey. But the Lord so mercifully prouided for him, that he both went and returned safe. Thus may we see to what dangers these good peo∣ple were exposed, and what miseries they sustained from the be∣ginning because of their sonne Christ Iesus. Of Hermopilis. HErmopilis was called the Towne of Mercurie, distant from Ierusalem 304 miles towards the Southwest: it was one of the chiefe cities in Aegypt, as Appianus writeth. Nicephorus and Zozemenus affirme, lib. 5. cap. 22. that Ioseph and Mary came and li∣ued in this Towne, where they continued all the daies of Herod that cruel King. But Ziglerius saith, that they liued in the land of Gosen, where the Patriarch Iacob and his posteritie liued: which agreeth well with the words of S. Matthew cap. 2. and Hosea 11. Out of Aegypt haue I called my sonne. This land of Gosen lay 200 miles from Ierusalem towards the Southwest. The inhabitants of Al∣caire in Aegypt take vpon them to shew the place where Ioseph and Mary dwelt when they went downe into that countrey; but how true it is I cannot tell, because there is no Author for it. Of Canah in Galile. This was city in Galile distant from Ierusalem 68 miles to∣wards the North; of which you may reade more in the tra∣uels of our Sauiour Christ. Of Capernaum. THis towne stood vpon the sea of Galile, 68 miles from Ieru∣salem toward the North; of which you may reade more after.
The trauels of the Wise-men out of the East, which came to Bethlehem to see IESVS. THe Magi were certaine wise men of Persia, so called from Meditation, being deriued of Hagah, that is, He hath medi∣tated; and taken in the third conjugation, it signifies, To finde or search out a thing: they being such as gaue themselues to the knowledge of hard things, and to finde out the secrets and misteries of nature. But according to Varinus, they were not only Philosophers, but Priests also. And Plato vpon Alcibiades, saith, Magia est deorum obseruantia siue cultus diuinus; that is, Magicke prescribeth the due obseruance and diuine worship of the gods. Strabo saith, Geogra. lib. 6. That the Magi were such among the Persians, as those whom the Indians call Gimnosophists and Academi∣ans; the Babylonians, Chaldaeans; and the Hebrewes, Prophets, or Priests, which taught the people diuine knowledge. And when the ten Tribes were carried into captiuitie by Salmanasser Emperour of the Assirians (into Assiria, Media, and Persia) there is no question but they tooke with them into the East, the holy bookes and volumes of the Law and of the Prophets, whereby without doubt many of the people and Philosophers of the East came to haue a taste of the true knowledge and worship of God. Also the Prophet Daniel was brought vp in all the arts of the Chaldaeans; whose writings and prophecies were not only writ∣ten and published amongst the Babylonians, but also had in great account and estimation amongst the Magi: so that they di∣ligently perusing those books, came not only to the knowledge of God, but also without doubt to the knowledge of our Saui∣our Iesus Christ, whom they called The Starre of Iacob; from whence may be concluded, That the Wise-men that came to see our Sauiour Christ, were rather of Susa in Persia, than of Zaba in Aethyopia. Wherefore these wise-men came from the Academy of Susa
in Persia to Ierusalem, which was 920 miles; saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Iewes, for we haue seen his Starre in the East, and are come to worship him. This hapned in the moneth of Ianua∣rie, in the second yeare after the birth of our Sauiour; for Herod in the seuentieth yeare of his age caused all the male children of the Bethlemites of two yeares old and vnder (according to the time that he was told of the Wise-men) to be put to the sword. From Ierusalem they went to Bethlehem, which was 6 miles, where vpon the sixt of Ianuary they offered their Presents which they brought out of Persia, to our Sauior; viz. Gold, as to a King; Frankincense, as to a Priest; and Myrrhe, as to a mortall man, Mat. 2. So let vs offer vnto Christ our Sauior, the Gold of faith and heauenly doctrine; the Frankincense of earnest prayers, and the myrrhe of patience in the midst of calamitie. Afterward, the Wise-men (as they had bin warned in a dream) returned another way to Susa in Persia, which was 920 miles. So their trauels were 1846 miles. Of Susa you may reade before in the trauels of the Old Testa∣ment. Of the Starre that appeared to the Wise-men in the East. SInce this Starre appeared in the lower region of the aire (as it is apparant it did) from thence it may be concluded, That it neither was any of the fixed starres, planet, or a Comet, be∣cause they commonly are seene in the vpper region of the aire; but rather, according to the opinion of some, it was an Angell of God appearing in the forme of a bright shining Starre, to direct the Wise-men in their way as they went to the town of Bethlem; and so by little and little descending from the sublimitie of the aire, pointed out vnto them the very house where they might find Mary the mother of our Lord, and the childe Iesus. Almost after the same manner as the Angell of the Lord in the time of Moses appeared to the children of Israel; that is, in the day like ta cloudy pillar, and in the night like a flaming fire, to direct them their way, Exod. 13.14.34. Wherefore this Starre without doubt was no naturall apparition, which hapned in the inferiour region
of the aire, suddenly vanishing away; but as I haue said, an Angel of the Lord representing the forme of a Starre. Or else as Chryso∣stome saith, a certaine miraculous new Starre, which according to the opinion of Augustine, was gouerned by an Angel of the Lord; and for the greatnes of the body, and variety of the aspects, was not seene first in the land of Iudaea, but in Persia, a countrie in the East, where the Magi dwelt, and accompanied them thence into Iudea. And although for a short space it left them in the journie, yet when they came in the way to Bethlem, it appeared to them againe, Mat. 2. As Nicephorus and Chrysostome obserue; the Starre appeared vpon the day of the conception of Christ, being the 25 day of March; about which time the Archangell Gabriel spoke with the Virgin Marie, Luke 1. And with seene for a whole yeare and 41 weeks, that is, till the 6 of Ianuary, in the beginning of the second yeare after the natiuitie of Christ. It wanted 11 weeks of two yeares; and therefore Herod caused all the male children of the Bethlehemites of two yeares old and vnder, to be slaine, ac∣cording to the time declared vnto him by the wise men. Mat. 2. Wherfore this new Starre did first foreshew the birth of Christ, that bright shining Starre and eternall light of glory, according to the prophecie of Billa, Num. 22. Secondly, the light of Gods Word & the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1. Thirdly, godly & faithful ministers and teachers, who by their doctrine and godly life and conuersa∣tion, should set before their auditors and such as obserue their actions, the way to Christ and eternall happinesse, Dan. vlt. The Trauels of Iohn Baptist. IN the moneth of Thisri, which answereth to our September, Annoo mundi, 3966, the Feast of the Tabernacles being then ce∣lebrated, the Archangell Gabriel told Zacharias the Priest, of the conception of Iohn the Baptist, which should be the voyce of a crier in the wildernesse. And a little after, that is, about the Autum∣nall Aequinoctiall, Iohn the Baptist was conceiued six moneths before our Sauiour. The next yeare after, about the moneth of
Iuly, he was borne. Six moneths after that, our Sauiour Christ was borne. In which yeare Zacharias che father of Iohn Baptist, was slaine in the vpper court betweene the Altar and the Tem∣ple, for saying, that our Sauiour Christ was borne, and, That Ma∣rie his mother was a Virgin, Matt. 33. Wherefore Elizabeth the wife to Zacharias, fearing the cruelty of Herod and of the Phari∣ses, about that time when the young infants of the Bethlehemites were slaine, shee fled from Ierusalem to Apumim, as Nicephorus faith, which was scituated in the wildernesse betweene Iericho and Ierusalem, where she priuatly brought vp her sonne, which was 32 miles. In the 39 yeare of the natiuitie of Christ, and vpon the 24 day of Iune; Iohn the Baptist being then 30 yeares of age, by the com∣mandement of the Lord tooke vpon him the ministerie: for it was not lawfull for any to enter into that function before they were thirtie yeares, of age, Numb. 4. Wherefore vpon the eight and twentieth day of September, it being then the feast of the Ta∣bernacles, and about the middle of the last weeke spoken of by Daniel, Hee went from Adumim to Bethabara, where hee tooke vpon him the Ministerie of the New Testament: Hannas the chiefe Priest being then newly entred into that office, Luke 2. (which was about foure miles) and within a short time after, that is, vpon the seuenth day of October, beeing then the feast of Expiation, our Lord and Sauiour Iesuis Christ was baptised, when hee was fully thirtie yeares of age, Luke 3 Matthew 3. Iohn 1. In the yeare following, which was the one and thirtieth yeare of the Natiuitie of Christ, a little before the feast of Easter, the Synedrion of Ierusalem sent messengers vnto Iohn, hee then remaining at Bethabara, to know whether hee was the Christ, or Elias, or some other Prophet, Iohn the first. Vpon the eigh∣teenth day of September, the same yeare Iohn entred vpon the second yeare of his ministerie: About which time Caiphas be∣gan to enter vpon the office of the high Priest, and the Sadduces and Pharises to persecute Iohn Baptist. Wherefore he departed from Bethabara and went to Aenon, a Citie in Galile, which was 24 miles.
After that Iohn had preached publikely and freely, by the space of a whole yeare and two moneths; about the moneth of December, and the end of the first yeare of the Ministrie of our Sauiour, by the commandement of Herod, hee was taken and led prisoner from Aenon to the Tower of Macheruntes, which was 28 miles; where he remained vntill his death. So all his Trauels were 88 miles. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Adumim. ADumim, or Adummim (as it is in Ioshua, ca. 15.) was a Tower twelue miles from Ierusalem towards the East, scituated in the wildernesse that is betweene Ierusalem and Iericho; so called because of the multitude of robberies and murthers that were done in that place: for Dam, signifieth Blood. Here the poore man that Christ mentioned, Luk. 10. fell amongst theeues; and here Eliah continued when he was fed by the Rauens, aad dranke the water of the riuer Cherith, 1 King. 17. which was a notable type of Iohn the Baptist, who liued in a caue in this place. This caue stood close by the Garden of Engedi, where in former times the Academie and Schoole of the Prophets Eliah and Elisha, was kept: here the Esseis (which was a Sact amongst the Iewes) also continued, who led a Monasticall kinde of life, and gaue them∣selues wholly to prayers and good workes; vnder whose disci∣pline and instruction Iohn was brought vp. Mathesius wisely obserues, that of all other, the Esseies would neuer oppose Christ; but were a people that liued chastly and honestly according to the custome of the Nazarites; with all diligence reading the Scriptures, and auoiding idlenesse as a great temptation of the diuell, giuing themselues principally to the studie of Phisicke. After rhis sort was Iohn brought vp. Of Bethabara. THis was a towne scituated vpon the East side of the riuer Ior∣dan, 16 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, where there was either a Bridge or a ferry to passe ouer Iordan: from whence
this place was called Bethabara, being deriued of Baith, a house; and Abarah, a passage: Wherefore at a certaine time there be∣ing assembled in this place a great concourse and congregation of people, Iohn did first enter vpon the ministerie of the New Testament, and taught the people the Doctrine of Repentance and Baptisme. Here Elias the Thesbite, who was a type of Iohn the Baptist, was taken vp into heauen in a fierie Chariot. Here Iohn spoke with the messengers that came to inquire, Whither he was the Christ or not; to whom hee answered, that hee was nei∣ther Elias nor a prophet of the Old Testament, but the voice of a crier in the wildernesse, Io. 4. Is. 40. And in the same place where the Priests stood with the Arke of the couenant, whiles Ioshua and the children of Israel passed ouer Iordan, Iohn baptised Christ, the true Arke of the Couenant of the Throne of grace, Iosh. 3.4. Mat. 4. Luke. 3. Heb. 9. Of Aenon. THis towne stood vpon the West side of the riuer of Iordan, 42 miles from Ierusalem Northward, a little on this side of the sea of Tiberias, neere the mouth of the riuer Iaboch, where it falleth into Iordan, in which place was great aboundance of wa∣ters. Here also Iohn sometimes baptized, Ioh. 3. it being two miles from Salem where Iacob in times past dwelt, Gen. 33. Of the mee∣ting together of the waters this towne was called Aenon, of Ain which signifies an Eye, and a fountaine that springeth as it were from an Eye. Of Macherus or Macharuntes. MAcherus was a towne of Peraea, beyond Iordan, 20 miles from Ierusalem towards the East, scituated in a high moun∣taine: being deriued Macherah, that is, A Sword. This was one of the chief castles of Herod Antipas, who obtained the chiefe command in the citie of Ierusalem, Plin. lib. 5. c. 16. In this place Iohn Baptist was beheaded, as Ioseph. saith, lib. Antiq. 80. c. 10. And although his Disciples buried his body thereabouts, yet long af∣ter the christians remoued his bones & reliques to Sebasten, that is, Samaria, where they were the second time buried with great
honor and reuerence. Afterward (as Nicephorus and Theodor saith) his bones were taken vp againe by Iulian the Apostata, and burnt. There are many other things that are written concerning his re∣liques, which (because of the vncertainty of them) I omit to speak of; and will proceed to a further description of this citie. Alex∣ander King of the Iewes first built and fortified it; and then ma∣king warre against Aristobulus, it hapned to be destroied by Ga∣binus one of his Captaines, and so continued desolate till Herods time, who rebuilt the towne and the castle, and fortified it with strong walls and high towers, euen a hundred and sixtie cubits in height, so that a man could scarce see to the top of it. But, that God might reuenge the bloud of his Saints, at such time as Ieru∣salem and the Holy land was left desolate. Lucius Bassus (a noble Roman) came to this citie and besieged it; during which siege, Bassus tooke a certaine young man which was a Prince of the Iewes called Eliazer, and caused a Crosse to be set on purpose to haue crucified him: but they which were besieged in the towne, seeing the pittifull lamentations this young man made, promi∣sed Bassus, if he would spare his life to yeeld vp the towne, which he did; so the castle being taken, the gates of the citie were set o∣pen. But the Romans fell to the slaughter without mercie, & put to the sword 1700 persons, besides there were a great multitude of women and children carried thence into captiuitie, as Iosephus (lib. de Bello Iud. 7. cap. 25.) affirmeth. There were many goodly wells, and stately buildings, within this city: there is cut out in the castle a Rue tree of an admirable greatnesse. And in the valley vpon the North side of the Citie, the root Baarus is found, presenting both in colour and figure a flame. There are also found many hot Baithes and Fountaines of wholsome waters. But aboue the rest, Iosephus maketh mention of one in a caue, where two streames issueth, as it were out of two duggs; the one hot, the other cold: which two waters being min∣gled together, are very wholesome and cure many diseases, but principally the shrinking of the sinewes. And this shall suffice concerning the trauels of Iohn the Baptist.
The Trauels of our Lord and Sauiour Christ in his infancie, Matthew 3. Luke 2. FRom Bethlehem the childe Iesus was brought to Ierusalem, and there presented in the Temple, Anno Mundi 3967, which was 6 miles. From Ierusalem Ioseph and Marie, (when they had accompli∣shed all things in the Temple of the Lord) carried the childe Iesus to Nazareth in Galile, which was 64 miles. From thence Ioseph and Marie brought Iesus backe againe to Bethlehem, which was 72 miles. Vpon the second day of Ianuary, in the second yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, the wise men of Persia brought gifts and wor∣shipped him. A little after, that is, about the Ides of Ianuary, just the night before the command came from Herod to kill the innocent children, Ioseph and Marie went with the childe Iesus through the mountains and desarts of Iudaea, into Aegypt to Her∣mopolis, in the land of Gosen; which was reckoned from Beth∣lehem 296 miles. From Hermopolis in Aegypt (after the death of Herod) Iesus was brought backe againe by his parents to Nazareth in Iudaea, which was aboue 368 miles. When Iesus was twelue yeres of age, he went with his parents from Nazareth to Ierusalem, to the feast of the Passeouer, which was 64 miles. And when his parents had lost him, and found him againe in the Temple among the learned; then he continued in obedience vnto them, and went with them from Ierusalem to Nazareth, which was 64 miles. So his Trauels were 934 miles. Concerning the townes and places mentioned in his Trauels, you may reade before in the Trauels of the Virgin Marie.
The trauels of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, from his Baptisme till the first yeare of his Ministrie. CHrist in the thirtieth yeare of his age, went from Nazereth and came to Bethabara, which stood vpon the riuer Iordan, where Iohn baptized; and vpon the seuenth day of October, in the middle of the last weeke spoken of by Daniel, cap. 9. was there baptized, at whose baptisme the testimony of the spirit descended downe vpon him in the likenesse of a Doue; which was 52 miles. From Iordan, Iesus was led by the spirit into the Wildernesse to be tempted of the diuell, and there fasted fortie daies and for∣tie nights: at the end of which time, the diuell came vnto and tempted him. How this wildernesse was called, the Euangelist doth not specifie: but it is to be thought that it was the desart of Arabia Petraea, & that our Sauiour Christ fasted vpon the moun∣taine of Sinai, where Moses and Eliah fasted fortie daies and for∣tie nights, Exod. 24.1. Reg. 19. For this desart extendeth it selfe from the borders of Aegypt and the Red sea, to Iordan, where Iohn baptized: and from thence by the country of Trachonitis, to the mountaine of Libanus. Therfore our Sauior Christ might that present seuenth day of Actober whereon he was baptised, come into this Wildernesse; and by little and little goe thence to mount Sanai, which was 136 miles. For there was no place more fit for Sathan to tempt our Sauiour in, than where the law was deliuered, which is the power of Sinne: for although the Son of God was without sinne, yet he tooke vpon him the sinnes of all the world, Leuit. 16. Ioh. 1. Isa. 53. So then our Sauiour Christ (according to this supputation) continued in the Desart from the seuenth day of October to the sixteenth of Nouember, which was fortie daies and fortie nights. Epiphanias lib. 2. Tom. 1. Hoeres. 51. saith, that our Sauiour Christ was baptized vpon the eighth day of Nouember which was the twelfth day of the mo∣neth Athyr amongst the Aegyptians: but this supputation is false
and altogether repugnant to the certain Mathematicall calcula∣tion. Wherefore vpon the 17 day of Nouember our Sauior Christ hungred, Mat. 4. Mark 1. Luke 4. and then the diuel with an extra∣ordinarie boldnesse came vnto him, and carried him from Mount Sinai with great violence through the aire, and set him vpon the top of a pinacle of the temple in Ierusalem, which was 120 miles: this pinacle was so exceeding high (as you may reade in the de∣scription of Ierusalem) that whosoeuer looked down from it into the valley of Cedron, their eyes dazled, and it seemed as though there had bin clouds in the bottome of the valley; for it was 600 foot from the bottom to the top. From this place the diuell bad our Sauior Christ throw himselfe downe, &c. Mat. 4. From the pinacle of the Temple the diuell tooke our Sauiour Christ and set him vpon a high mountaine; but what hill it was, or how called, the holy Euangelist doth not set down. The inha∣bitants of the Holy land thinke it was the hil that stood betwixt Bethel and Ai, vpon which hill in times past Abraham dwelt, Gen. 13. But that hill is not very high, and there are many higher hils in the holy land: wherefore it is to be thought that he was caried vpon the top of that high mountain Nebo, which was also called Pisgah, and stood 24 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, where God shewed vnto Moses all the holy land beyond Iordan, Deut. 34. and in this place, as God had shewed Moses, so the diuell shewed our Sauior the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, saying, All these will I giue thee, &c. It is to be thought that all these sharp temptations of the diuell were done in one day. This hill Pisgah is distant from Bethabara 8 miles, where Iohn Baptist baptised, and bare witnesse of our Sauior Christ, Ioh. ca. 1. Now after the diuel had left him, and the Angels had comforted him, he came thence vnto Iohn, which was 8 miles, and Iohn said to his Disciples, Behold, this is the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world, Ioh. 1. So these trauels were 140 miles.
The Trauels of our Sauior Christ in the first yeare of his Mi∣nistery, which was the 31 of his age. BVt yet our Sauiour Christ began not to preach publiquely, because it was not lawfull for any to be admitted into the Ministerie of the Word vntill they were past thirty yeres of age. Now our Sauior Christ in the moneths of Ianuary and Fe∣bruary, being then past thirty (for he was full thirty vpon the 25 day of December) began to preach publiquely, but yet hee had no disciples, neither had he wrought any miracles. In the month of March Iohn Baptist testified of Christ before the Priests & Le∣vits; and within two daies after, Christ being then present, Iohn said, Behold the Lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world, &c. Within a while after, Christ went thence towards Cana in Galile, in which journy he took vnto him some disciples, namely Andrew and Iohn the Evangelist, and as some thinke, Peter, Philip, and Nathaniel; neere to the town of Bethel, where the Patriarch Iacob saw a ladder reaching from earth to heauen (for Christ ma∣keth mention of that vision in this journey) which was 32 miles, Ioh. 2. where hee graced the marriage with a notable mircle, tur∣ning six pots of water (containing 168 gallons and three quarts, or thereabouts) into wine, Ioh. 2. After, he went thence with his mother and his disciples to Ca∣pernaum, 20 miles: but he stayed there but a while, for the passe∣ouer of the Iewes was at hand, Ioh. 2. In the beginning of Aprill Christ went from Capernaum to Ierusalem, to the feast of the Passeouer, which was 56 miles, and there cast out of the Temple the money-changers, and those that sold sheepe, and oxen, and doues in it. This was done about 46 yeares after Herod Ascalonita King of the Iewes had rebuilded and beautified the Temple; of which you may read in Iosep. li. Ant. 15. cap. 14. Ioh. 2.
This first Passeouer of the Ministery of our Sauiour Christ,The first Pass∣ouer of the Ministerie of Christ. of which you may reade, Iohn, cap. 2. was celebrated vpon the sixth day of Aprill, and continued vntill the thirteenth day of the same moneth. During which time our Sauiour Christ did many Mi∣racles, insomuch that many beleeued in his name; and amongst the rest Nicodemus, who came to him by night, and reasoned with him concerning the kingdome of God. Nicodemus signifies the Victorie of the people, Ioh. 3. At this time he continued in Ieru∣salem till the moneth of October, and there celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles, and preached the acceptable yeare of the Lord, Esay 61. The feast of Tabernacles being ended, Iesus with his disciples came into Iudea, that is, hee went from Ierusalem, and began to teach in Iudea, and his Disciples baptised, Ioh. 3.4. Iohn also bap∣tised at this time vpon the borders of Galile neer Iudea, 42 miles from Ierusalem Northward, vpon the East side of the riuer Ior∣dan, for hee was not yet cast into prison. Therefore Christ chose him a place to teach and baptise in vpon the riuer of Iordan, neere Iohn, that they might meet and conuerse together. A little after, the question was moued concerning Purification, and Iohn began to preach of Christ, and that he was the Son of God, and Spouse of the Church. In this Sermon Iohn in many places called him∣selfe the Friend of the Spouse. From whence it is euident, That Christ and Iohn in the moneth of Nouember did often meet and conuerse together. In the moneth of December Christ being assured of the capti∣uitie of Iohn the Baptist, Mat. 4. Mark 1. and of the persecution and fallacies of the Pharisees, Iohn 4. went from Iordan, and re∣turned into Galilee by the prouince and countrey of Samaria: in which countrey he came to Iacobs Well, which stood close by Sichar, in former times called Sichem, about some 10 miles from Iordan towards the West; in which place he spake with the Sa∣maritan woman (this happened some foure months before Har∣uest) and after went into Sichar, and continued there for the space of two dayes; and after returning into Galile, was very ac∣ceptably
entertained of the Galileans, because they formerly hauing seene his miracles done at Ierusalem, were ioyfull to see him there. When he had trauelled from Sichar to Cana (a city in Galile the lower, which was 32 miles, where he had changed water into wine) there was a certain Ruler came vnto him, whose sonne lay sicke at Capernaum, 20 miles distant, and besought him to heale his son; our Sauiour told him that his son was made whole: so he beleeued, and his son was made whole the same houre. This was the second miracle that our Sauior Christ did, Io. 4. It is thought that this rulers name was Chuza, of whom there is mention Luk. 8 and was Herods Procurator; whose wiues name was Iohanna, which signifieth Gratious. This woman ministred of all her substance vnto Christ, Ioh. 4. So these Trauels were 192 miles. ¶ Of the Townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Canain Galile. THis was a city of the lower Galile, where our blessed Sauior Christ turned water into wine, being distant from Ierusalem 68 miles Northward. The place where our Sauior wrought this miracle is to be seen at this day; but it is within the ground, and you must descend by certain steps before you can come at it; be∣cause (as it seemes) there haue bin many churches and buildings set vpon it, which being sundry times ouerthrown, the ruins ther∣of haue raised the earth in such sort, that the antient place is as it were hidden & laid vnder the earth, as is also the place of the An∣nuntiation, of the natiuity of our Sauior Christ, and many other where hee wrought miracles; to which they doe descend downe vnder the earth by steps. Vpon the North side of this towne stood a round hill, and vpon the South a goodly plaine; beeing called Cana in Galile, to put distinction between it and another towne called after the same name, which stood vpon the borders of Ty∣rus and Sidon, in the Tribe of Aser; in which the Canaanitish
woman or Syroph oenicean dwelt, which besought Christ to heal her daughter who was possessed of a diuel, Mat. 15. Mark 7. which was called Canah the greater, as this was called Canah the lesse, and was distant each from other 44 miles. Canah was so called because round about it grew Reeds, and there were many moorish and waterish grounds, wherof the town tooke the name. For Canah signifies a Reed: which is a fit type of the Church; for as our Sauior Christ at this town (which stood in a moorish and reedy place) graced the marriage with an extra∣ordinarie miracle; so likewise will he grace the marriage of his Church (though troubled with miseries and afflictions in this world, tossed to and fro like a wauering reed) with the glorious presence of his gratious countenance, and in the world to come crowne it with eternall glory. Of Capernaum. THis city was so called from the pleasant and comfortable scituation of it. In the Hebrew text Mathew cals it Caphar∣nacum, i. The town of comfort; being deriued of Nocham, i. Con∣solation. In this town our Sauior dwelt after he had left Naza∣reth, and in it wrought many miracles, as the healing of the sick, casting out of diuels, and such like, whereof you may read, Mat. 8. Mark 1. Luke 5.7. Iohn 4. It stood in the land of Genesareth, vpon the West and North side of Iordan, in an angle of land ioyning to the sea of Galile, 56 miles from Ierusalem Northward, in the tribe of Issacher; and as it is thought by some, iust in the middest of the twelue tribes. Mat. 9. calls it the city of our Sauior. And that Christ was no stranger, but an inhabitant of this city, it is manifest, Mat. 17. where Christ when he gaue tribute to the ma∣gistrats of this city) asked Peter saying, Of whom doe the Kings of the earth take tribute? Peter said, Of strangers: Then, quoth hee, the children are free; yet neuerthelesse, &c. From whence may be gathe∣red that he was no stranger, but an inhabitant in Capernaum. It had vpon the Northside of it the three Tribes, Nepthalim, Aser, and Zabulon; vpon the South, Benjamin, Iuda, Dan, and Sime∣on; vpon the West, Issacher, Ephraim, and the halfe Tribe of Ma∣nasses;
and vpon the East, Reuben, Gad, and the other halfe tribe of Manasses: so that our Sauior Christ dwelt in the midst of the 12 tribes of Israel. Furthermore, it was a goodly market towne, and had as well relation to Tyrus and Sidon (two townes of the Gentiles within 44 miles of it) as to Ierusalem: from whence may be verified that saying of Esa. ca. 8.9. The land of Zebulon and Nepthalim, neere the way of the sea beyond Iordan, and Galile of the Gen∣tiles; a people which sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death, saw a great Light. This town is therfore instly called the city of Com∣fort and Consolation; since our Sauior Christ dwelt there, who with his doctrine and preaching refreshed & comforted all such as were afflicted with the burthen of their sins. But the great men that were inhabitants of this City had more respect to their pri∣uat profit, than to the doctrine & miracles that Christ wrought among them; from whence it came to passe that they did as it were neglect and contemne that good which God had offered vn∣to them: which made our Sauior say, And thou Capernaum, which seemest to be exalted vp vnto heauen, shalt be cast down into hell: for if the miracles had been done in Sodom and Gomorah, which haue been done in thee, they had continued vntill this day. Verily verily I say vnto you, It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorah in the day of Iudgment, than for thee, Mat. 11. For there was no such benefit offered to any Citie, neither such honours and dignities, as were to Capernaum, our Sauior himselfe dwelling there. Wherefore for their ingratitude and impiety the city hath diuers times bin wasted and destroied, as well by the Romanes as other nations; so that at this day this glorious city is become so desolate, that there is scarce 8 houses standing, and they also like small sheds. Of Sichar. IN antient time this towne was called Sichem, of which you may reade more both in the trauels of Iacob and Abimilech. After it came to be called Sichar, according to the opinion of Luther vpon Genesis, because the inhabitants of that country were giuen to pleasure and voluptuousnesse, the greatest part of their delight being in drinking and quaffing: for Sichar, being deriued of Schachar, signifieth, to bee drunke, or inordinately to swal∣low
sweet and pleasant wine, of which there was great plenty in that towne, made of the juice of Apples, the fruit of Palme trees, and honey, which may very well resemble Hipocras or Metheg∣lin, as some Authors haue it. And although by the incursion of the Romanes it was vtterly wasted and left desolate, yet in suc∣ceeding times it was rebuilt, and called Nicapolis, that is, a New towne. It is scituated very pleasantly, and aboundeth with all manner of delights; but it is vnfortified, neither can it by any meanes bee fortified; neither haue the inhabitants any helpe, if they be oppressed by the Enemy, but to fly: for it is scituated in the middle of a valley, betweene two high mountaines, so that a man may fling a stone from the top of one of them into the city. About two bowes shoot without the South gate of this towne is to be seene the Fountaine or Well of Iacob, vpon the brimme of which our Sauiour Christ sate when hee was wearie, as wee may reade in the fourth of Iohn. This Well standeth iust in the way as Pilgrimes trauell to Ierusalem. Vpon the right hand aboue this Well there standeth a mountain of an exceeding height, di∣uided into two tops, the one of them being called Gerizim, the other Heball. In mount Gerizim the Patriarch Ioshuah built an Altar, and the people standing vpon mount Heball, he caused the whole booke of Deuteronomie to be read ouer, with the Blessings and Cursings, so that all the people might heare them; for thus we reade in Ios. 8. The one halfe of the people stood close by Mount Ge∣rizim, and the other by mount Heball, &c. Deuteronom. Chap. 27. These two great mountaines began vpon the right side of the Citie Sichar, and extended themselues in length to the Citie of Iericho. Vpon the left side of this Wel is to be seen the ruins of a great towne, which is thought to be the old Sichem, and by the relicks that remaine there, it may be iudged to haue been a very goodly Citie. For there are yet to bee seene certaine broken Pillars of Marble, as also large and spatious Buildings, which in times past without question haue beene very goodly things, and standeth wonderfull pleasantly; the soile round about it beeing very plea∣sant and fruitfull, onely there is want of water. This Towne lieth some two Bowes shoot from Sichar, and the inhabitants
of that place judge this Sichar to be Thebez, where Abimelech di∣ed, Iudg. 9. Not farre from Iacobs Well, is to be seene that piece of ground which Iacob gaue to Ioseph, more than the rest of his brethren, Gen. 48. It is a long valley, very fruitfull and pleasant, where there lies buried in a certaine faire garden, the bones of Ia∣cob and Ioseph, which were brought out of Aegypt, Iosh. 24. the re∣liques of which sepulchre are yet to be seene. Mount Garizim or Gerizim, is so called from the cutting downe of Trees: for Garaz signifies, To cut downc. Vpon this Mountaine is to be seene (euen to this day) the place where the Temple stood that was built by Sanballath, dedicated to Iupiter Olympius, in contempt of the Tem∣ple of Ierusalem. The chiefe Priest of this Temple was one Ma∣nasses, a fugitiue of the stocke of Leui. This Manasses was brother to Iaddus, chiefe Priest of Ierusalem, of whom you muy reade Ne∣hem. 13. But some two hundred yeares after the first foundation, Iohn Hircanus high Priest of Ierusalem vtterly destroied it to the ground. The Trauels of our Sauiour Christ in the second yeare of his Ministerie; which was the two and thirtieth yeare of his age. IN the moneth of Ianuary, Christ went from Cana in Galile to Nazareth, which was eight miles. Here, vpon the Sabboth day he went into the Sinagogue and began to teach, insomuch as the inhabitants were astonished at his doctrine: but the citizens being ingratefull, he went to Capernaum, a citie which he had chosen to dwell in before all others, Luke 4. Mat. 4. which was 12 miles, or thereabouts. In the moneth of February hee compassed about all Galile, preaching the Gospel of the kingdome of God, healing the sick, and those that were diseased amongst the people, Matth. 4. In this visitation our Sauiour went to Gaesarea Philippi, which was distant from Capernaum fortie eight miles towards the North. Here Matthew was called, as he was at the receipt of Custome;
and the woman was healed of her bloudy issue, Mat. 9. But that Mathew was called about this time, the circumstances of times make euident; for a little after the second Passeouer of our Saui∣or Christ, the same Mathew was chosen to be an Apostle, Luke, 5, 6. Mat. 9. Mark 2. In the moneth of March, the inhabitants of the towns which Christ visited in Galilee, brought vnto him many that were possessed of diuels, and afflicted with other diseases, all which he healed: insomuch that there followed him a great com∣pany out of Galile and Decapolis, and from Ierusalem and Iu∣daea, and of all the countries beyond Iordan, Mat. 4. Thus hauing finishing this visitation, as it may be thought, he returned backe againe to Capernaum, where he dwelt, as I haue shewed before, which was 48 miles; for Caesarea Philippi stood so farre from Capernaum. A little after these things were finished,The second Passeouer of the Ministerie of Christ: was the feast of the Iewes, Iohn 4. and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem, Iohn 5. to celebrate the feast of the Passeouer, which this yeare hapned a little before Haruest, which was 56 miles. This second Passeouer of the Mi∣nistrie of Christ fell vpon the six and twentieth day of March, at which time Christ celebrated the Passeouer with his Disciples according to the Law of God. Here, vpon the Sabboth day, be∣ing the last day of March, he healed a certaine man that lay by the Poole Bethesda, which had bin diseased eight and thirtie yeres, Ioh. 5. And at the end of the Passeouer he went with his Disciples from Ierusalem, through the corne fields: but his Disciples being hungry began to pull the eares of corne, and to eat them; where∣fore the Pharises beeing offended at them, began to reprehend our Sauiour Christ and his Disciples: vpon which followed the disputation concerning the Sabboth, Luke 6. Matth. 12. Vpon the seuenth day of Aprill he went on the Sabboth day to Peraea, which country was in the command of Herod Antipas, and there he healed a man with a dried hand, Luke 6. Marke 3. The country of Peraea beyond Iordan is distant from Ierusalem twen∣tie miles. But when the Herodian Councell heard that he had healed a man on the Sabboth day, they sought occasion how they might doe to put him to death: Wherefore our Sauiour Christ went
thence to the sea of Galile, which was 40 miles. Here he went vp into a mountain not far from Capernaum, and chose the twelue Apostles, Luke 6. Mark 3. And then vpon this mountain he prea∣ched vnto the people, which resorted thither vnto him out of the Countrey round about, whom they heard with great diligence and attendance. This sermon being ended, hee came down from the mountaine, and healed the man that was sicke of the Lepro∣sie. Hee also went into Capernaum and healed the Centurions seruant, Mat. 8. Luke 7. Afterward Christ in the same moneth of April, when the man whom he healed of his leprosie had pub∣lished that Miracle, hee went from Capernaum into the Desart which lay neere vnto Bethsaida; for there was a certaine Desart, Marke 1. Luke 7. In the moneth of May our Sauiour went out of Galile towards Ierusalem, to keep the feast of Penticost; so he came to the gates of the city Naim, which stood on the border of Samaria, and was distant from Capernaum 16 miles. Here he re∣called the widowes sonne to life, Luke 7. And after he went to Ie∣rusalem, which was 48 miles, that he might celebrate the feast of Penticost, according to the law of God, Exo. 23. Thrice euery yeare shall euery male childe appeare before the Lord thy God. This feast fell this yeare vpon the 15 day of May; for it behooued our Sauiour, according to the law, to go euery yere to Ierusalem to these three principall feasts, that is, of the Passeouer, Penticost, and of the Tabernacles. A little after the feast of Penticost, Iohn Baptist (be∣ing then in prison) hauing certaine intelligence of the Miracle that our Sauiour wrought vpon the Widowes sonne at the gates of Naim; and of other wonderfull Miracles that he did in Ieru∣salem, and in other places in Iudaea; sent two of his disciples from the Castle of Macharuntes, to aske him the question, whe∣ther he was the Messia or no? So when they came vnto him and deliuered their message, at that time he cured many of their sick∣nesse and plagues, and euill spirits, and to many blinde men hee gaue sight freely. And Iesus said vnto them, Goe your wayes and tell Iohn what things you haue seene and heard, That the Blinde see, the Halt go, the Lepers are clensed, the Deafe heare, the Dead are raised, and the Poore receiue the Gospell: And blessed is hee that shall not be offen∣ded in me, Mathew 11. Luke 7. At this sermon it was thought hee
conuerted the sinner that washed his feet, & poured a box of pre∣tious oile vpon his head, Luke 7. In the moneth of Iune our Sauior Iesus Christ went with the Twelue about six and fifty miles out of Iudaea into Galilee, and there in diuers Cities and Townes he began to preach and teach the Kingdome of God. At this time there were diuers Women followed him, whom hee had healed of euill Spirits, and of their infirmities; but principally Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seuen Diuels; and Ioan the wife of Chuza, Herods Procurator; and Susanna: All which ministred vnto him of their substance, Luke 8. Now when he had trauelled from place to place some certain time, and visited many cities and towns thereabouts, he returned backe again to the city of Capernaum, where it is said that our Sauior Christ dwelt; and there dispossest the man of a diuel, that was both blind, lame, and dumbe, Mat. 12. Mar. 3. Luke 11. And going thence to the sea he recited 8 Parables, Matth. 13. Marke 4. Luke 8. In the euening of the same day he went six miles into the country of the Gadarens, Mar. 4. Luke 8. The next day betimes in the morning he went out of the ship into the countrey of the Gadarens, and healed two that were possessed of diuels, Matth. 2. Mar. 5. Luk. 8. Out of these two he cast a legion of Diuels, and suffered them to enter into the herd of swine, which they caried headlong into the sea. Presently our Sauiour Christ went thence 6 miles, into the land of Genesareth, where there was a great multitude vpon the sea shore not far from the City of Capernaum, that expected his comming, Mar. 5. Luke 8. Within a few daies after, about the beginning of Iune, hee entred into Capernaum, and there healed the man that lay sick vpon his bed of a dead palsie, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luke 5. after he went to sea, and taught the multitude that came to him, Mar 2. From Capernaum hee went to Caesarea Philippi, 48 miles, where being inuited to a banquet by Mathew, he ate among Pub∣licans and sinners, and confuted the Pharisees and Iohns disciples. In the same city he restored the daughter of Iairus to life, Mat. 9. Marke 2. Luke 5. and as hee went thence, hee restored two men
to their sight, and cast out a Diuell, Mat. 9. About the end of the moneth of Iuly our Sauior Christ went from Cesarea Philippi to Nazareth, 36 miles; where because of the ingratitude and contempt of the citisens he did no great mi∣racles, Mark 6. Mat. 13. In the moneth of August our Sauior Christ went from Naza∣reth toward Ierusalem to the feast of Tabernacles, and as he went visited the towns and cities neere adioyning. Now when he saw that they wanted Teachers, it beeing at this time the second har∣uest, he said vnto his Disciples, Loe the Haruest is great, but the La∣bourers are few, &c. and he sent his Disciples out into the Haruest, Mat. 9. Luke 9. Of this second haruest you may reade, Exod. 23. where God commanded the people that they should obserue the feast of the Tabernacles, when in the end of the yere they had gathered in all the fruits of the fields. Also in Levit. 23. it is thus written, From the fifteenth day of the seuenteenth moneth, when you haue gathered all the fruits of your land, you shall celebrate vnto the Lord your God seuen dayes, &c. From Galile our Sauior Christ came to Ierusalem, 64 miles; where from the 20 to the 27 day of September he celebrated the feast of Tabernacles, according to the Law of God. About the 18 day of Octob: in this yeare, the Practises of Seianus were discoue∣red, and he di∣ed miserably, Tac. lib. 5.The rest of the trauels of our Sauiour Christ, and the miracles that he wrought in these three last moneths of this yeare, viz. in October, Nouember, and December, for their great multitude cannot be described. So the trauels of our Sauiour Christ in the second yeare of his Ministerie were 912 miles. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Caesarea Philippi. THis city is scituated not far from the foot of the mountain Antilibanus, 104 miles from Ierusalem toward the North, close by the two Wells of Iordan, Ior and Dan. Vpon the East side of this Citie these two streames meet, and make the Riuer Iordan.
Philip the Tetrarch of Traconitis called this city after his own name, Philippus; and in honor of the Romane Caesars he added the name of Caesaria; Tiberias at this time beeing Emperour of Rome. In times past it was called Laisch or Lais, which signifies, a rauening or roaring Lion. But the tribe of Dan hauing conque∣red it and rebuilt it again, they called it Dan; and the inhabi∣tants of the Holy land, Laechem Dan, as you may reade in the trauels of the Danits. But this town (as it is reported by such as haue trauelled into the holy land, and by the authority of Vo∣lateran) notwithstanding these names, is often called Belenas. Here (as Eusebius, Zozomenes, and Nicephorus say in their Ecclesi∣asticall histories) the woman that was diseased with the bloudie issue, was healed by touching the hem of our Sauiours garment; which woman in token of thankfulnesse for so great a benefit, and in memory of so notable a miracle, erected in this City, a little without the gates of her house, a stone pillar, on which shee cau∣sed to be set the image of Christ made of brasse; and behind that stood the image of this woman, who had been diseased 12 yeares with the bloudy issue, bowing her self at the feet of our Lord, and touching the hem of his garment. They also say there grew cer∣tain herbs about this pillar, whereby miracles were wrought thir∣ty yeares after it was set vp. But Iulian the Apostata hauing intel∣ligence of these things, caused those images to be broken down, and erected his own in the same place. But soon after there hap∣ned such an exceeding thunder, that fire falling from heauen, strook this image thus set vp by this cruell tyrant, vpon the brest, and cast the head and the necke thereof with great violence vpon the earth. These things hapned in Caesarea Philippi. Vpon the borders of Caesarea Philippi our Sauior Christ asked his Disci∣ples saying, Whom do men say that I am, Mat. 6. Iosep. Ant. li. 20. ca. 6. saith, Agrippa King of the Iewes did much inlarge Caesarea Phi∣lippi, in honor of Nero, and called it after his name Neronia: but it retained not that name long.
Of Peraea. PEraea or Peraia was the vtmost part in the holy land, in which were the Tribes Gad and Reuben, separated from the rest of Iudea by the riuer Iordan, and vnder the subiection and gouerne∣ment of Herod Antipas. It was 16 miles from Ierusalem Eastward, so called of Peran, which signifies, beyond, or vpon the other side, Pli. li. 4. ca. 1. In the castle of Macharuntes, standing in this coun∣try Iohn Baptist was beheaded. Of the sea of Galile. THis sea lay 44 miles from Ierusalem Northward, represen∣ting vpon the bankes a harpe in figure, whence it was called Kinnaereth, that is, the sea of the harp, Num. 34. for Kinnor signifi∣eth an harpe. Toward the North it extendeth it selfe into some bredth, but toward the South it drew into a streight angle, & was called the sea of Galile, because it bordered vpon Galile. It was also called the lake of Genesareth, because of the pleasantnesse and fruitfulnesse of the soile lying vpon the North side of it. It is called (Ioh. 6.) the sea of Tiberias, from the city Tiberias that stood vpon the shore of it. It was but 4 miles and a little more broad, but in length from the North to the South 12 miles. Vp∣on the East side it had the towne Chorazin, and vpon the West Capernaum; and (as Iosephus saith) the water of this sea was very sweet and pleasant, from whence it came to passe that fishes did greatly abound in it, and there were many fishers that liued there∣abouts only by fishing in that sea. There were many other Cities besides those two before mentioned, that stood vpon this Sea; as Bethsaida, Migdala, Tiberias, and Trichaea; these stood vpon the West. Vpon the East stood Iulia and Gadara. Of the holy mountaine neere Capernaum in Galile. ABout a mile from Capernaum toward the Southwest, is to be seene an exceeding high hill, standing vpon the shore of the sea of Galile, beautified with many herbes and floures of di∣uers
kindes, being very fruitfull and pleasant, extending it self in length almost two bowes shoot, and in bredth one. From this hil one might haue seen the whole sea of Galile, the countries of Itu∣ra and Trachonitis, euen to mount Libanus, also the mountaines Sanir and Hermon, and a great part of the vpper and lower Gali∣lee. Heere also the inhabitants of the holy land shew a certaine stone, on which they say our Sauiour Christ did vsually sit when he preached to the people; which stone the Christians cal the ta∣ble: here was that sermon made of the eight Beatitudes, Mat. 5.6.7. Luke 6. Here were the twelue Apostles chosen, Luke 6. Mar. 3. And our Sauiour Christ descending from this mountaine, in the suburbs of the City of Capernaum healed a man that was infe∣cted with the leprosie. About thirty paces from the foot of this hill there ariseth a fountain which is compassed about with a wal, and is thought to be a vein of Nilus, because they finde in it such kind of fishes, the like whereof are not to be found in any other place but Nilus. Io∣sephus calleth this Spring Capernaum, and likewise all the plaine (being very pleasant and fruitfull for the space of a mile, euen vn∣to Iordan) after the same name, because it is subiect to the juris∣diction of that city. About 20 paces from this wall, on the shore of the sea of Galile, there is shewn a place where they say Christ appeared to his seuen Disciples after his resurrection, and asked them whether they had any meat? And about ten paces from that is shewn a place where they say our Sauiours Disciples came to land, and they drew vp in their nets a great draught of fishes, &c. Ioh. 21. Of Naim. NAim signifies Fruitfull and pleasant: it stood 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the North; and typically representeth the condition of this world. For the children of this world liue in all manner of pleasures and delights, neuer thinking of any sorrow til death seiseth on them; but then that ouerturns all, and those delights become loathsome vnto them. Notwithstanding this one comfort wee haue left vs, Hope in Christ Iesus; who as e raised the Widowes son (at the gates of this city) from death
to life, will by his mighty power raise vs againe at the last day, from the bowels of the earth, and make vs partakers with him of an heauenly habitation. It stood in the land of Samaria; and in the tribe of Issacher about two miles off it, vpon the East side, stood mount Tabor; & a little from it vpon the South side stood mount Hermon the lesser; and extended it selfe thence vnto the sea of Galile, 16 miles. Of these two hils you may read, Psal. 89. And about 2 miles from Naim Westward Sunem is to be seene, to which the Prophet Elisaeus sometimes resorted, 2 Reg. 4. Of Gadara. GAdarah or Gederah in Hebrew signifies munition; and som∣times it is taken to compasse about, of Gadar, hee hath hed∣ged or compassed about. S. Ierom saith, in his time (that is, 400 yeares after Christ) this was a very faire city, and stood in a very high mountaine vpon the East side of the sea of Galilee beyond Iordan, in the halfe tribe of Manasses, some 48 miles from Ierusa∣lem Northward, and is to be seene at this day. Strabo, lib. 6. Geogr. saith, that close by Gadara there is a venomous lake, wherof what beast soeuer drinketh, he immediatly loseth his hornes, his hoofs, and his haire; and there are many that thinke this Lake became thus venomous, because of the 2000 swine that were drowned in it, when our Sauior suffered the diuels to enter into them, Mat. 8. Mark. 5. Luke 8. Close by this town stood Gerasa, called also Ger∣gesa, Mat. 8. so named (as some thinke) of Girgasus the son of Ca∣naan, Gen. 10. Of Genesareth. THis was a Countrey bordering vpon the Northwest side of the sea of Galile, from whence this sea was called the Lake of Genesareth, Luke. 5. This land was very pleasant and fruitfull, as if it had bin a Princes Garden, bringing forth faire Apples, Pomegranates, Palmes, Olives, Vines, and diuers other kinds of pleasant Fruits, faire and goodly to the eye, and therefore not without cause was it called the Garden of a Prince; beeing de∣riued
of Gan, which signifies, a Garden; and Sur, a Prince. It is distant from Ierusalem six and fiftie miles towards the North, as you may reade. Matth. 6. & 14. The chiefe cities of this countrey were Capernaum and Bethsaida; of which cities though in for∣mer times they were very faire and large, there are at this day not scarce eight houses to be seene. The Trauels of our Sauiour Christ in the third yeare of his Ministrie, which was the three and thirtieth yeare of his age. FRom Ierusalem our Sauiour Christ returned, some six and fif∣tie miles, into Galile, and in the beginning of this yeare win∣tered in that place: so that (as it may be gathered out of the Euangelists) hee continued there the most part of Ianuarie and February, and now the Spring approaching, a little after the death of Saint Iohn the Baptist (who, as it is thought, was put to death betweene the midst of Winter and the Spring, not long before the feast of the Passeouer; so that hee liued two yeares and a halfe in his Ministrie) hee wrought many notable mi∣racles, not farre from the citie of Bethsaida. The same time the Feast of the Passeouer drawing neere (which was the third Passe∣ouer of his Ministrie) he went thence ouer Iordan and so beyond the sea of Tiberias, Matth. 14. Make 6. Luke 9. At this time the Apostles of Christ being dispersed through all Galile and Iu∣daea, teaching the Gospell of the Kingdome of heauen, hearing of the miserable death of Iohn the Baptist, about the beginning of the Moneth of Aprill returned with all possible speed out of euery part to our Sauiour Christ, that so they might be secure against the tyranny of Herod, Matth. 14. Marke 6. Luke 9. Also the Disciples of Iohn came vnto him and told him of his death and buriall, Matth. 14. Our Sauiour Christ therefore hauing by this meanes certaine intelligence as he was betweene Bethsaida and Tiberias, of the death of S, Iohn Baptist, in the month of April he went into a ship
and passed about foure miles to the further side of the sea of Ga∣lile, where, in a certain desart, he fed fiue thousand men with fiue barley loaues and two fishes, Ioh. 6. From thence he returned backe again to the sea, and so to Ca∣pernaum, which was foure miles: here he made that long sermon of the spirituall eating of his flesh, Mat. 14. Luke 9. Iohn 6. From thence he went to Ierusalem, which was 56 miles, to the feast of the Passeouer, being the third Passeouer of his ministerie. The third Passeouer of the Ministrie of Christ.Vpon the thirteenth day of Aprill being Sunday, according to the Ecclesiasticall computation, Christ (as God commanded) celebrated the third Passeouer of his Ministerie for the space of eight daies in the citie of Ierusalem, that is, till the twentieth day of the same moneth. After the feast of the Passeouer, the Iewes tooke councell how they might put him to death, Ioh. 7. wherfore about the end of A∣pril, he departed thence, & went 56 miles into the land of Galile. In the moneth of May, after the controuersie that hapned con∣cerning the tradition of the Elders (because of the falacies & con∣tentions of the Scribes and Pharises) he departed thence into the borders of Tyrus and Sydon, which was 56 miles, Matth. 15. and there entred into a house, and would faine haue been priuat; but there was a certaine woman that was a Grecian of Syrophoenissa came vnto him and intreated his aide, Marke 7. But our Sauiour hauing a determination to depart from this place, this woman was very importunate that hee would dispos∣sesse her daughter of a diuell; which (because of her importuni∣tie) he did, Mat 15. And after he went thence into the countrey of Trachonitis beyond Iordan, going through the borders of Decapolis, and comming to the Galilean sea, and in the way he healed one that was both blinde and dumbe, Marke 7. and there ascending vp into a mountaine, he cured many that were blinde and lame, and the third day after fed foure thousand with seuen loaues and a few fishes, Mat. 15. So this journey was 64 miles. Afterward in the same moneth of May he went into a ship and passed thence into the parts of Dalmatia, and vpon the borders of Magdala, which was foure miles, hee propounded the signe of the Prophet Ionah to the Pharises and Sadduces, Mat. 15. & 16.
From thence he sailed to Bethsaida, which was 4 miles, & by the way he admonished his Disciples to take heed of the leauen of the Sadduces and Pharises, Mat. 16. and as he was entring into a towne he cured a blinde man of his sight, Marke 8. About the end of the moneth of May Christ went to Ierusa∣lem, which was 56 miles, where vpon the second day of Iune he kept the feast of Penticost, according as God had commanded, Exod. 23. The feast of Penticost being ended, hee returned from Ierusa∣lem into the Countrey of Galile to Capernaum, where he dwelt, which was 56 miles. In the same moneth of Iune he went the second time vnto the borders of the Gentiles, where Peter in the name of all the disci∣ples vpon the confines of Caesarea Philippi, made that notable confession, saying, Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God, Luk. 9. Capernaum is distant from Caesarea Philippi 48 miles. Six, or (as Luke saith) eight daies after, our Sauiour in the mo∣neth of Iune went to the mountain Thabor, which stood 48 miles from Caesarea Philippi towards the Southwest, where hee was transfigured; and the next day after he cured the Lunaticke, and cast out a Diuell, Mat. 7. Marke 9. In the month of Iuly Christ walked into Galile, and there con∣firmed his doctrine with many wonderfull miracles, which did greatly amase his Disciples, where hee put them in minde of the crosse and of his death, Mat. 17. Luke 9. From thence he returned to Capernaum, which was 10 miles from Mount Thabor: at this time Peter went to the Lake of Ge∣nesereth, & there caught a fish, in whose mouth he found a Stater, which was worth ij. s. vi. d. in our money, Mat. 17. Here also our Sauior Christ made a long Sermon, wherein he reprehended the pride and arrogancie of his Disciples, and withall taught the do∣ctrine of the remission of sinnes, Mat. 12. Marke. Luke 9. In the moneth of August he had a full determination to make a journey through Samaria into Iudaea, and so by little and little (visiting the Churches as he went) to go to Ierusalem to the feast of the Tabernacles, Iohn 7. but when he came to Samaria, which was ten miles from Capernaum, the Samaritans would not re∣ceiue
him, because he made as though he would go to Ierusalem; wherefore he turned aside into Galile, Luc. 9. And as he was there visiting the Churches, there came a certaine man vnto him say∣ing, I will follow thee whither soeuer thou goest. But Christ answered him saying, The Foxes haue holes, and the fowles of the heauens haue nests, but the Sonne of man hath not where to hide his head, Matth. 8. And to another Iesus said, Follow thou me. But he answered, Let me first goe and bury my father. There was another also that would haue followed Christ, but he would first goe take his leaue of his friends, Luc. 9. In the month of September, about the time of the second har∣uest, which was next before the feast of the Tabernacles, Leu. 23. Christ began his last visitation throughout all the land of Iudea; at which time he sent forth seuentie of his disciples into Galile, to prepare the way, and so Dispersed labourers into his haruest; saying, The haruest is great, but the labourers are few, Luc. 10. This speech seems to be taken from the present condition of the time for it was now heruest time, it being a little before the vernall Ae∣quinoctiall. About the beginning of October, when the feast of the Taber∣nacles drew neere, the Disciples and those that were of the kin∣dred of our Sauiour according to the flesh, went vp to the Feast, but he remained in Galile, notwithstanding a little after he went priuily vp: now betweene Galile and Ierusalem were accounted 56 miles, Ioh. 7. Vpon the ninth day of October was this feast ce∣lebrated in Ierusalem; and being now half past, our Sauior Christ taught publiquely in the Temple, Ioh. 7. Vpon the fifteenth day of October (it being the last day of the Feast of the Tabernacles, and the Sabboth day, he taught the second time publiquely in the Temple, and so continued preaching and doing miracles in Ieru∣salem vntill the Feast of the Dedication, which was kept about the middle of Winter, Matth. 4. In the Month of Nouember he preached daily in the temple, and at night went to the Mount of Oliues, where he rested, which was aboue halfe a mile from Ierusalem, and euery morning re∣turned backe to the Temple. At this time there came vnto him certaine Scribes and Pharases, who brought a woman which had
beene lately taken in adultery, and said vnto him, Master, what shall we do with this woman, &c. And hee answered, He among you that is without sinne throw the first stone at her, Iohn 8. About this time al∣so were the Sermons concerning the power of the Son of God, and a great disputation between our Sauior and the Iewes, Ioh. 8. for which cause they would haue stoned him. In the Moneth of December Christ wintred in Ierusalem, and recited the parable of the Sheepe, Ioh. 10. Also vpon the Sabboth day a little before the feast of the Dedication, he healed a man that was born blind, Iohn 9. In this feast the Iewes (being angry because he had healed the blind man vpon the Sabboth day) compassed our Sauiour about as he was in Solomons Porch; and when they heard our Sauiour confesse openly, that hee was the Sonne of God, they began to grow into a fury, and for very anger would haue stoned him to death. Wherefore our Sauiour Christ went thence beyond Ior∣dan, and continued there the rest of the Winter, Iohn 10. But before hee went to Ierusalem there were returned vnto him cer∣taine of the seuentie Disciples, which a little before (in the mo∣neth of September) he had sent abroad, and there at that time he recited the similitude of the man, who descending from Ieru∣salem to Iericho, fell amongst theeues. This similitude seemeth to be taken from the present occasion, because our Sauior Christ going from Ierusalem beyond Iordan, was to passe through great wildernesses just in the way as they goe thence to Iericho, Iohn 10. At the same time he went from Ierusalem to Bethania, which was almost two miles, and there visited Mary and Martha, where Martha ministred vnto him, but Mary sitting at his feet gaue dili∣gent heed to his Doctrine, Luke 10. At this time he tooke his leaue of these two sisters, and went thence to Bethabara beyond Iordan, where Iohn baptised, which was 16 miles, it being now about the midst of Winter, Christ at this time being about 33 yeares of age. I am not ignorant that there were many which refer that long journey of our Sauiour Christ when hee went to visit all Iudaea, the sending forth of his Disciples, & diuers other miracles men∣tioned
from the ninth chapter of Luke to the sixteenth, to the be∣ginning of the following yere. But I am of opinion that all those things could not haue beene done within the compasse of foure moneths, and before the feast of the Dedication: so that it must needs bee that the seuentie Disciples were sent forth before the feast of the Dedication; for after the feast of the Dedication (which was celebrated in the midst of Winter, Iohn 10.) there were but two moneths betweene it and the raising vp of Lazarus, in which short time all those things which are described by Luke, could not possibly be accomplished, especially considering that our Sauiour Christ wintered some time in Bethabara, and there taught the multitude that came vnto him, Ioh. 2. So these trauels of our Sauiour were 596 miles, or thereabouts, besides the diuers visitations and journeies hee went hither and thither: which be∣cause of the great multitude of them, it was not possible for the Euangelist to set them downe. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Bethsaida. BEthsaida, signifies the house of hunting: being deriued of Baith a house, and Zaid, hunting, from Zod, he hath hunted: for from this place went the fishers and hunters which fished and hunted through the world, Ierem. 16. In this Towne dwelt three Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and Philip, Iohn 1. It was scituated vpon the West side of the Galilean sea; in the Tribe of Issachar, fiftie six miles from Ierusalem towards the North. And because of the aboundance of Fishes that were in the sea of Galile, Peter and Andrew became Fishers, and in that vocation got their liuing, till our Lord and Sauiour Christ made them Fishers of men, Matt. 4. Luke 5. Before the birth of Christ this was but a small Towne, and without doubt was so called from hunting; because close by it stood a wildernesse that did greatly abound with wilde beasts. Philip the Tetrarch of Traconitis and Itura made this a faire ci∣tie, which in honour of Iulia hee called Iuliades. This Iulia was the daughter of Augustus Caesar, and wife of Tiberias. Philip also brought many inhabitants thither, who dwelt in that Citie.
But when Herod (the Tetrarch of Galile, and brother of this Phi∣lip) had builded vp Bethara, (which stood beyond the riuer Ior∣dan on the East side of the sea of Galilee) and called it by the name of Iuliades, in honour of this Iulia. This towne re-edified and inlarged by Philip, was called againe in the time of our bles∣sed Lord and Sauiour Christ, after the antient name Bethsaida, and so continueth to this day. From hence it is manifest, that the sea of Galile was subject to the gouernment of both these Te∣trachs, since vpon the shore thereof on both sides they had cities standing. I doe thinke the wildernesse or wood and land neere adjoining to Bethsaida, is called Itura, of Ietur the sonne of Ismael, Gen. 25. or else from the compasse and roundnesse of it; for Tur in He∣brew signifies, A circle. But that Itura stood vpon the West side of the sea of Galilee, those that haue beene at the Holy land can testifie. This citie of Bethsaida hath an antient water course comming from a riuer not far from it, which Iosephus calleth little Iordan, which falleth into the sea of Galile, just in the mid-way betweene this towne and Capernaum, the channell whereof appeareth to this day. Beside the many sermons which our Sauior Christ prea∣ched here, he did many notable miracles, Marc. 8. &c. But for the ingratitude and impietie of the citisens the curse of our Sauiour fell vpon them, Woe be thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if the miracles had beene done in Tyrus and Sidon, which haue beene done in thee, they had long ere this repented in sackloth and ashes: Verily, verily I say vnto you, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon in the day of judgement, than for you, Matt. 11. Luc. 10. The prophecie of our Sa∣uiour Christ fell vpon them accordingly; for after diuers and sun∣dry ouerthrowes and deuastations, this towne became vtterly vn∣peopled, and as Britenbacchus saith, there are scarce six houses stan∣ding in it at this day. Of Chorazin. THis city also stands vpon the further side of Iordan, close by the sea of Galile, in the same country as Capernaum stands:
for the city of Chorazin standeth vpon the East side of the riuer Iordan, where it falleth into the sea of Galile; and Capernaum vpon the West, in the halfe tribe of Manasses, some 16 miles from the citie of Ierusalem towards the North. This citie also negle∣cting the preachings and miracles of our Sauiour Christ, felt the efficacie and force of the curse of the Sonne of God, Mat. 11. Luc. 10. For there is not at this day a house to be seene, onely some ru∣ines where it stood. Chorazin doth denote a dukedome or prin∣cipality, from Coh and Razon, a Prince and Duke; for Rozez signi∣fies, A laborious Prince. Ierom turning this word Rozez into Razi, calls it A secret mistery, or my secret. Of Tiberias. TIberias standeth vpon the West side of the sea of Galilee, 48 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. Before the birth of Christ it was called Kinnereth, that is, the city of the Harpe; after which name the lake of Tiberias or sea of Galile is called, Numb. 14. But Herod the Tetrach of Galile (at whose command Iohn the Baptist was beheaded) did beautifie this Citie with many faire buildings and compassed about with strong walls, and after Ti∣berias Caesars name called it Tiberias. He also gathred thither ma∣ny inhabitants, and indowed it with many large priuiledges: for although this place before the restoring of the citie was very fil∣thy and impure, by reason of the dead bodies both of men and beasts, which lay in that place, (from whence it hapned that the Iewes shunned this place as vtterly vnlawfull, and durst not dwel there) yet notwithstanding, Herod with singular industrie and di∣ligence remoued all that filthinesse, and in that very place built vp this Citie both faire and spacious; partly with gifts, partly with faire speeches alluring many Iewes to inhabit therin. Many poore people also built themselues houses at their owne charge, and those that had no children gaue way vnto the liberty of the citie; besides, many rich and noble men were constrained to re∣moue their whole families, and to dwell in this citie, so that in short time it became very well peopled, according to Ios. lib. An∣tiq. 18. cap. 4. & Egisip. lib. 2. cap. 3. Not aboue two miles from Tiberias towards the South, vpon
the shore of the sea of Galile stood Tarachaea, a town wherein Io∣sephus dwelt. Now it hapned that the Citisens of Tiberias vpon some discontent, and as it was thought at the instigation of one Clitus, fell into rebellion; of which Iosephus hauing certaine intel∣ligence, he caused all the gates of Terachaea to be shut, least any man going thence should disclose his intentions, or any comming from Tiberias, should mooue that Citie also to rebellion; and then priuily sent out a command to assemble all the shippes and other vessels that were vpon the sea or lake, euen to the number of 230 ships; all which he caused to be manned only with foure men apiece, and of a sudden sailed towards Tiberias. But when he came within view of the city, so that the citisens from the wall might discern the ships, he left the body of the nauie a good way remote from Tiberias, and tooke only one ship manned with se∣uen men, and went close to the citie of Tiberias, as it seemed to haue had a parley with the citisens: but they seeing such a multi∣tude of ships, and the bold resolution of Iosephus, supposing that they had beene sufficiently manned, and contained a great armie, were greatly affraid, insomuch that they cast away their armes, and came out of the citie with humble petitions to Iosephus, en∣treating him to spare the city, and to take pity of the inhabitants. Notwithstanding hee vtterly refused to shew them any mercie, vnlesse they would deliuer vnto him the Ruler of the citie, which they did: so he settled the affaires of that Towne, and tooke the Ruler thereof with him to Terachaea, where hee committed him to prison. But after, it being certainely found out that one Clitus was the principall author of this rebellion, he sent Leuyn one of his Gard with command to apprehend him and cut off both his hands: of which punishment Clytus being certainly informed, with tears and prayers humbly besought rhis Leuyn that he would spare one of his hands, and he would willingly lose the other; which with much ado was granted him, vpon condition that he would cut off his owne hand: so he tooke his sword and cut off his left hand; which being done, Iosephus returned the captiues to Tiberias and receiued the inhabitants againe into fauour, and euer after retey∣ned it in obedience.
Vespasian also inuaded this citie at such time as he vndertooke his expedition against Ierusalem, as it appeareth in Iosephus lib. de bello Iuda. cap. 16. but the inhabitants fearing his greatnesse, wil∣lingly submitted themselues to his power, and opened him the gates, going forth of the citie to meet him with great humilitie, giuing him and his whole armie entertainment into the citie, re∣ceiuing him with musick and songs, and with great acclamations and shouts; calling him their Sauiour and protector: which kind of courtesies the Emperour tooke very louingly, and in token of thankefulnesse for this kindenesse, hee commanded his souldiers (after they had broken downe a great part of the wall vpon the South side) that they should abstaine from all manner of rapine and violence; so that he continued there peaceably and went away peaceably. This citie to this day (as Borchardus the Monke saith) is a faire towne, scituated to the longitude, vpon the shore of the said sea, there beeing vpon the South side many wholesome bathes and springs; and there are to be seene also many great ruins of decay∣ed buildings. The land also round about is very pleasant and fer∣tile, abounding with Palme trees, Vines, Oliues, and Figs. This city in antient time was scituated in the Tribe of Issachar. Of Tyrus or Zor. THis was the chiefe citie of Phoenicia, distant from Ierusalem 100 miles towards the North. It was first builded by the ci∣tisens of Zidon, (because of a sedition that hapned in that Citie) 240 yeares before the Temple of Solomon, as Iosephus saith, just in the place where at this day the ruins of antient Tyre are to be seene. But after it began to grow famous (which was about such tims as Troy was destroled) King Angenor remoued it to a rocke which stood in the heart of the Mediterranean sea, compassed about therewith like an Island, Ezek. 26. and bestowed great cost in fortifying and building it. It stood round, compassed with strong walls, beautified with goodly buildings, and fairely scitu∣ated for the entertainement of shippes; for which puprose, on euery side there were many safe hauens and harbours made. It
was but a small towne, almost three miles about, and two miles wide: yet the great Mart Towne in those parts, for Merchants resorted thither from all the three parts of the World (Europe, Asia, and Africa) as well for the vttering as buying commodities; and was made so much the more famous, because of the scituati∣on and strength: It stood distant from the land of Phoenicia al∣most two miles; vpon which continent they had obtained a por∣tion of land for the maintenance of the citie, containing 19000 paces in compasse. The citizens also being greatly inriched, be∣cause of their trafficke, built vp many faire cities and townes in more remote parts, which was added to their jurisdiction, as Leptis, Vtica, rnd Carthage, scituated in Africa. They also built Cades, which at this day is called Caliz, as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 19. beeing scituated in a very faire Island in the Mediterranian sea, not far from Hercules pillars; insomuch as the citizens of this towne hauing thus inlarged their command, and increased their substance; In euery place they called themselues Princes, and tooke vpon them to weare scarlet and purple, which colours in that place aboue all other colours, were most artificially dyed: And because of the raritie of them, transported thence into many countries more remote. But because of their extreame arro∣gancie and pride, it was twice conquered and ruinated: First by Nabuchadonozer Emperour of Babylon: and then by Alexander the Great, as it appeareth in Quint. Curtius, lib. in the life of Alex∣ander. Now the occasion that Alexander made warre vpon this Ci∣tie, was because the citizens vpon a time sending vnto him cer∣taine Embassadors with a crowne of gold, in token of friend∣ship, and to congratulate his prosperitie (which he accepted ve∣ry kindely, and gaue them royall entertainment, as to his friends) amongst other things, hee told them that hee would come vn∣to their Citie, and doe sacrifice to their god Hercules (for the kings of the Macedonians are perswaded that they proceed from the off-spring of that god, and beside hee was commanded by an Oracle so to do.) But the Embassadors of Tyre answered, that the Temple of Hercules stood without the citie in Paaetzron, where ancient Tyre stood; so that the King might easily come thither
to doe sacrifice; but Alexander hearing these words, could not containe himselfe, but in a great anger answered, And doe yee proud Citizens put such trust in the strength and scituation of your Citie, that you thinke I am not able to come to it with my Army by land? You shall well perceiue within this short space, that you are scituated vpon the continent, and that I will enter it and sacke it. With these terrible words the Embassadors depar∣ted and shortly after Alexander followed them with a great and mightie army. But when it was knowne that Alexander had vndertaken the sacking of this citie, there were many that thought it almost im∣possible for him to accomplish his designes; first, because of the inconstancie of the windes, and the vehemencie of the water, whereby all such matter as they cast into the sea to joine it to the continent, would be driuen away by the violence of the Water; againe, the city was compassed about with such exceeding high walls, and fortified with such strong towers, that it was not pos∣sible for him to bring any engines to batter them, or fasten any scaling ladders to ascend them, vnlesse it were by ships. Twice Alexander attempted by flinging into the sea mighty trees of Li∣banus, and heapes of the ruines of ancient Tyre to haue made a bridge to it, or else joyne it to the continent, insomuch as the Ty∣rians mocked the Macedonians; saying, What, can your king Alex∣ander conquer Neptune the God of the sea? For the violence of the sea was so extreame, that it carried away all things with it, and oftentimes broke the ships that were joyned together to make a bridge, and drowned the soldiers that besieged and sought against the citie. During this siege, a Citisen of Tyrus dreamt that their Idoll Apollo would depart from them; whereupon they bound the Image of Apollo with a chaine of gold, vnto the pillar where∣on he stood, that he might not leaue them. There hapned also a horrible ostent amongst the Macedonians; for a certaine souldi∣er breaking bread, there fell from it some few drops of bloud; at the hearing of which accident Alexander was greatly amased, vn∣till hee was resolued by one Aristander a very skilfull Prophet, That if it issued from off the outside of the bread, it had betoke∣ned a heauie euent to the Macedoniaes; but in regard that it is∣sued
from the inside of the bread, it foreshewed that hee should forthwith conquer the towne hee had so long besieged: And so it hapned; for when Alexander had besieged the city for the space of seuen moneths, with great difficulty he woon it: but before he could win it he was constrained to vse a great multitude of ships and fasten them together with yron bands, vpon which placing many engines of battery and other offensiue instruments, what with the moouing of the ships and the extreame violence of the batterie, they ouercame the citie. This exploit Alexander per∣formed when he was 25 yeares of age, and about 300 yeares be∣fore Christ. There was one thing that Alexander did during his siege, that was memorable; for before any of his souldiers would attempt to ascend the walls, hee went in person with his crowne vpon his head, and in princely armor, and scaled a high tower of the citie, where he exprest an extraordinary resolution, and by reason of his courage did great hurt to the enemy, who perceiuing him to be the King, resorted to that place in great heaps, and shot at him with all their might; but hee manfully defended himselfe, and compelled the enemy to fly. In this assault there were 6000 of the inhabitants slaine; and after he had entred the wals and sackt the citie, he caused 2000 to be tyed to crosses and throwne into the sea. From whence may be gathered, that God by this young Prince did accomplish this great worke, that the prophecies of the Prophets, Esay 23. Ieremy 43. and Ezekiel 25.26. might be ful∣filled. Afterward Alexander (as Pliny and Strabo obserueth) caused the sea to be filled vp, that it might be no more an Island, and joi∣ned it to the continent; vpon which place he caused Tyrus to be rebuilded, and compassed it about with a wall fiue and twentie foot thicke, strengthned with twelue towers, that it might be suf∣ficiently fortified to oppose the incursion of any enemy; so that it continued safe a long time after, and in the time of our Sauiour Christ was a faire city, though it neuer attaind to the former dig∣nitie and power that it had before Alexander conquered it. The ancient citie of Tyre was distant from this city about foure miles towards the South.
Our Sauiour Christ being in the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, helpt a woman of Canaan, whose daughter had beene cruelly tormented with a Diuell, Matt. 15. In the time of Dioclesian the Emperour, there were many Martyrs put to death in this Citie: And at this time it is called by the name of El porta del zur, that is, the hauen of Zur; as it was in the Old Testament called by the name of Zor. In the yeare 1100, when the holy land was in the hands of the Christians, there was an Archbishop of Tyre, vnder whose gouerment were the Bishops of Ptolomais, Sydon, and Beryti, &c. The holy man Origen lieth buried in this citie: in the Church of the holy Sepulchre, which is compassed about & for∣tified with a mighty strong wall. There also lies buried the Em∣perour Fredericke Barbarosso, who died Anno 1160, after hee had done many valiant acts, and fought many great battels for the Christians against the Turkes and Saracens, being ouercome by Saphadinus the Sultans son, and put to flight, was drowned in the riuer of Suro, to the great griefe of his armie; but he left behind him a famous report. Pope Alexander the third being a great ene∣mie to this Emperour, in S. Maries church in the citie of Venice, when this Prince submitted himself to his Holinesse, set his foot vpon his neck, repeating these words, Thou shalt tread vpon the Aspe and vpon the Basiliske, &c. Eusebius in his Ecclesiasticall Historie saith, that there are yet standing in Tyre certaine Marble pillars, and other precious stones of a wonderfull greatnesse, that it ama∣seth such as behold them; neere to which there haue beene many Christians and Pilgrims put to death by the Saracens. There are also foure wels of wholesome and pleasant water standing not far from it, of which wells you may reade before. Of Zidon. THis also was a city of Phoenicia, scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterranean sea, thirtie six miles from Ierusalem to∣ward the North, and sixteene from Tyrus. In times past it was assigned to the Tribe of Ashur, and lay vpon the borders of the Philistines, neere to Mount Libanus. Being called Sidon or Zi∣don, of Zidon the sonne of Canaan, who first built it, Gen. 10. and
signifies a hunter. It was a notable mart towne, wherein much Sa∣tin was made, which kinde of stuffe was very precious among the Iewes: and it is said, That Ioseph of Arimathia wrapped the body of our Sauior in white Satin, for in Matthew 27. it is called Zadin, which in English is Satin. And as at this day the finest glasse is made at Venice, so the finest glasse in those times was made at Sarepta, a city that belonged to the Sidonians: about which there stood many mines, of which it is 'called Sarepta, as you may reade before. This towne in times past was one of the chiefe cities of Phoe∣nicia, but because of the extraordinarie pride of the citisens, God afflicted them with diuers punishments, & brought in Ocho king of the Persians, who besieged it, and by treason woon it and burnt it to the ground, as Diodorus Siculus lib. 16. saith. The Citisens whereof were driuen to such streights by the enemy, that there perished in the fire aboue fortie thousand men. Within a while after Darius last Emperour of the Persians rebuilt it, but made it nothing so beautifull, neither fortified it in like manner as it was before: hee ordained one Strato to be King thereof, a man proud and arrogant. After, about three hundred and two yeares before the natiuitie of Christ, Alexander being then but 24 yeres of age, hauing ouercome Darius that mighty Emperour of the Persians, at Issa a citie of Cilicia, in a cruell and sharpe warre; he sent Hephestion one of his Princes, to the Sydonians, with authori∣tie to depose Strato, and to let the Citisens vnderstand that they should chuse him for their King, whom they thought most wor∣thy of that honour, as Quint. Curt. sheweth, lib. 4. At this time there was a certaine young man among the followers of Hephe∣stion, in whose behalfe he moued the Citisens that hee might be their King; but they refused, saying, it was not their custome to chuse any to rule ouer them, but such as were of the Kings stocke and progenie. Hephestion hearing this answer, greatly admired their resolution and modestie, especially when they refused to accept him for their King, whom others had sought to obtaine with fire and sword; saying, Truly there is more required to rule and gouerne a Kingdome, than to get it; but yet name one vnto me of royall discent, whom you would willingly receiue to
be your King. So they named vnto him one Abdolomius, who had beene knowne to haue beene of the Kings stocke, by many discents; but because of his pouertie he was constrained to dwell in the suburbs of the Citie in a cottage, and had little else but a Garden to liue vpon. This man howsoeuer poore, and because of that, of many contemned; yet hee was knowne to be honest and of an vpright life, following with all dilligence his vocation, without any regard of other businesse; insomuch as he was vt∣terly ignorant of all these stirre and combustions which had so lately vexed Asia. As he was now in his garden digging and la∣bouring, purging it of weeds, and planting herbes; Hephestion with the rest of the Citizens went vnto him, and brought him the robes and habiliments of a King. The poore Gardner stood ama∣zed to see such a company of gallants come vnto him: but Hephe∣stion told him, That the occasion of their comming was to make an exchange with him of those royall ornaments which he had in his hands, for those poore and foule garments which he wore; therefore goe and wash thy selfe and returne. So he did, where immediately they put vpon him those royall robes, and saluted him as their Soueraigne. Afrer these things were finished, quoth Hephestion, Now remember in what a state thou art, no more Gar∣dener but a King; and therefore take vnto thee the minde and re∣solution of a King, that so thou mayest rule and gouerne this ci∣tie as a man worthy of that honour; and remember, that although the liues and goods of thy subjects are at thy command, yet by them thou wast chosen, neither be forgetfull of him that was the author of thine honour. No sooner was he enthronised in his kingdom, but fame (who is more speedie than a thousand Posts) had dispersed this newes through all the neighbouring cities: some being thereby moued to admiration, and quickned in their studies; others stirred vp to indignation and enuie. Those that were mighty and friends to Alexander, contemned and despised his humilitie and pouertie; and no sooner were they come into his presence, but they began to accuse him for his ignorance: wherefore Alexander comman¦ded that he should come before him, where, after hee had wel viewed the lineaments and proportion of his person, and could
not perceiue it any whit repugnant to the fame of his birth, hee demanded of him how it was possible that hee should endure his pouertie with patience. To which he answered, I pray the gods I may continue the gouernment of this kingdome with the like minde; for these hands were sufficient for me to liue by, and as I had nothing, so I wanted nothing. At which answer Alexander was so well pleased, that he not only gaue him all the princely jewels and ornaments of the first king called Strato, but also a great part of the booty which he tooke from the Emperor of Persia, and ad∣ded to his command all the neighboring countries round about. This history I haue inserted, that thereby we might perceiue the mighty power of God in all his works; that can exalt the poore, contented with his estate, out of the very dust, and can pull the mighty from their thrones. So the Euill carke and care in this world to gather riches for the Vertuous to inherit. But to return to Sidon: This city did so much increase, and grew so famous in succeeding ages, that it was the chiefe town (Tyrus onely excep∣ted) in all Phoenicia, ioyning vpon the West to the Mediterrani∣an sea, extending it selfe towards the North and South, lying in a plain vnder Antilibanus, which mountain lay some two miles off it vpon the East. It oftentimes, because of the pride of the inha∣bitants, felt the wrath and punishing hand of God, as wel by the inuasion of Enemies, as sickenesse and dearth, according to the predictions of the Prophets, Esay 28. and Ezek. 28. vntil at last in succeeding ages it was vtterly destroyed, the ruins of which city remain to this day, and make euident that it was a faire and spati∣ous towne. There is to be seen yet to this day a city built out of the ruines of the former (though nothing so large as it) very strong & migh∣tily fortified, so that it seemeth almost inuincible, if it haue men wherewith to defend it. Vpon the one side it ioyneth to the sea, and vpon the other side of it there standeth two mighty strong ca∣stles, one of them scituated toward the North, vpon a very strong ock as it were in the heart of the sea, the which was built by cer∣ain Pilgrims that came out of Germany to visit the holy city of erusalem. The other of them was scituated vpon a hill toward
the South of the city, as well fortified, and no lesse difficult to be conquered. These two castles with the whole city in times past were in the hands of the Knights templers. The land round about it is very pleasant and fertile, abounding with all kinde of good things necessarie for the maintenance of life and delight. There is also found great aboundance of Grapes which are very delici∣ous and pleasant to the tast, wherof the wine Canamella is made. But because the Turkes and Saracens are inhibited by the strict law of their Alcaron from drinking of wine, therefore they suffer no vineyards to be planted, neither the inhabitants to dresse those Vines that grow naturally. Before the East gate of the antient city which now lies destroied, there is built a Chappel, in which place they say the woman of Canaan entreated our Sauior Christ to cast a Diuell out of her daughter, Mat. 15. The mountain An∣tilibanus beginneth close by the riuer Eleutherius, and extends it selfe beyond Tripolis; and in some places it ioyneth so close to the sea, that for the streightnesse of the wayes those that trauel that way can scarse passe. In this city was the fairest purple in all those parts: nay as some Authors affirme, the like was not to be found in the world, &c. Of Cana Syro-Phoenicea. THis towne, which was called Cana the Great, was scituated vpon the borders of Tyrus and Sydon, 112 miles from Ieru∣salem Northward, scituated in the Tribe of Ashur, 4 miles from Sydon towards the South, and three from Sarepta towards the East. In this towne the Syrophoenician dwelt, that besought our Sauior Christ to heale her daughter that was possessed of a diuel, Mat. 15. Mar. 7. It was called Cana, to put a difference betweene it and another Cana scituated in Galile the lower; in which city our Sauior Christ turned water into wine. You may reade more of this towne before.
Of Trachonitis. THis city was so called from the stony hardnes of the moun∣tains of Gilead which compasse it in vpon the East side: in which prouince the tribe of Gad and the halfe tribe of Manasses inhabited. It was in antient times called Basan; in which Og the mighty Gyant had a great command: but Moses ouercame him, and gaue the land to the tribe of Gad and the half tribe of Manas∣ses. In Christs time the Tetrarch and gouernour of it was Philip, who was son to Herod the Great, and brother to Herod Antipas Te∣trach in Galile and Petraea; which Herod tooke to wife Herodia, whom his brother Philip had formerly maried, the said Philip bee∣ing at that time aliue: but because Iohn Baptist reprehended him for that fact, therefore at her request he was beheaded in the Ca∣stle of Machera. Itura was another Prouince belonging to the tetrarchy of Phi∣lip, ioyning vpon the West to the riuer of Iordan, and called Gali∣le of the Gentiles, of which you may reade before. Of Decapolis. THis country is so called of ten cities that were scituated in it. It stood beyond Iordan and the sea of Galile, as may be gathered out of Mark, ca. 7. and Mat. 15. So that it is manifest that that country which in times past was called Gilead, was af∣terward known and called by the name of Decapolis, because of the ten cities which stood there; as Chorazin which Christ cur∣sed, Mat. 11. Gamala, where Agrippa King of the Iewes was hurt in his right arme, Ios. de bell. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 1. Iuliades, built by He∣rod Antipas in honor of the Empresse Iulia. Gadara, where our Sa∣uior Christ cast out the legion of diuels, suffering them to enter into the herd of swine, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Astaroth, the chiefe citie of that Countrey in the time of Og King of Basan, Ios. cap. 12. Here also that holy man Iob sometimes had his dwelling. Iabes in Gi∣lead, where Saul King of Israel lieth buried, 1 Sam. 31. Mizpah,
where Ieptha offered his daughter for a sacrifice to the Lord, Iudg. 11. Ramoth in Gilead, where King Ahab was slaine with a Dart, 1 Reg. 22. And Abel of the Vines, where Baalams Asse spake, Num. 22. These are those ten cities whereof this country is called De∣capolis; being scituated in the land of Gilead betweene Iordan, where our Sauior healed the man that was both blind and deafe, Mark 7. This opinion exactly agreeth with that of the holy scrip∣ture. Yet I know there are some (as Plin. lib. 5. cap. 18. and others) who differ from this in the description of this countrey, but they erre from the truth. Of Magdala. THis was a city scituated vpon the West side of the Galilean sea, 52 miles from Ierusalem Northward; in which Coun∣try Mary (who of this town was called Magdalen) was borne. At this time this city is called by the name of Castle Magdala; in which place they shew the house of Mary Magdalen. Vpon the West and North side of the city there lieth a great and spatious plain, preserued only for pasture, which Mar. cap. 8. calls Dalma∣nutha, that is, Drawn dry, or a poore and naked habitation; being deriued of Dalal, He hath made dry; and Maon, a House or dwel∣ling place. It may be a notable figure of the Christian Church, which in this world may rightly be said to haue a poore habitati∣on, but yet is a right Magdala, that is, a strong and impregnable Tower, against which the gates of Hell shall not be able to pre∣uaile, Matt. 16. Vpon the borders of Magdala and Dalmanutha, the Pharisees and Sadduces tempting our blessed Sauior Christ, demanded of him a signe from heauen, Mat. 15.16. Mar. 8. This city belonged to the tribe of Issacher. Of Thabor. MOunt Thabor was a round and high hill, vpon which our blessed Sauior Christ was transfigured: scituated vpon the borders of the tribes of Issacher & Zebulon, fifty two miles from the City of Ierusalem towards the North, and extendeth it selfe
toward the South to the riuer Kison. Heere Deborah and Barack discomfited the Host of Sisera King of the Canaanites, and put them to flight, Iug. 4. Of this mountain you may reade, Psal. 89. Hos. 4. Ierem. 45. There was also a towne called after this name, scituated at the foot of this mountaine, where Ziba and Zalmana Kings of the Midianites put to death the brothers of Gideon, Iud∣ges 8. It was a very fruitfull and pleasant place. Concerning the signification of the name you may reade before. Egesippus saith, That this mountaine is almost foure miles in height, and that vp∣on the toppe thereof there is a round Plaine almost three miles ouer, in which there growes great plenty of trees of an admirable pleasantnesse and sweetnesse; amongst which Trees there are ma∣ny birds which sing very pleasantly, to the great delight of all such as heare them: and the aire on the top of it is very pure and pleasant. It is the receiued opinion, that vpon the top of this mountain our Sauiour Christ in the presence of Peter, Iames, and Iohn, was transfigured, and he spake with the holy Prophets Moses and Eli∣as, Mat. 17. Luke 9. which place at this day is compassed about with a great Wall, within which is a faire and pleasant Orchard, watered with many cleare & goodly springs, but there is no man that dwels in it, (notwithstanding there are many townes and in∣habitants at the foot of the mountaine) neither do they thinke any man worthy to dwel in it, they hold it in such estimation, and reuerence it as the Hill of God. There are to be seen in it diuers great ruins of Pallaces, Towers, and princely Edifices; in which at this day there harbour many Lions and other wilde beasts. It is very difficult to ascend vp to the toppe of it, it is so exceeding high: it is one of the principal hils in the holy land, not only be∣cause that Christ on it was transfigured, but because it is verie fruitfull, and plentifully aboundeth with Vines and other profi∣table plants, and herbs. The aire thereof is wholsome and good, and the dew vpon it rising thick and sweet, with indifferent rain; the trees high and faire, greene both Winter and Sommer. At the foot of the mountaine, towards the South neere to Endor, in the way that leadeth from Syria into Aegypt, is shewed the place where (as it is said) Melchisedech met with Abraham, when
he returned from the battell of the foure Kings, Gen. 14. At the foot of the mountaine lying toward the West, iust against Naza∣reth, there is a Chappel built, in the place where they say our Sa∣uior Christ descending from this mountaine, spake to his Disci∣ples saying, Tel none of this vision, Mat. 17. Vpon the East side of it runs the brook Kison, where Barak and Deborah ouercame the Ar∣my of Sisera, Iudg. 4. There is also another hill in the vpper part of Galile, 92 miles from Ierusalem Northward, which hill is also called Thabor, and is three miles distant from Caesarea Philippi Eastward: but that was not the place of Christs Transfiguration. The Trauels of Christ in the fourth yeare of his Ministery, be the foure and thirtieth of his age. IN the moneth of Ianuary Christ the sonne of God wintered in Bethabara, 16 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, where Iohn sometimes baptised, Ioh. 10. And many came vnto him say∣ing, Iohn shewed vs no signes, but whatsoeuer he preached of this Christ are true. And many beleeued on him. Now as Christ went into the Desart to preach, his Disciples came vnto him saying, Lord teach vs to pray, as Iohn taught his Disciples to pray. Wherupon he prescribed to his Disciples a forme of prayer, which is called the Lords prayer, Luke 11. At this time there came vnto him a great multitude, and thronged about him, where hee made that long sermon which is described Luke 12 & 13. Vpon the seuen∣teenth day of Ianuarie, it being then the Sabbath, he cured a cer∣taine woman which had beene diseased 18 yeares, Luke 13. And when there came vnto him certain Pharisees saying, Thou art the Sonne of God, wherefore get thee out of this countrey, for Herod seeks to kill thee: Iesus answered them saying, Goe and tell that crafty Foxe, Behold, I cast out Diuels to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected. Presently he departed out of Petraea,
(where Herod kept his Court in the castle of Macharuntes) and went into Galile beyond Iordan, 28 miles, Luke 13. Vpon the last day of Ianuary being the Sabbath, our Lord and Sauiour Christ healed (in the house of a certaine prince of the Pharisees) a man sicke of the dropsie, and recited the parable of the great Supper, Luke 14. In the moneth of February he went through all Galile, which was 80 miles long, and 24 broad; in which visitation there follo∣wed him a great company. And when there came vnto him Pub∣licans and sinners, he began to speake of repentance: but the Pha∣risees and Scribes murmured at him, and opposed his parables of the lost sheep, of the woman that had lost her groat, & of the pro∣digal son, Luke 15. And a little after he recited vnto his disciples the parable of the vniust Steward, and of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. About the later end of February (as by the circumstance of the historie and times may appeare) he made that sermon of the power of Faith and Good works, &c. Luk. 17. And going out of Galile through the middest of Samaria he healed the ten Lepers, Luk. 17. he recited the parable of the vniust Iudge, and that of the Publican and Pharisee, Luke 18. In the moneth of March hee finished this generall visitation. Which journies were so many & diuers that his disciples could not describe them. Notwithstanding in this moneth he went in∣to the borders of Iudaea and Petraea beyond Iordan, and came to Bethabara where Iohn somtimes baptised, and there followed him a great company, and he healed them, Matth. 19. Mark 10. There the Pharisees moued the disputation of the Diuorce, and Christ louingly embraced the little children, Mar. 20. In this moneth of March Lazarus the brother of Martha and Mary, who dwelt at Be∣thania, fell sicke of a deadly disease, and they sent messengers to Christ, who at this time was at Bethabara, to giue him to vnder∣stand of his sicknesse, Ioh. 11. This message came vnto our Saui∣our Christ to Bethabara vpon the twentieth day of March, being the last day of the twelfth month Adar, Anno Mundi 4000. and about such time as the seuenty weekes spoken of by Daniel were fully ended: At the end of which prophecie it behooued Christ,
that he might fulfil the prophecies of the old Testament) to suf∣fer, and by his resurrection and ascention to enter into the glory of God, and to be partaker of his eternall kingdome. Although our Sauior had receiued this message of the sicke∣nesse of Lazarus, he stayed at Bethabara. Two dayes after, and as it may be thought about the 22 day of March, which was the se∣cond day of the first moneth Ahib, Lazarus died. But Lazarus be∣ing dead and buried, then our Sauiour went from Bethabara to∣wards Iericho, Ioh. 14. Luke 8. and in the way a man came to him and said, Good Master what shall I do that I may inherit eternall life? Christ said vnto him, Go and sell all that thou hast, and giue it vnto the Poore, and thou shalt finde treasure in heauen, and then come and follow me. But because hee was very rich he refused, and went his way. After, he recited the Parable of the Laborers in the vineyard, ma∣king mention of predestination. Also in this journy he reprehen∣ded the sons of Zebedeus for their pride and arrogancie, and fore-telleth his disciples of his death and passion, and in the way hea∣led the blinde man that sate begging, and so entred into Iericho, where he rested all night in the house of Zacheus, Mat. 20. Zacheus signifies Clean. Vpon the 24 of March Christ went from Iericho to Bethania, which was 12 miles. Here he healed Bartimeus the son of Timaeus, Mark 10. (Timaus signifieth Vncleane, of Tame, Hee is defiled) And going a little further hee healed other two, restoring them to sight, Matth. 19. Vpon the 25 of March (being Tuesday) our Sauior Christ came to Bethania, where by the power of his word he raised Lazarus to life after he had bin buried four daies, Io. 11. Lazarus and Eleazer haue both one signification, that is, God is my Helpe. Vpon the 26 day of March, the feast of the Passeouer of the Iews drawing neere, he sent from Bethania to the city of Ephra∣im neere to the desart, that he might auoid the traps and deceits of the Iewes, who went about to take him, Iohn 11. which was ten miles. Vpon the 27 day of March hee returned backe againe from E∣phraim to Bethania (being 10 miles) comming thither about the
euening, six daies before the Passeouer, at which time Martha mi∣nistred to him, & Mary anointed his feet, wherat Iudas grutched, Ioh. 12. Vpon the Sabbath day, being the 28 of March, hee rested in Bethania at the house of Martha. Now as he was at supper with Lazarus, many of the Iewes vnderstanding that he was there, resor∣ted thither, not onely to see him, but Lazarus also whom hee had raised from the dead, Ioh. 12. Vpon the 29 of March Christ sitting vpon an asse went to Ie∣rusalem. Now when the multitude heard that he was come vnto Ierusalem, they went out to meet him, some laying their gar∣ments in the way, others strowing the boughes of trees, where he should go; and those that went before cried saying, Hosanna to the Sonne of Dauid, blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord. At this time our Sauiour Christ wept ouer Ierusalem, and cast out all those that bought and sold in the Temple, Matt. 21. Ioh. cap. 17. About the euening he went out of the city again to Be∣thania, almost two miles, and there rested all night, Mat. 21. So this daies journy was almost foure miles. In the euening of this day the Iewes chose their Paschal lambe, according to the Law, Exod. 12. Vpon the 30 day of March hee went from Bethania to Ierusa∣lem betimes in the morning; in which journy he cursed the Fig-tree that wanted fruit, and after entring into the city, hee cast out of the Temple the mony-changers and Merchants, Mark 11. A∣bout the euening (as may be gathered by circumstance of time) he returned back again to Bethania. This daies journy was foure miles. Vpon the last day of March in the morning Christ went back againe from Bethania to Ierusalem; and by the way as hee went, his Disciples beheld the Figge tree that he had cursed, and loe it it was dried vp, Mar. 11. After, when he was in the Temple, there came certaine Pharisees vnto him and disputed with him. At which time he recited the Parable of the mariage of the Kings daughter. Also certaine Scribes and Pharisees came vnto him as∣king him whether it was lawfull to pay tribute vnto Caesar, Matth. 21.22. He also sharply rebuked the Scribes and Pharisees, and
recited the Simile of the Hen and her Chickens, Mat. 23. After that, he went to the mount of Olives, almost a mile. And then his Disciples looking vpon the goodly building of the temple, from thence he tooke occasion to preach of the destruction of Ierusa∣lem, & the consummation of the world; so he stayd al that night in the mount of Oliues, Mat. 24. Vpon the first day of Aprill being Wednesday, our Sauiour Christ rising before day, taught again in the Temple; and after as he was going to Bethania, he said to his Disciples, Know yee that within these two daies is the feast of the Passouer, and the Son of man shall be deliuered tnto the hands of sinners, and crucified. At the same time the chiefe Priests assembled themselues together, and took coun∣sell how they might do to take him by deceit, Mat. 26. The same day as our Sauiour Christ was in the house of Simon the Leper, (whom he had healed of that sicknesse) there came a woman and brought a box of pretious ointment and poured it vpon his head, at which the Disciples murmured, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 21. The 4. Passeo∣uer of the Mi∣nistry of ChristVpon Turseday being the second day of Aprill, the dayes of the feast of the Passeouer being now at hand, Christ with his dis∣ciples prepared for the eating of the Paschal Lambe; which was the fourth Passeouer of our Sauiour, and when about the eue∣ning of this day it was necessarie for them to keepe the Paschall Lambe, and to prepare the Passeouer according to Gods Law; Christ sent Peter and Iohn to make ready the Supper, and he with the rest of his Disciples about euening went from Bethania to∣ward Ierusalem, iust at the beginning of the 14 day of the 1 mo∣neth Abib or Nisan, which began about the euening of this day. Here he celebrated his last supper among his Disciples, between six and seuen of the clock in the euening; at which time he cele∣brated the sacrament of the Lords supper, concerning the true re∣ceiuing of his body and bloud: of which you may read, Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. Afterward about the eight houre he washed his Disciples feet, and then leaning vpon the table, hee pointed out Iudas that should betray him, Iohn ca. 13. From the ninth houre to the tenth houre, about the second Watch of the night, Iudas that Traitor went from his Disciples, Ioh. 13. In the
mean time Christ made that long sermon recited onely by Iohn, 14.15.16. and made that effectual prayer, Iohn 17. About the 10 houre (after they had sung a Psalme) Christ went ouer the brooke Cedron, to the garden of Gethsamene, being somwhat more than halfe a mile. There between the hours of 11 and 12, he sweat wa∣ter and bloud, and prayed earnestly. About 12 of the clock, it be∣ing then midnight, Christ was betraied by Iudas, who about three daies before had sold him for thirty siluerlings, which was worth about 3 li. 15 s. From Gethsamene the Iews brought him bound to Ierusalem being more than halfe a mile: and about one of the clocke in the morning caried him to the house of Annas who was one of the chiefe priests. About two of the clock they led him from thence to Caiaphas chiefe Priest. From three of the clock till 4, (which was about cocks crowing) Peter denied Christ. At the same time Caiaphas and all the Priests of Ierusalem would haue condemned the Lord of Glory the son of God. At the same time also the ser∣uants and Officers of the Priests beat him and mocked him. A∣bout fiue of the clock in the morning Christ was condemned by the whole consent of the Synedrion of the Iewes, Luke 22. All these things Christ suffered between Thursday and Friday. And whereas the Iewes according to the commandement of God be∣gin their day in the euening, therefore that night wherin our Sa∣uiour Christ suffered all these things, belonged vnto the 14 day of the moneth Abib. So that iust at the same time as the Feast of the Paschal Lambe was celebrated amongst the Iewes, Christ the true Lambe of God was made a liuing sacrifice on the Crosse for the sinnes of man. Thus as we haue obserued the houres of the night, so likewise let vs obserue the houres of the day. Friday being the third day of Aprill (which as I haue said be∣gan the euening before) was the fourteenth day of the first mo∣neth Abib or Nisan among the Iewes. At six of the clock in the morning, about Sunne rising of the same day, our Sauiour Iesus Christ was brought vnto Pilat, and Iudas Iscariot hanged him∣selfe, because he had betrayed the innocent bloud. About seuen
of the clock in the same morning our Sauior Christ was carried to Herod Antipas, that cruell Tyrant who the yeare before had put Iohn Baptist to death: here he was daisdainfully handled. At 8 of the clocke our Sauior Christ returned to Pilat, who propounded vnto the Iewes (because they were to haue a capital offender deli∣uered vnto them at the feast of the Passouer) whether they would haue Iesus their King, or Barabas who had beene a murtherer, let loose vnto them? But they condemned Iesus and chose Barabas, which name signifies, The sonne of the multitude, or a seditious man. About 9 of the clock in the morning (which the Iews com∣monly called the third houre of the day, because it succeeded the morning, and continued till noon) our Sauiour Christ was whipt and crowned with thornes. About ten of the clock Pontius Pilat, in the place called Gabbatha publikely condemned Christ to be crucified, and washed his hands in token of innocencie. Pontius signifies cruell and inhumane; Pilat, a man armed with a Roman dart, Mart. lib. 10. Ioh. 19. Between ten and 11, our Savior Christ carying his crosse, was brought to the place called Golgotha. A∣bout 11 of the clock (the third houre of the morning beeing not yet fully finished) our Sauior Christ was fastned vpon the crosse, Mark 13. He therefore hung 4 hours vpon the crosse, that is, from about 11 of the clocke, till about three in the afternoon. And he spake before that supernatural Eclipse of the Sun three memora∣ble sayings: First, Father forgiue them, for they know not what they doe, Luke 19. Secondly he said to his mother, Woman behold thy Sonne: And to Iohn being conuerted, Behold thy mother. Thirdly, to the Theefe, Verily I say vnto thee, this day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. About twelue of the clock (in that meridian which the Iewes call the sixt houre, that is, the sixt houre from the rising of the Sunne) that supernatural Eclipse of the Sunne happened, of which you may reade in Dionysius the Areopagite, and Eusebius. About three of the clock in the afternoone, which the Iewes call the ninth houre (the Sunne now beginning to receiue his light) our Sauiour Christ spake these foure sayings, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me? Matth. 27. I thirst, Ioh. 19. When he
had taken the Sponge he said, It is finished, Ioh. 19. And after, cry∣ing out with a loud voice he said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and so died. At which time there were many wonderfull miracles wrought, as you may read Mat. 27. Mark 15. Luk. 23. Ioh. 19. About foure of clock in the afternoone our blessed Sauiour was pierced through with a Lance, and there issued out of his side bloud and water, Ioh. 19. About fiue of the clock, which the Iews call the eleuenth houre of the day, our Sauior Christ was buried by Ioseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. About the sixt houre there fell an eclipse of the Moone, which was naturall and not miracu∣lous, neither is it obserued by any of the Euangelists. Vpon the fifteenth day of the first month, which answereth to the 4 of Aprill (beeing iustly called the great and holy Sabbath of the Iewes, for that Christ this day rested in the Sepulchre) the Priests & Pharisees being partly ioyful because, as they thought, the disturber of the common peace & one that opposed their au∣thority was dead; and partly carefull how they might preuent his resurrection, went to Pilat, and obtained of him a band of soldiers to watch the sepulchre, and to put his seale vpon the stone. Vpon the fift day of Aprill early in the morning, our Sauiour Christ hauing ouercome death and the diuel, by his diuine power raised him self vp from the dead, according as he had foretold his disciples, and appeared to Mary Magdalen, Ioh. 20. and to other women that touched his feet, Mat. 28. About noone he appeared to Simon Peter, Luk. 24. 1 Cor. 15. In the afternoone hee trauelled with two of his disciples almost 8 miles, to the castle of Emaus, Luke 24. One of these disciples was Cleopas the brother of Ioseph, who brought vp our Sauiour Christ. The other, as may be gathe∣red by the circumstance of the story, was Luke, because hee hath set it down so exactly. In the euening of the same day he returned inuisibly from E∣maus to Ierusalem, 8 miles, where when the doores were all shut, and his disciples were assembled together for feare of the Iewes, Iesus came and stood in the midst of them and said, Peace be vnto you. And he shewed himselfe to all his Disciples except Thomas.
Mark calleth this the first day of the Sabbath, that is, of the week, Mark 16. Luke 24. Ioh. 20. for the Sabbath of the Iewes (as Iosep. witnesseth) is not onely taken for a day of rest, but also for the whole weeke: from whence is that saying in the Gospel, Iejuniobis in Sabbato, i. I fast twice in the weeke, Luke 18. Vpon the 12 day of April, and eight daies after his resurrecti∣on, he appeared again to dis disciples, Thomas being then present and the dores shut; that hee might make euident that his Omni∣potencie was not tied to any secondary causes, or hindered by the property of any natural bodies, which according to S. Austin. Ser. 160. was so much the more wonderful, because hee appeared vnto them substantially and effectually, not as a Phantasma or Sha∣dow which vanisheth away, and is without any corporiall sub∣stance. In the same moneth of Aprill our Sauiour Christ appeared a∣gain to Peter, Thomas, Nathaniel, the sons of Zebedeus, and other two Disciples, as they were fishing vpon the shore of Tiberias, which stood 56 miles from Ierusalem Northward, betweene Bethsaida and Capernaum, Ioh. 21. The day of this apparition is not set downe. From the sea of Tiberias neere to Capernaum and Bethsaida, to mount Thabor scituated in Galile, is reckoned 10 miles: there about the end of April our Sauior Christ appeared to aboue 500 brethren at once, where many worshipped him, & others doub∣ted, Mat. 28. 1 Cor. 15. In the month of May our Sauior Christ ap∣peared to Iames the son of Alpheus, for he had been seen before of Iames the sonne of Zebedeus: both which were after crowned with martyrdom in the city Ierusalem; the son of Zebedeus vpon the 25 day of Iuly, ten yeares after the resurrection; and the sonne of Alpheus vpon the feast day of the Passeouer was throwne from a Pinnacle of the Temple, 29 yeares after the resurrection of our Sauior. Vpon the 40 day after his resurrection hee returned fiftie sixe miles to Ierusalem, where his disciples were assembled together: and vpon the fourteenth day of May, in the sight of all the Apo∣stles,
with great triumph and ioy he ascended vp into heauen, and sitteth at the right hand of his father in diuine majestie and glory Mar. & Luk. vlt. Act. 1. Psal. 28. Ephes. 1. 1 Pet. 3. Heb. 1. So these Trauels of our Sauior Christ were 319 miles. But if you reckon his trauels from the time of his infancie to the day of his ascenti∣on, they make 3093 miles. Besides his generall Visitations and journies hither and thither, which were so many, that as Iohn wit∣nesseth, cap. vlt. they could not be described. ¶ Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Iericho. THis city stood very pleasantly in the tribe of Benjamin, ten miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. Ioshuah ouercame this towne by sounding of trumpets, Ios. 6. Heb. 11. it was rebuilt by Hiel, and was compassed about with a new wall by Herod, that mighty King of the Iews, who put the innocent children to death and called it after his mothers name Cyprus, Ios. de Bell. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 16. And although this city was taken and vtterly ouerthrown the second time by the Romans, at such time as Vespasian and his son Titus wasted and destroied Ierusalem and all the land of Iu∣daea; yet afterward it was re-edified, and in Ieroms time which was 400 yeares after Christ, it was a faire city. There was shewn the house of Zacheus, and the Sycomore tree that he went vpon to see Christ, Luk. 19. But by reason of the often destructions and deua∣stations that hath fallen vpon it, there is not to be seen at this day aboue eight houses in the towne, and all the monuments and Re∣liques of the holy places are vtterly destroyed, the house of Za∣cheus and the Sicomore tree are no more to be seen in that place: only the place is to be seen where our Sauiour restored the blind man to sight when hee cried after him, Lord thou Sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon mee, Luke Chap. 18. Also though this Coun∣trey throughout be very fruitfull and pleasant, yet is it nothing so fertile and pleasant as it was when the Children of Israel did dwell there. For the Roses of Iericho are no more to bee found there, but rather in a Village about sixteen miles from Iordan to∣wards the East. And although they stand so farre distant off, yet
they retain their antient name. Between Ierusalem and Iericho there is a desart or wildernes, which by the inhabitants of the ho∣ly land is called Quarentena, where the man of which Christ speaketh fell among theeues, Luk. 10. There is in the same place at this day great theeuing, and many roberies committed, as Brit∣tenbacchus saith. In this place also is to be seen the riuer Chereth where the Rauens fed Eliah, 1 Reg. 17. Neere to Iericho also is found the riuer, the water whereof Elizaeus made sweet by casting in salt, whereas before it was bitter; and it remaines very pleasant and sweet to this day, 2 Reg. 2. Of Ephraim. THis city is so called from the pleasantnesse and fruitfulnes of the soile, being deriued from Parah, To fructifie. It lieth 8 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward, iust in the way as you go from thence to Iericho, in the wildernesse of Quarentena, close by the riuer Chereth in the tribe of Benjamin. Heere our Sauiour Christ, after he had raised Lazarus from death to life, hid himself with his disciples, because the Iewes sought to take away his life by deceit. The Passeouer following, he was made a sacrifice for the sin of man, Ioh. 11. Of Bethania. THis city was a type of the Church, which is alwaies subject to the Crosse, and exposed to euery calamitie; and therefore is called Bethania, that is, The house of sorrow and affliction: be∣ing deriued of Baith, an House; and Oni, Affliction. According to the prophecie of our Sauiour, who foretold of the afflictions and tribulations that should fall vpon his Church, You shall mourn, but you shall be comforted, and your griefe shall be turned into ioy. It was di∣stant from Ierusalem almost two miles towards the South-East. Borchardus the Monke obserueth, That close by a Well about a stones cast out of this Towne, there is shewed the place where Martha met our Sauiour Christ when he came to Bethania, and a little after called her sister to meet him, Iohn cap. 11. There is al∣so shewne in this Towne the house of Simon the Leper, where  certaine woman hauing an Alabaster boxe of pretious Ointment
poured it on our Sauiors head, not without the great indignation of his Disciples, Matth. 26. There is also to be seene the house of Martha, to which our Sauiour did oftentimes resort, Luk. 10. Ioh. 11. & 12. and in that place there is at this day a Church built in honour of those two sisters, which were the sisters of Lazarus. There is also seen the sepulchre out of which Lazarus was raised from death to life, Ioh. 11. which stands close by the said Church, and ouer it is built a chappell of Marble, very decent and come∣ly. The Saracens hold this Chappell in great estimation. You cannot see the citie of Ierusalem from Bethania because of the mount of Oliues, but as soon as you ascend a little hill in the way as you got hence to Ierusalem, you may discerne mount Sion and a part of the city: then when you are discended from that hill, the citie is againe hidden. After that vpon the left side of the mount of Oliues, some stones cast from Bethpage, you doe leaue a small village standing vnder the mountaine of Offence, where Solomon in times past committed Idolatry. From this village the Asse and the Colt was brought vnto Christ. Not farre from thence, vpon the South side as you goe vpon the Mount of Oliues, you come vnto the place where Christ mounted vpon the Asse, as we reade, Matth. 21. And a little after you may see the whole citie of Ieru∣salem, with Solomons Temple, and the Church of the holy sepul∣chre, with many other holy places. Then as you descend from the top of the mount of Oliues, you may see the place where the multitude cryed, Hosanna, blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord. And in this discent also our Sauiour Christ wept ouer Ierusalem, saying, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, how often would I haue ga∣thered thee vnder my wings as a Hen gathereth her Chickens, but thou wouldest not? Of Bethpage. BEthpage standeth vpon the right hand of the way towards the East, as you goe from Bethania to Ierusalem; and as S. Ierom saith was somtimes a habitation of the Priests, which at their ap∣pointed times went vp to Ierusalem to minister to the Lord. It was so called because of the multitude of Figs that grow there:
for Pagim signifies a Figge, Cant. 2. Bethpage is a notable type of the Church, for that ought likewise to be fruitfull, and to bring forth sweet Figges, that is, good workes, and many other comfor∣table vertues, that so men in their afflictions might be comfor∣ted. As it is thought, the Fig-tree that our Sauiour Christ cursed because it wanted fruit, stood not farre from Bethpage, Matth. 21. Marke 11. Wherefore let vs take heed that wee be not like that fruitlesse Fig-tree, couered onely (like our forefathers Adam and Eue) with leaues, and bearing no fruit, Gen. 3. lest so Gods curse fall vpon vs, and we be thrust out of eternall happinesse, Matth. 3. Of the Castle from whence the Asse and the Colt were brought vpon which our Sauiour rode to Ierusalem. THis Castle (as Adamus Risnerus saith) was a certaine Hold compassed about with strong walls, and within beautified with a faire pallace, supported with goodly columnes: it stood not farre from the Mount of Oliues, just in the deuiding of the way as you goe from Bethania to Ierusalem; for there goes one way to the fountaine gate, and another to the valley of Gehinnon. In the Hebrew text it is called Tirah, as you may reade in Mat∣thew, which signifies not onely a Castle, but a firme and sure buil∣ding, with good decorum and order: for Tor signifies a circular or∣der. It is credible that this Hold is a resting place, and that the Asse and the colt were tied in the way, for this cause, that if by chance any trauellers were wearie (by reason of the tediousnesse of their journey) they might hire them for certain houres to car∣rie them ouer the Mount of Oliues, and so returne them backe a∣gaine. The Allegoricall meaning of this Asse and the Colt, ac∣cording to the opinion of many learned men, signifies the peo∣ple of the Iewes, who were burthened with Moses lawes: and the Asses Colt signifies the rest of the Gentiles, which were not char∣ged with the burthen of Moses law, but tyed onely to the law of nature. So we also like trauellers and strangers in this miserable world, are tyed to the afflictions and calamities thereof, standing in two waies, expecting the death of the body, and libertie of
the soule; then our Sauior Christ commeth in peace and looseth this bond of death, (as the Apostle saith, Rom. 7.) and bringeth vs to that heauenly Ierusalem, eternall joy, according to that of Saint Paul in the first of the Philippians, I desire to be loosed and to be with our Lord Iesus Christ. Of the Mount of Oliues. ABout halfe a mile and a furlong from Ierusalem towards the East, stood the Mount of Oliues, very fruitfull and pleasant, bringing forth Oliues, Palmes, Figs, Gossumpine, & many other notable fruits, but principally Palmes and Oliues, of which the mountaine taketh the name. It is said in Pliny, lib. 16. cap. 19. that these Oliue and Palme trees doe neuer lose their leaues, and are greene both Winter and Summer. Saint Austine calleth it, The mountaine of vnction, because of the fertilitie and pleasantnesse of it: also, The mountaine of health, because it bringeth forth Oyles and many other plants necessarie for Physicke: also, The mountain of light; first, because it lieth vpon the East, so that the Sun shi∣neth in the morning very pleasantly vpon it, and in the euening when it setteth, the beames thereof reflecting vpon the Temple of Ierusalem, casteth a beautifull light to this Mount: secondly, because it bringeth forth Oyle, which is the nourishment and life of light: thirdly, because it was beautified with the gratious pre∣sence of our blessed Lord and Sauiour Christ, which is the Day-starre and light of the Church, rising vpon high to enlighten all those which shall be called vnto eternall happinesse. For which cause it typically representeth the Church, which is the light of the World, wherein are found many Christians that bring forth pleasant fruit, (good workes) relieuing the necessitie of such as are in want, comforting the afflicted, & patiently supporting the calamitie and misery of this world, that so they might trium∣phantly rejoyce with Christ in that heauenly citie of Ierusalem. What things Zacharias hath spoken of this Mount in his last chapter, is to be vnderstood of the preaching of the Gospell, and propagation of the Church through all the world. Saint Ierom
saith in his Epitaph vpon S. Paul, That vpon this hill the Iewes commonly burnt the red Cow, with the ashes whereof the peo∣ple of God being sprinckled, they were purified and sanctified, of which you may reade, Num. 19. Heb. 6. Hellen the Empresse, mother to that godly Emperor Constantine the Great, about the yeare of our Lord 332, caused a faire and beautifull church to be built vpon this Mount, just in the place where our blessed Lord and Sauior Christ ascended vp into hea∣uen. It was built round, all of white polished marble: vpon the top therof there is no roofe, but a window euen as Christ should ascend through it, as Eusebius saith in the life of the Emperour Constantine the Great, lib. 3. cap. 40. The same S. Ierom affirmeth, in his booke de locis Hebraicis. He also saith, That the inhabitants of the Holy land take vpon them to shew in this Church, the im∣pression of the feet of our Sauiour Christ, which hapned as they say, just at such time as he ascended vp into heauen: out of which, trauellers and pilgrims take sand to carry with them as an holy relicke, though indeed it is verily to be thought, that they were feet made in stone by antient Monkes, thereby to get mony from such as resorted thither vpon deuotion; for looke how oft pil∣grims take thence the sand, they are presenly filled againe: from whence may bee gathered, that there is no sand naturally there. Euery man therefore ought to embrace a neerer way to saluation, than to follow those monkish fables; and to seeke Christ in the holy Scripture, not vpon the Mount of Oliues, or amongst sand: for since the graue could not containe him, the Mount of Oliues cannot hold him, who now sitteth at the right hand of his father, in power and eternall glory: but rather if wee be desirous to see the footsteps of Christ, let vs seeke them in the Church, which is disperst through the world; wherein wee are sufficiently taught how we should follow him. The Palme is a famous tree which bringeth forth Dates; and is so called because vpon the top the boughes are thicke and round, extending out like fingers; from whence it is called Dacty∣lus, that is, a finger.
Of Gethsamene. THis was a village scituated at the foot of the mount of O∣liues, in a pleasant and fruitfull place. Neere vnto this vil∣lage, as Saint Augustine obserueth there were many pleasant gar∣dens which gaue forth very sweet and delectable sauors; vnto which place Christ and his Disciples did oftentimes resort, as the Euangelist Luke cap. 22. obserueth. It was so called from the pres∣sing forth of oyle; for Gathor Geth, signifies, a Presse, and Schaemen, Oyle. In this place the heart of our Sauiour Christ was so prest with affliction that he sweat drops of bloud: By which bloud the sinnes of our soules are washed away, and wee that are wounded are made whole, as with a most precious balsome, Isa. 53. Hellen the Empresse, in an Orchard close by this towne, set vp a faire and beautifull Church, ouer the sepulchre of the Virgin Mary; which she called by the name of the mother of God, Ni∣ceph. lib. 2. cap. 30. It is said that this sepulchre remaineth to this day in this Church, made of white polished Marble, standing a∣bout eight and fortie steps vnder ground, being something wider than the sepulchre of Christ: in it there is two doors, one to goe in, another to goe out. But whither this be the right sepulchre of the blessed Virgin, it concerneth vs not, sith it appertaineth not to our saluation, neither is mentioned in the holy Scriptures: but if any man be desirous to be further satisfied in it, let him reade Nicephorus, who makes mention of that and her ascension, both in my opinion of like credit; because, I suppose, that Saint Luke (who wrote the Acts of the Apostles, and liued in those times) would not haue omitted so memorable an action. But to returne to the Garden of Gethsamene. About some fiftie paces towards the East of this sepulchre of the blessed Virgin, close by the foot of the mount of Oliues, stands a certain chappell, just in the place where sometimes the towne of Gethsemane stood. Not far from this chappell is showne a certaine hollow place vnder a rocke, where the inhabitants say our Sauiour sweat drops of bloud. They also shew a certaine stone whereon the Angels stood which comforted our Sauiour. Discending thence about a stones cast,
they shew vnto Pilgrims a place close by the caue in the Mount of Oliues, where Peter, Iames, and Iohn, sate when our Sauiour was in his agonie. They also shew the place where Peter cut off Mal∣chas eare. There is to be seene a memorable place where Iudas betraied our Sauiour with a kisse, when he deliuered him to the Iewes. Not farre off is to be seene the place where the Iewes fell backeward when our Sauiour askt them, Whom seeke yee? Besides many other things (if Borchardus may be credited) as the impres∣sion of his haire and head vpon a stone; and of his finger, as if it had beene in wax, vpon a rocke: and in the place where he pray∣ed, of his hands and knees, which are so firme in stone that they cannot be defaced with any instrument. But there haue beene many in this place since these times, which haue seene none of these things: from whence may be gathered, that they haue been idle delusions vsed by ancient monkes to get money from Pil∣grims and strangers; and I haue here remembred them, that o∣thers knowing these, may beware of the like fallacies and deceits purposely inuented for lucres sake. This garden of Gethsamene is credibly thought to haue been planted in former times, by the Kings, Dauid and Solomon; but in∣creased & inlarged by other succeeding Princes, that there they might recreate themselues, & receiue some content by the fruits of the earth. But on the contrary, that great King the annointed of the Lord, our blessed Sauiour, in this place of pleasure, this paradise of the Iewes, was constrained to vndergoe that almost vnsupportable passion, to make vs partakers of that heauenly pa∣radise and place of pleasure. Not far from hence is to bee seene the place where Iudas han∣ged himselfe: and a little from that, the field of Akeldoma, which was bought with the thirtie Siluerlings for which Iudas betraied Christ. This field (by the appointment of the Empresse Hellen) was compassed about with foure walls, in the maner of a tower: vpon the top whereof there are seuen distinct doores, like win∣dowes, by which the dead bodies of Christians are let downe in∣to it: it is fiftie foot wide, and seuentie two long. It standeth not farre from the valley of Hinnon towards the East, and vpon the South side of Mount Sion in Ierusalem, &c.
Of Kidron or Cedron. THis brooke was so called because of the blacknesse of the water, being deriued of Kadar, To wax blacke. The Moun∣taine whence it first riseth, stands not farre from Ierusalem towards the South; from whence it runneth through the valley of Iehosaphat (which vally being very fat and fertile, changeth the colour of the water, and makes it looke blacke) and so through Ierusalem; then passing towards the East ouer a cliffe of Mount Oliuet, it falleth into the Lake of Asphaltites. When there falls any store of raine the channell is very full, but in Summer it is of∣tentimes dry with the extremitie of heat. Ouer this brooke Da∣uid passed when he was persecuted by his sonne Absolon, 2 Sam. 16. and our Sauiour Christ when he dranke of the Riuer in the way, that is, when he suffered vpon the crosse for the sinne of man, according to that saying of the Psalmist, Psal. 69. Saue me, O God, because the waters are entred euen into my soule. Of Mount Caluarie. THis Mountaine, according to the common opinion, was so called of dead mens skuls, or the skuls of such who were put to death for some capitall offence. It stood vpon the West side of Ierusalem as you goe out of the ancient Gate, and is a part of Mount Gihon. At this day it standeth within the city of Ierusalem together with the sepulchre of our Sauiour: and vp∣on it is built a faire Church, which is joyned vnto the Church of the holy Sepulchre, being as it were a Quire vnto it: But it stan∣deth somewhat lower. It is built all of Marble, and the inside is all polished and wrought very curiously. It is also paued with the same stone. Within it, is seen a piece of the pillar of stone, to which they say Christ was tyed when he was whipped: in which stone are to be seene certaine red spects, as if they had been drops of bloud; and these also (they say) were the bloud of Christ when he was scourged; besides many other things, of which you may reade at the beginning of this treatise in the description of Ieru∣salem as it is at this day.
The Description of the holy Sepulchre. THe Sepulchre of Christ stood vpon the West side of Ieru∣salem, close by Mount Golgatha, in the garden of Ioseph of Arimathea: for it was the custome of the Iewes to build their tombs or sepulchres, in their Orchards and Gardens; and beautifie and adorne them with Lillies, Roses and other floures, on purpose to put them in minde of their mortalitie, according to that of Dauid, Psal. 103, The daies of man are like grasse, as a floure of the field so flourisheth he: for the winde goeth ouer it and is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. And for this cause the Iewes, but especially the kings, would be buried in their gardens: so Io∣seph, a good and just man, following this custome, had hewed him out of a rocke a new monument, in which there had been no man laid; that so when he walked into the Garden to take the aire, he might be put in mind of his mortalitie. In this monument our Sauiour Christ was buried: And from this place vpon the third day early in the morning, he rose; to the terrour and astonishment of such as watched the sepulchre. From whence may be gathe∣red, That as our first parents, Adam and Eue, trespassed against God, and lost felicitie in a garden; so Christ the Sonne of God in a Garden made satisfaction for that sinne; restored vs againe to grace, and make vs capable of heauenly felicitie. This sepulchre (as it is described by S. Iohn, when he went with S. Peter, to see of that notable miracle of the resurrection were true) was like a little chappel, the doore thereof being vpon the outside, & was but one roome without any diuision, so that a man might see all that was within it: for he saith, Ioh. 20. That he did not goe in, but lookt in, and saw the linnen clothes were they lay wrapped vp: from whence may be concluded, that the sepulchre which is now ex∣tant (howsoeuer perhaps it may stand in the same place) is not the same sepulchre wherein our Sauiour Christ was buried: for it is described to be four square, to be open at the top, to haue with∣in it two vaults (an inward and an outward) and that you discend to it by staires, as you may reade at the beginning of this treatise; which description doth not agree with that of S. Iohns. Again S. Iohn saith, that they rolled a great stone to the doore of the sepul∣chre,
did not lay it vpon the top of it. Also Eusebius and Nicepho∣rus affirme, that the Pagans and other heathen people filled vp the Sepulchre of Christ with earth, and built vp in the place the Temple of Venus, and in it put her image, where shee was wor∣shipped a long time after, vntill such time as that godly Empe∣resse Hellen caused that Temple to be abolished, and the sepul∣chre clensed and purified. Afterwards at her instigation, Con∣stantine the Great (who was her sonne) built vp in the very same place a faire and goodly Church in memory of our Sauiour, and bestowed great cost both in the workemanship, and in beauti∣fying it with gold and siluer. This Temple (as it was before it was destroied by the Saracens) is said to be built all of white po∣lished marble, and beautified with stones of diuers colours, guilt with gold and siluer, couered on the outside with lead to with∣stand the stormes and showers of raine that happened; but the inside was guilt all with splendant and refulgent gold, which cast a wonderfull lustre vpon the beholders. On either side of it were two walking galleries, one aboue, which was close; and another below, which was open; extending themselues the length of the sanctuarie; all the roofe and vault being couered ouer with gold and artificiall worke: the one being supported with pillars of Marble, the other with posts of wood plaited with siluer. There were also three gates towards the East, very fitly and fairely dis∣posed, by which the multitude that resorted thither, go in & out: within these, there stood an arch, representing after a sort the He∣misphaere of the Heauens, extended to the top of the sanctuary like a circle, girded about with twelue pillars of equall bignesse, representing the twelue Apostles, and vpon the top of this arch were placed cups of siluer, beautifully burnished. All which the said Emperour dedicated to God for a monument. There were many other memorable things that did belong to this Temple, which were admirable to looke on, all which as you came vp the high street from the market place, were presented to your view; a stately sight, the like whereof those parts did not affoord. This temple was built by the Emperor Constantine, Anno Dom. 333. Venerable Bead; who was a Dr of Diuinity, and liued in England 700 yeares after Christ, describeth the holy sepulchre
after this manner: This Sepulchre ouer head was something round, & so high that a man could scarce touch it with his hand; standing in that rocke which extendeth it selfe from mount Cal∣uarie into the Garden of Ioseph of Arimathea: representing in forme, a little chappell; the entrance thereinto was towards the East. And further hee addeth, that they which went into this vaile, found on the right hand towards the North, a stone tombe which resembled a coffin, scituated in the pauement, joyning to the wall; which stone coffin was of a mixt colour, that is, white and red, being seuen foot long, and three handfulls high. This de∣scription venerable Bede receiued from certaine Monkes, that went vpon deuotion to Ierusalem to visit this Sepulchre: but since, it hath beene diuers times destroied and polluted by the Turkes and other heathen people. From whence may be gathe∣red, that the Sepulchre which is now standing and shewed vnto Pilgrims, is some new deuice of Monkes to get money of stran∣gers, and procure a kind of blind deuotion in the hearts of igno∣rant people; wherefore as the Angell said, Marke 16. Let vs not seeke Christ any longer amongst the dead, or in the graue, but in his holy Church, where the liuely pourtraiture of his diuine pre∣sence is set forth vnto vs: that so we may be made partakers with him hereafter in that place of eternall glorie. Concerning the residue of this description you may see it before. Of Emmaus. THis citie or castle of Emmaus, is distant from Ierusalem al∣most eight miles towards the Northwest. It signifies the mo∣ther of fortitude; being deriued of Em, a mother; and Vtz, which the Hebrewes call Fortitude. It stood where three seuerall waies were, that so it might serue for a direction to passengers. From whence Melancton saith that it was a notable type of the Church, which is our true mother, shewing vs the way vnto eternall life. And although it be but little, and the number in it few, yet it is strong. As the castle, though it were small, yet it is almost inuin∣cible; and for that cause called The mother of strength, as the Church is called The mother of the righteous, against which the gates of hell shall not be able to preuaile.
In the time of Iudas Macchabeus (though it was then a small city) it was numbred amongst the greatest cities of Iuda, because of the scituation and strength of it. To this place our Sauiour trauelled from Ierusalem the same day that hee arose from the dead, Luke 24. In the time of the Romans warres in Iudaea, this city was won∣derfully defaced and ruined by the souldiers of Tiberius Maxi∣mus (who was chiefe Captaine in this countrey, in the absence of Titus Vespasian,) but yet not vtterly abolished; for about a hun∣dred and fiftie yeares after, Heliogabolus Emperour of Rome cau∣sed it to be rebuilded, and called by the name of Nicopolis, that is, the citie of Victorie. Not farre from Emmaus there was an Inne, or a place to which strangers might resort, and there three waies met; two went of either side the towne, and one through it: in this place the two Disciples constrained our blessed Sauiour to stay with them, because it was then about Sunne-set. Neere vnto this Inne Nicephorus and Zozemenus say (in their Ecclesiasticall Hi∣storie) there was a Spring or Well of that admirable vertue, that if either man or beast that was infirme or sicke did drinke of the water thereof, they were immediately restored to their former health. The reason that these Authors haue for it (because they are impertinent) I willingly omit. But to return ro the city of Emmaus, as it is now called Nico∣polis, being scituated eight miles from Ierusalem towards the Northeast, in the way as you goe thence to Ioppa: the countrey round about it being very fertile and pleasant, by reason of the riuers and springs wherewith it is watered, as Pliny saith, l. 5. c. 14. and much altered from that which it was in times past: but be∣cause you may reade more of this city in Pliny, as it is at this day, and in Nicephorus and Eusebius, I leaue to speake further of it. Of Simon of Cyrene. THis Simon which carried the Crosse of our Sauiour Christ, was born in Kir, a city in Africa, scituated 16 miles from Ie∣rusalem towards the West, Matth. 27. Luke 23. In which city Tig∣lath
Phulasser Emperour of the Assirians planted many of the in∣habitants of Damascus, after he had conquered that city, 2 Reg. 16. This citie and the country round about it, by reason of these new inhabitants, by little and little changed the name: and wher∣as in former times it was called Kir, in the time of our Sauiour it was commonly called Cyrene, and this man (of that countrey) Simon of Cyrene. At this day it is a strong and beautifull city, sci∣tuated betweene Mareotides and Zeugitania: at first built by Bat∣tus, whom Callimachus the Poët claimeth to be his progenitor. This Battus was a mighty king in Africa, but was one that had a great impediment in his speech, insomuch that many thinke this word  to haue beene originally vsed by him, and by none other. Afterward (as is said) Tiglah Phulasser hauing obtained the jurisdiction of this citie, planted the people of Damascus in it: and they obtaining some power there, continued till a long time after Christ, and imbraced the religion of the Iewes, built vp Sy∣nagogues, and dispersed that law in many parts of those quar∣ters. There were some of this countrey that opposed that holy Marter Stephen, and were consenting to his death. There were many learned men in it, as Eratosthenes the Mathematician, Cal∣limachus the Poët (both which were had in great estimation a∣mong the Aegyptians) Carneades also the Academian, Cronus Apollonius, and Hegesias the Philosopher (of whom Cicero speaketh in the fifth book of his Tusculans) and Eratosthenes the Histori∣an, who was sonne of Agaclis. Salust saith, that this citie in his time was so mightie, that it maintained war against the Cartha∣ginians for their bounds and limits of their fields and grounds, a long time; and Iustine lib. 39. That they maintained warre against two nations, the Phoenes, and the Aegyptians: in which warres they gaue Aprius, the King of the Aegyptians, such a mighty ouerthrow, that there were very few of his army that returned into his countrey with him, as Horodot affirmeth, lib. 4. there were also many great Princes that ruled in this city, of which because you may reade in diuers other Authors more at large, I omit to speake of them.
Of Ioseph of Arimathea who buried Christ. THis Ioseph which caused our Sauior Christ to be buried in his garden, was a rich man, vpright & just in all his actions, a Se∣nator of Ierusalem, and one that expected the Kingdome of God, borne at Arimathea a citie of the Iewes, Luc. 23. This citie was sometime called Ramathaim Sophim, and sometime Ramah, be∣cause it was scituated in a high place, and in times past was a fair citie standing 16 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest, the description whereof you may reade before. At this day it is called Ramalea; being nothing so farre as it was, but like a coun∣trey towne, the houses being carelessely dispersed here and there, lying without walls or bulwarkes to defend it; notwithstanding, the ancient ruins of the former city is to be seen euen at this day. There is also a great Inne or resting place for strangers, hauing within it many roomes for the receit of passengers, and a well of very sweet water. This house was first purchased at the charge of Philip Duke of Burgondie, and by him committed to the pro∣tection of the Monkes of Mount Sion, by whom it is at this day made an hospitall, wherein pilgrims, trauellers, and strangers are entertained and find much reliefe. In an inward Orchard belon∣ging to this hospital, there is a faire plot of ground that bringeth forth great aboundance of Aloes, of which there is often mention in the holy Scriptures, but more especially in Psalme 48. Thy gar∣ments smell of Aloes and Cassia, when thou commest out of thy Iuorie pallaces, where they haue made thee glad. Nichodemus a Prince of the Iewes, together with Ioseph of Ari∣mathea, brought with them an hundred pound of Aloes mixed with Myrrhe, to embalme the body of our Sauiour Christ, when they had begged it of Pilat, before they buried it, Ioh. 19. Myrrh is a kind of gum that issueth out of a tree that growes in the East countries, but principally in Arabia: the tree out of which it is∣sueth is commonly two yards and a halfe high, with some pricks vpon it, the barke whereof being cut, there issueth out of it drops like teares, which congealeth into a gum, and is called Mirrh: the principall vertue that it hath, is to keepe the bodies of the Dead
incorruptable, see Pli. li. 12. ca. 15. & 16. In Arabia Foelix there is such abundance of sweet Myrrhe, Frankincense, and other odori∣ferous gums, that such as saile in the Red sea may easily smell the sauour of them. There is also found in the holy Land Myrrhe and Aloes. Aloes is the juyce of a certaine bitter herbe, which by some is called Euerliuing: it killeth the wormes, and preserueth from putrifaction; it is also good for the sight. There is to be ga∣thered in India, Arabia, and the Holy land, a certaine herbe of an extraordinary sweet smell, with leaues broad, fat and juicie, which being prest yeeldeth more Aloes than honey; from whence this metaphoricall prouerbe is vsed, Quod plus molestiae quam voluptatis gignit, that is, more troublesome than profitable. You may reade also in Plautus, that the life of man tasteth more of Aloes than ho∣ney. And Iuvenal speaking of an euill wife, saith, she hath more of Aloes than honey. So Euripides, Euery sweet hath his sowre. So also the holy Crosse seemeth to haue more of Aloes than hony, notwithstanding it preserueth vs from eternall corruption, and killeth the venomous worms of conscience, clenseth vs from our sinnes, and freeth vs from the feare of the Diuel & eternall death, that so we might be recreated, and by the faith of our Sauiour be raised vp at the last day, and pertake with him in his euerlasting kingdome: according to that of Iohannes Taulerus, Where the crosse, there the light; where temptation, there prayer and regeneration, &c. The Trauels of Peter. IN the 35 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, about the moneth of Ianuary, and a little before the conuersion of the Apostle Paul; Peter and Iohn were sent from Ierusalem to Samaria, which was 32 miles, that the Samaritans might receiue that admirable gift of the Holy-Ghost, and there they disputed with Simon Ma∣g, Acts 8. From Samaria they returned backe again to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles. In this journey they went to diuers townes of the
Samaritans, teaching and preaching vnto them the doctrine of the Gospell, Acts 8. In the sixt yere after the resurrection of Christ, Peter went to Lidda, which was distant from Ierusalem twentie miles towards the Northeast; where he cured Aeneas, who had lien sicke eight yeares of the Palsie vpon his bed, Acts 9. From thence hee went to Ioppa, which was three miles: here he raised Tabitha from death, Acts 9. In the seuenth yeare after the resurrection of Christ, Peter went from Ioppa and came to Caesarea Strato, which was six and thir∣tie miles: where hee preached the Gospell to Cornelius the Cen∣turion, and baptised him and his whole familie, Acts 10. Clemens Recogn. lib. 9. From Caesarea he returned to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles; where being accused for going to the Gentiles, hee excused him∣selfe, Acts 11. In the eleuenth yeare after the resurrection of Christ, hee was cast into prison, and set at libertie by an Angell of God, Acts 12. So he went secretly from Ierusalem (as it was thought) into the desart, or to some other vnknowne place: vpon the second day of August in the same yeare, Herod Agrippa King of the Iewes was strucke by an Angell of God at Caesarea, and he was deuoured of wormes, Acts 12. Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 4. After, Herod Agrippa being dead and buried, Peter returned to Ierusalem, where hee was in Councell with the rest of the Apo∣stles, about sixteene yeares after the resurrection of Christ, and fourteene after the conuersion of Paul, Gal. 2. Acts 15. See also Bede vpon the Acts of the Apostles. In the seuenteenth yeare after the resurrection of Christ, Peter went from Ierusalem and came to Antiochia in Syria, which journey was 280 miles: there Paul resisted him, Gal. 2. From Antiochia hee went to Babylon in Aegypt, where hee wrote his first Epistle: this journey was 520 miles. So all his Tra∣uels which are mentioned in the Scripture were 955 miles.
Allegations of the Author to proue that Peter was neuer at Rome. BVt that Peter was twenty fiue yeares seuen moneths and fiue daies Bishop and chiefe Priest at Rome, cannot be proued by the testimony of the Scripture, and is vtterly repugnant to the supputation and true accompt of the times. First, because it is manifest by that which hath beene said, that he continued at Ierusalem and in Iudaea during the time that Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius were Emperours of Rome. And shortly after the martyrdome of Steuen, hee and Iohn were sent into Samaria, that the Samaritans might also receiue the gift of the holy Ghost, Act. 8. Paul also in the third yere after his conuersion, came to Ie∣rusalem, and there spoke with Peter, and remained with him fif∣teene daies, Act. 9. Gal. 1. Fourteene daies after the conuersion of Paul, Peter was at the Apostolicall councell held in Ierusalem; and there, with Iames and Iohn gaue the right hand of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, that they should goe and preach the Gospell vnto the Gentiles; and that hee and the rest would goe vnto the Iewes & those that were circumcised, Gal. 2. In the time of Clau∣dius Caesar, Peter was committed to prison by Herod Agrippa in Ierusalem, and miraculously deliuered by the Angell of God, Act. 10. In the ninth yeare of Claudius Caesar, Peter was at Antio∣chia in Syria, where Paul resisted him to his face, Gal. 2. All these things manifestly proue that the Apostle Peter was not at Rome at such time as any of these three, viz. Tiberius, Caligula and Clau∣dius were Emperors; but either in Ierusalem, or else at Antiochla in Syria. Secondly, it may axactly bee made euident out of the holy, Scriptures, that Peter was not at Rome in the time of Nero. For in the second yeare of Nero, Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, and sent it from Corinth by the hand of Phebe: in which Epistle he saluted all his friends which he had in that citie, by name, as by the conclusion of the Epistle more plainely appeareth; but there is no mention of the Apostle Peter, who (if that at time Bi∣shop
of that place) surely should not haue bin omitted. Also in the fift yeare of Nero, Paul being then in prison at Rome, wrot his Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and to Philemon; and in the conclusion of these Epistles he expressely nameth all his friends that he had in Rome, yet makes no menti∣on of Peter. And when he was the second time in prison vnder Ne∣ro, in the last yeare of the reigne of this Emperour, hee wrot from Rome his second Epistle to Timothy, beeing a little before his death, at the end of which Epistle he plainly shewes that he had no companion there but Luke, 2 Tim. 4. From whence it is mani∣fest, that Peter during all the pilgrimage and life of Paul, was ne∣uer at Rome: how then can it possible be, that Peter should be bi∣shop of Rome for the space of almost 26 yeares? Truly there are many learned men, and they also of great iudgement, which hold this opinion false, and vtterly repugnant to holy Scripture, nei∣ther can be proued by any good Authors or histories. But if Peter were euer at Rome, hee came thither after the last imprisonment of Paul, and a few daies before his martyrdom. Because (as Onu∣phrius saith, in Comment. fast. lib. 2. also Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 22. and Ter∣tul. cont. Marcion.) Peter and Paul in the 35 yeare after the resurre∣ction of Christ, and vpon the third day of the Calends of Iuly (C. Fonteius Capitonius & C. Iulius Rufus being then Consuls of Rome) were crowned with the Wreath of martyrdome, and with their bloud sealed the truth of the Gospel. But there are others of opi∣nion that Peter neuer came at Rome, but that he was crucified at Ierusalem by King Agrippa's command; others say at Babylon. But because it is a thing doubtfull, and not greatly materiall, I leaue it to the Readers consideration. ¶ Of the Townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Samaria. BEcause I haue before briefly intreated of the beginning and foundation of this city, I shal not need here againe to repeat it. I will now therefore shew the end of it, which was principally caused by the obstinacie of the inhabitants: who refusing the do∣ctrine
and prophecy of Elias and Elizeus, imbraced and followed strange gods, and offered incense vnto idols; whereby the wrath of God was kindled against them, insomuch that hee left this goodly city as a prey to the Gentiles and forreine nations, that carried the people thereof into captiuitie, where for a long time they remained in great miserie. After the first desolation, because the countrey round about this citie was very fertile and pleasant, abounding with springs, riuers, vines, oliue gardens, mountaines, fruitfull valleyes, faire cities, and strong castles and townes; Herod Ascalonites (that great King of the Iewes, who put to death the innocent children) ree∣dified it, set vp many goodly buildings beautified with marble pillars and pleasant walkes: and also in the circuit of the Kings house, and vnder the buildings of the nobilitie in the common Market place, the houses and vaults were supported with marble pillars, according to the maner of the Iewes. The pallace (callled the K. house, stood in the midst of the citie, vpon the top of the mountain: and round about it there were diuers other buildings set vp, but much lower, euen about the descent of the mountaine; yet so scituated, that the inhabitants might see out of their hou∣ses the country round about. Then close to the pallace in the vp∣per part of the citie, he caused a temple to be built in honor of Au∣gustus. Thus hauing finished the inside, he compast it about with a mighty wall, and vpon that placed many turrets: & then to flat∣ter Augustus, called it by the name of Sebasten, which among the Grecians signifies Augustum & venerabile principem: now although this citie was very glorious and spatious in those times (for it was three miles about) yet at this day it is vtterly ruined & destroied, insomuch, that there is not a house standing, two Churches only excepted, which were built in honour of S. Iohn Baptist: and the chief of these, which was the Cathedrall Church, the Saracens haue conuerted to their vse, so that at this day Mahomet is wor∣shipt in it. In this stood the Sepulchre of S. Iohn Baptist, cut out in marble, like the sepulchre of Christ, where (as Hierom saith) he lieth buried between Elisha & Obediah the Prophets. This church stands vpon the side of the mountaine, in the descent. The Saracens do principally reuerence S. Iohn Baptist next af∣ter
Christ, and they affirm the virgin Mary to haue conceiued by the holy Spirit, and not by the seed of man: That S. Iohn was the greatest prophet (except Christ) that euer was. They also beleeue Christ to be the son of God, but not to be equall with God. Yet they prefer Mahomet before both, because they hold him a mes∣senger sent of God, not vnto all men, but onely vnto the Saracens and Turks, and their subiects. The other Church which stood in Samaria, was vpon the top of the mountain which somtimes the Kings palace stood. In this Church in times past there dwelt certain Grecian Monks, which were Christians, and entertained Christian Pilgrims with great humanitie, and furnished them with many necessaries. But the city of Samaria it selfe hath bin so often ouerthrown, and brought to such extreme miserie, that almost all the ground where it stood is at this time conuerted into an Olive garden. So that as that wicked King Ahab turned the Vineyard of Naboth which stood close by his house, into an olive garden; so God in his singular justice hath turned the palace of that King, & the whole city wherein he dwelt, which was the strength of his kingdome, into an olive garden. There are not so many ruins found through all the land of Iudaea (though there haue bin many worthy cities destroyed) as are in this place at this day. The scituation of this city was very beautifull, for a man might haue seen from it to the sea of Ioppa and Antipatris; also to Caesarea Palestina, & thorow al the mountain of Ephraim, to Ramatha Sophim, & so to mount Carmel and the city of Ptolomais. Of Lidda. THis city was scituated not far from Ioppa, vpon the shore of the Mediterranian sea, 20 miles from Ierusalem Northwest∣ward. In this city Peter healed Aeneas, who had bin sick 8 years of the palsie. At this day there is nothing to be seen but the Church of S. George, who was beheaded by the Emperour Dioclesian, for professing the Christian faith. The Grecians call this town Dio∣spolis, i. an holy Town. And the Turks account S. George for a va∣liant Knight and holy man.
Of Caesarea Strato. THis city was scituated vpon the shore of the Mediterranian sea, some 32 miles from Ierusalem Northward: in antient time it was called Strato, being first built by Strato King of Sy∣don. But time hauing decayed a great part of it, Herod Ascalonita repaired it, and made it a goodly thing, calling it Caesarea, after the name of Augustus Caesar. And that ships might lie at anchor there without danger, he caused to be builded a fair hauen to op∣pose the violence of the sea. This hauen was so wonderfully con∣triued, and set vp at such a great charge, that it was admirable to looke vpon; for he laid the foundation of it twenty yards vnder water, burying in the Deepe stones of an extraordinarie great∣nesse, some fifty foot long, eight foot thicke, and ten foot broad, and many of them more. The Hauen it selfe was beautified with faire buildings and goodly Walkes, supported with marble Pil∣lars, and mounted vp aloft, so that you might see the ships as they were vpon the sea, and made way to this harbor. The entrance in∣to it was vpon the North, at the mouth thereof there stood three mighty Colosses vpon marble pillars. Hee also placed vpon the wall of the City towards the Hauen mighty Towers, the chie∣fest and fairest of which he dedicated to Drusus, Augustus his son in law, and called it by the name of the Drusian tower. The buil∣dings that ioyned to this Hauen were all of white polished mar∣ble, and the streets of the City were directly towards it. Also the Market-place where they bought and sold was not farre from it. Vpon a little hill close by this Port he caused a Church to be built in honour of Augustus Caesar. This Temple was a very mag∣nificent and stately building, and in it hee caused the Statue of Augustus (curiously wrought and cast iust in the figure of Iupi∣ter Olympius) to be erected, and worshipped it as his god. There are many other stately and sumptuous buildings that were set vp by this King. But amongst the rest, he bestowed great cost vp∣on the market place, the Theatre, and the Amphitheatre, which hee wonderfully beautified, and instituted certaine Games to be there vsed once euery fifth yeare in honour of Augustus, as
Iosep. de Bell. Iud. li. 1. witnesseth. After the death of this king, He∣rod Agrippa was made King of the Iewes. This Prince some ten yeares after the resurrection of Christ caused Iames the son of Ze∣bedeus vpon the 25 day of Iuly to be put to death in Ierusalem; and when he perceiued it was acceptable vnto the Iews, in the fol∣lowing yeare about the feast of the Passeouer hee caused Peter to be cast into prison; who by the prayers of the Church was mira∣culously deliuered, as you may reade Acts 12. A little after, that is, about the moneth of August, this King was strook by the An∣gel of the Lord, and died miserably: for when he came to Caesa∣rea Strato he caused the publique shewes to be solemnly practi∣sed, and in honor of Claudius Caesar set forth very sumptuous inter∣ludes and playes; to which feast and shewes all the Nobility and Gentry of that countrey round about resorted. Where the next day very early in the morning, hauing put on a rich and goodly garment made all of cloath of gold, he went into the theatre, and there according to his vsuall custome sate in a princely seat, and made an oration to the inhabitants of Tyre. Now when the sunne was vp and shone vpon his garments, the raies thereof cast such a reflection vpon the beholders, that it dazled their eies, insomuch that they could scarce see. Wherefore those that were his flatte∣rers, hearing his gratious speech, cried with a loud voice, O Agrip∣pa be propitious vnto vs; for although heretofore we feared thee as a man, yet now we well perceiue thou art of a more noble and Diuine nature. But when the King (taking delight in these speeches) would not re∣strain the impious clamour of these flatterers, a little after he lif∣ted vp his head, and vpon the top of a pillar he saw an Owle sitting ouer him. Presently he was troubled in his minde, and within a while after hee was strooke with an extreme paine in his bowels, insomuch that with a loud voice he cried out vnto his friends, I whom but now was called your god, am but a man; and him that you ima∣gined to be immortall, must presently die. These words being ended, they caried him sick into his palace, and it was giuen out that he was dead. No sooner came this newes to the eares of the vulgar, but they with their wiues and children put on sack-cloath, and fell vpon
the ground with earnest supplications to God to bee mercifull vnto him. But the King looking out of his window and seeing them lie thus prostrate vpon the earth, wailing and weeping, he could not abstain from teares. At the length after he had beene cruelly tormented by the space of foure dayes, vpon the fift dyed, beeing the second of August, the wormes hauing consumed his guts, and eaten through his body. Thus God grieuously punished him, who had so much afflicted the members of the Church of Christ: but towards other men, as well strangers as Gentiles, hee was milde and courteous. He raigned in the whole almost seuen yeares; for he held the Tetrarchy of Philip three yeares vnder Ca∣ligula, and other foure yeares he held the whole kingdome of the Iewes. He died in the eleuenth yeare after the resurrection, and in the third of Claudius Caesar, being then about 54 yeres of age, Act. 22. Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 19. Plinie saith that this towne of Caesaria Strato, was sometime called Apollonia, but after obtained the name of Caesarea Pale∣stina. Saint Ierome saith in his Epitaph vpon Paul, that in his time (which was 400 yeares after Christ) there was to be seene in this place the house of Cornelius the Centurion, whom Peter baptized, Act. 10. (This Cornelius is thought by some to haue been of the family of the Lentuli in Rome, for they were also called Corne∣lij, as appeareth in Salust in the conspiracy of Cataline: & it may be that this Cornelius was that Lentulus which wrot to Tiberius Cae∣sar that excellent Epistle, concerning the figure, proportion, and person of our Lord and Sauior Iesus Christ.) Also the house of Philip the deacon, and the chambers of his foure daughters who were Prophetesses. When Paul came vnto this towne, Agabus the Prophet came vnto him, who bound his hands and feet with the girdle of Paul, saying, The man that oweth this girdle shal be thus bound by the Iewes at Ierusalem, and they shall deliuer him into the hands of the Gentiles. Here he made a notable sermon before Festus, Agrippa Iu∣nior, and his sister Bernice, Act. 16. This towne flourished for a long time after the destruction of Ierusalem, and it was scituated in a faire and profitable place, fortified towards the West with the Mediterranean sea, and
towards the East it was compassed about with a lake, in which were great aboundance of Crocodiles, though the water was very sweet, and of a great depth. Many godly and religious men were here crowned with the wreath of martyrdome, for professing the Gospel of Christ, as Eusebius Bishop of this town and of Pamphi∣lius well obserueth in his Eccles. Hist. But the Lord did so sharply reuenge the death of these men, that at this day it is vtterly de∣stroied, and there is not a house left, though in times past it had been a Bishops See. There was also another town built by Philip the Tetrarch, called Caesarea Philippi, whereof you may reade before. Of Ioppa. COncerning this towne I haue already shewed many things in the Trauels of Ionas, but omitted some, specified by Britten∣bach and Dr Ranwolfe, who haue described the holy land as it was in the yeare of our Lord 1575. which Authors affirme that there is seen a great chain of iron fastned to a certain rock, to the which ships that lay in that harbor were somtimes tied. Also the chain wherewith Andromeda was fast bound to a stone, when she should haue bin deuoured of the sea monster. Also they say that there is a Chappell at this day built vp in the place where sometime the house of Simon the Tanner stood, who gaue entertainment to Pe∣ter, standing by a rock close by the sea side, and dedicated to saint Peter. But for the rest of the town (although formerly it hath bin a goodly city) it is vtterly destroied, nothing standing but a part of the wall, & two castles vpon the hauen to defend such as come thither with ships, from the injuries & incursions of Pagans and Saracens. Of Babylon in Egypt. BAbylon signifieth Confusion, as you may read before. There were two Cities of this name; the one was in Chaldaea, and the other in Aegypt. That in Chaldaea was scituated vpon the riuer Euphrates; and this vpon the riuer Nilus, which was 244 miles from Ierusalem toward the Southwest, & called in the Arabian tongue Alcair, or Cair, whether you please, which also
signifieth Confusion. Concerning both which cities you may reade more at large in their former description. From this towne it is credibly thought (and not from that towne which stood in Chaldaea) Peter wrot his first Epistle, as the circumstances of the historie doe euidently declare: for that Babylon which stood in Chaldea was in the time of Peter vtterly destroyed; but then this Babylon was had in great estimation. About this time also Mark who was the disciple of Peter, was the first Bishop of Alexandria, as you may reade in the end of his first Epistle. Wherefore that opinion which some would haue to passe for truth, that Peter wrot his first Epistle from Rome, calling it allegorically Babylon, is vtterly to be condemned, since there is none who can certainely proue that conjecture, neither is it grounded vpon any firm foun∣dation; for although Babylon in the Reuelation of S. Iohn (because it was a secret prophecie) was allegorically vsed; yet in a plaine and manifest historie such kinde of Allegories are not allowed. From whence may be concluded, that S. Peter wrot his first Epi∣stle from this Babylon, not from Rome. The Trauels of Saint Iohn, with the Annotation of the Times wherein he liued. IOhn the Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Iesus Christ, was borne in the tenth yeare after the natiuitie of our Sauior, and was made his Disciple when he was 21 years of age. He saw the miracle of Christ when hee changed the Water into Wine, Iohn cap. 2. In the yeare following, viz. in the 22 yeare of his age, hee was taken into the number of the twelue Apostles, Luke 6. Mar. 3. After that, in the three and twentieth yeare of his age he saw the transfiguration of Christ in mount Thabor: and when hee was foure and twenty yeares of age he stood vnder the Crosse of our Sauiour Christ; and the same yere a little after Christs Ascenti∣on, he with the rest of the Apostles receiued the gift of the holy-Ghost, being then the feast of Penticost, which fell about the
foure and twentieth day of May in the same yere he was cast into prison with Peter, for healing the lame man, Acts 3.4. Thus much of his youth. About the middle of the first yeare after our Sauiour Christs ascention (Iohn being then 25 years old) was sent with Peter from the city of Ierusalem to Samaria, 32 miles. From Samaria he returned back again to Ierusalem, 32 miles, and as he returned preached the gospel of Christ in diuers towns of the Samaritans, Acts 8. Mary the mother of our Lord being now 59 yeares of age, died in the twelfth yere after the resurrection of Christ, and was buri∣ed by Iohn the Evangelist in the garden of Gethsemene, Iohn bee∣ing then 35 yeares old. Foure yeares after her death hee was pre∣sent at the Apostolical Councel in Ierusalem. Now Iames his bro∣ther, who was called the Elder, was beheaded two yeares before; for this Councel was celebrated in the presence of Iames the yon∣ger, Peter, Iohn, Paul and Barnabas, &c. about sixteene yeares after the resurrection of Christ, and 14 after the conuersion of Paul, Gal. 2. Before the destruction of Ierusalem, which hapned about the 61 yeare of his age, and 38 after Christs ascention, Iohn went from Ierusalem, and came to Ephesus, 544 miles, where after the death of the Apostle Paul hee gouerned the Churches of Asia minor. In the 86 yeare of his age, beeing cast into a Vessell of boiling oile, and comming out vnhurt, by the command of Domitian the Emperor he was banished into the Isle of Pathmos, distant from Ephesus 40 miles. There he wrot his Revelation to the 7 churches in Asia minor, whereof you may reade Apoc. 1. From Pathmos hee returned to Ierusalem, which was fortie miles, being then 88 yeares of age, and there he raised Drusana from death to life. After this, he gouerned the Churches in Asia foure years, that is, from the gouernment of Nero the Emperour, vnto the fourth yeare of the gouernment of Trajan the Emperor, and called the yong man to repentance which was of the Socie∣tie
of theeues: at length he died at Ephesus when he was 91 yeres old, An. Dom. 100. as S. Ierom and Nicephorus li. 2. ca. 32. obserue. So all his trauels were 688 miles. ¶ The testimony of the Fathers concerning Iohn. THe testimonies of the holy fathers that are yet extant con∣cerning Iohn, are these: In Euseb. li. 3. c. 1. 18. 20. 3. you may read the history concerning the conuersion of the yong man from the company of theeues. Irenaeus witnesseth the same, li. 2. ca. 23. In Irenaeus also, li. 3. ca. 23. you may reade the history of Cerinthus, and how that Iohn liued vntill the time of Trajan the Emperour. Also li. 3. ca. 11. hee saith, that the Gospel of S. Iohn was written because of the blasphemy of Cerinthus. ¶ The description of the townes and places to which Iohn trauelled. Of Ephesus. THis was the metropolitan city of Ionia, scituated in Asia minor, 544 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. It was built (saith Strabo) by Androclus the son of Codrus king of Athens, in the time of Dauid King of Israel, and because of the beautifull scituation and fertilitie of the soile called Ephesus: in future A∣ges growing into such credit and estimation, that it was mightily encreased, and became one of the most famous mart townes in all Asia; but it stood somewhat low, so that the sea brake in vpon it and drowned it, and many of the inhabitants perished. Neuerthe∣lesse Lysimachus K. of Thrace built it vp again in the place where now it stands, and called it Arsinoës, after his wiues name. But he being dead, it was againe called by the antient name Ephesus. There were many worthy men that liued in it, as Heraclitus, Scoti∣nus, and Hermadorus, who for his excellent vnderstanding & singu∣lar honestie was banished. Hipponachus also the Poet, Perrhasius & Apelles the Painters, Alexander the orator, and Theodotio a Iew, who interpreted the Bible. It was in antient times inhabited by the
Amazons, whose queen kept her court there, and wonderfully in∣creased and adorned it with faire and beautifull buildings. Here also that notable Temple dedicated to Diana, which as Stra. saith li. 14. Plin. li. 36. ca. 14. was 220 yeares a building. It stood vpon moorish ground to auoid the danger of earthquakes. There were in it 127 pillars, erected by so many Kings; among which there were 36 that were curiously sieled, and artificially carued and in∣grauen: it was 425 foot long, & 10 broad. There were so many gifts & gratuities sent from all the cities and kings round about, toward the building of this Temple, that the riches and treasure thereof was wonderfull; insomuch that when it was finished, it was accounted one of the stateliest buildings the world could af∣ford, and numbered amongst the wonders of the world. This tem∣ple thus built at such an extraordinarie charge that it was almost vnvaluable, was set on fire by one Herostratus a wicked & peruerse fellow (in the same Olympiad and day that Alexander the Great was borne) who hauing nothing in him that might make him fa∣mous in after-ages, burnt this goodly building, that so (though not for his good, but for his euill) he might get a name. But the Ephesians were so insenced because of this mischiefe, that they procured proclamation to bee made through all the kingdomes round about, that his name should not be once mentioned: which perhaps for a time was obserued, but in future ages they could not preuent it, but that he was both spoken of & written of. Not∣withstanding afterward the inhabitants of this City became so exceeding wealthy, that they soon after rebuilt this temple of Di∣ana, and made it much fairer than it was before; all the Citisens contributing with willing hands to the charge of the building: insomuch that the women brought all their siluer, gold, and other pretious ornaments, and communicated them towards this great worke. Also in after-times those faire pillars before spoken of, were againe erected; towards the rebuilding whereof they receiued so many and wonderfull gifts, from all the neighbouring Kings, Ci∣ties, and Countries, that this Temple might (as it was thought)
compare with all the world beside for riches and treasure. It was standing in S. Pauls time, who came thither about 12 yeares after the resurrection of our Sauior, and continued there three yeares; in which time he so faithfully and diligently preached the Gos∣pell, that he conuerted most of the Citisens, from their idolatry and worship of Diana, to the reuerend knowledge and confession of our blessed Sauior. For which cause Demetrius the siluer smith (who made a great gain by idolatry) stirred vp a great tumult; so that the Gentiles running vp and down the City for two houres space, cried out with a loud voice, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. Here also Paul fought with beasts, 1 Cor. 15. And to this city Paul wrot his Epistle, and sent it from Rome, 996 miles. He made Timothy also a Bishop of this city, to whom he wrot two E∣pistles; the first was sent him from Laodicea to Phrygia, beeing 280 miles: the second from Rome, as I said. By these Epistles Timothy was greatly comforted, and taught them to his disciples and auditors, that so they might constantly continue & perseuer in the Christian faith and religion to the end. To conclude, Iohn the Evangelist came also to Ephesus, & wrot his Gospel against the heretick Cerinthus, who denied Christ to be the true God; for which cause God grieuously punished him, so that he died as hee was bathing himselfe in a bath, Irenaeus, lib. 5. ca. 3. Euseb. li. 3. c. 22. This was the first Church to which Iohn wrot his Reuelation; and there when he returned out of Pathmos he raised his host Drusa∣na from death to life. So when he had gouerned the churches in Asia 30 yeares, after the death of Paul hee died, when hee was 91 yeares old, and was honorably buried at Ephesus not far from the city. There was also another Iohn that liued in Ephesus, to whom (as many think) the Epistles of Iohn the Evangelist were dedica∣ted, as Ierom sheweth in his catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers. The sepulchre of this man is shewed not far from the Sepulchre of S. Iohn the Evangelist, as Euseb. witnesseth, lib. 3. cap. 31. At this day this city is named Figlo ho Epheso. See Gesner.
Of Pathmos. THis is an Isle of the Aegean sea, scituated betwixt Asia mi∣nor & Grecia, 2080 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. Pli. l. 4. c. 12. saith, that it was 30 miles in compasse. Into this Isle the Evangelist was banished by Domitian Nero, where he wrot his Reuelation. It was one of the Cyclad Islands, which were 53 in number that lay round about the Island Delus, as Stra. li. 10. Geog. obserues. It stood 40 miles from Ephesus Southwestward, and as Petr. Apianus saith, was somtimes called Posidius, but now, Pal∣mosa. Of Smyrna. THis is the second city to which Iohn dedicated his Reuelati∣on. It was scituated in Ionia in Asia minor, 540 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. This was a very faire city, beautified with many goodly buildings, and of good account in Grecia. It was at first but a Colony, transplanted from another city in that country. But Theseus that great prince beeing then King thereof, that he might adde some grace to that which hee had begun, hee called it after his wiues name Smyrna, signifying Myrrh. Herod. saith that Homer was born here (but not blind) and called by the name of Melisigines: but after the Cumaenians called him (of his blindnesse) Homer. Strab. li. 14. Geogr. saith, That the inhabitants take vpon them to shew his picture standing there, & also a tem∣ple built in his honour. During his life he was a man of small or no reputation, or rather contemned than honored, as Herod saith. But after his death his works beginning to grow famous, the Ci∣ties of Greece contended who should patronise him. The Colo∣phonians claim a part in him, because he was in that towne, and there made some of his Odysses. They of Chios say he belonged to them, because he liued there a long time, and taught schoole. But for ought that can bee found by Authours, the Smyrnians haue most interest in him. Neuerthelesse I leaue him to them that please to patronise him, since it is not certainly found where hee liued. He liued about 900 yeares before Christ.
Eusebius saith, Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 14. that in after times this city grew very famous, and was so much inlarged that it became a Bishops See, whereof Polycarpus a very godly and religious man was Bishop. He gouerned the Church in that place at such time as Iohn the Evangelist wrot his Reuelation, and by him, cap. 2. is cal∣led the Angell of the Church of Smyrna. This man after he had faithfully preached the Gospell for the space of 86 yeares, was by the inhabitants thereof condemned to death for the profession of Christ, Anno 170. But the towne of Smyrna because of the vn∣thankfulnesse and crueltie of the inhabitants was grieuously pu∣nished, for within ten yeares it was cast downe by an earthquake, since which time it was hardly rebuilt again. The riuer Pactolus which beginneth in Lydia, runneth by this town of Smyrna. But the inhabitants, because of the golden veins that are found there∣in, call it Crysorrhoas, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29. A little after that, there was such an extreme plague hapned in Rome, that they were con∣strained to carry out the dead bodies in carts. Thus God turneth the aire and the earth to the confusion of those that persecute his Church. Of Pergamus. THis was another of the townes whereto Iohn wrot his Reuela∣tion. It was a famous city, and metropolitan of Mysia, sci∣tuated in Asia minor, 228 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. It stood vpon a high rock close by the riuer Caicus, from whence it was called Pergamus. For in antient times all famous and no∣table places were called amongst the Graecians Pergama, as Sui∣das and Servius obserueth. Strabo, lib. 13. saith, That in the time of Lysimachus the sonne of Agathocles (who was one of the succes∣sours of Alexander the Great) it was but a castle; in which place because of the strength of it, he vsually kept all his treasures, and those things that were of account, and committed the custody of it vnto one named Philetaerus, an Eunuch of Tyanus. But this man being accused to Lysimachus, That he would haue forced his wife Arsinoës, for feare of some future punishment because of that offence, moued the inhabitants of that Hold to rebellion. At
the same time also there happened many commotions in Asia, whereby Lysimachus was constrained to leaue this, and make op∣position against Seleucus Nicanor, who had inuaded his domini∣ons. But in this war Lysimachus was slaine. And Philetaerus hauing in his possession great riches, that hee might enioy what hee had, was alwayes obseruant to him that gat the victorie, by which meanes he kept himselfe and his riches for the space of 20 yeares in that castle; and then dyed, and left all his wealth to Eumenes his brothers sonne, who inlarged his gouernment, and ouercame Antiochus the sonne of Seleucus. This man after hee had raigned 32 yeares dyed, and Attalus his sonne succeeded him in the Go∣uerment, who hauing conquered Galatia made a league with the Romans, and by them was first called by the name of a King. Af∣ter him succeeded his son Eumenes the second of that name, who aided the Romanes against Antiochus magnus King of Syria; for which seruice the Romans gaue him all the dominions that An∣tiochus had on this side the Alps. This man was the first that en∣larged the castle of Pergamus, and made it a goodly city, planting round about it a thick wood or grove, and called it Nicephorus. And after he had reigned 49 yeares he died, and left his kingdom to his son Attalus, called Philometor. This Attalus after hee had done many notable exploits, died without issue, when hee had reigned 5 yeares, and left his kingdome to the Romans, who tur∣ned it into a prouince. There liued in this town many learned men, as Galen the Phy∣sitian, who was famous in the time of Trajan the Emperor, and (as the fame went) liued 140 yeares. Of that town also was Apolodo∣rus the Rhetoritian, who was schoole-master to Augustus Caesar, of which man the Apollodorean sect tooke name, and Dionysius At∣ticus his scholer. Here Antipas was crowned with the Wreath of martyrdome. To the Bishop of this Towne Iohn wrot his Reuelation, and in the second Chapter thereof sharpely reprehendeth him, be∣cause he bore with the sect of the Nicholaitans; which although it lasted not long, yet it was very dangerous. Eusebius saith, That Nicholaus one of the seuen Deacons for the poore at Antiochia, of whom you may reade, Act. cap. 6. was the first author of this sect:
yet Clem. Alexand. cleares him of it, laying that offence rather on certaine idle persons, that misconstruing his words, being giuen ouer to vile affections, couered their euils vnder his name, calling themselues Nicolaits, though indeed he had no hand in it, but li∣ued and died honestly. The opinion that this Sect held (as Euseb. saith, li. 3. ca. 23. and Irenaeus, libr. 1. Chap. 27.) was, That women were to be common, That it was lawful to eat meat offered to Idols; That fornication and Adultery was no sin: beside many other wicked and peruerse opinions concerning the Deity, which would be too tedious to recite in this place. You may read more of it in Eusebius and Ter∣tullian. Of Thyatira. THis was the fourth church to which Iohn wrot his Reuelation: it was scituated close by the riuer Caicus, vpon the borders of Mysia and Lydia, 600 miles from Ierusalem Northeastward. It was a very faire city in Asia minor, yet subiect to the Lydians. In this country Lidda was born, that dwelt at Philippa, and gaue entertainment to Paul and Sylas, Acts 16. Philippa was distant from this town 400 miles. It was at first called (according to the testimony of Stephen) Pelopea and Semiramis. But after Seleucus Nicanor K. of Syria (making war vpon Lysimachus king of Thrace) comming to this towne, had newes that his wife had bore him a daughter, in honor whereof he would needs haue the town called Thugateira, which in Greeke signifies a daughter; but Thyatira, Diuine reuerence. Of Sardis. TO this city also S. Iohn wrot his Reuelation. It was a famous and princely seat, scituated in Asia not farre from the moun∣taine Tmolus, where Croesus King of the Lydians kept his court, being 536 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. It was so called (without doubt) of Sardus the sonne of Hercules, which maketh Sardis in the plural number. Of this Towne were those two Diodories which were Oratours. The younger of them did write Histories and Poems, and was one of Strabo's great friends.
Close by this Towne is found a precious stone, which after the townes name is called Sardis: it is of a fleshly colour, and there∣fore is commonly called Carnalia; of which you may reade more in Pliny, lib 37. cap. 4. Of Philadelphia. SAint Iohn also wrote his Reuelation to this city. It was scitua∣ted in Mysia a countrie in Asia Minor; being 450 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. This city is so often troubled with Earthquakes, that the inhabitants are many times constrai∣ned to dwell in the open fields. Vpon the East side thereof lies a dry and barren country, which seemeth to be burnt and scorcht with heat, being 60 miles long, and 48 miles broad; where there grows no trees, but there are found great plenty of grapes, which being prest yeeld very pleasant wine, and may compare with the best of those parts. The superfices of the earth seemeth like ashes, mountany, stony, and blacke: many conjecture the cause therof to be by reason of the great thunders and lightning that they haue there; but there are some which giue other reasons for it. It was called Philadelphia of Attolus Philodelphius who first built it. Of Laodicea. THis was the seuenth and last Citie that Iohn directed his Reuelation to. It stood close by the riuer Lycus in Caria, a country in Asia the lesse, fiue hundred and twentie miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest; and is likewise oftentimes troubled with Earthquakes, as Sardis Magnesia and Philadel∣phia are. The reason of these often Earthquakes is thought to be, because there are vaults and hollow caues vnder the earth, into which the aire (in the time of heat) hauing free entrance, then clo∣seth vp againe so that it can find no passage out; it striueth with continuall motion to make way through the earth, by which meanes the earth trembleth and shaketh: and looke how much the deeper these vaults are vnder the earth, so much the more vi∣olent are the Earthquakes; by which means, cities are oftentimes vtterly ouerthrowne and ruined, sometimes the earth sinketh and ponds and riuers are swallowed vp.
It was at first called Diospolis, that is, the city of Iupiter; then Rhoas; and lastly, it obtained the name of Laodicea. And al∣though at the beginning it was but a small town, yet by reason of the fertilitie of the soile, and pleasant scituation, it of a sudden be∣came a faire citie, beautified with many faire and goodly houses, wherein there dwelt many wealthie citizens, so that for their no∣bilitie and worthinesse it was accounted the most famous towne in all Asia. Here Hiero dwelt who diuided his inheritance among the citizens, and ouer and aboue he gaue them two thousand ta∣lents of gold, besides many other gifts and gratuities to adorne and beautifie the citie. After him there liued Zeno the Orator, and Polemon his sonne; who for his noble acts was first by Antonio, and then by Augustus Caesar, honored with the dignitie of a King, as Strabo witnesseth, lib. 12. This Laodicea, Colossis, and Hieropolis where the Apostle Philip was crucified, were sunk by an earthquake, about the tenth yeare of Nero, and a little before the Martyrdome of Paul. There were three cities called after this name; that is, this which stood in Caria (to which Paul neuer came; as appeareth in the second chapter to the Collossians;) a second stood in Phrigia, where Paul wrote his Epistle to Timothy; and a third in Syria, neere ro Antio∣chia, Seleucia, and Apamea. The Trauels of Philip. THan a little after the martyrdome of Stephen (which hapned in the Moneth of Ianuary, thirtie and fiue yeares after the natiuitie of Christ) Philip which one of the seauen Deacons with Stephen, Acts 6. went from Ierusalem to Samaria, which was thirtie and two miles: and in many Cities of the Samaritans preached the Gospell, and did many miracles; at which time he conuerted Simon Magus, Acts 8. From Samaria he went to Bethzur, which was scituated for∣tie and foure miles towards the South: here Philip baptised the Aethiopian who was Queene Candaces Eunuch. And suddenly he
was taken out of sight by the spirit of the Lord, and went to Azo∣tus, which was 16 miles. From thence preaching in all the cities as he went, he came to Caesarea Strato, which was 44 miles. So all his Trauels were 136 miles. Concerning the townes and places mentioned in his Trauels, you may reade of them in seuerall places mentioned before. The Trauels of the Aethiopian which was Eunuch to Queene Candaces, who kept her court in Saba. FRom Saba or Meroe in Aethiopia, this Eunuch came to Ieru∣salem, which was about 964 miles, Acts 4. From Ierusalem he came to the towne of Bethzur, which was 12 miles: here he was baptised by Philip in the Moneth of Ianuary, the next yeare after the resurrection of Christ. From thence he returned to Saba in Aethiopia, which was 952 miles. So all his Trauels were 1928 miles. Of Saba. THis citie is before mentioned: and at this time when the Eu∣nuch came to Ierusalem, Candaces gouerned it and a great part of Aethiopia, Tiberius Caesar being then Emperour of Rome. Shee was a very warlike woman, but blinde of one eie, as Strabo saith, lib. 16. and Plin. lib. 6. cap. 29. In whose time the citie Saba was called Meroe; and the Queenes, for many successions, Can∣daces; because of the worthinesse of those Queenes which had beene of that name. This woman was very well beloued of her subjects; and was very gratious towards them, as Suidas saith. To this Queene the Eunuch which Philip baptised was chiefe Ste∣ward; and no doubt spread the Christian faith in many places of those parts.
An Introduction to the Trauels of Saint Paul. NOw before I enter vpon the Trauels of the Apostle Paul, I though it fit to make a collection of all the Countries, I∣slands and Cities wherein he taught: so that they which are skilfull in Geometrie or Cosmographie, might discerne their Longitudes, Latitudes, and seuerall distances, according to the degrees and scruples hereafter following. Townes in Italy.   Long. Latit. Rome 36.40 41.40 Puteoli 39.50 41.00 Naples 39.10 41.00 Capua 40.00 41.00 Brundusia 42.30 39.40 Regium 39.50 38.15 Townes in Graecia. Constantinople 56.00 43.05 Neapolis 51.15 41.40 Philippi 50.45 41.45 Amphipolis 50.00 41.30 Apollonia Mygdoniae. 49.30 40.30 Thessalonica 49.50 39.50 Athens 52.45 37.15 Corinthus 51.15 36.55 Cechera 51.20 37.00 Cities in Syria. Antiochia 69.30 35.30 Seleucia 69.25 35.40 Sydon 67.15 33 30 Tyrus 67.00 33 20 Ptolomais 66.50 32.58 Caesarca Stratonis 66.16 23.25 Ioppa 66.40 32.06 Ierusalem 66.00 31.55 Damascus 60.55 30.00 Cities in Asia minor. Thrasia 67.40 36.50 Attalia 62.15 36.30 Perga 62.15 36.56 Antiochia Pisidiae 62.30 39.00 Laodicea Phrigiae 63 40 39.40 Lystra 64.00 39.00 Iconium 64.30 38 45 Derbe 64.20 38 15 Calcedon 56.05 43.05 Nicea 57.00 41.40 Cities in Asia. Ilium 55.30 41.00 Troada 55.25 40.40 Assus 56.00 40.15 Pergamus 57.25 39.45 Philadelphia 59.00 38.50 Sardis 58.20 38.15 Ephesus 57.40 37.40 Thyatira.     Smyrna 58 25 38.25 Myletus 58.00 37.90 Halicarnassus 57.50 36.10 Gnydus 57.10 35.30 Patara 60.30 36.00 Mira 61.00 36.40 Hycropolis 60.00 38.15 Cities in Aegypt. Alexandria 60.30 31.00 Memphis Alcayre 61.50 29.50 Hermopolis magna 61.40 28.55 Jslands. Ciciliae ciuitatis Siracusa 39.30 37.15 Malta 38.45 34.50 Corsica 45.40 38.15 Creta 45.00 34.45 Clauda 52.20 34 00 Salamis 50.00 37 00 Enbea 43.40 38.15 Andros 55.00 37.12 Samathrocua 52.30 41.15 Mithilena 55 40 39 20 Chius 59.20 38.25 Trogylion 57 15 37 40 Pathmos 57.00 37.35 Cous 57.00 36.25 Rhodus 58.30 35.40 Raphus cypri 64.10 35.05 Salamais cypri. 66.20 35.10
The Trauels of the holy Apostle S. Paul, with an axact annotation of the times. PAul was borne at Tarsus in Cicilia, about the tenth yeare of the natiuitie of our Sauiour; and was neere about the age of S. Iohn the Euangelist, as the circumstances of Histories doe declare. After he grew to some bignesse, he was sent by his pa∣rents from thence to Ierusalem, being 304 miles; where he had not beene long brought vp with Gamaliel (which signifies, The recompence of God) Acts 22. but he became the Disciple of Si∣mon the just, Luke 2. Acts 5. This Paul was of the Tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 2. 2 Cor. 11. and being yet but a young man, he was one of those that kept the gar∣ments of the holy Martyr S. Stephen, who was stoned about the end of the foure and thirtieth yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, Acts 1. at which time also S. Iohn the Euangelist was but foure and twentie yeares of age. If therefore you would obserue the age of the Apostle Paul in this following discourse of his Tra∣uels, deduct ten from the yeres after the natiuitie of our Sauiour Christ, and the remainder is his age. At his circumcision he was called Saul, that is, a mortall man: but when he was made the A∣postle of the Gentiles, he was called Paul; of which name there was a noble family in Rome, so called because of the lownesse of their stature, and smalnesse of their body; as Carolus Sigonius obserueth. In the 35 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ Paul was an inqui∣sitor for priuate heresie, and a cruel persecutor of the Gospel. The next yeare he went from Ierusalem to Damascus in Syria, which was 160 miles: in which journey (about the 25 day of Ianuary) he was conuerted; and vpon the 28 day of Ianuary was baptized by Ananias. So he staied some few daies in Damascus, and taught the Gospell of Christ, Acts 9. & 22. In the same yere that he was conuerted, the Iewes & those that were enemies to the Gospell, went about by deceit to take his
life; wherefore he went from Damascus to Arabia Petraea, which was 160 miles; here hee continued teaching the Gospell by the space of three yeares, that is, from the beginning of the 35 to the end of the 37 yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ, Act. 9. In the 38 yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ he returned from Arabia Petraea and came to Damascus, which was 160 miles; and there he diligently taught the Gospell of Christ. But when in the same yeare Araeta King of Arabia went about to put him secretly to death, he was let down in a basket ouer the wall, and so went from Damascus to Ierusalem, which was 160 miles: and when hee came thither he brought Barnabas to the A∣postles, and shewed them his conuersion, and remained with Pe∣ter 15 daies preaching the Gospell. At this time he saw Iames the sonne of Alpheus and brother of our Lord, Acts 9. 2 Cor. 11. Galat. 1. But when his aduersaries that were at Ierusalem went about secretly to put him to death, hee went from Ierusalem and was brought by the brethren to Caesarea Strato, which was 32 miles, Acts 9. About the 38 yere after the natiuitie of Christ he went thence into Syria to Tarsus a citie of Cilicia, which was 272 miles: here he continued some yeares teaching the Gospell of Christ, Gal. 1. 2 Cor. 11. In the 41 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, and about the se∣uenth yeare of his Ministrie, hee was brought by Barnabas from Tarsus to Antiochia in Syria, which was 120 miles. At this time and in this towne all those that beleeued in Christ began to bee called Christians, wheras before they were called Disciples and brothers, Acts 11. These things hapned in the eight yeare after the resurrection of Christ: about this time also Matthew wrote his Gospell, and Agabus prophesied of the vniuersall dearth that should happen vnder Claudius, Acts 11. In the 42 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, Paul being then at Antiochia, and about 32 yeres of age, was wrapt vp into the third heauen, 14 yeares before he wrote his second Epistle to the Co∣rinthians, 2 Cor. 12. In the 43 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, the famine wher∣of
Agabus prophecied, being now begun, hee went with the gifts of the Church from Antiochia to Ierusalem, which was 280 miles: this yeare Iames the elder was beheaded at the command of Agrippa, Acts 11. & 12. In the 44 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, Paul and Barnabas with Peter, were deliuered out of prison by the Angell of the Lord. Now hauing distributed the gifts of the Church, hee re∣turned in the company of Iohn Marke, from Ierusalem to Antio∣chia, which was 280 miles. So these trauels were 1928 miles. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. of Tarsus or Tharsus. THis was the Metropolis of Cilicia, scituated vpon the riuer of Cydnus, which beginning at Mount Taurus, runs thence through this towne into the Mediterranean sea. It was first built by Perseus King of the Persians, (whom the Poëts faigne to bee the sonne of Iupiter and Danaë) & called Tharsus, of the Hyacinth stone, which, as it seemeth, is found thereabouts. It was distant from Ierusalem 304 miles towards the North; in antient time a goodly city; but through the injurie of the time, and inuasion of the enemy, much impaired, & lay almost ruined, til (as Strab. saith, li. 14.) it was repaired by Sardanapalus that effeminat K. of the As∣sirians; of whom Tully remembreth this Epitaph, lib. 5. Tuscula: Haec habeo quae aedi, quae{que} exaturata libido, Hausit, at illa jacent multa & praeclara relicta. What things I eat or spend in sport and play; Those I enjoy, the rest I cast away.  From his time, vntill the raigne of Darius the last king of the Per∣sians, it continued in great prosperity, and was become a maruel∣lous stately citie, the inhabitants therof being growne very weal∣thy: but then Alexander the Great, making warre vpon that Prince, amongst others, brought his Army against this citie: but the citisens hearing of his notable exployts, durst not abide his
comming: therefore they fired the citie, left hee should make a prey of their riches, and fled: which when Alexander perceiued, he gaue order to Parmenio with all possible speed to quench the fire, and saue the citie. In the meane time the King (being prest with an extraordinary thirst, by reason of the extreame heate that was in that country, the dust, and his long journie) put off his roi∣all garments, and cast himselfe into the riuer Cydnus, which be∣ing a cold water comming out of the North, stroke the heat pre∣sently inward, and so benummed his sinewes, that had it not been for the present helpe of his souldiers, and the extraordinarie dili∣gence and care of Philip his Phisitian, he had died immediately; notwithstanding, by the great prouidence of God, and the care∣fulnesse of his physitian, hee recouered his dangerous sickenesse beyond the expectation of man; and after ouercame Darius in a sharpe and cruell warre, neere to a place called Issa, as you may reade before, See Plutarch in vita Alexand. and Quintus Curtius. From that time forward this citie grew to be very famous, and daily increased in statelinesse and faire buildings. And to adde more dignitie to it, there was a famous Academie, in which were many learned and rare Philosophers; in so much that they of Tharsus exceeded the Philosophers of Athens and Alexandria for learning and knowleged, though indeed for number of scho∣lers and common resort they exceeded Tharsus. Saint Paul was borne and brought vp in this Towne, and here learned the knowledge of the tongues, Philosophie, and other good arts. Hee also perused the writings of Aratus, Epimenides; Menander, and other learned men, whose sayings are here and there dispersed through his Epistles. From thence he was sent to Ierusalem, where hee liued and was brought vp at the feet of Ga∣maliel, who was Prouost of that Academy: and after, was conuer∣ted to be an Apostle of Christ Iesus, as appeareth Acts 22. This towne at this day is subject to the Empire of the Turkes, and called by the name of Terassa; beeing neither so famous nor so faire a citie, as in the time when the Roman Empire flourished; for then, because of the extraordinary vertue of the citizens, it was indowed with the libertie and freedome of Rome.
Of Damascus. THis was a metropolitan towne in Syria, distant from Ieru∣salem 160 miles towards the Northeast; being an ancient and faire citie, and, before such time as Antiochia was built, the head of all that kingdome. It was scituated in a faire and fruit∣full place, close by the mountaine Libanus, which bringeth forth Frankincense, Ceders, Cypresse, and many odoriferous and sweet smelling floures. There were many Kings that kept their court in it, as Hadad, Benhadad the first, Benhadad the second, Hasael, and others, who grieuously opposed the Kings of Israel in many sharpe and cruell warres, as you may reade before. The land round about it aboundeth with white and red Roses, Pomegra∣nats, Almonds, Figges, and other sweet and pleasant fruits. In that place the Alablaster stone is found, very faire and cleere. The aire, pleasant and healthfull. The riuer called Chrysorrus, run∣neth close by it, in which there is found golden veines which yeelded perfect gold. The houses without are not very curious; but within, all of polished Marble and Alablaster guilt with re∣splendent gold, so artificially that it dazleth the beholders eies. There was a certaine Florentine who reuolted from the Chri∣stian faith, and obtained to be chiefe gouernour of this towne; in which he erected a strong and beautifull castle, which stood for the defence of it. No man can sufficiently expresse the beautie and glory of this citie: there is great traffique, and much resort of people to it, but especially of Turkes, Saracens, Mamalucks, and other kinds of Pagan people, who are preferred before the Chri∣stians in that gouernment: and although there are many Christi∣ans in that place, yet they are constrained to indure great injurie by those Barbarians, because they are hated euen to the death: and if any of them chance to die, they are buried in that place where Paul was conuerted. The inhabitants shew the place where Saint Paul was let downe ouer the wall in a basket; also the house of Ananias, who cured the blindnesse of Paul, besides many other things that are memorable in that citie, of which you may reade in Sebestian Munster, Sebastian Frankus, Plin. lib. 5. and many other authors.
Of Arabia. MAny things are already spoken concerning this Countrey, as the diuision of the place; one called Petraea, the other De∣serta, and the third, Foelix. Arabia Petraea is so called from the Metropolitan citie thereof, called Petra, which is scituated forty miles from Ierusalem towards the South, and bordereth vpon Ae∣gypt and India. It is also called Arabia Nabathea, as you may reade before. Paran and Sur are a part of it, compassing towards the East the land of Iudaea, and so extendeth to Damascus. This countrey is very full of rockes and stones, the chiefe citie Petra being scituated vpon a rocke, of which it taketh the name. Here standeth the mountaines Horeb and Sinai; here the children of Israel trauelled when they went out of Aegypt; here is the Sardo∣nix stone found; and the people of this countrey in times past were great Prophets and Astrologians; here also S. Paul taught the Gospell a little after his conuersion, Gal. 1. at which time Are∣tas was King thereof, whose sister was married to Herod the Te∣trarch of Galile and Petraea; but he cast her off, and married He∣rodias his brother Philips wife, vpon which there began a bloudy warre betweene Aretas and Herod, and a sharpe battell was fought neere to Gamala a citie beyond Iordan. And although the two Kings were not at this battell, yet by the treason and flight of the soldiers out of Tracones, (who without all question would haue reuenged the contempt done vnto their Lord Philip) the Arabi∣an armie carried away a notable victory, as Iosephus witnesseth, lib. antiq. 18. cap. 9. Aretas signifieth, An excellent man; which was a common name to the Kings of Arabia. It is to be thought that Damascus and all the Countrey round about was vnder the jurisdiction of this King; and that he ordained a Lieutenant or Generall in those parts, who would haue taken Paul and put him to death, Acts 9. 2 Col. 12. The other part of Arabia is called by Ptolomie, Deserta; but Strabo calls it, Scenilis, because the inhabitants thereof are with∣out buildings or Tents, and liue like vagrants vp and downe the woods. This is compast in vpon the South with certaine moun∣taines
of Arabia Foelix; towards the North, it borders vpon Me∣sopotamia; and towards the West, vpon Petraea. The third is called Arabia Foelix, because of the fertilitie ther∣of; for they haue there euery yeare two haruests, as they haue in India, as Strabo obserueth. See Plin. lib. 6. cap. 28. Of Antiochia. YOu may reade of this Towne before. It is said that Luke the Euangelist was borne here. This man was by profession a Physition, Colos. 4. and an inseparable companion to Paul in all his Trauels: he was of the number of the seuentie Disciples, as E∣piphanius obserueth. Tertullian saith in his fourth booke against Marcion, that Luke receiued his Gospell from the mouth of Paul: he liued till he was 84 yeares old, and then died, and lies buried at Constantinople, as S. Ierom saith; for his bones were remoued out or Achaia thither. The second Trauels of the Apostle Paul, in the company of Barnabas. IN the eleuenth yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, and in the foure and fortieth yeare of Paul, he and Barnabas was sent by the holy spirit from Antiochia in Syria to Seleucia, which was foure and twenty miles. From Seleucia they sailed to Salamais in Cyprus, which was 94 miles, Acts 13. From thence they went to Paphos, which is in the same Isle where Sergius Paulus was conuerted, and Elymas the Magitian, who professing himselfe to bee the Messias and Sonne of God, was strucke with blindnesse, Act. 13. this journey was 100 miles. They loosing from Paphos, went by sea and land (the same yeare) to Pergamus a city of Pamphilia, scituated in Asia minor, which was 148 miles. In the 45 yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ, they went from Pergamus to Antiochia in Pisidia, which was 132 miles.
From thence they went to Iconia, which was 96 miles; here they staied some time and conuerted many, Act. 13. & 14. In the 46 yere after the natiuitie of Christ, there being a great tumult raised in that countrey, lest the inhabitants should haue stoned them, they fled thence to Lystra a city of Lyaconia, where Paul healed the lame man, which was 28 miles. The inhabitants seeing this miracle, worshipped them for gods, and called Barna∣bas, Iupiter; and Paul, Mercurius; because he wrought the miracle. But not long after, certaine Iewes comming from Antiochia and Iconia, arriued in Listra, by whose perswasion the people stoned Paul, and supposing him to be dead carried him out of the citie: but when his Disciptes came vnto him, he rose vp and went into the towne, Act. 14. The next day they went to Derbe, a citie of Lyaconia, which was 48 miles. From thence they returned backe againe to Lystra in the same yeare, which was 28 miles. From Iconia they came to Antiochia in Pisidia, which was 16 miles: in this citie they comforted the Disciples, exhorting them that they should perseuere in their faith, For through many affli∣ctions we must enter into the Kingdome of heauen. They also elected Elders in the Churches, so with fasting and praiers they com∣mended them to the Lord in whom they beleeued. In the 47 yeare after Christ, they went from Antiochia tho∣rough all Pisidia, and came to Pergamus a citie in Pamphilia, which was 132 miles: here they preached the word of the Lord, Acts 14. From Pergamus in the following yeare they went downe to the citie of Attalia, which was 26 miles. In the 48 yere after the natiuitie of Christ, they loosed thence and went to Antiochia in Syria, which was 340 miles, here they assembled the Church and shewed what wonderfull things the Lord had wrought by them, and how hee had opened the doore of faith vnto the Gentiles: in this place they staied a great space, Acts 14. In the yeare following they went from Antiochia to Ierusa∣lem (which was 280 miles) to the Apostolicall Councell, which
was celebrated in that citie, Anno Dom. 49. and as they went they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, and there declared the estate of the Church among the Gentiles, Acts 15. From Ierusalem they (with Sylas and Iudas, syrnamed Barsa∣bas) went againe to Antiochia in Syria, which was 280 miles: here Paul opposed Peter for preaching vnto the Gentiles, Gal. 2. So these trauels of Paul were 1744 miles. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Cyprus. BEcause you may reade of Seleucia before, I therfore willing∣ly omit it, that I might speake more fully of Cyprus. This is a faire and spacious Isle, scituated in the Mediterranean sea in the gulph of Issa, bordering vpon Cilicia and Syria, distant 160 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, as Strabo saith, lib. 14. It is in compasse 428 miles, very fertile, powerfull and spacious for an Island. There inhabited in it in times past nine Kings, and (as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 31.) called Macaria, or one of the happy I∣slands: the inhabitants were giuen much vnto luxurie and vene∣rie; from whence it hapned that Venus was greatly honoured a∣mongst them. It is said that there are many pretious stones found in it, besides Crystal, Allum, and Cypresse wood which abounds in that place, from which it seemeth the Island was called Cy∣prus. There are also found many Symples that are Physical, much Sack comes thenee and many other things necessarie for the life of man. Here also standeth the Mountaine Olympus, whose top seemeth to touch the heauens, from whence it taketh the name because there neuer lies any clouds vpon it. Lucan, lib. 2. There are foure mountaines of this name; the one lyeth between Macedon and Thessalie; the other in Cyprus, the third amongst the Mysi∣ans, at the foot whereof Haniball built Prusa; and the fourth in Aethiopia, vpon the East side of Heliopolis. There are many cities in this countrey, as Macaria, Cyprus or Cyrhera, after called Paphos, and now Baffa (in which there stan∣deth such a famous Temple, that Venus of that is called Cypria and Cytherea) Nicosia, and Salamus now called Famagusta.
There haue beene many and cruell sharpe warres betweene the Venetians and Turkes concerning this countrie, but at this day it is vnder the jurisdiction of the Turks; from whence they fetch great abundance of Pitch and Rosin for their ships and cables. Of Salamais. SAlamais, Salamin, or Salamina was one of the principal cities of Cyprus, and was distant from Ierusalem 196 miles towards the North; built by Teucer the sonne of Telamon, and scituated in the Eubeian sea just against Athens. The occasion why this town was built, hapned by reason of a discontent that grew betweene Teucer and his father Telamon: for Teucer returning from Troy (not hauing reuenged the death of his brother Ajax) so much in∣censed his father that he banished him his countrie, whereupon Teucer sailed thence to Cyprus, where he built this citie, and be∣cause of the extraordinarie affection that he bore to the countrie where he was borne, called it by the name of Salamena, or Sala∣mais. Saint Ierom saith, that there is a riuer of extraordinary hot water that runneth through a great part of this countrie; and that it was once ouercome by the Iewes, and vtterly ruined and de∣stroied; but afterward repeopled and called by the name of Con∣stantia. This towne at this day is called by the name of Famagu∣sta, and was taken (with the whole Island of Cyprus) by Mustapha chiefe Captaine to Selimus the second, Emperour of the Turkes, An. Dom. 1570. Solon that notable and famous Philosopher was borne in this Towne. And Paul and Barnabas sailed out of Syria and liued in this Towne, Acts 31. Of Paphos. THis Citie is scituated vpon the shore of Cyprus, 212 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, and seemeth to take the name from Paphos the sonne of Pigmalion the Artificer. In this towne there stood a notable Temple, built by that Pigmalion in the honour of Venus; for that (as it seemeth by the Poets) hee was much giuen to women. Here Elimas that wicked Magician who (as some will haue it) called himselfe the sonne of Iesus; as others,
the sonne of Iehouah, dwelt, whom the Lord by the hand of Paul strucke with blindnesse. Here also Sergius Paulus the Proconsull was conuerted. It was in times past a goodly faire citie, as the ruines thereof testifie to this day; but now it is destroied and almost desolate. There (as it is for the most part through that Island) the ayre is impure and vnwholsom, and the ruines of many goodly churches and buildings are to be seene; also the wals of a strong and almost impregnable tower scituated vpon a hill in the middle of the ci∣tie; and as may be thought, was sometime the habitation of Ser∣gius Paulus. There is also showne vnder a certaine Church (which in antient times belonged vnto the brothers of the Minories (a certaine Prison diuided into seuen roomes, where Paul and Bar∣nabas were imprisoned for preaching the Gospell. Here also vn∣der another Church is found a spring of very wholesome water, which is a present remedy for the Ague and Feuer. Here also is excellent Wine. Of Perga. PErga was a citie of Pamphilia, from whence Diana is called Pergea, because there was a notable Temple in that Towne which was dedicated to her. It is scituated in Asia the lesse, neere to Cheractus, as Ptolomais saith; but as Strabo saith, close by Ce∣stria a faire and goodly riuer, 356 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. The countrey wherein this standeth is full of moun∣taines, extending from the mountaine Taurus (which beginneth in this place, abounding with Vines, Oliues, and other fruits) vn∣to the sea. There are many faire and fruitfull pastures in it, and many goodly and beautifull cities; as Aspendius, Phaselis, & this Perga, besides many others needlesse to be named. There was vsu∣ally euery yeare a great feast kept here in honour of Diana; but Paul and Barnabas comming to this town, conuerted most of the inhabitants to the knowledge of God and of his sonne Christ Ie∣ssu, Acts 13. Of Antiochia in Pisidia. THis was the chiefe citie in Pisidia, scituated in Asia minor, 460 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. S. Paul con∣uerted a great multitude in this towne to the faith of Christ.
Of Iconium. IConium was one of the Metropolitan Cities of Lycaonia, as Pliny saith, lib. 5. cap. 27. scituated not farre from the bowing of mount Taurus in Asia the lesse, as Strabo saith lib. 12. 420 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. In this citie Paul and Barna∣bas continued a long time, and did many miracles, by which meanes a great multitude of the inhabitants were conuerted to the Christian faith, Acts 13.14. It is to this day a faire citie, and vnder the gouernment of the Turks, who woon it from the Prin∣ces of Caramanian. About 400 yeares before, there was a great battell fought close by this towne, betweene the Saracens and the armie of the Emperour Conradus the third, in which the Christi∣ans lost the day. Of Lystra. THis is a Citie in Lycaonia scituated in Asia the lesse, 436 miles from Ierusalem towards the North. In this Towne Timothy was borne, Acts 16.2 Tim. 3. In this citie Paul healed the Cripple and was stoned, Acts 14.2 Cor. 11. Of Darbe. THis also was a citie in Lycaonia scituated in Asia the lesse, 388 miles from Ierusalem towards the North, where Paul and Barnabus preached the Gospell, Acts 14. Of Attalia. ATtalia was a hauen Towne of Pamphilia, built by Attalus Philadelphus King of Pergamus, after whose name it was so called, as Strato obserueth, lib. 14. being distant from Ierusalem 332 miles towards the North. Paul and Barnabas sailed out of Syria into this towne. At this day it is called Catalia.
The third Trauels of Paul in the company of Sylas. IN the fifth yeare after the ascention of Christ Paul tooke vnto him Sylas, and going through Syria and Cilicia, came to Der∣be, which is 400 miles, and there established the Churches, Acts 15.16. From Derbe they went to Lystra, 48 miles, where Paul circum∣cised Timothy, Acts 16. In the 51 yeare after Christ they went from Lystra, and so tra∣uelled through Galatia, Phrygia, and being hindred by the spirit that they could not preach in Bythinia, they went thorow Mysia, and so came to Troas; where by a vision that Paul saw in the night he was admonished to go into Macedonia, Acts 16. So this jour∣ney between Lycia and Troas was 480 miles. Loosing from Troas they sailed with a direct course to Samo-Thracia, 116 miles. From thence they sailed to Neapolis, 92 miles. From thence they went to Philippos in Macedonia 24 miles; Act. 16. here Lydda the seller of purple was conuerted, and Paul dispossessed a Diuel: and then he and Sylas being scourged were cast into prison, Paul being then about 41 yeares of age, Acts 16. From Philippos they went to Amphipolis, about 36 miles, Acts 17. From thence they went to Apollonia, 44 miles. From Apollonia they went to Thessalonica, where the Iewes stirred vp a tumult: 80 miles. Wherefore they went thence by night, and came to Berrhaea 60 miles: here also the Iewes stirred vp a tumult, Acts 17. These things hapned in the summer season, An. Dom. 51. From Berrhaea Paul was brought by the Brethren to the sea, where entring into a shippe hee went to Athens, which was 264 miles; where he conuerted Dionysius the Areopagite. From this
towne he wrot both his Epistles to the Thessalonians, as the sub∣scription witnesseth, and sent them to Thessalonica. These were the first Epistles that Paul wrot. Afterward hee went from Athens and came to Corinthia, 74 miles: he came thither about the beginning of August, An. D. 51 and continued there a whole yeare and six months, preaching the Gospell, and making tents with Aquila the Iew, who was of that trade, Acts 19. From Corinthia, about the spring An. Do. 53. he went to Cen∣chraea with Aquila and Priscilla, 304 miles. There for deuotions sake he polled his head. From Cenchraea he sailed in the company of Aquila and Pris∣cilla to Ephesus, about 304 miles. Here he left them, Acts 18. From Ephesus hee sailed to Caesarea Strato in Iudaea, beeing 280 miles. From Caesarea he went to Ierusalem, 32 miles, and saluted the Church. From the city of Ierusalem Paul went to Antiochia in Syria, 280 miles. So all these trauels were 2154 miles. ¶ Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Cilicia. BEcause you may reade of Syria before, I wil omit it, and pro∣ceed to speake of Cilicia. This was a countrey in Asia the lesse, so called (as some would haue it) from Cilix the Kings son of Phoenicia; compassed in vpon the East with the mountaine Amanus; vpon the North with the mountaine Taurus; vpon the West by Pamphilia; and vpon the South by the Mediterranean sea. At this day it is called Caramania, and is distant from Ie∣rusalem 304 miles towards the North. In times past it was diui∣ded into two parts, that is, into Cilicia the higher and the lower: Cilicia the higher aboundeth with mountaines, the lower is a plaine champian countrey very fertile and pleasant. The prin∣cipal
cities thereof are Tarsus, where the Apostle Paul was born, and where the riuer Cydnus runs through the midst of it; Issus, where Alexander ouercame Darius last Emperor of the Persians; Anazarba, where Dioscorides that excellent Physitian was borne, who was of great estimation with Antonius and Cleopatra. There are six books yet extant of his profitable and necessary labours in that science. From hence may be gathered that the scituation is strong and pleasant; in regard it is fortified on euery side with mountaines, but principally with the mountaine Taurus (famous for the ferti∣litie of it, and the passage of Alexander with his army, who at the he conquered Darius, went through the straight passages thereof, being both dangerous and difficult) and watered with many Ri∣uers that take their beginning from that mountaine, & so passeth Southward through all Cilicia, falling then into the Mediterra∣nian sea. Of Galatia. GAlatia or Gallo-Grecia is a countrey of Asia minor, distant from Ierusalem 400 miles; hauing vpon the East Cappa∣docia, vpon the South Pamphilia, vpon the West Bythinia, and on the North the Euxine sea. The cities of this country were an∣tiently Sinopis, where King Mithridates kept his Court, and Dio∣genes the Cynick was born; Amisus, also Pessinus, where the Mo∣ther of the gods was had in great honor, and was fetcht thence by the Romans. This was a famous mart town (as Livy saith, li. 29.) Laodicea, Tauius, and Ancyra, where there was held a notable Si∣nod: and in this large and spatious country also stood Antiochia Pisidia; for the Galathians dwelt in all Paphlagonia a part of Li∣caonia, Pisidia, and Isauria: in which countries the Apostle Paul taught the Gospel of Christ. These inhabitants (which in those daies were called Galathi∣ans) are said to be a people of France, who ioyning themselues to the Cymbrians, Danes, and Germans, vnder the conduct of Bren∣nus their captain inuaded Italy; in which enterprise they were so fortunat that they conquered a great part of it, wherin they plan∣ted colonies: and because of their neernesse to their own country
in processe of time grew mightie; and from that beginning the countrey where they inhabited was called Cice-alpine-Gallia; taking that name partly of the place, partly of the people. After, Brennus and his armie making vse of their fortunes, forraged all Italy, and came to Rome, which they woone and sackt, all but the Capitoll, and that also was in great danger, vntill such time as Ca∣millus (a valiant Roman Captaine) taking aduantage of the ene∣mies securitie (who now tooke more care how to satisfie their couetousnesse, than to defend what they had got) of a sudden set vpon them; by which vnexpected inuasion they were put to a maruellous straight, and the besieged greatly incouraged; so that they also issuing out of the Capitoll, made such a slaughter, that they forced Brennus and his armie to retire, and to restore all the pillage that hee had got, and also forsake the countrey. This misfortune they bore patiently, considering their former prospe∣ritie, and in hope of better successe sailed thence into Grecia: where, after they had attempted many noble exploits, and failing in some, they determined a voyage for Delphos, because there was great store of treasure, and the inhabitants (as they suppo∣sed) weake to oppose their armie. In this expedition they vsed much pillage and robbing vpon the Seas; and through many dangers came at length to this Isle, landed their men, wan the ci∣tie, fired a great part of it, and put many of the inhabitants to the sword: with this victorie, most of his armie which were more re∣ligious than the rest, would haue willingly left the countrey; but Brennus who beforetimes had beene vsed to sacriledge, and those that were as couetous as himselfe, thought it basenesse through an opinion of holinesse to leaue so great a bootie behind them as was contained in the Temple of Apollo, (for that place of all the Temples of the world in those times was notorious for riches and treasure, the many and great gratuities and offerings of most Princes, which were both magnificent and rich, being hoarded vp in the secret caues of this Oracle) wherefore they attempted the assault, but with bad successe, for the diuell raised such a tempest, with thundring, lightning, and other strange and vncoth acci∣dents, that Brennus in this distemperature of the aire wasSome say he killed himself with his owne dagger. slaine, many of his shippes were set on fire, and the greatest part of
his armie lost, being either spoiled with lightning, slaine by the inhabitants, or dispersed with feare. Such euent had this sacrile∣gious attempt. Those that remained, after they had gathered themselues into a body, went thence into Asia the lesse, and plan∣ted themselues in this country; where the inhabitants in pro∣cesse of time called them Gallo-Graecians, adding their origi∣nall name to that of the countrey wherein they liued: and after, for beauties sake, they were called Galatians, See Liu. lib. 5. Dio∣dorus Siculus, lib. 6. saith, That the inhabitants of Galatia were so called of this people, in the time that Gidion iudged Israel, & that Cyrus was Emperour of Persia; both may be true, considering the mutabilitie and change of States in those times. Some thinke they were first called Galatians by Attalus King of Pergamus, (who gaue them a great ouerthrow close by the ri∣uer Halym) because they originally were of Gallia, and continu∣ed sometime in Graecia, and after came into Asia; so he joyning these two names into one, called them Gallo-Graecians, or Gal∣latians. This history is diuersly reported by diuers authors; but all conclude that they rested and inhabited in Asia, where their posteritie continued to this day. In times past it was a very warlike and generous nation, and in their expedition performed many noble exploits, attaining to eminence onely by their sword; for which cause many Princes neere them were beholding vnto them for their aide: but withall, cruell and barbarous, insomuch as they oftentimes eat their cap∣tiues or offered them to their gods; and thus they continued for the space of 300 yeares, till Paul comming into that countrey preached the Gospell amongst them, and conuerted them from this Barbarisme to the Christian faith. He sent an Epistle to this people from Rome, being 1200 miles. They in those times held all Paphligonia, a part of Phrigia, Cappadocia, and of all the neighbouring countries thereabouts, which after their names was called Gallo Graecia or Galatia: such a mightie nation was this growne in a short time, at first being a people thrust out of theit owne countrey for want of a place to inhabit in, as you may reade more at large in the fifth booke of Liuie, whose autho∣ritie I haue principally followed herein.
Of Phrygia. PHrygia is as much to say as a dry and sandy country, scituated in Asia the lesse between Galatia and Mysia, 600 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. It is diuided into two parts, the grea∣ter and the lesse: in the greater Phrygia stood Smyrna; in the lesse Dardania, so called of Dardanus who first built it: in which town there reigned many wealthy & mighty Princes, as Erictho∣nius, Tros of whom it was called Troy, Ilus of whom it was called Ilion, Laomedon who was the father of Priamus the last king ther∣of, for in his time it was destroyed by the Grecians. Of which de∣solation I will not speak because it is commonly known. It lay waste so long (although it had bin a faire and goodly ci∣ty, the like not in the world) that the place where it stood was be∣come like a plain field, only here and there some heaps of old ru∣ins, to shew that there had been a city in that place. And as Vir∣gil said, I am seges est vbi Troia fuit, Corne now growes where Troy stood. A long time after there were a certain people that called them∣selues Trojans, who rebuilt it, but not in the same place, and in it erected a goodly Temple in honour of the goddesse Pallas to the which Temple Alexander the Great (after he had conquered Da∣rius King of Persia close by the riuer Granicus, which tooke be∣ginning in a mountain not far from Troy) went, and with singu∣lar gladnesse and great solemnitie offered many rich and goodly Presents, enlarged the towne, and greatly adorned. But after he had ended the Persian war, and conquered almost all the knowne world, he sent very kinde and louing letters to these new Trojans, promising not only to inlarge the towne, and endow it with ma-priuiledges and reuenues, but also to build vp a faire and sumptu∣ous Temple there, as Strabo lib. 15. saith: all which was done for the loue he bore to Homers Iliads. Wherefore looke what Alexander had promised, Lysimachus (one of his chiefe Princes, and King of Thrace) after his death performed; for he returned to Troy, enlarged the city, beautified it with goodly buildings, set vp a stately Temple, and then com∣past
it about with strong wals. After this sort it continued a long time, vntill Fimbria a Questor of the Romans (when he had slaine Valerius Flaccus the Consull, with whom hee was sent, against Mi∣thridates King of Pontus) besieged it, and within ten dayes space woon it; making his vaunts, that hee conquered that citie in ten dayes, which Agamemnon could scarce do in ten yeares; to which one of the inhabitants of the citie answered, That then Troy had a Hector, but now it had none. But for this hee cruelly wasted the citie. This destruction hapned in the 84 yeare before Christ: thus it lay desolate till Augustus Caesars time, who caused it again to be re-edified and beautified with many faire and goodly buildings, because the Romanes, and especially those noble families of the Iulij and Caesars, doe deriue their progenie from the Trojans: for which cause Augustus vsed such diligence in the rebuilding of this citie, and bestowed such infinit cost, that he much exceeded Alexander, and made it a faire and goodly citie. At this day it is called Ilium. But in the place of old Troy there is little to bee seene, only a small towne, as Strabo saith. It is distant from Ierusa∣lem, 760 miles, Northwestward. Of Bythinia. THis countrey is opposite to Constantinople, scituated in A∣sia minor, distant from Irusalem Northwestward, and so cal∣led of Bythinus the sonne of Iupiter and Thrax. It was sometime called Pontus, Bebrycia, and Mygdonia, as Stephanus saith. In this countrey the Apostle Paul could not preach the Gospel of Christ when he went into Macedonia and Graecia, because hee was hin∣dred by the Spirit, Act. 16. The principall cities thereof were Calcidon, Heraclea, Nicea, Nicomedia, Apamea, Flauiopolis, Li∣bissa (where Hannibal lieth buried) and Prusa, now called Byrsa, where in times past the Emperours of Turkie kept their Courts, and were buried. The mother and metropolis of all these cities was Nicea, or rather Nicaea, beeing distant from Ierusalem 720 miles towards the Northwest; at the first called Antigonia, of Antigonus the sonne of Philip King of Asia, who built it after the death of Alexander the Great. But Lysimachus called it Nicaea, af∣ter his wifes name, and at this day is called Nissa. The compasse
thereof is two miles, being foure square, scituated (as Strabo saith lib. 12.) in a faire and pleasant place, lying close by the poole of Ascania, and hath in it 4 gates, standing in a direct line; al which gates might easily haue beene seene from a certaine stone which stood in the middle of the Market place. In this citie the most Christian Emperor Constantine the Great celebrated a Councell, anno Dom. 325. at which time there were present 320 Bishops, who condemned the Arrian herisie, and in∣stituted the Nicaen Creed. But after that, viz. anno Dom. 326, the Arrians endeauouring to hold a second Councell in this citie, to confirme their opinions, and to dissolue that which went before, the Lord hindred them with an Earthquake, by which almost half the citie was throwne down. Not long after, there hapned another earthquake which vtterly destroied it: notwithstanding it was re∣built again, and in it a second Councell held, wherein the Nicaen Creed was condemned. There were many cities of this name; that before spoken of, another in Thrace, a third in France, not far from the riuer Varus, a fourth (as Stephanus saith) is amongst the Lorrenses in Graecia, a fift in Illeria, a sixt in India, a seuenth in Corsica, and the eighth in Leuctris of Boetia. Of Mysia. THis is a country of Asia the lesse, bordring vpon Helle spont and Troada; being diuided into two parts, that is, the grea∣ter and the lesse. That part that bordreth vpon Troada, is distant from Ierusalem 800 miles Northwestward: but that which is cal∣led Mysia the lesse, and bordring vpon Lydia, is 1028 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. In this countrey stood Pergamus, to which Iohn wrote his Reuelation; Scepsis where one Neleus kept the bookes of Aristotle til Apollonius time, also Antandrus, Adra∣mitium, Tranoiapolis, and Apollinia, which stood close by the riuer Thyndaeus. The inhabitants were men of a base condition, and contemned of the world, insomuch as they became a prouerbe, as often as a man would denote a thing of no estimation, they would say Vltimum esse Mysiorum, that is, It is worse than the Mysians, as it
appeareth in Cicero's oration for Flaccus. Yet notwithstanding, Paul and Iohn the Euangelist preached the doctrine and light of the Gospell to this poore and despised people, so that the Mysi∣ans, which were a contemptible and abhominable nation before all the world, were not so before God, for they were conuerted at the preaching of Iohn and Paul: From whence he saith, Not many wise according to the flesh, not many mightie, not many noble; but God hath chosen the foolish things of this world, that they might confute and ouerthrow the wise, &c. 1. Cor. 1. In times past they were a great people, though of smal estima∣tion, for they had vnder their iurisdiction, Lydia, Caria, Perga∣mus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philidelphia, and Laodicea; to many of which Iohn wrote his Revelation. Also (as Herodotus saith, Lib. 7.) the Mysians and Teucrians, before the Trojan war, past into Eu∣rope, and there woon and held Thracia, Macedonia, and all the land to the Adriatick sea, &c. Of Troas. THis citie Troas, where Paul raised Eutichus (which signi∣fies happie or fortunate) from death to life, Acts. 10. stood vpon the sea of Hellespont in Asia the lesse 720 miles from Ieru∣salem Northwestward. Antigonus king of Asia called it Troas, be∣cause it was in the countrey where Troy was. But after the death of Alexander he called it after his owne name Antigonia: And the better to honour it, kept his court there. But Lysimachus King of Thrace hauing got this city into his iurisdiction, bestowed great cost vpon it, and set vp many fair and goodly buildings, then cal∣led it after Alexanders name, Alexandria, and so it began to be cal∣led Alexandria Troas, Plin. lib. 5. Strabo, l. 13. Ier de locis Hebraicis. Now it was called Alexandria Troas to put a difference between it and diuers other cities of that name: for there was an Alexan∣dria in Aegypt, another in India, and many others elsewhere; but only this in the countrey where Troy stood. It was scituated in a high and spacious mountaine, about a mile and a halfe from the shore of Propontus towards the East, between which & Troads is twentie and eight miles.
It is a thing worthy obseruation, to consider by what diuers names the sea that lies between Europe and Asia the lesse is cal∣led, for betweene Constantinople and Calcidonia, close by the Euxine sea it is called Thracius Bosphorus, in which place it is not aboue halfe a mile broad: here Xerxes when he inuaded Graecia, built vp a bridge for his army to passe ouer. There is also another strait and narrow place in this sea, which is called by the name of Cimmerius Bosphorius. These two Bosphori are so called (as some authors hold) because a Bull when he loweth may be heard from the one side to the other: but Pliny seemeth to deriue the name from Io, that faire maid which Iupiter turned into a Cow, who swam ouer this sea, and of her was called Bosphorus, lib. 6. cap. 1. It is also called Propontus, because it lieth just before the Euxine sea; and Hellespont from Helle the daughter of Athamantis K. of Thebes who was drowned therein: then running thence it falleth into a gulph of the Mediterranean Ocean, & there it is called the Aege∣an sea, of Aegeus King of Athens, who drowned himselfe therein for the supposed losse of his sonne Theseus. In this sea were scitu∣ate the Isles of Pathmos, Mytelene, Samothrace, Chius, Lesbus, and many other Isles, as you may reade in the trauels of S. Paul. Of Samothracia, ot Samothrace. SAmothracia is an Isle of the Aegean sea, scituate between Tro∣ades and Thracia, eight hundred and eightie miles from Ieru∣salem towards the Northwest, close to that part of Thracia, where Hebrus falleth into the sea; sometimes called Dardania, of Dardanus King of Troy, who when hee had slaine his brother Ia∣cius, and taken from him the Palladiam, he came first into Samo∣thracia, and then into Asia, where he first laid the foundation of the citie called Troy, and of that Kingdome. And although this Isle at that time was called Dardania, yet because of the neerenes that it had to Thrace, and the altitude of the rocke whereon it stood, it soone changed the name: and then especially, when the people called Samos came thither to inhabit, who after their own name called it Samothracia. It stood vpon such a loftie place, that from thence all the countries round about might easily bee
seen. Arsinoë Queene of Thrace was banished by Ptolomeus her brother, into this Island, who after put to death all her children, and vsurpt vpon the kingdome of Thrace. A cruell part in a bro∣ther. Virg. li. Aeneid. 3. makes mention of this Island, saying, Treiciamque Samum quae nunc Samothracia fertur. And Samian-Troy, which now adayes is Samo-Thracia call'd. Strabo also writeth of it, li. 13. And in Acts 16. it is said, S. Paul sailed from Troad is to Samothracia, & so went thence into Thra∣cia and came to the city of Neapolis. Of Neapolis. THis Neapolis to which Paul went, was a city of Thrace not far from Macedoni, 880 miles from Ierusalem Northwest∣ward, called also of some Caurus. There are many other Cities of this name; one in Iudea, where Sichem and Sichar stood; another in Caria, a third in Africa, a fourth in Pannonia; but aboue all, that which stands in Campania is most remarkable being the chiefe city of the Neapolitan kingdome. Of Philippa. THis city in times past was called Crenides, because of the veins of gold that were found close by it. But after, Philip King of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great, caused it in the yeare before Christ 354, to bee re-edified and inlarged, and then after his own name called it Philippos. It was scituated in Gre∣cia close by the riuer Stridon, 936 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest) and endowed with many priuiledges. In those times the gold was so much increased in this place, that the reue∣nue thereof was worth vnto this King more than a thousand Ta∣lents, which at 4500 li. the talent, amounteth to forty fiue Milli∣ons of pounds yearely. By the which means King Philip grew so rich, that he caused his gold to be coined, and called it after his owne name, Philippian gold. To this place Paul came, and did
many miracles, taught the Gospell, and conuerted many. From hence he wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent it to Corinth; euen 292 miles. He also wrote an Epistle from Rome to the Christians of this Towne, and sent it them by the hands of Epaphroditus, euen 628 miles. It was afterward a Colo∣ny of the Romans. Of Amphipolis. THis was a city of Macedonia, compassed about with the ri∣uer Strymon, from whence it tooke the name; and was di∣stant from Ierusalem 960 miles towards the Northwest. Here al∣so the Apostle Paul was, Acts 17. Of Apollonia. THis was a citie of Mygdonia, scituated not farre from Thes∣salonica towards the West, close by the riuer Echedorus, 948 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest: being so cal∣led from Apollines, which signifies the Sunne: it stood twentie miles from Thessalonica. There are many other Cities of this name; one scituate in Graecia, close by the Adriatick sea; ano∣ther, among the Islands of Thrace; a third, in Creet, on this side the riuer Ister; a fourth, in Syria; and a fift, in Africa amongst the Cyrenes. Of Thessalonia or Thessalonica. THis was a citie of Macedon, in ancient times called Halia, because it stood vpon the sea; after, called Therma, of the hot bathes that were in it; and lastly, Thessalonica, of Philip the sonne of Amyntas King of the Macedonians, who gaue it that name ei∣ther of the great victory that he had against the Thessalonians, or else after the name of his daughter called Thessalonica, who was the mother of Cassandrus: it stood close by the Thermaick gulph, not farre from the mouth of the riuer Echedorus, 932 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. The Apostle Paul taught publiquely in this city, and there conuerted a great multitude of people, Act. 17. Hee also wrote two Epistles to the inhabitants thereof, and sent them from Athens, being 232 miles distant.
In the time of Theodosius the first, Emperor of Rome, there hap∣ned by reason of some discontent, a grieuous sedition amongst the Thessalonians, in which stirre some of his captains & gouer∣nors were slain. Wherefore the Emperor (hauing intelligence of what had hapned) sent an army against the city, with authority to put to death a certain number of those who had rebelled: whence it hapned that the city was filled with many vniust slaughters: for the soldiers respecting more their priuat profit than the equitie of the cause, spared neither innocent nor nocent, yong nor old; so that as well the inhabitants as strangers that resorted thither did partake of this miserie, and suffered like punishment as did they which were the first authors of this rebellion. But because the emperor was consenting vnto these euils, Am∣brose Bishop of Millaine would not suffer him without publique repentance to come to the sacrament of the Lords supper: where∣fore in a publique assembly hee acknowledged his offence with great contrition, Theodor. li. 5. ca. 17. & Soz. li. 7. ca. 24. This town was afterward purchased by the Venetians, of An∣dronichus Palaeologus son of Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople; who held it a long time, vntill Amurath Emperor of the Turkes won it from them, and exercised grieuous cruelty vpon the inha∣bitants. At this day it is a faire and goodly city, wherein is to be seen 23 Churches, and is inhabited both by Christians, Iews, and Turks, as Sebastian Munster saith: but the greatest number is Iews, who are partly merchants, partly of other trades; their number in this place (as it is said by some of their own nation) is 14000, and they haue 80 synagogues: but they are constrained to weare yel∣low wreaths about their heads, the Christians blew, & the Turks white. There are many Iewes also in Constantinople and Adria∣nople; but in no place more than in this town, which is now cal∣led Salonica.
Of Berraea. THis is a city of Macedon, scituated vpon the riuer of Halak∣mon, 960 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. In this ci∣ty the Iewes stirred vp a great tumult and sedition against the A∣postle Paul, Acts 17. At this day it it is called Voria. Of Athens. THis was the most famous City of all Grecia, the mother of Arts, and a bountifull nourisher of large and mighty Colo∣nies, in that part of Achaia called Acte or Attica. It was scitua∣ted vpon the shore of the Mediterranian sea, 720 miles from Ieru∣salem Westward. It tooke name from a Diuine knowledge; for the word is deriued of  and , i. the minde of God. It was first built by Cecrops, fiue yeares before Moses fled out of Egypt into the land of the Midianites, and of him called Cecropia. This Ce∣crops was the first King thereof, and there succeeded him at least 40, both famous & worthy princes. But after it was called Mop∣sonia, of Mopsus K. of Thessaly: and after Ionia, which name it held for a while: and lastly Athens, dedicated to Pallas (which goddesse the Grecians say was born of the brain of Iupiter) which name it held a long time after. There liued in this city Solon, Socrates, Pla∣to, Aristotle, Demosthenes, and many other excellent Philosophers. It was scituated vpon a faire and strong Rocke, beautified with many goodly Temples and buildings; but principally that of Minerva was most sumptuous, in which there hung a great num∣ber of Lampes, which gaue a continuall light. There was also the Monasterie of the holy Virgins, and the image of Pallas made all of white Ivorie very curious and costly. There were many Schools, Colledges, and pleasant gardens in which Philosophers vsed to walk, and it abounded with sweet and delectable musick, and with great resort of Merchants and Schollers. To conclude, in those times it was the most notable city in the world. Moreouer, there were many profitable hauens for the receit of ships, but that which was called Piraeum exceeded, being ca∣pable
to receiue 40As some say 400. ships; beautified with many goodly buil∣dings, in compasse two miles, fortified with seuen walls, and ioy∣ning to the city (wherof Terence writeth in Eunuch. Act. 3. Scen. 4) At this day it is called Porto Lini, fortified with two wals foure miles in length, extending to the hill Munichya, the syrname of Diana (being compassed in the figure of a Chersonesse, & so ioy∣ned to the city of Athens. In which distance there are two other hauens besides that of Piraeum. In this Iupiter had a magnificent Temple, and in it were found many artificiall tables, pictures, and grauen images, all which are at this day destroied and carried away. It hath beene three times destroyed; first by Xexes and Mar∣donius, which happened in the yeare before Christ 479. Then by Lysander, who broke downe an hundred paces of the wall, and al∣most vtterly destroyed their ships, and broke downe the hauen of Peraea. It was also sore oppressed by the Romans, and they also brake downe their hauen and burnt their shippes, but spared the towne, and held it in great estimation. But it was the third time ouerthrowne and vtterly destroyed by the Turks, who both chan∣ged the place and name of the city, after it had flourished 3113 yeares. At this day it is diuided into three parts, and called by the name of Sethina, because of the varietie of the inhabitants that liue in it, being very well peopled, and a faire and spatious City, but much altered from that it was in times past. For al∣though before it was the very mother of eloquence, and glory of Attica, yet at this day it is so much altered, that their language is base, and their glory is eclipsed. The vppermost part of the city, where formerly the temple stood dedicated to the vnknown God, is now wholly and absolutely in the hands of the Turkes, in which they haue built a strong and almost inuincible Castle, which hath the command of the rest of the towne. The second and middle part of the towne is all inhabited by Christians. In the third there standeth a fair and goodly Palace, supported with marble pillars, and adorned with goodly workes. In this part of the City there inhabiteth people of diuers sects and conditions. And heere also is the seat of a Metropolitane, who hath vnder him many Bishops. So that God doth support and maintaine
his Church euen amongst the enemies thereof; for there ate four Patriarks in Turky, to which al the other Christian Metroplitans and Bishops are subiect; viz. the Patriarch of Alexandria, Con∣stantinople, Antiochia, and Ierusalem. Paul was the first man that preached the Gospell of Christ in this city, and conuerted many citisens, but especially Dionysius the Areopagite, who dwelt vpon a promontory without the city, and as it seems was one of the principal Iudges and gouernors of the town; for after he had taught publiquely in the towne, & had disputed against the Iewes and Philosophers concerning Christ, they supposing him to be a busie fellow, and one worthy of death as a disturber of the common peace, brought him before this Dio∣nysius, that so by his iudgement he might receiue condign punish∣ment for his offence. But S. Paul so well behaued himselfe, and preached with such admirable eloquence and learning, that hee not only confuted his enemies, but among others conuerted this Dionysius Areopagitus, who was afterwards the first Bishop of A∣thens (as Euseb. saith, lib. 4. cap. 23.) and went captiue with Paul to Rome, and from thence to Paris in France, where he suffered mar∣tyrdome vnder Dionysius the Emperor. Of Corinthia. COrinthus is a famous city in Grecia, scituated in Pelopones∣sus a pleasant countrey of Achaia, ioyning to the continent of Grecia like an Isthmus or Peninsula, distant from Ierusalem 760 miles towards the West, commonly called Corantha, built (as Eusebius saith) by Sisiphus sonne of Aeolus, at such time as Io∣shuah gouerned Israel; who was a mighty Pirat. At first it was but a castle, and called after his name Sisiphyus: but after, because of the strength of the place, and pleasant scituation, it became a faire towne, and called by the name of Corcyra, as Strabo faith; then Ephym, of Ephyra, who was a faire and goodly Nymph, and Queen of that place. Now although euen in those times it was held in great estimation, yet it became much wasted and decay∣ed through the continuance of time, vntill it was repaired by King Corinthus (who as some thinke was the sonne of Marathon
Suidas saith, the sonne of Pelops; others would haue him the sonne of Orestis: and after his name was called Corinth, that is, The floure of Maides. It was a faire and goodly citie, very commodiously built, for it stood betweene the two seas of Ionium and Aegeum, so that there resorted thither great multitude of Merchants from all places, Close by the citie there stood a steepe mountaine, which was as it were a bulwarke for the defence thereof, being 560 feet high, and called Acrocorinthus, that is, the glory and strength of the Corinthians. It was also compassed about with strong walls, and beautified with many goodly buildings and temples, but aboue the rest, the Temple of Venus was had in great reputation, which (as Strabo saith) stood vpon the top of the mountaine Acrocorin∣thus, wherein there were aboue a thousand Maides prostituted euery yeare. This Temple was had in such great honour, and was so gloriously built, that aboue all the places of the world there was resort vnto it. Close by it stood the ancient castle cal∣led Sysyphius, built all of white Marble; and a little below that, the fountaine of Pyrene dedicated to the Muses. There were many mightie Princes that ruled in this citie, as Alethes who was King thereof at such time as Samuel judged Is∣rael, which was 1103 yeares before Christ; hee bestowed great cost vpon it, set vp many faire and goodly buildings, and ruled ouer it thirtie and fiue yeares, as Eusebius saith. After him there succeeded many Kings, by whose worthinesse and prowesse it was so much inlarged, and made so famous, that it was little infe∣riour to the citie of Rome: for at such time as Embassadors were sent thence to intreate of some businesse concerning the state, the Corinthians did not let to giue them many reprochfull tearmes, as Strabo saith, lib. 8. because of which insolencie the Romans sent Lucius Mummus the Consul, into Graetia, who besieged Co∣rinth, and within a short time tooke it, and burnt it downe to the ground, in the yeare before Christ, 145, of which you may reade more in Florus, and in the second Decad of Lyuie. It was a mar∣uellous rich Towne, and abounded with gold, siluer, and costly brasse, also with plate, and curious pictures: so that although Mummius conquered Corinth, yet Corinth conquered Rome;
for the citizens thereof were so bewitched with the riches and glory of this towne, that they forgot their ancient seueritie, and with violence followed their vices, as Salust saith, lib. 1. So that as before Corinth abounded with luxurie and diuers other abho∣minable euils, as whoredome, adulterie, fornication, couetousnes, idolatry, rapine, and murther: so Rome in future ages became as bad or worse than it. Thus it continued waste from that time till Iulius Caesar was Emperour of Rome, who hauing trauelled into those parts of the world, and seene the ruines of this citie, and the profitale scitua∣tion for traffique, caused it to be rebuilded: after which time it began to grow great & spacious, little inferiour to the former in glory, and no lesse corrupted with vices, hauing forgot the former miserie which it sustained by the hands of the Romans; and so continued from the yeare before Christ 44, vntill the yeare after Christ 41, at which time Paul came thither & preached the Gos∣pell, by whose diuine doctrine and godly life and conuersation, they were conuerted from their euill courses, and liued more ho∣lily and honestly, as appeareth by the two Epistles of Saint Paul wrote from Philippos to the inhabitants of this towne. But after, they falling from their faith and forsaking their an∣cient integritie, the Lord punished them with a second desolati∣on; for at such time as Amurath Emperor of the Turkes grew to eminencie, and had conquered Thessalonica, Boaetia, and Attica, he came into this Isthums, and made all Peloponessus tributary to him. Then after him Mahomet the second (although the inha∣bitants of Corinth had fortified their citie with three walls, and made it so strong that it was thought to be almost inuincible) be∣sieged it and woon it, An. Dom. 1458. about six yeares after Con∣stantinople was conquered by the Turkes. But now it is in the command of the Venetians, and that, and all the countrey is cal∣led by the name of Morea, as it appeareth in the Turkish Histo∣rie, lib. 10.
The fourth peregrination of the Apostle Paul. IN the yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ, 53, Paul went from Antiochia in Syria, and came to Galatia, and Laodicia in Phry∣gia, and thence wrote his Epistle to Timothy, as it appeareth by the subscription of that Epistle, which was 380 miles. From Laodicea hee went to Ephesus, which was 280 miles; and there appointed Timothy to be a Bishop, and daily disputed in the schoole of a certaine Tyrant, and did many miracles, as it appeareth, Acts 19. From Ephesus he came to Troada, which was 200 miles, where when he could not find Titus he was troubled in spirit, 2 Cor. 2. From Troada hee sailed into Macedonia, and came to Philip∣pos, which was 232 miles: from hence hee wrote his Epistles to the Corinthians, and sent them to Corinth, which was 292 miles. In the same yeare also, Paul passing through Graecia, (in euery place where he came, preaching and visiting the churches, Act. 19.) at length came to Corinthus, which was 480 miles. In the 57 yeare after the Natiuitie of Christ, when Paul had wintred among the Corinthians; in the Spring (that hee might auoyd the deceits of the Iewes who went about to take away his life, hee went thence and returned to Philippos, which was 292 miles, where he celebrated the feast of Penticost, Acts 2. From thence he sailed to Troada, which was 232 miles, where he raised Eutichus from death to life, Acts 20. From Troada he went to Assa, which was thirtie and six miles, Acts 20. From Assa he sailed to Mileten, which was 760 miles, Acts 20. From Mileten he went to Chius, which was 64 miles, Acts 20. From Chius he sailed to Samus, which was 60 miles, and con∣tinued in the Isle of Trogylius which was close by Samus, as Pl. saith, lib. 5. cap. 3. and Strabo, cap. 13.
From Trogylius hee sailed by Ephesus, and came to Miletus, which was 160 miles. From thence hee sent Messengers to the Ministers of Ephesus, commanding them to haue a speciall care to the flocke of Christ, which he had purchased with his pretious bloud; and added that he was so much the more importunate in that behalfe because they should neuer see him againe: Where∣fore they embraced Paul with great lamentations and sorrow, Acts 2. From Myletus he & his companions went with a direct course to the Island of Cous, which was 200 miles, Acts 21. From thence the next day they went to Rhodes, which was 84 miles. From Rhodes they went to Patara, which was 100 miles. From Patara they sayled to Tyrus, leauing Cyprus vpon the left hand, which was 360 miles, where hee found certaine Disci∣ples, and remained there seuen daies, Acts 21. From Tyrus Paul and his companions sailed to Ptolomais, which was 24 miles. From thence they came to Caesarea Strato, which was 44 miles; there they remained in the house of Philip the Euangelist, who was one of the seuen Deacons with Stephen, Acts 21. From thence Paul went to Ierusalem, which was 32 miles, and there about the feast of Penticost he was taken by the Iewes, im∣prisoned and scourged, Acts 21. At this time Paul was about 47 yeares of age. So all these Trauels were 3396 miles. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. And first of Assus. COncerning Laodicea to which Paul trauelled you may reade before. I will therefore proceed to Assus, which was a towne within the jurisdiction of Troada, scituated close by the Aegean sea, 700 miles from Ierusalem towards the North-East, as Stra∣bo saith, (Lib. 13.) wonderfully fortified both by nature and art, so that it is a thing almost impossible to be conquered. There
is found close by it the stone called Sarchophagus, in which if any mans corps be buried, within the space of 40 daies it is vtter∣ly consumed all but the teeth, as Pliny saith, li. 36. cap. 17. In this citie Cleantes the Stoicke was borne, as Chrysippus saith. Of Mitylene. THe Isle and towne of Mitylene is scituated in the Aegean sea, 624 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest. In times past called Lesbus, which obtained the whole jurisdiction & go∣uernment of Troada. It is in compasse 136 miles, and containeth in length from the North to the South 56 miles. In it is found much matter for the making and calking of ships: there was ma∣ny goodly cities in it, as Mitylene and Pyrrha, which stood vpon the West part of it; also the Metropolitan called Lesbos, Eres∣sus, the hauen of Antissa, and Mithymna. Of Lesbos in times past this whole Isle was called Lesbus, vntill the citie of Mity∣lene grew famous; being so called of Mitylene the daughter of Macharus, as Diodorus saith, lib. 4. and after that cities name it was called Mitylene. There were many other goodly cities which stood in this Isle, but they were either consumed by earthquakes or drowned by the sea. The land thereof was very pleasant and fruitfull, bringing forth grapes, whereof there was a very excel∣lent and cleere wine made, which they of Constantinople princi∣pally liked: there is also found great store of Cypresse, Pines, and plenty of figs come thence. Their horses are very strong, but of a low stature: it is very mountainy, and pestred with wild beasts. There were many famous men that liued and were borne in this country; as Pittachus one of the seuen Wise-men of Graece, Aliaeus the Poet, and Alcimenides his brother, Diophanes the Ora∣tor, and Theophanes who wrote the acts of Pompey the Great, (as it appeareth in Tullies Oration for Archia) Theophrastus also that notable Philosopher, (who at first was called Tyrtamanus, then Euphrastus, that it, a good Orator) and lastly, Theophrastus, that is, a diuine Orator: this man was an excellent Perapateticke, and schol∣ler to Aristotle, whom he succeeded in his schoole, and had two thousand schollers.
Vitruvius the Architect maketh mention of Mitylen in his first booke, saying that it was a very magnificent city, and rarely buil∣ded, but very badly scituated, for when the South winde did blow, the inhabitants grew sicke; when the West, they coughed, and when the North wind did blow they were made well. Not∣withstanding the Apostle Paul and his companions came to this citie, as it appeareth, Acts 20. At this day it is vnder the iurisdi∣ction of the Turkes, and is called by the name of Midilly. Of Chius. THis is an Isle scituated in the Aegean sea, distant from Ierusa∣lem 600 miles towards the Northwest, being 112 miles in compasse; the principall citie thereof is called Chios, taking the name, as some say from the Masticke tree, which sweateth out a certaine gum, of the Syrians called Chian, and by vs Mastick: this Mastick is the best in those parts of the world. Ephorus calleth it by the antient name Aetalia; but Cleobulus, Chia; either because of the Nymph called Chion, or else because of the whitenesse of the soile: there are others that call it Patyusia; and there are some who deriue the name of Chius from the temple of Apollo that standeth in it, called Chion. There stands in it a faire and goodly mountaine called Pellenaeum, from whence the inhabitants dig very excellent marble. Also in times past the best Malmsey came thence, but in these daies it is brought from Creet. Of Samus. THis is an Isle and Citie scituated in the Aegean Sea, vpon a high or loftie piece of ground, so that from thence the inha∣bitants may see into all the Countries neere adjoyning, lying vpon the coast of Ephesus and Ionia, 560 miles from Ierusalem toward the Northwest; it was in compasse 88 miles, very fertile and pleasant, much exceeding Chius, although it brought forth no Wine. In times past it was called Artemisia, Parthenea, and Stephane; taking those names from a crowne or wreath of sweet smelling floures, of which there were great plenty in this Isle: the Poëts feigne that Iuno was both borne and brought vp in it; and Varro saith, That there was a faire and stately Temple dedicated
vnto her, where solemne seruice and the rites of Marriage were yearely celebrated. Pythagoras the Philosopher was borne here; and one of the Sybels (which prophecied of the comming of Christ) liued here. S. Paul also came to this Isle, and conuerted many, as appeareth, Acts 20. There is another Isle called Samus, scituated vpon the coast of Epirus, not far from the gulph of Ambracius, called also Cepha∣lenia, not far from the promontorie of Actium, where Augustus ouercame Antonius; in honour of which victory he built vp a ci∣tie and called it Nicapolis, &c. Of Trogyllium. THis is a promontorie and town not far from Ephesus, scitu∣ared in Asia minor, at the foot of the Mountaine Mycales, foure miles and somewhat more from Samus, where Paul staied, Act. 20. It is distant from Ierusalem 460 miles toward the North∣west. There are which say, that S. Paul staied at a certaine Isle joi∣ning close to this promontory, called after that, by the name of Trogylium, See Strabo, lib. 14. Of Myletus. THis was a famous city, scituated vpon the borders of Ionia and Caesaria, close by the shore of the Aegean sea, 104 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. The Poëts fein, that Mi∣letus, who was the first builder of this citie, was the son of Apollo, and called it after his owne name Myletus: but Strabo, lib. 12. thinketh that it was rather built by Sarpedon the sonne of Iupiter, and brother to Radamanthus and Minos, and by him was called Myletus, from another Citie of the same name, which stood in Crete. The wooll that commeth from this towne is wonderfull soft, and singular good for many purposes; but it was principally vsed to make cloth of, which they died into an excellent purple and transported into many places. There were many famous men that either liued or were borne in this towne; as Thales Milesius one of the seuen Wise-men of Graece, Anaximander, who was his scholler, Anaximenes and Hecataeus the Historian; also Eschenes the Orator, (not he that contended with Demosthenes who taking
too much libertie against Pompey was banished) Timothius the musician, and Pittacus the Philosopher, besides many others. But of all these, Thales Milesius was held in greatest estimation, because he was thought to be the first that taught natural Philo∣sophie and the Mathematicks amongst the Grecians. He was the first also that foretold of the Eclipse of the Sun, about such time as the battell was fought betweene Cyaxares father of Astyages King of the Medes, and Hallyates father of Croesus K. of the Lidi∣ans, which was about the 44 Olimpiad. There came vnto him a certaine man, who asked him what was the hardest thing in the world; he answered▪ seipsum nosce, to know himselfe. Another came to him, and askt him how he might do to liue justly; he answered, Si quae in alijs reprehendimus, ipse non faciamus, That we doe not those things which we reprehend in others. He died about the 58 Olympi∣ad. Meletus at this day is called Melasa. Of Cous. THis is one of the Cyclad Islands, lying in the Aegean sea, bor∣dring vpon Caria; being so called from the Vaults and caues that are in it, and distant from Ierusalem 524 miles. It hath a city called after the same name, wherein there was a stately Temple built in honour of Iuno; & another standing in the suburbs therof dedicated to Aesculapius: this was a very sumptuous temple, and made very rich, because of the many presents and gifts that were sent and dedicated to it. When the Romanes had obtained the command of this Isle, Octavius the father of Augustus Caesar, tooke out of this temple a naked Venus, which was a goodly image, and carried it with him to Rome in honour of his progenitors, who deriued their progenie from her. It is in compasse 56 miles, being so pleasantly scituated that it was a sea marke to Mariners, very fruitfull, and bringing forth abundance of wine & silke, by reason of a certain fish that is found there, from which they got great plenty. See Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22. There were many that liued onely by weauing of silke, and a∣boue the rest there was one Pamphila the daughter of Plates, that was most excellent in that Art.
There were many famous men that were either born or liued in that country, as Hipocrates that excellent Physitian, Apelles that notable painter, Simus the Physician, Philetas the poët and orator, Nicia the prince and tyrant of Cous, Ariston the Peripatetick, and Theomnestus that notable politician. At this day this Isle is with∣in the Turkish Empire, and by them called Stacu: also the prin∣cipall citie thereof is called by the same name, and wholly inha∣bited by the Turks, two towns only being inhabited by the Gre∣cians: but there are many that dwell in strong castles compassed with round and stately towers. This countrey is very fertile, abounding with cattell, and the mountaines thereof are little in∣ferior to those of Creet. Of Rhodes. THe city and Isle of Rhodes (which is so called from the sweet smell or roses) is scituated in the Mediterranean sea, a little from Asia the lesse, vpon the South; being distant from Ierusalem 140 miles toward the Northwest, as Strab. saith, l. 14. It is in com∣passe 112 miles. It was at first called Ophy, then Statilia, & after Telchin, of the inhabitants thereof, who were called Telchines, a people which, as some say, were witches; others say, curious Arti∣ficers, and were the first that found out the making of brasse and yron. At last it tooke the name of Rhodes from the principal city that stood in it: for there were three cities in it, viz. Lyndus, Ca∣mirus, and Ialyssus. In Lyndus, Cleobulus one of the seuen Wise∣men of Graece, and Chares that famous Statuarie, who made the Colossus which stood in this Isle, were borne. Ialyssus of a Rose that was found in it, was called Rhodes, being scituated vpon an exceeding high promontorie, lying toward the East part of that Isle. This exceeded the other two cities both for ports, waies, walls, and other ornaments, and the inhabitants were gouerned with such excellent lawes, and so skilfull in nauigation, that it might compare with the strongest citie of the world, and for a long time had the command of the sea round about, and vtterly abolished all Pirats and robbers from those parts.
Diodorus Sicul. li. 6. saith, that it was called Rhodes of Rhodia a faire and beautifull maid, who was dearely beloued of Apollo, and therefore this Island was dedicated to the Sunne; for as Solinus saith, though the heauens be neuer so cloudy yet the Sun shineth in Rhodes. Pindarus the Poet (because of the fertility of the soile, and the exceeding opulencie of the inhabitants) saith, that it rai∣ned gold in that country. In former times it flourished with lear∣ning and good arts, insomuch that the Romans for the most part sent their children to be brought vp at Rhodes. This Isle is very fruitfull, and bringeth forth many things necessarie for the main∣tenance of life, but aboue all, a certaine red wine which the Ro∣mans did greatly delight in, and valued at a high price. In this ci∣ty liued that notable Painter called Protogines, which Apelles con∣quered in that science, as Pliny saith, lib. 35. ca. 10. Demetrius King of Asia erected a notable Collossus or Statue of the Sun in this Isle, which that notable caruer Chares made, be∣ing outwardly all of pure brasse, but within nothing but stones; it was seuentie cubits high, and so artificially made, that it was accounted for one of the wonders of the world. Afterward it was carried into Aegypt by the Aegyptians who woon the towne. This Isle is famous to this day: in times past it was accounted one of the keys of Christendome, but at this day subject vnto the Turk: of which you may reade more in the Turkish History. Of Patara. PAtara was a Citie of Licia, so called of Patarus the builder thereof; who was the sonne of Apollones, or Lacones, as Strabo and Servius saith: it was scituated vpon the South side of Asia the lesse, close by the shore of the Mediterranean sea, 408 miles from Ierusalem towards the Northwest. Ptolomaeus Philadelphius K. of Aegypt inlarged this city, and called it after his sisters name, Arsinoës Lysiaca, to put a difference betweene it and other Cities called after that name; for there was an Arsinoe in Aegypt, and another neere Cyrene, where Apollo in certaine Moneths of the winter season (by the help of the Divel) gaue answer to them that
sought after him. S. Paul was in this towne, Acts 11. There was also another towne of this name in Achaia, where S. Andrew was crucified. The Trauels of S. Paul when he was taken captiue and carried Prisoner to Rome. IN the 57 yeare after the natiuitie of Christ, Paul being then 47 yeares of age, by the command of Claudius Lysius was taken and scourged by the Iewes, and brought thence to Antipatris by night (because there were forty Iewes which had sworne his death) which was 12 miles, Acts 22, 23, 24. From Antipatris hee was brought to Caesarea Strato, which was 28 miles, where he was brought before Foelix (who was Pre∣sident for the Romans in those parts) and was captiue there for the space of two daies, Acts 24, 25, 26. In the 59 yere after the natiuitie of Christ, Paul being then 49 yeares of age or thereabouts, was sent by Portius Festus President of the Iewes, to Rome: so Paul sailed from Caesarea Strato, to Si∣don, which was 84 miles, Acts 27. From thence Paul sailed close by Cyprus, because the winde was contrarie, and came to the sea ouer against Cilicia (which was very troublesome) and so passing by Pamphilia they came to Myra, which was 480 miles. Loosing from Myra they sailed to Gnidum, which was 248 miles, Acts 27. From Gnidum they sailed towards the South, and came to Crete, and so passed by the townes of Salmo, Lasaea, and Assus, and so came to Phoenicia, which was 180 miles. From Phoenicia they came to the Island of Claudia, which was 108 miles. From the Island of Claudia they came to Melite, which now is called Malta; in which place they suffered shipwracke, and Paul shooke off the Viper off his hand into the fire, and did ma∣nie
other miracles, which was 720 miles. From Malta they sailed in a ship of Alexandria, to Syracusus, in Sicilia, which was 180 miles: Paul at this time was 50 yeares of age, Acts 28. From Syracusa they sailed to Regium, which was 52 miles. From thence they went to Puteola, which was 164 miles. From Puteola they went to Apiforum, which was 12 miles: there certaine Christians of Rome came to meet them, aboue 22 miles, and receiued Paul with great friendship. From Apiforum they led him to Tribatera, which is six miles, and there he met more Christians. From Tribatera he went to Rome, being 16 miles, where hee remained two yeares prisoner, and there wrote his Epistles to the Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Philemon, and the Hebrews: so all these Trauels were 2300 miles. And in the whole, from his first beginning, vntill his being prisoner in Rome were, 10270 miles. But being deliuertd out of prison, the last ten yeres of his age he did not only preach the Gospell in Asia and Creta, where he appointed his disciple Timothy to be a Bishop, and in Macedonia, (where being in Neapolis he wrote an Epistle to Titus, and sent it to him aboue 300 miles to the Isle of Creta) but also he preacht the Gospell, and spred the word of God abroad in the countrie of Spaine, Rom. 15. which is distant from Ierusalem 2800 miles: and being the second time imprisoned in Rome, he wrote his second Epist. to Timothy, & sent it aboue 996 miles to Ephesus: not long after, he was beheaded in Rome, in the place called Via Ostensi. Of the townes and places to which he trauelled. Of Antipatris. THe towne of Antipatris is distant from Ierusalem twelue miles towards the Northwest. In times past it was called Caphar Zalama, that is, a Village of peace. There Iudas Mac∣chabeus ouercame Nicanor, 1 Mac. 7. Afterward Herod that liued in the time of our Sauiour Christ, built this towne much fairer,
and called it after the name of his father, Antipatris. It stood in a very pleasant and fruitfull soile, hauing many faire trees and fresh waters about it, Ios. lib. 16. ca. 7. S. Paul was by night brought pri∣soner into this towne, Acts 23. Of Myra. THis was a great town, as Strabo, li. 14. saith, and stood in Asia minor, in the prouince of Licia, vpon the coast of the Medi∣terranean sea, 380 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. S. Paul was in this towne. Of Gnidus. THis towne lieth in Asia minor, vpon the Mediterranean sea, in the Pennisida called Doris, which by a narrow point joineth vnto the Prouince of Caria, and is distant from Ierusalem 492 miles. In this town the goddesse Venus had a great temple, wherin her image was placed, made by that cunning workman Praxiteles, of Marble stone; and for that cause Horace calleth Venus Queene of Gnido, Lib. 1. carm. Od. 30. O Venus Regina Gnijdi Paphi{que}, that is, O Venus Queene of Gnidus and Paphos, &c. There came many learned men out of this towne, as Eudoxus, Agatarchides, Paripateticus, Theopompus, and others. This towne is yet standing, and (as it is thought) it tooke the name of the fish Gnidus, which is taken there in the sea; which fish is of so strange a nature, that if you take it in your hand it stingeth like a nettle. At this day this towne hath another name, and is called Cabo Chrio, as Conradus Gesnerus in his Onomastico writeth. Of Creta. THe Island of Creta tooke the name (as Strabo saith) from the people called Curetes that dwelt in this Island: those people vsed to cut all the haire off from the foreparts of their heads, and therefore they would not endure to suffer any man to weare his haire being in the warres; for which cause in the Grecian tongue they were called Couretes, and in time this name by corruption of speech was changed, and they called Cretans. This Island stan∣deth in the Mediterranean sea, between Graecia and Africa, 600
miles from Ierusalem toward the West. It is a great Island, being 200 miles long, 48 miles broad, and in compasse 588 miles: it is very fruitfull of Cypresse trees, Malmsey, Sugar, and other spi∣ces: the Malmsey taketh the name from the towne of Maluesia, in Peloponessus, standing vpon the point of Malta, right ouer a∣gainst Creta or Candia; and at this day the like wine is made in Creta, and called by the same name, from whence it is common∣ly brought vnto vs, though in times past it came out of this Island of Chius. Among all the hills that are found in the Island of Creta, the hill Ida is most spoken of, because of the height: about it standeth diuers townes and villages: it hath many hills and woods; for the Island is very full of sweet Cypresse trees, insomuch that there are woods full of them. Pliny writes, that vpon a time there was such an Earthquake in this Island, that one of the hills remo∣ued, out of which there came a man being forty cubits high. In this Island there are no venomous beasts, but in times past it was inhabited by cruell people, of whom S. Paul complaineth in his first Epistle to Titus, cap. 1. where he rehearseth the saying of Epi∣menides, which was after this manner, The people of Creta are alwaies liers, euill beasts, and slow-bellies. And to conclude, they resemble some of the Friers among the Papists; for as they are idle people and shaue their heads, so were the men of Creta. Titus (Pauls dis∣ciple) was a Bishop in this Island, and S. Paul wrote an Epistle to them, and to Nicapolis, and sent it them aboue 320 miles. This Island in times past was very rich & populous, for in it there was 100 townes; the chiefe of which were Gnossos, Cortyna, and Zydon, but Gnossos was the most principall and antientest, wher∣in King Minos kept his court: in it the notable Geographer Strabo was borne. This town of Gnossos in times past was called Ceratur, of the riuer Cerata which passeth by it; but now it and all the Island is called Candia. The Venetians euery three yeares appointed a new Duke to gouerne it. In this Island stood the townes of Sal∣mona and Lassica, (by Pliny called Lasas) and in the middle be∣tween those two townes was the hauen of Gutfurt, whereof Saint Luke maketh mention in the Acts of the Apostles, cap. 27. saying,
That Paul counsailed the Saylers that were in the ship to anchor there, and stay the Winter season in that Island: but the Captain of the ship gaue more credit to the Master of the ship, than to Pauls words, wherby in the end they were in danger of their liues. The townes of Salmona and Lassica, with the hauen of Gutfurt, lay Southward in this Island, vpon the coast of the Mediterranean sea: somewhat distant from them stood the towne of Asson, by Pliny called Asum, where they hoised out their boate and sayled Northward; and because they had a faire South-winde, they thought to saile to Phoenicia, a hauen in Creta, but the winde comming about to the East, draue them backe againe into the sea, by which meanes they were in danger of their liues. This Island was brought vnder the subjection of the Romans 66 yeares before the birth of Christ, and so for a long time conti∣nued, vntill the Saracens entred therein, and tooke it from the Romans, 800 yeares after the birth of Christ. After that, in the yeare of our Lord 979, the Emperour of Constantinople draue the Saracens out of the Island, and kept it; but in the end the Ve∣netians brought it vnder their subjection and seigniorie, in the yeare of our Lord 1202, and at this day it is called Candia. Of Clauda. CLauda is an Isle not farre from Creet, lying towards the Southwest in the Mediterranean sea, 288 miles from Ierusa∣lem towards the West: at this day it is called Porto Gabaso; here the Saylers, the Apostle Paul and the rest of the company, haled ouer-bord their Cock-boat and tyed it to their ship, and fell to awing lest they should haue been sunke into Syrtis, a dangerous gulph vpon those seas. Acts 27. Of Syrtis. THis is a gulph of the sea lying vpon the shore of Africa, in which the water is both troublesome and the shore dange∣rous, because of Quick-sands; and in this there are two places most remarkeable, called by the name of Syrtis, from drawing and attracting ships vnto them, by which they were greatly en∣dangered: the one was called the greater, the other the lesse; the
greater lay 1000 miles from Ierusalem towards the West, but the other lay vnder the Isle of Mylete towards the South, being distant from Ierusalem 1320 miles towards the West: in this place it was where Paul and his companians were in such danger, mentioned, Acts 17. Of Mylete. THis Island was so called from the great aboundance of hony that was found in it; but at this day it is called Malta, scitua∣ted in the Mediterranean sea, 1340 miles from Ierusalem towards the West. It is very pleasant and fruitfull; bringing forth great plenty of Wheat, Rye, Flax, Comin, Cotton, Figs, Wine, Roses, Violets, Tyme, Lauender, and many other sweet and delightfull herbes from whence Bees did gather great plentie of honey. The Sunne is very hot in this Island, insomuch that by the extreame feruor thereof, the inhabitants lose their naturall complexion, and looke of a tawnie colour. In Summer euenings there falleth great plenty of dewes, whereby the earth is refreshed, and the herbes increased. There is neither snow nor frost seene in it, for the Northerne windes (which with vs are the authors of cold and frosts) with them procure raine, which greatly refresheth and in∣creaseth the fruits of the earth; so that the pastures and medowes become very pleasant and full of grasse: and although it be but 28 miles long, and 60 miles about, notwithstanding it is very po∣pulous; for in the eight parishes that stand in this Isle, there is numbred aboue twentie thousand men. The inhabitants are ve∣ry honest, religious and godly; and the women faire, chaste, and modest, for they neuer come abroad but with their faces couered. The children that are borne in this country feare not any snakes, neither are hurt be any thing that is venomous, insomuch that they will take Scorpions and eat them without danger, although in all other parts of the world those kinde of creatures are most pernitious. In this Isle also there are bred a kinde of Dogs that are but small, yet very white and shagged, and so louing that the inhabitants of all the neighbouring countries will buy them, though they be at deare rates. The chiefe citie thereof (called Malta) is so strongly fortified
both by art and nature, that it is almost impossible to be conque∣red, vnlesse it be either by treason or famin. The tower or Castle thereof is fortified with the knights of S. Iohns Order, who haue mightily expressed their valour and resolution in defending this town from the Turks. About a mile from this, the ruins of a good∣ly faire city are to bee seene. And vpon the East promontorie, a little from the city of Malta, there yet remain the decaies (which are worthy to looke vpon) of a goodly temple dedicated to Iuno. It seems by what remaineth, that this church hath bin a fair and goodly thing in times past. There is also here and there in the earth found certaine brasse monies, hauing vpon the one side a superscription written in Greeke letters, and vpon the other the image of Iuno. There stood vpon the South side of Malta a Temple dedicated to Her∣cules, the ruins of which are yet extant; and in it are found monu∣ments worthy of admiration. At such time as the Captaine of Massanissa King of the Numidians had conquered this Island, a∣mongst other pretious things that he found in these Temples, he tooke thence a great deale of goodly Ivorie: but that religious King did faithfully restore all those things backe again, and dedi∣cated them to the seuerall Temples. Thus we may perceiue that the inhabitants of this Isle of Malta were wholly giuen to ido∣latry and superstition, vntil such time as Paul by the inconstancy and vehemencie of the winde was driuen vpon it, and conuerted them from that peruerse and prophane worship to the Christian Religion, at such time as he suffered shipwracke, and Wintered amongst them, Acts 27. The inhabitants shew vpon the North part of this Isle, the place where the ship was cast away wherein the Apostle Paul was; in which place they haue built vp a Chap∣pel, and dedicated it to Saint Paul. They shew also a Caue, in which they say he liued; and they verily beleeue that he expelled all venome and poyson out of that Island at such time as he was there. It was first subiect vnto the Africans, as may appeare by cer∣taine Marble Pillars which are heere and there found, in which there are ingrauen certain Characters of the Carthaginians, not much vnlike to Hebrew letters. And although the Inhabitants
are Christians, yet their speech is much like the Saracens, which differeth little or nothing from the antient Punick. At such time as Dido built Carthage (which is thought to be 890 years before Christ) Battus was King of this Isle, and held a confederacy with Dido: for when Hyarbas King of the Gelutians made warre vpon Dido, because he could not obtain her in matrimony, she receiued ayd from this Battus; and when for the loue of Aeneas she had kil∣led her self, Hyarbas hauing conquered Carthage, banished her si∣ster Anne, who was entertained by this Battus. But Hyarbas taking that vnkindly, made war vpon Battus, and conquered the Island of Malta: so it continued in the jurisdiction of the Carthaginians a long time after, vntill the Carthaginians were conquered by the Romans; and then one Titus Sempronius (about such time as Hannibal brought his army before Trebia) woon it, 217 yeares be∣fore Christ. And after it continued vnder the jurisdiction of the Romans 130 yeares, and then it was conquered by the Saracens; but they held it not long, for Roger Norman King of Sicilia got it out of their power, An. D. 1090. And so it continued in the hands of the Sicilians til An. Dom. 1520. And then Charles the fift be∣ing Emperor, gaue it to the Knights of saint Iohn, vpon condition that they should oppose the Turkes gallies, and defend that part of Christendome. So the Knights of S. Iohn together with their gouernor sailed to Malta, & so fortified it, that it is impossible to be taken vnlesse by famine or treason. There were many famous Bishops that liued in this place, and very deuout Christians. In the time of the Emperor Theodosius there was a Councel held, at which were present 240 Bishops. At this day this Bishopricke is subiect to the Archbishop of Palermo; and the chiefe gouerne∣ment of the Isle is in the power of the Knights of S. Iohn, &c. Of Syracusa. THis was a City of the Isle of Sicilia, built by one Archia of Corinth, standing close by the sea shore on the North side of the Isle, 2756 miles from Ierusalem towards the West. It was a faire and goodly city, in antient time called Tetrapolis, because it was diuided into three parts: one of which parts stood in the
Isle of Ortygia, separated from the continent with a little streit sea, and with that famous fountain Arthusia. The other part was called Acradine, and the third Tycha; to which in after-times there was built vp a fourth, and called by the name of Neapolis. All this city was compassed in with three walls, so strong and so admirably fortified both by Nature and Art, that it opposed the Carthaginians in equall war. It was called Syracusa, from draw∣ing or sucking; and in processe of time obtained the whole juris∣diction and gouernment of that Isle; which was so well peopled in the time of Dionysius the Tyrant, that he was able to make and maintaine an Army of one hundred thousand foot, and twelue thousand Horse. There were two hauens in that part which was called Ortygia, so maruellously fortified with such huge Rockes and other munition, that they were wonderfull to looke vpon. There also stood a Castle or Tower called by the name of Mer∣cia, which was so strong, that when all the rest of the Town was conquered, yet that maintained Warre for a long time. In this Hold the Kings and Tyrants of this Countrey vsually kept their Treasures and other things that were materiall. There were ma∣ny worthy and famous Princes ruled in it; but aboue them all, Dionysius the elder exceeded the rest. Who when hee saw what aboundance of Vessels of gold and siluer Dionysius the younger had heaped together, cried out and said, In te Regius affectus non est, qui ex tanta poculorum vi amicum neminem conciliasti: That is, Verily the minde of a King is not in thee, that out of so many Cups couldest not procure one Friend. For after hee was bani∣shed, and constrained to keepe a Schoole. Both these Dionysians were learned men and great Philosophers. It is thought that this Island was sometime a part of Italy, and ioyning to the field of Brutius; but in time through the violence of the sea separat from the continent. From whence it was called Sicilita, and also Tri∣nacris, because there were three mountaines standing vpon three promontories in three seueral places of it, giuing the proportion of a triangle; for there was an angle toward the South, called Pa∣ctinus, another towards the Southwest called Lilybaeus, and ano∣ther called Pelorus, which lay distant neer about two miles from Italy. In times past it was vnder the command of the Romanes;
but now the Spaniards haue chiefe gouernment of it. There are many things remaining to this day worthy obseruation, but chie∣fly the mountain Aetna, which still casteth out fire & smoke, &c. Of Rhegium. THis was a town of Italy belonging to the family of the Bru∣tians; at first built by the Calcedonians and Messenians, vp∣on the vtmost bounds of Italy toward the Sicilian sea, beeing di∣stant from that Isle 60 furlongs, and called by the name of Rhe∣gium, as some thinke, from Rumpo, to breake; for that neere about the place where that town stood, the sea being very tempestuous, broke the Isle of Sicilia from the continent. Others think it was called Rhegium, because it was so strong and beautifull a Citie that it might well haue bin the seat of a Prince. Close by this ci∣ty in the Sicilian sea there stands a rock somewhat aboue the wa∣ter, representing in figure the proportion of a man, and round a∣bout it are to be seen other little rocks like barking dogs. In this place the water is so extreme violent, and runnes with so strong a current, that it is very dangerous for mariners (especially such as are ignorant) to saile that way. Wherefore the Poets made this verse, to signifie a man that stood in a dangerous and doubtfull estate: Decidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charibdim. Seeking to shun Charibdis curled waves, He thrusts himselfe into stern Scylla's jawes.  But that mariners might auoid these dangerous places, vpon the North angle of Sicilia in the promontorie of Petorus there is e∣rected a lofty tower, standing as a sea mark, that so they by that di∣rection might escape these dangerous places. Not far from Scil∣lari is to be seen another town, of that rock called Scyllacus, but of the inhabitants it is commonly called Scyglius or Scyglio; and Rhegium also at this day is called Rezo and Reggio; of An∣timnestus captain of Chalcedon: and as Strab. li. 6. saith, is scitua∣ted in Calabria, 1332 miles from Ierusalem Westward.
Of Puteoli. THis city is in Campania, a countrey of Italy not farre from Naples, scituated on the sea shore, 1388 miles from Ierusa∣lem Westward; taking that name from fountains or Wels of hot water, being built by the Salamians, as Eusebius saith, about such time as the Tarquins were banished Rome, 507 yeares before the natiuitie of Christ. It was antiently called Dicaearchia, because of their singular justice & noble gouernment. But when the Ro∣mans made war against Hannibal, they fortified this town to with∣stand his forces, and then called it Puteoli, which name it retai∣ned a long time after. At this day it is called Puzzoli. At this city the Apostle Paul & his companions ariued when they sailed into Rome, Acts 27. Between Puteoli and Baia there lieth the lake of Lucrinus, into which by the command of Augu∣stus Caesar, a Dolphin was thrown. Now there was a young Youth called Simon, the son of a poore man dwelling in Baia, who vsually played among other youths vpon the banks of this lake; and see∣ing the Dolphin (it being a strange fish in those parts, and verie amiable to looke vpon) did take great delight in it, and oft times fed it with bread and other things as he could get: insomuch as the Dolphin when it heard the boyes voice vpon the banks of the riuer, would resort to him & receiue at his hand his accustomed food. Thus it continued so long, that the Dolphin would suffer the boy to handle him, take him by the gils, play with him, yea and somtimes to get vpon his backe, then swim with him a great way into the lake, and bring him back again, and suffer him to go safe vpon the shore. After this manner hee continued for many yeares together, and in the end the youth died. Yet the Dolphin resorted to his vsuall place, expecting his accustomed food from the hands of this boy; but missing him, he left the shore, languisht away and died. Concerning the nature of this fish you may read more at large in Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 8.
Of Colossa. THis City is scituated in Phrygia a countrey in Asia minor, neere the riuers of Lycus and Meander, 520 miles from Ie∣rusalem Northwestward, not farre from Laodicea; so called from the mighty statues and Colosso's that were set vp in it. These ci∣ties, Colossa, Laodicea, and Hierapolis (where the Apostle Philip was put to death in the tenth yeare of Nero) a little before Pauls martyrdome were sunke by an earthquake, which without doubt was a great judgement of God vpon them, because they refused the grace and comfort of the doctrine of the Gospel offered vnto them by the Apostles. The Epistle of Paul dedicated to the Co∣lossians was sent by the hand of Onesymus from Rome vnto these towns, being 1080 miles. For although the Rhodians were called Colossians, because of that famous Colossus that stood there: yet this city wherein Archippus and Philemon dwelt (to whom Paul di∣rected that Epistle) stood in Phrygia a country of Asia minor, and not in Rhodes. Of Nicopolis. NIcopolis is a city of Macedonia, scituated close by the riuer Nessus, not far from Philippus vpon the borders of Thrace, 920 miles from Ierusalem Northwestward. From hence the Apo∣stle Paul wrot his Epistle to Titus, and sent it to Creet, 600 miles. There are many other cities of this name: one standing in Epyre, built by Augustus; another betweene Cilicia and Syria, built by Alexander in glory of his victorie against Darius. A fourth in By∣thinia, a fift in the holy land, formerly called Emaus. Of Rome. THis city, if wee rightly consider the deriuation of the name in Hebrew, was not built without the singular prouidence of God; being deriued of Rom, i. Hee hath exalted or made high. But the Grecians deriue it from Romen, i. strength & power. Now although the prouidence of God extendeth to euery Creature, may to the very haires of a mans head; yet where hee determines
to expresse his singular power, there hee worketh beyond the ex∣pectation of man. And who knowes not that the beginning of this City was meane, raised from a confused company, destitute both of ciuilitie, communitie, and lawes; yet hath it bin, and for the most part is the glory of the world, and the great commander of the Princes of the earth. It was so called at first by Romulus (as Livy, lib. 1. saith) who first built it, seuen hundred fifty and one yeares before the Na∣tiuitie of Christ; being scituated vpon seuen hils, that is, Capi∣tolinus, Aventinus; Palatinus, Caelius, Exquilinus, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. But after, when the City was compassed about with walls, the hill Ianiculus was inclosed within it. The Vallies that lay between these hils were so raised vp with arches, vaults, and artificial mounts, that in processe of time they became levell with the top of some of those hills. It was beautified with faire and sumptuous buildings; so that as it was the head of the world for command and power, in like like manner it exceeded all the rest of the world for glory and riches, but principally for stately buildings. There were many goodly Temples, dedicated to Iu∣piter, Apollo, Aesculapius, Hercules, Diana, Iuno, Minerva, Lucia, Con∣cordia, Fides, Pietas, Pax, Victoria, Isis, besides many other dedicated to other gods. But aboue all, that was the most sumptuous that was called Pantheon deorum; at this day called the Church of All hallowes. Moreouer, here was to be seen the princely Edifices of Kings, Emperors, Consuls, Senators, Patricians, and other Romans who were mighty in wealth and substance, built all of polished Mar∣ble, beautified with gold and siluer; beside palaces, bulwarks; the∣atres, triumphant arches, statues, and such like, al which were glo∣rious, and greatly adorned the city. But aboue al these, the house of Nero was most worthy of obseruation, which to see to was built all of burnisht gold very curiously wrought. Here also stood the monuments of the two Caesars, Iulius and Augustus; also their sta∣tues, the one made of pure brasse, the other of white marble. Be∣sides, there were many fruitfull orchards, water-courses, & whol∣some baths, brought thither by Antonius, Nero, Dioclesian, and Con∣stantine the Great.
Also the Emperor Constantine erected many goodly churches for the vse of the Christians, & indowed them with great means; and amongst the rest that which was dedicated to Saint Iohn of Latteran, a faire and goodly Church, and for riches and curious workemanship might compare with the stateliest Temples that euer had beene in the world, most of the ornaments and images beeing made of Gold and Siluer: hee also erected the Vattican, which was dedicated to Saint Peter; and another holy house dedi∣cated to Saint Paul; in either of which he placed their seueral se∣pulchres and monuments, bestowing extraordinary cost to beau∣tifie them. So many were the gifts and gratuites of this Em∣perour, that they can scarce bee numbred: so that although the Emperour Trajan, and Boniface the fourth, Pope of Rome, bestow∣ed great cost to beautifie and adorne the city; yet were they no∣thing comparable to that which this Emperor did. These things then beeing presented to your viewe, you might iustly say, that Rome in her prosperitie and eminencie was the glory of the world: but as all estates are fickle and vncertain, still subiect to varietie and change, so was this: first enuied of the world, be∣cause of the extreame oppression of her gouernours; and after made desolate by violence and force, all her former glorie beeing eclipsed, and the greatest part of these goodly buildings layed leuell with the ground. Thus haue I shewed you what Rome was when it was in her prosperitie: It resteth now to shew what Rome is. Rome at this day differeth as much from the antient Rome, as the substance from the shadow. For although the Pope hath beautified and adorned the West part of it with many faire and goodly buildings, and called it by the name of new Rome. Yet is it nothing comparable to the antient city, as it was when Au∣gustus and Constantine the Great were Emperours thereof, neither doth it stand in the antient place: for the first Citie stood vpon the East side of Tyber, this vpon the West. The chiefe part of the other stood vpon the mountaines Capitolinus and Palati∣nus, vpon which were the stately buildings of Senatours, Kings, and Emperors, but now they lie desolate and waste. The Capi∣tol also, and the Temple of Iupiter Feretrius (goodly Buildings)
beaten to the ground; onely some ruins, to shew that such things there hath beene. And what now resteth, that are worthie note, are in the commaund and power of the Pope: which are not ma∣ny; the most that can be named, are the Vattican, the tower of S. Angelo, the Popes Pallace, his banquetting house, and the gardens and walkes about it; which are so well scituated, that they are a grace to all Rome, the rest are but ordinarie and common buil∣dings. Thus may you see that there is nothing in this world but hath a period, to which if with much labour it attaineth, then it commonly declineth, seldome continueth: for who knowes not with what labour, what perills by sea, what dangers by land, through how many forreine warres and Domesticke seditions, Rome was raised to her greatnesse? And how suddenly was all this lost? What the vertue and wisedome of graue and resolute Consuls, Captaines, and Commaunders had with great hazard heaped vp; thrusting their Capitol and other Treasuries ful, with the triumphant spoiles of forreine nations, was left to be consu∣med either by seditious souldiers or prodigall Emperours, and the State left as a prey to those that were mightiest: so that they were accounted most honourable, that with most injurie could get to themselues either countenance to ouersway authoritie, or opulency, to purchase eminency; insomuch that there hath been no action so euill, nor any attempt so pernicious in former times, but may be matcht in the declining of the Romane state. Where more murthers? where more corruption? where more oppressi∣on than is mentioned in Histories to bee practised amongst the Romans? the liues of men, the state of Prouinces, and the crowns of Kings sold for money. But now her time is finished, and her ruins are left for succeeding ages to admire; that so in beholding, they might learne to know the difference betweene vertue and vice; and from thence conclude, That there is nothing perma∣nent; and that those things wherein men most glorie, doe often∣times soonest decay. For if this citie which commanded the na∣tions & Princes of the earth (whose Colonies, Armies, Legions, confederacies, and treasures, were so mightie, and extended so farre, that there was almost no countrey vnconquered, or nation
that did not feare to heare the inhabitants therof named) is made desolate and laid leuell with the ground: what then may be said of pettie Cities, Townes, Lordships, Manors, and Houses? shall not they likewise be subiect to the like calamities, & wasted and destroyed through the continuance of time? Verily yea: Where∣fore let not the king glorie in his power, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches: but let him that glorieth glorie in the Lord. FINIS.
A Table of the Persons, Townes, and places men∣tioned in the foregoing Treatise. A ADam, 72.78. Abarim, 127, Abel of the Vines, 129. Abner & his trauels, 194. Abraham and his trauels, 79 Absalon and his trauels, 197. Achor, 134. Aethyopia, 205, & 320. Aialon, 134. Alexandria, 324. Amanus, 361. Antiochus Epiphanes and his tra∣uels, 325. Antiochus Eupator, 357. Apamca, 320. Aphec, 166. Arabia, 522. Aroer, 154. Asdod, 136. Azeca, 134. Asteroth, 92 128. Athens, 542. Antipatris, 556. Ahab and his trauels, 218, Aeziongaber, 125. Arbona, ib. Almon Diblathaim, 127. Athniel, 143. Arad, 144. Abdon, 155. Ascalon, 158. Of the Arke of God, 165. Abiathar, 180. Abishag, 200. Ahazia, 224 Abijn, ibid. Aza, ibid. Ahazia, 240. Athalia, 241. Amasia, 242. Amos, 287. Ammon king of Iuda, 250. Assarbaddon, 260. Abelmehola, 274. An instruction to vnderstand the Prophets, 297 An Alphabeticall table of all the cities & countries mentioned in the Prophets; fram 298, to 309. Ange, 319. Antiochia, 330. 523. Asseremoth, 343. Adarsa, 344. Addus, 352. Addor, ibid. Arabath, 355. Alexander son of Epiphanes, 359 Alcimus and his trauels, 373. Arbela, ibid. Adummim, 448. Aenon, 429. Antiochia Pisidia, 527. Attalia, 528. Amphipolis, 540. Apolonia, ibid. B BAbylon, from 253, to 258. Babylon in Aegypt 583. Baaena and his trauels, 197. Baesa and his trauels 215. Bazra 289. Benhadad & his trauels, 228, 232 Berea 374, 542. Bethabara 429. Bethania 480. Bethoron, or Bethcoron 202. Bethel 100. Bethlem 104, 420. Bethpage 481. Bethsaliza 173. Bethsan 176, 350. Bethseme, ibid. Bethsura 234. Bethulia 321. Beerzaba 86 Baalzephon 117. Benei Iaaechon 125. Baalam, and his trauels 129. Besech 142. Bezra 152. Bahurim 192. Baalhazor 198. Baaelath 203. Ben Merodach 263. Balthazar Emperor of the Assi∣rians 268. Bildad 317. Bschamah 352. Bethsaida 454. Bethbesah 350. Bythinia 535. C CAdes Barnea 124. Caesarea Philippi 444. Caren 78. Caleb and his trauels 141. Caphar Salama 344. Catchemis 266. Carmel 174. Cedron, or Kydron, a little Hill that runs through Ierusalem, 487. Chasor, or Hazor 138. Creet, and the scituation thereof 363, 537. Chehelah 112. Chasmona 124. Chesbon 128. Chinereth 152. Cilicia 319, 530. Caspina 310. Caspin 345. Chazor a field 351. Canah in Galile 423, 436. Capernaum 437. Chorazin 435. Of Canah Syro Phoenicia, 466. Of Mount Caluarie 487. Caesarea Strato 502.
The Isle of Cyprus, and how it is scituated. 525. The Isle of Chius, and how sci∣tuated, 550. The famous citie of Corinthia, 544. Cous, how scituated, and why so called, 552 Of the Isle of Clauda, and how scituated, 559 Of Colossa in Phrigia, 566. D DOthan, so called from com∣maunding, 111. Doch, a castle, 356 Dora a hauen towne, 366. Dibon Gad, 127 Deborah and Barak, 145. 147 Debir, 135. Danites, and their trauels, 160 Demetrius Soter, and his trauells 358 Demetrius Nicanor, and his tra∣uels, 361. Decapolis, and why so called 467 Derbe, 528 Dauid, and his trauels, 180. The typical signification of Da∣uid, 192. Daniel and his trauels, 282. The typical signification of Da∣niel, 286 Damascus a famous citie in Sy∣ria, 521. Dibon Gad, 127. E ELeazer (Abrahams seruant) & his trauels, 93 Esau and his trauels, 106. The typical signification of Esau ib. Elim, 118. Eglon, 135 Ehud, 143 Of mount Ephraim, 144. Elon and Ebzan, 155. Estaol 157 limelrc, 164 cron, 166 Engedi, 175. Endor, 176 Ella, 216. Elah, 244. Ezekias, 247. Euil Merodach, Emperour of Ba∣bylon, 267. Eliah the Prophet, and his tra∣uels, 271. The typicall signification of E∣liah, 274. Elisaeus, or Elisha, 274 His typicall signification, 276. Ezekiel, 281. Elam, 285. Egbatan a famous citie, 286, 318. Euxin sea, 290. Eleutherius, 351. Esdras the lawyer 310. Of the booke of Ester, 312. The types and figures collected out of Ester, 312. Eliphaz the Temanite, 316, 317. Esdrelon, 320 Eporaim, 480 Emmaus, 490 Eyhesus, 506 Queene Candaces Eunuch, and his trauels, 515. G GIhona hill, 32. The valley of Hinnon, idem. Gera, 86. The countrey of Gilead, 102. The land of Gosen, 105 Goren Atad, 112. The Graues of concupicence 121 Gedion Iudge of Israel, 147 The typicall signification of Ge∣dion, 150. Gilgal, 133. Gibion, 134. Gaza, 136. Of mount Gerizim, 151 Gath, 166 Of mount Gilboa, where Saul killed himselfe, 176. Gazer, 192 Gesur, 196. Gurbaal 245. Gath Hepher, 289. Gesem, 320. Genezereth, 351. Tadara, 448. The lake of Genezereth, ib. Of Gethsamene, and the gardens thereabouts, 485. Of the countrey of Galatia, and how the inhabitants came to be called Galatians, 531 Gnidus, 557. H HAran, or Charan, 81 Hebron, and the inhabitants thereof, 84. The field of Hakeldema, 38. The hill Hameskita, ib. Hazezon Thamar, 92 Hagar, and her trauels, 96 Hagars Well, and the significati∣on of it, 94. Heliopolis, otherwise called the citie of the Sunne, 111 Of mount Horeb, 115. Hazaroth, 121. Harada, 123. Horgid gad, 125. Of the mountaine Hor, 126. Hazor, 146. Hemath, 133. Hay, ibid. Hohab, 144 Hananias the false Prophet, 281 Hosea the Prophet, 286. Of the Prophet Habacuck, when he liued; how he liued, when he dyed, and where hee lyeth buried, 295 Of the riuer Hidaspia, 319. Hyrcania the high Priest, 364. Hesiodorus who would haue rob∣bed the treasurie of Ierusalem, 367. Hermopolis, or the town of Mer∣curie, 423. J OF Ierusalem, 6. Of the scituation of it, 7. The description of it, ibid. The circuit and bignesse of it, 8. Of the gates of Ierusalem, 34.
The destruction of Ierusalem by Vespatian, from 38 to 49. Of Ierusalem after this destru∣ction, from 49, till 58. Of Ierusalem as it is now, from 58 to 63. Of the sects in Ierusalem, from 63 to 67. Where Ishmael dwelt, 93. Of Jsaac and his trauels, 94. The tipical signification of Isaac 98. Jacob and his trauels, 99. The typicall signification of Ja∣cob, 105. Iuda and his trauels, 107. Ioseph and his trauels, 109, The typicall signification of Jo∣seph, 112. Iotbatha, 125 Igim, 127 Iahra, 128. Iaezer, ibid. Iael and her trauell, 145 Ioshua and his trauels, 137 The typicall signification of Jo∣shua, 138 The names of the kings that Io∣shua ouercame, and wher they dwelt, 139 Iaboch, 149 Iogbha, 150 Iotham, 157 Of Iaier Iudge of Israel, 152 Ieptha and his trauels, 153 The diuers opinions concerning his death, 154. Iabes, 163. Ionathan Sauls sonne and his tra∣uels, 179. Iohn and his trauels, 194 Of the Countrey called India 204. Ieroboam and his trauels, 124. Of Ieroboams wife, 214. The iourney of the men of God which came out of Iuda, 214. Iezreel, 219 Iehoram and his trauels, 224 Iehu and his trauels, 221. Iehohas, 222. Johas and his trauels, ib. Ieroboam the second of that name, and his trauels, 223 Iehosaphat and his trauels, 237. The typicall signification of Ie∣hosaphat, 239. Ioram king of Iuda, and his tra∣uels, ibid. Of Ioas King of Iuda, 241. Iabnia, 245. Iotham King of Iuda, and his tra∣uels, 245. Josiah and his trauels, 250. Iehoahas King of Iudah, and his trauels, 251. Ihiakim King of Iudah, ibid. Of the destruction of Ierusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, 253. Of the Prophet Isayah, 277. Of the Prophet Ieremiah, and his trauels, 279. Of the Prophet Ioel, 287. Of the prophet Ionah, and his tra∣uels, 288 The typicall signification of Io∣nah, 294. Iapho, 289. Of the holy man Iob, 314. Of his three daughters, 318. Of Iesus the sonne of Syrack, 323 Iudas Macchabaeus and his tra∣uels, 336. The typicall signification of Iu∣das Macc. 344. Ionathan and his trauels, 345 Iohn Hyrcanus and his trauels 356 Iason and his trauels, 368 Iohn Baptist and his trauels, 426. Iericho, 479. Of Ioseph of Arimathea, 493 Ioppa, 503 Iohn and his trauels, 504. The testimonie of the Fathers concerning Iohn, 506. Iconium, 528 K Kiriathauen, 92. Karkor, 150 Kiriathiarim 161. Kegilah, 180 Cyr, 260. Kereth, 271. eder, 319. L LOt and his trauels, 87. Of Lots daughters, 90. Of the kings that tooke Lot pri∣soner, 91 Of Libnah, 122, 135. Lachis, ibid. Libanus, 137. The Leuite and his trauels, 161. Lais, 160. Of Lacedemonia called also Sparta, 369. Lidda, 489. Laodicea, 513. Lystra: 528. M OF mount Moriah, 10. The Aligoricall signification of it, 11. The buildings vpon mount Mo∣riah, 25. 86 Of mount Acra from 27, to 29. Of mount Besetha, 32. Of the mount of Oliues, 37. Of the mount betweene Bethel and Hay, 83. Machanaim, 102. Mount Seire, 106. Moses and his trauels, 112. Midian, 115. Marah, 117. Mithca, 123. Macehelath, ib. Maseroth 124 Makedah. 135 Merom, 137 Mizpah, 153. Minneth, 154. Mickma, 173. Maon, 175. Memphis, by whom, and when built, 209 Menahem and his trauels, 224. Maresa, 234. Manasses and his trauels, 249. Micah, 294. Malachi, 296 Mallos, 319 Mattahias, 335
Medaba, 350 Menelaus and his trauels, 370 Of a Mina, 376 The Virgin Mary and her trauels 415 Machares, 429. Of the holy mountaine neer Ca∣pernaum, 446. Mysia, 536. Of the Isle and city of Mitylene, 549. Of the Isle and citie of Mylerus, now called Malta. 551. Magdala, 468. Of the Island Mylete, 560 N OF Neapolis, or the new town, 32 Of Noah, 78 Of Nimroth, 79 Nabach, 149. Nob, 174. Nadab, 214. Naaman the Syrian and his tra∣uels, 231 Nebuchadnezzer and his trauels, 263 Ninus, or Nineueh, when built and by whom, 291 Nahum the Prophet, 294. Nehemia the Prophet. 311. Nepthaly 322 Nazareth 418 Naim, 447 Nicapolis. 539, 566. O OF the caue of Odullam, 108. Oboth, 127. Omry and his trauels, 216. Obediah the Prophet, 288 Orthosia, 366. Onias and his trauels, 367. P OF the poole Bethesda, 26. Of Paradice and where it stood, from 72, to 78. Of the Palme or Oke of Mamre, where Abraham dwelt, 83 Penuel, 103 Of Pibaccharoth, 116 Phunon, 126. Pisgah, 129. The Plaine of the Vines, 129. The Philistims trauell from their campe to Michmas, 178. Pharaoh and his trauels, 209. Peka and Pekahiah, 225. Of Phul Belochus King of the As∣sirians, and his trauel., 259. Pharaoh Necho King of Aegypt, and his trauels, 270 Pelusio, 266. Persepolis, when built, by whom and why so called, 337. Ptolomais, 350 Of the countrey of Parthia, 364. Perea, 446. Peter and his trauels, 494 Allegations of the Authour, to proue that Peter was neuer at Rome, 496. Of the Island called Pathmos, 509 Of the famous citie Pergamus, 510 Philip and his trauels, 514 Paul and his trauels, 517, 523. 529, 547. 555. Of Paphos, why so called, 526. Of Pega, 527 Of Philippa, 590 Patara, 554 Puteoli, 565 Q THe Queene of Saba, 204. R OF the Roman mile, 2. Rachels graue, 104. Raemses, at what time it flouri∣shed, 115. Of the red sea, 116 The mysterie of the Red Sea, 117. Rephadi, 118 Rithmab, 120. Rimnon, ibid Rissa, ibid. Rechob, 132.. Of the rocke Eta, 158. Ramah, 162 Reson, Solomons aduersarie, 212. 232. Rehoboam and his trauels, 233. Of the riuer Cheber, 281. Of the riuer Eulaeo, 285: Of the Angel Raphael, 322 Of Rages a citie of the Meades, 323 Of the Isle and citie of Rhodes, and why so called, 553 Rhegium, 564. Rome, and why so called. 566: Rogel, 197 S OF Stades and furlongs. 2. Of mount Sion 8. The Allegoricall meaning of mount Sion, 10. Of the Springs and Foantaines about Ierusalem, 36 Of the Saracens and Turks, from 68, to 71. Of Sem, 79 Sichem, 82. Sodom, 88. Of the Sea Asphaltites, 89 Of the valley Siddim, 96 Succoth, 103 Salem, ibid. The desart of Sin, 118. Of mount Sina, 119. Of Saphar, 123. Sidon, 138. Sampson and his trauels, 156. The typicall signification of Sampson 459. Of the riuer Soreck, 158. Samuel and his trauels, 167. The typicall signification of Sa∣mael, 168 Saul and his trauels, 196. The typical signification of Saul 158 Sur, 191 Sunem, ibid. Sichor, 192 Shemei, 199 Solomon and his trauels, 200 The typicall signification of So∣lomon, 203
The trauell of Solomons ships, 204 Saba and the scituation of it. 205 Samaria, by whom built, 217 Seleucia, when it was built and flourished, 363. Syria, ibid. Of the star that appeared to the wise men in the East, 445 Sychar 438. The sea of Galile 446. The description of the holy se∣pulchre 488 Simry 217 Sallum 224 Saerah King of Aethiopia and his trauels 269. Salmanasser and his trauels 260. Sanacharib and his trauels 261. Sysach King of Aegypt, and his trauels 236. Sarepta 273. The Sunamite and her trauells 277. Of Susan 283. Scrubbabel 311. Sobal 320. Simon and his trauels, 352 Sephala, 356 Of a Sickle 375. Simon of Cyrene who carried Christs Crosse 491 Samaria 497. Smyrna 509. Sardis 512. Saba 515. Salamais 550. Samus an Isle 559. T THe description of the Temple 6 Of the Portches or open Courts of the Temple, from 16 to 19. Of the Allegoricall or Spirituall meaning of the Temple from 20 to 24. The Tower Antonia, 26. The Tower Ophel 27. The tower of the Centurions, 27 The typicall signification of A∣braham 87. The trauels of the two Angels 90. The Tower Aeder 104 Thimnah 108. Thahath 123. Tharah ibid. Thabor 146. Thola 152 Thob 153. The trauels of the children of Is∣raell, when they fought agaīst the Benjamites 162. Thecoah 198. Thamor 203. Thirza 213. Thipza 225 The Trauels of the people that Salmanasser carried into capti∣uitie 227 Tiglat Pullasser & his trauels 259 Tyrus or Zor 266. Thispe 273. Tharsis 289. Tobias 321. Of the citie Tharsus 332. The Tubiani a people 343. Tripolis 358. Tryphon and his trauels 365. The trauels of the wise men out of the East 424. The trauels of our Sauior Christ in his infancy 431 The trauels of our Sauiour Christ from his Baptisme, till the first yeare of his Minstrie 432 The trauels of our Sauiour Christ in the first yeare of his Minestry 434. The trauels of our Sauiour Christ in the second yeare of his Ministry 440. The trauels of our Sauiour Christ in the third yeare of his ministrie, 449 Tyberia, 456. Tyrus or Zor, 458. The trauels of our Sauior Christ in the fourth yeare of his mi∣nisterie, 470 Thyatira, 512 Tarsus or Tharsus, 519. Troas, 57. Trogyllium, 551. V THe valley of Cedron, 31 Vzziah or Azariah, and his trauels, 243 Vryah and his trauels, 280 W OF the wals that compassed the citie of Ierusalem, 33. Of Weights, Measures, and Mo∣neyes from 375, to 411. They Way betweene India and Aegypt, 422. Y THe yeares of the iniquitie of Israel, 214. Z ZOan, 82. Zin Cades, 126. Zalmona, ibid. Zarea, 157. Zoba, 173. Ziph, 175. Ziglag, 129. Zemeraim, 219. Zakariah, 224, Zarea, 234, Zedekiah, 252. Zephania, 224 Zacharia, ibid. Zophar, 317 Zabadei, 351 Zacharias, 414 Zidon, 462 FINIS.
