4296 99850261 15450
A Briefe and necessarie Cate∣chisme, concerning the principall poynts of our Christian Religion. Written for the good of all such as seeke after consòlation in Christ. By R. C. 1. Pet. 3. 15. Sanctifie the Lord God in your harts, and be rea∣die alwaies to giue an aunswere to euerie man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you. AT LONDON, Printed for Edward VVhite, and are to be solde at the little North doore of Paules Church, at the signe of the Gun. 1602.
¶ A briefe and necessarie Catechisme, concerning the principall points of our Christian Religion. Question. WHereas all men desire to bee blessed, and most men are de∣ceiued in seeking that blessed∣nesse, tell me, which is the true way thereto? Aunswere. To know God to be my Father in Ie∣sus Christ, and therefore to serue him ac∣cording to his will, and to set foorth his glorie, beleeuing that I shall want no∣thing, that is good for me in this life, and that I shall enioy euerlasting blessednes in the world to come. How know you this? By the working of the holy ghost, and by the meanes of his word. What call you his Word? The reuealed will of GOD, set foorth vnto vs in the holy Scriptures. Which doe you call the holy scriptures? The bookes of the olde and newe Testa∣ment, commonly called Canonicall.
Are all things that are necessarie for vs to know, contained in them? Yea: for GOD beeing full of all wis∣dome, and goodnes, would leaue out no∣thing, that was requisite for vs to know. Is it lawfull to adde to, or take anie thing there-from? No: for GOD hath flatly forbidden it, and hath pronounced grieuous curses vp∣pon those that doe so. Why is it so grieuous a sin? Because it is a great sin to alter the last will of a mortall man, therefore much more to change the last Testament of e∣ternall God. Why is it requisite that the will of God should be set forth vnto vs? That wee might haue pure rules of his worship, and sure grounds of our sal∣uation. Is it not lawfull to repose any part of Gods worship, or our saluation, in the doctrines and dooings of men? No: for all men by nature are liars, and defiled with sinne: wherof it follow∣eth, that all mens doctrines and dooings, are mingled with lies and corruptions. How far are we bound to their doctrine
and dooings. So farre forth as they are agreeable to Gods word. May all reade the Scriptures? Yea: all that be of age, able to discerne betweene good & euill, ought to increase in knowledge, for their furtherance in saluation, as they doe in yeeres. VVhy must all such reade the Scrip∣tures? 1. Because euerie one must be able to proue and try himselfe, whether he be in the faith or no. 2. Because euerie one must be able to prooue and examine mens doctrines and dooings by the Scriptures, that they be not thereby in their saluation deceiued. 3. Because euerie one must be able, as his calling requireth, to teach, admonish, exhort, and comfort one another. 4. Because euerie one must be able to make an account of the faith & hope that is in him. But what if men cannot reade? Then they must vse the helpe of others that can. Is it enough to read the Scriptures pri∣uately, or with others?
No: for God hath also commaunded to heare thē read publiquely in the Church. And is that enough? No: for he also hath ordained preaching. Why must preaching be ioyned vvith reading? Because it is the most principall and proper meanes to beget faith in vs. Why must faith be mixed with the word read and preached? Because otherwise the Word profiteth vs nothing. How many things are requisite to be in euery one that wil come to heare the word read and preached? Amongst other, foure are necessarie: 1. A trembling feare of the Maiestie of God. 2. An assured faith in Christ. 3. An earnest endeuor to frame our liues ther∣after. 4. To pray for the holy Ghost to be giuen vs, to enlighten our mindes, and write all these things in our harts. Which be the principall parts of Gods word? The Law and the Gospell. What call you the Law? It is that part of the word, that comman∣deth all good, and forbiddeth all euill.
What if we could keepe the Law? Then we should be blessed. What if we breake the Law? Then are we subiect to the curse of God, and so to death and damnation. What call you the Gospell? It is that part of the word, which con∣taineth the free promises of God, made vnto vs in Iesus Christ, without any re∣spect of our deseruings. What doth it worke in vs? A true and liuely fayth in Iesus Christ, whereby we lay hold of the free remission of our sinnes in him, and come by true re∣pentance of them. VVhat must wee learne by the vvhole word of God. Two things: First, to make a right and sounde entrance into our saluation. Secondlie, how to increase and continue the same vnto the end. What is required for our right & sound entrance to our saluation. Thrée things: First, to know and be perswaded of the greatnes of my sinnes, and the miserie due to the same. Secondly, to know howe wee may be deliuered from them.
Thirdly, to knowe what thanks we owe to the Lord, for our deliuerance. How shall wee come to aright fight of our sinnes, & a sound perswasion of them. By the Spirit of GOD, leading vs to the true vnderstanding of the Law, and a due examination of our selues there∣by. Where is the Law set downe? It is written in many places of the scrip∣ture, but the summe thereof is contained in the ten commaundements. Rehearse them. I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt haue no other Gods but me. &c. How are they deuided? Into two principall heads or Tables. What doth the first Table teach vs? Our duetie towards GOD, and is con∣tained in the foure first Commaunde∣ments. What learne we by the second Table? Our dutie towards our neighbour, and is contained in the latter sixe Comman∣dements. VVhy are the duties towards GOD set downe, before our duties towards our neighbour?
Because the loue of GOD, is the ground of the loue of our neighbor, wher∣of it followeth, that none can rightly loue his neighbour, except hee first loue GOD. Why are the duties towards our neigh∣bour, ioyned to our dutie towards God? Because the loue of our neighbour, is the proofe and triall of our loue towards God. Whence it followeth againe, that none can loue God aright, except he also loue his neighbour. VVhy are the Commaundements set downe in tenne parts, and not in generall. Because God is not pleased with doo∣ing our duties in generall, or in some part, but hee will be wholy serued in all and euerie one of his Commandements. VVhy are they set downe singulerly, or to euery one? Because euerie one must doe his owne duetie, though none goe before him: whence it followeth, That euerie one must beare his owne burden, and none shall haue excuse by others example. Are there not some rules, which serue for the better vnderstanding of euery one of the Commaundements.
Yes: there are foure which haue espe∣ciall vses. 1. In euery commaundement where euill is forbidden, the contrarie good is commaunded: and where any good is commaunded, the contrarie euill is for∣bidden. 2. In euery commaundement, manie more euils are forbidden, & many more good things commaunded, then in worde are expressed. 3. God is a Spirit, and therefore his commaundements, require a spirituall obedience. 4. In euery Commaundement where euill is forbidden, there the occasions of euill are also forbidden, and where good is commaunded, there also the occasions of good are commaunded. What is the first Commaundement? Thou shalt haue no other Gods but me.Com. 1. What euill is heere generally forbidden? Euen that which the words do import. What good is commaunded. To haue God my onely God, and to be alwaies in his presence. What is it to haue God to be our only God.
To giue him all those things which be proper and peculiar to his maiestie. Which be those, that properly concerne God, and therefore be the especiall things commaunded. The summe of them are these: I am bound by this Commaundement to be∣lue in God, to loue, feare, and obey him, to praise him, and pray vnto him. After what sort must you performe these duties. With my whole mind, and vnderstan∣ding, with my whole hart & strength. Which be the peculiar things forbidden. To faile, in giuing to God any of these or the like good things in any part or respect. What else is particularly forbidden. To giue any of these fore-named things, to any creature or any other thing what∣soeuer, whereby our hart may be in any sort withdrawen from God. What be the occasions of breaking this Commaundement. 1. The vaine desire of pleasures, riches, and glory of this world. 2 A negligent and carelesse vse of the meanes to serue God. Are not the contrarie good things to
these Commaunded. 1 Yes: As first a hart contented with any estate, and vsing the things of this world, as if it vsed them not. 2 A reuerent and diligent vse of the means to serue God his prouidence. Rehearse the second Commandement. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauenCom. 2. Image. &c. What euill is expresly forbidden heere. I am forbidden to make any Image ey∣ther to represent God or worship him by. What euill is generally forbidden. I must auoid all inuentions and deuises of man in the outward worship of God, which be contrarie or beside the word. What be the especiall euils forbidden. Chiefely all the corruptions, in the sub∣stance of doctrine, Prayer, Sacraments, and discipline of the Church. What occasions of euils be forbidden. There be some which we must necessari∣ly auoid, vnlesse we will fall into super∣stition and idolatrie: as: 1 To ioyne the false parts of worship, with the true worship of God. 2 To be present at idolatreas and su∣perstitious seruice.
3 The reseruation of some especiall monument of superstition and idolatry. Which be the lesser occasions forbid∣den, and yet so that we haue the especiall grounds of Gods worship, which must and may tollerate, when we cannot helpe them. 1 All vaine, idle, and superstitious ceremonies. 2 All keeping companie with false worshippers. Is not the euill in hart also forbidden. Yes: so farre forth as I trust in my hart to haue any of them preuaile or be esta∣blished. What good is commaunded. 1 Generally, all the outward means of God his worship, which be agreeable to his written word. 2 Specially, doctrine, prayer, sacra∣ments, and discipline of the Church, as agree with Gods word in the substance thereof. What occasions of good be commanded. 1 To haue and vse good bookes, of the doctrine and histories of the Church, written according to Gods word. 2 Erecting & maintaining of schooles
of learning as nurseries of the ministery. 3 Sufficient prouision to be made for the ministers. 4 Building & maintayning Churches, with all things belonging thereto. 5 All good ceremonies and orders a∣greeable to Gods word. 6 All familiar company with the true worshippers of God. What good in hart is heere commaun∣ded. To vse the meanes of Gods worship not onely outwardly, but also in spirit and truth. What meane these words, For I the Lord thy God, am a iealous God. &c. That God will punish false worship in the false worshipper, and vnto the third and fourth generation in their po∣steritie. What is meant by that, And will shewe mercie vnto thousands, &c. That God will blesse his true worship in the true worshippers, and their poste∣ritie into the fourth discent. What is the vse of these. To make false worship more vile, and his true worship more pretious in our eyes.
Rehearse the third Commaundement. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thyCom. 3. God in vaine. &c. What is heere forbidden. 1 All periury or false swearing, ban∣ning or cursing, inchanting or coniu∣ring. 2 All swearing by false Gods, or na∣ming them with reuerence. 3 All customable speaking of God, or swearing without reuerence. 4 Causing Gods Name to be dishono∣red by false doctrine, or an vngodly life, in my selfe, or other. What good is commaunded. 1 In matters concerning Gods glory, I must sweare by God onely in iustice, iudgement, and truth. 2 I must indeuour from my hart to grow vp in the true knowledge of God, and a godly life, that God may be glori∣fied therein. VVhat meane those words, For the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that ta∣keth. &c. That God will certainly punish the dishonouring of his name in any sort. VVhat is the vse hereof.
To make vs more fearefull to disho∣nour God, and more carefull to honour him. Rehearse the fourth Commandement. Remember the saboth day to keepe it holy. &c.Com. 4. VVhat is heere commaunded. Generally, to make it my whole delight to sanctifie the holy Saboth of the Lord, from morning to night. 1 Particularly, to vse all the publike meanes of Gods worship in the congre∣gation of Gods people. 2 To reioyce to vse all such priuate exercises as may make the publique meanes profitable to my selfe & to other. VVhat be those priuate exercises. 1 The examining of my sinful wants, priuate prayer, reading the scripture, sin∣ging of Psalmes, conferring with other, and applying all things to my selfe, with a care to profit other. 2 Releeuing the néedie, visiting the sicke, and them that be in prison, comfor∣ting them that are in misery, reconciling them that be at variance, admonishing the vnruly, &c. 3 The considering the creatures of God, thereby to prouoke my selfe and other to
prayse him. VVhat else is generally commaunded. A diligent searching with my hart, with the like care to finde out, and to reape some profit of the forenamed meanes, so that I may be better for, and thorow them. VVhat is forbidden. Generally, the vsing of those eyther pri∣uate or publike means, in ceremonies, without some good fruit in my selfe, or care of fruit in other. 1 Particularly. All such labours and pleasures in thought, word or deede, as may hinder me or other fron vsing or profiting by the forenamed meanes. 2 The leauing vnused any of those publike or priuate exercises. Rehearse the fift Commaundement? Honour thy father and thy mother. &c. VVhom doe you vnderstand by Fa∣ther and Mother. Not onely my naturall parents, but also all those whom God hath set ouer me, for my good, as Magistrates, Mini∣sters, Maisters, &c. What duties doe Children owe to their Parents?
Reuerently and obediently to receiue their instructions, commandements and corrections, to succour and pray for them. vvhat are they forbidden to doe. To refuse or murmure their instructions, commaundements, and corrections, or to neglect any duty belonging to them. vvhat duties doe seruants owe to their maisters. In feare and trembling to submit themselues to their instructions, com∣maundements, and corrections, and to pray for them. vvhat are they forbidden. To refuse or repine their instructions, corrections, and commaundements, and to doe no eye seruice to them. vvhat if parents and maisters doe not their duties. Yet they must obey for conscience to Gods ordinance. vvhat if they command vniust things. They must obey God rather then man, and submit themselues to their correc∣tions. vvhy are those things added, That thy daies may be long in the land. To allure vs more carefully to kéepe,
and willingly to obey his commaunde∣ments: whereas disobedience shall be punished with a short and miserable life. Rehearse the sixt Commaundement. Thou shalt do no murther.Com. 6. vvhat is heere forbidden. 1 Foure things especially. First, by weapen or poyson to kill our brother. 2 By wound, or blow, or any such means to shorten the life, or impaire the heath of any man. 3 By word, countenance, or gesture, to mocke, grieue, or contemne any man. 4 To be mooued with anger, hatred, or enuie, whereby we may be brought to reuenge our selues on our brother. vvhat is commaunded. 1 To haue peace with all men, as much as possible is in vs. 2 In thought, word, or déed, to seeke the preseruation of all. Rehearse the seuenth Commandement. Thou shalt not commit adulterie.Com. 7. How many things are heere forbidden? 1 Thrée. 1 All those outward actes, wherby the bodie is defiled, as adulterie, fornication, and vncleannesse, and this
is committed two waies. 1 Eyther against our owne bodies, which is vnnatural, or against the bodies of other creatures, which is monstrous. 2 By marrying one either of a false re∣ligion, or no religion, or within the de∣grees forbidden, or by the intemperate vse of the marriage bed. 2 All those instruments and occasions are forbidden, whereby this sinne is stir∣red vp, or strengthened in vs, and they be all contained in this word, wantones. Which is, 1 When eyther the whole body is abused in idlenes, or vaine sports, or else when any part of the bodie, as the eye, the eare, the tongue, the nose, the head, or the foot, are abused to euil. 2 When we vse intemperately, meat, drinke, sleepe, or apparrell, or any in∣conuenient company, time or place. 3 All that inward setled lust is forbid∣den, whereunto the hart doth giue con∣sent. VVhat good is commaunded. 1 To keepe my selfe pure and chast in minde and bodie. 2 To vse those means carefully which may keepe vs chast.
What meanes be those. Continuall temperance in meat, drinke, sleepe, and apparrell, continuall paineful∣nesse in our calling, fasting and watch∣ing so long as need requireth. What if by these meanes we cannot be kept chast. Then may we marrie, and in marri∣age to vse those meanes carefully, wher∣by the marriage bed may be kept pure and vndefiled. Rehearse the eight Commaundement. Thou shalt not steale.Com. 8. How many euils are heere forbidden. 1 Three. 1. All those outwarde actes, whereby stealth is committed, and that is, by our selues, or by other. By other, when wee commaund or counsaile others to steale, eyther by keeping counsell, or any way consen∣ting to them. By others. 1. All secret filching and open robberie, of neuer so small a thing for neuer so great a neede. 2. All extortion, or violent wrong, all op∣pression and vnmercifull dealing. 3. All deceit in buying or selling, or exchaun∣ging and not restoring things borrowed, found, giuen to be kept, and such like.
2 All the outward occasions of stealth▪ 1 As false waights, measures, coyne, &c. 2 Liuing in an vnlawfull calling, idle∣nes, wastfull spending of our goods. 3 All inward stealth of the hart is for∣bidden: that is, the setled will or desire of our neighbours goods, although wee cannot get them, eyther for feare, shame or &c. we doe not take them. What is heere commaunded? 1 To restore goods euill gotten, or wrongfully kept. 2 To labour faithfully in a lawfull calling, to be sparing of that we get, and to helpe others as need requireth. Rehearse the ninth Commandement. Thou shalt not beare false witnes, &c.Com. 9. What is heere forbidden. Not onely to beare false witnes our selues, but also to be partakers with false witnes bearers. How may waies is false witnes borne. Two: Outwardly and inwardly. Against whom doe men beare false wit∣nes outwardly? Against others, or themselues, against others, two waies. 1 In iudgement, when they giue or receiue false infor∣mation,
pronounce or write false sentence. 2 Out of iudgement, and that is also two waies. 1 When any rayse vp, spread abroad, or listen after false reports. 2 When any report the falts of others, without care of their credit, or when with flattering hearts they commend any man. How doe men beare false witnes against themselues. Eyther when they denie that to be in them, which is indeed, or take that vpon them which is not, good or euill. VVhat be the occasions of false witnes. The fleshly hatred of our enemies, or car∣nal loue of our selues, or our friēds, to get the things we loue, & auoid that we hate. How do mē beare false witnes inwardly. Eyther in suspition without a iust cause, or in iudging falsly or hardly of any man. How are we partakers with false witnes bearers? If we eyther commaund or counsaile it to be done, or if we mislike it not, stay∣ing it if we can. VVhat is heere commaunded. 1 In iudgement to further righteous causes, so far forth as my calling requires
2 To speake the truth from my heart to euery man, so much as is requisite for him to know. 3 To be as carefull of the credit of my neighbour, as the nature of his offences will permit. Rehearse the tenth Commaundement. Thou shalt not couet. &c.Com. 10. Are all motions and desires euill. No: For the desire and appetite of meat, drinke, and sleepe, are naturall, and in their owne nature good, vnlesse through our corruption they become sinfull. What motions then be euill. Those which are eyther against God, or our neighbours. Are all such forbidden in this Command. No: For those which are against God are forbidden in the first commaunde∣ment, those therefore are forbidden heere which are against our neighbour. Seeing in the former commaundement, we are forbidden to hurt our neighbour in hart, how doth this differ from the former. There, the setled desires of the hart are forbidden, but here are forbidden those only, wherto the hart doth not consent. VVhence doe these motions arise.
Eyther of our owne corruption, or else are offered by Sathan, or else by men. Are all these sinnes in vs. All that arise of our own corruption, are, but those which the deuill or men offer vnto vs, are not, vnlesse wee be infected with them. How are we infected by them. When we take pleasure in them, when we be intangled by them, or when wee suffer thē to tary in our minds, although our harts do not giue consent. How is this commaundement broken. 1 When euill motions arise of cor∣ruption, moouing vs to hurt our neigh∣bour. 2 When we be infected with those euil motions, which sathan or euill men put into our minds. 3 When we doe not with like affecti∣on desire the good of our neighbour as we doe our owne. VVhat is commaunded. To loue my neighbour as my selfe. Who is your neighbour. Euerie one that is neere me, and stan∣deth in need of my helpe, and it lyeth me t elpe him, though he be a stranger, or
my foe. Why iudge you so. Because of the image of God in him, and that he is mine owne flesh in respect of our first parents. Doth the law of God prescribe the per∣fect rule of righteousnes? Yea: For there is no good thing in déed, word, or thought, but it is heer cōmanded & likewise no euil but heerit is forbidden. Can euerie one keepe the Lawe per∣fectly. They that are not borne againe of God, cannot keep it at all in any point, as plea∣sing God therby in respect of themselues. For except he be borne againe of God, he cannot sée the kingdome of God, nor enter therein: much lesse keepe the com∣maundements of God: Moreouer all men by nature, being borne and con∣ceiued in sinne, are not onely vtterly in∣sufficient to any good thing, but also dis∣posed and ready to all sin & wickednes. What punishment is due to the brea∣kers of Gods law. In this life the curse of God and death, with manifold miseries of bodie & soule, or both. And where this curse is not ta∣ken
away, euerlasting death and dam∣nation of bodie and soule in hell. But God is mercifull. Yea and God is iust & righteous, which righteousnes must fully be discharged, or else we cannot be pertakers of his mercy. And cannot we by ourselues make sa∣tisfaction for our sinnes? No: But rather from day to day in∣crease our debt. But doth not God wrong to man, to re∣quire of him that which he is not able to performe. No: For God made man so yt he might haue performed it, but he by his sinne, spoyled himself and his posteritie of those godly gifts. Can any creature in heauen or earth, which is onely a creature, satisfie his righ∣teousnes. None at all, for 1 God will not pu∣nish that in another creature, which is due to be paid by man. 2 None that is onely a creature can abide the wrath of God against sinne, and deliuer other from the same. What manner of man is to be sought out to be our Mediator and deliuerer.
Hée which is indeed a verie right man, and perfectly righteous, & more mighty then all creatures beside: that is, hee which also is God. Why must he be man, and perfectly righteous. Because the righteousnes of God re∣quireth, that the same nature which had sinned, should pray and make amendes for sinne. Why must he be God withall. That by his godly power, he may abide the burthen of Gods wrath in his flesh, and may get againe, and restore to vs the righteousnes and life which we in Adam lost. Who is that Mediatour which is verie God, and very man, and perfectly righte∣ous withall. Our Lord Iesus Christ, who is made vnto vs, wisedome, righteousnes, sancti∣fication, and redemption. What is the vse of all which hath hither∣to beene taught. To bring vs to a sound perswasion and féeling of our sinnes, because they haue deserued so grieuous punishment, as ey∣ther the death of the Sonne of God, or
hell fire. Are they deliuered from the curse of the Law, and made partakers of Christs me∣rits, that are truly humbled. Yea: For heauen and earth shal passe, but one tote or tittle of Gods lawe shall not faile, till all be fulfilled. How is the truth of Gods law fulfilled. Both in Gods children and in the wic∣ked. In them, because it bringeth them to be truly humbled in themselues for their sinnes, and then sendeth them to Christ, who doth quite fulfil it. In these, because it declareth to them their iust confusion, when to the ende they eyther perseuere, or dispaire. Is sorrow for sinne sufficient to bring vs to saluation. No: But wée must also haue a true faith, which is a true perswasion of the mereies of God, merited by our Sauiour Iesus Christ. How shall we attaine to this true faith. By the spirit of God, giuing vs the true vnderstanding and perswasion of the Gopell. VVhere is the Gospell declared vnto vs. It is generally declared vnto vs in the
holy Scriptures, but the Church of God hath gathered out of them a certaine sum thereof, which is the articles of our Chri∣stian faith, commonly called the Creed. Rehearse those articles. The Be∣leefe. I beleeue in God the Father, almightie, &c. How many parts are ther in these articles. There are two. 1 Touching our faith in God. 2 Of our faith concerning the Church. What beleeue you in the first part. I declare, that I beléeue in God the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. Why say you I beleeue in God, and not in Gods? For that there is but one onely true God, vpō whom my faith is wholy staied. If there be but one God, why name you three, the father, the son, & the holy ghost. Because God hath so opened himselfe in his word, that these thrée sundry per∣sons, are but one true & euerlasting God. Why say you I beleeue in God, and not rather, that there is a God. By saying I beléeue in God, I declare that I put my whole trust & assurance in God, whereas the deuils & wicked men, beleeuing that there is a God, yet cannot
put their whole trust & confidence in him. vvhy say you I beleeue, & not we beleeue Because I must be saued by my owne faith, and not by the faith of another. Why call you God Father? Because he is the Creator of heauen, and earth, & so the father of all creatures. Why say you Creator, and not Maker of heauen, &c. Because he created all things of no∣thing, but to make, is to make somthing of that, which was before. Why call you him Almightie. Because as he created all things of no∣thing, so he doth preserue & guid thē by his mighty power, wisdom, iustice, & mercy. What comfort hence do we receiue. 1 That al ye good angels of god shal watch ouer me, & pitch their tents about me. 2 That neither the deuil nor men, shal haue any power to hurt me: but when, and so farre as God will permit them. 3 That I shal haue a profitable & con∣uenient vse of all Gods creatures. 4 Though I suffer hurt by sathan, or want of his creatures, yet all this shall turne to my good in the end. How can this be.
Because God can doe it as an almightie God, and will doe it, as a most mercifull and louing father. True it is, that by creation we had this benefit, but we haue lost it, and are be∣come the children of wrath, how then can God become our father, and shew vs, thys mercy. Hee is become my father by faith in Christ, the sonne of God, What beleeue you of GOD the Sonne. First, that he is able to worke my sal∣uation. 2. That he hath wrought it in∣deed after the manner that is heere set downe. How can you beleeue that he is able to worke your saluation. I beléeue it, because he is both God and man, and hath receiued an office from God the Father to worke my saluation. By what words in the Creed do you be∣leeue that Christ is God. By these: (His onely sonne,) I declare that I beleeue in Christ the onely begot∣ten Sonne of God, begotten of his Fa∣ther before all worlds: God of God: light of light: verie God of verie God: be∣gotten
nor made: being of one substance of the father, by whom all things were made. Why call you him the onely begotten Sonne of God. Because he is the alone Sonne of God by nature. How can this be, seeing the Angels, A∣dam, and we also, be the Sonnes of God. Adam was the sonne of God by crea∣tion, which state we haue lost, but now we be the sonnes of GOD by regene∣ration. VVhy was it requisite hee should be God. Because nothing but God was able to abide, and ouercome the wrath of God, and the punishment due vnto sinne. What comfort haue you by this, that Christ is God. Héereby I am assured that he is able to saue me, by reconciling me to the Fa∣ther, that he may make me the child of God. By what words in the Creede doe you shew, that you beleeue that Christ is man. By these words (Borne of the Virgine Mary) where I shew that he was borne,
as other men bee, and subiect to all infirmities of man, sinne onely ex∣cepted. Why are these words added? Concei∣ued by the holy Ghost? To shew that Christ by the holy Ghost was conceiued in the womb of the virgin Mary, she continuing still a pure virgin, and that he was borne holy and without sinne, whereto all other by nature are subiect. VVas it needfull that Christ should be without sinne. Yea: For otherwise the Godhead and manhood could not haue him ioyned to∣gether: besides if he had béene a sinner hee could not haue satisfied for others sinnes. Why was it requisite that he should be man? Because the righteousnes of God re∣quireth that the same nature which had sinned, should also pay and make amends for sinne. What cōfort is in this, that Christ is man? I am thereby assured that Christ is fit to suffer the punishment of my sinne, and beeing man himselfe, will be more
pittifull and mercifull to me. vvhat fruit haue you by his holy con∣ception? I am assured, that his holy concep∣tion hath couered the corruption of my nature, and that his pure conception shall be imputed vnto mee. vvhat comfort haue you by this, that he is both God and man? That hee is able to finish most ful∣ly my saluation, seeing as hee is man, hee is fit to suffer for sinnes: as hee is GOD, hee is able to beare the pu∣nishment of sinne, and to ouercome in suffering, and therefore to be called Iesus. vvhat doth Iesus signifie? It signifieth a Sauiour: which name agreeth to Christ, because hee saueth mee from all my sinnes, & because there is no other meanes, whereby I may in part or whole, bee deliuered from them. vvhat comfort haue you by this? Euen the same which I said, and the ra∣ther, because GOD from heauen gaue him this name, and the Church on earth hath subscribed thereunto,
What signifieth Christ. Annoynted, for he was annoynted to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, for all his people, and so for mee. How gather you this? By the annoynting Prophets, Priests, and Kinges, which were figures of him. VVas Christ annoynted with materiall oyle as they were. No: But with all gifts of the Spirit, without measure. Why call you him Prophet? Because he was, is, and euer shal be the onely teacher of the Church. What were then the Prophets and A∣postles. They were his disciples and seruants, speaking onely by his spirit. What comfort haue we by this. Héereby I am assured that he will lead me into all truth, needful for Gods glory and my saluation. Why call you him Priest. Because offering vp himselfe a sacrifice once for all, he hath satisfied for all my sinnes, and maketh continuall interces∣sion to the father for me.
What comfort doe wee reape by his Priesthood. That, I am sure, that he is my Me∣diatour, and that I am made a Priest. How is that. By him I haue fréedome and boldnes to draw néere, and offer vp my selfe, and all that I haue to God the Father. Why call you him King. Because he doth guide and gouerne me to euerlasting life by his word and spirit. What comfort haue you by this. Héereby I am assured, that by his king∣ly power, I shall finally ouercome the flesh, the World, Death, and Hell. Why call you him Lord. For that, not with gold or siluer, but with his precious blood, he hath purchased▪ vs to be a peculier people to himselfe. VVhat comfort haue you thereby▪ Séeing hée hath paid so precious a price for me; that he will not▪ suffer me to perish. VVhat is the second thing wherein thy faith in Christ consisteth. I beleeue, that he hath wrought my saluation in deed, after that manner that is set downe in the Creed▪
How is that? 1 First by his most painefull suffe∣rings for sinne. 2 By his most glorious victorie and triumph ouer sinne. In what words are his paineful suffrings expressed. In these. Suffered vnder Pontius▪ Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, &c. vvhat is the generall meaning of these words? Therein I shew my selfe to beléeue that Christ indured most grieuos tor∣ments both of bodie and soule. vvhat comfort haue you ny this? I am fréed from all those punishments of bodie and soule which my sins haue▪ de∣serued. How then commeth it to passe that we are so often afflicted with grieuous tor∣ments of bodie and soule. Our sufferings are not by desert any sa∣tisfaction for our sinnes in any part, but being sanctified in the most holy suffe∣rings of Christ, they are medicines a∣gainst sinne. vvhy are those words set downe, Suffe∣red vnder Pontius Pilate.
Not onely for the truth of the story, but also to teach, that he appeared willingly, and of his owne accord, before an earthly Iudge, of whō he was pronounced inno∣cent, & yet by the same man condemned. vvhat comfort haue you hereof? That my Sauiour thus suffering not for his owne sinnes, but wholy for mine and other mens, vnder an earthly Iudge, I shall be discharged by the heauenly Iudge. vvhat is meant by this that he was cruci∣fied. That he died not only a common death, but such an one as was accursed both of God and man. vvhat comfort haue you by this? This: That I am deliuered from the curse which I haue deserued by the breath of the law, and shall obtaine the blessing▪ due vnto him▪ for keeping the same▪ vvhat meaneth this, that he died? That his soule was separated from his bodie, so that he died a corporall death. VVhy was it requisite that he should die? Because by sinne came death into the
world, so that the iustice of God could not be satisfied for our sinnes, vnlesse death had béene ioyned with his suffrings. VVhy is it further sayd, that He was bu∣ried. To assure vs more truly that he was surely dead. VVhat comfort haue you by his death and buriall. 1 This is my first comfort, that my sinnes are fréely discharged in his death, and so buried, that they shall neuer come in remembrance. 2 Besides, my comfort is the more, be∣cause by the virtue of his death and bu∣riall, sinne shall be killed in mée, and bu∣ried, so that henceforth it shall haue no power to raigne in me. 3 I néede not feare death, séeing that sinne, which is the sting of death, is taken away by the death of Christ, and that death is now made to me an entrance into life. What meanes this, He descended into hell. That my Sauiour Christ did not onely suffer in bodie, but also in soule did abide most miserable vexations, griefes, and painefull troubles, and feare of minde,
into which, both before, and most of all when he hanged vpon the crosse, he was cast. VVhat comfort haue you heereby. That in all my grieuous temptations and assaults, I may stay and make sure my selfe by this, that Christ hath deliue∣red me from the sorrowfull paines and griefes of hel. What beleeuest thou in this article, He rose againe. I beleeue, that Christ which in his1. Cor. 15, 20. manhood had suffered for me, did on the third day rise by his owne power from the dead. Wherin doth this article minister com∣fort vnto thee. 1 In thrée things. 1 His resurrection assureth me, that his righteousnes shall be imputed to me for my perfect iustifi∣cation. 2 Because it rayseth me vp from day to day to righteousnes, and newnes of life in this world. 3 It ministreth vnto me a comforta∣ble hope, that I shall rise againe in the last day from bodily death. What beleeuest thou in this article, He
ascended into heauen? I beléeue that Christ in mans nature,Act. 1. 2. 9. the Apostles looking on ascended into heauen. What comfort haue you thereby? 1 I am comforted in this, that ChristHeb. 9. 15. hath prepared a place for me in the hea∣uens, which now I féele by faith, and héereafter I shall fully inioy. 2 I am comforted by his intercession to the father for me. What fruit haue you thereby? 1 It doth reconcile me to the Father, for those sins which I daily commit. 2 Being reconciled to him, I can pray to God with boldnes, and cal him father. What meaneth that, Hee sitteth at the right hand of God, &c. That Christ in his mans nature was1. Pet. 3. 22. aduanced by the father vnto that hie au∣thoritie, whereby he ruleth all things in heauen and earth. What comfort reape you heereby? 1 Because I shall receiue from himMath. 6. 26. &c. all things néedfull for me vnder his gra∣cious gouernment. 2 By his power all mine enemies shal be subdued and troden vnder my feet.
What beleeue you in this article, From thence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. That Christ shal come in his maiestie,1. Cor. 15. 51. 52. to pronounce sentence vpon all those that were dead before, and that shall be found aliue. What comfort haue you by this? 1 I am comforted in my greatest mi∣serie,Reue. 22. 20 knowing that Christ will come one day to rid me out of all. 2 I am sure he will giue sentence onRom. 8. 1. my side, and take me to glory with him. VVhy say you, I beleeue in the holy Ghost. Because he is God, equal with the Fa∣ther and the Sonne. Why call you him holy. Because he is the author and worker of all holines. What fruit haue you by this? 1 He doth assure me, that I am yt child of god, by making me cal him Abba, Father. 2 He assureth me, that by the death and resurrection of Christ, sinne dieth in me, and I am raised vp to holines of life. 3 He leadeth me into all truth, need∣full to Gods glory and my saluation.
4 He comforteth me in all troubles, and in death assureth me of a better life in this same bodie and soule. What meaneth this article, I beleeue the holy Catholike Church. That there is a Church of God, though it cannot alwaies be seene with the eyes of men. Why call you the Church holy. For that, although in this life in it selfe it is sinfull, yet in Christ the head it is holy, and in the life to come, shall be brought to the true perfection of holines. Why doe you call it Catholike. Because God at all times, and in all pla∣ces, and of all sorts of men, hath an holy Church. What meaneth this article, The commu∣nion of Saints. That the whole Church communicate with Christ, & euery member one with another. VVhat comfort haue you by this. 1 I am comforted, for that I am iu∣stified by that faith, whereby Adam and Abraham were iustified: which is tyed to no time nor place, and excludeth no person.
2 Because I am made pertaker of Christ, and all his merits by faith, and all the blessings of the Church by loue. VVhat beleeuest thou by this article, I beleeue the forgiuenes of sinnes. That God for Christs sake, doth frée∣ly forgiue not onely my sinnes, but also the punishment which I haue thereby deserued. vvhy say you, I beleeue the forgiuenes of sinnes. Because no reason can perswade mee, but the holy Ghost must worke the assu∣rance thereof in my hart onely. vvhat comfort haue you thereby. 1 Because all the sinnes I daily com∣mit shall neuer be laid to my charge. 2 Because the weaknes and wants of all my duties are couered and supplied in Christ. 3 For that God will heare me pray∣ing for other, that they may haue faith to féele the forgiuenes of sinnes. vvhat meane you by this article, The re∣surrection of the bodie into life euerlasting. That this bodie after it shall be dissol∣ued into dust, shall be raised vp againe at the last day, and my soule shall liue in
euerlasting glory. VVhat comfort reape you thereby? 1 I am made cheerefull in well doing, séeing my labour is not in vaine. 2 I am made to dispise the pleasures and glory of this word, and with patience to suffer all the troubles of this life. 3 It comforteth me ouer the death of my friends, and maketh me to be chéere∣full in death, knowing I shal haue a part in the resurrection of the iust. What fruit haue you by beleeuing all these articles. The drift of all this, that being iusti∣fied by faith, I am made righteous be∣fore God. Which be the seuerall fruits? 1 I am at peace with God, although in my selfe, for my outward sins, which I daily commit, and my inward concep∣tion which remaineth, I am accused. 2 I get strength to fight against my outward sinnes, to subdue my outwarde corruption, to do outward good works, and to delight in the law of God, in my inner man. 3 I haue an interest in all Gods crea∣tures, so that the vse and want of them
shal turn to ye furtherance of my saluatiō. 4 I am assured of the glorification of my soule and bodie in the heauens, be∣cause I am made an heire of euerlasting life. Why is this giuen wholy & only to faith. Not because faith doth deserue it, but because the merits of Christ can be laid hold on, and applied to my selfe by no o∣ther meanes, but by faith alone. Cannot good works in some part iusti∣sie vs. No: For righteousnes which is able to stand before God, must be perfect. Are not our workes so. No: For many waies we sinne all, besides, the best works we do are defiled with sinne, and therefore can deserue no∣thing at the hand of God. vvhy then doth God promise a reward to them. That is not for the desert of works, but of Gods grace and mercy. Then this doctrine will make men care∣lesse for well doing. No: For they that be ingrafied into Christ, must néeds bring forth good works vvhy is it needful they should doe good works.
1 That wee may by them shew our selues thankefull to God for all his be∣nefits. 2 That we be assured of faith and e∣lection by good works. 3 That by them we may ediffe others, and that will be. 1. By incouraging and strengthening those that are good. 2 By winning those that are not yet come to God. 3 By stopping the mouthes of the wicked. 4 That God may be glorified therby. Are good works so needful that we can∣not be saued without them. Yea: For although they worke not our saluation, in any part, yet for that, they that are iustified are also sanctified, they that doe no good works declare they are neyther iustified nor sanctified, and therefore cannot be saued. Then they must much more be con∣demned which commit sinne and lie in it. Yea: For such are not onely pronoun∣ced accursed by the law, but also the Gos∣pell hath denounced that they shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen. Can euerie one doe good workes. No: None but such as are borne againe,
that is, that they haue receiued Christ, as he is offered to vs of God ye Father, to be our wisedome, holines, righteousnes and redemption. vvho then doe good works. They that are thus borne againe, and carry in them the image of God, haue repentance wrought in them, from whence good works do procéede. What is repentance? It is a turning of our selues to God, whereby we crucifie and kill the corrup∣tion of our nature, & reforme our selues in the inner man according to Gods will. What is it to crucifie the corruption of nature. It is truly and with all my hart to be sory, that I haue offended God with it, and my other sinnes, and euery day, more and more to hate it, and them, and flie from them. How is this sorrow wrought. Partly by the threatnings of the law, and the feare of Gods iudgements, but especi∣ally increased by séeing Christs death, wherby I haue power to hate sinne and llaue it.
How is this reformation of our selues wrought in vs. Onely by the promises of the Gospell, whereby we feele the fruit of the rising againe of Christ. What insueth hereof. Héerby we are raysed vp into a new life, hauing the Law written in our hearts, and so reforme our selues. Heereby it appeareth that none can re∣pent of themselues, or when they will. True: For it was said before, that it is the gift of God, giuen vnto them that are borne againe. By this also it is euident that Gods chil∣dren stand in need of repentance so long as they liue. Yea: For there is none of the Saints of God, but carrying alwaies this cor∣ruption about them, sometime fall, and are farre from that perfection of godlines which the Lord requireth. Why then saith our Sauiour Christ, that the Angels of God reioyce more ouer one sinner that repenteth, then ouer 99. who need no repentance. Our Sauiour speaketh of repentance from dead works, and grosse sins, where∣of
the righteous doe not stand in néed, and yet they are daily to repent of their er∣rours and infirmities. Seeing it was said before, that good works proceed from repentance, what properties are required of works. 1 That they be such as God hath com∣maunded in his law. 2 That they which doe them, be in∣grafted into Christ, and doe continue in him. What say you then of their good works which are not in Christ. They doe no good works, because they neyther are as yet members of Christ, neyther do they offer them in his name. 3 That they be done to glorifie God, and assure vs of saluation. Is it not lawfull to seeke our owne praise or merit by our good works. No: For all our good works are im∣perfect, and saluation is onely merited by the death of Christ. VVe haue heard that the Law worketh knowledge of our sinnes and feeling of our miserie, what meanes hath God ordai∣ned to worke faith in vs.
These fiue: The Gospell, Prayer, Sacraments, discipline, and affliction. How many kinds of faith be there. 1 Two: Generall, whereby I be∣léeue God to be true in all his words. 2 Special, whereby eyther I beléeue God to be iust in his threatnings, and so am made penitent, or else whereby I beléeue that he is mercifull in his promi∣ses, and so come to repentance. vvhat difference is there betweene peni∣tence and repentance. Penitence is a sorrow for sin, wrought by the Law. Repentance is a remoouing our selues from sinne, wrought by the Gospell. Is there such difference betweene the Law and the Gospell. Yea: They differ in foure things. 1 The Law reueileth sinne, rebu∣keth vs for it, and leaueth vs in it. The Gospell reueileth vnto vs the remission of sinnes, and freeth from the punish∣ments belonging thereunto. 2 The Law commaundeth to do good, and giueth no strength, but the Gospell inableth vs to doe good, the holy Ghost writing the Law in our harts, and as∣suring
vs of the promise. 3 The Law is the ministerie of wrath, death and condemnation, but the Gospell is the ministerie of grace, iustification and life. 4 In many poynts the Law may be conceiued by reason, but the Gospell can∣not, being far aboue mans reason. vvherein doe they agree. In this, that they be both of God, and de∣clare one kinde of righteousnes, though they differ in offering it vnto vs. What is that one kinde of righteous∣nesse. The perfect loue of God, and of our neighbour. What insueth heereof? That the seuere Law, pronounceth all the faithfull righteous, because they haue in Christ all that the Law requireth. But yet they remayne transgressors of the Law. They are transgressors in themselues, and yet righteous in Christ, and in their inner man they loue righteousnesse, and hate sinne. VVhat then is the state of the faithfull in this life.
They are sure in Christ, and yet fight against sinne. VVhat fight haue they. 1 Within, they haue the battaile of the flesh against the spirit. 2 Without, the temptations of sathan and of the world. How shall they ouercome. By a liuely faith in Iesus Christ. VVhat call you the flesh. The corruption of our nature wherein we were borne and conceiued. Doth that remaine after regeneration. Yea it dwelleth in vs, and cleaueth fast vnto vs, so long as we carry the outward flesh about vs. How doth the flesh fight against the spirit. By continuall lusting against it, and that is two waies. 1 By hindering or corrupting vs in the good motions, works & deeds of the spirit. 2 By continuall moouing vs to euill motions, words and déeds. What call you the spirit. The holy spirit which God in Christ hath giuen vs, wherby we are begottē againe. Doe wee not receiue the spirit in full measure, and in perfection at the first.
No: But first wee receiue the first fruits, & afterward daily increases of the same vnto the end, if yt fault be not in vs. How doth the spirit fight in vs. By lusting against the flesh, and that is also two waies. 1 Partly by rebuking, and partly by restrayning in vs the euill motions and déeds of the flesh. 2 By continuall inlightening vs, & af∣fecting vs with thoughts, words, & déeds agreeable to Gods will. What call you the world. The corrupt state & condition of men, and the rest of the creatures. How doth the world fight against vs. By alluring and drawing vs to the cor∣ruptions thereof, and the meanes it v∣seth héerein are two. 1 Oft times by false pleasures, profit, and glory of this world, from our obedi∣ence to God. 2 Oft times it draweth vs by paines and losses, and reproches, to distrust Gods promises. How shall we ouercome the pleasures, profit, and glory of this world. 1 By a true faith in Iesus Christ, who
desposed all these things to work our sal∣uation, and to make vs able to ouercome them. 2 By a faith in Gods word, that fea∣reth vs from doing any thing that is a∣gainst his will. How shall we ouercome the paines, los∣ses and reproches of this world. 1 By a liuely faith in Iesus Christ, who suffered all these things to worke our saluation, and inableth vs to suffer them. 2 By a stedfast faith in Gods proui∣dence, that we shall want no good thing: and that all things soeming hurtful, shall be turned to the furtherance of our sal∣uation. What call you sathan? The aduersarie and enemie of God and his people. How doth he fight against vs? 1 By subtilty, alluring vs to sinne, and therefore he is called a tempter, and a Serpent. 2 By laying fearfully to our charge our sinnes committed, and therefore he is called the deuill, that is, an accuser. 3 By séeking by manifold inward ter∣rors,
and outward troubles, to swallow vs vp, and therefore hee is called, a roa∣ring Lyon. How shall we fight against him and his temptations. 1 By faith in Iesus Christ who ouer∣came all his temptations in his owne person, to the end we might ouerthrow him. 2 By resisting the inward motiens, and outward occasions of sinne. How shall we doe that? By beleeuing that we are baptised into the death and resurrection of Christ. How shall we ouercome sathan and his accusations. 1 By faith in Iesus Christ, who hath iustified vs for all the sinne, for the which he can accuse vs. 2 By all those comfortable promises of the forgiuenes of sins, which in Christs name is made vnto vs. How shall we ouercome him in our ter∣rors and troubles. 1 By faith in Iesus Christ, who was heard in all his terrors and troubles, to giue vs an assurance that we shall not be ouercome by them.
2 By faith in Gods prouidence, wher∣by we knowe that he can doe no more vnto vs, then the Lord doth direct for our good. VVe haue hard that the word is the first & chiefe means, not only to beget, but also to strengthen and increase faith in vs, what is the next principall meanes. That is Prayer, chiefly seruing for the strengthning and increasing of faith. vvhat is Prayer. Prayer is a lifting vp of the minde, and a powring out of the hart before God. Is there any prescript rule of Prayer left vs in the Scriptures. Yea, euen that which our Sauiour Christ taught his disciples, called the Lords Prayer. Is it lawfull to vse no other manner of words. Yea, we may vse an other forme, but we must pray for the same things, and with like affection as are prescribed ther. How is that Prayer deuided. Into three parts: 1 The preface, or en∣terance thereto: 2 The prayer it selfe: 3 The cōclusion or shutting vp of yt same. vvhich is the Preface.
Our Father which art in heauen. vvhat doth this put vs in minde of. 1 Of him to whom we pray: 2 Of our owne estate in prayer. To whom doe we pray. To God the Father, the Sonne, and the the holy Ghost. vvhy doe you heare name the father. Because discerning the persons, wee pray vnto the father, secretly vnder∣standing that wee doe so in the mediation of his sonne, by the working of the holy Ghost. vvhy must we pray to the father in the mediation of Christ his Sonne. Because God beeing displeased for sinne, we can haue no dealing with him, but only by the meanes of his sonne, in whom he is well pleased. vvhy must we pray by the working of the holy Ghost. Because the holy ghost assureth vs, that God is our Father, & whereas we know not what to pray, nor how, he teacheth vs. vvhat must we be perswaded of our owne estate in prayer. Partly concerning our selues, and partlie concerning others.
VVhat perswasion must wee haue touching our selues. We must be truly humbled, and with∣all, haue a certaine confidence that wee shall be hard. How shall we be truly humbled. 1 With a perswasion of our sinfull miserie and vnworthines to be holpen. 2 With a most certaine perswasion of the most glorious Maiestie of God in heauen, that must helpe vs. How shal we be assured that we shall be heard. 1 By being perswaded that God lo∣ueth vs as his own children, in our Lord Iesus Christ. 2 By faith, being perswaded that God our Father is able to doe whatsoeuer he will in heauen and earth. What must wee be perswaded concer∣ning other. 1 That all Gods people pray for vs. 2 We must be perswaded that it is our bounded dutie to pray for other, as well as for our selues. How are the petitions duided. 1 We make our requests for those things which concerne Gods Maiestie.
2 For those things which concerne our owne welfare. Which be those that concerne Gods Maiestie. The thrée first: 1 Hallowed be thy name, 2 Thy kingdome come. 3 Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. What is meant by the name of God. 1 The names and titles of God, as Iehoua, the Lord of Lords, &c. 2 The wisedome, power, mercy, good∣nes, truth, righteousnes, and the eterni∣tie of God. Why be these called the names of God. Because as names serue to discerne things by, so by these things GOD is knowne to be God. What is meant by this word sanctified. We pray that God as he is glorious in himselfe, so he may be declared and made knowne to men. How shall Gods name be declared to be holy and glorious. 1 We pray that his wisedome, power, mercy, &c. may more and more be im∣parted into vs, and other of Gods people. 2 We pray, that according as wee know these things, so the fruits of them
may appeare in ours & all Gods peoples liues, that so Gods name may be honou∣red and praised. What doe we pray against in his pe∣tion. 1 Against all ignorance of the holy things we should know, and want of good workes, whereby God wants of his glory. 2 Against all false religion, wicked∣nes, and vngodlines, by which Gods name is dishonoured. FINIS.
