5677 S1871 22855212 25817
The Cheating Age: Or LEONARD of Lincolnes iourney to LONDON to buy Wit. To a pleasant new tune. FRom olde famous Lincolne that's seated so hye, Well mounted and furnisht, with gold did I flye, To Londons fam'd Citie some wit for to buy, Which cost me so deare, makes me sigh, sob, and cry. For this is the cheating Age, For this is the cheating Age. Before I had entered Bishops wide gate, The Mouth me an offer as if it would prte: But one scrapt acquaintance vnto my hard fate, And made me consume there most part of my state. For this is the cheating Age, &c. For after a neate comly French salutation, His tongue he did order in such a scut fashion, As I for to heare him amazed did stand, But he in the Tauerne me pull'd by the hand. For this is the cheating Age, &c. When each one had tasted a cup two or thrée, What knowledge of Country and kindred had wée, How bountifull Bacchus with vs did agree, That no'e till this houre did each other see. For this is the cheating Age, &c. He askt my affaires? I made him reply: And tolde him my comming was wit for to buy: (uoth he) I'le beiend you with that presently, He vnlatcht a window that Westward did flye. For this is the cheating age, &c. Then straight a strange whistle he to the stréet sends, Audaciously blowne from his Theeues fingers ends, The Drawer runs vp, sayes, there's some of your friends Hath call'd for some wine, and your comming attends. For this is the cheating Age, &c. He cheard me, and tolde me, for them he had sent: Should teach me wit gratis ere homeward I went: But I ne're misdoubting, the Knauery he meant, Haue swallow'd a baite which hath made me repent. For this is the cheating Age, &c. Vp straight comes a Roarer with long shaggy lockes, New broke out frō Newgate, the Cage, or some Stocks Or else from the Spittle, halfe cur'd of the Pox, But I'le carefull be, least he pepper my box. For this is the cheating Age, &c. This totterd grin? Rascall amaz'd me to heare, The terrible oathes which for nothing he sware, With that stampt his foote, and straightway did appear Such horrible faces that made me to feare. For this is the cheating age, &c. Vp marches two creatures in torne totterd cases, With long rustie Rapiers, swolne eyes, & patcht faces As if that black Pluto from Limbo had sent, These horrid grim visions to make vs repent. For this is the cheating age, &c.
The second part. To the same tune. MY former Companion straight rise from the boord, And courteous kinde greeting to them did afford: Saying, pray sir bid welcome my friends of the sword, That gaine credit by deeds sir, and not by their word: For this is the cheating age, &c. First hauing saluted, we sate downe againe, And call'd for Tobacco, burnt Claret amaine: The Drawer officious to giue vs our bane, With cups plyde vs hard to put's out of our paine. For this is the cheating age, &c. These chimney-nos'd-Rascals did make such a smother, I ne're saw the like since I came from my mother: Such cloude of blew vapour frō their nosthrils did come, Had like for to choakt me, and fired the roome. For this is the cheating age, &c. Then vp comes a Poet with a Rooke at his taile, That feedes all the Winter of Toasts drown'd in Ale, And in the Summer so setteth to sale, Inuentions of others before, his time stale. For this is the cheating age, &c. Then straightway one calls to the barre-Boy for Dice, Which wrapt in a paper, was brought in a trice, Requesting to put off a little odde time, They would play for no more then a pottle of Wine. For this is the cheating age, &c. I gaue my consent, and with them did play, From wine for dry money, till next breake of day, Where vext at my losses, I set at one cast, Full forty good pounds to be rid of my last. For this is the cheating age, &c. My money being set, the cast straight was throwne, And he like the diuell cride, All is mine owne: So euery penny he from me did get, And bad me to Lincolne goe backe by my wit. For this is the cheating age, &c. They hauing my money, did all steale away, And left me with nothing, fiue pound for to pay: But my cloake lin'd with veluet, & my rapier guilt gay, Did make cleane the score, and all charges defray, For this is the cheating age, &c. A Pox of all Cheaters, and grim roaring Boyes: All rooking base Pandars and nitty Decoyes: And all that make practise to thriue by such fits, The thrée cornerd night-cap once cocker their wits. For this is the cheating age, &c. Now Leonard of Lincolne with griefe bids adiew: My iourney to London long time I shall rue: I ne're in my life met with villaines so vilde, To send a man home like the Prodigall Childe. For this is the cheating age. For this is the cheating age. By William Cooke. Finis. Printed at London by E. A. for Iohn Wright.
