5766 99844349 9153
A RELATION O  Most lamentable Burning of th  of Corke, in the west of Ireland, in the Province of MONSTER, by Thunder and Lightning. With ether most dolefull and miserable Accidents, which fell out the last of May 1622 after the prodigious barrell of the birds called Stares, which fought strangely over and meare that Cit the 12. & 14. of May 1623. As it hath beene Reported to divers Right Honourable PERSONS. men work with fire-fighting equipment in a burning town Printed this 20 of Iune. 1622. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer, 1622.
❧ To the courteous Reader. CHristian Reader; There was this last yeare 1621. in October last, publi∣shed a report of a wonderfull battell fought betwixt cer∣taine birdes, called Stares, or Sterlings, at and neare a Cittie in Ireland called Corke, which was so strange and admirable an acci∣dent, as the like hath very seldome or never bin heard of, or registred in any History in moderne or former ages. This report being so strange, was of some censured as an vntrue and idle invention, Of others, which vnderstood, and by enquirie were resolved of the truth, it was ima∣gined to prognosticate some strange and dreadfull acci∣dent to follow, as warres, plagues or pestilence, with such like coniectures. Sithence which time, namely, this last of May 1622. the Omnipotent Maiestie of heaven hath not onely reprooved their vanitie, who would not beleeue so strange a Relation, but hath fur∣ther by a most dreadfull and lamentable demonstration
of his power and Iustice, resolved what that battell of Birds might or did prognosticate, wherein his Iustice in one respect may be feared, and his mercy by so exem∣plar a manifestation may be sought after in another. In what manner this battell of Birds was performed, is needles in this place to be repeated, because the relation is extant in Print, albeit, fitting for the Reader to know, because he shall thereby vnderstand, how di∣rectly this dreadfull, and most terrible late Accident in Corke, was prognosticated in the clamorous and cru∣ell fight of the Stares, at and neare vnto Corke, where the Stares began their fiery and furious fight at the East end of the Cittie; there began the first ori∣ginall of the ruine of Corke: And as the Birds pro∣ceeded in their fight, so did the Cittie of Corke con∣sume by fire from heaven, as it is more plainely deli∣vered in the Relation following, to which I leaue thee.
A RELATION OF THE MOST LAMENTABLE Burning of the Cittie of Corke in the West of Ireland, in the Province of MONSTER, by Thunder and Lightning. THe Cittie of Corke hath his beginning vpon the side of an Hill, which discendeth ea∣sily into one wide and long streete; The onely principall and chiefe streete of the Cittie. At the first en∣trance there is a Castle, called Shandon Castle.
And almost over against it, a Church built of Stone, as the Castle is a kinde of Mar∣ble, of which that Country yeeldeth store. The Cittie hath many houses built of the same stone, and covered with Slate. But the greatest number of houses are built with Tymber, or Mudde walles, and co∣vered with Thatch. This last of May, being the most pleasant and delightfull moneth of the yeare; To take his farewell, gaue it in the most rue∣full and terrible manner, the like seldome heard of, or seene in any Country, or heard of in any Age, since the beginning of the World. The Citties of Sodome and Gomorrah were not more suddainely, or more horri∣bly consumed with fire from heaven, then this Cittie of Corke was this last of May: Albeit I compare this Cittie with Sodome and Gomorrah, it is not in respect of the sinnes, but in respect of the heavy hand of God shewed in like degree. To consume by fire from Heaven eyther of them, the sinnes of Sodome are by the Scriptures made knowne, which are, and ever will be knowne, by the names of the sinnes of
Sodome. No question but this Cittie of Corke had her sinnes: Otherwise the hand of God had not falne so heavily vpon her, but they are not made so apparant as the sinnes of Sodome. But if Vox Populi, be Vox Dei, If the people of the Country adioy∣ning round about them, may be taken for witnesses, for sufficient proofe of their sinnes, which might provoke the wrath of God vpon them: The Citizens, and In∣habitants of Corke, haue beene taxed and noted for Vsury, (the chiefest Daughter of Covetousnesse) to exceed any Cittie in the Kings Dominions, except some Citties in England, which as they are farre greater in quantitie, so I feare they doe as much ex∣ceed in qualitie of the same sinne. But of this more hereafter, when I shall haue passed over this lamentable Narration of Corke. This last of May, being Fryday, be∣twixt eleven and twelue of the Clocke, the Cloudes over the Cittie began to ga∣ther thicke, which caused such a darknes in their houses, that they were amazed to behold so sodaine a darkenes. These darke Cloudes seemed to Muster together, and
to descend by degrees nearer to the Cittie. Whilest the Inhabitants stood thus won∣dering at the extraordinary darkenes, sud∣denly they heard a terrible clappe of thun∣der; And at the same instant they saw a dreadfull lightning, with flames of fire breake out of the Cloudes, and fall vpon the Cittie at the same instant, at the East end, and the highest part of the Cittie. At that very place where the Stares beganne their Battell, and where they first fell downe, being killed in the fight; There the fire first began with horrible flames: which the Inhabitants of the West and lower part of the Cittie beholding, they began hastily to run towardes the East part where the fire began. They were not runne halfe the way, when as they heard a woefull cry of fire behinde them, for the West part was also set on fire. Be∣twixt two fires, being amazed and con∣founded, not knowing what to doe, the flames of fire raged also extreamely in the middest of the houses on both sides of the streete. Albeit, they had great aboundance of water neare at hand, there was no
meanes to be had, nor any endevour to be vsed to quench the flames. For the fire was so sodaine, the flames so hot, and ra∣ging, that there was no possibilitie to come neare them. For the fire which fal∣leth from Heaven is vnquencheable, and rageth with that violent heate, as may not be endured. So that the Inhabitants seeing all their labours and indevours to be spent in vaine, and many consumed which adventured too neare, to saue their goods, their wiues or children; then they resolue to saue themselues by running and flying out of the Citie into the fields, and to an Iland adioyning neare vnto the Cit∣tie. Some were saved by this meanes: But those who were in the Cittie were so enclosed vpon bothsides with fire, that they were brought into miserable extrea∣mities. These had no other meanes to saue themselues, but to fly for refuge into the Churches. There were in this Cittie three Churches, all which were filled with people tormented with woe and terrour. For albeit they were in the Chur∣ches covered with Slate, and built other∣wise
with thicke stone walles, yet this was no securitie vnto them, when as they had nothing to hope for, but a dreadfull expectation every minute of an houre, when the Churches would be fired also. For they could not goe out of the Chur∣ches, the fire raged so on all sides. And in the Churches they heard nothing but clamors and out-cries. Every mans feare was a tor∣ment, not onely to himselfe, but to others generally. For the houses round about the Churches flaming, vpon every glimce of fire, the cry was raysed, the Church is now on fire; now we shall all be consumed. This was the miserable and woefull case of those who fled to the Churches. Now for those who remained in the streets (as all people whose weaknesse might not shift for themselues) or yong children, whose want of discretion could not foresee how to avoyd the danger; or such persons who loued their wiues, children, & goods more then themselues, many hundreds of these people were consumed by the fire. Now concerning those who to saue their liues fled into the Ilands and fields adjoyning, in
what a woefull and miserable affliction were they? These were beholding their Cittie in a lamentable Combustion. They were turning their eyes this way and that way, where sometimes their habitations were: where they had goods, wiues, and children, brothers and sisters; fathers and mothers, cosens and friends; And all either consumed, or in danger to be consumed with fire. And to aggravate the bitternes of their heauie afflictions more, they heard out of the Cittie, hydeous and rufull cryes and clamors, which made them imagine all were vtterly perished and consumed. Thus what the battell and fight of the birds did presage and prognosticate, fell out too true and dolefull, in the vtter ruine & con∣sumption of a rich and wealthie Cittie. Vpon this so grievous an accident, it is ab∣solutely necessary, that all the Citties and Townes of England and Ireland, should make speedie Vse of so dreadfull an example. For they must consider, the Saviour of Man∣kinde in the xiij. of S. Luke, when he was told of the bloudy execution of the Galileans by Herod: Thinke you (sayth Iesus) that these
Galileans were sinners, more then all the Ga∣lileans, that they suffered such things? No, But I say to you, vnlesse you repent, you shall all likewise perish. As those xviij. vp∣on whom the Tower fell in Siloe, and slew them: Thinke you they were sinners a∣boue all the men that dwell in Ierusalem? No, I say to you, but except you repent, you shall all likewise perish. By this our Saviour doth make it manifest, that some sinners are punished for examples sake, that other who are guiltie of like sinnes, may by speedie Repentance pacifie the wrath of God, that he may spare his rod of Iu∣stice. These inhabitants of the Cittie of Corke, were not the onely and greatest sin∣ners, aboue all other Citties of England or Ireland, but that other Citties are as grievous sinners as they: But that God hath made an especiall example in them, that others may be moved to Repentance, thereby to es∣cape the heavic Iudgements of God vpon them for the like sinnes. God is mercifull and long suffering, but if the offer of his mercy be not taken in due time, his Iustice falleth heavie where the offer of mercy is
refused. The Battell of Birds over the Cit∣tie being so strange and wonderfull an ac∣cident, might haue moved them to consi∣derations of Repentance, but they sleighted it over; And now they find (which others may feare) it is good to lay hold on Mercy whilest it is offered. ∴ FINIS
