6287 99848307 13392
Triall of Maist. Dorrell, Or A Collection of Defences a∣gainst Allegations not yet suffered to receiue convenient an∣swere. Tending To cleare him from the Imputation of tea∣ching Sommers and others to counter∣feit possession of Divells. That The mist of pretended counterfetting being dispelled, the glory of Christ his royall power in casting out Divels (at the prayer and fasting of his people) may evidently appeare. Iohn 7.11. Doeth our Law iudge a man before it heare him, and know what he hath done? Proverb. 14.15. The foolish will beleeue euery thing, but the Prudent will con∣sider his steppes. 1599.
To the right honorable & righteous Iudge, Sir Iohn Poppham Knight, Lorde chiefe Iustice of England, and one of her Maiesties most honora∣ble privy Counsell: Increase of wisedome and sin∣cerity, to carry himself, as hither to, so more and more faithfully in matters of God and the Queene, &c. THE Iniquitie of these times considered,Act. 25. &c. I thinke it happy (right honorable vpright and worthy Iudge) that there is such an one as your Hois, to whō an∣swer may be made of all ye things whereof M. Dorr. is accused by the Prelates: chiefly because you haue the knowledge of all Customes and Lawes which are in this Nation. Wherefore I beseech you to heare me pauently. The cause which I am to recommend to your Lo. favourable and iust consideration is of great importance, and yet will not bee suffered to receaue iust defence from him whom it most con∣cerneth. Wherfore as I am to open my mouth for the dumme in the cause of a childe of destruction, so,Prov. 31. let your iudgement be as a Robe and a Crowne that the blessing of him that is ready to perish may come vpon you.Iob. 29. 14. Pro. 26. And let it not be ob∣iected against me, That hee which medleth with the strife that belongeth not vnto him, is as one that taketh a dogg by the eares. For the maintenance of this cause tendeth aswell to the Glorie of Christ, as to the credit of M Dorrell:Mat. 11. & there∣fore wisdome is to be iustified of all her Children. Indeede I graunt there be many no lesse willing and more able (for wis∣dome and learning) to manage this matter then I am. But I knowe none that hath vsed moe meanes to be truly and tho∣roughly informed in this cause (whereof at the first I was in∣deed very doubtfull) the I haue don: and therefore I think my selfe bound in conscience, being perswaded my selfe to perswade others,Luc. 22. and to iustifie wisdome (as I may) in this case. Which I cannot do more conveniently then by presen∣ting to your L. patient and iudiciall reading these Collection
which I haue withall sincerity (God is my witnes) gathered togeather out of printed bookes, written reportes of sundry faithfull & discret brethren present at the pleading on Whit∣soneue, & out of certaine Apologeticall answers of M. Dorr himselfe and other.. 2.10. I beseech your Lo. as you haue receaued the loue of the truth to reade them ouer. They be but short, and therefore quickly reade: and they bee so pithy that they will informe your Lo. more soundly then all the hearing you haue had. Which hearing notwithstanding, there be many weighty reasons that should moue your Lo to enter into a better consideration of a cause so generally hearkened after, and concerning as highly the glory of Christe our Saviour as it doth merely the credit of a faithfull Minister. For it cannot be but conveivent, that your Lo (beeing a Counsailer & imployed in hearing of this cause) should faith fully report the truth thereof to her Maiestie, to whose Royall doome, as to a soueraigne salue, M. Dorrell committeth the wounded creditt of his holy Ministery. That her Maiesties most excellent spirit may reioyce in the Lorde who addeth to so longe and happy Government such a notable signe of his heavenly favour,at. 12.28 as either the glorious manifestation of his mighty power ouer the enemie of mankind in this part of his Church wherevnto hee hath vouchsafed to make her grace a Nursing Mother, or such Prelats as (herein) are not like them of ye Romish Synagogue who by false miracles draw foolish people to their vaine superstitiō.ct. 25.26. In perfourming which duty, your Lo. cannot take a better course then that which Festus tooke who examined Paule the second time, that hee might write a certaine truth to Caesar to whom Paul had appealed. Where it may please your Lo. to obserue, that Festus did not heare againe the plaintifes, but only Paul the defendāt whom he had heard before at large.. ver: 15  16. For when the Highe Priests & Elders of the Iewes desired iudgement vpon their only infor∣mation, Festus aunswered, That it is not the manner of the Romains (for favour) to punish any, before that he, which is accused, haue the accusers before him, and haue place to de∣fend himselfe concerning the crime. But in this case may it please your Lo. likewise to consider. That the Prelats (whom you haue heard againe and againe) do presse iudgment vpon their heaped informacions, and yet concerning them, M. Dorr. hath not had convenient place to defend himself. And therefore there is great reason, that before you certifie her Maiestie: your Lo. should satisfie your owne conscience by reading these his collected defences: wherby the principall allegations (if not all of any force) vrged on Whitsoneue, are seuerally and (I am perswaded) fully and truly answered.
To come somewhat neerer your selfe I pray you (good my Lord) remember your diligence in hearing,Iob. 29. and sincerity in determining causes in other Courtes (namely in the Starr-chamber) where the ears of many heare you iudge vprightly and freely without respect of persons (yea honorable persons dissenting from you) and they blesse you, and so remembring your selfe, examine your own hart why you should not mani∣fest the like diligence & sincerity in this cause. What? Is it in respect of the Lordly Bishops? O! Be it far from you that you should be like such of whom it is said:Iohn. 12.4 Neuerthelesse euen a∣mong the chiefe Rulers many beleeued in him but because of the Pharises they did not confesse him. Nay rather this is concei∣ved of your Ho that howsoever Pashur the Priest (appointed Governour in the house of the Lorde) did smite Ieremy,Ier. 30.1,  & 26, 8, 10, 16. put him in the Stockes, and (with other Priestes) would hastily bring his innocent bloud vpon themselues, yet your Lo. will with the Princes of Iudah, consider better of Ieremyes cause. If then not respect of persons, is it for that this cause is pro∣ceded in ex officio, and not udicially as a cause betwene party and party? Indeed it is to officiously proceeded in, but the truth is, The cause is betweene party and party: I say not be∣twene a faithfull servant of Iesus and a periured Boy, but be∣twene Michaell and the old Serpent, Christ Iesus and the en∣vious man. For Iesus pleadeth (by M. Dorrell) that his great name, which ought to bee glorious among all Christians is highly dishonored, by calling into question his mighty power in casting out Divells at the prayer and fasting of his holy people. On the contrary parte Satan, who long since moved the Pharisees (even against their own consciences) to charge Christ with casting out of Diuells by the power of Belzebub, doth eftsoons (by his instruments) traduce such dispossession pretending it to bee but very counterfaiting. If then a loyall Iudge will diligently heare whatsoeuer can be said in behalfe of her Maiestie in a cause wherein she is pretended to be a party, much more religiously will your Lo. (being a Christian Iudge) heare whatsoeuer can bee said in the behalfe of Iesus, in a cause wherin he is pretended to be a party. And whether the name of Iesus be more glorified (indeede) by vndoubted dispossession, or pretended counterfaiting, your faithfull hart cā quickly iudge. If by vndoubted dispossession, then as good policy as that, whereby M. Moore is not called into any que∣stion about the dispossession of 7. in Lancashire, might direct Christian Magistrates to bend their authority rather to mani∣fest the Glory of Christe, then (altogeather) to obscure the same by pretended counterfaiting. What soever other do, heare you (8 worthy Iudge) what
the Spirite speaketh evidently and plentifully (concerning this very ving that sposses▪ (in these es) is no acle. . 23. . 24. cause) from the 22. vers. to the 38. of the 12. chap. of Mathew where you may first generally obserue; that Sa∣tan neuer set himself so earnestly against any miracle wrought by Iesus as against this of dispossession. For perceiving the people hereby occasioned to take Iesus for the Sonne of Da∣vid, he moved the Pharisees to traduce the same as before is said▪ and contrariwise Iesus conceiving how highly this mi∣racle concerned the glorie of his Name, did never take his owne part more earnestly then in iustifying the same. From whence wee may learne▪ that Christ his people should shew forth the vertue of him, by whose name they are called Chri∣stians in mainteyning his cause so much the more resolusly, as Satan by his instruments shall oppose himselfe malitiously. But so it is in this cause: For Satan perceiving thousands of the best professors (among whom not a few be honorable, wor∣shipfull, & learned) occasioned by the dispossession of Som∣mers and 9. other to glorifie the name of Iesus, yea so, that Nottingham (heretofore not so forward) became (for a time) very zealous (as I heare) in hearing the worde: Satan (I say) perceiving such a consequent of dispossession, moved sundry adversaries to traduce the same as Papists who deny any such power to be in our Churrh, Atheists who scorne whatsoever tendeth to prove that there is a God or a Divel, But especially certeine Prelates, who (being grosser in their conceipt then the Pharisees) by discrediting 12. sufficient Commissioners, 6. worshipfull Gentlemen, and 6. learned Preachers, by sup∣pressing 17. sufficient depositions, by withhoulding M. Dorr. from answering at large for himselfe, make it (forsooth) a matter of counterfaiting. And yet I must needes say that the L. B. of London (as I haue heard) was fumbling about some proofe▪ That M Dorrell did cast out Divells by witchraft or coniuration But (belike) he remembreth, that so he might overthrow his first pretended counterfaiting. These thinges well weighed, it followeth that all Christians ought to take this cause to heart: and to further the manifestation of truth, no lesse zealously thē the Prelats would obscure it indirectly. If all Christians, then especially it behoveth your L. so to do, having authority even in that case. But the rather because all the godly (whose desire to bee satisfied is not to be despised) attribute most to your L. faithfulnes, yea the Prelates seeme to lay the burthen on your H. For Mistris Dorrell and Mi∣str Moore suing to the L. Bishop of Cant. that their hus∣bandes might haue (at least) the liberty of prison, were referred to your Lo. as to him, that gaue the sentence of close
imprisonment, till further punishment were decreed: and it is likely if further punishment be determined, your Lo. shal∣be put to pronounce the same. Secondly in Christ his apologeticall discourse your Lo. may consider sundry forcible reasons to perswade due regard of the Lordes worke so wonderfull in our eyes, if we will not cast a vaile before them. Which be these: First Christ iu∣stifieth dispossession with vnaunswerable argumentes in the Mat. 1 25.26.27. verses, and then hee reproveth the traducing thereof. Concerning the former I refer your Lo. to these Collections. The reproofe Christ prosecuteth by noting the offendours, and by censuring the sinne. Hee noteth (as with a blacke cole) the offendours, in the 33.34 35. verses, where he thus argneth, An evill tree cannot bringe foorth good fruite. Therefore no merveill though envious Pharisees traduce the Spirit or Finger of God. To apply: Lordly Bishopes in the iudgment of most, if not of all learned Preachers of the Gos∣pell in England, France, Scotlande▪ and the low Countryes (except Soul-killing non-residents, and ambitious aspirers to to the Prelacy) are plants which (in respect of their ecclesi∣asticall dignitie) the heavenly Father hath not planted in his Church by the hande of his Sonne:Mat. 28.18 19. Eph. 4.8.1 12.13. 1. Cor. 12. who onely (having all power committed to him) appointeth what callinges ecclesi∣asticall hee thinketh best for the building of his Church. If this iudgement be found, then better proceedings then these against M Dorrell cannot be ordinarily expected from them, especially against such as desire the Church to bee reformed of the Romish Hierarchy and Ceremonies enforced. As for your Lo. better fruits are expected from the same, as from a tree planted in the Courts of the Lord, and that by his owne right hand. The sinne is censured by discouering either the corruption, or  danger thereof. The former is performed by proving wherein, and shewing against whom the offence is committed. Christ proveth wherein, after this manner in the 28. and 29. verses. Only the Kingdome (that is the souveraigne power) of God can cast the strong & envious man out of his possessō: there∣fore in traducing dispossession, ye traduce ye kingdom of God. This argument applyeth it self. I therfore only admonish you to think of it seriously: & the rather, Because Atheists abound in these dayes and witchcraft is called into question. Which error is confirmed by denying dispossession▪ & both these er∣rors confirm Atheists mightily▪ For thus wil they gather if 11. possessed (at sundry times & in sundry places) were all coun∣terfeits, why should we thinke there is any possesson at all?
If neither possession, nor witchcraft, (contrary to that hath bene so longe generally & confidently affirmed) why should we thinke that there are Divells? If no Divells, no God. Christ sheweth against whom the sinne is committed name∣ly against himselfe and the holy Ghost. Against himselfe in respect of the matter to wit the very slandering of dispossessi∣on, arguing to this purpose in the 30. vers. My Royall autho∣ritie is so great, that whosoever is not with me is against mee: much more ye, who traduce so glorious an effect of my King∣ly power. This argument ought to moue all faithfull Christi∣ans to take part with Christ, whosoeuer bee on the contrary: much more your Lo carefully to enforme your selfe in this case,. .13.13 least (vnawares) you confederat with them, with whom you should not consent. For answerably to this reason of Christ) it is elswhere written: Whosoeuer wilbe a frende of the world,. 4.4. maketh himselfe the enemy of God. A notable example whereof we haue in Pilat, who beeing loth to displease the high Priest, became guilty of innocēt bloud for all the wash∣ing of his handes. Christ proceedeth in the 31. verse to shew this sin to be not only an offence against himself (who then appeared to ye Pha∣risees in the shape of a servant) but in respect of the maner or minde wherewith they did traduce this miracle to bee also Blasphemy against the holy Ghost. As if he should thus speak vnto the Pharisees,. 4.25.26 or. 10.5  4.21.25 br. 9.10 I know your thoughts and immaginations exalted against the acknowledging of me to bee Christ, and hatefull against reformation which cannot bee avoyded. In envy whereof ye malitiously (even against your owne consci∣ences) traduce the Spirit, the Finger or power of God so evi∣dent in this miracle, & therefore ye blaspheme the holy Ghost. That the Prelates (which nowe sett them selues against dis∣possession) be guilty of this vnpardonnable sinne, I will not say. But (without doubt) their hatred of reformation carieth them (as I am perswaded) somtimes to far, and their crooked courses about Sommers, with their deepe silence touching the  dispossessed in Lancashier occasioneth me verily to thinke yt in their hearts they acknowledge vndoubted dispossession. As for your Lo I beseech the same (as you tender the com∣fort of your own soul) to pray with David saying, O cleanse me from my secret faults,. 19.12.13 and keepe me from the presumptuous sin of wilfull reiecting (as libels) the informations of truth touch∣ing the royall power of Christ in casting out Divells, so shall I be free from this great offence. Lastly Christ discouereth the danger of this sinne, For in the 3.36.37. verses he concludeth to this effect, Men are either iustified or ondemnedy their wordes, therefore accompt is to
be given at the last day of every idle worde, much more of the vnpardonnable sinne of blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Which argument may move your H to say (that which God hearkneth for) what have I done,Ier. 8.6 in countenancing such pro∣ceedings against M. Dorrell; and what haue I done in taking occasion to condemne him, because hee said Sommers is now possessed. Wherin if he be deceaved, It is but an error in opi∣nion, impling rather his simplicity then otherwise, and yet he pretendeth some ground, to witt proofe of repossession, and pleadeth that if Sommers can do his Feares (so called and as is pretended) so strangely as is deposed, he must needs be repos∣sessed: If not, then obiected coūterfeiting is but deluding Gods people, abusing authority, & eclipsing Christ his glory which should rather be cleared. If that your heart smite you,Dan. 4. let (O Christian Iudge) my counsell be acceptable to you, Breake of this sinne and heale this error by taking that course which (out of the premisses briefly collected) I thus conclude. If 1. (as Festus, so) your Lo. should throughly informe your selfe more Certeinly to certifie our Caesar to whom M. Dorrell appealeth. 2. If your Lo. ought to be nolesse diligent and sin∣cere in this case of dispossession wherein Christ is a party, then in a cause wherein her Maiestie is a party. 3 If all Christians (specially your Lo.) should endeavor the manifestatiō of vn∣doubted dispossession no lesse zealously then many would ob∣scure it indirectly. 4 If it be the fruite of a good tree, planted in the Court of the Lorde to advance the glory of Christ in this Cause. 5. If traducing dispossession be an impeachement to the Kingdom of God, and confirmation of Papistes and A∣theistes. 6. If he that is not with Christ by iustifying dispos∣session is pronounced to be openly against Christ. 7. If mali∣tious traducing of dispossessiō be blasphemy against the holy Ghost, and we are to feare all steps leading in the same And 8. If every idle word spoken to the preiudice of dispossession shall be punished at the day of iudgment. Then I require you in the name of Iesus (our Kinge and Saviour) patiently and iudicially to reade these Collections, and (abhorring his example,act. 24.2 who to get favor of the Iewes left Paule bound) to be an honorable meane that M. Dorrell may haue time and place convenient, to proue and pleade for himselfe, and then if he cannot iustifie his cause, let him bee made a publike ex∣ample of severity against such vngodly counterfeiting. But if he can manifest vndoubted dispossession, let the name of Iesus be magnified in his Church to the conversion or con∣fusion of Papistes and Atheistes.
To the Reader. BEcause sundry supposed these Collections might be offensiue to the Lord chief Iustice of Eng∣land and the Prelates: the Authour (though after diligent paines therein taken) would not publish them. They therefore comming to my handes by occasion, I thought it a great iniurie to suppresse them, and so the godly to bee depriued of that benefite which no doubt may come by them. Not that I would be more careles in offending then the Authour, but that I presume the right Honorable L. chief Iustice will take no offence to be admonished and rightly in∣formed in a matter so highly touching not onely the good name of one man, but euen the credit of the Go∣spell, and the glory of Christ him selfe: and wherein his L. hath had and is to haue an especiall stroke, but as yet by the iniurious dealing of some of the Prelates (especially the L. B. of Lond.) hath not fully nor suf∣ficiently heard the same. Hoping the rather of his L. patience heerein, for that his H. (since the last hea∣ring of the matter at Lambeth on Whitson eve last) namely in his circuit in Suff. did heare euidently pro∣ued vnto him, that a Maid there was handled and tormented very grieuously, in many things as Som∣mers and the rest were. Whether it may be called Possession or Obsession, or any other proper name, I for my part will not strive, (neither is it materiall) but will leaue it to bee decided by the learned. Onely this may suffice, that they were fearfull and straunge vexations of the Devill in Gods displeasure against vs, whiche could not possibly be done by any humane
wayes or means whatsoeuer: which is the very maine point in controversie. For the further and more ma∣nifest clearing whereof, and for the satisfying of all such as are indifferently carried in this cause, I haue thought good to adde to the ende of this Treatise, a brief Narration of those accidentes which befell the said Maid in Suffo. Wherein neither M. Dorr. nor any of his friendes ad dealing, and therefore the more materiall for their clearing in their cause. Presuming therefore on the lawful fauour of that Honorable & worthy Iudge, I am withall the rather imboldned to publish these Collections. First, because (being my self an eare-witnes at Lambeth on Whit∣son eve last, when the llegations in this Treatise mentioned were obiected against M. Dorrell, & com∣ming thither with an indifferent minde to be satisfy∣ed in the truth (yea rather I protest mistrusting M Dorr. then otherwise) I heard and saw to my great grief, that he cold not be permited (although very humbly & earnestly he intreated the same) to make his particular defences to the said allegations as they were laid to his charge: but was still fro time to time ut off by the L. B. of London especially, in the very materiall & maine pointes which ended to his clea∣ring yea also in thse which the L. chief Iustice (ve∣ry honorably) seemed desirous to be satisfyed in. Who would now & then giue him leaue to speak yet could not heare him to any purpose, being still interrupted by the L. B. of Lond who fed him with these wordes, Staye, heare another matter, you shalbe heard at large anon. &c. and yet not then ney∣ther suffred him to make his apologie, saue only to an obiection or 2. Which was to so good purpose, & ten∣ded
so directly to his clearing in the waightiest mat∣ters against him, that I doubt not if he had bene per∣mitted to proceede in the rest, he would haue satisfied or at least giuen cause of suspense vnto the H. and Wor. there assembled. But being in the chief mater and that which touched the quicke, the L. B. of Cant. or Lond. interrupted him saying, My LL. I thinke i not fit he should be suffered thus to goe on. For what cause, I doubt not but those of discretion both did and can iudge well enough. Another reason and that (not the least) mooving me to publish this Treatise, is because I heare that the L. of Lond. is writing a booke against Mr Dorell. Now I doubt not these Collections will in some mea∣sure (though briefly) answer all the obiections of any moment which he shall publish. Onely we doubt that he will, as he did at the said last hearing, curt all the Depositions of such persons as by reexamining may seeme in some things to make against M Dorell, (which yet in some thinges being layde togeather doe make much for him) leaving out altogeather that which by the same Deponents might serue to cleare him any way. Which thing if he doe againe, it will proove but a trick of his In his booke of cottizing and Gene∣ting &c.wonted dealing, and will do him small pleasure or credit in the end. And I doubt not M Dorell will (if he may be permitted) suffici∣ently defend him selfe at large, if occasion require. In the meane time this smal discourse may serve I trust, in some steed, sith he being a Prisoner, can not do what he would, or in reason he should. Septemb. 30. 1599.
Allegations Against Mr DORRELL, Made at Lambeth the 26. of May. 1599. With such DEFENCES as are made in his behalfe. HE challengeth to him selfe a singular  gift to cast out Divells for vaine glory sake. 1. Mr Dorrell his profession is, that how∣soever  it hath pleased the Lord to vse his poore Ministery of prayer, &c. in the dis∣possession of sundry: Yet he doth not chal∣lenge (neither ever did) anie speciall gift therein aboue the least of his brethren, or anie private Christiā; and his practise (an∣swerable to that profession) doth manifest the contrary to that frivolous imputation. Which also may be witnessed by his letters to Mr Starkey in Lancashire, and to Mr Aldridge of Nottingham, by thousandes that have heard him in Pulpit disclaime such a gifte, by 16. Ministers in Leycester shiere that vrged him to goe to the 7. in Mr Starkeys house▪ by other Preachers, & by Darlings friends that could not entreat him to ioine with them in fasting, &c. 2. But admit vainglory (whereof yet God
is only Iudge) it may reprove the person, but not overthrowe the cause. Mr Dorrell taught 4. to counterfeite, viz: Katherine Wright of Ridg way lane in the County of Darby, Tho. Darling of Bur¦ton in the County of Stafford, Mary Cou∣per, & William Sommers of Nottingham. For the signes of possessiō & dispossessiō were alike in all. Therefore these 4. and 7. in Lā∣cashire were counterfectes, and taught by Mr Dorrell. 1. Besides his Negatiue oath (which also Maister Browne. M. Porter. M. Eving∣ton. M Brinsley 4. grave, godly, and learned Divines of∣fered to confirme as compurgators accor∣ding to the lawe) Mr Dorrell solemly pro∣testeth, that he is most free from teaching any to counterfeit either possession or dis∣possession.  2. In ordinary course of law the affirmatiue part proveth, but in this course the affirmatiue is suppressed, & the nega∣tive enforced. For in this cause cōcerning a matter of fact, Mr Dorrell should proove that there was vndoubted possession and dispossession. But that will not be admit∣ted.  3. The 7. in Lancashire are spokē of to no other purpose but to imply; that for the reason of like handling, if the other 4. were counterfets, then these 7. were likewise. Which Mr Dorrell graunteth & retorteth
thus: If those 7. had the same signes of pos∣session & dispossession; if they were cured by the same meanes, to wit, by fasting and prayer, and if they did not counterfet, then is it likely that Mr Dorr. did not teach the other 4. to counterfeit. But the 2. former are graunted to haue ben at least in shew. And M. Dorrell presumeth no counterfei∣ting can bee imagined in them. Because then the L. B. of London, who hath labo∣red (night and day) to prove the other 4. to be counterfeits, sent his pursivant for som to be examined, and addressed Harsenett his examiner, and Pigott his secretary to Chesterfeild in Darbyshire there to exa∣mine Katherine Wright her possession, which was 12. years agoe, would not have lost so great a pray, having had a large dis∣course thereof, but would haue made som shew of proofe or at least demaunded som answer from M. Dorr. touching the same, and charged M. Moore therewith (against whom hee wanted matter) or (in so long time of imprisonment) examined them partners in that dispossession) about the same. But (belike) the L. B. of London vn∣derstanding 2. of the 7. were but 10. years old, & therefore could not possibly coun∣terfeit so strange thinges; knowing Jane
Ashton (an other of the 7) is repossessed, & by Popish Priestes made a spectacle to Pa∣pistes; reading M Starkey (the gentleman in whose house the 7. were) his confident lettre to the L. B. of Chester, who by the direction (as he said) of one in great place, (belike the L.B. of London) required true certificate; and hearing (it may be) the re∣port of sundry of credit in Lancashire, thought that case to be cleare, and there∣fore hurtfull to the rest of his proceedings  if it were drawen into question. 4. If many thinges were donne or suffered by these 4: which cannot possiblie be coūterfetted, then Mr. Dorrell could not teach them: if not them, why the rest? But such things he proved to be donne or suffered by Som∣mers: and may be proved (if commission were graunted) by the rest. Therefore M.  Dorrell did not teach them. 5. If Maister Dorrell did teach all 4. why is not time & place (necessary circumstances) spoken of in the 3. firste supposed counterfeits, but only in the last? For if he did teach them, there must needes bee a time when, and a  place where, he did teach them. 6. The reason doth not prove that Maister Dorrell taught any to conterfeit: for by the same reason Christ may be convinced of the
same sinne, which were impiety to admit. Sith sundry by him dispossessed had the like signes as our supposed Counterfeites had, Mar. 1.24.26. & 9.18.20.26. Lu. 4.35. 7 Indeed Mai. Dorr. graunteth that the  like handling may argue the same teacher or handler, as the like proper symptomes may argue the same cause. But any religi∣ous and reasonable mā may argue the Di∣vell to be that teacher or handler: conside∣ring the signes of possession and disposses∣session in these 4. were like to those posses∣sed in Christs time, and some of them not possible to be counterfeited. Catharin Wright deposeth counterfeiting. First her supposed feates were either im∣possibilies, or such as any (not wilfully bent to speak against his owne perswasiō) would say they were the effectes of an vn∣cleane Spirit, and not counterfeitings: viz. 1. In her fits she was so oft cast into the fire and water, that shee was chained to a post. 2. She was cast into sundry wels, yet being sought and found was without hurt. 3. o∣therwise (as by cutting her throate) shee would haue destroyed her selfe. 4. Trāces supernaturall. 5. Strength. 6. Knowledge. 7. Swelling so as her body and necke were swollen twise as big as they were wont to
be. 8. A thing (as if quick) felt stirring vp and down in her body: and drink brought in her thirst (in most strange sort) sprouted out of the cup vp to the roofe of the par∣lor.  2. Catherine Wright dispossessed by Prayer, was repossessed and so continued from the 18. to the 30. yeare of her age, or thereabout. In all which time it is marvel that none could perceave her counterfei∣ting before Harsenet came, nor shee bee wearie thereof: sith thereby she is deprived of Mariage, and other cōforts of this life.  3. All this while she hath dwelled with her Father and Mother in an obscure place, where she hath not, nether can reape pro∣fit  by her counterfeiting. 4. Since her cō∣fession, shee doeth, or suffered the same things still. Therefore to bee punished, or  to be reputed no counterfeit. 5. If she had not confessed, Harsenet, &c. threatned to burne her feet. But presently after she cam from the Cōmissioners she bewayled her  periurie. 6. Ma. Ed. Beersfoord examined vpon oath would have set downe some of the strange thinges he sawe, but Harsenet cast away the paper, saying, If you will have a miracle you shall aunswer it before  my L. of London. 7. But let it be admitted that she confessing the counterfeiting of
impossibilities, saieth true. What is this to M. Dorrell, who had never seene her be∣fore shee was brought to Maunsfield, (where M. Dorr. dwelt) by one Ma. Beck∣ingham (Parson of Bilstrop) his appoint∣ment, of whom helpe was expected, after it had ben sought for of one Arthur a Cō∣iurer: who, after he had raised a Divell (in a likenes not remembred,) was instantly apprehended by the L. Darcies meanes. Katherine Wright hath deposed that at  Maunsfield Dorrell bad hir answer in a straunge voice, and say Middlecub, when he should aske the name of the Spirit. 1. Mai. Dorrell denyeth that, or any other  such instruction, as he shall answere at the dreadful day of iudgemēt: which he thin∣keth (all circumstances considered) shall countervaile her inforced oath, & the ra∣ther sith none other doth witnes the same. 2. But this is to small purpose were it true: it only sheweth that M▪ Dorrell taught her to vse some wordes in her supposed coun∣terfeiting renued, which he calleth repos∣session, and not her former feates. Which wordes a boy can teach her, wheras it pas∣seth Dorrells skill to teach those straunge things spoken of before. 3. Kather. Wright fter she had forsworne her selfe, was tou∣ched
in conscience, sorrowfully confessed her periury, and was in most miserable ta∣king through trouble of minde because of the same. Of her recovery I doe not heare. Dorrell lay on Katherine Wrights belly, and was so foūd by one Beckingham a Mi∣nister, who plucked him of by the heeles, & thrust him out of the Chamber. Which lying M: Dorrell hath deposed to haue bene, in imitation of Elias and Paule. 1. In deed the L.B. of London examined M. Dorrell vpon his oath, wherfore he lay vpon or beside Kathar. Wright, & though M. Dorrell answered that hee did not well remēber the reason of a matter of no mo∣ment donne 12. or 13. yeares agoe, yet the L.B. would needes haue present aunswere one or other, M. Dorr. thus vrged did an∣swer, that it might be in some childish imi¦tation of the Prophet and the Apostle, be∣cause (at that time) he was yong in age, & Divinitie. But whē he had better thought of the matter, he remembred him selfe, re∣turned withal convenient speed he could, and vpō his oath absolutely denying such  imitation, confidently affirmed, 2. That he lay not vpon her belly but on her side, and that was to helpe one Edward Loade
(who by him self tryed in vayne) to keepe her downe in her fitt; That Beckingham was not present when that lying was; and that many women (and amongst the rest M. Dorr. owne wife) were then present in the roome, which was no Chamber. All which M. Dorr. can prove sufficiently. 3. Harsenet was earnest with Kath. Wright  as to accuse her selfe to be a coūterfeit, so to charge helfe and M. Dorrell with this filthy shame: wherevnto she could not be drawen by any meanes. 4. But the allega∣tion  admitted (though it be not cōfirmed by the deposition of any other then Beck∣ingham) proveth not the matter of tea∣ching to counterfeit, but onely depraveth the person which in deed can not be: and the rather because this shameles lyer short¦ly after his periury, went vp & downe the Country bereft of his wittes, and died in lamentable sorte. And yet Barlow, the L. B. of Cant. Chapleyne, could not spare so grosse a lye when he commensed Doctor, uch is his charitie, such his divinitie. Thomas Darling confesseth that he coun∣erfeited. 1. That Cōfession was inforced by Har∣enets harde vsage and threatning to whip im, that he should be hanged as the Bur∣gunnian
was (to whom he was caried for his further terrifying when he was newly hanged in the streat) & that he should be burnt with a hoat iron in the forehead: & by cunning devices; as faire promises, and counterfeiting sundry letters from Maister Dorrell to perswade him to confesse. As the boy avouched by word and writing as soone as hee gott out of the L. B. of Lon∣dons house: and stoode to it, though after∣ward the L.B. kept him (being about 14. yeares old) in the counter in South warke 7. weeks togeather, and in baile til the day  of hearing. 2. The things which he did or suffered in his fits cānot be coūterfeited viz. 1. Such swelling that his dublet but∣tons would breake and the aglet holes of his dublet & breeches, though sett on and made strong for the purpose. 2. Superna∣turall strenght so as 2. strong men could not hold him down lying on a bed, he be∣ing about 12. yeares old. 3. In traunces he vttered cōtinued speaches wth his mouth wide open. 4. In many of his fits his armes & shoulder bones were thrust out of ioynt: yet presently after the fits he had the vse of them againe. 5. He was lame, so as a strong man was hired to carie him for 12. weeks of 17. vntill he was dispossessed, and then
he rose and walked. 3. Alice Goodridge  (a witche) confessed the time, cause, and manner of his bewitching. For which Iudge Anderson (after a verdict) gave sen∣tence vpon her. 4. But suppose hee coun∣terfeited, yet M. Dor. simplicitie rather thē imposture is to be imagined of indifferent men. Sith Darling never did nor would confesse, but ever denied that Mr Dorrell did teach him: his being in prison, and so long vnder baile at London, and his often examination notwithstanding. 5. If hee  had confessed teaching, it cannot be true: both because the thinges done or suffered are not counterfeitable, as also because M. Dorr had neuer seene him but once, & that with many Preachers at an exercise in Burton, vntill the day before hee was dis∣possessed: when M. Dorr. only advised the childes friendes to fast and pray, but was not present him selfe. 6. Darling was not  once placed beside Sommers, no nor once called to accuse Dorr. to his face (as Somm. did) or to acknowledge Counterfeitinge, though the said L. B. had long kept him vnder baile and bound him to appeare for that purpose, & was also present there ac∣cordingly in the face of the Court. Belike the L.B. knew full well by former and oft
experience, that the boy would deny Mai-Dorrels teaching of him and all counter∣feiting. It may bee also he feared least the boy would haue discouered the foresaide dealing with him, as also tolde that Sōmers was appointed his keeper, and that Harse∣net added to his confession that which hee neuer spake, whereof he before had accu∣sed Harsenet: offering either to sweare him selfe, or to rest with Harsenets oath, but he could not be heard. Mary Cooper confesseth Counterfeiting. 1. The things which she did or suffered in her fitts cannot bee counterfeited, viz. Supernaturall 1. strength and 2. know∣ledge. For among other things she told 2. or 3. dayes before it happened of her hus∣bands returne, who had long before rūne from her, & had bene but fewe dayes be∣fore at Linne, which is from Nottingham (at least) an hundreth miles. 3. Shee was without feeling in her fittes. For her little finger was bēded inward with all the force of a man whereat shee then stirred not, though presently after it swelled much & (many dayes after) shee had great paine. 4. When her fitts ended immediatly began her brother Sommers fitts, and when his ended hers began presently in the twinck∣ling
of an eye, notwithstanding they were in severall roomes. Mary Couper deposeth that she thinking  her selfe with childe, Dorrell would assure her that she was not: and said moreouer, God blesse euery good woman from such a child. Againe, that shee laughing and smyling, Dorrell would saye that that laughing was from the Diuell; whereas indeed she laugh∣ed to heare him talke so foolishly. 1. Heere is nothing to proove that Mr  Dorrell taught her to counterfeit. 2. If she  had proved with childe the worst that can be imputed to M. Dorrell, is simplicitie. But strange events manifesting the con∣trary, & sufficiently discerned by M. Dor. he had reason (and the rather being Prea∣cher of the town) to draw her from wilfull perswasion of being with childe, to the cō∣sideration of the work of God by the mi∣nisterie of the Devill, who either inwardly possessed her (which he rather beleeueth) or being without vexed her by some ex∣ternall operation. As may appeare by these strange effectes: first Her belly was in the middst as it were divided, and raised vp of either side. 2. Out of her belly was heard sensibly a kinde of whoopping, and also a noyse much like the whurring of a cat. 3.
Her belly suddenly swelled as if shee had bene halfe gone with childe, and so conti∣nued with little or no increase about a quarter of a yeare. 4. This swelling would be suddenly gone, & after a while be there againe. 5. Vpon and during this swelling she felt something (as it were quicke) stirr within her, which from the beginning she said was nothing like the stirring shee felt when before shee was with childe. 6. At last shee seemed to travell 2. or. 3. dayes, & midwife after midwife was sent for, and many neighbour-women, whereof some were of good worshippe who will testifie the rare accidents. 7. In the beginning her belly was of the bignes aforesaid and soft, the next day very bigg and hard as if she had bene with child indeed, and at the point of deliuerance. 8. Sometimes again very big and soft, sometimes very gaunt, and lesse then any womans ordinarily is. 9. A moving (as of some quicke thing (yet no substance) was seene and felt about her stomacke: aboue her breastes, and in her arme or shoulder. 10 She had the paines of a woman in travaile, & in danger of death, so as the bell was told for her. 11. There were all the signes and forerunners of a child: yea that issued from her which ne∣ver
came from woman, but when a childe was borne 12. Besides the things in com∣mō with a woman, she had lumps of flesh came from her: which caried to the Phisi∣tion, he said, If they came from nature she could not live. 13. Yet while these things were in doing, and presently after, she rose out of her bedde and went vp and downe the house, & for all this travaill kept ney∣their bed nor house. 14. In her breast was sometimes water, sometimes milke. 15. And after such travaill M. Dorr. and others haue seene her belly somewhat bigger thē ordinarie, and within halfe a quarter of an hower so great, as if shee had ben ready to  bee delivered of a childe. 3. The reasons moving M, Dorr. so to iudge (as is saide) of her laughing, be these. 1. Hee perceyved Satans work in and vpon her. 2. He remē∣bred the like countenance of Katharine Wright, and of 3. or 4. of the 7. in Lanca∣shire. 3. He cōsidered that such an effect may well come from Satan delighted in all vanitie. 4. Hee hearde that for 4. or 5. weekes of her supposed going with child, she could not abstayne (as shee then con∣fessed) from flearing, when she looked on any. 5. Hee indeavoured (beeing a Prea∣cher vnder whose ministerie shee was) to
turn hir eye to God correcting her. 4. The allegation of her laughing at M. Dor. foo∣lish talking, is but in vaine: considering he resorted to her seldome, and her laughing was many weekes, and in that tyme shee laughed full often when he was absent. William Sommers deposeth Counterfei∣ting and that Dorrell taught him, which though of it selfe it be of small validitie, yet sith 3. other affirme the like, it is to some purpose. 1. But the accusation of these other three being palpably false, this 4. depositi∣on & the circūstances to support the same be (at least) very much weakened, and ac∣cordingly to be regarded. 2. The thinges  which he did or suffered in his fits, cannot be counterfeited viz. 1. He being gathe∣red round on a heape like a loafe was cast vp about halfe a yarde high. 2. A strange noise was sensibly hearde to come out of his belly. 3. Hee often with great force hath beaten his face & head to the groūd, and cast himselfe headlong against the walls, so as one would haue thought hee had spoiled or bruised himselfe greatly, yet receaved he no hurt at all. 4. His face was turned directly backward. 5. For sixe weekes (ofte in a day) his body seemed as
big againe as naturally it is, and (once) by swelling he brake a new leather girdle. 6. In this swelling his entralles shott vp & downe like a weavers shittle. 7. Three or 4. men could scarsly lifte him. 8. His fo∣ming white and thicke roaped downe his brest somtime an hower togyther, though often wiped away. 9. In his fits his temples and pulses did not beat. 10. He lay for an hower and a halfe as dead, cold as Ice, face and handes blacke, and without breath perceived. 11. His tongue vsully retorted into his throate so as no parte of it was to bee seene in his mouth. 12. He spake di∣stinctly in a cōtinued speach for a quarter of an hower his mouth being shutt close. 13. His tongue drawen into his throate & his mouth wide open hee said, Ego sum Deus, ego sum Rex. 14. He neither tooke any sustenance nor disburthened nature for 3. dayes. 15, Pinnes were thrust deepe into sundry partes of his body. Somtimes vp to the head, yet he felt not, neither did blood issue. 16▪ Often cast, sometimes hand, sometimes face in the fire: where he lay a while, yet not burned. 17. Three men did striue with him about an hower till they sweat and were breathlesse, yet he did not pant nor drawe winde, perceived: yea
sometimes 4.5.6. or mo were scarse able to hould him though they had him at great advantage, as lying flatt vpon the ground, or vpon a bed, or tyed fast to a chaire. 18. He said Dal. Freeman & Hig∣getts wife were stripping & searching. Dal: hath a marke vpon such a shoulder, and the other in her mouth though vnknowen. A∣gaine they (to witt Iustice Perkins, &c:) haue her (to witt Milisent Horseley) and are examining her, and she saith she doth all by prayer, now they strippe her and search her, and after, nowe she is brought to towne. Againe they (to witt a constable, &c.) are there now: She (to witt Milicent Horsleyes sister) sitteth lapping her sore toe, ô sore toe! she cannot goe for her sore to, now they hale her forth, looke how they pull her out, they call for ropes and a horse. Looke where she commes running through the meadows, now see shee is come to towne. Againe now M. Dorrell (then at Ashby) hath consented to come, and the next day, now he is come to towne. All these things were as he said, at the same instāt, though far frō him. Again to a traveling stranger, O murtherer what doest thou heere? Who acknowledged fly∣ing the land for killing a man about 20. yeares before. An other stranger hee told
where hee had gone out of the way, that such a thing befell him in such a place, & of a secret of his body; the man acknow∣ledged all. Againe 7. weekes before the Assizes in a traunce, I must go to S. Johns (a house of correction where he was after∣wardes had by commaundement of the Maior and Aldermen of Nottingham, a∣gainst the will of his parentes) and being there M. Dorrell must not come at me, (which proved true) and at the Assises I must be before the Judges, & they must see. It came so to passe indeede, for by com∣mandemente of Iudge Anderson beeing before him, they saw a trifling and de∣luding fitt, the boy beeing brought to say hee counterfeited. Lastly he expoun∣ded the Creed an hower togeather divine-like, save that he intermixed an error or two, as of Christ his Soules descent into Hell, &c. 19. There were felt vnder the co∣verlet (where he lay) 4. or 5. (as kitlings, or whelpes &c.) stirring, & sometimes round as a boull, which vanished or gave place like aire or winde in a bladder, when some would haue held them; the hand removed the boull filled. The coverlett sudainly cast vp, they were gone: thrown downe, there againe: the boyes handes and feete
being held. And this cōtinued 10. dayes & nights, in which time he appeached 8. wo∣men (of whom they before named were some) and 2. men to be witches, one after an other: at the most two togeather, and as sone as hee named one to haue a catt he was never quiet, but was often tossed and thrown vpon his bed strangly & grevously crying out vpon the partie or parties to fetch and bring them, often saying: their Cats were in bed with him, continuing so till they were had before the Magistrate, & brought vnto the boy. Neere whom as they came (but one after an other) while they were in the house (though in another roome) or offered to go from him, he was grievously and extraordinanrily handled: and yet while the suspected person taryed by him, he lay as if he had bene a sleepe. Besides which observation, there was such triall made, that such as were about him knew as well when any of thē were neere, as if they had bene told. After those tenne persons had bene with the Magistrate and him, he cryed vpon them no more but was quiet. 20 There was in the roome where he lay a strange rapping as vpon wainscott with a finger, Sommers handes and feete being held immoveable. 21. He had a
swelling in some places as big as an egge, in some places bigger, in some lesse, run∣ning swiftly betweene the flesh and the skinne, from legg to legg, from arme to arme, from finger to finger, on the backe of his hande, forehead, eare-roots, and tongue, yea thereby his eyes were thrust out extraordinarily big and blacke. When it made any stay in legg or arme, it made the leg or arme as heavy and inflexible as iron. Which swelling may seeme to be by the speciall providence of God to stop the mouthes of Atheistes swarming in these dayes. For sundry troubled wth the sclaun∣der of counterfeiting secretly and earnest-prayed to God (the knower of hearts) that they might see some thing that might sa∣tisfie them. They went to Sommers, & by this signe (by Gods providence rather pre∣sented vnto them then other signes) were satisfied. Sommers offered to counterfeit this swel∣ling  before the high Commissioners at Lam∣beth. 1. In deed hee putt his tongue into his  Cheekes. So (belike) he would haue coū∣terfeited the rest, except hee had had the Divels helpe beyond the L. B. of Lond. his expectation. 2. Before he vtterly denied
the fact. And that not serving the L. B. of Lōdons turne, the L. B. said it was the Cho∣lique. But perceiuing that healing so strāg a Cholique by fasting, &c. makes for Mr Dorr: Coūterfeiting in all things seemeth to be resolved vpon as the best policie and  colour. 3. Thyreus de Daemoniacis, ca. 32 telleth of some possest that had the like  swelling. 4. Some Popish persons (for the same not called into question as M. Dorr. is) chased the swelling (as they speake) with the signe of the Crosse from head to foote, and from foote to head. Satan ther∣by feeding them in their superstitious esti∣mation  of the signe. 5. By fasting & pray∣er it was so driven quite away, that it re∣turned not, till Somm. was repossest, which was 12. weekes after. All these things cō∣sidered, this (with the rest) came from Sa∣tan. Sundry of Dorrells witnesses haue cor∣rected their oathes. 1. No marvaile though some (among many) prove weake; specially beeing dra∣wen by such meanes, viz. First laying be∣fore them the confession of Sommers him∣selfe and of other: So dealt they with Mai. Beersford. But that not prevayling, then were they threatned with aunswering be∣fore
the L. B. of London at their peril. One was commaunded to appeare the first day of the terme following, & another (name∣ly Henry Butler) was commanded to pri∣son in the sight of others, Ad terrorem. 2. They doe not denie the trueth of Som∣mers possession, but extenuate some parti∣culars. As for example, Rich. Mee denieth not all swelling of Sommers tongue, and eyes, but lesseneth the bignes. 3. They goe not backe frō other particulars which  they haue sworne, of no lesse importance then those they extenuate: Nay it may be, if their reexamination were seene, they do confirme them. 4 They are but few, and  cannot preiudice the rest, especially seeing many scores are ready (for all the L. B. of London his storming) to depose all that, and more then is yet deposed. Some doe depose, that indevouring to try  the matter of Kitlings, & suddenly putting their handes into Sommers bed, one at one tyme caught his hande or foote, another his privie partes; Another sweareth that he de∣siring to haue throwen off the Couerlett to aue seene what it was, Mai. Dorrell for∣ad, saying, that Sommers sweating, it was nough to cost him his life.
1. The Affirmatiue is directly sworne by sundry witnesses who are not to bee periu∣red, because these men failed; for there might bee such thinges at other times,  though not then whē they tryed. 2. They sweare not that they made such tryall within those tenne dayes, So that it might be afterward when Somm. pretended coū∣terfeiting: If they did, it were to no pur∣pose except they sweare that within that time, many such tryalls were made, & yet that were to no great purpose for the for∣mer  reason. 3. It could not be his handes or feete, for his armes and feet were held, and there were 4. or 5. supposed Kitlinges: nor his privie partes (a ridiculous matter) for the Kitlings stirred a pretty space from his body. 4. As for Mr Dorrels forbidding  to vncover Somm. for the pretended daun∣ger, it is both false, (for Sommers did never sweat in any of his fittes) and absurde, for Sommers lay in his clothes with a light co∣verlett onely vpon him. But he that often counterfeiteth laughing, must sometimes straine him selfe. Thomas Garland deposeth that Sommers was sometymes of an ordinarie strength. 1. This letteth not but that sometimes he was of an extraordinarie strength.
2. It is not said that he had alwayes super∣naturall  strength, no not in his fitts, wher∣in some supernaturall or straunge workes were seene in one fit, some in another, sel∣dome all in one. Sommers was cast with his shoulder to∣wards  the fyer, where was a grate, & so ta∣ken quickly away. 1. This may be at one time, and yet he  might be so cast (as is deposed by sundry, yea by the foresaide Thomas Garland be∣fore the L. B. of Lōdon) that his bare hand lay in the fire. At another time hee was throwne so as his face did beare downe hoat coales; lying thus Mary Cowper snatcht at him; caught his lynnen cap; but left his bare face and head in the fyer, and yet neither face burned, nor heare singed. Sommers had blacke lead in his mouth, and therefore he fomed, and betweene his teeth, wherewith he seemed to gnash. 1. Blacke lead cannot cause foming, es∣pecially  roping for an hower togeather, as is said and proved. 2 The blacke lead was found but once, & that sundry weeks after his dispossession, whē he was perswa∣ded to be a conterfeit. 3 Blacke lead may  cause crashing when he was a counterfeit, but not that gnashing, which was sundry
weekes before: at what time hee was no  counterfet. 4. They that depose gnashing were blind, if they could not see blacke lead betweene his white teeth. Sommers deposeth that Dorrell taught him to counterfeit. 1. It is proved that nothing was coun∣terfeit, Ergo no teaching. 2. Sommers is but one witnes, therefore not sufficient, espe∣cially against a Minister, 1. Timot. 5.19.  3. The affirmatiue oath of a man of good birth, educatiō, yeares & lyfe, much more of a Minister, should make light the oath of a lewd boy, especially with such as are accompted Guardians of the spiritualtie: as they are called 13. Elizabeth. cap. 12.  4. Sommers is an vnlawful witnes, beeing manifestlie guiltie of periurie (having by oath both denied and affirmed counterfei∣ting) as also of blasphemy: (if hee were a  counterfeit) For hee said, he was God and Christ. 5. Sommers coūterfeited (to speak as the L. B. of London would have it) a moneth or 6▪ weekes, before M. Dorr. ever saw him. Sommers deposeth that long before Dor∣rell came to Nottingham, they mett at Ash∣by de la Zouche, where Dorrell then dwel∣led, and (vpō agreement) they mett at Ash∣by
parke 4. yeares together, euery time Som∣mers comming 4. miles, to witt from Ma. Gray (with whom he then dwelled) his house at Gray Langley in Leicester-shire: Jn which Parke and time Dorrell taught and Sommers learned to counterfeit, and after by Dorrels direction, Sommers shewed him self at Nottingham. Also before Sommers went to dwell with one Ma. Brackenbery, (where he began to coūterfeit) Dorr. taught him, but Sommers having not well learned his feates, gaue over till Dorrell had taught him better. Lastly, Dorr. comming to Not∣tingham (5o No. 97.) acted before Sommers the signes of possession and dispossession, gi∣ving him direction (and that two dayes to∣gether) immediatly before the supposed dis∣possession. 1. Either there needes not so much tea∣ching, or the like tale should haue bene framed of the other 3. counterfeits so cal∣led, sith they are all saide to haue played the same feates, and that therfore M. Dor. taught them, because they were handled all alike. 2. To one Sommers said, that the  sommer before his dispossession, M. Dorr. perceyving a swelling in Sōm. body got by often going into the water, came to him at Nottingham, and bad him conceale it, &
so they first agreed vpon counterfeiting▪ To an other, that they came first acquain∣ted when M. Dorrell dealt with Katherine Wright, which is aboue 13. yeares agoe, when Sommers was scarse 9. yeares olde. And touching the manner of their first meeting at Ashby deposed: One tyme Sō∣mers tels the L. B. of London that he came to M. Dorrell and two strangers talking in the street, and demanded whereof they were talking: M. Dorrell answered of one Katharine Wright sometimes possest, the strāgers departed, they went into the fields &c. Another time he telles the L. B. that M. Dorr. first mett him in an alehouse a∣mong other boyes; had speach with him apart, and so they first agreed vpon coun∣terfeiting.  3. About tenne yeares agoe, (which is 4. or 5. yeares before the saide pretended meeting) Sommers then about 10. yeares old (went from M. Gray to M. Brackenbury in Warwickshire: And it is not 7. yeres since Dorrel came frō Mans∣field to Ashby. For most part of whiche time, Sommers being gone from M. Brac∣kenbury, and never returning to M. Gray, dwelt in Nottingham and was servant (for 4. yeares before his dispossessiō) with Tho.  Potter. 4. If Mai. Dorrell acted signes of
possession and dispossession two mornings togeather, without doubt some may de∣pose the same with Sommers, considering Somm. was never without companie night or day. 5. M. Dorr. can proue that those whole mornings he was elswhere far from Sommers. Though the boyes testimony alone be not  good, yet it is fortified by sundry circum∣stances hereafter set downe. 1. Circumstances be but halfe a profe  in the civill lawe, and that in a case where one sufficient witnesse speakes fully to the matter. Now Sōmers is no sufficient wit∣nes: therefore these circumstances are no sufficient proofe. 2. Besides that which is  said before of the commissioners their bad dealing with deponents, it may now be further excepted against them that they are Mr Dorrells mortall enemies, and were chosen by his adversaries, without his con∣sent or knowledge, one of themselues be∣ing their Clerke. 3. If notwithstanding all  allegations to the contrary it bee evident, that nothing was counterfeit, but that many things were impossible to be coun∣terfeited, then a thousand such presumpti∣ons doe but dazle mens eyes, & conclude not M. Dor. to teach Sommers to coun∣terfet,
especially sith Somm. deposition so advisedly & preciselie sett down touching the time and place of teaching is vtterlie  false 4. M. Dorrell doubteth not mani∣festly to falsifie some and overthrow all these circumstances: if he may haue a cop∣pie of the depositions, or a new commissi∣on to examine the same deponents againe.  and other witnesses not a few. 5. Not one of these circumstances tend to proue that M. Dorr. and Sommers were acquainted longer together then 2. dayes before the dispossession. The contrary whereof if it can be proved, M. Dorrell will yeild. 6. In  consideration af Sommers periury, & blas∣pheming of M. Dorrels life & calling, the strāgnes of the things said to be counter∣feited, the heinousnes of the crime obiec∣ed, & the nature of a presumtion (brought for proofe in every common cause) Cir∣cumstances are no pregnant matter. But even probably to conclude the thing pre∣sumed, these Circumstances should be (as divers, so) very strong. Which (indeede) heere are very weake and in no probabili∣tie, doe conclude the thing presumed, to witt, that M. Dorrell taught Sommers to counterfet. As for example, the 13. & 14. Circumstances (two of the strongest) doe
thus conclude. M. Dorrell bought out Sommers his yeares of apprentiship, and Sommers resorted to M. Dorrels chamber where they had private talke. Therefore it is likely M. Dorrell taught Sommers to counterfet. Indeed if redemption and talke had bene before dispossession, these pre∣sumptions had ben somwhat probable, it being graunted that all Sommers his sup∣posed feates could be possibly counterfei∣ted. But further aunswer here after. 7. These circumstances are out counte∣nanced  by stronger which more probably infer. 1. First that the L. B.3. Cha by con¦iecture ¦gainst  procee∣dings  M. Dor of London sits not as Iudge indifferently disposed to ma∣nifest the glory of God or pretended coun∣terfeiting, but sets himself as an adversary to convince M. Dorrell per fas aut nefas. 2. That the L. Bishop of London did draw Somm. to accuse M. Dorrell. 3. That the high Cōmissioners on whitson even, a∣greed in pollicy (by conference or self con∣ceiving) rather to blame M. Dorrell, then to shame the L. B. Where note, that the se∣cond charge presumeth the first, the third presumeth both, & all presume the weak∣nes & nullity of the Circumstāces against M. Dorrell.Circūst¦ces to p¦ve the charge The outcountenancing Cir∣cumstances are these concerning the first
charge. 1. Though M. Dorrell hath many adversaries at Nottingham (some affecting witchery, some Popery,) who would glad∣ly prosecute this cause (so enterteyned) with might and maine. Yet the L. B. of London would needs be at charges in sen∣ding downe his Commissioners. 2. Harse∣net (his chaplaine) was by his appointment (as keeper and examiner of Darling, so) a principall Cōmissioner, whose partiallity in executing his commission, may be pre∣sumed by his impudency before the high Cōmissionerson whitsoneve. Both (touch∣ed heereafter) presume concurrence with his maister. 3. When deponentes would speake to the iustifying of M. Dorr: Har∣senett threatned them, not with the high Commission so much, as with the L. B. of London. 4. The L. B▪ of London not abi∣ding any thing that makes for M. Dorrell (according to that of Christ He that evill doeth, hateth the light.) Hideth & hindreth all evidences, checketh or threatneth all witnesses for M. Dorr: Namely M. Ireton (a famous learned minister) M. Gray, and Bambridge worshipfull gentlemen. 5. By his sole warrant the L. B. of London tooke from M. Dorrel certeine directions in law cōcerning this cause only, which M. Dorr.
(being denied councell to plead for him) was constreined to procure. 6. Often did the L. B. of Lond. examine (as Darling the boy of Burton) so M. Dorrell (at onetime with an other) vpon 180. interrogatories or thereabout. 7. The register would haue graunted M. Dorr. wife copies of his an∣swers, &c. but onely the L. B. of London would not. 8. On Whitson eve the L. B. of Lond. had a booke of depositions, & plea∣ded as earnestlie as Doct. Crūpton the ap∣pointed advocate, to whom standing at his elbow the L. B. of London was suggester & director. All these things well weighed it is likely that the L. B. of London sits not as Iudge, &c. Concerning the 2d.Circum¦stances prove t 2. charg charge 1. The L. B. of London agreed with a Bar∣ber about Sommers his service and free∣dome. 2. The L. B. of London tooke Sō∣mers into his house, clothed and vsed him to his liking. 3. Before this, Sōmers never charged M. Dorr. with teaching: though long, and ofte before hee had pretended counterfeiting. 4. Sommers (made for the purpose) was appointed Darlings keeper when he was close prisoner in the L. B. house, and then dealt with Darling to doe as he had don. 5. Sōmers robbing of Har∣senett was smothered. 6. Though Darling
was (by indirect meanes) drawn to say he had counterfeited, yet because he would not say also that Dorrell taught him, he was vsed otherwise then Sommers, as is before shewed. 7. After the L. B. of Lond. had served his tourne, Sommers was sud∣dainly made away out of his house & the Barbers service too, when hee had giuen him money fo he Remaynder of his yeates. But whither it is not knowen. Saue that in Whitson weeke the L. B. of London sent his Mother word that he should go to Sea. Least (belike) Sōmers should either be seene in his fitts, & so the opinion that he is still possessed bee iustified, or some should offer money (as a noble personage did) to see his feats, which he either refu∣sing to do or not performing according to that hath bene deposed, all the packe of knavery will be opened. These things well weighed, it is likely that the L. B. of Lon∣don did draw Sōmers to accuse M. Dorr. Concerning the 3d.ircum∣nces to ove the charge. charge. 1. The L. B. of Lond. hath giuen out, that sith he hath ta∣ken Mai. Dorrels matter in hand, he will haue the credit of it. 2. Most of the after∣noone (on Whitsoneve) was spent in plea∣ding and pretended proving against Mai. Dorrell. 3. M. Dorr. beginning to speak
at large to all matters obiected against him, was by the L. B. of Cant. forbidden, and for this reason, least M. Dorrel should perswade his favourites there present. 4. M. Dorrell desired a cōdition to examine witnesses for his parte, or that depositions already taken, and by him then presented, might be heard. But the L. B. of Cant. de∣nied both. 5. M. Dorrell did charge Har∣senet and his fellowe Commissioners with threatning of witnesses, taking mony, &c. Harsenet openly answered that M. Dor. durst aswel eate a toades head as name par∣ticulars, M. Dorrell did name particulars; wherevpon was some silence. But excuse was readily coyned, and as easily taken. 6. M. Dorrell perceyuing the L. Bisho. their course, appealed to the L. chief Iustice of England; earnestly desiring his Lordsh. to vouchsafe hearing some few particulars as possible for Sommers to counterfeit, as to fly. Audience was graunted. Among the rest he tolde, that Sōmers spake his mouth gaping and tongue retorted. He described the running swelling, and shewed how he was dead an hower, &c. The Iudge ac∣knowledged them very wonderful. It was aunswered, That the retorting was by meanes of a string, and that the boy could
counterfeit swelling, which the Iudge de∣siring to see, Sommers rowled his tōgue in his mouth. To the third nothing was said. 7. Yet for all this that iust Iudge (who in his owne Court admitteth no coppies of depositions without an oath that they are true copies, much lesse boūd vp in books, & suffereth the accused to pleade & prove aswell as the accuser, (yea in a former hea∣ring told Mr Dorrell that he was to prove) tooke now occasion to signifie great disli∣king of Mai. Dorrell, because he saide hee thought Sommers to be yet possessed. The like occasion or lesse, tooke Doctor Caesar to signifie semblant mislike (though vpon reading M. Dorr. Apologie and the storie of the 7. in Lancashire) he had pronoūced M. Dorrels cause to be Gods cause. 8. Not∣withstanding so great proofe pretended of so hainous a matter obiected: As of abu∣sing 1. the name of Iesus: 2. the exercises of preaching, prayer and fasting, and hun∣dreds of Gods people, by so many couse∣nages and counterfeitings as he was char∣ged with: yet Mai. Dorrell (the pretended offendor) hath no more punishment, then M. Moore for only iustifying his cause. Amongst the rest perpetuall imprisonmēt was threatned. For the L. B. of Londō had
said he should not out of prison while hee were B. of London. These thinges well weighed, it is likely that the Cōmissionars being wise men and able to discerne co∣lours, had such regard (in pollicy) of the L. B. of Londons authority, that they hear∣kened to whatsoever tended to M. Dorr. blame, and neglected the contrary: least (otherwise) the L. B. of Londō so indirect∣ly and egerly following, yet altogeather fayling in so great a matter, should reape no little shame. Though these generall answers bee sufficient, yet more to satisfie all men, M. Dorrell answereth thus parti∣cularly. Dorrell said vpon the bare receipt of a  lettre from a woman, that Somers was pos∣sessed hefore he saw him. The letter (indeed) was subscribed only by M. Dorrels wifes sister,Answere. but written in the name of manie of Nottingham, and conteyning some signes of possession. The messinger (conversant with Sōmers) made the case more plaine: whervpon M. Dorr. (though he had then never seene Sōmers, yet) crediting Gods word which recordeth like signes, answered that if Sommers was handled as is reported, no doubt he was possessed.
Dorrell was told at his first comming to Nottingham, that Sommers did counter∣fett: he notwithstanding gaue out the con∣trarie. Answer.It is true that the next day after he came to Nottingham and had seene Sommers fitts, M. Dorrell said to some suspecting counterfetting, that it could not be possi∣bly. This may presume hundreths to haue taught Sommers, and others, to counter∣feit: as well as M. Dorrell. Dorrell did interpret the sinnes which Sommers acted in a dumb shew, saying hee had seene others possessed doe the like. Answer.M. Dorrell never sawe the like before, neither was he the interpreter. Indeed no one man especially, but many confusedly did interpret the dumb shew. So that (once) in open Court, the L. B. of London charged Mistris Gray therewith. But ad∣mit that M. Dorrell did interpret, it pre∣sumeth forwardnes to speak, not teaching to counterfeit, and the rather sith by no arte the like can be counterfeited. Dorrell said of certen speaches vttered by Sommers in his pretended fitts, that they were not his but the Divells. Answer.It is true, M. Dorrels ground is Mar. 1.23.24.34. But suppose it was not the Di¦ell:
this presumeth error of iudgement, ot imposture by teaching. Dorrell affirmed that Sommers felt not in  is fits and yet when one (to try) would haue ickt him with a pin, he would not suffer: ying, ôh do not so, for though he feele it not w he will heereafter. The former parte is true, the latter false:Answer. t admitt, yet teaching cannot be presu∣ed, but that M. Dorrell would not haue mmers to much payned, sith sufficient all had bene before made. Dorrell said that Sommers was possest not   his owne sinnes, nor his Fathers, nor yet Nottingham, but of the whole Land. It is false: but admit that where so.Answer. Yet s proveth not teaching. Dorrell said in his preaching over night  ore the Fast, that maryed persons kee∣g a fast must abstaine from knowing another. t is true: M. Dorrells ground is Joell 2.Answer. & 1. Cor. 7.5. Yet neither this proveth teaching. Dorr. preaching at the fayned dispossessi∣ ndevored to perswade the people present  Sommers was possessed. t is true, M. Dorr. reason was:Answer. Of manie mbled, some acknowledging Sommers
to be tormented, yet doubted of possessiō others were of M. Dorrells minde: To sa∣tisfie all, M. Dorr. chose for his text, Mark 9.14. &c. deliuered the doctrine of posses∣sion, and applied accordingly. This doet not presume teaching, but M. Dorr. stron perswasion, that Sommers was possest, an not by naturall disease, or otherwise to¦mented. Dorrell then preaching, sometimes pa¦sed, and made some stay: that the signes  possession & dispossession might be seene. Answer.It is false, for perceiving the worde a worke of God to meete togeather, hee d will the people so to behold the work th especially they hearken vnto the worde God. But admit: this presumeth not teac¦ing, but that the strāgenes of Gods wor compelled both preacher, and people pause for a while. Dorrell then said▪ they should see grea things, and before they were acted, she the signes of dispossession. Answere.M. Dorrell comming to the 26. v of that text, onely said, that if the Lo would bee intreated to cast out the D these strange thinges should be seene: sequele presumeth the efficacy of fa and prayer, and not that M. Dorr. spea
hereof aforehand (yet not prophecying) was guilty of teaching. Dorrell said, that Sōmers was bewitched  y a woman in Worcestershire, and an other n Darbyshire. Except bewitching bee disproved,Answer. this Circumstance presumeth not teaching: but rather that Sommers did not coun∣erfett. When Sommers was in prison, Dorrell  rocured his father in law to baile him. Sommers Father in law can easily dis∣prove that. Besides M. Dorr:Answer. was at Ashby hat day, when Sommers was both impri∣soned and bailed: But admitt, this being after dispossessiō, presumeth nothing lesse thē teaching. Only it sheweth M. Dorrells minde, that Sommers should not haue to much wrong being accused to be a witch, and that of malice, because (in his fitts) he had named one Doll Freeman (kinswomā to an Alderman of Nottingham) to bee a witch. Dorrell bought out Sommers yeares of ap∣prentiship. M. Dorrell indeede was suerty,Answer. (and paid 13 s. 4 d.) for Sommers Father in law, who agreed (6 weekes after the dispossessi∣on) with Sommers maister (being a fidler)
for his yeers. Towards paymēt whereof M. Maior of Nottingham collected, &c. For the deed and cause was openly knowen, & approved. This presumeth not teaching more in M. Dorrell then in the Maior, but that M. Dorr. had a godly care that Som∣mers should not any longer prophane the Sabbath, but serve the Lorde IESVS in whose name he was delivered. Sommers came oft to Dorrells chamber, and had private talke. Answer.About 8. weekes after the dispossession, there was once or twice such talke. The cause was, Sommers Father and other per∣ceiving some misdemeanour, desired M. Dorrell to talke with him hoping that Sommers would regard M. Dorrell then preacher of Nottingham, and the rather because of his deliverance. This presu∣meth teaching no more by M. Dorr: then by others, who had oftener private talke with him, who by crossing (as is said) had chased the swelling, had charged the spi∣rit in the name of Iesus to goe out, affir∣med Sommers to be possessed, and inter∣preted the dumb shew: Indeed if it had ben deposed either that this talke had ben be∣fore dispossessiō it had ben some thing, or that M. Dorrell was heard commending
of Sommers for his acting or counterfe∣ting, it had ben more then a presumption. Dorrell sent Sommers to see Darlings fits  in Burton, that so he might be more expert. Indeed Sommers avouched as much to Darlings face in the hearing of many in the L. B. of Londons house.Answer. But Darling asking him, whether the bridge into Bur∣ton were long or short, or whether his vn∣cles house were of wood or stone, and 3. in what end of the town builded? Somm. an∣swered, 1. that the bridge was short. 2. That Darli. vncles house was a sorry one of wood: and 3. stāding at such an ende of the towne. Looke (said Darling) what a notable lyar he is. For the Bridge hath so many Arches, and is a quarter of a myle long: my Vncles house built of stone, is one of the fairest, & standeth in the midst of the towne. Besides, Sōmers was all the time of Darlings possession with his Mai∣ster Potter at Nottingham, 20. myles from Burton. 4. Let this be proved, so as Dor∣rell having commission can not disproove it, and he will yeeld. Obiections in behalfe of M. Dorr. more fully to shew the vanity of allega∣tions, and invalidity of proceedings a∣gainst him.
If those 4. were counterfeites, they can do the same things againe, & in such sort, as many deposed that they haue done thē: If not, (the things being supernaturall) it must needs be, that they were done by the Divell. Answer.Tumblers by discontinuance cannot act their trickes as before. 1. Tumbling trickes are performed by nimblenes. The signes or effectes of pos∣session and dispossession can not be so per∣formed.  2. Sommers avouched before the high Cōmissioners (on Whitson-eve) that he could doe them againe as straungely as ever: whervpon roome was made. But the L. B. of London was vnwilling that more tryall should bee made, then hee thought convenient. For if Sommers had gone on, he would either haue shamed all, by coū∣terfeiting the rest, as hee did the running swelling, by rolling his tongue. Or if hee had acted all the fearfull thinges, that are deposed, the L.B. of Lond. him self would thinke that Sommers said true, when hee cōfessed; That the Devill perswading him to say that hee counterfeited, promised to helpe him to doe the same. If those 4. were counterfeites, they can shew by what meanes they did coūterfeit,
as tumblers and iuglers can shewe their sleightes, and other connterfeites (before them) Wie de praest daemot. 4.26. have shewed their Conveyances: So as the reason of counterfeiting by arte may be perceived. Sommers hath shewed by what devises he hath counterfeited.Answer. His devises, namely the said rolling of  his tongue to counterfeit the swelling that shifted from legg to legg, The blacke lead to counterfeit foaming that roaped down, &c. Though vrged by the L.B. of London appeare but ridiculous and absurd shiftes to anie indifferent man, that hath but half an eye. 2. Sommers hath told devices, but  for some not for all his trickes. Thirdly, none of the other 3. (no not Darling, for  all his oft examination) haue tolde of anie such matter. Let all tell all their devises; let them be cōsidered, and so speedie & sound iudgement be giuen. If not onely those 4. but the 7. also in  Lancashire were counterfeites, which yet is but suggested, for feare of shame kee∣peth the L.B. of Lōdon from enterprizing convenient proofe hereof: It is very likely that (as tumblers and iuglers, so) some of so many, in so long time, haue taught som other to do their feates, or some of them;
If none, it is likely, that their feates be not to be taught or learned. If M. Dorr. taught these 4. to counter∣feit, It would haue bene proved, what end he and they (as theeves and other malefa∣ctors) had of their imposture. For Wierus (de praestig. li. 4. cap. 26.27.28.) reporteth, that the end of certeine counterfeites and their instructors were discovered, as soone as their counterfeitings. Answer.Darling confessed to Mai. Harsenett, that he coūterfeited, thereby to bring credit to the Gospell or Ministerie. The rest (belike) had no end: Also if it be said that M. Dorr. taught for vaine glo∣rie, this is but obiected, not proved. 2: If Darling (scarse 13. yeares olde) did coun∣terfeit to that end, it is likely that other of the coūterfeits (being elder) had the same ende; sith M. Dorrell (a Minister) is said to  haue taught them all. 3. Harsenett, who abused the boyes confession (as is saide)  may abuse him in this to. 4. Darling & his friendes might thinke, that though it bee credit to the Gospel to dispossesse; yet smal credit, that where the Gospell is professed, so many should be possessed, especiallie a  professor. 5 Againe it must be supposed that Darling was a litle Prophet, For hee
was possessed 17. weekes before Fasting & prayer, or M. Dorr. (a meere stranger dwel∣ling in an other Country) was thought of, or his vexacion (knowne to bee by witch∣crafte) was perceived to bee possession. 6. Lastlie, neither Mr Dorr. nor any Minister was present at his dispossession: Howsoever the L. B. of London hath  shewed him selfe in this case Domine fac totum amōg the high Commissioners, yet sith other Commissioners must needes ioyne with him in many thinges, for war∣ranting the same, Mai. Dorr. humbly cra∣veth favour; that having sufficient causes and reasons, he may (without preiudice to the high commission it self, which he ho∣noureth as a most lawfull authoritie) cha∣lenge the equitie and lawfulnes of the L. B. of London, and some of the Commissi∣oners (his partakers) their proceedings in this cause. For though this pretended coū∣terfeiting  were thoroughly examined, and evidently proved by most sufficient Com∣missioners to haue ben no counterfeiting, so as the L. Archbishop of Yorke was per∣swaded of vndoubted possession and dis∣possession, And yet moved by the letters of some great personages (it may be the Bb. of Cant. and London) he suspended Mai.
Dorr. (whom he acknowledged to bee an honest man) from the executiō of his Mi∣nisterie to the impoverishing of him, his wyfe, and 5. poore children, and to the dis∣couraging of all those, who by his mini∣sterie (affected because of Somm. his dis∣possession) began to tast of the Gospell in Nottingham, where a setled Preacher had not bene since her Maiesties raigne. And that only because hee holdeth fasting and prayer bee meanes left by Christe in his Church to cast Devils out of the possessed: yet so, that therein he referreth his opiniō to the censure of his learned & godly bre∣thren. Notwithstanding (I say) the cleere manifestation of possession and dispossessi∣on (against which no exception hath bene  or can be laid) yet further he cōplayneth, that by warrant from the high Commis∣sion of Canterbury Province, he was sent for, and presently committed to the Gate-house for the supposed heresie, where hee hath lyen a yeare and certen monethes, & still lyeth without any iudiciall & lawfull tryall, (notwithstandinge sufficient bayle was often & humbly offered) yea so hard∣ly vsed, that (by no entreatie) hee can ob∣teyne liberty to goe abroade with his kee∣per, (as other prisoners doe) no not to goe
to Church vpō the Sabbath day. In which proceedings Dorrell supposeth small re∣gard to be had first of 28. H. 8. cap. 9. where an Archb: is restrayned from drawing a cause of haeresy to his own hearing, from any B. or ordinary within his province, ex∣cept the said B. or ordinarie consent or do not his duty in punishment of the same. Much lesse may M. Dorrell his cause bee drawne out of another Province from an Archb. and that after punishmēt inflicted, except high Commissioners of Cant. may execute a transcendent authority. Second∣ly as of this ground of lawe, Nemo bis pro eodem delicto puniendus est, so of 1. Eliza. cap. 2. where it is provided that a Minister depraving the booke of common prayer, &c. shall not be punished both by the B. and Iudge. Much lesse (thinketh M. Dor.) is supposed (not convicted) heresie to bee punished twice in Ecclesiasticall Courtes. Thirdly, of 1. Eliz. ca. 1. where it is expres∣lie provided, That nothing is to be iudged heresy, which hath not bene so iudged by authoritie 1. of the Canonicall Scripturs. 2. of any of the 4. first generall Councills, or of the Parliament, &c. But affirming fa∣sting & prayer to be meanes, &c. hath not bene so adiudged. Ergo. Fourthly, of mag∣na
Charta, the violaters wherof are solem∣ly accursed An̄. 12. H. 3. where (cap. 29.) The Prince thus protesteth, No Free-man may be taken or imprisoned, &c. we will not goe vpon him, &c. but by lawfull iudgement of his Peeres, or by the law of this land. To none will we denie or deferr Justice or right. If not the Prince, much lesse may Cōmis∣sioners violate this Charter. And of West. 1. cap. 15. where it is said; If any with holde prisoners replevisable after they offred suf∣ficient surety, he shall pay a grievous amer∣ciament vnto the King. But baile is not de∣nyed M. Dorr. by any lawe, for any thinge yet laid to his charge. Ergo. tionFor all this suspending, and imprisoning M. Dorr. for his supposed haeresie, yet whē Sommers was drawen to accuse M. Dorrel of teaching him to counterfett, the L. Bb. followed that sent with a full cry with exa∣mination vpon examination (M. Dorrell himselfe being examined at several times, vpon (about) 180. articles) with commis∣sion vpon commission; M. Dorrell often desired to ioyne in commission, to haue copies of depositions, and to haue a new commission to examine witnesses on his parre, but was denyed all: witnesses (grave Preachers, and worthy Gentlemen) spea∣king
for M. Dorrel were reproved, and de∣positions materiall to his iustification (ta∣ken by other Commissioners) were twice snatched from him in open Court, some would not be receaved at all, yea some were blotted out beeing recorded by the Register. Nay these hunters for matter a∣gainst M. Dorr. could so hardly abide anie thing that sounded towardes the significa∣tion of his innocency, that a poore parish-Clerke was fetched vp from Nottingham, onely because he did sing the 94. Psalme before that the Nottingham Commissio∣ners (forsooth) satt in Commission. Which proceedings M. Dorrell hopeth all indiffe∣rent men will deeme, as very indirect, so of small validitie. For these considerations: First, M. Dorr. was cōmitted for one thing, and prosecuted for another. Secondly, the iudging of counterfeiting belongeth (as M. Dorr. supposeth) to the Starr chamber, or some other of her Maiesties Courts, and not to the high Commission. Thirdly, in that lawe (whereby the high Commission reigneth) it is a rule, Delegatus non potest delegare. And fourthlie, In the Stare chā∣ber (where most criminall causes be heard & determined) the party accused (of what fault soever) hath leave to plead and prove
for him selfe, and to take out copies of de∣positions for him or against him. If there had bene a sincere purpose to finde out the trueth, it is straunge that the same Commissioners should bee still im∣ployed in discovering these 4. coūterfets: as Darling by Harsenett, Kather. Wright by Harsenett, Pigott, and Gregory. Indeed the Maior of Chesterfielde (for countenāce sake) was one with them, who (simple∣man) was content to sett his hand to what they had don, though hee was not at the doing him selfe. Mary Cowper by those 3. and other of Nottingham for the pur∣pose, as hereafter, &c. And Williā Somm. by the same. And it is more straunge, that so many of all sortes, wise, simple, godlie, prophane, learned, vnlearned, who viewed those 4. manie times in their fitts (sith they were long vexed, one 10. weekes, another 17. weekes, a third halfe a yeare, and the 4th. aboue 12. yeares) could not perceive counterfeiting, and these finde it out so quickly, and yet none of them ever saw any of the possessed in their fitts, nay the Nottingham men could not be drawen to come to that sight fearing (belike) in their hearts that, which with their mouths they said to haue ben counterfett. Were all o∣ther
eye witnesses fooles and could not, or partiall and would not discover? Doubtles if these Commissioners had gon into Lan∣cashire they had founde the 7. possessed there, to have bene counterfets too. These were enioyned by authority to bend their witts to find counterfeiting;Answer. and there is no cause why these should be partiall. Yes, two causes, First partiall affection.Reply. For Harsenet and Pigott (servants of trust to the L.B. of London set against M. Dorr. as is shewed) were to make good their Ma∣sters word, that sith he had taken M. Dor∣rells matter in hande, hee would have the credit of it. And the men of Nottingham must iustifie their accusation of Sommers, and wreck their malice vpon M. Dorrell, sith they had power in their handes by their commission. Secondly Popery: for (not long since) Harsenet held about 12. grosse errors of Popery never yet soundly recanted. For which Cambridge spewed him out, and now lately denyed him the grace of Doctorship. M. Morrey of Not∣tingham is generally reputed to be a Pa∣pist, and either for his owne or his wyves popery hath ben before the high Cōmis∣sion at Yorke: and M. Gregory hath not receaved the Communion for 11. yeares
togeather. No merveile though the secret friends of Rome doe what they can that the true Church of Christ may not haue credit by casting out Devills, which that Synagogue glorieth in as proper to it self. So that som Papists not denying the posses∣siō of the 7. in Lanc. do say, That if it were plaine that they were dispossessed by the fasting and prayer of M. Dorrell and M. Moore, &c. they will forsake the Church of Rome: wherein they shew more since∣rity (though lesse pollicy) then the L. B. of London and his Commissioners. Againe others (Iohn Therold squir high herife of Nottingh. Sir Iohn Biron Kni. Iohn Stan∣hope, Rob Markhā, Rich. Par∣kins esqui∣ers. Peter Clerk ma∣ior of Not∣tingham, Arch. Wal¦ton, Miles Leig. offic. Ioh. Iretō, Io. Brown, Rob. E∣vington, & Tho Boltō Preachers. mo in number, & of greater cre∣ditt) had ben before enioyned by authori∣ty to sift out the truth touching Sommers: who after diligent examination, and seing him in such a fitt, That M. Walton (an Archdeacon, and then an arch-adversa∣rie) was constrained to say, This is the fin∣ger of God; returned, That Sommers was no Coūterfeit, as had then ben giuen out. If these, or the like mē for credit, learning, iudgment, and godlines, had ben imploy∣ed in examining the trueth cōcerning the other 3. pretended counterfetts, no doubt, they would also (in them) haue acknow∣ledged the finger of God. So that, if the L.B. of London might chalenge a right
honorable personage for threatning Som∣mers, whereas it was onely said (and that fter hearing) take heede least these trickes ring thee to the authour of them; much more may M. Dorrell challenge the L. B. of London his Commissioners (being M. Dorrels enimies) for threatning to whip, ang, and burne, for committing, and in∣oyning to appeare at London (when dra∣wing meanes could not prevaile) such as would not sweare as they desired, or more hen they well liked. And for interlyning n the absence and without consent of the eponent, and all this (not to vrge taking f money of witnesses, as of M. Beersford nd others) before hearing, as is shewed efore and can not be too often noted. Sundry times was M. Dorr. convented  efore the high Cōmissioners. At the first even the time of his commitment) when ommers his accusation of teaching to ounterfeit was not hatched, M. Dorr. was alled Heretique, Devill, and threatned to e the Devils martyr, &c. Onely because e denied Sommers to haue counterfeited. t the second and third cōvention he was alled Most impudent varlett, Asse, Patch, &c. Also when at the same time entle audience was given to Papists, Ari∣ans,
Atheists, & blasphemers, neither then nor at any time after would they permit him to speake any thing to the purpose, i his own defence: save somwhat in the las day of hearing, for their promise sake, an least otherwise their dealing should ap¦peare too grosse in the eyes of the L. chie Iustice of Englande, who was desirous t heare him speak. Yet somewhat being s¦roundly and substantially spoken then t the matter, that the L. B. of Cant. his co¦lour went and came so, that hee could n endure: he silenced M. Dorr. for this rea¦son, least he should perswade his favorit present. In which last convention (whe vnto most is attributed) these things are  bee observed. First, though promise w made by the L. Bishops to honorable pe¦sonages, that M. Dorrell should be hea iudicially, at, or before the ende of East terme, yet he was not convented til Wh¦soneve, and that so suddenly, that M. Do & M. Moore had no more warning, the▪ Make you ready and away to bee at La¦beth before the Bishops, Iudges, & Co¦missioners haue dyned. The L. Bishops ¦devour (belike) was, That few or none  of their owne creatures, should be witn¦ses of their indirect proceedinges. T
sundry sufficient witnesses for M. Dorr. ex∣pecting the promised hearing, might bee gon into the country, as they were indeed when they saw nothing donne at the ende of the Terme. Secōdly, Three large books conteyning not only depositions, but rea∣sons (or pleadings) also against M. Dorrell written by Ledsam and other the L. Bish. of Lond. his servantes, were brought: one for their Advocate, and (least hee should aile in pleading) an other for the L. B. of Cant. his secretary, and the 3d for the L.B. f London him self. Thus L. Bishops may e (by their high commission) parties, or leaders, and Iudges too. Thirdly, The L. b. fitted their turne with an Advocate for heir purpose, namely Doctor Crompton, a an as I haue heard, so suspected for Po∣erie in Oxforde that Cardinall Allens aunderous invectiue against the Executi∣on of Iustice in England, was sought for nd found in his study, and therevpon for  time he was committed, & after that he as once (or twice) denyed his Doctorship hough Sir Christop. Hatton then Chaū∣ellor of England and of Oxon. wrote in s behalfe) because the Vniversitie still spected him. Nowe, hee (no doubt) did take as earnestly as he could against M.
Dorr. (for such mē cannot abide that pro¦testant Ministers should cast out Divells whereas M. Dorrell was both denyed co¦sell & not permitted to plead for him sel Fourthly, They not only read Sommers cō¦fession artificially penned farr beyond h reach) but produced him also viua voce t accuse M. Dorrell: which course they di not take with Katharine Wright, Ma Cowper, and Thomas Darling, Thoug they had time enough to haue sent a pu¦suivant for the two former, & boūd the to appeare as they did Darling, whom y they did not cal for (though he were the present) to accuse M. Dorrell to his face▪ The reason was, Somm. was made for the purpose, whereas Katharine Wright a Mary Cowper would haue appeared ( not possessed, yet) straungely affected, a Darling would haue iustified M. Dorr. a charged Harsenet with bad dealing, as  was beginning to doe when his pretend confession was read, but that his Vn (who was bounde for him) did staye  speach. Fiftly, whē M. Dorr. vrged sun impossibilities, as the rūning swelling,  they aunswered that the boy by count¦feiting, could do them as strāgely as ev Then Sommers rolled his tongue, &c.
when better demonstration was desired, they had their shift. For (quoth the L. B. of London) it is to no purpose sith M. Dor∣rell holdeth Sommers to bee repossessed. Sixtly and lastly. They spent all, or most of the afternoone, in reading, conferring, and cavelling vpon peeces of depositions (read out of the said bookes) against M. Dorrel. Whereas it had bene convenient to haue reade the depositions at large, conside∣ring M. Dorr. had no copies of them, that it might appeare whether the witnesses (which are drawen to speake somewhat in in shew against M. Dorrell) haue not spo∣ken more in substance for him: as Thomas Garland did: as also M. Gray and his wife, M. George Smale, Thomas Porter, and M. Ireton, M. Browne, and M. Evington, 3. learned and godly Preachers: who spake materially in the behalfe of M. Dorrell, if it would haue pleased the L.B. of London to haue produced their depositions at large and vncorrupted. The L. B. of London still promised, That when all was said that could bee, M. Dorrell should haue time enough to answere at large to every parti∣cular, as he oft desired. But when it came to the point he was cut of from speaking: So that he said nothing to any of the Cir∣cumstances
concerning confederacy with Sommers, or of teaching the other 3. and yet was condemned for teaching all 4. to counterfeit. Neither would they reade any worde of any of the 17. depositions that were taken by commission from Yorke: a copie wherof he eftsoones presented vnto thē. Notwithstanding also they had twice before (in open Court) taken the like from him. Which proceedings M. Dorrell iud∣geth to bee against these rules of Gods worde,. Tim. 5.8.19. Rebuke not an elder hut admonish him as a father, Receave no accusation a∣gainst an elder but vnder. 2. or 3. witnesses. And the Judges shall make dilligent inqui∣sition,Deut. 19.18 & if the accuser be found false, &c. As I heare I iudge,Ioh. 5.30. & 7.51. Mat. 26.62. Act. 25.16. and my iudgement is iust; and against the practise of the Iewes, yea of the Priests, who vrged Christ to an∣swer for him selfe; Of the Romanes, Of o∣ther her Maiesties Courts of Iustice, where both parties bee not onely permitted to pleade and prove for them selues, but pu∣blication also of Depositions is graunted certen dayes before hearing, at what tyme both parties are heard at large, there being great care had of the credit of the copies of the Depositiōs. Yea against the practise of the Assises, where murtherers and fellons
may speake for thē selves & except against the Iury or witnesses what they cā. So that M. Dorr. complayneth that in a matter of so great importance wherin Christ for his names sake, & his people for their infor∣mation sake, haue great interest, hee is yet condemned without forme or iudgment. The Ecclesiasticall Commissioners may proceede summarie & de plano,Answer. & sine for∣ma iudicii, That is summarily, & without forme of iudgement. It is true, but adde Non sic iudex litem abbreviare debet,Reply. quin probationes necessa∣riae & legittimae defensiones (ne veritas o∣mittetur) admittantur, that is: The Iudge ought not otherwise to shorten the con∣tentiō, but so (least truth be omitted) that necessary proofes & lawfull defences may be admitted. Againe Si occasione clausula∣rum memoratarum aliquid constiterit in alterius preiudicium constitutum, id viri∣bus caret; In ca eam quae de resc: that is, If by occasion of the mencioned clauses (to wit sūmarie, &c.) there shall be any thing ordered or decreed to the preiudice of an other, such an order or decree is of no va∣liditie. Sec: If the high Cōmissioners ex∣ercise such a transcendent authoritie, that they proceed when they will so without
forme of iudgment, that necessary proofes and lawful defence will not bee admitted. Their proceedings are to bee accompted rather tyrannicall then lawfull, for then none can be innocent whom they will ac∣cuse. 3. The very clauses (summarie &c.) doe shew that such a course i o be taken, when they want time, but in trying this case they haue had time enough, so that they haue sent commission after commis∣sion, and taken examination vpon exami∣nacion, and therefore their not admitting M. Dorrell his necessary proofes and law∣full defences doth argue that (beeing se∣cretly perswaded) in their consciences that there was no counterfetting, they would haue truth omitted. Otherwise if they were assured of coūterfetting, they cannot but know, but that the more liberty, M. Dorrel hath to plead and prove, the more to his shame will his imposture appeare. Answerable to their proceedings, is their iudgment (if it may be so called) conside∣ring the L. B. of London doth forbid the Register to give M. Dorrel a copie thereof, or of the act of that dayes determination, whereof (belike) hee is ashamed. For they punnished M. Moore only for his opinion that heere was no counterfetting, and that
as grievously as M. Dorrel, for teaching (as they say (eleven to counterfeit, depriving both of their Ministery & cōmitting both to close imprisonment, vntill further pu∣nishment were determined. And thats not yet perpetuall imprisonment, though this also hath bene often threatned. But not one of so many supposed counterfers is to∣wards any punishment, no not Sommers who is guilty of blasphemy, if he did coū∣terfeit, but rather he hath ben made much of, since he accused M. Dorrell. As for the Popish exorcists in Lancashire (which play their pageant with Iane Ashton) and those in Nottingham who chaced (as they af∣firme) the Divell in Sommers with the signe of the Crosse. None of these are once called into question. In which procee∣dings M. Dorrell observeth. 1. First mat∣ter of Iustifying him selfe, as thus: Close imprisonment (a strange punishment after a cause publikly & largely debated on the plaintifs side) argueth a feare, that Maister Dorrell would iustifie himselfe to so many as would (if permitted) resort to him, whi∣che presumptiō is so much the more preg∣nant, because Maister Moore was like∣wise committed to close imprisonmēt on∣ly for holding a good opinion of M. Dorr.
dealing in dispossession, and because the Archb. said, If they were abroade they would infect the common wealth. Which feare they conceive not of Popish Priests, whose opinions be more dangerous then that of M. Moore: neither neede they to conceive feare of M. Dorrell, if he had ben manifestly detected, for then every one would be ashamed of him. Againe, if M. Dorr. were manifestly convicted, of teach∣ing eleaven to counterfet, without doubt, some shamefull and publike punishment would be sone inflicted for an example to other, without taking so long time for de∣termination, and not onely perpetuall im∣prisontment would bee threatned, least thereby they should seeme Murtherers of the persons, and smootherers of the cause. Moreover, If the Commissioners did not secretly thinke counterfeiting to be but a pretended matter, some of thē would haue vrged that (as heretofore Mistres Pinder, and Mistres Brigges their daughters were compelled to confesse such counterfeiting at Paules crosse, so) some of so many coū∣terfeitts discouered at one time, should be punished for example, least by the forbea∣ring of so many, the number of such coū∣terfets should daily encrease. Sec: M. Dorr.
observeth partiality and vnequall dealing, somwhat like that of deliuering Barrabas, & crucifying Iesus: but heerein worse, for then it was the peoples deede, but now to the grief of al the godly (in city & coūtry) that know both man & matter. Yea flatly against these words of God.pro.  He that insti∣fieth the wicked add he that condemneth the iust even they both are abomination to the Lord. For Somm. his wickednes is notori∣ous and (to say nothing of M. Dorrell) M. Moore having hadde experience of Gods power, and Satans malice in these 7. in Lancashire, knowing the godlines & ho∣nesty of M. Dorr: and the periury of Som∣mers, acquainted with the testimony of many faithfull eye witnesses, seeing (him∣selfe) Sommers in a most strange fit before the Commissioners at Nott: and hearing frivolous Allegacions and Circumstances against M. Dorrell not suffered to receaue answer, can not (in honesty) but continew, not onely a good opinion, but a good re∣port also, of M. Dorrell his dealing about the dispossession of Sommers, & the other three: according to that of Peter and Iohn:Act.  We can not but speake the thinges we haue seene & heard. Nay it is cōtrary to a W 1. c Sta∣tute which provideth that an exigent shall
not go out against the accessary vntill the principall bee attainted by outlawry or o∣therwise, and cōtrarie to the course of iu∣stice in Germany,erus raest. mon, 4. ca. 7. where not onely a Priest was punished for teaching to counterfeit possessiō, but the partie likewise so taught yea a begger also, for such counterfeiting were tormented in a wheele 2. howers, and then hanged. wer.Thomas Darling (one of the coūterfeiters) was laid in the coūter in Southwark 7. weeks & otherwise punished. But if none of the coū¦terfeiters had bene punished, yet it followeth not that the Bb. had any grudge against M. Dorr. & M. Moore that might be probably supposed, to be the roote of their partialitie. eply.If Darl. were punished for coūterfeiting, then the verdit of 12. men and sentence of Iudge Anderson (whereby a witch was cō∣demned for tormēting Darling by her fa∣miliar) are called into questiō to the preiu∣dice of her Mats Court, & contrary to the statu. of 27. Ed. 3. ca. 1.2. But indeed Darl. was not imprisoned for coūterfeiting, but for not cōfessing coūterfeiting, & denying it after such confession was drawne from him. As may appeare by that is aforeshew∣ed; by the not punishing of Sōm. & by not calling Darl. (at the last day of hearing)
to answer the disclaiming his cōfessiō, but presently after they released him & his vn∣cle of his band. 3 The L. Bb. rigorous dea∣ling with M. Dorr. & M. Moore doth of ne∣cessitie argue either zeale against the hor∣rible sin of coūterfeiting possessiō, or grudg against the persons. The former it is not, for thē (without dout) they would not on∣ly diligently seek out the sin, but punish it also severely wheresoever they finde it, at least, in some of so many coūterfeits disco∣vered about the same time. But so they do not; Therefore it followeth, there is some grudg against M. Dor. & M. Moore though the cause be not readily perceyved. 4. But indeed sundry causes may be perceived of all not willingly blinde. 1. The hatred wch the L. Bb. (Cant. & London) haue against those that desire reform. of the church (a∣mong whō they accompt M. Dor. and M. Moore) whom they persecute more egerly then Papists, as if they were more ielous of their own miter thē of the Queens crown. Which their Articles in visitatiōs, & other their proceedings do more then manifest. Yea they so loth such professors, that they cannot brook fasting & prayer, as they vse it, without some tast of the leaven of the Pharisees. 2. They would gladly haue this
matter for a complement of that sclaūde∣rous and schismaticall booke of Scottizing Genevating Discipline, that (through M. Dorrell sides) they might goare all refor∣med Churches about vs, and all desirers of reformatiō amongst vs. In this sort, These Disciplinarians not prevayling by the con∣spiracy of Hacket, nor by the libelling of Martin, nor threatning with Vdall, (yet fearing to attempt the rebellion of Scotland and Geneva for their reformation) would ob∣teyne credit by working miracles in casting out Devills. To which purpose the L. B. of London and his Advocat, have confident∣dently and openly (but most falsly) spokē. Lastly, they must needes iustifie the L. B. of Londons wordes; who (as is said) vaun∣ted that sith he had taken M. Dorr. cause in hand, he would haue the credit of it. But all the premisses wel considered, M. Dorr. appealeth to God, the church, & the Queene to iudge: whether he be iustly pu∣nished for teaching to coūterfeit possessiō &c. or the L. Bb. of Cant. & Lond. (overru∣lers of this case) haue not heerein shewed themselves the adversaries of Iesus. Sith to the glory of his Name at the fasting and prayer of his people, vncleane Spirits haue ben cast out by the finger of God.
To the Christian and in∣different Reader. THE Report before promised (for some causes not sent with this treatise to the presse) was omitted so long, as that (in meane while) the booke against M. Dor∣rell begottē (as for som reasons it may seeme) by one, to wit th'authour of Scottizing Ge∣nevating discipline, is come foorth in deede; but fathered (as a bastard) vpon another, viz. S. H. Whereof I thought good to take knowledge, and to referre some fewe things to thy Christian consideration. First concerning the Publishing thereof, Jt is to be observed, that as copies of Deposi∣tions were denied before hearing, and M. Dorrell not suffred to answer (as he should) at hearing, So he is traduced in print after hearing, though he be yet in sure holde, and therefore without conuenient meanes to re∣ply in such sort, as this case requireth. Is not this to binde a man, and then to fight with him? Hath not the publisher of M. Dorrels apologie some reason to call such courses exorbitant?
Secondly, concerning the Matter: It is to be considered, That howsoeuer the Discoue∣rie of M. Dorrels practises in teaching sun∣dry to counterfeit possession, be only preten∣ded; yet D. Barlowes opinion That in these dayes there is no possession must needes be heere and there maintayned, and yet not di∣rectly. J call it D. Barlowes opinion, Because in processe of disputatiō the last Commence∣mēt in Cambridge, he defended the same; yea so, that he would haue no possessiō (but obses¦sion) in Christes time. Notwithstanding that worthy Vniversity would not suffer him at first to professe so grosse an error, but (in∣serting this word Ordinary) compelled him to set vp his question to this effect, In these dayes there is no Ordinary possession, &c. Now to what purpose is Possession so sim∣ply denied? Marry, to cut Mai. Dorrels combe. For, if there be no Possession at all, then Sommers was not possessed, and then M. Dorrels supposed crowne of glory may proue but a withered garland. Nay verily. If this were so, yet they gaine nothing there∣by, neither is M. Dorrels cause the worse. For what if there be Obsessiō? & so if Som∣mers were thus affected and tormented in∣deede, as he appeared in shew, is M. Dor∣rell then to be condemned as an impostor?
Yea further, admit Sommers to haue coun∣terfaited: why should M. Dorrell deceiued by him, be punished? Was that good man, of reverend memorie (M. Fox) deceyued by Anne Brigges & Rachel Pindar, called in∣to question for the same? Hee was not. But how is this absolut deniall of posses∣sion proved? First, forsooth, by an Induction not vrged as a reason, but insinuated like a fallacy, thus to be collected: Wil. Sommers, Tho. Darling, Kath. Wright, the seauen in Lancashire, &c. Martha Brossier (whose matter is discoursed by Abraham Hartwell & published in the very nick with S. H. his Discouery) were coūterfeits: Therfore (as it is concluded p. 77.) a Magistrate saide to Mengus, Of 50. exorcistes 49. are coun∣terfeits. To whom Mengus answered: If I were not present, you would so iudge of me. O worthy Induction from a most suf∣ficient enumeration of vndoubted particu∣lars. But marke (good Reader) how like a squint-eyed man S. H. in his parting blow lookes one way, and strikes another. For in the title he pretendeth to discouer Mai∣ster Dorrells bad practising but with 4: and yet, in sundry places of the discouery, hee laboureth to proue the 7. in Lancashire to be also counterfeits, yea, though he confesse
pa. 4. that, touching thē examinations haue not bene taken. If the L.B. of London had tryed at first, how his Chaplaine could (by verie witt) without farther examinations haue made th' other 4. Counterfeits in the o∣piniō of all that would beleeue him, his Lp. might haue saued great charges, and paines bestowed in hunting after their supposed counterfeiting. Here is yet another note vpō this Induction not to be forgottē, viz. That S.H. presuming (belike) to be borne out, doth call into question the sentences of death gi∣uen by her Maiecties Justices of Oier and Determiner vpon the Witches, that bewit∣ched the 7. in Lancashire, and the boy of Burton, to the publique and perpetuall pre∣iudice of those her Maiesties Courts of Assi∣ses. Secondly, Absolute deniall of possession is faced out by a ridiculous and slight (not an∣swering, but) evading from arguments fra∣med by S.H. him self from the word for pos∣session, &c. the refutation whereof I referre to some treatise that may be heereafter: also from the volūtary confessions of witches thē∣selues; who, at their death haue confessed, That they sent Divels into parties possessed. Indeed, if witches by deniall would excuse themselues, Such deniall for sundry reasons
might bee thought insufficient. But seeing many witches, in sūdry Kingdomes & ages, haue, by their voluntarie confessions, iustifi∣ed evidences and sentences giuen against them, and when? Euen at their death when they see no hope to saue them selues by per∣sisting in deniall, what reason is there, why they may not bee thought guilty of sending euill spirits into the possessed, whereof they were conuicted? S. H. auoucheth none, but suggesteth (pag. 39.) that learned men haue sufficiently confuted this already. But S. H. are you ashamed of your learned men, or of their reasons, that you neither quote th'one nor set downe th'other? Must J helpe at a pinch? If memory faile me not (as it may be it did S. H.In his Dis∣covery of witchcraft) M. Scot imputeth such confessions to a stronge imagination arising from Melancholy the predominant humor of old women and such like. O superstitious Catholique Melācholy, that no lesse strang∣lie thē strongly deludeth so many young, as∣well as old, men, aswell as women, and that at their executions! Tell me S. H. what you thinke bona fide: was it Melancholy that caused Hartley (who bewitched the 7. in Lancashire) stifly to deny, both at the barre and gallowes, his divelish witchcraft: & yet when he saw that breaking an halter would
not deliuer him from hāging (as the Divell had promised) then penitently to confesse, that all wherewith M. Starky (in whose house the 7. possessed were) had charged him, was very true? Yet admit the reason. But know withal, that your learned men in∣tend theroby to dispoue not only possession, but all witchcraft whatsoever, otherwise then by poysoning. Are you S. H. of that o∣pinion too? Why should I doubt it? For doe not you hold (pag. 36.) That Witches can∣not send Divels into men and women? and, Is it not as easie for witches to sent Divels Into, as Ʋnto men? Heere Doctors doubt. But D. Barlowes reason at Cambridge strikes all dead. For (saith he) one substāce cannot enter into another. Heere is a dead blowe indeede. For, Jf neither ayre (which is a substance) nor meate can enter into our bodyes, what will become of vs? Jf either en∣ter, why cānot the Divel, sith he is a spirite? But admit that it is an harder matter to sende the Divell Into, then Ʋnto a man: I meane so Ʋnto, as to torment him, yet (me thinkes) S. H. doeth holde the deniall of one, aswell as of th' other. For, by th'autho∣ritie of the same authours, who deny witch∣craft in sending Divells both Ʋnto & Jnto men,Lib. 1.6. he likewise indefinitly concludeth that
his discourse against the cōfessions of Wit∣ches Againe, Is it not likely, That D. Barl & Abrah. Hartwell belong to the L. B. of Can. S.H. to the L.  of Lond. birdes of a fether will fly togeather? Further, D. Barlowes reason at Cambridge Why in these dayes there is no possession, was this: Christ came to dissolue the works of darknes, & vpon the Crosse he triumphed ouer pow∣ers and principalities: Ergo, There is nowe no possession. He may conclude aswel, Ergo, There is now no witchcraft: yea no murder, no pride, no Jdolatry, &c. Moreover, There is reason why it is expedient for S. H. inde∣finitly and implicatiuely to make witchraft doubtfull. For, If there be no witchcraft at all, then may he conclude, All M. Dorrels possessiōs (which ar said to be by witchcraft) must needes be counterfeitings. Who would loose such an argument? But consider (good Reader) whether such a conclusion tend not to the cōfirmation of Atheists. If so: may we not feare, that Witches & Atheists may hope for more fauour with thē, then M. Dor. The rather, if we cōsider 2. actions of S.H. his L. & master on friday 8. dayes at the Session in Lond. First, howe vnwilling hee was to finde Concer∣ning Anne Keke, spo∣ken of in the end.Witchcraft if his L. could haue overruled that court: for notwithstāding he heard suf∣ficiēt witnesses testifying grieuous things, & saw a yōg girle falling into a most terrible fit
yet he smiled (at no laughing matter, as som of the Bench tolde his L.) saying, That hee sawe nothing that might not be counter∣feited, and tolde, how many Counterfeits he had lately discouered. Wherevpon Iudge Anderson, and other of the Bench thought it necessarie for the satisfying of the Iurie to vrge the Scriptures for proofe that there is witchcrafte, and (of their owne knowledge) to tell of sundry bewitched, yea possessed out of whom Diuels spake: and of a childe be∣witched to death whose eyes were fast clo∣sed, yet when the Witch came in presence they opened, and (as it were) stared vpon the Witch. Second: How earnest his L. was to free an Atheist then and there arraigned for blasphemie against God. For notwith∣standing his L. acknowledged that the A∣theist had bene before the high Commission for such blasphemie, yet he pleaded that the secular power had nothing to doe with him vntill the spiritual iurisdiction had pronoū∣ced him obstinate in his blasphemie. Ʋpon whose wordes the Atheist tooke holde and heart, openly and impudently to say, My Lord, if any heere can proove there is a God, I will beleeue it. Would the L. B. haue done such a part if Mai. Dorrell had bene then and there arraigned for teaching
to coūterfeit possession? To drawe towards an ende. Whereas S. H. his Discoverie con∣sisteth partly of matter of Opinion, viz. a close fight against possession, at least in these dayes: and of matter of Fact, viz. a bearing downe of Mai. Dorrell with a tumultuous riot of wordes as a Teacher of sundry to counterfeit possession: This (I hope) I may presume to saye touching the former, that if S. H. will take in hande directly and syllo∣gistically to conclude his negatiue opinion from the Scriptures, sonne (no doubt) of M. Dorrels friendes (so oft by him provoked) wil returne (to vse his own wordes pag. 324) matter sufficient to shewe his skill in. As for the matter of Fact, this I dare boldly say: That if M. Dorrell doe not refute all imputations & arguments materiall, which are not sufficiently answerd in this Collecti∣on (provided hee may haue libertie) all his friendes will abandon him: yea the Narra∣tor, Publisher of his apologie, and this Col∣lector, if they be alive & make cōscience of their wayes. I say, If they be aliue, because if they be all one (as some may suppose, and I haue heard presumptions giuen so to thinke) then they, in one, be departed this life. Jn meane while, I desire thee (good Rea∣der) to consider one thing with me, that is,
whether it may not be concluded, That a Raking of riches doeth manifest the vn∣satisfyed pouertie of a couetous minde; so the Raking of matter, euen from papistes, and that to no good purpose: The exami∣ning of M. Dorrell (at seuerall tymes) v∣pon 8. or 9. skore interrogatories; and the deposing of 52. witnesses (as S. H. recko∣neth pag. 13.) doeth not manifest an vnsa∣tisfied minde, and (by consequence) the po∣uertie of S.H. his cause. Which point, that is, of the Prelates their not beeing satisfied (in their secret perswasion) touching M. Dorrel his guiltines, may the rather be con∣ceaved, For that, within these fewe dayes, notwithstanding Ma. Dorrell, and Ma. Moore were both deposed from the Mini∣sterie, and committed to close prison, there to remayne vntil order were taken for their further punishment, (as S. H. reporteth pa. 9.) yet for all that, they haue offered (by M. Barker the Register, who went of purpose to M. Dorrell in the Gatehouse) libertie vpon these conditions, That they should not iusti∣fie their cause, nor meddle any more with prayer, and fasting for parties possessed. Which good motion of graunting liber∣tie (J say not vpon such conditions) to Prea∣chers, of whose Ministery the Church may
haue good vse, in these tymes, when Priests and Papistes multiply and practise so fast, I could wish the Reverende Prelates would follow, and doe that of loue towards Christ his Church and Gospell,Act. 16.3 39.23.18. which the Gouer∣nours of Philippi did for feare of the Ro∣manes, to wit, They deliuered Paul out of prison with credit, whom they had punished more severely then casting out a Diuell had deserued. But how soever it shall please God to mooue the heartes of our Reuerend Pre∣lates, Let me intreat thee (Christian Rea∣der) to suspende thy iudgement in M. Dor∣rels till M. Dorrell, or some of his friendes haue made further aunswere then heere is, or can bee made: and then to iudge as thou shalt see cause. And so I passe to the promi∣sed Report, accompanied with another of like argument.
A REPORT, Contayning a brief Narra∣tion of certain diuellish and wicked witcheries, practized by Oliffe Barthram alias Doll Barthram of Stradbrook in the County of Suffolke, vpon Ioane Iorden the Servant of Symon Fox of the same Towne: For which, she was ar∣raigned before the right Ho▪ the L chief Iustice of England condemned and executed at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolke the 12. of Iulye. 1599. ABout midsomer last, the said Doll Barthram, falling out with the said Ioane Iorden for refusing to giue her of her maisters goods, practised and devised, to afflict the said Joane by wit∣cheries: as, through Gods permission by the meanes of Satā it came to passe; which in briefe was thus. First the said Doll Barthrā sent 3. Toads to trouble her in her bed, not suffering her to rest. The first, being thrown out into the middest of the chamber, returned, and sat croaking on her beds side: which being thrown out of the window; another with∣in fewe dayes after came and vexed her a∣gaine; which was taken and burnt. After that within a while came the 3d. which
Ioane was counselled to burne her selfe; and going downe stayres to doe so, she was violently thrown to the stayers foot, there lying (a while) for dead. And when this Toade began to burne, (which Simon Fox had put into the fire,) a flame arose at the stayers foote where the toade lay when Ioane fell, & grew so great, that it seemed to them to indanger the house, yet no hurt was don. After this, On Satterday the 9. of Iune, in the sense of Ioh. Th¦ston, An∣thony A¦dam ger Will. Go bolde ch Constabl of Hoxa M. Ran¦vicar. Io Sheerem Symō Po and d others. many of good accoumpt and credit, A Spirit (which had ben there the night before, and said then, beeing asked, that his name was Gyles, & that he came down the chimney in the likenes of a cat) came nowe againe about eleven a clock at night; first scraping on the wals, then knocking, after that shufling in the rushes: and then (as his vsuall maner was) he clapped the maide on the cheekes a∣bout halfe a skore times as to awake her; and, (as oft times els he did) he kissed her 3. or 4. times and slauered on her: and, (ly∣ing on her brest) he pressed her so sore that she could not speake; at other times hee held her handes that she could not stirre, and restrayned her voice that she could not answer.
The Shape which they sawe the Spirite then to haue, was a thick darke substance about a foote high; like to a sugar lofe, white on the top. And (being charged) he did shoote vp in all their sightes as high a∣gaine as he shewed himselfe before. As this spirit had a shape, so had he also an audible voyce: by which he spake and vttered many thinges. This voyce was not the maides, neither from her, nor yet of a∣ny other saue of the spirit it selfe. For; (be∣sides that the maide denyed it,) she & the spirit were heard speak both at once; also, her lips were seene not to moue, when the spirit spake; and, some standing neerer to th'one then to th'other, did sensibly dis∣cerne and distinguish both their voyces. Neither was this the voyce of any coun∣terfait confederate; for, (to put this out of doubt) the house was searched, the parties in the maides presence (except Io. Sheere∣man, M. Randall, and Sy. Fox) were stran∣gers, the roomes vnder and adioyning to her, were full of people, and the house was besett with divers who came to see and heare these strang accidents, which indeed they did; for the voyce was easily heard to them all. This Spirit being demanded diverse que∣stions,
returned answers; saying, (among diverse other things,) Joane, Ioane, I come for thy life; J will haue it, I am a Boy, a Boy; my name is Gyles; an old woman that dwells in the streete gaue mee that name, to witt, Doll Barthram; She sent me; I haue serued her 10. yeares, yea 20. yeares; She is now in prison, (as indeede she was); Nan Barthram sent me now; I will kill Ioane to¦morrow night; J will teare her in peeces; She hath giuen her life and soule to mee (which Ioane in parte acknowledging, viz. that she had given him her life, hee laughed Ho, Ho, Ho.) To this whē John Sheereman defying him) replyed, that he should not haue her life, he said, I wil haue thine then; I come to thee, J come; & with that, offered towards him, to the great astonishment & feare of him and the rest present. And yet thus for that time he vanished away. But, not long after, he returned againe; in maner as at the first (except scraping the wals.) When, vpō occasion of talke touch∣ing one Cavers wife, in the presence of many, he said: Tom, (which was another of the Spirites of the said Doll,) and J, at Doll Barthrams commandement, did hang her. But first I led her into a ditch vp to the chyn and could not drowne her, and there∣fore
I brought her out againe. Then Tom brought a rope and put it vnder her chaps, and I pulled her vp and hung her. Which seemeth to haue ben so, because of the strangnes of it. For, the rope werewithall Cauers wife was hanged, was but put vn∣der her chaps, not about her neck: and the noose was so bigge, that three mens heds might haue slipt through it at once. Moreover, this Spirite then declared, That he, (at Doll Barthams cōmandment) had killed a child, in the womb of the mo∣ther, by nipping out the braines; and that hee entred into another partie and killed him, by tearing his heart in peeces. Both which seeme to be true also: for, the wo∣man was deliuered of a dead child, & the man did dye in a very strange maner; and both at the same time that the Spirit de∣clared. Then, after many speaches vsed by the spirit, as, that hee would kill Ione, and teare Iohn Sheereman in pieces; that he was their God; and that he would not be content with the life of Ioane only, but would haue also the liues of Fox, his wife, children, and cattell, and that by the commaundement of Doll Bartharm, hee went away for that night. But Satan and the Witch, nothing con∣tented
with that which as yet had ben don, eturned againe in more grieuous sort then before. For, in the presence of Of whō 4. were Sir Nicolas B¦cons men, sent of pu¦pose to bring true report. many credi∣ble persons, there was seene a lump to arise in her body as big as a mans fist; which as∣cended vpwardes in her body till it came to her throate, & there setled as big as a mans arme. With this the maide was somewhat vnruly, and therefore was bound in a chaire with a long to well, very fast. But she (or ra∣ther the Divell in her) strugled and strained so sore, that it brake in pieces. Being againe bound in the chair, sixe stronge men leaned with their whole strength thereon, each al∣so setting one foote on the rounde of the chaire to keepe it down. But she, (though so bound) notwithstāding all their strength, remoued the chaire round about the house, a yard at a time, they hanging thereon. After this fit ended, the maide was had to bed: And about eleaven a clock the Spirit came; not after his vsuall aner, but with a great stroke on the bordes, like the fall of a greate stone. Wherewith, the people awoke, and the maide cried, Helpe, Helpe: & then, a thicke shadow was seene to goe vp to the maides bed. Shortly after which, the maide was takē out, & throwne so violētly against the wall, as if it would haue driven out the
side of the chamber. Then search being made for the maid, she was found lying vn∣derneath the standing bed: From whence, it was as much as fower men could doe to pluck her. Neither was this great throw, and heavy waight, the only strange thinges in this her fit: For, her eyes were sunck into her head an inch. Her head and body were bent backwards, almost to her hips. She lay as it were dead. Her teeth were so fast clo∣sed, that a man could not opē them, though with all his strength he assayed it with his dagger and a key. And, (that which strang is,) a stiffe dry Rush being put into her no∣strels, so far, as it might touch her braines in the iudgment of them that were present, yet she moved nothing thereat; neither at the violent bending of her fingers; nor yet at a great quantity of Aqua-vitae, which was powred into her mouth. In which case she having lyen halfe an hower, at last she opened one of her eyes ga∣zing there with very strangly; then th'other, crying, ô Barthram, thou hast killed mee. Then, being layed in her bed, she so striued to get out, that all there present (which were not a few for such a purpose,) could scarse hold her therein. And this is the summe of that wch happened to this maide bewitched.
Another Report of like Argument. IN Castle Alley neere Broken wharfe in London, there dwelt a witch called Anne Kerke; who for her notorious mischievous witcheries heereafter in brief described, was arraigned in London the 30. of November 1599. before the right honorable the Lorde Anderson & other of her Maiesties Iustices, and then condemned, and executed at Ty∣burne the 4. of December following. To let passe the Evidence, that of long time she had ben suspected for a witch; I will set downe the summe of th'other evi∣dences giuen in against her. First, this witch falling out with a woman in the streete, said she would bee meete with her, or hers. Wherevpon the woman going home and sitting by the fire with her child in her lap, it gaue a great skreeke, and was suddenly changed; and after that continual∣ly pined away till it dyed. After whose death, her other child going vp Bredstreet Hill, met with this witch; who asked her how her sister did. But before she could make answer, she was stricken downe in a very strange maner; her mouth beeing drawne aside like a purse, her teeth gnashing togeather, her mouth foming, and her eyes
staring the rest of her body being strangely disfigured. When the witch was gon, she re∣couered out of this traūce; howbeit she was still oftimes cast into the like. This, the maide her selfe deposed: who being willed by the Lorde Anderson, to To trie like if ee coun∣feited shew how she was tormented; she said she could not shew it, but when the fit was on her. Another time, this Witch taking displea∣sure with a woman for not bidding her to her childes Christening, tormented the child twice or thrice a day in strange maner, vntill the Father with others went to mother welling  the nkside. Gil∣lams; who tolde them, that the childe was forespoken, and that the witch had ben (as indeed she was) twice with the mother of the child before they came home; and that, for the childes recouery they should cut of a piece of the witches coate with a payre of sheeres, & burne it togeather with the childs vnder cloth: which they did, and the childe accordingly was healed. Againe, at another time, this witch fell out with an Inkeeper; and in revengement, be∣witched his only childe so strangely, as that by no means of Physik which he could get, it could be recouered; but still it was from time to time tormented, till it dyed. But be∣fore the death, the Father (finding no helpe
by Physicke) went to a cuning man (as they call them;) who told him, that the causer of his childes torments was one that was con∣versant in his house: and (after promise made of not revealing the partie) he shewed him in a glasse this witch, Anne Kerke. After this, this man the Father of the childe, met this witch comming out of his neighbours dore, and making stay till she was gon, tolde his neighbour that she was a witch, and that she had bewitched his childe to death. Where∣vpon he going home, fell sick and dyed. Besides all these, among other mischiefes don by Satans instrument in the house of one M. Nayler dwelling in Thames street neere Broken wharf, she tormēted his sonne George in such grievous maner that he dyed. So also did she torment his daughter Anne till she dyed: who was oftimes vexed wth a frenzines: and with an evill spirit, to which this maide in her Fathers hearing did often talke. And being demaunded who was the causer of these her torments, the spirit which was within her said, that one would come after who should For yet th did n suspect Anne discouer the causer, and the truth of all; as afterwardes it came to passe by Ione Nayler, another of the saide M. Naylers daughters. For so it was, That money being given to
poore at the buriall of the said Anne Nayler; This witch was vexed that she had none, be∣ing a parishioner; and therefore practised a∣gainst the said Ioane Nayler also. Who the next night after her sisters buriall, was tor∣mented with an evill spirit, which spake in her oftimes in the hearing of her Parents; saying, Giue me thy liuer, thy lights, thy heart, thy soule, &c; then thou shalt be released, then I will depart frō thee: also; Goe, take thy lace & hang thy selfe: Go into the next roome and hang thy self in the iack rope, and so thou shalt be released. She was oftimes grievously tor∣mented and in a traunce, during which her mouth was turned to th'one side, her ioyncts so shrunke vp that the soles of her feete did beate togither, her shoulder bones did strike one against another, so, as that they were heard to rattle, to the terror of them present. And (according to the wordes of the spirit in her sister Anne) she oft said, that mother Kerke had bewitched her. And when the maide (according as some had willed her to doe) did reach forth her hands to scratch this mother Kerke, they were so fast closed tha none could open thē. Whervpon, her Fathe suspected this Anne Kerke of witchcraft, & procured a warrant from Sir Richard Marti to fetch her before him, he being thē in th
house of the said M. Nayl. & in the presence of the maide. But so soone as the witch came to the dore, she fel into her former traūce, her handes being againe so closed as they could not be opened, Sir Rich▪ Martin himselfe as∣saying it. Into the like traunce the maide did also fal being in the houses of Sir Iohn Hart, & Sir Steph. Slaney (or Some) so soone as the witch (being by thē sent for,) was entred into their dores: And the like also did she fal into, being in the fields, at the same instant when the witch was bayled forth of prison: as also being in the Sessions house, when the iury were departing to cōsider of the matter. But that of Sir R. Martin is not heere to be omit∣ted: who having heard that a witches hayre could not be cut; sent for the said An. Kerke, & cōmanded a Seriant to pull from her head 10. or 12. of her haires, & try if he could cut them. The Seriant did so; and offering to cut thē with a paire of Barbers Sissers, they tur∣ned round in his hand: and the edges were so battered, turned, & quite spoiled, as that they would not cut any thing. Then the Seriant tooke the haire, and did put it into the fire to burne it; but the fire flew from it, and the haire in the middest thereof vnburnt. Who is wise that he may observe these thinges? The righ∣teous shall see and reioyce, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Psalm. 107▪ 43.42.
