6398 99849937 15111
EVERY-DAYES SACRIFICE. Wherein are comprehended many comfortable Prayers and Meditations, very neces∣sary for all Christns. ALSO, Many comforts for the sicke which are afflisted by the sight of their sins and the terrour of deah; Written by D. M. Luther, a little before his end. With most true comforts out of holy Scripture of the knowledge we shall haue of one another in the world to come. Translated by, W. R. S. LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Iohn Parker, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paules Church yard at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1624.
The Translator to the Reader. IT pleased Al∣mighty God (gentle Rea∣der) in his last great vi∣sitation 1603. (amongst a great multitude of others) to take to his mercy al my Children, to the great griefe and sorrow of my heart, which caused me to remember the saying of
our Sauiour Iesus Christ in his holy Gospel: If these things bee done vnto a greene Tree, what shall bee done to a dry? And therefore it beseemed mee, rather to prepare for my selfe, that I might bee ready when it pleased God to call mee, then to lament for them which are at rest with Christ. All which considered, caused mee to reade ouer diuers com∣fortable Bookes; and at last light vpon this, which as it appeareth in the be∣ginning of this book, was first penned for the com∣fort
of one that was in great affliction by reason of sicknesse; who, besides a great number of others, receiued great comfort of the same; for which cause it was first penned. The like cōfort hath it, by the goodnesse of God, effe∣cted in mee; which moued mee to vndertake the pub∣lishing hereof in as plaine and fruitfull manner as I could, for the good of euery Christian, without any borrowed phrases. And therefore such as it is, I commend to thy fauo¦rable acceptance, pray∣ing
God that it may work such comfort in thee (and in all other that shall reade it) as it hath done in mee, for the glory of his holy name: vnto whose most mighty protection I com∣mit thee.
Exhortations to make the sick de∣sirous of death. WE bee but strangers and soiourners, as were all our fa∣thers: our daies on earth al∣so are but as a shadow, and there is no abiding. The dayes of man are the daies of an hireling, yea wind and nothing. We are made as dust, and must return to dust, as a leaf that is carried of the winde, dry stubble, and a garment that is moth-eaten. Man is burthened with
many calamities: he cometh vp, & is cut down like a flour, and he lieth as it were a sha∣dow: short be his dayes, and the Lord hath appointed him his bands, which he shall not passe. Where is there any man that liueth, and soeth not death? Our daies passe away swiftly, and we are gone. A man in his time is but as grass, and florisheth as a flour of the field: fo as soon as the winde goeth ouer it, it is gon, and the place thereof knowes it no more. Man is like to a thing of nought: his daies passe away like a shadow. Euery thing hath a time,
yea, all that is vnder heauen, hath his conuenient season. There is a time to bee borne, and a time to dy. Death doth not forget him self. By one man, death entred into the world, and went ouer all men; and through one sin of one man, all men are sub∣iect vnto death. All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grasse. Our life is euen as a vapor that appears for a little tune, and then vanisheth away. Héer haue we no continu∣ing city, but wée seek one to come. Whatsoeuer hath béen borne since the beginning of
the world vnto this day hath been subiect vnto death: and whatsoeuer is yet aliue, or shall be born, must néeds die euery-while. Whosoeuer receiueth life, must also suffer death reme∣dilesse. On this condition camest thou into the world, that thou shouldst leaue it again. Thou hast béen sure of death, euer since thou wast conceiued in thy mothers womb. Whatsoeuer thou hast li∣ued ouer the first day of thy birth, is superfluous and too much; and God hath suffred thee to liue long enough. There is no remedy, but that thou must néeds die, and
no man can saue thee nor de∣fend thee: for, thou art dust, and must bee turned into dust again. Think none other in thy minde, but that the end of thy life is comne. This misery geeth not on∣ly euer thee: for, great and small, rich and poor, yong, old, Lord, seruant, man, woman, and all men must take this iourney in hand. This debt hast thou owed a great while, and thou must néeds pay it; the sooner the better. If thou shouldst be put to death or execution, with a hundred more besides thy selfe, what should it auaile thee, whether thou were the
first or the last. He that is first dispatcht, is soonest rid out of his pain. Thou hast full well deser∣ued at the hand of God, to die a worse and a more sudden death: wherefore thou art bound to thank him, that hee handleth thee so graciously. This life is short: childe∣hood flowes away like water: youth and manhood are full of sin and labour: age is full of infirmities, although not one among a thousand doth attain to it. This life is but a prison, full of heauinesse, calamity, bondage, incombrance, pain∣fulnesse, labour, trauailes, vnlustinesse, sinne, diseases, temptations, yea, 'tis nothing
but a crosse. From all which miseries, death dooth deliuer vs. The day of death is better than the day of birth. In the day of birth, thou art put to cold, heat, hunger, thirst, tediousnesse, sinne and wretchednesse. In the day of death art thou deliuered from all bodily impediments. Therefore doo Iob and Ie∣remy curse not onely the day of birth, but also him that brought the message to their father, that a child was born. The bitternesse of death which is sent thee, passeth all the paine that euer thou dibst seele in all thy life: but it la∣steth not long, and it is soon done.
Through the grace & help of GOD canst thou wade through this danger, & drink this cup. Thou didst neuer truely feel the passion of Christ in all thy life: wherefore now in the houre of death thou shalt patiently féel and taste. In case the diuell by force, for his last feat, would proue himself vpon thee; then bée thou sure, that he is a might∣lesse enemy, and is ouercome by Christ, and can gette no more at thy hand, but onely as much as thou fearest him, and doubtest in Christ. If there happen vnto thée any fearfull temptation, giue thanks to God, that he hand∣leth thee so gratiously: for,
thou art worthy to haue a more grieuous punishment. The wicked spirit which tempted Christ, wil not leaue thée vntempted: but hée can∣not preuaile against thée; for, he hath nought in Christ, nor in thée. Many temptations shall assault thee, which thou must patiently suffer; thinking, that the Lord might iustly send thée greater temptations, which neuerthelesse he leaues vndone of his meer mercy. When thy conscience doth lay before thée thy manifould sins, and sendeth thée to good works; then remember, that Christ hath paid for thy sins vpon the Crosse. Let not vnprofitable
thoughts trouble thee; as, If God would lengthen thy life, thou wouldst think to become more holy, and more apt to die: for, although thou mightst liue yet (which is vnpossible) an hundred yéers, thou canst deserue nothing with thy ho∣linesse before God. Although all creatures were against thée, yea, al∣though God himselfe should lay before thée his fearfull in∣dignation and terrible indge∣ment, and shew himself none otherwise than as though he were thine enemy, & although thou shouldst see nothing but diuels about thee, yet care not for it, whatsoeuer thou feelest: shut the eyes of thy minde: take hold of faith, and
trust in the Gospell. There is no Diuell so strong, that is able to ouerthrowe it. Trust to God, and feare not. Cast all thy care on the Lord, and hee will prouide and preserue thee. Hitherto thou hast béen as dead, but now shalt thou first begin to liue: for, death is a do of life, a beginning of re∣surrection, and a departing from sin and pain. Forsake the world, and re∣ceiue death (which is seat vn∣to thee by the grace of God) willingly: for, it is thy owne, and must also serue thee for thy wealth. This smart and paine is ordained for thee of God, and hee doth not chasten thee be∣cause
he hateth thée, but that hee may preserue and receiue thée as his sonne. Therefore faint not, séeing thou art cha∣stened of the Lord. No maner of chastising for the present time seems to bée ioyous, but grieuous: neuer∣thelesse, afterward it bringeth the quiet fruit of righteousnes vnto them which are therein exercised. The afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall bee shewed vpon vs. Tribulation, anguish, per∣secution, hunger, nakednesse, perill, sword, death, life, An∣gels, rule, power, things pre∣sent, nor things to come, height, lownesse, neither any
other creature shall be able to separate vs from the loue of God. If thou didst truly remem∣ber and consider the vnfaith∣fulnesse, falshood, blasphemy, and the Antichristian conuer∣sation and life of this world, truely thou wouldst not couet to liue any longer. A thousand liues (if it were possible) oughtst thou to lose, onely because thou hast heard and tasted the gospell; name∣ly, that thou hast obtained re∣demption and forgiuenesse of sinnes through the bloud of Christ, and not through thine owne merits. Thou hast prayed daily, that it would please GOD to take thee out of this euill
world into his Kingdom, and that his will might be done. Wherefore, séeing hée will now, through his grace, bring thee into his Kingdome, thou oughtst (as his son) willing∣ly and gladly to obey, and to reioice with all thy heart, that thou, out of the diuels King∣dom, out of this vallie of mi∣sery, and out of this wretched life, commest to thy Father, and all his Elect in euerla∣sting Paradise. The Heathen, which not∣withstanding were without hope, did, for ye loue of the life to come, destroy themselues: and shouldst thou, béeing a Christian, to whom so much comfort, hope, and euerlasting life is promised, despaire in
death, and desire not to die with all thy heart? The Iewes die merrily, which neuerthelesse haue cru∣cified Christ, and are damned for euer: and shouldest not thou, being a Christian man, be more earnest and bolder to die; to whom such ioy is pro∣mised, as ye eie hath not séen, the eare hath not heard, nei∣ther hath entred into the hart of man? and wouldest thou now giue place to the miscre∣ant and cursed Heathen and Iewes, in bodily dying? The seruant is not aboue his Lord, nor yet the Disciple aboue his Master. Christ thy Master and Lord suffered and died for thée: thou must also suffer and die.
All they which are baptized to die, are baptized: thou art baptized, therfore art thou al∣so baptized to dy. For Gods sake art thou killed, and art counted as a shéep appointed to bee slame. What were a slaughter shéep, if it were not slaine? or what were a Christian man, if he should not be assaulted, suffer, and die? Faint not in this affliction, to which thou knowest thy self to be constituted. Now will Christ thy Sa∣uiour and Redéemer prooue whether thou wilt stand by him or no, whether thou wilt for his sake valiantly abide death, and bee like vnto the shape of his passion, or not.
Therefore suffer now as a good warrior of Iesus Christ, and think not to be crowned, vnlesse thou fight valiantly: for, if thou die with Christ, thou shalt also liue with him, thou shalt also triumph with him. Unfaithfull and without honour is hee counted before the world, that giueth-ouer his holde in his dominions: & shouldst thou not bee with∣out honour, if in the necessi∣ty of death thou shouldest shrink from Christ thy Sa∣uiour? Take vp thy Crosse and death, and follow him. Knowest thou not, with what great ioy and desire all the Apostles and seruants of
Christ haue shed their bloud for Christs sake, and haue gon euen to meet death? For Christs sake hast thou not yet suffred any speciall thing. Therefore giue thy self willingly and ioyfully vnto death, as a shéep, for Christs sake. God is by thée in thy trou∣ble: he will pluck thée out of it, and bring thée to honor; and he is at thy right hand, that he may help thée. Put now thy trust in God, and thou shalt be holpen. Bee of good comfort, and bestowe thy stinking carcase▪ which is but wormes-meat, vpon Christ thy Redeemer and Sauiour, and trust onely to him and his holy Gospell,
which is the power of GOD to saluation to all that be∣leeue. Abide the Lord, and let thy heart take sure hold. Commit thy cause vnto the Lord, and trust in him: hée shall order it well enough. Be sober and watch: for, thine aduersary the diuell, as a roaring lyon, will go about thée, séeking how he may de∣noure thée; whom resist, sted∣fast in the faith. Ye wrestle not against flesh and bloud, but against rule, against power, and against worldly Rulers of the dark∣nesse of this world, against the spirits of wickednes, yea, against sinne, death, hell, and the diuell. For this cause,
behaue your self as a Chri∣stian champion, and take vn∣to you the armour of God, that ye may bee able to resist in the euill day, and to stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore, and your loynes girt about with verity, ha∣uing on them a brest-plate of righteousnes, and shod with shooes prepared by the Gos∣pell of peace. Aboue all, take vnto you the shield of faith, wherewith yee may quench all the fiery darts of the wic∣ked. And take the helmet of saluation, and the swod of the Spirit, which is the word of GOD. And pray al∣waies in all manner of necessities.
¶ A short instruction of the confession of sinnes. FIrst, because all mankind by the lawes of GOD: Secondly, and also out of the sorrow of death, the cruell martyrdome and bitter death of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, by reason of our sinnes which hee took vp∣on him: Thirdly, and also out of the fearefull examples of holy Scripture, how God alwaies punisheth the vnre∣pentant, which continue in their sinnes, and are bound to confesse the same, if they will bee quit thereof, and die happily.
Therefore should we poor creatures, with the great fearefull miseries and woes, wherein we (alas!) through sinne are grieuously fallen, repaire vnto our deare God with hearty sighing and wée∣ping earnestly call for mer∣cy, as the holy Prophet Da∣uid did also; Enter not into judgement with thy seruant, O Lord. And let vs take héed, that we blaunch not our sins, as the Hypocrites and the Pharises did, Luke chapter 18. For, the Cherubins and Angelles of GOD, which are wholly holy, doo couer their faces and feet, that is to say, all their glory, works, and dooings, and will not bée praysed; but doo sing with
their voice, their Gloria, la, and Gloria in excelsis Dee; to the end that GOD the Lord onely may bée acknowledged for holy, honoured, and pray∣sed. But in such confession of sur, let vs not créep into cor∣ners, as Adam did, Genesis the third chapter, but call vp∣on God from the bottome of our hearts for grace and for∣giuenesse, through the wor∣thy deseruing of Christ Ie∣sus, as ieremy the fourtéenth chapter: Lord, we acknow∣ledge our wickednesse, and the misdeeds of our fathers. For, we haue sinned against thee: and the offenses wher∣with wee haue angred thee, are great. But, for thy names
sake, let vs not bee brought to confusion. Let not the throne of thy glory be moc∣ked. Remember yet, and let not thy Couenant with vs cease. Thou art yet the Lord our God, on whom wee hope: for, thou canst do all this. So did Dauid pray in the 25 Psalme; Remember not, O Lord, the sinnes of my youth, nor my trans∣gressions: but thinke vpon me according to thy mercy, for thy goodnes sake. And in the two and thirtith Psalm hee speaketh very comforta∣bly: I said, I will confess my transgressions, and thou for∣gauest mee the wickednes of my sinnes. Likewise Daniel in his ninth chapter prayed,
Lord our God, &c. we haue sinned, & haue alas bin wic∣ked. O Lord, for thy righte ousnes sake turne away thy wrath and anger for our sins sake, wee are blamed of all them that are roūd about vs: and now, our Lord & God, heare the prayers of thy ser∣uant, & his complaints, and behold with fauor thy holie place which is destroyed for the Lords sake. So likewise should euery Christian com∣fort himselfe, & beléeue with his heart, that hée for Christs sake, through such faithfull prayer, shall surely obtaine Gods grace and forgiuenesse of his sinnes, as it is said and promised to all the faithfull, Iohn 16. Verily, Verily, I say
vnto you, whatsoeuer you desire of the Father in my name he wil giue it you id Ieremy 14 saith Thou art the Lord our God, and canst and wist doe all this same, Amen. Heere follow certain Pray∣ers, how a man should call to God for grace, and forgiuenesse. O Almighty and Euer∣lasting God, most gra∣cieus and mercifull Father, I poore sin∣ner acknowledge from my heart, and confesse it also be∣fore thee with my mouth, that I am (alas) a great sinner, conceuied, borne, and growne
vp in sinne: and so haue ma∣ny times transgressed thy ho∣ly commandements, with evill, sinfull, vncleane, and vnseemely thoughts, wo, and wicked deeds. All which I do repent from my very heart, and pray and desire thee of thy Grace, O heauen∣ly Father, indue mee with the Grace, and forgiue me all my sinnes, in the name of thy deare and onely Senne, my Lord and Samour Iesus Christ, in whom thou hast promised me comfort, and re∣mission of all my sinnes. I comfort my selfe with this gracious promise, Iohn 6. where thy deare Sonne saith; Who eateth my Flesh, and drinketh my Bloud; That is,
Who beleeueth on mee, hath euerlasting life, and I will raise him vp at the last day. Such godly and gracious promises of thy Son, doe I trust vnto and beleeue, and am certaine, that I, through such saith, haue forgiuenes of my sinnes: and shall bee a child of thy Kingdome, and remaine so for euermore, A∣men, Amen. Another Prayer. O Thou Almighty and Euerlasting God, Fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ, maker of Heauen and Earth, and of all Creatures, I poore, miserable and sinfull creature, come héere before
thy diuine Maiesty, full of sin and vnrighteousnesse, and fall downe at thy féet before thy glorious Maiesty: for I haue mightily offended thee my Lord and God, and sinned against thy commandements and done against thy godly will. But because I cannot other wise bee quit and free from this my heauy burthen, but onely through thée my Lord and God: Therefore doe I now from my very heart complaine vnto thee my woe and misery; and especially what I haue at this present franed in, and haue accom∣plished the same against thy godly will: besides all other (alas) which I daily commit,
with deceit, in shew and false heart, with negligence, euill lusts and otherwise: whether it bee with euill thoughts, words or workes, wittingly or vnwittingly, secretly or openly; whether it bee a∣gainst thee, or the loue of my neighbour: All which I ac∣knowledge vnto thee, and confesse it also from the bot∣tome of my heart; and pray thee, that through thy grace thou wilt graciously and fa∣therly forgiue mee all my sinnes. Haue respect onely to the bitter death, Martyr∣dome, and bloud-shedding of thy onely deare Sonne, in whom thou art pleased, who innocently died for mee poore sinner. O my Lord and God,
looke vpon thy deare Sonne, and especially on the great loue which hee shewed vnto vs poore sinners, when hee went so patiently and wil∣lingly to death. O looke vp∣on the great obedience which thy deare Sonne hath us∣red for our sakes, and h∣bled himselfe vpon the er, deth, graue, and hell. O looke also von the great gl to, wherewith thou hast ad∣orned thy Sonne, in th thou hast made him Lord ouer all. For which our,  b on ee, and oy, ou wouldst graciously eue me this daies offence where∣into I, by temptation,  sllen, with all my formr sames which I haue done
from my youth: For in sinne was I conceiued, borne, and brought vp, and yet doe liue therein without ceasing: So that sinne hath gone through my whole bodie, marrow, and bones. There∣fore I beseech thee most gra∣tiously to remit and forgiue me all such sinnes, to cast the same behind thée, and neuer thinke more on them, nor punish my body or soule, ei∣ther in this world, or the world to come: for thou art rich vnto all that call vpon thée. And because thou wilt not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turne from his wickednes and liue: therefore do I pray thee to giue me a good meaning to amend my
life, especially in that thou hast promised mee also, through thy deare Sonne, to giue mee whatsoeuer I aske in his name. Therefore do I pray thee through Christ, thou wouldst forgiue mee all these my sins, and poure thy holy Ghost into my heart, that I may constantly abide in a godly life. All which grant vn∣to mee for thy deare Sonnes sake Iesus Christ, my Lord and Sauior, Amen,
Another prayer to our Lord Iesus Christ, the euerla∣sting Son of God, for grace, and for∣giuenesse. O My deare Lord Iesus Christ, I confesse vnto thee from the bottome of my heart, with great sighing, that I am, alas, a pooe sin∣ner, conceiued and home in sinne and iniquity, to haue li∣ued wickedly against thee and thy holy Word, with vngodly and vnthankefull heart, for which I am hearti∣ly sorry. But I am comfored in my heart, that thou wilt not the death of a sinner, which
thou hast sworne and con∣firmed with an oath: That thou wilt not be angry with me for euer, nor yet for euer punish mee. Thou dost call and entice all them that are weary, oppressed, comfort∣lesse, sorrowfull bearts and consciences, to thee and thy holy Word: and namest thy selfe A heauenly Physicion, which takest vpon thee our woes and miseries (where∣in wee through sinne are fal∣len) and bringest to vs thy euerlasting helpe and refresh∣ing, by Preaching of thy ho∣ly Gospell, wherewith wee may be holpen for euermore: vpon such thy gracious pro∣mises come I to thee, and pray thee from the bottome
of my heart (O my Lord God and Sauiour) to be mer∣cifull to me poore sinner, like as thou hast promised such mercy, for the loue of thy owne grace & merits: Amen, Lord Iesus Christ, Amen. The Lords Prayer contai∣ned in a short forme. ABba, deare Father; wée thy vnworthy children call vpon thee in the name of thy beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, through thy holy Ghost, vphold vs by thy holy Word, giue vs honest and true Teachers and Prea∣chers to distribute the same amongst vs: Release vs quickly out of the Diuels
kingdome; bring vs to thy Kingdoom of Grace, and to euerlasting life: And giue vs thy holy Spirit, that wee, as the Angels of God, may liue holily, according to thy will and pleasure. Nourish, blesse, and preserue our house∣holds, Wiues, Children, and Seruants, in this life: couer our trespasses and of fences, and giue vs a louing heart, to forgiue all those that haue offended vs. Let vs not consent vnto sinne, nor fall from thy onely Word of saluation, but keepe vs from the euill Fiend, and from all his deceites. Thou art a most mightie King, powerfull to rule; thou canst, and wilt grant vs all these things:
For which wee will giue thee thankes, and praise thee for euer, Amen. A Prayer (wherein the con∣fession of our Christian Faith is simply contained) where∣with a man may cal vp∣on God for steng∣thening of his faith. O Almightie and euer∣lasting God, which art a Father of all grace and mercy, and a God of all com∣fort. for vs poore sinners, which I and all Christians (through reuealing of thy Word) doe acknowledge and beleeue for certain, There∣fore
doe I land, honour, and praise thee, deare Father of heauen, for such thy vnspeak∣able loue, wherewith thou hast graciously had respect to vs thy enemies, transgressors of thy commandements, and damned creatures: Namely, in that thou hast not spared thy onely Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, who is equall with the God head, and with the holy Ghost: Especially that thou hast let him bee in∣carnate for our sinfull nature and doings, with our actuall misdeeds: and howsoeuer we haue thereby deserued, and into manifold horrible repro∣ches; and finally to yeeld himselfe to the shamefull death of the Crosse. And so
of pure fatherly loue, hast ordained him a Lambe, to carry my sinnes, and the sins of the whole world vpon the Crosse, and to be a perfect Oblation therefore, and dost proffer, proclaime, and promise the same throughout the whole world, comman∣dest also the same to be belée∣ued, vpon paine of losing euerlasting saluation: for thereby, and by no other meanes, must it onely bee ap∣plyed and impropriated to me, and to all the faithfull, and to bée our owne. Therefore, deare Father, do I constantly beleeue, ac∣cording to the same reuea∣ling of the holy Gospell, all this same, and doubt not
thereof any thing at all, as I thy Childe am bound, and will doe, not respecting my vnworthinesse. In Christ thy onely Sonne, are all my sins, and all which beleeue, and boldly trust vnto it, suffici∣ently punished, corrected, spent, and through his perfect obedient death of the Crosse, all killed and taken away: And that I am, and also all Christiās, through such faith, planted in the Kingdome of thy deare Sonne (as the holy Scripture saith) by whom we haue redemption through his bloud: namely, remission of sinnes. I beleeue also verily, that in the death of Christ thy deare Sonne, my death is
ouercome, that it shall neuer hurt mee nor consume mee into damnation, (as the Scripture saith) Christ hath aed of death for all; hath taken into his power, and brought to lighten vntransi∣tory life and being, through his Gospell. I beleeue also, that the de∣stroying of ell, which was done by thy deare Sonne, is destroyed and torne asunder for mee and all faithfull; that the same cannot consume or deuoure mee, nor any of the right beleeuers, as the Scrip∣ture saith, ll, where is thy victory▪ And in another place; The gates of Hell shall not preuaile against the right Beleeuers. And The
Prince of this world is iud∣ged. I beleeue also, that thy Commandements, with all the power thereof which they haue, haue no more right ouer mee, although I cannot absolutely keepe them: For the Lord Christ thy deare Sonne hath through his obe∣dience perfectly kept the same for mee, and taken from them the right and interest which they had in mee: wherewith thou almighty, Euerlasting, and Mercfull God and Fa∣ther, art satisfied. I beleeue also, that the re∣surrection of Christ thy deare Sonne, is a new life vnto mee, and to all faithfull, vnto euerlasting life.
Finally, I beléeue also (as the Scripture saith) that hee is ascended into Heauen, and hath taken rule on the right hand of his Father: and an∣swereth for me and al ye faith∣full, that hencefoorth the Diuell and all his power is taken, must bee subiect, and lie at the feete of mee and all the Faithfull. Therefore I pray thée, O Lord GOD, thou infinite Fountaine of all grace, that through the power & work∣ing of the Holy Ghost, thou wilt giue mée such faith and acknowledging this day and lawaies, to the end of my life. And I pray thee also, my Lord Iesus Christ, which
art true and perfect GOD with the Father and the Ho∣ly Ghost; forasmuch as thou hast put thy selfe vnder the tyranny of the Law, which (by reason of sinne) it had towardes mee and all man∣kind, and hast taken on thée my sinne, Death, Hell, and damnation, which I by all reason, right, and rigour thereof should haue borne; that thou wilt help to still and pacifie these great mis∣deedes betwéene GOD our heauenly Father and mee, especially in my conscience, which continually disquie∣teth mee, through the power of God, & of the Holy Ghost, which thou hast promised to send vs from the Father.
so said,  m  ek▪ th, bu th  the▪ Thou art the onely euer last , vasparable truth: There  do I sedfastly be∣leeu, by knowledge of the Styue, that thou art to m o all Ecleeuers a  hpnest, a seat of Grace, and Auacate so thy heauen∣ly Father and I beleeue verily, (notwithstanding that reason is astonished thereat) that through no other Obla∣tion workes, or meanes, ei∣ther in Heauen or on Earth, our sinnes, Death, Hell, and damnation, is ouercome and taken away and we at agree∣ment with God thy heauen∣ly Father, but onely through
thee Iesus Christ; whereon I will trust, and also die thereon. Thereto helpe thou me, thou deare God, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost. Amen. O LORD Iesus Christ, which with the Father and the Holy Ghost a one vnseparable Essence, and a Fountaine of all Grace: I thanke and praise thee al∣waies, that thou hast also reuealed vnto mee thy grace for my better comfort, as thou hast endued thy deae Mother Mary, and also other Saints, with great grace, and wrought wonderfull workes in them. I pray thee therefore heartily to look vp∣on
on mee with the eyes of thy mercy, as thou diddest looke vpon the euill doer, which was hanged vpon the Crosse by thee, and diddest open his heart that hee confessed his sinnes, and was mightily afraide of them, but yet des∣paired not, but confessed, & desired thy grace and mercy which thou gauest to him willingly and plentifully. Also Saint Peter which de∣nied thee: and Mary Magda∣len in her sinfull liuing: And hast also respected Mathew the Customer in open estate, Saint Paul a raging and earnest persecutour of Chri∣stians: Also in the old Testa∣ment Dauid, King Manasses the Tyrant, and other sinners
more, which thou didst bring to repentance and confession of their sins; and of pure loue, grace and mercy (which thou didst reueal vnto them by thy holy Word) hast placed them with thee in thy Kingdome. Therfore dear God and mer∣cifull Father, will I streng∣then my self so much ye more, and doubt nothing thereof. These, and other godly peo∣ple of worth, which thou of thy grace hast taken out of this sinfull life to righteous∣nes, are a comfort and exam∣ple to mee, and all beléeuing Christians, that thou wast mercifull to them, and so wilt be to me, and to euery sinner which repents, according to thy owne pure loue, which the
holy Ghost, through faith in the Gospell, worketh in vs both gracious and mercifull, and grants vs a happy end in such acknowledging of thy Name. Which, help thou me with, and all Christians (dear God) Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, which art in three inseparable per∣sons, one only and euerlasting GOD, for euer, A∣men.
Heer follow certain Praiers, to call vpon God for strengthening of our faith. O LORD ESUS CHRIST, streng∣then mée also with thy holy Spirit in my feare and quaking. And admonish me, that I thinke vpon thy sa∣cred Wounds in my last end. And let not thy holy and bitter Passion bee lost on mee poore sinner, thou which art therefore come, that thou maist destroy the Diuels worke, and pay and counter∣poize my sinnes with thy
hard and painfull labor: and thou which hast sworne, Thou wilt not the death of a sin∣ner. Strengthen my weak faith, and kéep mee through thy Spirit of grace and of praier, vnto a happy end, A∣men. A Prayer. O Lord Iesus Christ, I confesse vnto thée my great and manifold sins, and the righteous wrath of God, and euerlasting punishment which I haue deserued. But I comfort my self with the great loue and pure mercy of thy Father; and pray thee (séeing thy bloud is more than the sinnes of the whole
world, and thou art our Me∣diatour and Aduocate) that thou wilt bee Intercessor for mee to thy Father, that my faith doo not diminish, and that I neuer despaire of thy mercy for my sinnes, Amen. A Praier. O Lord Iesus Christ, in∣crease my faith and trust in thée, that I despair not of thy gracious mercy, nor in my greatest sin perish in vn∣beleef. O Lord, preserue for mee thy promised grace in the holy Gospell: let it not come out of my heart. Thou art my onely comfort and hope: stand to me in this my
sorrow. Let not my poor soule come into the hands of my horrible. Aduersary, and giue him no power ouer me. But shew mee thy goodnes at this present: for thou art my Sa∣uiour and Redéemer, Amen. A Prayer. O Lord Iesus Christ, I pray thee, through thy goodnes and mercy, that thou wilt strengthen my soule vp∣on thy holy way which lyeth before me, into thy heauenly and euerlasting Kingdome. I beléeue, that thou diedst for my sake, hast of thy grace and mercy forgiuen mee my sins, and that euerlasting life is promised to mee. Of this
my faith, O Lord, shall thou be witnes, and all thy Elect: and in this faith shall bee my last Will to die therein (O Lord) in thy pure mercy. And although I through griefe, want of sense, or other trou∣bles, should fall off from the same yet (O Lord) let me not die in vnbelief and blas∣phemy: but strengthen and increase my faith, that neither sinne, hell, nor diuell, hurt me. Thou art stronger, and of more power than all they: whereunto I will trust. Lord, let me not be confounded, A∣men.
A comfort out of holy Scrip∣ture against the feare of sinne. ESAY 12. Behold, God is my saluati∣on: I am safe, and feare not: for, God the Lord is my strength, my Psalm, and my saluation. The first Comfort. How a man should comfort himself against sin, and the just anger of God, out of the comfortable pro∣mises of the holy Scrip∣ture.
The first comfortable sen∣tence. GENESIS 3. The Seed of the Woman shall tread down the head of the Serpent. THis is the first Euange∣licall Doctrine of the euerlasting Sonne of God in Paradise, reuealed vnto the fallen and damned man∣kinde; whereby he might be released againe from death, Gods wrath, Sinne, Hell, and power of the Diuell, and might obtaine, through beliefe in these words, Comfort, Grace, Remissi∣on
on of sinnes, and euerlasting life. And with this Promise, haue all the holy men com∣forted themselues, vntill A∣braham, two thousand yéers long: for, héer doth GOD tell vs, that he, euen of pure loue and mercy, will send vnto vs (poore damned sin∣ners) his onely and deare Sount, borne of a Uirgine, to take vpon him mortall and humane flesh and bloud; who should, with his absolute Obedience and Passion, pay the ransome of our sinnes, pacifie GOD's wrath kin∣dled by reason of our sinnes, destroy Death through his death; and with his victory, and rising againe, restore
againe righteousnesse, re¦surrection, and euerlasting life. This comfort should wée conceiue with faithfull harts, and bee certaine thereof, that the Diuels workes are de∣stroyed for or sakes, and all his power taken away; that wee neuer néed to bée afraid of sinne, death, hell, or God's anger; but, through Iesus Christ our Lord, true God and Man, haue gotten againe righteousnesse and e∣uerlasting life. Do did an ho∣nest Christian at reiberge in Misnia, in the yéere of our Lord 1547, comfort himself with this sentence, and got victory ouer the diuell, who did trouble him by reason
of his sinnes, and GOD's wrath. For, as hee was troubled in his sicknes, the diuell came to him in visible forme with Ink and Paper, and sate him downe besides the sick man, and said; Hee should re∣hearse his sinnes: hee was therfore there to write them vp, and to giue sentence vp∣on them. The sicke man was affraid: but yet hee re∣membred himself of this sen∣tence, answered the diuel, and said he should write, The seed of the Woman should tread downe the head of the Ser∣pent. Straight-waies the diuell vanished away, and left such a stinke behinde him in all the house, as if hée
would baue choaked them all. The second comfortable Sentence. GENESIS 22. Through thy Seed, shall all the Nations of the earth bee blessed. THis is the second Pro∣mise and Preaching of the Lord Iesus Christ. All other mankinde, from the first Adam vntill the last, were by nature full of wickednesse. God was angry with them, and became their enemy: for,
there was no blessing with them, but cursing, because they were sinners. But through this Man Ie∣sus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, the onely Son of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, is the onely right Séed of Abraham; wherein all the Nations of the earth must bee blessed, if they will attaine vnto euerlasting sal∣uation. In this Sentence, behold what Saint Paul writeth to the Glat. 3. where hee saith, Christ hath redeemed vs from the curse of the Law (for, it is written, ursed is that man which hangeth on a tree); that the blessing of Abraham might come a∣mong
the Gentiles in sesus Christ; And we doo receiue the promised Spirit through faith. In this place Saint Paul placeth these two words one against another; First, the curse; and then, the blessing. All men are of themselues poore, cursed, and damed sinners: For, as the foure∣téenth Psalme saith, They are all gone astray: there is none that dooth good; no, not one. Against the which, this blessed Séed bringeth the blessing vnto vs, and re∣déemeth vs from the curse of the Lawe, in that hée was a curse for vs: for hee as the onely immaculate Lamb of God, hath taken our sinnes
vpon him; and, as S. Peter saith, Offred our sinnes him∣selfe with his body on the Crosse. Wee should hence∣forth bee quit from sinne, and liue vnto righteousnes; or, as Saint Paul saith, To come to the blessing by him, and to receiue the Holy Ghost, and be the children of God. In this bespoken blessed séed did Abraham trust, and was happy. Abraham beleeued alwaies on God, and it was counted to him for righ∣teousnes.
The third comfortable Sentence. ESAY 43. Thou hast made me labor with thy sinnes, and hast made mee weary with thy mis∣deeds: I will wipe out thy transgressions for my names sake, and wil not think vpon thy sinnes. IN this comfortable saying the Lord Iesus Christ tea∣cheth vs, that hee onely hath paid the ransome and satisfa∣ction for our sinnes, with his bloudy sweat, bitter passion & death; and that hée through his owne merits hath forgi∣uen
vs all our sinnes, in such sort, that they shall be wholly put out, and cleane wiped a∣way before the face of God, and cast into the bottome of the sea, as though they had neuer béen, and shall neuer be thought vpon. Therefore let vs not be a∣fraid of ye greates or multi∣tude of our sinnes, that wee despair not of Gods mercy, as ain & Lucas did; but cm∣fort our selues with the s∣sion & stsfaction of our Lod Isus Christ, and some vpon ths words. So did king Ezecs com∣fort himselfe, Eay 3. in his great tribulation, by reason of his sinnes and the wrath of God; where hee saith, Be∣hold,
I was much grieued for want of comfort: but thou hast heartily accepted of my soule, that it doo not perish: for, thou castest all my sinnes behinde thee; that is, thou wilt no more know nor think vpon my sinnes. Likewise did King Dauid also pray in Psal. 51. Wash me from mine iniquiry, O Lord, and clense me from my sins: then shall I be whiter than snowe. For no other washing of anoin∣ting on earth can help.
The fourth comfortable Sentence. EZECHIEL 33. So sure as I liue, saith the Lord, I haue no pleasure in the death of the vngodly; but rather, that hee turne from his wickednes, and liue. HEER the euerlasting Sonne of GOD, our onely Lord and Rock, swea∣reth an oath by himselfe (be∣cause hée hath no greater), as true as he is a liuing, eternal, and almighty GOD, hée will not that a sinner die, and bée damned for euer; but that hée, in acknowledging
of his sinnes, and sure con∣fidence of Christs bloud and merites, in true inuocation and good pretence turne vn∣to GOD, so shall hee surely obtayne remission of sinnes, euerlasting righteousnes, and the Holy Ghost, with eter∣nall life. Vpon this deare, constant, and true oth, should wee haue respect when wee are troubled by reason of our sinnes, and Gods wrath, and also in our last end: and say or thinke, I care not now how often, and how greatly I haue sinned, and angred my Lord God: but I look vpon the oath, and com∣fort my selfe, that the true GOD hath sworn (and hée cannot repent it) he will not
the death of a sinner: so will hee not also, that I bee dam∣ned, but for his Sonnes sake will forgiue mee all my sins, and take mee with him into euerlasting life. So did the holy Apostle S. Paul comfort himselfe and others; as, in ye first epistle to Timothy, and in the first chapter: It is cer∣tain and true (saith he) that Iesus Christ is comne into the world to saue poor sin∣ners.
The fift comfortable Sentence. IOHN 3. So God loued the world, that he gaue his onely-begotten Son, that whosoeuer beleeued on him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life. THis is one of the chie∣fest Sayings in all the new Testament, which IESUS CHRIST (whom God the Father from heauen commāds vs to hear) did himselfe bring out of the bosome of his Father, and preached the same to his lo∣uing
Ct c  holar Nichodemus. Wherein he teacheth vs his Father will, what the e∣ternall GOD is determi∣ned towards the world, that is, towards all great sinners as euer were in the world, or yet may bee; that hée loueth them, and will not haue them lost. And this great loue did hée shewe and set foorth vnto vs, when-as there was no other meanes whereby the sinnes of the world might bée taken away, Gods wrath pacified, death and hell vanquished: then spared hee not his onely Sonne, but did let him take humane flesh and bloud vpon him, and to fulfill all which
was vnpossible for vs to ob∣serue, and suffer all payne and punishment, which all the world with their sinnes had deserued. Whereby Gods righte∣ousnesse might bee fully ac∣complished, and wee released from the curse of the Lawe. This purchased treasure, through the onelie perfect ob∣lation, the Holie-Ghost doth put into the Word of the Gospel, & into the holie Sa∣crament, and causeth to bée preferred to the whole world. All that beleeue, that is, which doe acknowledge this onely Sauiour, and comfort themselues with heartie re∣suge to his demerits, shall not be lost, but haue eternall
life. Therefore, let vs out of these words, learne to know Gods gracious will and fa∣therly loue, and comfort our selues against all tribulations, against sinne, and against the Lords aner. These sayings the deare and godly man Master Doctor Martin Luther, and the migh∣tie Prince Iohn Fredericke, Duke of Saxon, of godly me∣morie, haue had in their last houre, for a happie comfort; and so departed both of them happily, and with merry and quiet consciences. And euen so did the poore Publican comfort himselfe in the Temple, Luke the eigh∣téenth chapter, when he did pray vnto the Lord, God be
mercifull vnto mee a poore sinner: that is to say, a wicked creature am I, and the most part of the world: but I doe recomfort my selfe with the fountaine of pure mercy, and endlesse loue of my most déere God, which he hath manife∣sted vnto me in the passion and oblation of his onelie be∣gotten Sonne our Redéemer Iesus Christ the Righteous, who hath payed and satisfied the ransome of my sinnes and aous transgressions, and hath pacified Gods wrath, and hath giuen vnto me euerlasting life.
The sixt comfortable Sentence. MAT. 11. Come vnto mee, all you that la∣bour and are eauie laden, and I will refresh you. WHat can wée heare more kindly, yea or more louingly, then that the euerlasting Sonne of God calleth vnto him all that be weary and op∣pressed in heart, and troubled for their sinnes: and biddeth them come to his holy word, naming himselfe a gentle and humble Teacher?
Let euery one reioyce in his heart, that God hath sent such holy comfort and refre∣shing vpon earth; and pro∣miseth in plaine words, that all, whether they be poore or rich, yong or old, shall sure∣ly find by him, rest, peace, ioy, refreshing, ease, help, and assi∣stance, shall bee comforted in their soules, and bee made a∣liue againe. Therefore, when any is tormented by reason of his sinnes, that he féele his heart troubled with sorrow, and almost ouerthrowne with discomfort: Let him not creepe into a corner, or run away from the people, as A∣dam did, Genesis 3. but let him run to the Lord Christ,
and to these, and such other the like comfortable words, which wee shall finde in the house of God before his face, or where God hath appoyn∣ted, in remembrance of his name: that is, in preaching, in the holy Sacraments, and in the Writings of the Pro∣phets and Apostles: for, so soone as we seeke Christ, hée will méete vs▪ as hée saith in the first chapter of Zacharie, Tune ye vnto me, then will I turne vnto you So doth the Lord méete Mary Magdalen, a poore troubled sinner, from whom our Lord and Sauior had before cast out seuen di∣uels, and maketh himselfe knowne vnto her soone after his resurrection, and comfor∣ted
her heartily, when shee sought him, Iohn 20. The seuenth comfortable Sentence. ROM. 5. But where Sinne is mighty, there is Grace more migh∣tie, through Iesus Christ, &c. HEere doth S Paul méet with a great tribulation, and heauy thoughts. When wee do often thinke, My sins are too great: Oh, if I had not such great sins vpon my heart, then would I hope I should be saued:
There doth Saint Paul answere, If Sinne be great, yet Grace is greater, and ex∣céedeth farre all our sinnes: that is, one droppe of Iesus Christs blood is greater, more glorious, powerfull, yea and stronger then all the greatest and fearefullest sinnes of the whole world: yea, as a little moat in the Sun, is not to be compared towards Heauen and Earth: so is the whole worlds sinne not to be compa∣red to the precious blood of Iesus Christ. And as the cleare Sunne darkens al the starres of hea∣uen, that they cannot be seene in day time (although they do stand in the firmament): euen so, when the right Sun rising
shineth from aboue, all sinnes are quenched. Whosoeuer with heartie faith catcheth hold on the bloud of Christ, his sinnes are all couered be∣fore the face of GOD, that GOD will neuer sée them: and is reckoned so cleare and holy, as if hee had troubled no water all his life time. For the bloud of Iesus Christ, the Sonne of Al∣mightie God, purgeth vs of all our sinnes. So did the holy Prophet Esay comfort himselfe and his people, in the first chap∣ter, where he saith, Though your sins were like Purple, they shal be white as Wooll. Likewise Dauid the Pro∣phet, a man after Gods owne
heart, in his déepest hell & tri∣bulation comforteth himselfe thus, with the Lord is merie and much redemption, as in the hundred and 30. Psalme: for the more sins that Christ forgiueth vs, the more is his praise, honor, and glory: as he himselfe teacheth in the se∣uenth chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, where he doth speake of the great and open sinner; To her are many sinnes for∣giuen, because shee loued much. But to whom little is forgiuen, the same loueth little.
The eightth comfortable Sentence. PSAL 16. I thanke the Lord that hath counselled me. WHenas the first man (through the craft of the old poisoned and fierie Serpent, and through their disobedience) fell into sinne, Gods wroth, and iustice, which after suc∣céeded vpon all Adams Chil∣dren; there was no comfort, not counsell to sinde, except the helpe and redemption of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ.
But through the wonder∣full counsell of the high and godly Maiestie, at the inter∣cession of the onely and euer∣lasting Mediatour, our Lord Christ, it was concluded, that the Sonne of almighty God, borne of the Father euerla∣sting, should take humane Nature vpon him, pacifie Gods fierce and iust anger, and bring vs out of the Di∣uels power, and euer coun∣sell and help vs, from whence he carrieth the name: so that Flay the Prophet, in the ninth chapter (amongst other glo∣rious names) calleth him a Counseller. Now when wée are ouer∣whelmed by reason of our manifold sinnes and trans∣gressions,
then let vs cause such help, as a harty and true counsell, to be brought before vs, by preaching of the holie Gospel. And let it be preached vn∣to vs, that through confi∣dence of his gracious help and redemption, wée shall be quit of our sinnes, released from death, and obtaine his grace, righteousnesse, and euerlast∣ing life. This is such a true coun∣sell, that in all tribulations we may stade, and haue some comfort therein: which Da∣uid did acknowledge, and thereforre saith, Had it not beene for thy Word, I had perished in my miserie, Psal. 119. and heere hee giueth the
Lord harty thanks for all such mereifull comfort and help: I thank the Lord my GOD, which hath counselled mee For, this is also a counsell of such power, that if a man should now depart out of this life, and that neither goods, fiends, riches, mony, or gold, nor any other temporall mat∣ter or thing, wherein he had peraduenture héere to fore put his trust, can counsell or help; yet hath he heere by Christs word, a sure and certayne comfort, and a powerfull counsell, whereby hee shall bee rght and well, yea pros∣per and bee holpen for euer∣more. This dee the poore Chri∣stians acknowledge in :
Therefore, when they should depart out of this miscrable life, and leaue all that is tem∣porall, they doe take hold of this happie comfort and coun∣sell of the holy Gospel in their hearts, and die therein happi∣ly Thus Saint Peter comfor∣ted himselfe, Iohn 6. Thou hast the word of life. And the Apostle Saint Paul, in the first chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, The Gospel of Christ Iesus, is the power of of God to saluation to all that beleeue.
How a man should comfort him selfe against sinne, and Gods iust indignation. Other ge∣neral comfortable sentences. ESAY 1. IF your sinnes were redde like blood, yet shall they bee white as Snow: and if they were like purple, they shall be like wooll. Esay 2. The Lord will not iudge according to the sight of his eies, nor punish according to the hearing of his eares: But will with righteousnes iudge the poore.
Esay 6. Thou kéepest continuall peace, according to sure pro∣mise, for man relyeth vpon thée: Therefore rely you vpon the Lord alwaies, for God the Lord is an euerla∣sting Rocke. Esay 27. God is not angry with me. Esay 38. Thou hast heartily accep∣ted my Soule that it perish not, for thou hast cast all my sins backward behind thee. Esay 40. Comfort my people (saith your God) speake faire to
leru aler, and preach to her, that her warrefare is at air end, her misdedes are par∣doned, for shee hath receiued double from the hands of the Lord for all her sinnes. Esay 44. Israel, dee not forget mee, I driue away thy misdeeds like a cloud, and thy sinnes like a mist. Turne thee vnto me, for I haue redemed thee. Reioyce, yee Heauens, for the Lord hath done it. Esay 53. Hée was wounded for our misdeeds, and beaten for our sins: The punishment was laid vpon him, that we might haue peace, and through his
wounds are wee healed. Esay 53. Through his knowledge shall my righteous Seruant make many righteous, for he beareth their sinne. Esay 64. Thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer; from the be∣ginning hitherto, that was thy name. Esay 66. I haue respect to the wret∣ched and him that is of a low∣ly spirit, which is afraid of my Word. zechiel 33. So sure as I liue, I will
not she death of a sinner, but that hée turne from his wic∣kednesse and liue. Dan. 9. In the Lord our God is mercifulnesse, and forgiue∣nesse. Zachary 9. Thou redeemest also through ye bloud of thy Coue∣nant, thy Prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water. Micheas 7. Who is such a God as thou art, which forgiuest sins, and releasest misdeeds? Ierem. Hée is mercifull, hee will
take pitty on vs againe, put downe our wickednesse, and cast all our sins into the bot∣tome of the Sea. Ionas 4. I know that thou art gra∣cious, mercifull, long suffe∣ring, and of great goodnesse, and repentest thée of euill. Psal. 13. I hope vpon thée, because thou art so merciful, my heart reioyceth that thou so wil∣lingly helpest. Psal. 25. The Lord is good and gra∣cious, therefore directeth hée sinners vpon the right way.
Psal. 22. I said, I will confesse my trans ressions vnto the Lord: and thou forgauest mee the inquity of my sinne. Psal. 31. I rejoyced and was glad in thy goodnesse, that thou didst consider my misery, and know my soule in his need. Iohn 3. God hath sent his Sonne into the world, not to iudge the world, but that the world through him might bee saued. Whosoeuer beléeueth on him shall not bee iudged.
Iohn 3 Like as Moses sifted vp the Serpent in the Wildernesse, so must the Sonne of man bee lifted vp, to the end that all which beleeue in him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life. Iohn 1. This is the Lambe of God which taketh away the sins of the world. Iohn 6. This is the will of him which sent mee, that whoso∣euer looketh on the Son, and beléeueth in him, hath euer∣lasting life, and I will raise him vp at the last day.
Iohn 6. Verily, verily, I say vn∣to you, whosoeuer beleeueth on mee, hath euerlasting life. Math. 1. The Angell saith of Christ. Hée shall saue his people from their sinnes. Mathew 9. I am come to call sinners to repentance, and not the righteous. Luke 24. Thus it is written; and so must Christ suffer. And in his name doe they preach Re∣pentance, and forgiuenesse of sins amongst all people.
Acts 4. There is no other saluati∣on, nor any other name giuen to mankinde, whereby they should be saued. Acts 10. Of Christ doo all the Pro∣phets witnesse, that through his Name, all they which be∣léeue in him, should receiue remission of sinnes. 1. Tim. 1. This is a true and worthy Saying, that Iesus Christ is comne into the world to saue poor sinners. 1. Tim. 2. There is one GOD, and
one Mediatour betwirt God and man; namely, the Man Christ Iesus, who gaue him∣self for vs, to the redemption of all. 1 Iohn 2. If any man sinne, we haue an Aduocate with GOD the Father, Iesus Christ, who maketh vs righteous, and hee is the atonement for our sinnes. 1 Iohn 4. GOD hath loued vs, and sent his Son for a reconcilia∣tion of our sins. 1 Peter 2. Christ hath offered vp our sinnes himselfe with his body
vpon the Crosse; to the end we might be frée from sinne, and liue vnto righteousnesse: through whose wounds you are healed. 1 Cor. 1. Christ is made to vs from God, for righteousnes, glory, and redemption. 1 Thes. 5. GOD hath not appoin∣ted vs to wrath, but to attaine saluation through our Lord Iesus Christ, which died for vs. 1 Pet. 1. Ye are not redéemed with transitorie siluer or gold, but with the most precious bloud
of Christ like a guiltlesse and vnspotted Lamb. 1. Iohn 1. The bloud of Iesus Christ maketh vs cleane from all sinne. Mat. 9. Be comforted, my sonne: thy sins are forgiuen thée. The second comfort against sin, and the right wrath of God, out of examples of holy Scripture. BEsides these mercifull promises, God hath cau∣sed many comfortable exam∣ples
to bee written in the sa∣cred Scriptures; how hee hath taken the greatest sin∣ners to mercy, when they haue méekely acknowledged and confessed their sinnes, be∣lieued in Iesus Christ, and amended their liues; and all for the comfort of vs poore sinners. For, when sinne and Gods wrath is rightly felt in our harts, some man is somtimes so troubled therewith, that no comfortable Sayings will enter into the heart: but hée thinks alwaies; Ah! GOD speaks not of such great sin∣ners as thou art. But, that the mercifull God not onely promiseth for∣giuenes of all great and ma∣nifold
sinnes, but sheweth al∣so indéed, what sinners and wicked people hee hath iusti∣fied; he hath set downe diuers examples, which in our feare and despaire wee may set be∣fore vs for a singular com∣fort. First, as these: first, Adam and e, the greatest sinners, blasphemers, and murderers of all mankinde; by whose sins and disobedience, all sin, shame, death, and euerlasting damnation, came ouer all men: and yet GOD made them pure and holy, after his owne Image. Then when they were fal∣len into sin and disobedience, GOD shewed this mercy vnto them, and receiued them
again, for the promised blessed Séeds sake, as the first E∣uangelicall Promise was gi∣uen to them for a comfort, Genesis 3. which they besée∣ued, though they had no ex∣ample of the forgiuenesse of sins. Secondly, Abraham was an idolatrous man, and serued the idols of Vr in Chaldea: to him did GOD giue the Promise of the blessed Séed, and made him a Father of all Beléeuers, that is, as Esay in his fortith Chapter repor∣teth; Comfort my people, saith the Lord: for, their of∣fenses are forgiuen, and they haue receiued double from the Lords hands for all their misdeeds.
But this is double; that GOD first remitteth to vs the sinne, and releaseth to vs the punishment of the sinne, and after giueth vs withall euerlasting righteousnes and saluation, that wee may liue and raigne with him in euer∣lasting righteousnes, ioy and glory. Thirdly, Dauid, though an abominable wedlock-breaker and murderer, hath forgiue∣nes of sins for Christ's sake, and is saued for euer. Fourthly, Manasses, the cruell and raging tyrant, who with a Saw caused the holy Prophet Esay to bee cut in sunder (when he had preached eighty yeers in great pain and labour) and spilled much inno∣cent
blood, set vp all heathnish idolatry, letting his owne son passe through the fire; and lastly, offred him vp aliue to Moloch: then, when he was in prison, he turned and hum∣bled himselfe vnto God, and prayed him with teares; the Lord God did heare him, and brought him again to Ieru∣salem, to the earthly and hea∣uenly Kingdom, 2 Kings 27. Fiftly, what a great sinner was the thief on Christs right hand, and other intolerable Vsurers & Publican sinners! Sirtly, how grossely haue the deare Apostles oft-times gon astray! How horribly fel Saint Peter, when he denied his Master, in taking-vpon him so much, & cursed himself!
What innocent bloud did Saint Paul help to spil, when he was a persecuter of Christ his Congregation! For all these Christ prayed, forgaue them all their sinnes, and sa∣ued them for euer. Also through them hee did much good in Christendome. Seuenthly, Christ also had many sinners in his kinred, and are so registred, which were his Grandfathers and Grandmothers according to the flesh; as, Iuda the bloud-thirsty, Rachab the common Harlot and Heathen at Ieri∣cho; to shew thereby, that he was comne into this world to saue sinners. These examples hath Al∣mighty GOD (through
the holy Ghost) written vp for the learning and comfort of vs poor and wretched sin∣ners, that wée should beleeue, God will forgiue vs all our sinnes for his Sonnes sake, as often and as horribly as wée haue offended, not that wée should thinke our selues safe, and presumptuously sin on such mercy of the ord, but that we might haue a sure comfort and consolation a∣gainst sinne and damnation, that wée despaire not by rea∣son of our sinnes, or flée away from Christ: which is the onely sin whereby the world was damned, Iohn the six∣téenth Chapter: As the Apo∣stle Saint Paul also sheweth vs this profit, 1 Tim. 1. where
hee writeth thus: This is a true Saying, that Iesus Christ is comne into the world to saue sinners; among which, I am the chief. But mercy is shewed to me in this respect, that Iesus Christ hath shewed patience on mee for example, that all that beléeue in him, should haue euerlasting life. There∣fore to God the eternal king, the vntransitory, inuisible, and onely wise God, bee all praise and glory for euer, Amen.
A Praier. O Lord Iesus Christ, thou onely Fountaine of all grace and mercy, thou neuer didst deny thine endless mer∣cy, neither to Mathew, nor ye Publican, nor Mary Magda∣len, nor the lost sonne, nor to Peter nor Zacheus the Tole∣keeper, nor to the Thief on the Crosse, nor yet to any man∣kinde. Thou hast spoken with fatherly & comfortable spée∣ches, Come vnto me, all you that labour and are heauy▪ laden, and I will refresh you. O take care of mee, and look vpon mee with thine eyes of godly compassion, euen as thou didst look vpon Peter,
I, a poor and vnworthy sin∣ner, doo stand before thée, la∣den with so many great sins and offenses, that, by reason thereof, I cannot look vp, be∣ing both abashed and asham'd before that godly Maiestie whom I haue grieuously of∣fended, and knowe not what to say. O Lord, be mercifull to me a wretched sinner: turn away thy wrath, and impart thy mercy with me. Which I do desire with hearty tears, through the merits of Christ Iesus our alone Lord and Redéemer.
The third comfort against sinne and Gods wrath, out of the holy Sa∣crament. Esay 4. THe Lord shal wash away the filthinesse from the daughter of Sion, and shall purge the bloudy sinne from Ierusalem by the Spirit of iudgement, and by the Spirit of burning. Esay 12. With ioy and consolation shall you draw water from out of the Well of Saluati∣on.
Zach. 13. At that time shall the house of Dauid, and the Citizens of Ierusalem, haue a free and open Well against sinne and vncleannesse. Mark 16. Whosoeuer beléeueth, and is baptized, shall be saued. Acts 2. Peter saith, Repent, and let euery one bée baptized in the Name of Iesus Chist our Sauiour for the remission of sinnes. Iohn 20. Christ saith to his Apostles, Receiue the holy Ghost:
whose sins you forgiue, they are forgiuen. Mat. 26. Christ saith, This is my bloud of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. BEcause oftentimes tribu∣lation & grief is so great, and sorrow with the combate of death so ouertakes vs, that we cannot hastily, and in such great weaknesse, remember our selues of any sentence or example; and that a man be∣gins often to despair whether God hath forgiuen him his sinnes, and will be mercifull to him, and if Christs bloud especially bee shed for him al∣so:
so: there hath the Lord, of his great loue, not onely gi∣uen vs his holy promise, and set downe comfortable exam∣ples, especially the holy and worthy Sacraments; that is to say, Baptism, and his ho∣ly Supper: which hee hath instituted and ordained for remission of sinnes, especial∣ly to all them that are bapti∣zed in his bloud, and absolueth euery one of all their trans∣gressions, that hée may bée sure hée is also cleare thereof in heaun before the face of God; and féedeth euery one seuerally with his Body and precious Bloud, to the end hée may bee assured, Christs Bloud was shed for his sins, and his Body offred vp also
for his mis-déeds, and giueth the same to euery one that receiueth the same (in true Faith, acknowledging his sinnes, and in good pretense) all and what soeuer hee hath earned and obtained with his Obedience, Death, and Pas∣sion. With this holy Sacra∣ment should wee admonish and comfort our selues, when sorrow, and the combate of death, is at the greatest, that wee cannot rememer any thing else; and think and say thus much in our hearts: I am baptized; whereby God the holy Trinity, hath made an euerlasting couenant with mée, that he will bée and continue my GOD, and hath
not grounded the same vpon my goodnes, but vpon his in∣finite mercy, the merits of his onely Sonne, and vpon the grace and power of the holy Ghost. So am I absolued through Christ, and haue of∣tentimes receiued the holy supper of the Lord according to his institution: therefore I am certaine of the forgiuenes of all my sins, Gods grace, and saluation of my soule. For, if the euerlasting, mercifull God, and my Lord Iesus, with the holy Ghost, would not haue mee saued, or taken me to mercie, he would not haue suffered mee to be baptized, or called mee to his Kingdome through his holy Gospell, nor let mee so often
receiue the holy Sacrament. Therefore should we haue these worthy Sacraments in great estimation, and often resort to the holy Communi∣on of our Lord, vsing the same in right worthinesse for con∣firming of our faith, and com∣fort against sin, and the wrath of God in our last end.
A Prayer. O Thou euerlasting, true, mercifull God and Fa∣ther, I thanke thee through Iesus Christ thy deare Son, in ye power and vnspeakeable sighing of the holy Ghost, that thou hast suffred mee to be baptized in the name and power of the holy Trinity, and taken me vp for thy child, and through power of ye keies hast absolued me from all my sinnes, and fed mee with the body and bloud of thy deare Sonne, for the strengthening of my faith, and forgiuenesse of all my sinnes. And I pray thée, dear Fa∣ther,
that thou wilt vphould me through thy holy Spirit, in true saith and confidence to my end, that I may sléep in peace like to holy Simeon, and rise againe with the righ∣teous to euerlasting glory, through Iesus Christ thy dear Sonne, our onely Lord and Sauiour, Amen. A Praier to bee said, when a man will receiue the bles∣sed Sacrament of the Body and Bloud of Christ. O LORD IESVS CHRIST, thou li∣uing Sonne of God, which before thy Death and Passion
didst institute and ordaine to all Christians a new Testa∣ment of the most worthy Sacrament of thy most holy Body and Bloud: which I poore sinner am not worthy to vse, or take thy holy Body and Bloud into my vncleane mouth, or vpon my sinnefull tongue: and that thou, béeing so great a Lord, shouldest come vnder the couer of my house, or into my vnpro∣fitable Bodie, I am (alas!) not worthy. But I pray thée (O dear GOD and Bro∣ther) open thou my mouth, touch thou my tongue, and purge thou my heart from all sinnes, and make mee thy poore seruant worthy of thy most holy Testament, that I
may receiue, take and vse' thy most worthy bodie, and pure deare bloud of thy Sa∣crament, to the health and sal∣uation of my soule, strength∣ning of my faith, amend∣ment of my life, in burning loue towards thee, true loue towards my neighbour: and bring mee to euerlasting life, Amen. A Praier of Thanks∣giuing. O Almighty and euerla∣sting God, I praise and thanke thy godly merciful∣nesse, that thou hast fed mee with the flesh and blood of thy onely Sonne Iesus Christ, my Lord and Sauiour, and
doe pray thee most humbly, thou wilt with the Holy Ghost so worke within mee, that I which haue receiued this blessed Sacrament with the mouth, may also with con∣stant faith, conceiue and al∣waies keepe fast thy godly grace, of remission of sinnes, and iustification with Christ, which is therein shewed and promised, and euerlasting life through our Lord Iesus Christ thy deare Sonne, who with thee in vnitie of the ho∣ly Ghost liueth and rai∣neth, one true God for euer and euer, Amen.
A godly confession of the deare and worthy man M. Iohn Stoliz. MY sins doe trouble mee. Gods grace ioyeth me. Two things know I, A poore sumer am I, God is mereifull: The first, acknowledge I; The second, beléeue I. O God bée mereifull to mée poore sinner. God giueth. Christ meriteth. Faith conceiueth. Workes do witnesse. Come to helpe mee, thou good God; weake is mans helpe in tune of need.
Esay 42. The bruised Reede shall bee not breake, and the glowing Tow shall ee nt quench out. O Lord strengthen & increase our faith, Amen. Of Gods gracious and euer lasting Prouidence and Maintenance, a most true com∣fort. Psalme 37. WHen I haue but thee (my Lord Ie∣sus Christ) I care not for hea∣uen or earth. When my bo∣dy and soule fayle mee, yet art thou alwaies God, the
comforter of my heart, and portion. Zachary 12. OVer the house of Dauid and ouer the Citizens of Ierusalem, will I powre out the Spirit of Grace, and of Prayer, for they shall looke vpon mée, whom they haue pearced. HEere doth the Lord pro∣mise to send his Holy Ghost to vs poore sinners, as Saint Iohn in the 15. and 16. Chapters, often maketh mention of this promise: for because wée are weake and of little faith, when sinne and Gods wrath doe terrifie vs, to the end our faith cease
not, then shall the Holy-ghost (as a true Comforter) streng∣then and comfort vs, and bee witnesse to our hearts, that our sinnes bee forgiuen, and that weere in grace, and she children of GOD, and shall help vs to sigh and pray with vnspeakeable sighing. Therewithall also shall the How-ghost for the comfort & strengthening of our faith, admonish and shew vs the holy wounds, whereby wee may acknowledge, that he was wounded and pearced for our sins, and his blood shed for the clensing and washing away of all our sinnes.
II. Esay 54. SO haue I sworne, that I will not bée angrie with thee, nor yet reprooue thee: for the Mountaines shall re∣moone, and the hills shall fall away; but my Grace shall not, oe away from thee, and the Conenant of my Peace shall not fall away, saith the Lord thy compassioner. GOd the Almighty hath (through Christ, his hest beloued Sonne) erected a Conenant of peace with vs, and confirmed the same with an doth, That if we do beleeue in Christ, hee will not punish, nor yet concernne vs for euermore, but continue
our deare and louing Father eternally. Such promise is so certaine, that the Mountaines shall fall down; yea Heauen and Earth shall passe away, before such words faile. A very glorious and com∣fortable cause doth the Pro∣phet set héereunto. The Lord thy Compassioner hath said; that is, God is so mercifull, that hee will not condemne you for your sinnes: Whoso∣euer beléeueth in Christ with a faithfull heart, shall rest in grace, and hee will for euer release and helpe him out of all misfortune.
III. Esay 54. Feare them not, thou shalt not bée ashamed. Bee not weake, for thou shalt not bée mocked. THESE are faire and comfortable words. The Holy Ghost seeth how flesh and bloud doe forment vs Christians; for although they haue exceeding promi∣ses, and sure comfort, yet is this weakenesse continu∣ally by it, that their hearts bee fearefull, and weake. They are astonished at the diuels power, and are afraide by reason of their vnable∣nesse: for because examples doe stand before our eyes,
how God doth sometime let the godly fall, therefore feare they the like will happen vn∣to them: but God comforteth them, they shall not bee asha∣med nor mocked: that is, God will not let them die or perish in their sinnes, but he will re∣déene them and help them for euer. For, to bee ashamed is nothing else in the Scripture, but when hope faileth and is in vaine. So the Rich man hoped in his money & goods, but he was ashamed therby; for a thousand things may happen to them, where neyther money nor goods will help at all. So must therbe shamed, who hope vpon I clatrie, & their owne goodnesse. But they which
set their hope on God, that hee will, for Christs sake, bée mercifull, and help, and saue them, this hope is sure, let∣teth them not be ashamed. So did Dauid comfort himselfe, Psalme 31. Vpon thee doe I trust, let me not be ashamed, release me through thy righ∣teousnesse. III. Esay 54. Thou shalt bée prepared through righteousnes Thou shalt bee farre from force and wrong, that thou needest not bée afraide thereof, for it shall not come neere thee.
HEere must thou not ap∣ply these wordes, force, wrong and feare, temporally; for with Christians héere it shall not bée otherwise, but that they shall bée oppressed, and sundry wayes made a∣fraid, as Experience shew∣eth. And Christ saith, In the world you shall haue sorrow. But the Holy Ghost spea∣keth of Force, Wrong, and Feare, that is euer and eter∣nally; from which Christi∣ans are sledde away through remission of sinnes (which they beléeue through Christ) for they know that GOD is their Father: although he let them suffer corporally, they comfort themselues with his
helpe and grace, and know, whilest they haue Christ, they cannot misse. V. Esay 49. Sion saith, The Lord hath forsaken me: The Lord hath forgotten me. Can a woman forget her Childe, that shée take not pitty of the sonne of her body? and although shée should forget it, yet will I not forget thee: Behould, I haue marked thee in the very hand. When the Lord God a lit∣tle suffereth vs to fall into ap∣parent need, crosse, and suffe∣rance, and helpeth not quick∣ly; then faileth often-times our comfort, and we thinke God hath forgotten vs. In
such tribulation, hee sheweth vs a comfortable Image to looke vpon, and to learne ther∣by to strengthen our faith. Thou art (saith he) a father or mother, & hast louing chil∣dren: tell me, if thy child should be for a while from thee, coul∣dest thou forget it? Oh no, it is impossible for any that are in their right wits, or that haue any reason or vnderstanding: for children come from the heart, and goe to the heart a∣gaine. But to me, saith the Lord, it is more impossible, for my heart is not so sickle as mans, neither is my grace so short or narrow. I haue an eternall grace and mercy; therefore can I
as little forget my Christians as mine hand, they are noted in my hand. I thinke on them continu∣ally, they are alwayes before my godly eies, that I must see them, and cannot forget them, yea & doe vphold them also, through the right hand of my Righteousnes, so that no man, neither Sinne, Hell, Death, nor Diuell, can by any meanes pull them out of my hand.
VI. Psal. 8. Thou hast put all things vnder his feete. WEe poore Creatures are afraid of this vile naughty world, the Turke, Death, and his beggerly sicknesse, and of the very Diuell, and are a∣fraide of his tyranny and hel∣lish power, which is naturall: but when wee acknowledge our Lord Iesus Christ, and what power and might hée hath, wherefore neede we be afraid? As the Church sing∣eth very comfortably out of the sixe and fortie Psalme.
If all the world fell diuels were, and would vs all deuoure: Yet need we not thē for to seare, of vs they haue no power. For this Champion, which is alwaies our Sauiour and Emanuel, is alwayes by vs, and hath such power to defend vs, and to vphold vs, that hee will bee our stedfast rocke and bulwarke against all our Aduersaries, Sinne, Death, and the Diuell, and preserue vs euermore: for God the Father hath put all things vnder his feete. And this saying must not bee vnderstood of Sheepe, Or∣en, wilde beasts, and Fishes of the Sea, but by this word (All) vnderstand all Diuels, all hellish rabblement, Turks,
and Heathens: In summ, the very gates of Hell▪ all sicke∣nesse, Plague, Pestilence, &c. is all put vnder Christs seet, that is to say, vnder his power. Therefore is it a sure com∣fort vnto vs, that wee haue a strong couragious Lord to de∣fend vs. For all the Diuels (how horrible soeuer they seeme) with all their armies and hellish power, are no a∣ble to make a Christian die, without the will of the Lord Iesus Christ, they must all acknowledge him to bee he rd, and now the kee be∣fore him. When dare not once sre, recpt  bee is will; much lesse, seeing hee hath with his owne blood bought
vs to his euerlasting King∣dome, and will not hinder vs of our saluation. This comfort should eue∣rie Christian bée sure of, that hée may say, I beléeue in Ie∣sus Christ our Lord, &c. I am certaine that Iesus Christ is Lord of heauen and Earth; yea, of all in the wa∣ter, in the depth of Hell: that hee hath all in his hands, in his power and command, in such sort, that all the Di∣uels, Hell, and Death, how raging soeuer they bee, can∣not crooke a ire of mée, or of any member of Christ. Also, all diseases, sicknesse, or pestilence, without his will, cannot poyson one little veine in mee: But if it doe hap∣pen
with his will, then must it not bee hurtfull vnto mee, but a furtherance and seruice∣able to my saluation. A praier. O My God, my Lord, and Father, shew vnto my poore soule, that it may per∣ceiue thou art my rocke, bul∣wark, shield, tower, treasure, defence, trust, helpe, refuge, protection and goodnesse; that I in this my great néede and tribulation, may, through thy godly grace, haue help and as∣sistance against my aduersa∣ries, and bee preserued for e∣uer. Lord, vpon thee do I trust,
let me neuer be ashamed. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit: O Lord, thou true God, release thou me, Amen. Generall comfortable Senten∣ces, wherewith a man may comfort himselfe with Gods eternall preseruation. Esay 41. THOU shalt bée my ser∣uant, for I haue chosen thee, and cast thee not away. Feare not, I am with thée. Goe not aside, for I am thy
God, I strengthen thee, I helpe thee also, and I pe∣serue thee through the right hand of my Righteousnes. Esay 43. Feare thou not, I haue redeemed thee, I haue called thee by thy Name, thou art mine. Psalme 31. Lord, on thee doe I trust, let mee neuer bée confounded, deliuer mee through thy righ∣teousnesse. Item. Be comforted, and not dis∣mayed, all you that tarry for the Lord.
Psal. 32. The vngodly hath many sorrowes, but hee that trust∣eth in the Lord, shall be com∣passed with goodnesse. Psal. 91. Though a thousand fall at thy side, and tenne thousand on thy right hand, yet shall it not touch thee. Psal. 91. Vpon the Lion and Adder shalt thou goe, and tread vp∣on the young Lion and Dra∣gon. Psal. 23. Goodnesse and merciful∣nesse shall follow mee all my
life time: and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for e∣uermore. Iohn 14. In my Fathers house are many dwellings: if it were not so, I would haue told you: I goe hence to prepare the places for you. Iohn 14. I will not leaue you fa∣therlesse: I liue, and you shall also liue. Iohn 14. I will come againe, and take you vnto mee, that you may be where I am.
Iohn 12. Where I am, there shall also my seruant be. Item. When I shall be lifted vp from the earth, then will I draw them all vnto me. Iohn 10. I knowe my shéep, and am knowne of mine: and no man shall pull them out of mine hands. Rom. 8. If God bée with vs, who shall bée against vs? who also hath not spared his onely son, but hath giuen him for vs; how can hes not but giue vs
all with him? Rom. 8. I am sure, that neither death nor life, neither Angell nor principality, nor power, neither things present, nor to come, neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature, can separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Ie∣sus our Lord, Amen. A Prayer. LAud, praise and thankes, bee vnto thée, my Lord Iesus Christ, for thy holy in∣carnation, for thy martyrdom and litter passion; out of which I acknowledge, that
thou art my Redéemer and Sauiour; and do beléeue, that thou hast ouercome sin, death, hell, and the diuell, that they cannot hurt me. With this onely doo I comfort me: héer∣vpon build I: there standeth my hope: there will I bée found. Onely bee gracious and mercifull vnto mee, as I doubt not of thy sure promise. O Lord, let mee not sink or despaire in this my great tri∣bulation and necessity, but preserue mee happily by such sure comfort, Amen.
Esay 49. Thou shalt vnderstand that I am the Lord; of whom they shall not bee ashamed, which tarry for me, &c. A comfort for poore sicke people, which are troubled by reason of their grie∣uous sicknes. Psal. 118. THe Lord thastiseth mée, but giueth me not ouer to death. Psal. 119. It is good for mée that thou
hast chastised me, that I may learn thy Lawes. WHen any outward mis-fortune, crosse or sicknesse falleth vpon vs, then are wée sundry waies assaul∣ted: wée behaue our selues impatiently, and doo comolain and wéep for it. Such im∣patience is a great torment to a Christian: for, when the diuell can doo nothing else on him, then commeth he with impatience, that many in their miseries doo snarle and powt. But if we could remember this onely word, as Dauid saith, It is good, Lord, that thou hast chastised mee; we should rather wéepe and cry
when we are without crosses, sickenesse, or other aduersity. But, what prosit or goodnesse this Crosse is of, should euery Christian earnestly thinke on in all his temptati∣ons. The chiefest profit of the Crosse, is this: First, that thereby fleshly lust and de∣sire may bée hindred, that it be not lasciuious, and throwe vs not into damnation, as our noerest enemie which wée daily carry in our bo∣somes: for, as a man must spurre a Horse, and hold him with the bridle, and bring him forward, Psalm 32. so must the Lord God also spur and bridle our olde Adam through the Crosse; without
which correction, wée shall neuer come there, whereunto woe through the Crosse haue cause. 2 Then shall wee thereby be driuen to the Word, and to Prayer, and brought also to be penitent, as the Prophet Esay saith; Onely mischance and tribulation teach vs to mark the Word; or (as Da∣uid chastised mee, that I might learn thy Lawes. 3 If it should alwaies bée with vs according to our own carnall wils, then should wée be proud and insolent, &c. But when God catcheth hould on vs with sicknes or any other crosse, then wee acknowledge our disability.
4 Wee shall bee thereby occasioned to esteeme and ac∣knowledge Gods gracious and almighty help; that hee is to vs a Rock, a Bulwark, Defense, Protection, Help and Strength in all our néed and necessity; without which gracious help, wée despaire of all things, and must bee without comfort. Now, when the diuell, with his poi∣son, pestilence, and beggerly sicknesse, is worst-minded towards vs, and scattereth his plagues and sickenesse a∣mong vs, yet then haue wee Christians GOD for a sure comfort: wee are vnder his godly protection & defense, and do trust alwaies on Gods help; therfore shall we neuer
be ashamed. 5 Then, when wée haue obtained and gotten GOD's helpe, others shall in like maner be therewith strength∣ned and comforted, that they, in all their tribulation and néed, may set their comfort & hope on the Lords gracious help. 6 Although the Crosse doo bring such profit, that many more causes might bee re∣hearsed; yet the greatest com∣fort vnder the Crosse is, that wee bee thereby assured, that wee are the children of God for euer, and so shall remain; seeing that euery father cor∣recteth his deare childe, if hée take it vp (to the end it may bée kept in kindly obedience)
Hebrews 12 Prouerbs 20. And héer it goeth after the common Prouerb, as often as the honest Parents do say before their Children, O dear Rod, Thou makest me good: Thou makest me gētle to be, That the Hangman Be not troubled with me. Such causes, how fatherly soeuer our Lord God means, that hée layeth so many kinde of crosses vpon His; and withall, the great bountifull goodnesse and profit that the same tribulations bring vnto vs, let vs earnestly thinke vpon, when we are in misery, sicknesse, or other calamities,
and not murmure against GOD: for, he knowes his creatures best, and can tell what is good and profitable both for soule and body. So did the Lord Iesus well see before, the tribulation that his Disciples should haue after his death and passion: but he comforted them, Iohn 16. It is good for you that I goe hence: for, if I goe not, the Comforter wil not come to you; but, if I go hence, I will send him to you. Therefore should wée set our will to GOD's will, as Syrach in the 2 Chap. admo∣nisheth: My Childe, if thou wilt bee Gods Seruant, then prepare thee to tribulation: leane thou vnto God, and
shrink not, that thou maist bee alwaies stronger. Suffer whatsoeuer happeneth vnto thee, and bee patient in all thy troubles: for, like as gold is tried in the fire; so shall they whom God plea∣seth, bee tried through the fire of aduersity. I. Against the first assaulting vnder the Crosse. God esteems vs not. Esay 27. I The Lord do kéep my vine∣yard, that is, my Christians, and water it quickly that his leaues doo not wither: I will
preserue it day and night. Héer doth God the Lord comfort vs, that his Christi∣ans should not bee grieued with the Crosse: for, he com∣pareth his Christendome to a pleasant Vineyard that stan∣deth open on all sides, that e∣uery one may come in; and no man keeps it, but lets it ly, yea, that it wants rain, and all will wither and bee dry. So doo wee also think vnder the Crosse, that God careth not for vs, else should wee hée better. But it is certain, that God himself wil be Guardian ouer his Christians, and will send them the rain of grace & comfort in all their temptati∣ons, as hee héer saith, e Lord doo keep it, and will
quickly water it. I will keep it both day and night, that no man hurt it: that is, My Christians shal not méet with any euill, so graciously will I watch and ward them. But ho is such watching and warding, and yet a man doth not see it? Although it séemeth, God hth no great respect with his guaring of temporal things, and whatsoeuer is corporall (whilst they belong not to his Kingdom), yet must ye world and the diuell let it alone, and not doo all things as pleaseth them, seeing the hairs of our head are numbred: As wee haue an example thereof in Mat. 8. that the diuell, without Christs leaue, could not goe
into a filthy Swine. And such doo the Histories sufficiently shew. But the right guard and protection of vs Christi∣ans, goeth inwardly to the heart; which, God with his holy Spirit and Word puts into vs, and day and night keeps vs, that sin growe not quite ouer vs, and that Satan be not too mighty for vs. Of such guard speaketh he shortly after. The sin of Ia∣cob shall thereby cease, that is, through the Crosse God defends vs against sinne, and mortifieth the old Adam. Many a one doth lie in his bedde; who, if hee were well, would doo all mischief. Ma∣ny a one hath another assaul∣ting, which driueth him to
Sermons and Praiers, and to amendment of his life; who, if that were not, would care nothing at all for God or his Word. Against such assaulting, should we earnestly think vp∣on this defense of our Lord God: for, the world doth not sée it, and the Christians also somtimes do forget it in their néed, and think, God doth not regard them, he hath forgot∣ten them. So did Dauid com∣fort himself, Psalm 32. Thou art my dfense: thou wilt keep me from sorrow.
A Praier. O Lord, thou kéeper of Is∣rael, which doost neither slumber nor sléep, and hast promised to thy faithfull that lift vp their eies toward hea∣uen to thee, and tarry for thy godly grace, comfort & help, that thou wilt kéep them day and night in their tribulati∣ons, and with the comfort of thy holy Spirit wilt moisten their hearts, and graciously accept of them, which is easie for thee to doo: I pray thée, let mee not forget thy watching and warding in my aduersity, nor bee weak in mine owne cause; that thou wouldst kéep me from trouble. O kéep me
from all tribulation. O kéep me from all euill. O kéep my soule and deliuer me: let me not be ashamed. O kéep thou my going out, and comming in, both now & for euermore, Amen. II. Against the other asaulting, God is our enemy. Esay 27. With me is no anger. Lamen. 3. The Lord troubleth, but he hath compassion again accor∣ding to his great goodnes: for hee vereth not nor troubleth man from his heart.
O God, whosoeuer could beléeue this, should yet bee merry although hee were ill. But all sorrows and com∣plaints come of this, that we think, God is angry with vs. Therefore he giueth vs in E∣say a pleasant similitude: I cannot bee so angry with my Vmeyard, that is, with my Christians, because I attend the same so diligently. It is a deare Iewell vnto me. Therefore doe I dresse it, I hack it, I cut it; not that I hate it, but because I loue it, and will further it, that it bring forth fruit; which o∣therwise
would not come foorth, if I should not in such sort hack it, and cut it: for, although it seem not friendly, that the hedger standeth ouer the Vine with his knife, and cutteth it, hath the Mattocke in his hand, and heaweth it with all his might, yet is it but for the good of the Vine∣yard, that it beare the more fruit. So shall you, my deare Christians, saith the Lord, vnderstand it sol kewise, and hold it for a certaine, that I loue you, Prouerbs 3. when I come ouer you with the Crosse, with the Wine-hook and Mattocke, cut and hack you. Another fine similitude
giueth he afterward of plow∣ing, in chapter 28. Hearken with your eares, and heare my voice: When a Husband∣man breaketh and ploweth his field, it séemeth that hée doth much harme, especial∣ly when hee oftentimes in the yéere, yea, thrée or foure times, turneth it ouer, and ploweth through the same. Wherefore doth hee it? It goeth heere after the com∣mon Prouerb; The fourth kinde bringeth the fourth Sheaf. Therefore dooth hee not let it rest after plowing: but when hee hath plowed tho∣row his field, hee soweth it; then followeth faire and goodly fruit. So, saith the
Lord GOD, doo I also. I plow you with the Crosse, and send one thing after an∣other; now pouerty, then sickenesse; &c. which dooth grieue you: but it procéedeth not of anger, as if I were your enemy: it is done for your good, that the stones and rocks may be rooted out, and the ground made readie for fruit. Therefore doe I chastise you thorow right and doctrine. Likewise doth leremy in this place also comfort: The Lord troubleth me, &c For that is his work, as Psalm 4 saith. Hee dealeth strangely with his Saints, he thrusteth them first unto hell, and lets them come into need, before
he do help them out: hée lets one bee first sick, before hee make him whole. But, in such Crosses and Tribulations, doth hée leaue them helplesse? No; but hath such a heart as is full of loue and compassion. Therefore is hee mercifull againe ac∣cording vnto his great good∣nesse; and sheweth himselfe like a helpfull GOD, and beareth a fatherly heart to∣ward vs. For, like as a fa∣ther dooth carry an heart to∣wards his deare childe, in that hee restraineth him, to the end he come to goodnes, and may see both ioy and ho∣nesty in him: So in GOD's heart towards vs also that he vexeth not, nor troubleth vs
men from his heart, but that he may preserue vs his deare children to his glory, kingdom and euerlasting life. Heer of hast thou a fine ex∣ample of Ioseph, which praied a long time: hee was guilt∣lesse, and cast into Prison. God heard him not so soone, else had he come home to his parents, and béen a poor shep∣herd all his life time: but af∣terward God took pity of his misery, released him of his imprisonment, and made him a great Prince ouer all the Land of Egypt. So will God also doo with vs his deare children: a cer∣taine time will he leaue vs, to bée troubled in misery: but afterwards will he accept of
vs, and take pity with his e∣uerlasting mercy, will per∣fectly reioyce vs, preserue and bring vs to euerlasting glory. A Prayer. O Lord God, heauenly fa∣ther, which of thy fa∣therly well meaning, wilt keep me thy deare Child héere on earth vnder thy rodde, to the end I may bée like thine onely Sonne, both in passi∣on, and afterwards in glorie: I pray thee comfort mee in my tribulations and crosses, with thy holy Spirit, that I despaire not; but according to the promises of thy Sonne, doe take sure holde of this
comfort, that the crosses of me and all faithfull, be but a little, and that thou wilt with thy grace, accept of vs a∣gaine in our troubles, with euerlasting pitty, that euer∣lasting ioy may follow; That I (through this hope) may with patience ouercome all misfortunes, Amen. Lamen. 3. It is a precious thing for a man, that he carry the yoke in his youth. MAny a one doth GOD lay his crosse and yoke vpon, betimes in his young bloud and youth.
Although our flesh and bloud doe shrinke for it, and would gladly forbeare it, yet should wee know, that it is a costly thing for a man, that hée be exercised from his youth vnder the Lords yoake, and bée rocked with the deare Crosse, for thereby teacheth hée, not onely to estéeme much of Gods help, but also to thanke God from his heart: for his gratious care hath kept him thereby from so ma∣ny terrible sinnes (which the Aduersarie in his youth did trouble him with.) And be∣cause hee is from his youth v∣sed to the Crosse, therefore is hee patient, for hée knoweth well, that he shall find no bet∣ter life heere. Therefore hath
hee is minde and longing to another world, and occasi∣oned to pray vnto GOD, for the gracious coing of his kingdome. For such and the like cau∣ses, will GOD preserue vs alwaies vnder his yoke. For when one crosse is scant past, there cometh soone another. And heere must  tell an example of a Christian Pastor and Preacher, which soone after the beginning of the Gospel, did preach in the precinct of Weida. This ho∣nest and godly man (without doubt) loued the Lord GOD and his holy Word entirely, therefore was the Diuell his sore enemy. And GOD the Lord (through many afflicti∣ons)
did trie his faith. For first, not onely hée, but his whole houshold, wife, and children were taken with a long lasting sickenesse of the French disease, on which his wise and children died. Not long after, the horrible plague of Pestilence fell vpon him: in the time of which sickneg, the wilde-fire kindled in oe of his armes, that hee was forced to haue the same sawed off: and was after wards be∣reaued of his senses, that hée was kept in chaines. Vpon whom the Lord shewed him∣selfe so gracious and merciful, that he gat his senses againe But shortly after, when hee sound himselfe very ill and weake, hee called on his deare
God, with these and such like words. O Deare God, I thanke thee for thy gracious helpe, and euerlasting Re∣demption, which thou hast shewed to mee poore sinner, through thy deare Sonne Ie∣sus Christ, and let so happen vnto me, that thou mightest preserue mee in the same thy euerlasting grace and mercie. Oh, how many tribulations and sicknesses hast thou layd die vpon me from my youth, hast visited me with ye French disease & Pestilence, hast let my wife & children die, sent the wilde fire into my arme, to bee bereaued of my wits
and memorie, and hast gi∣uen mee the same againe: O my deare GOD, what wilt thou doe more with me, and what is thy pretence? Euen at that houre, as he thanked his deare GOD for his euerlasting helpe, that hee had so heartily accepted of his Soule, and yeelded him further to GODS will and pleasure, without doubt for dissoluing of this life, pray∣ing with Saint Paul with his heart, the falling sicknesse tooke him, by the meanes whereof hee departed out of this life, but was perfectly heard. As God now dealt with this Christian, in sending
him one sorrow after an o∣ther: First, on his wife; then shortly after vpon his children, and his owne bo∣die, &c. So will hee often times do with his Christians in this life, from their youth, and it shall stand vs in good stead. For, nothing can bee dannable to them which bée in Christ Iesus. This same is somewhat a horror for our senses to hear: but a Christian should yéeld himselfe with patience vnto Gods will and pleasure, as this Christian man did. For like as the Lords yoake is a very costly thing; so againe is it also a costly thing to beare the same with patience, and tarry for his helpe.
Therefore, whosoeuer is subiect vnder the Lords yoke and crosse, let him here learne with the Prophet Dauid, to comfort himselfe, and to pray thus: O deare God, behold how I am heere in subiection vn∣der thy yoke, with many mi∣series and troubles. I know (if it bée thy will) that thy right hand can turne away all. But if it bée not thy godly pleasure to helpe mee bodily (as thou knowest what is best) then giue mée the comfort of thy holie Spi∣rit. I reioyce, and am glad of thy goodnesse, that thou hast respect of my miserie, and knowest my soule in aduersi∣tie,
Psalme 31. I hope vpon thee, for thou art mercifull. My heart reioyceth, that thou so willingly helpest. Therefore (O deare God) although thou kill mee, and let mée die vnder thy yoake and crosse, yet will I not doubt nor despaire of thine e∣uerlasting helpe. A Prayer. O Lord Iesus Christ, the flesh is weake, and vn∣patient. O deare Lord, burne, hew, strike, and plague mée how thou wilt; I onely pray thee for patience and méeke∣nesse, Amen.
III. Wherefore God layeth the Crosse vpon vs. Esay 48. Behold, I wil cleanse thee, but not as siluer, but I will make thee selected in the Fur∣nace of Affliction, for my sake will I doe it. WE poore Creatures haue often gone a∣way from God, and forgot∣ten him. Therefore it is néed∣full that he do cast vs into the melting Quen, like vncleane and falsified siluer, to bée clen∣sed and purified, to the end hée may againe haue a plea∣sure and delight in vs: And so wée, deliuered from sinne,
and comne againe into the feare of God, may kéepe his word. This is (for all that) no euill thing, but the chiefest pretence and meanes, that God spareth thy Soule, ta∣keth a while thy body, thy goods, wife, and children, &c. Therewith hee thrusteth thée into the furnace of affliction, that thou maiest thereby learn to acknowledge thy sinnes, to be sorry for them, to hum∣ble thy selfe before GOD, and pray for Gods grace, &c. whereas otherwise (if thou diddest not sticke in this fur∣nace) thou wouldest alwaies goe forward in sin, and more and more fall into damnation. But now, whilst thou dost
conuert, God hath a liking to thee, and taketh thée a∣gayne to his mercie, for his Names sake, that is, onely therefore, that he will through Christ bee mercifull vnto vs, to the end wee acknowledge his Name and Mercie, and praise the same. 1 Cor. 11. When we are iudged, then shall wee bee chastised of the Lord, that we be not damned with the world. HEere doth Saint Paul shew the cause why God doth lay the crosse vpon his people. Hée doth the same, that wée may attaine vnto his holines.
For it is certaine, if GOD should giue to vs all that wee would willingly haue, wee should bée safe, and haue no regard of our sinnes, neither thinke on the Word or Pray∣er. But when all goeth ouer and ouer, and now one affli∣ction, and then another hap∣neth, then hath a man cause to hasten, not onely to prayer, but also to thinke, how wee with our sinnes haue well de∣serued such correction: And therefore hencefoorth to pre∣pare our selues more earnest∣ly, for amendement of our liues: As it is saide in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Our Father in Heauen doth cha∣stise vs for our good, that
we may attayne vnto his ho∣linesse. A Prayer. O Deare and heauenlie Father, who of thy well meaning and loue, to keepe mée vnder thy childely obey∣sance for obtayning of thy ho∣linesse, and to make mée se∣lected, hast laide so manifold corrections vpon mee: Take pitty on my Soule, and come to help me in these mine affli∣ctions, occurrences, and temp∣tations of the raging Diuell. Deliuer my soule in this great néede from the hellish dogges, Amen.
Lament. of Ieremy 3. It is a costly thing to bée patient, and to tarry for the Lords helpe. MAny men do often fall vnder the crosse, into Impatience, and Despaire, for they know not yet what ye good God meaneth towards vs with the Crosse: and this impatience is a great afflicti∣on of the Diuell, by which the vnfaithfull are brought, either to seeke meanes that bee forbidden, or through des∣paire (when a had conscience meeteth with it) doe run their owne heart out, doe poyson, drowne, hang, or kill them∣selues, &c. for they haue no
comfort in their hearts. It fa∣reth with them, as the Pro∣phet Micheas in the 7. Chap. saith, When the day of thy Preacher commeth, they shall not know what to do. Against such afflictions doth Ieremy héere strengthen vs: O (saith hée) what a terrible & woful thing it is, when a man will not acknowledge, what a louing heart God hath to∣wards him? He begins to bee impatient, murmureth against God, and despaireth: against which, if any doe thinke thus in his heart, I know I haue a mercifull God in heauen, who esteemeth of mee, as of other his deare children; and will through these my afflictions, sicknesse,
woes, and miseries, &c. put mee in minde of my sinnes, and admonish mee to repen∣tance, that I may bee more godly, and shall keepe mee from sinne: These are preci∣ous and happy thoughts, for they are the comfort of the Holy Ghost, and worthy to bée praised. For whosoeuer hath such thoughts in his heart, is pa∣tient vnder the Crosse, see∣keth helpe by GOD with prayer, and hopeth for the Lords gracious houre of helpe, and is of sure hope that it will come; if not corporal∣ly, yet the Lord will perfect∣ly heare him: Therefore tar∣rieth hée for his helpe with patience.
So did the Prophet Aba∣cuk comfort in the 2. Chap. The promise shall bee yet ful∣filled in due season, and lastly come to light, and not tarry away. Though it linger, tarry you: it will surely come, and not stay. A Prayer. O Heauenly Father, giue mee thy holy Spirit to strengthen mee, that I may beare thy will with patience, that both in good and euill, I may alwaies breake my will, offer and mortifie my selfe, and not murmure against thee, although I thinke it goeth otherwise with mee, then I gladly would; I
would rather that it went al∣waies after my will, that I might bee without Crosses: but O Lord, doe thou thy will vpon mée, and giue mee obedience and patience in all Crosses and Afflictions, Amen. IIII. God will also deliuer from the Crosse. 1 Cor. 10. GOd is trusty, who will not let you bee tempted aboue your abilitie, but ma∣keth the temptation to get an end, that you may beare it,
HEere doth Saint Paul encounter with two great afflictions which great∣ly hinder our faith, especially when wee grone & lie bedred: The first, that wee thinke the Crosse to bée heauy, and too great, and feare wee must vn∣der it goe to the ground: The second, that wee sée no way nor meanes whereby wee may bee holpen; then wée make account we are vndon, and begin to doubt and to des∣paire. Therefore doth Saint Paul heere comfort vs: Why should you so despaire vnder the crosse? you haue yet a true mercifull God, which laieth vpon no man more then his ability, yea, hee himselfe gi∣ueth
strength and power to them which bee not able, and maketh the affliction a gra∣cious meanes and end, that how heauie soeuer the same seemeth, yet those which are his, doe goe through with it, and beare it: for the crosse is to a Christian but a slight burthen, and a light yoake, Math. 11. vnder which the Lord himselfe did put his godly arme, necke and shoul∣ders, and will comfort them, as hee promiseth, Esay 51. I, euen I am your Comforter, &c. And how long or endless the crosse séemeth to our vn∣derstanding, yet shall there be a happy end, and but a small thing, as the Lord himselfe reckoned his suffering, that
it was but little, Iohn 16. So also the Lord GOD comforted his Christians: Yet a little while, then shall my anger for thy sinnes, and my displeasure haue an end, Esay 10. Heere doth the Lord giue a fine comparison, Iohn 16. of a Woman in Child-bed, with whom it sée∣meth also, as if the Crosse were importable, both Mo∣ther and Childe must goe to∣gether. The poore woman can doe no more, but yeeldeth her selfe in such smart and deadly paine, vnto Gods will and pleasure, and saith: Whe∣ther I liue or die, I am the Lords. Now when the paine is at the greatest, and no power
more to beare: behold, it go∣eth then after the common prouerbe, Where mans helpe endeth, there Gods helpe beginneth, It is but for a lit∣tle time, and then in stead of death, two liues are brought into the world, and the wo∣man thinketh no more on the paine, for great ioy that shée hath brought a merry birth into the world. Likewise should wée also comfort our selues, that it is but a while, then shall Gods helpe bee vnto vs; and in stead of sorrow, ioy and com∣fort shall bee found.
A Prayer. O Thou most true and good Lord GOD and Father, giue mée, for thy Son Iesus Christs sake, through thy holy Spirit, a strong trust in thee, that I may as∣sure my self, and goe thorow with all the afflictions of the Crosse; and stedfastly be∣léeue (although the Crosse, to my thinking, and to all mens reason, séemeth too heauie and importable, and withall endlesse) that it presse mée not downe, but bée vnto mée a light burthen, and a light yoke. And lend mée likewise strength and able∣nesse, in putting-to thy holy
arme and help to beare, it till I (through thy godly help) shall with patience ouercome ye same; and that thou woul∣dest send to mee a happy end, and hour of help, with grace, Amen. Rom. 8. I am assured, that the suf∣ferings of this life are not worthy of the glory of God, which shall be shewed to vs. HEer Saint Paul the A∣postle puts all the mise∣ries of mankinde together, what name soeuer they haue; All diseases, plagues, sicknes∣ses, crosses and passions, and how heauy and great such
woes and miseries doo séem vnto vs; and saith, If all the troubles of this world were heaped together, yet were all much too slight to bee compared to God's glory. Why wilt thou then complain so much of troubles and mans miseries? It is but a little times: and then shall follow to euery Christian Beléeuer, an vnmeasurable and euerla∣sting glory. Héer in this life let no man think that it will bee better with him, as Christ himselfe saith; In the world you shall haue troubles, &c. For wée are héer in the diuels house: if thou hold not with the host, thou shalt haue small fauour in thy lodging. Many a one
thinks hee will go to another place, and flée away from the mischief: but wheresoeuer he commeth, he findes the hoste at home. Look what great dangers the Apostle Paul en∣dured, as in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, and ele∣uenth Chapter: but, the hope of euerlasting life, and glory to-come, caried him thorow, that with patience hee ouer∣came all. As it is true, that No eye hath séen, nor ear hath heard, nor euer came into the heart of man, vhat ioyes, habitati∣on, and glory is prepard for Christians, and shall bee re∣uealed vnto them: So is it most certain, that they shall haue holy, cleare,
immortall and powerfull bo∣dies; and therefore néed not feare any humane miseries, death nor diuell. And all these great gifts shall they haue through Christ for euermore. All shall bee Gods, and haue enough. A poor scabbed boy or wench, a poor scholar, a de∣spised begger, &c. which put their trust in Christ, shall haue more, and bée more rich, thn all the Emperors and Kins in this life: for, they shall pos∣sesse the euerlasting glory; in which, the Lord Iesus Christ shall crowne them with his vnwithered Garland of ho∣nour, to euerlasting heauen∣ly honour; as wée vse to set Garlands on for an honour. All worldly honour shall bée
but childrens play to such ho∣nour and glory: for, there shall the Christians in glory hee like the Son of GOD himself; yea, Lords ouer all tyrants and persecuters, ouer the holy Angels, who shall bée their seruants, shall stand a∣bout them, and wait on them; and shall in such honour and glory haue a merry, constant, and quiet conscience: where no mis-fortune more shall o∣uerthrowe their ioyes, their euerlasting righteousnes, in∣nocency, and saluation. Of which glory wee all should comfort our selues in all our afflictions: then may wee, through such hope, with pati∣ence ouercome the Crosse. So doth Saint Peter com∣fort
vs: You shall reioyce in the saluation, who were a small time in sorrow. Like∣wise S. Paul saith, 2 Cor. 4. Our small and slight trou∣bles cause to vs a far more excellent and an eternall waight of glory: for, wee look not vpon the visible, but on the inuisible things.
A Praier. O Dear and heauenly fa∣ther, I acknowledge, that I, for my sins sake, haue well deserued all woes and miseries, wherein I doo stick, besides euerlasting punish∣ment. But I thank thée with all my heart, that thou hast (through Christ) redéem'd me from such euerlasting woes; and doo beléeue, that these my sorrows and troubles are but smal, and that vpon the same, shall follow to me and all the faithfull, an euerlasting, and aboue all measure, an excée∣ding glory. I pray thée, that thou wilt preserue me in this poor trou∣blesome
life, which is so full of woes and miseries, throgh comfort of thy holy Spirit in sure hope and patience, to thy euerlasting honour and glory, for thy dear Son Christ Ie∣sus sake, his redemption, death, power, resurrection, life and glory, Amen. Set thou thy cause on God in∣deed. Hee will thee help in time of need. For, he that God doth trust, Speed well alwaies he must, Help thou, Lord God, euery where; The body heere, and the soule there.
A COMFORT against the fear and terror of Death, and the Graue; BEING An Exposition of Doctor MARTIN LVTHER, written a little before his end. LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Iohn Parker. 1624.
An Exposition of D. MARTIN LVTHER, written a little before his end. IOHN 8. Ʋerily, verily, I say vnto you, If any keep my word, he shall neuer see death. HOW incre∣dibly is this spoken, and a∣gainst mani∣fest and daily experience, in that we sée one carried away, and buried!
Yet it is true, when a man séeks after Gods Word with his hart, beléeues on him, and vpon the same sléeps or dies; he sinks and goes hence, be∣fore he might sée death, or be∣ware thereof, and is for cer∣tain saued by the Word, in that hee beleeueth, and deter∣mineth to depart from hence. Therefore should we Christi∣ans not be afraid of death. Iohn 5. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, He that hears my word, and beléeues on him that sent me, shal haue euerlasting life, and not come into iudgement, but shall passe through death into life.
THis may be called an ex∣cellent comfort, and ra∣tified with a solemne Oath, That wee Christians, when wee onely beleeue in Iesus Christ, and that the Father sent him for our righteous∣nesse; then néed we take no care for dying, nor bée afraid of damnation, but doo passe through this temporall death to euerlasting life: that is, so soone as we are dead before all mens eyes, wée are, in the twinkling of an eye, with God in euerlasting life. Who would then feare to die? O vnbeliefe, O originall sinne, that thou shouldest so hardly beléeue so many Promises, so many Miracles, and such
solemne Oaths of the true Son of God, made vnto the Saints and children of Christ. Iohn 11. I am the Resurrection and life. He that beléeueth on me, shall liue, although hee die: and who liueth and beléeueth on me, shall not die for euer. IN this Saying, the Lord teacheth vs for what cause death is no death to vs, but a beginning of eternall life: for, our Lord Iesus Christ liueth, and is the Resurrection and the life, because we are mem∣bers of Christs Body, incor∣porated to him in holy Bap∣tism.
Therefore shall wee liue with him for euer, as sure as he our head liueth; onely be∣cause our life is hidden with Christ in GOD. But when Christ our life shall appeare, then shall wee also appeare with him in glory, Colos. 3. O Lord, strengthen my faith. 1 Thes. 4. For if we belieue, that Ie∣sus Christ is dead, and risen, so shall they which do sléep in Iesus Christ, be carried away with him, &c. 1 Cor. 11. Behold, I tell you a my∣stery: we shall not all sléep.
THE Holy Ghost hath a strange spéech; who cal∣leth that a Sléep, which the world nameth Dying; and the dead, sléeping. With these words doth the holy Ghost declare vnto vs in a familiar comparison, that the death of Christians is no death, but a life; and descri∣beth to vs the temporal death of the faithfull Christians, af∣ter the friendliest manner. For, euen as there is no∣thing tearer or pleasanter to a sicke body vpon the earth, than a swéet sléep, when hee stretches himself in his body, and tumbles himself certaine
times to and fro vpon his bed, and feeleth grief, as if a mans head did ake. But before he bée aware, a soft sléep falleth vpon him: there sléepeth hée, and knowes not how or when. Hee heareth nothing, nor knoweth hee any thing: hée sleepeth away both thundring and lightning; neither can he tell how long hee hath slept. When he awaketh, his wea∣rinesse and sicknes is gone, and hee is as if hee were new borne: which euery one hath tried oftentimes in his sléep. So, saith the Lord God, is it also with the death of euery Christian. When wee haue wrought our selues weary vpon earth, and haue suffered and liued,
and often-times tossed our selues to and fro vpon our groning bedde, by reason of our bodily sicknes (for Chri∣stians must also, for their sinnefull flesh sake, haue their bodily sickenesse and griefe); then when, in the last com∣bate, the sinfull flesh and blood is killed, and the heart hath yéelded it selfe prisoner, that wee may bee spunne new and holy (which is not done without griefe), a swéet sléep commeth vpon vs, where all griefes and afflictions doo cease. There a Christian doth not knowe how he fell asléep: he is not aware of any death, nor knoweth hée of any, but liueth in the Lord GOD. And in this sléepe shall wée
sléep out all sinne, defects, miseries, sicknesse, woes and necessities, and shall awake at the last Day, and rise a∣gaine in a new, holy, spiri∣tuall, immortall, effectuall, and clarified body, and shall behold GOD and his glory face to face, and whole Chri∣stendome in euerlasting ioy. And although one haue slept fiue thousand yéeres vnder the ground, it shall bée as if he had slept but one houre; as the Christians in olde time were wont to describe vnto children, and to the simple, with example of the 7 Slée∣pers. With these words should we comfort our selues against the feare and bitter∣nesse of death: whereas wée
also beléeue, and with Sime∣on do sing with peace & ioy, I hence depart: in Gods wil my heart is comforted, béeing quiet and still; as God hath said, Death is my sleep, I am not afraid. O Mercifull God and Fa∣ther, I pray thée, throgh the death and resurrection of thy Son, when I haue liued and groned mee weary, and that mine houre is comne; grant mee, O Lord, a sweet sleep, and take my soule into thy hands, Amen. Dan. 12. Many which haue slept
vnder the ground, shal awake: some to euerlasting life, some to euerlasting reproofe and shame. THe Prophet Daniel v∣seth heer to speake after an Euangelicall manner, and calleth death also a sléepe. As Christ speaketh of the illumi∣nate Schoole maisters daugh∣ter, The Mayden is not dead, but sleepeth: And nameth Death, a sléepe. And without doubt the Holy Ghost had re∣spect heere to the death and Resurrection of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, by whom all pow∣er is taken away from death, Esay 25. Therefore should wée
Christians remember such friendly, kind, and comforta∣ble speeches; That wee speak not iestingly of the death of them that sleepe, as the wic∣ked and rude people do: He is gone into the old World: Hee is gone into the old Market: Hee is at Trores: His spoone is fallen downe: No, it is called, fallen asléep. S. Paul nameth it a depar∣ture, to bée dissolued; Saint Peter, to put off his Taber∣nacle, &c. But in what man∣ner such sléepe is, can wee not perceiue or vnderstand, more then of temporall sléepe know wee perfectly: As for example, In the mothers bo∣dy, the mother knoweth no∣thing till it stirre: So we in
bodily sléepe can do nothing; what can wee know of the sleepe of the Holy Ghost? But Christ instrueteth vs that beléeue, of such sleepe, Luke 20. They liue in God, saith hee. And heere it is to bée noted, that not onely Christians haue their sleepe, but the wicked also: but it is an vn∣like sleepe, a soft and swéete sleepe, against an vnquiet and heauy sleepe. As when one is sicke, hee hardly sléepeth: but he which is in health sléepeth soundly. But the vngodly do dreame alwaies of the diuell, as the Rich-man. Esay 66. Vermis eorum non morietur: But the Christians do rest in Christ, quietly and
peaceable, like a little inno∣cent Chilue, which often slée∣peth so soundly (as a man saith) Like a vong Hare. The same did Duid acknow∣ledge, therefore saith hée, Psal. 4. I will lay mee downe and sleepe quietly; for thou onely, O Lord, makest mee to dwell in safety. From such sleep shall be also a waking to all them which beleeue on Christ, and haue holden with his holy Word and Sacraments, and they shall bée comforted. They shall rise againe to e∣uerlasting glory, and receiue the euerlasting garland of ho∣nour, the Heauenly, euerla∣sting and immortall Crowne, and escape euerlasting iudge∣ment
and shame. But the vngodly which haue done euill, forgotten the couenant of their Bap∣tisme, and not beleeued on Christ, they shall awake to euerlasting reproofe and shame. A faire similitude of hoth resurrections haue wée, Gen. 40 on loseph, the Butler and Baker: They were all thrée laid in prison, and came to liberty againe, which signifi∣eth the Resurrection. One of them was set free, came to honour and to his Office a∣gaine: The other was also quit of his troubles, but commeth to the Gallowes: Ioseph signifieth our Lord Iesus Christ, who was also
put into this prison, but guiltlesse. The Butler signi∣fieth all honest Christians which acknowledge their sins, and with hearty repen∣tance and sorrow, haue belée∣ued on Christ: they shall at the latter day bee placed with him in euerlasting glory. The Ba∣ker signifieth all the vngodly: they shall bee also quit of their prison (that is, their Graues) but to euerlasting damna∣tion. Surely, surely, the graue is a very soft resting bed for Christians, which the Lord Iesus hath before warmed for them, that they neede not bee afraide thereof: Therein haue they a good, soft, and quiet sleepe. There shall
they alwaies dreame of the Vine. For the Vine signifi∣eth Christ; and the Grapes. the sweete doctrine of the ho∣ly Gospell, as it Mathew 7. appeareth. Doe men gather Grapes on Thornes? Iohn 15. Ego sum vitis vera, &c. There dreame the Christi∣ans in death and Graue, al∣waies on the Lord Iesus Christ, and of his swéee Doctrine. And in such soft dreames rest they so soft, that they thinke many thou∣sand yeares bee as though they had scantly slept an houre. But the Baker (that is the vngodly) dreameth al∣waies of the Diuell, and how the birds doe eate his
Bread out of the Basket. The Birds are the Diuels, which eate away Gods word from him: Such eating and gnawing must they féele for euer; whereof wee haue a similitude, which our El∣ders fained of Prometheus, that the Eagle did eate out his heart, and the heart did grow within him againe, and the eating neuer had end. The same doe the wic∣ked féele truely, as the wo∣full tragedy of the Rich man sheweth. That there are two resur∣rections, whereby all men may direct themselues, God causeth to bee preached vnto vs in the time of Grace: Therefore, whosoeuer will
escape such euerlasting gnaw∣ing eating consciences, hel∣lish paine and torment, let him take hold of the sweete doctrine of the Holy Gospell, and in the Sacraments, put therewith comfort into his heart, trust, and beléeue, as Gods word doth plentifully shew him; for so it must bée, as Christ very comfortably promiseth, Mark 16. Whoso∣euer beleeueth, and is bapti∣zed, shall be saued, Amen.
A Prayer. O Euerlasting God and Father, which art not a God of the dead, but of the liuing: For in thée doe all they liue, which rest vnder the Earth in their Cham∣bers: Wee pray thy fatherly goodnesse, that thou wilt not let the thinking of death, or of his sting, bee a feare vnto vs; but wilt through grace of thy holy Spirit, keepe vs in she right faith of thy déere Sonne, who is the truth and life, and giue vs a good con∣science, that wee may liue Christianly, and depart hap∣pily out of this vale of mise∣rie,
sleepe in peace and ioy' and rest quietly, vntill thou open our Graues; And tho∣rough the sound of the trum∣pet, bée waked againe to life, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. 1. Cor. 15. It is sowed a naturall body, &c. HEere the Holy Ghost vseth another word, and calleth Dying, To be sowed, which is a friendly similitude: wee are the Wheatcornes (as Christ himselfe saith. Ioh. 12) Now is the séed which the Husbandman soweth
glory, and bring foorth much fruit, whereon God the holie Trinitie shall haue euerlast∣ing ioy and pleasure. There∣fore should wee not bée afraide of death. A Prayer. O Lord Iesus Christ, come and sowe vs and our Children in thy Churchyard, that wee neuer neede to bee afraide for any trouble, néede, warres, or hearts sorrow, A∣men.
Luke 2. The old man Simeon singeth. Lord, now lettest thou thy Seruant depart in peace. THis olde Christian Si∣meon calleth Death, a Departing in Peace, which is also the saying of the Holie Ghost: for there is nothing in our whole body vpon earth, but vnrestfulnesse and dis∣quietnesse, one after another. But when we, our Lord and GOD, shall goe out of this vale of miserie, and come in∣to our euerlasting Countrey, then come wee vnto Peace. What man would not then
once haue also such peace and rest? Philip 1. I desire to depart, or to bée dissolued, and to bee with Christ; which is also much better. HEere Saint Paul calleth Death, A Dissoluing or a departure: for héere we are bound to sinnefull flesh, to paines and labour, and can∣not sooner bee quit thereof, then through the happie houre. 2. Pet. 1. I know that I shall quick∣ly put off my Tabernacle.
SAint Peter nameth Death héere, the Going out of a poore, ruinated, sinfull, and wofull Habitation, and to be remooued into a glorious pa∣radise, or to put off an olde worne gowne, and to put on an immortall and heauenly ap∣parell, whereof we ought by good reason to reioyce. Esay 26. Go hence (my people) into a chamber, and shut the doore after thée: hide thée awhile, till the indignation bee ouer∣past. Esay 57. The righteous are plue∣ked away from their misfor∣tune;
and they which haue wandred righteously, do come into peace, and rest in their chambers. HOW friendly and ioy∣fully speaketh the Holie Ghost of the death of Christi∣ans, and giueth the same fiue beautifull names! First, Dying, hee calleth, Going into a Chamber, to goe into a pleasant Parlour, as often-times a man buil∣deth a pleasant roome for him∣selfe, where hee would wil∣lingly héee alone, and bee quiet from his children and hous∣hold. Secondly, he nameth death, Hiding one a while, till Gods wrath and punishment bee o∣uerpast,
as when one stands vnderneath for soule weather, or hideth his daughter, when an army passes thorow, so doth the Lord God lay vs vp, that no misfortune hurt vs. Thirdly, Death is called, Plucking away from misfor∣tune: for when GOD will punish the World for their sinnes, hee taketh first his Christians away, gathereth them together, remooueth them into a place of safetie, that they be not hurt. Fourthly, it is called De∣parting in peace, as Simeon did. Fiftly, Resting in their chambers: for else vpon earth will be small rest or peace.
But the Graue of the Christians hee calleth, our Chambers and resting beds, wherein no man shall disqui∣et vs, or awake vs, nor any man can driue vs out, There would many a one also haue gladly a resting Chamber vpon Earth, and buildeth often with great charges in quiet places, euen where hee heareth no knock∣ing or running, especially when hee is sick; but all is to no effect, for on Earth is no such fléeping Chamber to bée had: wee are awaked with care, sorrow, need, world, and Diuell. So are our Chambers vpon earth but hired Cham∣bers: although wee haue
bought them, wee know not when wee shall goe foorth of them. But the Chambers in the Church-yard are quiet, and our owne. There shall no care, sickenesse, nor Diuell, make vs vnquiet, neyther shall anie man driue vs out, till the Lord Iesus awake vs to euerlasting life. This is comfortably and ioyfully spoken of the death of Christians, and of the Graue: Hee that beléeueth it, will béeglad from his heart for the houre. Philip. 1. Christ is my life, and Death is my gaines. SAint Paul giueth Death heere, a fayre name, his
greatest and best gaines: for there hee layeth in exchange a mortall, needefull, defectiue, sinnefull, weake, sicke, and vnperfect body, and taketh for the same againe, for vsurie and gaines, an euerlasting, immortall, holy, strong, and spirituall body, which may be called a Gaines: who would be afraid to die? Psal. 116. The death of his Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord. BEfore the world and our fiue Senses, nothing is more horrible nor terrible yea, nor more dishonourable, then death, and a dead body.
But before the face of Al∣mightie God, the Death of Christians is the fairest Re∣lique. Gen. 15. God saith to Abraham, Thou shalt goe to thy Fa∣thers with peace. HEere God himselfe na∣meth Death, a Going home into his Country, and to come to his Parents and Friends; And withall, vpon the iourney, to be conducted with peace. As a childe that hath beene long amongst strangers, re∣ioyceth in his heart, that hee may once goe home, so should wee also reioyce, when our
deaths houre approacheth, that wee may goe home into our euerlasting Country, and with all Christendome, haue an euerlasting Nuptiall day and ioy. Genes. 25. Abraham was gathered to his people. SO doth the Holy-Ghost speak of Abrahams death: For heer on earth wee are among a sort of euill degene∣rated people, with whom wée shall bée plagued and marty∣red; as the Children of If∣rael were of the Aegyptians, and of their Taske-mai∣sters. This Sentence of holie
Scripture, should wee con∣ceiue and keepe: wherewith wee may in dangerous times learne to prepare vs, and to comfort our selues, and pray with our hearts for an happy houre. And when we sée death be∣fore our eyes, or thinke ther∣of, not to be afraid. Vpon these sentences out of holy Scripture, haue the honest Christians alwaies had goodly wordes, where∣with they haue comforted themselues against Death: Of which wee will rehearse some. Cicely, a godly Christian woman of Rome, when her kindred would perswade her she should deny our Lord Ie∣sus
Christ, and what shee did meane to make such light ac∣count of her body and life, the highest treasure and best pawn we haue? Shee answered, If it had concerned onely our life, wee should not willingly lose it. But I beléeue another bet∣ter life, which lasteth for e∣uer, of which IESUS CHRIST hath preached vnto vs. This true Martyr and Confessor of the true Christi∣an faith, did take holde on the right comfort. Shee was not afraid of the horrible Death: for, shee knew, that this temporall Death was a beginning of euerlasting life. Item, whereas wee Chri∣stians
doo say and confesse, Miseria hominis moritur, non homo: that is, Of a Christian dieth nothing but his warres and miseries: hee dieth not. And it is true. No ioyfuller houre can happen vnto vs Christians vpon earth, than the happy houre of death: for euen in the twinkling of an eye, all our woes and mise∣ries doo
incessantly, deaths sting and sicknesse: but when wee are dead in the sight of the world, then doo wée first liue, and doo neuer feél any more either danger or death. For, our temporall death is an end of death, and a beginning of life. Item, whereas the Chri∣stian saith, Without the knowledge of Christ, death  sinne:
ledgeth Christ, to him is temporall death the best re∣medy for sinne; whereby fi∣nally sin is scoured quite out of our flesh and bloud, body and soule, that we neuer sinne more. Therefore wée should (by good reason) be glad of death, that wée may bée once rid of that shamefull sinne, where∣with wee are plagued and tormented day and night: as Saint Paul cryeth out ouer this prosecuting sinne, Ro∣mans 7. Now, as honest Christi∣ans haue out of Gods Word, for their comfort, spoken friendly and familiarly of death: so haue they also gi∣uen comfortable names to
the Graues, and to Burials. Prudentius dooth call the Graue, Our Lord God's Iewell-house; wherein hée hath his deare Gold and Re∣liques, and halloweth the A∣shes and Bones of his Chri∣stians, and will at the last Day demand them again by waight. The holy Scripture na∣meth the Buriall-place, A House of the Liuing, who dwell there aliue indeed. All other dwellings vpon earth (although they bee built of pure Cypresse and Marble) are but Pest-houses, where men doo sicken and die. One∣ly the Graues of Christians are the Houses of the Li∣uing.
The Latine Church calls the Church-yard, A sléeping house. The Dutchmen call it God's Field, wherein God soweth vs, as hath béen said before. Besides all these, Christ our Lord was buried: hee hath hallowed and warmed the graue for vs, and left his linnen clothes therein. And the holy Angels dwell in the graue, doo watch and kéep vs in our resting bed. Now, he that is so instruc∣ted in Gods Word, and be∣léeueth, desireth from his hart to bee out of his groning bed of sorrow, and to bee in his resting bed. Whereupon, the Lord Ie∣sus Christ help vs, through
grace of thy holy Spirit, A∣men. Rom. 14. Whether I liue or die, I am the Lords. A Prayer. O Lord Iesus Christ, all they which are baptized in thee, are baptized in thy death. I am baptized in thée, therefore am I also baptized in thy death. I will with thy help die merrily and willing∣ly; hoping, that as I haue bin partaker of thy troubles, I shall be also partaker of thy glory. O Lord Iesus Christ, thou
hast prayed vpon the Crosse, Father, forgiue them: So, Lord, doo I forgiue all that haue done against mee, that thou maist pardon mee of all my sinnes. O Lord Iesus Christ, thou hast called vpon the Crosse, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? Lord, leaue mee not at the point of death. O Lord, thou hast said vp∣on the cross, Eather, into thy hands I commend my spirit: euen so, Lord, do I commend my poor soule into thy hands, Amen. Psalm 31. Into thy hands I commit my Spirit: thou hast redée∣med
me, O Lord GOD of truth. An Epitaph of Gasper Huberin. Oh a sinner! Born, aliue, and dead am I. Christ my Lord, Renew, forgiue, and wake me vp. I am faithfull. Preserue, make cleare, and saue me. Psalme 4. I laid me downe, and slept quietly, for thou onely (O Lord) helpest me, that I dwel in safetie.
How wee in the euerlasting life to come, shall see and knowe one another. I beléeue a resurrection of the flesh, and an euerlasting life. WHen one preacheth of the resurrection of the dead, and hath heard how the dead doo rise; there ariseth a question amongst many; If wee also, in the euerlasting life to-come, shall knowe one another, as we doo héer? Of the Resurrection is no doubt; thereof are wee certaine e∣nough: and withall we know, that, if any haue a defect or
want on his body, that he hal∣ted, were lame, or a Cripple, and had not all his limbs, the same shall be all taken away in the resurrection of the dead, and shall bee altogether whole, and haue all his mem∣bers wholly. But shall wee in another life knowe one an∣other? Héerto doo the learned men giue this answer: Yes, wee shall knowe one another there. Séeing that God will make the whole man aliue a∣gaine with flesh and bones, shall knowledge and memory be gone? Nothing at all. Therefore shall you héer learne, that wee shall knowe all; not onely those which we now knowe, but those which wée knew not, nor in our life
time had euer séen, the same shall we see, and knowe how to call them, and they vs a∣gain. The Learned also doo say, that the Christians shall not onely knowe one another, but the vngodly also: and the wicked shall knowe them whom they haue héer oppres∣sed and persecuted, Sapience, chap. 5. There shall the wic∣ked say with repentance, Are not these they whom wee haue mocked? Oh how are they now reckoned among the children of God!
I. Testimony of Scrip∣ture. THe first proof they take from Adam. You know, that God made Heauen and Earth, with all ye Creatures: and Adam was made last of all. Then GOD let all yt Beasts passe by him: and when he saw them, he knew euery Beast, and his proper∣ty, and gaue to euery Beast his name according to his property. As Adam now na∣med them, so must they bée called at this present day. If Adam then in the naturall body, and before the Fall, had such sharp eyes, that he could see the Beasts in his heart; as for example, what the na∣ture
and property of ye Stork is, which hath a naturall born loue to the old ones that haue brought her vp: shall not we much more in the new spiri∣tuall body, which shall beare the Image of Christ, bee a thousand times wiser, and knowe all? This is a right good argument. The II. Argument. THis is like the first, that Adam knew Eue so soon as God brought her to him, when hée had made her of his ribs, before GOD said one word vnto him. There it is rightly said, Ille est felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas. Therefore said Adam (according vnto the Hebrew speech) This is mercifulnes: she shall haue a true hart, and shall bee called Woman, &c. Whil'st Adam in his na∣turall life had such sharp eies: shall wee not much more in the spirituall and euerlasting life, haue much sharper eies, that wee knowe one another, and also those which in this life we haue not knowne? I cannot finde any thought in me, to withdraw it from mee, that it should not be. The III. Argument. THe third proof they take from Christ, when Mary
Magdalen mette him in the garden, who (being yet in her sinnefull body) did quickly knowe him by his spéech, and likewise the Apostles also: much more shall wee knowe one another, when wee shall haue pure clarified eies. The IIII. Argument. CHrist laieth before vs the Rich-man and poor La∣zarus, which is no similitude, but a true History acted; al∣though it bée wonderfull and strange vnto vs, that in ano∣ther life they shall both know one another. In brief: There shall be a right perfect knowledge, that wée shall also knowe the
high Maiesty of God, and sée him face to face, as Iob com∣forted himself, chapter 19. I shall see God in my flesh. Such knowledge shal hap∣pen vnto vs, as the custome was in old time amongst our Elders, when they kept the hallowing of their Church, when all the friends and kin∣red came together once in a yéer, which had in a long time before not séen one another, as they vse often at Easter and Christmasse to visit their good friends. There are they knowne amongst the kinred: Is not that my Vncle? Is not this my Aunt? Are not these also my cousins and friends? So that they knowe one another with great ioy.
Then knowe, that at the la∣ter Day shall be the right re∣newed day, that right Church Holy-day shall begin; where all Christendome shall come together, make themselues knowne one to another, and shall haue an euerlasting Church-Feast, a perpetuall Easter-Feast, and a day of eternall ioy. These things should a Christian remember: for, they serue to this end, that many a one may bée comfor∣ted therewith, when hée must depart from a good Friend, Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, goeth far off, and knoweth not at his returne if hée shall finde them in health. Or else in the time of mor∣tality,
when we should depart one from another, then may one comfort himself in thin∣king thus: I shall not yet lose him altogether: I know, that our Lord God hath appointed a Church-holy-day, where my dearest children, brethren, sisters and good friends, come to mee again: there will wee consult together for euer. The same is a notable com∣fort, when his father, mother, and kinred bee dead, that hée be not discourged, but know that they bee but gone before him. And therefore it is called thus: Coming again makes me sure, That I esteem not departure.
A Praier. O LORD Iesus Christ, which art the conductor of life, thou through thy death hast ouercome euerlasting death in victory, made sin and death to be nothing, and con∣firmest with a double oath, that we which kéep thy word stedfastly in our hearts, shall not see death eternally; doost comfort and promise to vs thy faithfull, that we shall be for euer in the height of ioy and saluation where thou art. Therefore wee pray thee from our hearts, O Lord Iesus Christ, that thou wilt, through the grace of thy holy
Spirit preserue vs constantly in such faith, that thy King∣dome may quickly come, that wee may bee deliuered out of this vale of misery, that wée and our faithfull Children, Parents, Brethren and Si∣sters, all our kinsfolks, and all godly people (through thy spirituall grace) may bee brought one to another, as thou didst bring to the widow of Naim, her dear son in bo∣dily maner. That thou woul∣dest also (as thy Word com∣forteth) graciously grant, that as Adam in the state of inno∣cency knew Eue, of whom he before did knowe nothing; and as thou, after thy holy re∣surrection, didst make thy self knowne, we likewise may sée
and knowe one another in the highest ioy of thy saluation, and to thy laud & praise, may consult together euerla∣stingly. Amen, Lord Iesus Christ, Amen.
Heer after follow godly Sayings and Prayers, taken out of the Psalms of Dauid, to be vsed in the extreme necessity of death. O Lord, rebuke me not in thy Indignation: neither cha∣sten thou mee in thy heauy displeasure. Haue mercy vpon mée, O
Lord, for I am weake: my soule also is sore troubled, but Lord, how long? Turne thee, O Lord, and deliuer my soule. O saue me for thy mercies sake. O Lord my God, in thée haue I put my trust: saue me from all them that persecute me, and deliuer me. Haue mercy vpon mee, O Lord: consider the trouble which I suffer of them that hate mee, thou that liftest me vppe from the very gates of death. O Lord, thou art hee that tooke mee out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope, when I hanged yet vpon my mothers brests. Go not from me then: for,
trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help me. I am powred out like wa∣ter: all my bones are out of ioynt: my heart in the midst of my body, is euen like mel∣ting waxe. My strength is dried vp like a potshard, my tongue cleaueth to my gummes: but be not thou farre from me, O Lord, thou art my succour, haste thee to helpe me. Tarry not long (O Lord) for I am very faint. Quicken my soule (O Lord) and bring me foorth in the way of righteousnesse, for thy names sake. Vnto thee (O Lord) I lift my soule, my God, I trust in thee. O let me not be con∣founded,
lest mine enemies triumph ouer mee. For all they that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed. Thou art the God of my saluation. Call to remembrance thy tender mercies, and thy louing kindnesses, which haue euer béene of olde. Remember not the sinnes and offences of my youth, but according vnto thy mercie thinke vpon mee (O Lord) for thy goodnes. For thy Names sake (O Lord) be mercifull vnto my sinne, for it is great. Turne thee vnto me, and haue mercie vpon me, for I am desolate and oppressed. The sorrowes of my heart
are great. O bring mee out of my troubles. Looke vpon mine aduersi∣tie and miserie, and forgiue me all my sinnes. O kéepe my soule, and de∣liuer mee: let mee not be con∣founded, for I haue put my trust in thée. The Lord is my light, and my saluation: whom then should I feare? The Lord is the strength of my life: of whom then should I bee afraid? Though an hoast of men were laide against mee, yet shall not my heart bee afraide: and though there rose vp war against mee, yet will I trust in him. O hide not thou thy face
from mée, cast not thy seruant off in displeasure. Thou art my succour, leaue me not, neither forsake me, O God my Sauiour. The Lord is my strength, and my shield: my heart ho∣peth in him. In thee, O Lord, is my trust: let mee neuer bee put to confusion. Bowe downe thine eare to mee, make haste to deliuer mee. Thou art my strong hold, and my castle. O bee thou my guide, and leade mee for thy Names sake. Into thy hands I com∣mend my Spirit: deliuer me (O Lord God of truth). O Lord, consider my
trouble, and know my Soule in aduersitie. My hope is in thee (O Lord) thou art my God. Shew mee the light of thy countenance, help me for thy mercies sake. Let mee not be confounded (O Lord) for I call vpon thée. Thou art my defence, in the trouble that is come a∣bout mee: O compasse thou mee about also with the ioy of deliuerance. Striue thou with them (O Lord) that striue with mee, fight thou against them that fight against mee, and stand vp to helpe me. Awake, Lord, and stand vp: auenge thou my cause,
my God and my Lord. Thou art my helper and redéemer, make no long tar∣rying, O my God. Arise, O Lord, help me, and deliuer mee for thy mercies sake. Haue mercie vpon mee (O Lord) after thy goodnesse, and according to thy great mer∣cies do away mine offences. For I acknowledge my faults, and my sinne is euer before me. Against thée onely haue I sinned, and done euill in thy sight. Cast mee not away from thy presence. Heare my prayer, O Lord, and hide not thy selfe from my Petition. Take heede vnto
mee, and heare me, and pre∣serue my soule. Fearefulnesse and tremb∣ling are come vpon mee, and an horrible dread hath ouer∣whelmed me. Bee mercifull vnto me (O God) bee mercifull vnto mee, for my soule trusteth in thee, and vnder the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge. Heare my crying (O God) giue heede vnto my prayer: for thou art my hope, a strong Tower for mee against the e∣nemy. Take mee out of the myre, that I sinke not. Heare mee (O Lord) and turne thee vnto me, according vnto thy great mercie. I am poore, and in mise∣rie,
haste thée O God for to helpe mee: For thou art my helpe, my Redéemer and my God: oh make no long tarrying. In thee (O Lord) is my trust, let me neuer bee put to confusion: For thou art the thing that I long for, thou art my hope euen from my youth. Forsake mee not, O Lord, when my strength fayleth mee: for mine enemies that lay white for my soule take their counsell together. Go not farre from mee, O my God: my God, hast thee to helpe mee. O remember not mine ini∣quities, but haue merey vpon me, and that soone.
Helpe me (O Lord my Sa∣uiour) for the glorie of thy Name: O deliuer mee, and forgiue mee my sinnes for thy Name sake. Comfort the soule of thy seruant: for thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercie vnto all them that call vpon thee. In the time of trouble I call vpon thee, turne to me, haue mercie vpon mee, giue thy strength to thy seruant. Thou (O Lord God) art full of compassion, and mer∣cie, long-suffering, great in goodnesse and truth. The snares of death com∣passed mee round about, the paines of hell gat holde vpon me.
I found trouble and hea∣uinesse: O Lord deliuer my soule. Thy mercie (O Lord) en∣dureth for euer: despise not the worke of thine owne hands. Enter not into Iudge∣ment with thy seruant (O Lord) for in thy sight shall no man liuing be iustified. Bring my soule out of trouble, for I am thy ser∣uant.
A Prayer. O My God, my Lord, and Father, now shew vnto my poore soule, that she may perceiue, that thou art my strong rock, castle, shield, to∣wer, defence, hope, succour, refuge, defender and goodnes, that I in this great trouble for mine enemies, through thy godly grace, helpe and as∣sistance, may bee preserued. Lord, in thee I put my trust, let me not bee put to confusion. Into thy hands I commend my spirit: deliuer mee, Lord God of truth, Amen.
A Prayer. O Father, receiue againe the thing which thou hast created. O Sonne, re∣ceiue the thing which thou hast gouerned. O Holy Ghost fetch the thing which thou so boun∣tifully hast preserued. Three persons and one verie God, I beséech you remember not mine offences for euer. For I crie, Lord God and Father, mercie. Lord God Sonne, mercie, Lord God Holy Ghost mercie, Amen.
When thou departest from a sicke person, say vn∣to him. IN your trouble and neces∣sitie, call vnto the Lord and crie vnto your God, and hée will heare your voice, and your crying commeth before him in his eares: And God which called you vnto his e∣ternall glorie by Christ Iesu, shall his owne selfe, after you haue suffered a little affliction, make you perfect, shall settle, strength stablish and saue you. To him be glory and dominion for euer and euer. FINIS.
