6496 99840972 5522
The Principall matters contay∣ned in this discourse. A Short Encomiasticke speech in praise of Charing∣crosse. The sinnes of Westminster. The sinnes of London. The Buildings of Westminster and London. The Names of all the Kings and Queenes that lie buried in Westminster. Westminsters complaint. Vacations and Tearmes compared. A paradox in praise of going to Law. A paradox in praise of a Pen. Londons answere to Westminster. Paules steeples Complaint. The walkes of Paules described. The Stewes on the Banke-side, and the Suburbe-houses of iniquity at  compared together. A paradox in  of . An Inuectiue against . The Originall of London. A description of  bridge-Fayre. A merrie lest of two London Porters performed there, a∣bout burying of a Londo.
To the very Woorthy, Learned, Iuditious, and Noble Gentleman, Syr Iohn Harrington Knight. SIR, the Loue (which your immor∣tall Ariosto tels to the world) that you really beare to Diuine, (but now Poore and Contemned) Poesie, hath a long time made me an Honorer of those bright ascen∣ding Vertues in you, which those Holy and Pure Flames of Her haue kindled in your bo∣some. Happy you are by Birth, Happy, by your bringing vp, but most happy in that the Muses were your Nurses, to whome you haue beene so tender, that they make you an Elder sonne and Heyre of their Goodliest Possessions. So that your Loue to Them, hath drawne from Others, an Honourable Loue and Regarde of you. The Path which True Noblenesse had wont (and ought) to tread, lyes directly before you: you haue beene euer, and are now in the way, which emboldens me to presume, that as our Greatest Commanders will not disdaine to instruct e∣uen Fresh-water souldiers in the Schoole-poynts of war, so (out of your Noble disposition) you will vouchsafe to viewe the labours of so dull a Pen, as This that writes, vnto you. Two Citties haue I summoned to a Parley, and of their great Enter-view haue I chosen you to be Arbi∣ter. It is Boldnes in me, I confesse, but it is the Boldnes, of my Loue, referring which (and my selfe) to your wor∣thy Censure, I Rest. Deuoted to you in all seruice, Thomas Dekker.
Westminsters speech to London. O Thou goodliest Queene,Brute builded London, he conquered this Ile in A 1108. yeares before Christ. Sybert King of the East Sax∣ons, builded Westminster  he raigned in An. 596. after Christ. euen ouer the greatest Citties! How glad am I (O London) that wee two are met together? For now will I poure my sorrows into thy bosome. Thou art Reuerend for thy Age, (as béeing now, two thousand sea∣uen hundred and fouretéene yeares old, which is more then my selfe, am, by a thousand, six hundred and foure yeares) for I am but one thousand, one hundred, and tenne yeares of age.) Thou art Grandam almost to this whole Kingdome:160. Kinges in Brittaine since Brute. A blessed Mother thou art, for no lesse then one hundred and thréescore Emperours, Kinges, and Queens, hast thou borne in thy Wombe. Healthfull thou art of body, it appeareth by thy strength in holding out so long; pure thou art of com∣plexion; It is séene by thy Chéekes, the Roofes of them are nothing wythered: Rich thou art in the treasure of all thinges, witnesse the number of Nations, that for thy sub∣staunce, are thy dayly suitors: stored are thy breastes with wisedome, and the glory thereof shines in the gouernment of thy Rulers.
Thou art full of pollicy, great with experience, renow∣ned for Learning; Thou art full of loue full of pitty, full of piety: yea, thou art (O Noblest Daughter of Brutus) my Eldest Sister; thou rather (if our descents bee well looked into) art my Mother. Unto whom therefore can my condolements better come than to thée. Upon whose lap shall I lay my aking temples if not vpon thine? One eye of Heauen lookes downe vpon vs both; one and the same handfull of earth, serues vs both to dwell vppon: The teares that fall from both our eyes, make vp one Riuer, and that Riuer serues againe for both our bodyes to bath in. Since therefore wee are partners in all other thinges, why should wee not be Sharers in our mothers affliction! Thou standest silent, I sée at these my spéeches, as beeing driuen into wonder, why I (that haue alwayes kept com∣pany with the proudest, and beene euer Iocond) should now sinke downe into any kinde of complayninges. But to kéepe thée (O my best and fayrest Neighbour) from tor∣menting thy selfe with thinking on the causes of this my grieuing: let mée tell thée (thou Nurse to many thousandes of people) that I doe not pine, to see that Auncient and ol∣dest Charing-Crosse. Sonne of mine, with his Limbes broken to péeces, (as if hee were a Male-factor, and hadde beene tortured on the Germaine Whéele:) his Reuerend Head cut off by the cruelty of Time; The Ribbes of his body bruizes; His Armes lop't away; His backe (that euen grew crooked with age) almoust cleft in sunder: yea, and the ground (on which hee hath dwelt so many 316. yeeres since Charing Cross. vvas buided by Ed: 1, Anno. Ch. 1291. hundreds of yeeres) rea∣dy to bee pulled from vnder his feete, so that with gréefe his very heart séemes to be broken. I confesse (thou brauest of Citties) that this Graund-Childe of mine, hath beene the tallest and hardiest of all the Sonnes of my body:An Encomion of Charing Crosse. for thou knowest it aswell as I, that hee hath borne himselfe valiantly, (and without shrinking)
in many a storme. Many a tempest hath beene flung from Heauen to shake him, yet still hath hee kept his owne foo∣ting. Many astounding blow hath he taken on his head, yet for a long time did he beare them without réeling. So well beloued hath hee beene amongst the Kinges and Princes of this Nation, that they would almost neuer passe, to these Royall Pallaces where I inhabit, and neuer repayre to their Houses of Parliaments, or to their places of Kingly Tryumphes, but they would of purpose take their way by him: yea, so greatly hath hee in times past beene helde in honour, that the knees of common people hath beene bow∣ed before him, and the bare heades of the greatest Prelates héertofore haue shewed to him a kinde of reuerence. Yet it is not for his sake (O farre renowed Troynouant) that my Soule liues in sorrow: albeit, I see him now laughed at nd contemned. Neither am I afflicted by beholding the vnrulynesse of those Children that are vnder my kéeping.The sinnes of Westminster. It were a mad∣nesse in mee to trette at theyr wickednesse, because no sor∣row of mine can amend it. I know it, and am ashamed to tell thée,Drunkennesse that Drunkennesse reeles euery day vp and down my streetes. Fellowes there are that follow mee, who in déepe bowles shall drowne the Dutchman, and make him lie vnder the Table. At his owne weapon of Vpsie freeze will they dare him, and beat him with wine-pots till hée be dead drunke.Quartelling. Out swagger they will besides (being armed with that French weapon) a whole Fayre full of Butchers and Tinkers, who commonly are the greatest Fighters, and most profound swearers. As for that sin that is after serued in dinner, and after Supper: or rather that sinne that is vp night and day, and can see aswell in darkenesse as in Lights that Monster with two bellies,Lechery. (Lechery I meenne) doe what I can, no whips are able to make it leape out of my Iurisdiction. More Mayden-heades I verily be∣léeue
are cut off vpon my owne feather-beds (in one year) than are heads of Cattell cut off in (in two) amongst the Butchers that serue my families. But I feare (O London) that by dwelling so near thée thou hast infeted my houses with these two plagues, that now run ouer all the Kingdome: for all the world knowes that euen thy shop-kéepers and poorest Tradesmen lay by their owne occupations, and fall to these. Pride.Other sinnes lies gnawing (like diseases) at my heart, for Pride sits at the doores of the rich:Enuy. Extortion. Enuy goes vp and downe with the Begger, féeding vpon Snakes. Rents are layde vpon the racke (euen my own sight) and by my own Children that I haue borne, whilst Conscience goes like a foole in pyed colours, the skin of her body hanging so loose, that like an Oxford Gloue, thou wouldst swear there wer a false skin within her. AuariceCouerousnes hath got a hundred handes, and all se hands do nothing but tye knots on her Purse-strings, but Prodigality hauing but two handes,Vathriftines. vndoes those knottes faster, than the other can tie them. O thou Darling of Great Brittaine, thy Princes call thée Their Treasurer and thou art so. But more peeces of Siluer and Gold passe not through thy fingers, then oathes from the mouthes of my inhabitants. Thou art held to be (O London) the lowdest swearer in the kingdome, because (some say) thou hast whole shoppes and Ware-houses filled vvith oathes yet I feare,Swearing: I haue those about me that for filthy mouthing wil put thée down,Knights of the Posl. for I am haunted with some that are called Knights onely for their swearing. Ranckely doe these and other stinking wéedes grow vp in my walkes, and in my Gardens, the sauours of them are Pestilent to my Nosthrils, and are a∣ble to kill me, yet much good wholesome fruits do I féed vp∣on, that are to my life a preseruation. So, that for the aches that these diseases bréed in my bones I doe not languish neyther.
Thou knowest and I confesse it,The building of Westmin∣ster and Lon∣don compa∣red. (for if I should not, the whole world would swear it) that thou possessest the more, but I the more goodly buildings: thy hauses are contryued for thrist and profitable vses, mine for state and pleasure: thou dwe lest vnder plaine roofes, I within royall Palla∣ces: euery roome that thou lodgest in, is but called a Cham∣ber, and euery Chamber I sleepe in, is a Kinges Court: In thine Armes lie the sonnes of England to suck wealth, but in my lap sit the Princes of England to be Crowned, In my bosome doe they slumber whilest they liue, and when they dye, they desire to bee buried betwéene my breasts. To testifie this, all the annoyted kinges and Queenes, (except one, who receiued his Crowne at Glocester) with all the Wiues of those kinges, that haue raigned heere since that Norman Conqueror, would if they were now li∣uing speake on my side in that behalfe, for the full number of 21. Kinges and two Quéens (being a payre of Sisters) haue receiued the glorious Titles of Maiestie,21 Kings and two Queenes besides the wiues of those Kinges haue bin crowned at Westminst. and were seen the very first day of their sitting on the English throne onely at my hands, and in my presence, of which that con∣querour, and Matilda (his wife) had the honour to begin, for till hys time, other places wer made happy by that dig∣nity, as Kingston, &c. which then were farre aboue me, but now can no way be my equall.William con∣querour, and his Wife the first that were crowned in Westminster. To proue how much the Rulers of this Monarchy haue lo∣ued mee euen on their Death-beds, their bodies which they haue (as their richest Legacies) bequethed to my kéeping, are royall witnesses. I can shew thee (O thou Noblest of thy Nation) the bones not onely of most of those kinges before-named, but of some that liued here long before them. But because the Graue is the vtter destroyer of al beau∣ty, yea and so defaceth the lookes and the bodies euen of the goodliest princes, that men abhorre to behold them: also for that it is helde an acte most impious, and full of Sacri∣ledge to offer violence to the deade, I will onely giue thee
the names of all those Kinges, Queenes, and Princes Royal bloud, that now lay their heads on my knées & must sléepe there till that day,Kings buryed in Westmin. when all that rest in graues, shal be summoned to awaken. Of these, was Sybert (King of the East-Saxons) the first, with his wife Aethelsoda. Sy∣bert gaue me my first being in the world, and at his depar∣ture from the worlde, did I giue his body an euerlasting habitation. Next vnto him did I lay Harold (Sir-named Hare-foot) King of the West Saxons. Then Edward the Confessor, vppon whome king Wil∣liam bestowed a shryne of Syluer and Golde. And then these. Aegytha, wife to that Conquerour. Matilda, wife to Henry the first, and daughter to Mal∣coline king of Scots. Henry 3. who builded a great part of that my famous Temple, and whose Sepulcher was adorned with preci∣ous stones of Iasper, fetched by his sonne Edwarde the 1. out of France. Eleanor, wife to that Henry. Edmund second Sonne to that Henrie, the first Earle of Lancaster, Darby, and Liecester, wyth Auelyne (hys Wife) who was Daughter and heyre to the Earle of Al∣bemarle. Besides him, all the Children of the sayde Henry the 3. and of Edward, 1. (being nine in number.) Edward the first, who offered to the Shryne of Edward the Confessor, the Chaire of Marble, wherein the kinges of Scotland had wont to be crowned, and in which the king that first made England and Scotlande one Monarchy, was now lately inthronized. Eleanor wife to that Edward 1. and Daughter to Ferdinando king of Castyle. In memo∣ry of whose death, so many stately Crosses (as Monu∣mentes of his loue to her) were erected in all those places where her body was set downe, when it was sent to bee lodged with mee.
Eleanor, Countesse of Barre, Daughter of Edwarde the first, Edward 3. and Phillip of Henalt (his wife.) Wiliam of Windsore and Blanch (his Sister) children to Edward the third. Thomas of Wood-stock, sonne likewise to that Edward, Iohn of Eltham, (Earle of Cornewall) sonne to Edward the second. Richard 2. that vnfortunate king with Anne his Wife, Daughter of Vinceslaus king of Bohem, which Anne brought vp the fashion for women to ride in side Saddles, which till her time rode as men. Then that Guttorum Mastix, the scourge of the French, Henry 5. to doe honor to whose victorious and dreaded name, Katherine his wife, and daughter to the King of France, caused an Image (to the portraiture of hir husbande) to bee made of Massy Siluer, all gilded ouer, which was layde vpon his Monument: but Couetousnes, not suffering euen hallowed places, and the shrines of the dead to bee frée from hir griping talents, the head of that I∣mage, which was al of Massy siluer, is now broke off, & the plates that couered the body stoln, and conueyed away. That royall Quéene and Bedfellow of his, Lady Kathe∣rine, was with mee likewise layd to rest, but after, beeing taken vp, (without any wrong meant to the body) it nowe lyes vnburied in a poore Coffin of bordes and with the least touch falleth into ashes. Adde to these, Anne the wife of Richard the third. Margaret Countesse of Richmond and Darby, mother to Henry the 7. Anne of Clue, wife to Henry the 8. Henry 7. and Elizabeth his wife, do in mine armes like∣wise take their euerlasting sleeps: so does Elizabeth daugh∣ter to those most happy Princes. So doth Margaret daughter to Edward 4. So doth Edward the 6. Sonne to that famous prince, Henry 8.
So doth Mary whose name serues her only as a Monu∣ment. And lastly so doth Elizabeth, daughter to that great wa∣riour, who if shee had no Monnument at all consecrated to memory, yet were her name sufficient to eternize her Sa∣cred worth, and the wonder of her 44. years gouernement. Thus (besides other personages of great byrth, too many in number for me to recite and too tedious for thée to heare) am I compassed about with the dead bodies of 42, Kings, Quéenes, and the sons and daughters of Kings & Quéens, ye remembrance of whom is able to turn me wc sorrow into Marble, 42 Kings and Queenes and the Children of Kinges bu∣ried in West. but yt their statues & sumptuous monuments, do shine in my Temples, and worke such astonishment in the eyes (euen of straungers) that I estéeme that hurt of mine, the best part of my glory. Besides all these gallant obiects. The swifte-footed Thamesis, daunseth all the day long, (in wanton Water-ringes) before mee, shee transformes her Christall body into a thousand shapes to delight mee: Sometimes does shee chaunge her selfe into High water. a Girdle of Siluer, and then doe I weare it about my middle. Some∣times lookes shee like an Rough water. Amazon, (along curled hayre hanging loosely about her shoulders) and then dooes shee fight with the windes, and her combates are discharged with excellent grace. Anon shall you beholde her lymbes stretcht out to an infinite, but comely Ebbing water for then shee runs into the Sea, where hir length cannot be measured. length,) and then (O my worthyest Sister) doe we two grow proude, and take her for a Ryuer whilest shee continues in that shape, thou knowest what delicate turnings and windinges shee does make euen at our féete: thy habitations stande then like a rich Embrodery about the skirts of an imperial gar∣ment, but my buildinges shew like so many Castles, rai∣sed by Enchantment, where faire Ladies locke vppe their beauties, whilst knights aduenturers come armed thether with loyalty, challenging them for their loues: yea in such goodly, & in so artificial an order are my Turrets and To∣wers errected, that the Sun (at his rising) makes mee be∣léeue
they are Rockes of Burnisht Siluer, & with his blu∣shing vpon them (at his going downe) I haue a thousande times sworne they were so many hils of Gold. Bee thou nowe an indifferent Iudge (O London, thou fayrest Daughter of Europe) if I, beeing accusto∣med to this fulnesse of dignitie, and this variety of plea∣sures, haue not good cause to languishe when I am depri∣ued of them all. The more princely are my guests, the more insufferable, and more to be pittied are my passions, spent for their absence. Well was it for thée (thou Metropolis of the world) that the honours, the Habits, the Tryumphes, the gifts of Kinges, and the Reuennewes that belong to my Royaltyes, are not made Thine: thou swellest in thy heart enough already, but then wouldst thou haue bin too proud and insolent. How therefore can I choose but buffet my owne chéekes through the anguish of my Soule? Teare my owne hayre to sée my selfe distressed? and euen drinke mine own hart∣bloud in teares, to looke on my present miserie? Listen to me: for now (O my déerest Play-fellow) shalt thou heare the very true tunes of my most iust bewaylings. Those throwes of sorowe come vppon mee foure times euery yéere,Westminsters complaint. but at one time more, (and with more paines) then at all the rest. For in the height and lustiest pride of Summer, when euery little Uillage hath her Bathilers & her Damosels tripping deftly about May-pols: when Me∣dowes are full of Hay-makers: when the fieldes vpon the workidaies are full of Haestars singing, and the town∣gréenes vpon Hollydayes, trodden downe by the Youthes of the Par dancing: when thou (O thou beautifull, but bewitching Citty) by the wantonnesse of thine eye,Bartholmew∣tide. The long vacation before Michelmas Tearme. and the Musicke of thy voyce allurest people from all the corners of the Land to throng in heapes, at thy Fayres and thy Theators; Then, (euen then) sit I like a Widdow in the middest of my mourning: then doe my buildings shew like infected lodgings, from which the Inhabitants are fledde▪
then are my chambers empty, and my common paths vn∣trodden: then doe I not looke like thy next neighbour,The Court & 4. Tearmes but like a creature forlore, and vtterly forsaken. Were it not that my state is vphold by fiue great Pillers, (the chiefe of them being so hie, that Kinges and Princes sit on the top of it) I should euen loose my name, and the memory of mée would be buryed in the earth, that now beares me vp. That first and Capitall The Court. Columne (on which leanes all my strength) is a Pyramides, whose point reaches vppe to the Starres: whilest that stands in mine eye, I behold a The King. Maiesty, equall to Ioues: I sée a The Queen and her Po∣geny. Vine, whose braunches shall spread so farre, and so hie, that one day they shall co∣uer Kingdomes. I see likewise a The Coun∣sell. Table, at which sit none, but Those, whose heads grow white onely with the Cares of a Kingdom: I sée a Row of The Nobi∣lity. Lords too, whose flourishing doth dignify the place vppon which they grow, and whose shady boughes beate backe, and kéepe off from the people the violent heate of Tyrrany and oppression: Besides all these, do I behold a goodly Fountain, The Clergy large, cleare, strong∣ly, and curiously built, out of which come a thousand pipes, (some greater then the rest) thorough whome a swéete water flowes, that giues life vnto the Soule. And last of all (so full is my happinesse) in stead of earthly Creatures, I see none but The Ladyes of the Court. Goddesses. But (woe is me) when this great Piller is remooued from my sight, then (casting vp mine eye) me thinks I looke vpon nothing but my owne Ruines. Nay, that calamitie of mine doth euen stretch to thée; for thou thy selfe, for all thy loftinesse and boasting, dooest at that time droope, and hauge the head. But note how the Rulers of this Land haue loued mee; though they giue mee woundes, they giue mee Balme to cure them: though the Sunne goe from me, yet am I com∣forted with the brighnesse of the Stars. The Law (which lyes in, at euery Uacation) is brought to bed in foure seue∣rall months of the yeare, and deliuered of foure The foure Tearmes. Sonnes. Those Sonnes inuite me to foure kingly Feasts; they kéep
their Tournes;The good that the terms bring to west∣minster. and their Returnes, are so many seuerall Seruices. They are the Foure Elements that gouerne▪ and giue life to my body; yea, so déere doe I make them vnto me, that I account of them, as of Foure Golden Ages. Whilest any of these foure abide in my Company, I am more Iocond then a Woman in the embracements of her Louer. My Chéekes looke then red, with a high and lusty colour, for I wash them in Wines: my heart is merry, for I nourish it with gladnesse. Then doe my Tenants sléepe soundly, (for they drinke soundly:) Then dare they talke any thing for they haue Lawe on their sides; Then are they content to take crackt Crownes, though at another time they would stabbe him that should but hitte theyr eare. Vintners are then as busie as Bees are in Hiues,How busie Westminster is in a tearme time. for as Bées flye from one Flower to another to sucke out Hony, so doth the Drawers leape from one Hogshead to another to let out Wines. In euery roome are the Pottle Pottes working, to bring in gaines to their Maister, as the other labor, to bring forth wax for their hiues. The strings are in the tailes, and that is at the end of their Cups, when they come to a barre for the Reckoning: The Drones are those that drinke that which should doe others good, yet hurt themselues by it, taking too much of it. Neither do Tauernes alone fall into this profitable and healthfull sweating Sicknesse: but all other Trades, Oc∣cupations, Misteries, and Professions, do row vp & down this Spring-tide streame of businesse; and such good Draughts haue they, that all is Fish that comes into their Net. Yea, in the open streetes is such walking, such talking, such running, such riding, such clapping too of windowes, such rapping af Chamber doores, such crying out for drink, such buying vp of meate, and such calling vppon Shottes, that at euery such time, I verily beléeue I dwell in a Towne of Warre.
Going to law compared to going to war.For euery morning do the men of law march to the Hall, as it were to the fielde: The Counsellore are the Leaders, Atturnies and Clarkes, are petty Commaunders, and Of∣ficers of the band: the trayned old Weather-beaten Soul∣diers, are those that haue followed the Law a long time, and haue vndoone themselues by brabblinges. The raw, fresh-water-Souldiers, are such as entered but yesterday into the action. In which March of theirs, if you fall but in amongst the Rankes, you will by and by suppose your selfe in the Low-Countries; for as the Souldiers (there) so these (here) talk of nothing but Stratagems and poyntes of War. Some threaten to ouerthrow their aduersaries, vpon assaults and Battryes: Some (as if an enemy were to be blown vp in a Towne) sweare to driue them out of their houses by way of Eiectments: Others, as if they came to the sacking of a Cit∣ty, cry out vpon nothing but Attachments, both of goodes and body. And as among Soaldiers, some delight in bloud more then others, so amongst these, some take a pryde in cruel∣tie more then others, and labour onely to haue their Ene∣mies in Execution. At the length, they come into the fielde, (that is to say, to the Barre) where they must trie the quar∣rell by Arbiterment of wordes in stead of swords: for there either the one side or other is ouerthrown: There stand the Pikemen (that is to say, such as haue had long sutes) and being wearyed,They that haue had long sutes are like Pike-men, Chancery-mē like Bill-men. care not almost which end goes forward, because they are at a stand, The Bill-men hard by them, but they for the most part are euer complayning. And thus (thou Minion of so many Kinges) doth this stirring vp and downe of my body, stirre vppe my bloud, and kéepes mee sound: this peopling of my stréets, makes me to be crowned with the title, dignity, and liberties of a Cittie, (for what are Citties if they be not peopled:) this Phisick (so long as I take it) preserues my body in health: But because I am compelled sometimes to giue it ouer, (which is commonly
in Haruest,The hurt that vacations doe to Westmin∣ster. and now a little at the beginning of the fall of the lease, (for this part of the yeare doth most trouble mee) I féele the state of my body weake, and subiect to infirmi∣ties. For alasse there are certaine Canker-Wormes (cal∣led Uacations) that destroy the Trées of my Inhabitants, so soone as euer they beare any fruite. These Uacations are to mine owne body, like long and wasting consumpti∣ons, they are more grieuous to my remembrance, then the comming on of a tedious night to a man tormented with sicknes: or then marriages delaied, to them that lie sighing for the delights thereof. The vnwholesome breath of Autumne, who is so full of diseases, that his very blowing vppon trées, makes theyr leaus to fal off (as the French Razor shaues off the haire of many of thy Suburbians,) euen that, and all the foure Mai∣ster-windes that kéepe such a blustring in the world, do not more scatter the dust of the Earth, then the cold blastes of foure Uacations, doe blow abroad the wealth that before I haue gotten together. In the Tearme times euery day to me is a day of fea∣sting, but euery Uacation starues me with ill dyet, for all the daies of them are to me nothing but fasting daies. Yea, the Dog-dayes are not halfe so vnwholesome, so pestilent & so perilous to the bodyes of men, as those are to mee. The Tearmes are my flowings, the Uacations my ebbinges. So that (if I were sure the world would not hold mee for a miserable and couetous wretch) I could euen wish, that these battayles of the law, were fighting all the yeare long. It were as much glory, fame, and preferment for mee to haue it so, as it is for the Low countries, to be all the year vp in armes. And tell me I pray, (thou prouident Mistris ouer so ma∣ny families) tell mee in thine opinion, if it were not fit to haue all these foure Riuers of the law, run into one stream, without any stoppings or turnings. For, do but consider what voyage a man is to make when he sayes, I must goe
to Law: It is a Voyage, but short and easie to finish, if you méete with an honest and skilfull Pilot, that knowes the right puttings in, the watering places, and the Hauens, and can auoyd the Rockes, Gulfes, Créekes, & quick-sands that lie cleane out of the way, and yet many a thousand do desperately runne themselues on ground, and suffer Ship∣wracke vppon them. But on the contrary part, if a Man sets out carelesly, not taking the Counsell of men experien∣ced in those Seas, though he be neuer so well furnished, ne∣uer so well manned, neuer so strong in heart, neuer so able to brooke stormes and tempests; yet let him bee sure to be tossed from coast to Coast, to bee driuen forward with one prosperous gale to day, and to be blown thrée times further backward with a boistrous breath to morrow: to haue his Soule afflicted with cares, and his heart eaten vppe with frettinges, and in the end to finde (to his cost) that he had beene better to haue vndertaken a Voyage to the East and West Indyes: and sooner hadde he made his returne home. So that to hoyst vppe Sayles in this Ocean of Controuer∣sies, and to méete with a fortunate and faire Ariuall, is as much honor, as to go to Ierusalem, and safely to come back againe. Praise of the Law.The Law is vnto vs, as the heauens are ouer our heads: of their owne Nature they are cléere, gentle, and readie to doe good to man: they giue light to his eyes, comfortable Ayre to his Spirits, warmth to reuiue him, coolenesse to refresh him. But if they bee troubled by brablings and vn∣ruly mindes, and be put from their owne smooth and euen by as, then doe they plague the world with stormes: Then doth Thunder shake the Rich mans building, lightning burnes vp the poore mans Corne, Haile-stones beat down the fruites of the earth, and all Creatures that are within reach of their fury, tremble, and hide their heads at the hor∣rour. The very phrase of Going to Law, shewes the greatnes, Maiesty, and state of Law: for the Law comes to no man,
but he is eyther driuen, or else so busie of himselfe, that he goes to it. The Law sléepes continually, vnlesse shee bee wakened by the wronges of men oppressed, or by the tur∣bulency of those that will not let her rest: for the first sort of which people, she hath a payre of Balance, wherein shee wieghes their Innocence, and the Iniuries of others▪ for∣cing one to make good the hurts of the other. Against the second, she drawes a sword, with which shee both strikes them that break hir peace, and defends thē that are threat∣ned to be struck wrongfully. He that Goe, therfore to Law, goes before a personage, whose browes are vnwrinckled, yet full of Iudgement; whose eyes are not wandring, yet turning to both sides; whose lips are sildome opened, yet what they pronounce is iust; whose countenāce is austere, yet setled in vprightnesse; whose hands are open to all, yet neuer filled with bribes; whose heart lies hidden, yet frée from corruption. And what man would not desire to bee hourly conuersant with so excellent, and so composed a cre∣ature. He that is vp to the eares in Law,Paradox in prayse of go∣ing to law. is vp to the eares in experience; He cannot choose but bee a good Subiect, by∣cause he kéepes the Statutes and ordinances of his Coun∣try: he cannot choose but proue a worthy souldier, because he is still in action: he must of necessity be both honest and pittifull, for hee measureth other mens cases by his owne. Law: why it makes a man watchfull, for he that meddles with it, is sure neuer to sléepe? It keeps him from the Irish mans disease, (Lazynes:) from the Dutch-mans weake∣nesse (in not Bearing drinke:) from the Italians euill spi∣rit that haunts him, (Lust) for hees so busied with so many Actions of the Case, that hee can haue no leysure nor sto∣macke, to the Case of Actions: It preserues him from the French falling sicknesse, yet no Stoues in Moscoy can put a man into more violent sweates. And last of all, it kéepes him out of the English-mans surites, for his wayting at his Counsels Chamber so runs in his head, that he scarce∣ly allowes himselfe a time to dine or sup in.
O what an excellent Husband doth this going to Law make a man? He giues ouer gaming presently vppon it? He shakes off al commany that drew him to expences, and in euery Uacation is so prouident, that with the Ant hee layes vp Money then, to let it flye amongest Councellors, and Atturnies in the Tearme-time? what an able and lusty bodie doth he get by it, that followes it hard? No Carryer is able to take more paynes: no Porter beares more. It makes a man to be well giuen, for he prayes (euen as hee ambles vp and downe the stréetes:) It makes him to be beloued amongst Lawyers Clarks, and to be feared amongst his owne neigbours, (two properties which eue∣ry King desires from the hearts of his Subiects (Loue and Feare.) If men should not goe to Lawe one with another, the Courtier would walke vp and down (Ietting) by the Mer∣cers doore, and wearing his Silkes vnder his nose, which now he dare not doe. Thy Cittizens (O thou the Best and onely Huswife of this Iland) if Suites were not tryed, some would scarce kéepe a good Sute on their backs, Soli∣citors might likewise goe beg, and Scriueners goe starue themselues. Had not the people of this large Kingdome faine to so many priuate quarrels, about blowes giuen; To so many intricate bargains, about buying and selling of Lands; To so many Cozenages of wicked Executors, in vndoing Or∣phans and Heires, and so many starting holes, Crannies, Creuises, windings, wrestlings, rackings, Circumgira∣tions, & Circumuentions, to abuse the beautiful body of the Law, and to make it grow crooked, which of it selfe is com∣ly & vpright. And had not the Law prouided cures for these sores of a common-wealth, & whips to punish such villains, Thou (O princely Mother of many Citties) shouldst neuer haue had so many gallant, Sumptuous, & rare Nurseries for young Students, erected full in thine eye, which stand before thy buildinges, as Gates to Kinges Pallaces, and
are the onely honor for entrances into thée. Had not the Inhabitants of this Empyre warred so in law from time to time, one with another, shee coulde not haue boasted of so many Graue, wise, and Learned Iud∣ges. Of so many Discréet, Sage, and reuerend Iustices, Of so many carefull, prudent, and honourable Maie∣strates. By meanes of this, is the Gentry of the Land in∣creased, (for Studyes are Trées that bring forth aduance∣ment) by meanes of this, the multitude is helde in Obe∣dience, for lawes are bridles, to curbe those that are head∣strong. What a rare inuention therefore was pen and Incke,A Paradox in praise of a Pen. out of whom (as streames from a Fountaine, flow all these wonders? How much beholden are men to his witte, that out of a poore Goose-quill was the first deuiser of so strange an Instrument as a Pen, which carries in it such power, such Conquest, such terror, such comfort, and such authori∣ty, that euen the greatest Subiects in kingdomes are glad somtimes to be beholden to it, and as often to tremble whē it is but held vp against them. For a Pen in a princes hand commaunds with as ample force as his Scepter,It giues char∣ters to citties, binds leagues of Ammitie with forraign Nations. with it doeth he giue Pardons for life, or the heauy doom of death. It bestowes honours and preferments, and like a Trum∣pet proclaimes a kinges Liberality. Yea, of such Uertue is that worke which a princes hand doth with it, that Actes of Parliament cannot giue a stronger confirmation. In the hande of a Iudge, it is as dreadfull as his voyce, for it either saues or condemnes, pronounceth freedome or imprisonment. In the handes of a Spirituall finger, it sets downe notes of Musicke, which to heare the very Angels leape for ioy in heauen, and deliuereth forth such Diuine Oracles, that out of them, mortals finde meanes to climbe vp to eterni∣ty. Lastly, in the hand of a good Lawyer, a Pen is the com∣mon sword of Iustice, and doth as much in the quarrell of the poore man as of the rich: with it, doth he help those that
are beaten downe by oppression, and liftes them vp by sup∣plications: but they that are trespassers against the sacred Orders of equity, doeth hee with that Axe onely leade in∣to Execution. In the handes of badde and vnconionable Lawyers, Pens are forkes of yron, vpon which poore Clients are tos∣sed from one to another, till they bléede to death: yea the nebs of them are like the Beakes of Vutures, (who so they may glutie their appetite with flesh) care not from whose backes they teare it. How many thousandes (with that little Engyne alone) do raise vp houses to their posterity, whilest the Ignorant prodigall, drownes all the Acres of his Auncestors in the bottome of a Wine-seller, or buries them al in the belly of a Harlot? How many fly higher, and spread a more No∣ble wing with that one feather, then those Butter-flies do, that stare vp and downe in the eyes of a kingdome, with all the painted feathers of their riotous pride. Is it not pitty then (O thou wisest Censurer of worldly matters.) Is it not great pitty, that an Instrument of so musicall a sound, of such excellent rarity and perfection, should at any time lie dumbe and vntouched, and not ra∣ther be played vpon, euen from the beginning of the Suns early progresse to his ending, and without intermission? It is, It is, and I know for all thy silence thou subscribest in thought to this my opinion. Thus haue I made thée a witnes of my lamentings, the teares of mine eyes haue in their falling down, dropt vpon thine owne cheekes: I haue opened vnto thée my Bowels, and thou séest what consumptions hang vpon me, to make me pyne to nothing, Be thou now (O thou Bryde woorthy the loue euen of the greatest king.) Be thou and the whole worlde my witnesses, if I descend into these complaynings without iust inforcement. I haue heere, and there (in this story of my fortunes,) reckoned vppe some part of my owne worth, and my owne▪
inioyinges, least swimming altogether, or too long in the streame of my sorrowes, I shoulde vtterly quicke haue sunke, and so drowne my honour, by forgetting that I am a Citty. Counsell mee therefore now, (O thou Charitable Re∣leeuer and Receiuer of distressed Strangers) how I way ei∣ther make this burden of my affliction lye more lightly on my shoulders, or else how my shoulders may bear it with a commendable patience. Londons aunswere to West∣minster. AT these wordes, (The Mother of the twelue Companies,) once or twice shaking her aged but reuerend head, on the top of which stood (as the Crowne of her honour) a heape of lofty Temples and Pynnacles, to the num∣ber of one 109. parishes in London. hundered and nine) thus grauelie be∣gan. That I haue summoned vppe more yeares, and there∣fore more care than thou hast (O beloued of all our Eng∣lysh Princes) the Chronicles of Tyme, (who sets downe al Occurrents) can testifie. I dare boast, that Experience hath with her owne fin∣ger written her Histories on my fore-head, for I haue had Negotiation with all the Nations that be in the world. I haue séene the growings vppe, and the withering of many Empyres: the obseruation of forraigne Countryes hath bin my studdy, whylest the polliticke and stayed gouern∣ment of my owne hath béene my glory. So carefull haue I béene, and so Iealous of my own estate, (séeing Cittyes greater than my selfe, to lye as lowe nowe as their firste Foundation) that I haue Printed downe theyr muta∣bilities and their greatest miseries in the midst and depth
of my palmes, because they should be euer in mine eye as Cautionary prospects. So that it shall well become thee, (neyther néedest thou be ashamed) to borrow aduice from me that am thine Elder, and so beaten to the affayres of the world. Counsell is the cheapest gift that one Friend can bestow vpon another, yet if it be well husbanded, the Interest of no Golde nor Siluer, can amount to halfe the value of it. Giue me leaue therefore to speake (O thou Courtly Para∣mour) and to speake my minde boldly, for albeit thou art the Fauourite of Greatnesse, & standest Gracious▪ (as theyr Minions) in the eyes of our princes, yet will I be no slaue to my owne thoughtes (like a Parasite) to flatter thée in e∣uils, wherein I shall finde thee woorthy of reprehension. If I spy any blemishes on thy body, I will lay euen my finger vpon them (not to haue them hidden but discouered) and whatsoeuer I doe or say, take it not thou, as done in scorne or in thy dishonour, but as out of the office, of inte∣grity, zeale, & hawty affection of an honest friend. For wee two haue reason to assist one another with all the faculties and powers that are within vs, sithence, no calamitie can fall vpon the one, but the other must receiue many bruises by it. Noble thou art of byrth, as my selfe am, for from two se∣ueral kings had we both our beings. Noble is thy bringing vppe as is thy raising to high fortunes. Such therefore as thou arte, woulde I haue thée still to beare thy selfe, and not to be deiected into vulgar, low, & earthlie prosti∣tutions, for any threatninges or any blowes of insulting Fortune. Well did it become the greatnes of thy place, thy state and calling, not to be throwne downe into a woma∣nish softnes, for that aged and reuerend (but Charing Crosse. wry-necked) sonne of thine, whose woorthinesse thou hast sufficientlie proclaimed. Miseries that fall vpon vs by our owne wilfulnes, or by others Tyranny, are to be grieued at, because wee suf∣fer
iniustly: But stroakes yt are ineuitable, are to be recea∣ued, yea, to bee met and stood vnder with a most constant and resolued fortitude. His downefall, though it séeme great, yet is it not to be lamented, but to be borne, because he fell not vpon a disho∣norable Graue; But into such a one, as by the frailety of Time, Nature, and destiny, was preordayned for him. His end was not like the end of Traytors, who are cut off in the pride of their bloud and youth, or as the end of Citties, that reuolt from the obedience of their Soueraignes, and haue their Obloquies growing vp still, euē in their Ashes: But he threw himselfe vppon the earth, séeing the hand of extreame age (which must pull downe at last the whole frame of this Worlde) lay so hardly, and so heauily vppon him. Had his Ruine béene wrought by those terrible thun∣der-Clappes of ciuill Warre,Warres of the Barons in K. Stephens raigne. when (in the raigne of King Stephen) all the Realme was in a flaming combustion of discord, kindled by Maud the Empresse, in the quarrell of Duke Henry (her Son,) Or had he béen condemned in that mad Parliament held at Oxford,Mad parlia∣ment at Ox∣ford held by the Barons in 23. of Henry the third. when the Barons of this Land (within fewe monthes after) first forced their King (Henry of that name the third) to take my Tower for his Sanctuary, and after tooke him prysoner with his Sonne, and many of his Nobility, at the battaile at Lewes. Or had he béene brought to slauery and confusion, as I my selfe (for all my strength of friendes and my owne greatnesse) was likely to haue béene in two seuerall rebellions: The one in the raigne of Richard the second,Rebellion in Essex by Wa yk. by Essex men, who beheaded all men of Law, destroyed the Records and Mo∣naments of Learning; tyrranized ouer Straungers, and threatned to lead me and my Inhabitantes into Captiuit, and so bring vpon me vtter disolation. The other in those tempestuous and variable tossinges of that vertuous, but wretched King Henry the sixt,Rebellion in Ke lack Cade. in the handes of Fortune, when a fire of commotion was kindled by Kentish-men▪ whose flames euen beganne to burne in my owne bosome.
Or had that Sonne of thine perished betwéene the rage of those two great Families,Dissention of the two Fami∣lies, Lancaster and Yorke. (the Yorkists and Lancastrians,) that was nourished so many yéers together, with the liues, honors, and ouerthrowes of so many Princes of the bloud Royall,Battaile on Palm sunday. and with the fall of so many Subiects, that in one bataile were discomfited on both sides, 35111. Persons, then if thou hadst not lamented for him, I should worthily haue blamed thee, then would I my selfe haue borne a par in thy sorrow. A better, and not so blacke a fate hath weighted vppon That Mirror of antiquity belonging to thee, than (euer since the first rasing) hath falne vpon the Goodliest, the Grea∣test, the Highest, and most Hallowed Pauls steeple Monument of mine. His miseries haue béene so many, and the top of his calamities is clymbed vp to such a height, that I should do his sorrows wrong, to set thē to the tune of my voyce, whō no notes but his owne are able to sing them foorth.London spea∣king to Pauls steeple. Lift vp therefore thy heauy head (O thou that art maintayned by the Pillers of the Church) and though thou hast a leaden countenance, of which may be gathered the true and full weight of that which lyes vppon thée to presse thée downe, yet with a voyce (lower then theirs that are daily Singers of heauenly songs in thy hearing,) ring thou forth the Al∣lar of those passionate heart-breaking vlulations, which (like the ruptures of Thunder) force a continuall passage through thy bosome. Bee thou attentie likewise (thou Nurser vp of all our English Nobility) and as I haue lent an erected and serious eare to those Complaints which thou powrest forth in behalfe of thy Sonne, So be thou (I con∣iure thée) a silent and obseruing Auditor of these Lamen∣tations, which I sée are already striuing to make way through the lips of this afflicted Child of mine. Marke him well, for now he begins.
Paules Steeples complaint. WHerein? O wherein haue I (he most infortunate of all this Kingdome) offen∣ded so highly, that thus often, and with such dreadfull blowes, I shold be smote by the hand of heauen? So cruelly haue I béene strucke that euen fire (to my thinking) hath lasen out at mine eye: and such éepe woundes haue I receiued on my head, that instead of teares, my vary batilements haue dropt downe, and in their falling haue scalded my chéekes, as if they had béene shewers of molten Lead. Doth this hot Uenge∣ance fly (as if it were with the swiftest winges of Light∣ning) from aboue, to seze vpon me, for my owne sinnes, or for his, that first beganne to set me vppe? But alasse: How ingratefll am I, to haue of my Patron so vnrighte∣ous, and so godlesse a remembraunce? Ethelbert (King of Kent) was my Founder: out of the dust of the earth did he raise mée; out of the hard Rock was I fashioned to a beau∣tifull shape, and by him consecrated to a most holy and re∣ligious vse: For Ethelbert (that good King) was the first that gaue entertainment to Augustine, Melitus, Iustus, and Iohn:The first bringers of the fayth into this Land. who by Saint Gregory were sent hither to preach the Misteries Diuine: The deuotion of which men, like foure streames, caused the Christian Fayth to fly into this land, and that princely father of moe, was the first whom they conuerted. In aduauncement of Religion, and to make it spread higher, did hee set mee into the earth, planted mée, and hadde a reuerend care to haue mee grow vppe in state and beauty. It cannot be therefore, that so good and meritory∣ous a worke in him, should be so ill rewarded.
No, no, it is not for his sake, that I haue béene punnish∣ed, but eyther for my owne or some others wicked deser∣uing. Howsoeuer it be, or in whom-soeuer the fault lyes, on mée are the plagues inflicted, on my head are heaped the disgraces and dishonours, mine is the smart, mine is the Sorrow. And though the eyes of euery Straunger, and of euery starting Passenger be cast vp vppon mee, all of them wondering at, but none pittying my misfortune, because to them it appeares sleight, or else it appeares to them no∣thing at all, yet let mee stand before a Iuditious, cleéere, and impartiall Censor, and the condition of the most wret∣ched will not séeme so miserable and base as mine. When the Hawthorne and Low Bryer are cut downe, the spoyle of them is not regarded, for it moones not any: But when the Prince of the Forrest (the mighty and sa∣cred Oake) hath the Axe layed to his roote, at euery blow that is giuen, the very woods send out Grones. Small Cottages beeing on fire, are quickly either quenched, or if not quenched, the wound that a Common-wealth receiues by them is easily cured: But when a body (so noble; So antient, so comely for Stature, so reuerenced for State, so richly adorned, so full of beauty, of strength, of Cere∣monies: so followes, so kneeled vnto, and almost so ado∣red as my selfe am, and euer haue béene daily) is defaced by flames, and shaken into dust by the wrath of the breath Almighty. The very sight of this is able to bréede Earth∣quakes in Citties that behold it. And euen from such a height, such a happinesse, and such an honor am I fallen. My head was aduanced with the loftiest in the Kingdome, and so tender a care had the hea∣uens ouer it, that it was taken vp and layde in the bosome of the Clouds. My aking browes rested themselues vpon the Christall Chariot of the Moone, and the Crowne of my head (when I stoode on Tiptoe and stretched my body to the length,)
touched that Celestiall roofe, embossed all ouer with studs of golde, I did not onely ouer-looke the proudest buildinges in thée (O thou Land-lady to so many thousands of houses) with those also that are the inheritance of her thy next ney∣bour: But mine eye at euery opening hadde the greatest part of the kingdome as a prospect. The Marriner then called mee his Sea-marke, for to him I stood as a Watch-tower to guide him safely to our English shore. No sooner did ye Traueller by land sée me, but his heart leaped for ioy, and the wearisomnesse of his way seemed to go from him, because he knew he was in sight of the most goodly Cittie which he loued. But how often hath this glory of mine bin Eclipsed, and at such times when it was in the fulnes? whether my own ambition (in aspyring too high) or whether the Iustice of those aboue mee in pun∣nishing my pride, were the cause of my Fall▪ I know not. But sure I am, that my head hath beene often laid to the blocke, and many blowes giuen to strike it off. The first blow was pauls church builded about the year after Christ 610, & about 477. yeares after was consu∣med by fire 1087 in the time of Willi Conqueror. giuen me when I had stood vntayn∣ted, and vnblemished 477. years after the beginning of my foundation, for I was raised, and intituled to the name & honor of a Temple. about the yeare after the Incarnati∣on 61. And in the yeare of Redemption, 1087. was I, (with a great parte of thy body (O thou Best of Citties) consumed in Fyre. But I was in a shorte time healed of those hurts, by Mauritius Mauritius repayred it & new built it of stone. (thy Byshop) who to defend me from after-burnings, mounted me vpon Arches & gaue me ribs of stone, which was fetched from Cane in Normandy. Frée from the mallice (at least from the strokes) of ruina∣ting Tme and the enuious 1444 in the raign of Henry 6, Burnt with light∣ning. blasts of Fortune▪ did I conti∣nu full 357. yeares together after this first blowe, but in Anno 1444. heauen smote me with lightning, yet did I presently recouer, and held vppe my heade loftier then be∣fore, The descrip¦tion of the Steeple when it was at the Hith, & of the body of the church as it is now for in Anno 1462. did my body carry in heigth 52. foot, the stone worke being 260. foot and the Spire as many. In length was I 720. foot, and in bredth 130. At the same
time, did I weare on the Crowne of my head (as it hadde bin a Crest vnto it) a Cocke or Eagle, which beeing incon∣stant was (I thinke) destroyed for turning about with e∣uery winde: It carryed in weight fort poundes▪ being of copper gilded ouer: the length from the bil to the taile four foote, the breadth ouer the wings, three foote, and a halfe, the crosse (from the bole to the Eagle) fifteene foote, and sixe ynches of a size, the length thereof ouer-thwarte, was fiue foote, and ten ynches. The compasse of the bole nine foote and one ynch: of which crosse (which stood aboue my head as a rich Diadem) the inner part was Oke, the next couer was lead, and a third (vppon that) of copper, which with the bole and Eagle being of Copper also) were al gil∣ded ouer. In this magnificence was I arrayed, thus was I with Marble Towers and Pynnacles crowned: the wonder of the world was I counted in the iudgement of all eyes that beheld mee, and the onely marke that enuie of forraigne kingdomes shot at, who did but heare of my Greatnes. But (alacke) how momentary is all earthly happinesse? Howe fading is our painted Glory? Many yeares were not numbred, but behold in Anno▪ 1561.1561 in the raigne of Q: Elizabeth fy∣red by light∣ning 4. of Iu: the hand of Hea∣uen was once more filled with vengeance, which in clouds of fire, was there throwne vpon my head, so that in lesse than the space of foure houres, I that was the Mirrhor of the world (for beauty) was made the miserablest creature in the worlde by my deformity. Yet did that woorthy and my euer to be honoured Mistris Q. Elizabeth gaue 1000 marks in gold to reedifie the Chrch bestow vpon me in Gold 1000. Markes to make good my losses, and gaue (besides) warrant for a 1000. loades of Timber, to repayre my ru∣ines: Thy Cittizens likewise (O my dearest mother) and the Cleargy of the Lande, were euen Prodigall of theyr pursses to set me vp againe. Some good was done vnto mee, and much good lefte vndone. This last blow was to mee fatall and deadly, for now,
am I both headlesse, and honourlesse: my shoulders ∣ing daily troden vpon in scorne, branded with markes and Letters, and scoared vppon with the points of kniues and Bdkins, which howsoeuer the ignorant laugh at, those that are wise know they are Characters of my infamy, yea to so low a te am I brought, that madmen and fooles, & euery ydle companion lay wagers in mockery,8 Partridges on the top of Powles in an. 1597 onely to a∣buse mee. Some (séeing me so patient to endure Crowes and Dawes) pecking at my ribs, haue driuen tame Par∣tridges ouer my bosome, others euen riding ouer me, and Capring vpon my backe,A horse there likewise in An. 1600. as if they had bin curvetting on the horse, which in despight they brought to Trample vp∣on me. Who therefore that did but eyther knowe or hath but heard of my former prosperity, would not gréeue to sée mée fallen into this basenes, and most contemptible bondage, but I haue deserued (I confesse) I haue most iustly deser∣ued to haue these afflictions, these dishonours, and these o∣pen punnishmentes layde vppon mee, albeit they were tenne times numbred ouer and ouer. For whereas I was at first consecrated to a misticall & religious purpose (the Ceremonies of The quyre in which is di∣uine service twice euerie day in the yeare. which are daily ob∣serued in the better part of me, for my hart is euen to this hower an Altar vpon which are offred the sacrifices of ho∣ly prayers for mens Sinnes) yet are some limbes of my venerable bodie abused, and put to prophane, horrid and seruile customes,The bodie of the Church serues onely for walkes no maruell though my head rotte, when the bodie is so fl of diseases: no maruell if the Diuine Ex∣ecutioner cut mee off by the shoulders, when in my bosom is so much horrible and close Treason practised against the King of the whole world. For albeit though I neuer yet came downe all my stayres,The walks in Paules to bee Occuler witnesse-bearer of what I Speake, and what is (sometimes spoake openly, and sometimes spoke in priuate) committed in my Walkes, yet dooeth the daily sounde and Eccho of much knauish
villany strike vp into mine eare. What whispering is there In Terme times, how by some slight to cheat the poore coun∣try Clients of his full purse that is stucke vnder his girdle? What plots are layde to furnish young gallants with rea∣die money which is shared afterwards at a Tauern) ther∣by to disfurnish him of his patrimony? what buying vp of oaths, out of the hands of knightes of the Post, who for a few shillings doe daily sell their soules? What layinge of heads is there together and ting of the brains, still and a∣non, as it growes towardes eleuen of the clocke, (euen a∣mongst those that wear guilt Rapiers by their sides) where for that noone they may shift from Duke Humfrey, & bee furnished with a Dinner at some meaner mans Table? What damnable bargaines of vnmercifull Brokery, & of vnmeasurable Usury are there clapt vp? What swearing is there: yea, what swaggering, what facing and out-fa∣sing? What shuffling, what shouldering, what Iustling, what Ieering, what byting of Thumbs to beget quarels, what holding vppe of fingers to remember drunken mée∣tings, what brauing with Feathers, what bearding with Mustachoes, what casting open of cloakes to publish new clothes, what muffling in cloaks to hyde broken Elbows, so that when I heare such trampling vp and downe, such spetting, such lking, and such humming, (euery mans lippes making a noise, yet not a word to be vnderstoode,) I verily beléeue that I am the Tower of Babell newly to be builded vp, but presentlie despaire of euer béeing finish∣ed, because there is in me such a confusion of languages. For at one time, in one and the same ranke, yea, foote by foote, and elbow by elbow, shall you sée walking, the Knight, the Gull, the Gallant, the vpstart, the Gentleman, the Clowne, the Captaine, the Appel-squire, the Lawyer, the Usurer, the Cittizen, the Bankerou, the Scholler, the Begger, the Doctor, the Ideot, the Ruffian, the Cheater, the Puritan, the Cut-throat, the Hye-men, the Low men, the True-man, and the Thiefe: of all trades & professions
some, of all Countryes some; And thus dooth my middle Isle shew like the Mediterranean Sea, in which as well the Merchant hoysts vp sayles to purchace wealth honestly, as the Rouer to light vpon prize vniuly. Thus am I like a common Mart where all Commodities (both the good and the bad) are to be bought and solde. Thus whilest deuoti∣on kneeles at her prayers, doth prophanation walke vn∣der her nose in contempt of Religion. But my lamentati∣ons are scattered with the winds, my sighes are lost in the Ayre, and I my selfe not thought worthy to stand high in the loue of those that are borne and nourished by mee. An end therefore doe I make heare of this my mourning. The Steeple of S. Paule abruptly thus breaketh off, be∣cause he felt himselfe not so well as he could wish; The La∣dy of Citties (who is gouerned by the wisedome of 24. graue Senators, all those 24. submitting themselues to the authority onely of One, 24. Aldermes L: Mayor. thereby teaching examples of Obedience) did thus breake silence, and renew her spéech:Londons speech to west∣minster conti∣nued. Tell me now (O Westminster) which of Vs two, haue greatest cause to complaine for the misfortune of our sons; yet thou and I are not indifferent Iudges in this case, be∣cause it is our owne particuler: let vs therefore leaue the censure of it to the Arbitement of the world; and whi∣lest the Controuersie is in deciding, bee not thou offended wt me, if now a litle I take vpon me the office of a Mother, & fall into a gentle reprehension of thée. I remember, that when thou haddest layd abroad the Ruines of thy Sonne, and yet on the top of them haddest builded vp his honors, which to doe, did in thée seeme glorious; thou diddest then presently beginne to rip open the adulterous Wombe of those sinnes that are euery day begotten vnder thy roofes: the very naming of which, though it be odious to heauen and earth: yet diddest thou séeme to haue so little feeling of thine owne infamy, that thou diddest laugh at thy disho∣nor, and wert it not sory for those euilles which thou thy selfe confessest, aboundantly swarme within thée.
O how palpable is thy blindnesse! How grosse thine ignoraunce, in running into this errour! What vphol∣deth Kingdomes but gouernement? What subuerteth licentiousnesse and disorder? Uices in a common-wealth are as diseases in a body, if quickly they be not cured, they suddenly kill. They are Weedes in the fayrest Garden, if eare they take roote, you pull them not vp: they spoyle the wholesome Heahes and Flowers, and turne the Ground into a Wildernesse.Cities soonest destroy them∣selues. There is no destruction so fearefull to a Citty, as that destruction which a Citty brings vpon it selfe: and neuer is it more néere a fall, then when it maketh much of those sins, which like Snakes lie in the bosome of it, and sucke out the bloud. All those Cankers of a State, that lye gnawing to eate thee vppe; All those sensuall streames, that ow about thy body,The sinnes of London. and labour to drowne it in impieties, flowe in thy Ueynes, but as little Riuolets, but in mine they excéede all boundes, and swell vppe to an Ocean. And that the very least of them vndermineth and shaketh my strongest buildings. What abhomination reigneth in thée, which is not in me doubled?First Pride If Pride ride vp and downe in thy Coahes, She is all the fore-noone at her Glasse in my priue cham∣bers, and in the after none sits like a prostiuted Harlot, tempting Passengers to the talles of my Inhabitantes. If Usurers (who are Christiā Iews) dwell in thy stréets; I haue both Vsurers and Bokers,Vsury Brokery (who are the English Deuils) opening shopps in mine. Doost thou bring vppe Swearers,Periury Murder Atheisme I can sweare thée downe? Art thou Quarrel∣some? I thirst after bloud? Is there any one in thée that scoffes at Religion? Many there are in mee that sweare there is no Religion. As for that Monster with many heades, that Beast, (both Male and Female) I meane Letchery,Lechery it is within my Freedome more mae of, then Island Dogges are a∣mongest Cittizens liues: and when it gets out of my
fréedome, it is then like the place where it desires to lurk in, for then it lyes out of the cricuite of all ciuill Liber∣ty. In the troublesome reigne of King Stephen, there were shewed at one muster twenty thousand armed Horsemen, and thréescore thousand Footemen, all which number were Cittizens that liued within my walles: But I verily be∣léeue, that in this peaceable reigne of our Princes in these dayes, if a true muster were taken, there would be found almost as many Strumpets as would bee able to dare the Turke, (with all his Concubines) into the fielde, or to o∣uer-ranne all the Lowe Countries, and to spoyle the ene∣my, were he neuer so strong or desperate, if it came to han∣dy gripes. Beastes in their Act of generation vse not more com∣munity: sauage people that know not their Maker, breake not more the limites of Modesty: Common Inglers, Fid∣lers, and Players, doe no: more basely prostitute them∣selues to the pelasures of euery two-penny drunken Ple∣beian, than doe those Quadrantariae Meetrices, the Mer∣cenary Hackneies that stand at racke and manger within my suburbes. As Buls and Beares are for small pieces of Siluer to be bayted, so are these. As at common Outropes, when hous∣holds-stuffe is to bee sold, they cry Who giues more. So stand these vppon their thresholdes, not crying Who giues more, (only) but Who giues any thing. But that it stands not with the Maiesty of our state, nor with the Lawes of our Religion, It were as good, nay better, to giue fréedom and liberties to the setting vp of a cōmon Stewes, as here∣tofore on the Banck (opposite to thée and me on the farther side of the Thames) it hath béene vsed. In those dayes Orders were established to kéepe this Sin within certaine boundes, but now it breakes beyond all limits. It was then enacted by a parliament (at which thou y•
hast had thy voyce in so many Parliaments wert present) that the Bordello or common Stewes on the Bancke-side, should obserue these constitutions. Orders for the Stewes.First, no Stew-holder, or his wife was to compell any single Woman to stay with them against her will, but to giue her leaue to come and go at her pleasure. Our suburb Bawdes keepe ordinaries for all commersSecondly, that no Stew-holder should keepe any Wo∣man to bard, but shee to brd abroad, or where shée ly∣sted. Thirdly, to take for a Courtezan The price of sin is raysed, & so are the rents. Chamber not aboue 14. pence by the wéeke. Fourthly, not to kéepe open doores Noctes atque does now. vpon Holy-dayes. Fiftly, not to kéepe any single woman in his house on the Holy-dayes,Officers now haue siluer eies and canot see. but the Bailiffe to sée them voyded out of the Lordship. Few Turne∣coates in hou∣ses of this Re∣ligion.Sixtly, that no single woman should be detayned in any such house against her wil, hauing an intent to forsake that course of life. Aswell Pui∣tane as Prote∣stant are wel∣come.Seauenthly, that no Stew-hoder was to giue entertain∣ment to any Woman of any order in Religion, or to any mans wife. Now they work like Ba∣kers night and day.Eyghtly, that no Courtezan was to receiue hire of any man to lye with him, but she was to lye all night with him till the next morning. Ninthly, that no man was to be drawne by violence, or be inticed by any impudent and whorish allurements into any Stew-house.Now they vse plaine dealing They are sear∣ched daily.Tenthly, that euery Brothely or Stew-house was to bee searched wéekely by Constables, and other Officers. amque vrit flaminant dul∣ls.Lastly, That no Stew-holder should lodge in hys house any Woman that had the daungerous infirmity of burning, &c. These (amongst others) with penalties and punishments vppon the breath of any one of them, were the ordinances of these times, but nowe (thankes to the negligence of this age) though sharper Lawes doe threaten to strike,
this sinne, yet they do but threaten, for they seldom strike, or if they strike, it is with the backe of the sworde of Iu∣stice. The setting vp of a Whore-house, is now as common as the setting vp of a Trade: yea, and it goes vnder that name. A stocke of two beds and foure wenches is able to put a Lady Pandaresse into present practise, and to bring them into reasonable doings. In these shoppes (of the worlde, the flesh and the deuill) soules are set to sale, and bodies sent to shipwracke: men and women as familiarly goe into a chamber to damne one another on a Feather-hedde, as into a Tauerne to bee merrie with wine. But for al this it goes vnder the name of The sweet sin, and of all, they are counted Wenches of the old Religion, and for all their dancings in Tauernes, ryots in Suppers, and ruffling in Taffities, yet A cloyster of such Nunnes standes like a Spittle, for euery house in it is more infectious then that which hath a Redde Crosse ouer the dore. Such as Smithfield is to horses, such is a House of these Sisters to women: It is as fatal to thē, It is as infamous▪ The Bawds Pettie Bawds, and Pan∣ders are the Horse-coursers that bring Iades into the mar∣ket: wher they swear they are frée from diseases, whē they haue more hanging on their bones then are in a French Army; and that they are but Coltes of halfe a years run∣ning, when they haue scarse a sounde tooth in their heades. There shall you find beastes of all ages, of all Colours, of all prices, of all paces, yet most of them gyuen to false gal∣lops: hardly among twenty one that is good, for euery one that proues so, a hundred continue bad. Such is the quality of Smithfield Nags, such the pro∣perty of Suburbe Curtizans. In briefe, their beginning is brauery, their end beggery, their life is detestable, & death (for the most part) damnable. Since therfore so dangerous a Serpent shootes his ranckling stinges into both our bo∣somes, let vs not (as desperate of our owne estates) open
our brests to receiue them, and so be guilty to our own de∣struction, but rather prouide vs of Armor to resist the ma∣lice of her poyson, for be assured (O thou that art still ready, and still most woorthy to entertaine forraygne Princes and Embassador) that so long as this double dealing-diuell, (Lechery) walks vp and down in our houses, Vengeance will neuer be driuen from our doores. A litle more must I yet chyde thée (O thou Minion, now to Two mighty Nations) for I begin to growe Iealious of thee, that thou séekest to rob mee of my best, my most wor∣thy, most Princely, and my most desiredKing Iames. Louer, to enioy him solely to thy selfe: else wherefore dost thou repine that either I, or any other of our Sister-citties, should be made happy by his company? It shewes that thy heart is stufte with a rancke and boyling euie, thou gréeuest that any should prosper but thy selfe. It condemnes thee of ambiti∣on, (which nne thou thinkest becomes thée, because thou art a Courtier) It condemnes thée of Couetousnes, a vyce, than which none more viy blemisheth a noble mind, (such as all Nations that haue bin thy Guests, haue neuer sup∣posed to shine in thée.) I esteeme my selfe the most Fortu∣nate of all my neighbour Citties in this large kingdome, if That Royall Maister of vs both (nay of vs all) doe but vouchsafe to passe by mee, or but so much as to cast hys eie vpon me, and dost thou cry out Thou art vndone, when after his embracings of thée so many whole moneths (of∣tentimes) together, after his bestowing so many dignities, and so much wealth vpon thée: yea, and when hee giues thée his Royall word, not to be absent from thée long? can∣not this content thée, and satisfie the flame of thy desyres, but that thou must wish to haue him fonde ouer thée, and that the beams of his most princely and frée affection, shuld haue all their points méete in thy bosome, as their onelie fixed Obiect? for shame desire it not, for this immoderate appetite of thine is to the dishonour and hurt of al the Cit∣ties rand about thee. Bridle therfore these passions of thy
soule, which otherwise will make thée turne wild, and win them by gentle meanes to come in, and subiect themselues to the laws of Reason. If the moyst handed The Thames who takes the name from Thame & Isi Isis, shold send all her melted Siluer to that insearchable and vnknowne Treasury of Neptune, (into which all Riuers pay their cu∣stome) and shoulde neuer haue an profitable Returne of it, how soone would she grow poore? Or if the Sea-god, (out of a prodigal and flowing humor) should do nothing but our his gifts into the lappe of that his Christ all bosom daugh∣ter, how soone would her swimming too hie in riches, make her forget her selfe? and in that pride of swelling, worke the subuersion both of thée and me? we should lye drowned in her greatnes, as other partes of the land would bee ouer∣whelmed in thyne, if thou haddest what thou desirest and couetest. But thou séest the Sunne neuer tarries in one poynt of heauen alone, his remooing from place to place, shewes his Soueraignty, and makes him better welcome thither, where hee hath beene the longest absent, and euen so of kinges. A Cittizen of  (to his immortall memory) dyd in one day,Hen. Pichard vner, maior in An. 30, of Edward 3. feast at his Table Foure Kings (Viz) Edwarde the third (king of England) Iohn King of France, Dauid le Bruce. king of ots, and the king of Cyprus, and now of late (imitating that example) did another of my Praeters, Sir Iohn wats Clothwerker Lord Mayor now this pre∣sent yea, 1607 feast (tho not foure kinges) one equal in power▪ in Maiesty and in Dominion, to all thse 4. (euen the Heyre and pre∣sent Inheritor of 4. mighty Empires our soueraign Lord & maist▪ Iames the 6. To looke but backe vpon which happy daies (because I haue seene but few of thē) makes my hart beate against my ribbes for ioy: I am proud euen in the remembraunce of them, and to the intent they may neuer be forgotten, those yeares and months that brought forth this honor vnto me, shall be Chronicled in the midst of my bosome in Charecters of Gold. Thus do I comfort my selfe by repeating ouer ye blessings
bestowed vpon me by a few of our Princes, but how ma∣ny of them haue feasted, banqueted and reuealed with thée▪ And yet wouldst thou barre any of them from taking hys pleasures abroad, but onely in thy presence. Thou arte proude, and takest vpon thée to stretch forth too imperious a hand. Thou art contented to receiue in the Golden Haruest, but loath to bee shaken with the breath of Autumne. Thou likest it well to haue a Summer all the yeare, but dost not consider, that Winter is as wholesome for thy body. This shewes thy indiscretion, thy improuidence, and indulgence of thy selfe, to bee pampred like an Epicure. Thou art gréedy as the Sea, and wouldest deuoure all thinges, but wouldst part from nothing: thou art catching as re, so thy self mayst be fed, thou carest not who perish. Uncharitable are thy wishes, immodest are thy longings, and most vnconscionable are thy aspyrings, and most vn∣neighborly are thy fore-stallings. That which thou woul∣dest haue done, is not (I graunt) against all Law, but it is with All Law, for thou desirest to haue men go to Law all the yeare long, which wish of thine is as dishonest as if it were to haue continuall warres, and continuall wars are continual Slaueries: It is as if thou shouldest wish to haue an euerlasting thunder, for what are pleadinges of causes, but noise without ceasing. A paradox in praise of Va∣cations.Thou sayest the foure Tearmes are vnto thée as foure great Feasts, yet doost thou in bitternes of thy sorrow, cry out vpon foure Vacations: wherein thou behauest thy selfe all one, as if thou shouldest complain, because thou art not euery houre féeding. If foure Tearmes should be without tearme and neuer come to an end, those feastes which they incite thée to, would be to their incurable surfeits, and so consequently thy destruction. If the sounde of Lawyers tongues were but one whole twelue month in thine eare, thou thy selfe wouldst euen loath it, tho it were vnto thee neuer so delicate Musicke.
Nothing increaseth in vs as a delight in any pleasure, but to haue that pleasure taken away for a time. But that the night offends vs with darknes, we should grow wea∣ry of the day. So that foure Vacations (if thou canst right∣ly make vse of them) may be vnto thée as 4. seueral sawes, to sharpen thy stomacke against those great feasts, are ser∣ued vp to thy Tables. So goe to Law (I confesse) is necessary in a Repub∣like; So is it to haue a Plague, for thereby the Superflu∣os numbers of people, which otherwise (if they increa∣sed) would deuoure one another, are swept away: So is it to haue War, for the Sword cuts off those idle branches that steale away the Sap from the profitable boughes of a Kingdome. But to haue a Warre without end, or a Plague without mercy, is the vndoing of a Realme, and so would it be▪ if men were euer in brablings. The 4. Vacations are like so many Soundings of Re∣treat after 4. Battailes; in which breathing-times men re∣new their courages, their forces, and their manners of fight: where (else) the Pleader (neuer giuing ouer) would grow too rich, and so bee enuied, and the clyent euer spen∣ding, would be made a Beager, and so gather into faction. Uaine therefore, idle, sencelesse, shapelesse, and of no validity are those Encomiasticke honors, with which thy rhetoricall cunning hath fethered a Pen so, gaily. An Idoll hast thou made of it,Inuectiue a∣gainst a Pen. whereas in the true nature it is a py∣neon puld from the left wing of the deuill. A Pen! The in∣uention of that, and of Incke hath brought as many curses into the world, as that damnable Witch-craft of the Fryer, who tore open the bowels of Hell, to find those murdering engines of mankind, Guns and Powder. Both these are alike in quality, in mischiefe: yea, and almost in fashion; The Pen is the Piece that shootes, Inck is the powder that carries, and Wordes are the Bullets that kill. The one doth onely destroy men in time of warre, the o∣ther
consumes men, both in warre and peace. The one batters downe Castles, the other barters them away. Cedant Arma Togae, let Gns therefore giue place to Gownes, for the Pen is the more dangerous weapon to run vpon. Why then doost thou, nay, howe canst thou without blushing defend a cause so notoriously badde? How darest thou hang a Trée so barren of goodnesse, and so rancke of poyson at the roote, with so many Garlandes of prayses? Canst thou find in thy heart to write Ealogies in honour of that deadly double pointed Engine, that hath béen the con∣fusion of so many thousands? Then let wreathes of Law∣rell Crowne their Temples, that shall sing the dishonora∣ble Acts of those Swords, which basely haue béen inbrued in the bowels of their owne Countrey: for in what other tryumphes (then in the afflictions of men) are these war∣like Instruments of writing imployed? One dash of a Pen hath often beene the downefall of a man and his posterity. By help of this, Wiues practise to abuse their Husbands, by the Witch-craft of Amorous pas∣sions, (which are coniurd out of a Goose-quill,) Louers intice young wenches to folly. This is that which spreads abroad, and sowes the Séedes of Schismes and Heresies. This is that, which marres all Learning, and makes it contemptible, by making it common. It is the Weapon of a Foole, and oftentimes his braynes drop out of the end of it in stead of Incke. It is a sharpe Gade that prickes our young Gentry to beggery, for in lesse than a quarter of an hower, (with a Pen) doe they betray all the Landes and liuings purchased by their progenitors, into the hands of Brokers, Scriueners, and Usurers. What forten hand hath euer béen working in the forge of Treason (for the deuastation of this Kingdome, for the extirpation of the Religion in it, or for the murdering of our Princes) But Pennes (like Hammers on an Anuile) haue continually béene beating out the plottes, and con∣ueying
them hither to bee made smooth, and to passe cur∣rant. What Libilles against Princes, against Péeres, a∣gainst the State, or against our Magistrates, were euer (like pricking Thornes) thrust into the sides of this Em∣pire, to make it bléed,The wordes were these, Eurdam ne∣clee nolite  bonu est. of which a Pen was not guilty? This, by leauing a word vnpoynted, was the death of Edward the second: with this, holding it but in his hand, did Richard the second giue away all the royalties belong∣ing to a Crowne, and blotted out his owne name for euer any more to be found written with the name of a King. In conclusion, the Tragedie of so many of our Ancient Nobility, were neuer acted on Scaffodes, but a Pen was chiefe Actor in their deaths and downefals. So then you may perceiue, that this Rauens bill draw∣eth bloud where it once fastneth: The Iawes of a Toade (sweating & foaming out poyson) are not more dangerous than a Pen being filled with that banefull and venomous mixture of Gall and Copporas. Accursed therefore be that A Goose. Bird, out of whose wing, so pestilent and so malitious an enemie to humane creatures is taken: offensiue to the sto∣macke, be for euer the meat of it, and apt to engender mor∣tall surfeits, sithence so small a part of it (as a Quill,) hath bred from the beginning, and (til the dissolution of this Vni∣uersall Frame) will be the cause of so much distemperature in the body of the Worlde. Which mischiefe that worthy Romaine Captain, who (about the eight yéere of the raigne of Cassibelan,Iulius Caesar, 54. yeeres be∣fore Christ, conquered Brittaine. Brother to King Lud (my first Founder and 54 yéeres before the King, both of Heauen and earth, sent his Sonue to dwell amongst men) entred this Land, con∣quered it, & made it tributary to the people of Rome, wisely looking into, and obseruing, that Princes, Rulers, and Great personages, must of necessity (being bound thereto by the ceremony of their birth, or by their place in the state) yéeld sometime to that, which otherwise yt noblenes of their owne bloud would abhor, did often wish that he could not know how to handle a Pen.
And that Mirror of her Sexe, both for magnanimity of minde, inuinciblenesse of Spirit, and (which is to her the greatest part of her ame) for the closing vppe of so long a raigne, with so full and so grieuous a period, that God∣desse vpon earth whilest she liued, that our Good Mistris (Eliza) when shee was to signe any warrant for the death of any Péere, would passionately (yet with a Spirit equal to Ceaars) say thus, Would to God wee had neuer beene taught how to write. And thus (O thou that sittest crowned like an Empresse) withall our riches and fairest Monuments haue I dischar∣ged the Office of a faithfull surueior, by telling thée what part of thy goodly body is builded too high, wherein my Counsell is that thou shouldest a little plucke downe thy Pryde And in what other part thou stanest too low, where I could wish thée to raise it vp to a more noble Eminence. I haue likewise pointed with my finger, at al those Cracks, disioyntings, Flawes, and Flyings out, which if they bee not repayred, are able in time to shake into dust a Citty grea∣ter then thy selfe: And (in my Reall loue to thée) haue I scored such plaine markes vpon thy hidden Ruines, which (like Treacherous Seruants) receiue in stormes (for euer to vnd thée) that if in any fit season, thou vnderprop them, and take down whatsoeuer is amisse, thou shalt in this thy old age growe strong and lusty againe, and with an easie Rest saue thy selfe from Falling. With a frée and vn-mercenary voyce, haue I pleaded for thy good, by discouering what is ill in thée: so that my Lectures of Reprehention may serue as wholesom Coun∣cell. Thou canst not blame me for opening thy woundes, and searching them to the quick, sithence thou séest I spare not mine owne. My pils perhaps may séeme a little bitter in going downe, but in the working thou shalt finde them as comfortable as Restoratiues. Take courage therefore to thee, and like a Prince that can commaund his owne affections (which is the Noblest
Soueraignty, be bold not onely to strike off those sicke and in∣fected parts, about the body of the Weale-publicke, whych threaten daunger to those that are sounde, but also applie thou the same sharp medicines, which I haue ministred to thée, if hereafter (as I often féele my self) thou perceiuest me ready or subiect to fall into loathsome diseases. We are now both of vs as Buildings belonging to one Land lorde, so closely ioyned together in league, that the world thinkes it a thing impossible, by any violence, vn∣lesse we fall to ciuill discention within our selues, euer to be seperated: our handes as if it were at a marriage, are plighted one to another our bodies are still embracing, as if they were Twinnes: wee are growne so like and euerie day doe more and more so resemble each other that many who neuer knew vs before, woulde sweare that we were all One. Sithence then we are held to be so, let vs neuer bee ta∣ken to be otherwise. But as sisters do, if the one féel sorrow let the other mourne, if the one bee lifted vp to honors, let not the other repine. And as stringes to an instrument, tho we render seuerall soundes, yet let both our soundes close vp in swéet concordant Musicke. Arme thy selfe therefore (with Mee) to maintaine that Vnion, without whych Realmes are builded vpon sande, and On whych they are stronger then if they stood vpon Rockes. And because al Citties were bound in common ciuility, in pollicie, and in honour to maintaine their Names, their Callings, their Priuiledges, and those Ancient houses that Spring out of them, I wil in thy presence Annatomize my selfe, euen from head to foot, thou shalt know euery limbe of me, and into how many parts my bodie is deuided. My birth, may bringing vp, and my rising shall bee as manifest to thy vnderstanding as to mine, because by the wilfull ig∣norance of those that ought of duety to preserue my credit, my good name is oftentimes and in many places abused & taken from me.
Neither would I haue thée account mee insolent, vain∣glorious, or ambitious, in erecting these Trophyes of Fame to my selfe, with mine owne handes: for vpon them shall neither be ingrauen the Actes of my sumptuous Builders, (whych would be too great an ostentation) nor the battels which my Citizens haue oftentimes fought and won in de∣fence of my liberties, which (more to my glory) might be re∣hearsed by others. But passing ouer the Names of some (which to repeate would be to me an euerlasting renown).Constantine the Emperor Mawd the Empresse, and Henry son to Henry 2 born in London. As to boast (which lawfully & without the blot of arrogance I could doe) that Constantine the Emperor y• builded Constantinople, drew his breath from my bosome, or that Maud the Empresse, did honour to me as to the mother that gaue her life, or that King Henry (son to Henry 2,) was begotten in my womb, which Heny at the age of 7. years was maried to Marg. (ye French kings daughter) being not two years old, & after∣wards with her in the life time of his father, were crownd at Winch. But burying this glory of mine (to be forgotten) in the Graues where these my children lye (now consumed to nothing) I will onely content my selfe (& it is but a poore ambition) to tell thée how I came to be called a Citty. By what Names London from time to time hath bin called, and how it came to bee diuided into Wardes. OBserue me therfore (O my most ingenious Pupill and scorne not to cal me thy Tutor) for I must heere and there speake of some matters, that I was an Eye-witnesse to, long before thou hadst any being. Kn thē (because time) who alters all things, may perhaps heereaf∣ter as hee hath done already, giue me some other new vp∣start name) that Brute from whom I tooke my byrth, after
had broght me (as thou séest to this day I abide) close to the Ryuer of Thames,The Names of London. did there bestow a Name on me, & called me Troynouant or Trinouant, and sometimes Trinobant, to reuiue (in me) the memory of that Citty which was tur∣ned into Cinders, and that for all the spight of those Gods who hated it, there should be a new Troy which was my selfe. That was the style by which I was knowne, for the space of more than one thousand years, and then Lud cha∣lenging me as his owne, tooke away none of my digni∣ties, but as women marryed to great persons, loose theyr old names, so did I mine being wedded to that king, and (after himselfe) was crowned with the Title of Laire-lud, that is to say, the Citty of Lud or Ludstone, vpon whych some nations cald me Londonū or Longidinū, & Laodinū, others Lundayne, the Saxons Londonceaster, and London-bridge. The Spaniardes Londra, the French Londres, and nowe in these dayes the people of our owne countrey, London. In my Infant rising was I but of base and meane estimation amongest other Citties, and was scarcelie knowne for all I was the Daughter of a king. But Ludde lifted mee vppe to high honours and greate ad∣uauncementes, for hee set a Corronet of Towers vppon my heade, and although it were not beautifull for Or∣nament, yet made he for me a Gyrdle, strong for defence, which being made of Turffe and other such stuffe,Lud made a wall about London of Turfe &c, but the Romain cause it to be made of stone. tren∣ched rounde about, serued in the Nature of a Wall or Rampyre, to keepe and defende off the assaulting ene∣mies. Afterwardes the Romaynes beeing the Lordes of the whole Kingdome, and so consequently of mee, insteede of throwing mee into seruile Slauery, raysed mee vppe to high dignity and honour, and whereas I trembled wyth feare to hae my buildinges flaming about mine eares,
they adorned my body, and apparrelled it rounde about with stone, for til the arriuall of that warlike and industri∣ous Nation on our shores, the Brittons dwelt in Townes as basely builded, as those now of the wild Irish. After I was thus fashioned and refined into the ciuill and beautifull shape of a Citty,The seuerall Nations that conquered this land frō time to time I began to be courted, and to be the onely Minio of the Land, the Romaines fought in my quarrell▪ the Brittons heaped vpon me honours, the Saxons (that draue out them) bound Garlands of victorye about my forehead. But these being beaten from my company by the Danes, I was by them spoyled of all my Ornamentes, and prosti∣tuted as a strumpet to the lust of ciuill discord, In heate of which the Normans came in rescue, chased hence yt Danes recouered the whole Empyre, and reduced it into one Mo¦narchy. From that day haue I euer since flourished, euer since haue I swelled vp in greatnes, euer since haue I bin loued of our kings, because euer since haue to our kinges bin loyall. How London cam to be de∣uided into Wards.In which prosperous growing vp of mine, all my boughes and my branches, haue more and more in stead of bearing fruit, bin replenished with multitudes of peoples, whose numbers increasing, it was thoght fit (in policy) that they should be quartered like Souldiers into hands, the better to bring them into order. According therfore to the Romans custome of Citties, was I diuided into certaine Signories, all of them notwithstanding, like so many streames to one Head, acknowledging a priority and subiection, to One, Greater than the rest, and who sith aboue them, those Di∣uisions or Partages are called Wardes, or Aldermanries, being 26 in number, which are ciuilly guarded and wise∣ly prouided, for by 24. Aldermen, in whom is represented the dignity of Romaine Senatours, and of Two Sheriffes, who personate (in theyr Offices and places) the Romane Consuls. Then is there a Subdiuision, for these Greater Cantles
againe  into lesse, being called Parishes, which   number  which are vnto  within : so  with buil∣dings, so furnishes with  people with wealthy Cittizens,  so , wisely, and peaceably gouerned. Thost things are awell knowne to thée,  to my selfe, which  I am willing to repeate , be∣cause that both of vs calling to minde, the greatnesse of our byrthes, and casting our eyes on the state and flourishing glory, wherein we haue alwayes carryed our selues, our misfortunes may be the more pittyed (at the hands of for∣en Citties,Londons cō∣plaint about the Plague. who may fall into the like) séeing the present condition, in which wee nowe stand. For (alacke!) What auayles it vs to beast of our former strength, of our beauties, of our honours, of our possessions, or of the Ri∣h wherein we flow, when that wee cannot inioy our healthes, which is worth all these; Sicknesse hath dwelt a long time in thy Chambers, she doth now walks still in a hostly and formidable shape vppe and downe my stréets. Shee (with her Ill Company) infeteth my Sonnes and Dauhters, and leades them dayly into such daungers, that (in hundreds at a time) doe they loose theyr liues. Fiue yéeres hath shee beene a troublesome Guest vnto me; I receiued her at first, (though I loued not her Company) yet I giue her good entertainement, and patiently endu∣ed her insulting oust mee and mine, because I knew shée was a Messenger sent from aboue. But woe to mee (infortunate Citty!) Woe vnto vs both (O my distressed Neighbour,) shall wee neuer shake handes with her and part? Shall our faire bodies neuer reuer of this Disease, which so often and often hath run all  them, and doth nowe againe beginne to bee as a plague vnto vs? Howsoeuer (out of the fashion of Confe∣es, or out of a pride to shew my wit) I haue checkt thée for deecting thy Spirits for any stroakes of calamity, yet
beléeue me, the care that I haue of my Children, whom I sée drooping, Conquers the height of my minde, subdues my Nature,  me (with sorrow) almost the gra∣ling on the ground. ead vnto vs both, are  dayes, whilest this pestilent vapour hanges ouer our heades: Dead are our pleasures, for wée do now take de∣light in nothing but in mourning: Dead are  houres of leysure, and those which are full of  the Lawe it selfe, (of whose presence wee both are glad, be∣cause we gayne by her, and because she eue bringes vs good and merry Company to chéere our heartes) will sitte heauily in thy Courts of Iustice, nay, I feare shee will bee vnwilling (séeing vs so subiect to diseases) to sit there at all. Many a sad & black Tearme hath bin séen walking in thy Hall, (like a Mourner) and I perceiue by thy lookes, thou art now in feare to bee troubled with the like▪ I cannot blame thee, neither will I chide thée, for I purpose to be as great with griefe as thy selfe. Neyther if that Blacke and Ominous day so happen and fall vpon vs, shall I wonder▪ For I cannot see, how the Diuine Vengeance should bee driuen back, since so many bold darings are giuen, forcing it to breake through the gates of heauen. The shaking of the Rodde is not thought of, the stripes mooue vs not, the very drawing of bloud, is by some but made a mockery: to proue it I will recite vnto thee (though to fell it, my buildinges will shake at the very horrour of the same) A story of death, both true and new. And this it is. One (vppon whom I had but lately bestowed the Tle and Dignity of a Cittizen) of whome I had good hope▪A description of Sturbridge fayre. cause I found him woorthy him to bee aduanced, taking his last leaue of mee (as since it hath faine out) departed to that quarter of the Land, to which from all other partes men in multitudes repayre, to sucke the swéete∣nesse of honest gaynes, and so to increase theyr wealth.
It is a place, where (is a large fielde) a Citty as it were is in a fele dayes builded vppe, and so quickely raysed, as if it had beene done by Enchantment, and in as few daies is it afterwardes pulled down, no memory remayning of it, nor Monnument to shewe that there it stoode: though whilst the earth beareth it vppe, there be Fayre streetes, so filled with people, that they séeme to bee paued euen with the féete of men: whilest on eyther side, shops are so furni∣shed and set forth with all rich and necessary commodities, that many comming thyther, haue taken that place for my selfe, and haue not stucke to call it by the name of Little London, so like do they sweare it hath been vnto me, both in face and fashion of body. Thither went this young Sonne of mine,The death of a young man a linnen Dra∣per dwelling in Friday-street. and there mistaking the place, for me, layed downe his head, as thin∣king it had béene my bosome, but neuer lifted it vp againe. A token had hee sent from heauen, by which hee was bid∣den to make hast thither, hee obeyed the bringer of it, and in pawne of his soule that was gone at the iourney, left hee his cold body behind. To kéepe which safe, Two followes were hyred to hide it in the earth,The two Por∣ters of Lon∣don. they did so, vsing the body, as Souldiers do Townes which are taken, they risted it, of all that be∣longed vnto it, and what al men else were affraid to touch or come néere, did they (being armed with the desire of mo∣ny) nimbly, and Iocundly packe vppe, intending at theyr comming home to share it. No sooner had they dispatched their deadly busines, but those that had Authoritie of the place, and who made much of these two Sharkers before, when they stoode in néede of their helpe, make nowe as much hast as they can, to ridde them out of theyr company: Away therefore like Pedlers from the ende of a Fayre, so doe they send them away rudging. The Town looked euen sick so long as they were in it▪
It was a killing to any Countrey▪ fellowe to haue looked vppon them, if hee had but heard what parts in this black Tragedy of death they had played. And both of them be∣ing Porters, were taken by reason of their white Frocks, for two Ghosts walking in white Shirts: to haue drunk with these Pot-toffers hadde beene no way but one, to haue solde any drinke to them, had béene for a Tapster to haue drunke his last: nay, whosoeuer did but spy them 12. store off, or were but told that two such Rauens (who prei∣ed vppon a dead body) flew that way, cryed presently out, Lord haue mercy vppon vs, clapping their hard handes on their Country breastes, and looking more pale then the shéete in which the man was buryed. But the best was these Parines (that dealt in such a a dead commodity) were borne to beare, & tooke all thing patiently. But ambling on their way towards their , (which is vnder my wing) where they knwe they shld finde better entertainement, their mindes were troubled; and their téeth watered, at the remembraunce of not onely Money, but also of apparell, and other luggage which was left in the Bed chamber where the sicke man  which they perswaded themselues no man (vppon payne of life) vnlesse it were They two, . They shrugged as they went,  backe, would they stand stone-, for their  zzing about seuerall plottes . But the powder of  take  and  speak nothing to help them in this  should they  itched to lay hold vpon the prize, but all the  in the . At length one of them hauing a more plaugy pate than
his , swore  with sicknes, and with the  if he got not the bayt that he nibled at,  himselfe with the )  for it: but if he wnt away  in Cambridge , The other scratched at this, and grind, instéed of gyuing applaud it, which . Then  (nre Cambridge)  following  héed of the man, hées  vp and downe)  sought to stop him. At length he came to the house where the deade man had bin  be driuen, that was his Inne, there he would lie, that was his Bedlam, and there or no where must his mad tricks be plaid. In the end, the feare of further daunger to flowe from him (as being thought to haue the plague) and the autho∣rity of those that could command, made this vnruly guest be let into the same house, where entring, none durst kéep him company, but the Byrd of his own feather, and that was the sport which hee looked for: In no other chamber must he be lodged, but onely that where, al the dead mans
FINIS.
