A4201 08447133 41332
AN ACCOUNT Of a Remarkable SEA-FIGHT, BETWEEN An English Ketch, and a French Privateer. From Aboard the Breda Fregate, at the Spit-Head. April, 19. 1690. SIR, I Send you this in return of several kind Letters which are accep∣table to us remote from the News of the Town. 'Tis true, it is an Account of a small loss we have receiv'd; yet when you con∣sider the Bravery of the Resistance and how dear bought the Victory was to the Enemy, you will find it to be a Relation fit for publick view, to shew the Gallantry of our English Courage. Captain Robert Audley Commander of the King Fisher Ketch, carry∣ing twenty four Men, and four Guns, was sent by our Admiral from the Fleet here riding, to fetch the prest Men that lay at Plymouth. In his course, he was met by a French Privateer, of eighteen Guns and six Petterero's, off of Weymouth. The Privateer put out Dutch Colours at first, so that Captain Audley never suspected him to be a French Man, till he came up just with him, at what time the Privateer put up his French Colours; and then Captain Audley found his mistake. However perceiving there was no way to avoid a Vessel that Sayl'd better then he did, the Captain resolv'd to defend himself as well as he could. The French man being as I said before an Excellent Sayler, put off the Ketch from the Shore to make sure of her; and so the Fight began about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, and continu'd till almost nine: During which time the Frenchman Boarded the Ketch no less than four times, but was every time beat off with much loss, till at length of twenty four Men and the Captain, there were no more then seven Men left that were able to Maintain the Fight. When the Ketch was thus disibl'd, the Privateer Boarded the Cap∣tain a fifth time, and leaving twenty Men a Board, put off again. Now began another hot Contest between the twenty and the seven; which
continu'd till two of the seven were cut in pieces, and Captain Aud∣ley himself wounded in four places, after he had kill'd seven of the twenty with his own hand, and the rest of the twenty all but two, were kill'd by the few left in the Ketch, and then it was, and not before, that the French Privateer Boarding the Ketch the last time, and entring all his Men, the wounded Captain and his poor five Men were forc'd to yield to fresh aailants and superiour number. What loss the Privateer re∣ceived, we cannot understand, but considering the loss of the English, it is not to be question'd, but that he paid dear for the purchase of a little Ketch. When Captain Audley was taken, the Privateer impatient of the Mischief he had received, asked him, how he had the Impudence to fight such a Ship as his was, and in the height of his passion, was so unge∣nerous as to fall upon Captain Audley with his Cane, and to bestow so many hard blows upon him, as to set his VVounds a bleeding a fresh, and in other parts of his Body to beat him black and blew. A piece of insulting Tyranny, which none but a French Privateer would have been guilty of. Nevertheless we must say this for the Privateer, that when the heat of his Fury was over, he came so far to himself, that before he sent Captain Audley on shore at St. Malo's, he gave him his blew Suit back again to keep him warm in the Goal, because he had fought so bravely; and was so kind to his own Reputation, that to excuse the loss he had receiv'd, he reported to the Honour of the English, that never Men fought better in the VVorld; as by a Letter from St. Malo's, is attested by several Merchants upon the place, who offered six French Mates for his Ransom, but they would not be taken; twelve Cowardly French Mates not being a true value for one Valiant English Captain. He is at this present in the Castle of St. Malo's, and the four en that brought the News, being since redeem'd, are now in Portsmth, and the Rear Admiral of the Red Squadron, is takeing all the Care he can to obtain the Liberty of the Captain Himself, with some other Friends. This Account I could not forbear to give you, for the Honour of my Brother Robert, since you know us both, Remaining your humble Servant, John Audley. IF any person desire to be further satisfy'd in the Truth of this Relation, the Printer will direct where they may see the Original Letter, not to be contradicted. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers Hall. 1690
