B170 12729875 66412
THE Revelation OF GOD & his GLORY SOUNDED FORTH For the opening the Mystery of the Seven SEALS, on the Book of the WONDERS of GOD in the hand of the ANGEL. BEING A True and Faithful TESTIMONY Of the Enochian Prophecie Of the Rise and Fall of ANTICHRIST, And of the Restauration of ZION to its Primitive Glory. London, Printed in the year 1665.
The EPISTLE To the READER. I. LEt the Impartial Reader se∣riously weigh what is herein set down, and rashly pass no Sentence on a Work of this concernment; nei∣ther scruple at the Form and Me∣thod in which it is come forth to the view of all sorts of Spi∣rits,
wherein I cannot expect so kind entertainment, in matters of such nature, as to have all Men speak well of it, or of me therein, because then had I my Reward with men. II. For my whole and sole aim and intention in this work (as far forth as I know, and am made sensible of my own frame and temper of Spirit) is and hath been other ways grounded and founded in Truth, than to seek other Honour and Glory than what is of, and cometh from GOD; wherein I have a Wit∣ness both in Heaven and Earth,
which I might call to bear Re∣cord with and for me, that I con∣siderately love not vain osten∣tation, or to boast over the Weak, by soaring aloft out of the reach of their Capacities, that something else than the Spirit of GOD should be exalted in the Temple and Throne of Gods DIGNITY. III. Because then might I expect that God should glory over me, in the WORK of DESTRU∣CTION: Though I know in the following Treatise much is come forth in an unpleasant form and dress, to the curious search
of some that may count them∣selves wise; and it will be ac∣counted (at the first sight there∣of) rather FORM and SHA∣DOW then SUBSTANCE; and many will be ready to judge the truth of its Concern locked up in SIMILITUDES, and sealed in an unknown Tongue, in that through good Experi∣ence of the Enemies Work, I am taught not to be too prodigal in opening Terms, wherein some have suffered and come to a loss, by such means, and the Truth it self is thereby made of low esteem in the EYES of many proud and haughty Ones.
IV. Therefore have I employed my Endeavours (under the workings and motions of the Spirit of God, wherein many Mysteries of truth pertaining to the Establishment of his Kingdom, have been re∣vealed in and unto me) that I might leave no room for contention, to feed the snarling na∣ture of those dogged qualities in such that are gon out of the pati∣ence and content of God, where the Charity of Life is abounding, wherein Covenant is kept with the LORD, in that Spirit which particularly openeth and reveal∣eth the Mysteries of Truth, in
all to whom it pertaineth to know the same. V. And though such that hun∣ger after Advantages (in that SWINE-like Nature, which is ready to return again, and rend those that cast their Pearls before them) are in the nature of the Harlot, who is not to be fed with the portion of a true Matron, neither is Childrens Bread to be cast before them, in that adulterating spirit (which open∣eth the Quiver out of which the Darts of Disdain are sent forth, do fly abroad) and yet shall not the Truths of God always
continue clouded or obscured in silence, as a Treasure hid in the EARTH. VI. But the Time is come that the oppressed Life hath gathered strength, and the groans of the Sufferer have made way for the resurrection of the slain; and the Poor and Despised doth and will arise over all the con∣tempt it hath met withall in its Way onward to the Land of REST; and the Disdainful are ashamed to see the Beggar taken from off the Dunghil, and such exalted in the Favour of God, that were of low degree in the
Eyes of the Admirer of the Per∣sons of Men, because of advan∣tage, who have said, Sit thou here, and be my Footstool, since thou hast no Gold Ring, nor gay Garment; else depart, and be thou warmed and fed: but therefore are the Rich afflicted, and the Full are given up into the Tormentors hands. VII. For a Day is already appear∣ed, in which the simple have been preserved in their Way, and they shall grow in the Favour both of God and Man, through all opposition they meet with, by the fierce and cruel HUNTERS, for their Prey: And those that
have said, Come up higher, and sit thou here, because of thy covering and out-side Garment; shall them∣selves be seen naked and hun∣gry, and in want of all things, and many shall behold their shame; for they shall no more wear a rough Garment to de∣ceive, or through austerity appoint places to such that may serve their Interest: but the Voyce of the LORD shall be heard in the EARTH, calling and inviting many to the great and last Supper of the LAMB, who shall have on the Wedding Garment of a meek and quiet Spi∣rit, which is of great price with the Lord.
VIII. And this covering will ne∣ver prove too narrow, neither shall it be ripped off; though such may come up in an appear∣ance of Glory, to manifest the end of the Worldly Sentence that is gone out against them: but seeing fiery tryals are come, wherein all Foundations are to be searched into, that every Birth may live in, and receive the Re∣ward of that which it hath been sown in and to, and that it may appear whether they can indure and hold out in the time of af∣fliction: Blessed are all they that have found out, and are builded
on the unmoveable and lasting Rock of Ages, and Foundations of many Generations, that have passed before them: for I have seen many good beginnings in the Work of God, wherein his Grace and Love was and is suf∣ficient to perfect and finish the same, had it been trusted to, wholly and fully. IX. But such that have leaned to their own understandings, have given heed to lying Vanities, and have forsaken the FOUNTAIN of endless Mercies and Refresh∣ments, having still that of their own reserved, (which they are
very loth to part from) that se∣parates between GOD and them: these have begun well, but who hath hindered them, that they are so ready to sit down by the VVay in a false Peace and Rest? wherein they come short of perfect Satisfa∣ction in God, looking on a self-sufficiency, in something done as an Act of the Creature without the assistance of the Spirit of GOD to keep in the way of Peace. X. For their beginning was in and by the Spirit of GOD, why then seek they to be perfect by
the Flesh, and in a Name of Pro∣fession of Truth, while they have the approbation of such that have convinced the Under∣standing of that which is Truth in the Judgment of Creatures? but in a time of the tryal of their Faith, the ends of the World are manifest before them, and then is there a running to and fro, to increase the Knowledge of the WORK of GOD, as it is in themselves, though many have learned in this day to adde to their Faith, Vertue and Patience, and all good Fruits of the Spi∣rit of God, because of the Ex∣perience of the Work of Faith, which through Patience they
are kept in the sence of, in the midst of Fiery Tryals; and they hold fast the begettings of God thereby, in a confidence of good in him. XI. And then as they increase in Knowledge, it is on a good ground and foundation, that hath learned them to rejoyce in the FLAMES of DEVOURING FIRE, whose devouring QUALITY cannot reach their SENCE with any BITTERNESS of its Sting; but through Patience and Submission thereto, it is made sufferable, and the Cross is made easie therein, and the BURDEN light, because of a
quenching property in that love, against whatever maketh the Judgement of God to be unsufferable Torment to his Creature: for part of their Knowledge is, that it is not on∣ly given them to believe, but to suffer for the namesake of God, though in the beginning of the Work of Faith, the belief that was wrought by the Spirit of God in them, is a Convincer of sin, under which there was and is a suffering in the nature that hath contracted the guilt thereof on the Soul, by unity of Spirit therewith, even the Spirit and God of the World.
XII. Further, knowing and being perswaded, in patience to wait for the perfecting of the Work of God in the Heart, in that Faith and belief of the love of God therein shed abroad, that they are kept sensible of a good experience of the Work there∣of, having the Testimony of a good Conscience to manifest the same in the World; these can shew their Faith by its Works, and have a birth there∣of that makes not ashamed of a good CONFESSION among Men; and the fained Humility, and appearances of Love, from
the untimely Fruit of the Womb, that can never come to see the glory of the Sun of this day, withereth in its way: for that which can indure and hold out to the End, worketh by the love of God, that hath begotten in∣to a lively hope, concerning the Resurrection from the Dead, ha∣ving a Life tinctured in the Souls reach after true Charity in God, and Love unfained, which is the highest attainment in a Christi∣ans state, and the greatest Gift that can be attained by men un∣der the Bond of Perfection. XIII. Sealing the Work in which
God doth glory and delight, in that which is made able to pass through the stroke of Death, to leave an Earnest of the expecta∣tions of the Creature (after the day of Redemption) in that which is much more pretious than that of Gold that perisheth: But how have I seen many in this day, loading themselves with the Fancy and Imaginations of their disquieted Mind? and then being burdened with a Fear and Jealousie that ariseth from the Unbelieving Heart, and distrustful ground, they are ready to cry out of the Burden of the Lord, whereas their own words and thoughts are be∣come
their Burden; who have taken that on them, which God never layd on them; and yet they make the concern for the Lords sake, that lays no more on any than they are made able to bear in the Life of Patience. XIV. And in this ground stand all the several Separations, and hasty receivings into Fellowships, with sudden hands laid on Pro∣selytes; for herein is the ground of prejudice, swayed by the creaturely affection: yet in this mind may be maintained a fierce and fiery Zeal, for the opiniatedness, that may often
call for fire to come down from Heaven, and to have Vengeance and Plagues speedily executed on such against whom their Spirit is bent: for having wish∣ed evil in their Hearts, and mis∣chief against the Persons of such (towards whom they cannot admit of any CHARITABLE thoughts) they proceed in a ha∣sty Prophecy of their utter con∣fusion, and then would they rather that both Soul and Bo∣dy of the subject (over whom they seek to be avenged in that rejoycing) should for ever pe∣rish, than that they should be found False Prophets: so evil a thing it is to be engaged in a
Spirit of Enmity and Envy. XV. But such Extremities many have this day put themselves on, through rash censure, and then run back to former Ages and Generations of the World, for a President and Example to help them out, as they think; whereby they oft are ready to plead the lawfulness of cursing their Adversary, who standeth not justified in their sight and approbation, because ELISHA was once acted in that Mini∣stration, through the heat and zeal of his Spirit; it being so far from their nature, to live in
that which is wayting for the Worlds redemption from sin, and reconciliation to God, that they rather strengthen their FU∣RY in the expectation of utter Consumption and Destruction on all that cannot for wraths sake stoop to their perswasions; and it is the end of such wil∣lings, to see a People perish in their sins. XVI. Because of that mis-inform∣ed Zeal, under which their Spi∣rits are acted, against the Ene∣mies and Foes of that Cause for which they have found the life imboldened towards God, ac∣cording
to the quickning of his Spirit, as tinctured with that Power before which the Heavens have opened, and do shut; and in the like desire THEY are moved, as was HE before whom Fifties were destroyed, whose Spirit resteth Judgement on a Ground wherein God hath prepared Messengers to go before his face: But conside∣ring the difference in Admi∣nistrations, that Zeal which runneth out after an Object to maintain the heat of Spi∣rit against which it is en∣kindled, is not now held and retained in the like Cause and
Ground as that in which it first appeared. XVII. For God is gone out of that Administration, as acted towards the Persons of Men in their Generations, and cannot own any glory there∣in, but as that which had a Testimony of his day in the Prophecy thereof, wherein the Messengers went before his Face, in a sence of that terror that was come on the Wicked World; because such that wear the soft Cloath∣ing are got into Kings Houses, and they shall no more wear
a rough Garment, or prophesie in their Sackcloth Robes; there∣fore whom would men go out to see? since Times are come, that the Sacrifice of the Rebellious savoureth of the Work of Death, and there is not fire enough to kindle the combustible mat∣ter, in the House, on the top of which they are exalted; while the Displeasure of God continueth unawakened in the Pleasure and Will of Men that bring Wood, but where is the Flame of that other Spi∣rit which God requireth? even of Reconciliation to Him∣self, in the Life of Forgive∣ness,
in that which is able to Appease and Quench the Wrath and Rage of the de∣vouring Enemy, and make Friends in the Well-Beloved Life. XVIII. Yet where is Love and Forgiveness enough to heap Coals of Fire on the Heads of Enemies, the Gift hath been first left at the Altar, and such are in the way of Re∣conciliation to God and their Brother, and have their Sa∣crifice salted with Salt, and do find Acceptance before God, without any loud Cry to the Worlds BAAL, or Lord,
as did the Priests in Days of old; and they awaken no∣thing before its time, but are wayting on the Power of what is already kindled and awakened against Self, which is Gods Displeasure, where∣in the ENEMY hath been strengthened for a time. XIX. Thus desiring, if it be pos∣sible, to live in peace with all Men, no Spirits can be awakened in the wrathful Prin∣ciple to their hurt, because such things are not easily al∣layed again in their heat and sting; for the Executioners of
Gods Displeasure, as destroy∣ing Angels in God, rejoyce in the Power of Death, ta∣king occasion by Sin to tempt, and then to accuse, as sin hath taken occasion by the LAW, (once ordained in the hand of Angels) to revive a strength of Condemnation, under the Power of Death, wherein the Devourer and Destroyer imployeth his In∣struments in the Working of Concupisence, like a roaring Lyon seeking to betray under his Baits and Snares, as a ground of Enmity and Revenge, in which he lurketh with accu∣sations, after he hath once
conquered under the Power of his Dominion, and to con∣demn before God, that the Patient in Spirit may be de∣livered into his hand for tor∣ment, the time he hath to sift and try them. XX. For I have always desired of the Lord, to keep out of the ground and Cause of Just Offence to any, and to avoid occasions of Enmity, which is so ready to spring up in the distempered and discompo∣sed Mindes of Men of unru∣ly Passions, who have let in the SEED of Discontent
against the Dealings and Proceedings of God, either in Themselves or Others, wherein many are both seek∣ing and taking occasions un∣justly against those they are out of Charity with, because of a mind filled with preju∣dice and gainsayings, though to me such things are no whit strange, in that I know there is no temptation suf∣fered to work against the life of God in any, but what was common to the Saints in days of old, who with the Temptation have found out a way to escape the evil and danger thereof.
XXI. Yet am I clear herein, that I have not sought to hide the Counsel of God from any, by delivering forth the truth of what I have received from GOD, in an UNKNOWN Tongue, wherein I could keep my Conscience void of offence towards GOD and Man; but there is a Spirit which is Worldly wise and subtil, yet covered with Re∣ligious pretences, which is at this day seeking Prehemi∣nence in the House and Temple of God, and that is it which I desire to live and
act out of the reach of, in what form, or by what name soever they may be called; therefore from such I keep in the Clouds, and from thence must I in the Truth hereof, and the Truth in me descend to their Capaci∣ties, as way is made therein, through the fulfilling of the Prophecy. XXII. But though this is and hath been my Care and Conscience towards God, and love to the Creation of him that formed his Workmanship in the Womb of Nature, and curiously wrought the form wherein he rejoyceth, in the Mothers Belly, not to seek
or give any just occasion of of∣fence to Jew or Greek, or cast a stumbling Block in the way of the Gentiles, in which the House of Israel remaineth under suf∣ferings; yet as far forth as I am redeemed out of the ground of hurt, which worketh in the excess of Love or Fear of the Creatures, I question not but my LIFE will be preserved through all in my Way, and out of the reach of evil Tongues, in the bewitching faculty of pre∣judice, that swelleth with Envy. XXIII. My Bow's bent being whol∣ly drawn against the persecu∣ting
Spirit of the World, about Religion and Worship of God, under what name or pretence soever such are covered, who seek to keep the Innocent under the sufferings of Cruelty, in the Holes and Dens of the Earth, that are filled with a People more righteous before God, than themselves; though it was Israels Choice to have that Dominion established, wherein they might be like unto other Nations of the Earth, which is given them in the Ministration of Wrath and Fury; and in all Forms of Government he hath come forth higher than the common People by the Head,
as King in Nature; and though he hunt for his Prey, as a Par∣tridge on the Mountains, yet doth God watch over and pre∣serve his own, through all con∣spiracies of ACHITOPHEL, which shall come to nought. XXIV. Notwithstanding many are hereby given into the Hands of the Tormentor, for the destructi∣on of the Flesh, whose Spirits are saved alive in this day of the Lord, and they are now com∣ing forth in that Power which hath conquered the strength of the old Deceiver, which is ready to betray with a Kiss of Flatte∣ry,
and they are made able to trample on the Dominion of Death and Hell (in the worldly Spirits Excommunications, and Banishments, and sensual Separa∣tions (having not the Spirit of God) in a patient, suffering, and bearing Principle, that cannot re∣joyce to see and behold any evil in others, but mourneth over such that are left to themselves, and the pernicious ways of that Will, which is deserted by God, in the ground and Principle of the Lifes operation, though in his Sufferance they live, and move, and have their Being, while they grow in that which is past feeling of his Love, and
are dead to the apprehension of his Power, in the motion of which they were first quick∣ned, as given up to a reproved and reprobate sence. XXV. Therefore let the goodness of God to his Creature, lead to Re∣pentance (as that which shall leave all Men without Excuse before him) which is the only way to bring out of a perishing Estate, under which the Worlds are fallen, wherein his LOVE and MERCY maketh sensible of the Danger, concerning which they are forewarned, that as God cometh to leave any to
themselves, in the danger of their own Pernicious Ways, so in like manner they be dealt withal by them that profess his Name and Truth, and none to continue contending with the World in the wrathful Principle, for it is not lawful striving with any People out of the Power of God, in the Ministration of his Love, because all wrathful furi∣ous drivings and strivings are under the Power of the Destroy∣er, and it is the Devils strength to lead into the same, though therein Divine Justice cometh to be exalted over the Creature (in the execution of Vengeance that repayeth double to all the Rebellious.)
XXVI. Let the stiff-necked consider therefore why many have been given up unto Satan, and deli∣vered into the Tormentors hands for a season, while De∣struction and Contempt hath come on the Glory of the Flesh, which is stained: for the Hun∣ter after mischief shall fall in his own Snare and Gin; and the Trap he hath layd for the Innocent, shall take hold of his Feet in the Way he is walking, when the wronged comes to be apprehended on a Hill that is higher than that on which the Enemy and Destroyer hath been
exalted; and into the Hands of the PURSUED is put a sharp Instrument, the strength of that Reason whereof the World is robbed and bereft, (even the Sword of Goliah, and Spear of their Adversary) with which they shall wound the Head of RAHAB, and the Dragon, and thereby they shall do EXPLOITS. XXVII. Though they are kept from using it in a time of advantage, yea, I have seen, I have seen, while the Envious have been hunting abroad, the Pursued have been led into the Tents of
those that are Mighty in Battel; and the Man of War hath been found sleeping over his Master, until a Lap of his Garment (with which the Envious hath cove∣red the Cruelty of his Spirit) is brought forth into open view; and the Cruse and Spear at his Beds head, can now be shown to his shame, because the Blood-Avenger hath kept the Innocent from putting forth his Hand to touch Him that had once the Anointing Oyl on his Head, that had the favour of a Lot in Israel, when the Spirit of God rested on Him, that made it a Proverb, Is the Son of Kish also among the Prophets?
XXVIII. But the Cry of the Poor is heard, that hath been compas∣sed about with Tormentors, who hath said in his heat, What shall I now do? for behold here cometh a whole Army, and I have no Sword but that of Goliahs, and the Lord hath said, Take it, for there is none like it: and it shall be known that a Stripling is engaged in the Lords Battel, and is able to make war against Israels Ene∣mies, though he could not use the Sword in his own defence, neither dares he be too bold in the exercise thereof abroad, lest
the bruised Reed should be broken, and the smoaking Flax quenched, before Judgment is brought forth into Victory (at home, where the War is begun, by such that are engaged in the Lambs Battel. XXIX. Therefore in the Mystery of what is herein treated of, is the depth of whatever hath relation to the concern both of SOUL or BODIES Welfare, in the Knowledge and true understan∣ding of its state; and the uni∣versality thereof, is a Testimo∣ny worthy to be heeded in the General or particular Concern, because of the relation it hath
to the true and right Information of the Mind of all that are capa∣ble of benefit therein, through a pointing property at that which gives unto the Reader a sence of the Day, in which ma∣ny in old time were made Pro∣phets and Messengers, and have largely testified and prophesied there∣of, in the Restoration of all Prin∣ciples of Nature it hath posses∣sed and inhabited in the BODY, into its first Glory, which is the MYSTERY of the Second Re∣surrection, in those in whom the Power of the first Death is weakened, and over whom the second Death hath no power.
XXX. For the Life of JESUS is manifest in their mortal Flesh, discovering the Glory of which they are made Partakers, in a Kingdom everlasting, and World without End, because of their Faith and Belief in the changing and renewing Power of GOD, wherein the JUST do live, and witness Redemption from the Sting of SIN, and Strength of the LAW (which is the Power of Death) and the GRAVE hath not Dominion over the Soul; therefore you that pro∣fess Scriptures, contend not against the Verity and Infallibility
of the Testimony hereof, be∣cause for your sakes and satisfa∣ction I am constrained in some cases, to use such Words, that the RECORD of TRUTH is sealed by, in the Testimony of the PROPHETS of GOD in former Ages and Genera∣tions of the World. XXXI Neither let it scruple any (on the other hand) that I use not an exact FORM and ME∣THOD of Scripture-Terms, but am oft constrained to apply the bent of my Spirit toward such significant terms as are brought to my Understanding in the exer∣cise
of the VISION; for the Words are but an outward Sound and Declaration of what hath relation to an inward and invisible Work, in the Heart of the Creature, through the Sal∣vation of the Soul from Death: but I see it hard for many pro∣fessing SCRIPTURES, and the Knowledge of the TRUTHS of GOD therein declared, to own it nakedly, for its own sake, and yeild and bend to the dis∣posings of God, in matters of such concern; for then would it be consented to, in what hath relation to the Minds Informa∣tion, without respect to the Per∣sons of such that are found dif∣fering
in Judgment, concerning outward Circumstances in Ge∣stures, or PRINCIPLES in DOCTRINE, while in the End and Aim there is a respect to Truth in the Heart. XXXII. And there will be a joyning in the Acceptance, against what∣ever hath relation to Contro∣versies, in a state of disobedi∣ence against the Spirit of God, in which the WORLD is en∣deavouring to settle a Rest: and hence have I seen the Complai∣ner vexed with Burdens of his unruly Passion; but that God may more and more unseal the
Fountain of endless Good and Happiness (in the Knowledge of the Glory of his Kingdom, that is everlasting) is my Souls desire, that Truth and Righte∣ousness may be set up in the WORLD, and the Glory of the ANTIENT OF DAYS (proceeding in the increase of the Knowledge of GOD) may run down like a River, and cover the Earth like as the Waters cover the Sea. XXXIII. And as this hath its due ac∣ceptance in the Heart of the Up∣right and Unbiassed in Censure and Judgment, for the sake of the Controversies among men,
about their Opinionatedness concerning the Truths of God contained in the Scriptures, with which the World is filled) they will more and more come to see into its service, and the end for which it is given forth, which will make way for the opening and discovery of many pretious Secrets, pertaining to the Restauration of Nature, in its depraved Body of infected Elements, that are generated un∣der a Power of Corruption, that Creatures may come to see into the Mystery of what is contained in many words there∣in, that hath a signification ve∣ry intricate to the common
sence of private Interpretations thereon, which the limitting spi∣rit of the WORLD is apt to tye up the Faith of their Com∣municants in, because of the vulgar acceptance it hath in the Heart of a Multitude: But the Encouragement I find for the prosecution of what is remain∣ing in this Tract (wherein I am taking view of my passage through those Forms of Nature in which I am imbodyed in time and place, is centred in an higher Object, than the Readers well or ill Ac∣ceptance. XXXIV Though I am satisfied in the end thereof, that coming to
be seen into, will cause many to say, Now I know thou speakest no more unto us in PARABLES, but hast plainly shewed us of the Fa∣ther. But among the Multi∣tude, how hard a thing is it to believe well of future Events, either in general or particular Con∣cerns? so narrow is the Heart of the Creature tyed up in his Generations, and cannot see the good of any thing in Posse, though that which is in Esse, Self is continually labouring for Interest in; yet consider the want of Faith in the World, con∣cerning any Help and Delive∣rance to the Oppressed (after which they have fixed Expecta∣tions)
shall not always keep down and hinder the day we groan after, but it shall come when Faith is scarce to be found on the Earth, and Deliverance shall spring up to the Afflicted, (as well concerning outward Op∣pressures as inward, when they are left as Men without hope. XXXV. But none of those that are in the fanning Love, and out-side shews of Humility in appearan∣ces, under any pretence what∣ever, of a universality of Spirit (while in a sensual Separation they continue rending them∣selves from the Body of Fellow∣ship
[in God] wherein is the ho∣ly Order of Saints) will be able to stand and hold out the indu∣rance of the Tryals that are come into the Worlds; though for a Time they make Parties, and have Headships in the Di∣visions of Men, about Opini∣onatedness; for it is that eve∣ry thing may appear in its birth, that the Mystery of Iniquity hath been suffered to work: and the Selfish Love (in appearances of Hu∣mility) is one with the Spirit of the WORLD, in which it is grounded and founded, and the day hath made it manifest.
XXXVI. For it is not lo here! or lo there! will now hide the Pro∣fessor, neither A. nor P. in Profession, or that thou hast Love or Zeal in thy Heart, but what art thou joyned to, in the exercise thereof, that le∣veneth NATURE into a Principle; it is that which will discover whose Side thou art on; which I long since have had a perfect sight of; and that both the fearful and unbelieving of God and his Goodness, that for want of Zeal to God (in the Cause and Case in which they once
have appeared) seek to cover their dead mind in a habit of Love and Forgiveness, and while filled with the Power of Death, they move and reach after a sence (in others) under which they would be apprehended to live; and al∣so the Proud and Presumptious who are heightned in a fierceness of that fiery Zeal) could be content to persecute for their OPINIONA∣TEDNESS, with Tongue or might of Arm, and both will joyn hands to conclude the matter, under which a My∣stery doth work.
XXXVII. This is already seen; and that Doctrines of Truth may be received and believed, that have Universal Principles, and yet retained in a narrow empty Heart, whereby the Cause for which the Just doth suffer, is maintained in a Ground that is evil to the Life of Jesus who lighteth every man, &c. and therefore the Nature of what springeth from thence, effect∣eth that which is contradi∣ctory to good sence: but I leave the Issue thereof to God, who is the Highest and Chiefest GOOD; whereby the Crea∣ture
(who is the Subject on which it doth work) may come to grow into Unity of Spirit with Him therein, wherein Time and Place is measured and comprehended, in the incomprehensible Beau∣ty of Holiness, which shineth in and over all his Works, and standeth in the excelling Properties of that Vertue that transcends the worth of all visible created things, which are all to perish in that state of Corruption un∣der which they are brought forth BEAUTIFUL into MANIFESTATION, that many may come to com∣prehend,
with all Saints, what is the height and depth, and length, and breadth of these things, as they are in JESUS. XXXVIII. But the order of what hath relation to a Publique Good herein, depends on a Ground that hath the Truth of all Pro∣phecy opened, in the concern it hath to both outward and inward man, of which a large Testimony is already given forth, in the passage of all those that died in the Faith of the Day, many are become Witnesses of, and do see and
possess great Glory therein, through a sence of Redem∣ption and Restauration, come unto, and come up in the Worlds, in its Principles, in the several and respective States, where many have been found wandering from Satis∣faction, (in the progress of the Work, which leads up unto God) and therefore con∣cerning the Times and Sea∣sons, for which the Vision is set, and made to speak, thou shalt count a year for a day, from the Creation of the Worlds in the Generations of ADAM, according to the days of the Life of ENOCH,
which were 365 years, where∣in is the ground of all Pro∣phecie comprehended, in number and figure, that is now made able to utter its voice. XXXIX. And it will appear to be the fifteenth day of the fifth Month, of the sixteenth year, since the Creation of the Worlds (in the Generations of Adam, to this present year 1665.) wherein thou shalt count in each month 28 days and ⅔ parts, between New Moon and New Moon, coun∣ting the beginning of the Month from the Phasis, or first
appearing-time thereof; and from the fifteenth year the Worlds stood divided in that which rested the Judgment of GOD (which is brought thereinto) on its fourth part, or North Quarter, over which the Ea∣gle hath had Power (in the time the Dragon remained bound down in the bottomless Pit) with a chain of the An∣gel of GOD, while those that had received the first Fruits of Joy and Comfort (in the Spirit of God, and that are made partakers of the first Resurrection) have raigned in the Dominion and Power of God, in that which hath
quickned the Spirit of the Souls of the once dead in Sins and Trespasses, as of those Spirits in Prison, unto whom the Prea∣cher of Redemption is become manifest. XL. And by fifteen degrees of the Sun (according to which it hath gone ten degrees back∣ward on the Worlds, and in which the Days of the Month, and Months of the Year are equally divided) thou shalt be made able to measure the Worlds in what is discernable, and whence Glory descendeth into Nature, from the Equinoctial Pole, according to its Elevation;
counting in the Diurnal Motion of the Wheels, wherein a Day standeth for a Year (in its figure) according to the times and sea∣sons under which the Worlds have multiplied their number, to the Generations that are come to possess the Substance of the Wilderness Travel, where Mo∣ses saith, I appoint ye a Year for a Day, &c. for fifteen Minutes of one degree of the Sun, to make one minute of an hour of the day (each hour being fifteen degrees of the Sun) but in the Annual motion in the Wheels, by ONE degree of the Sun there is signified a year, and in a month is signified five minutes, as doth
one minute signifie six days, and some odd hours) of a de∣gree of the Sun, which hath four minutes of an hour to eve∣ry degree of the Sun in its diur∣nal Course of Motion. XLI. But wherein the fifteenth year made its Revolution (in the first month of the sixteenth year) as the Sun came to enter the first point of Aries,) on the tenth day of the Month, the first or Spring-Quarter of the Worlds growth, standeth manifest in the Signs of the Times, while Glory ascendeth the three Vernal Signs of the Zodiack in an in∣ward
World) called Aries, Tau∣rus, and Gemini, and from the eleventh Day of the Fourth Month, did the Sun enter the first point of Cancer (in its de∣grees) wherein is revealed the Summer-Quarter) with the Rays and Beams of scorching Heat, dispersed through Leo and Virgo, the Heart and Bowels of Na∣ture, this being the fifteenth day of the fifth Month, from the time that the Power of the Dra∣gon hath been loosed out of the bottomless Pit, in the form of those Beasts like unto Goats, called Locusts, wherein he had given up his Power unto the Beast with seven Heads and
ten Horns, for the thousand year, which is the time he was bound. XLII. For from thence count thou the beginning of the five months, that torment hath rested and seized on a third part of men, in this fourth part, or North-Quarter of the Worlds, that have the mark, and name, and number of the Beast, and the first Wo is manifest therein, because the Devil is come down in great rage among men, and the Inhabitants of the Earth are therefore terrified and afraid, by the sounding of the fifth Trumpet of God (after which
these evils have followed the Worlds, in the casting down out of Heaven the Accuser of the Just) to the awakning a sence of what is thus come on and into the fourth part of the same, wherein the Beast hath made his Seat; but the second Wo followeth what is awaken∣ed out of the bottomless Pit, whence a sence of torment rest∣eth on those men, from the sounding of the sixth Trumpet on that Great River EU∣PHRATES. XLIII. Wherein a sence of the de∣stroying Power of God, exalted
in the Angels of the four Beasts that stand on the four Corners of the Earth, to hold the four Corners of the Winds, and whose Power is to with-hold those Winds from blowing, is come into the renewed World, (under the Redeeming Power of God) through the Sounding of the seventh and last Trumpet of God on the Air, from the time that the Commandment of God went forth, for the again building up and restoring Jerusalem, in which the Myste∣ry of what pertaineth to the Kingdom of God, is come to be fulfilled and finished; there∣fore a third Wo cometh, and
shall stand manifest, from the concluding of the fifth month, wherein the fourth Beast with the Face of an Eagle, shall give up his Power, which are the se∣ven last plagues, to come on the Earth and Worlds, (even seven Golden Vials, filled with the wrath of God and the Lamb) unto the seven Angels of God, that are come forth of the Temple to sound. LXIV. For in the number of Years in thirty two Jubilies (since the great Prophet and Minister of a better Tabernacle and Temple than that which is built by Man, fi∣nished his Testimony therein)
and in the sixtieth Jubilie, since the beginning of those Offer∣ings wherein was the dayly Sa∣crifice, which hath been made to cease in time; those seven Angels of God that came forth of the Temple of God, with their seven Golden Trumpets, have been manifest in the Parts and Quarters over which they have sounded; it being the tenth day of the Fourth Month, from the awakened sence (that came into those Parts of the World over whom the Trumpets had soun∣ded) of the torment of those Women that sat weeping in the North Gate, over TAMUZ.
XLV. So that counting four minutes of an hour to one degree of the Sun, (in the Diurnal Motion of the Wheels) and fifteen degrees of the Sun, for an hour of the DAY, wherein the Heavens (in Man) are brought under fiery Tryals, by the sounding of the Trumpets of God, in the Angels of his Covenant, on all the Glory of Worlds, (in its third part of Earth, and Waters, and Sun, and Moon, and Stars, that stand manifest in what thereof is smit∣ten, according to the breaking forth of the day) it is now 120 degrees of the Sun, from the
fifteenth Revolution of Years in the Heavens, according to the fifteenth Year that the Forms in the Heavens have remained a Te∣stimony of what was finished in the lively Patterns themselves, that have their figure in the Ta∣bernacle of Witnesses. XLVI. And reckoning from the tenth day of that first month, (wherein the Sun made his ap∣pearance in the first degree of the Ascendant;) from the sixth Hour of the Day, which was his hour of rising in three minutes of ARIES, to make his Right Ascention over the Heart of the
Orient (in the fire of the Meri∣dian) from the twelfth hour, or Mid-day, called Noon, where∣in he gave fourteen degrees to the Succedant; it will now ap∣pear to be the last hour of the Day that many are called to be Fellow-Labourers and Workers to∣gether with God, in his Vine∣yard, counting the Suns rising in the degrees of the Meridian, from the first degree of the As∣cendant in Aries, according to the motion of the Moon in her passage through the twelve Signs of the Zodiack. XLVII. For the Sun encreasing the
strength of 22 minutes in ten days of the first month, to make his rising to be the fifth hour of the 11th day of the second month (in his passage through the Hou∣ses of his Ascendant, Succedant, and Cadent) in the Vernal, or Spring-Quarter, there being thirty degrees in each House of the Hea∣vens, (according to the Signs they have in the Zodiack of the Moon) the Suns setting is made in the seventh hour of the day, and further increasing strength, for timely rising, in his passage through Taurus, that is, the se∣cond House of his Dignities, governing the left part of the Meridian in the middle of the
Spring, wherein the Dominion of the House is in the Neck and Throat of NATURE, over Melancholy, and the Earth (in the Succedant) he maketh his rising to be 10 minutes past four in the Cadent, on the eleventh day of the third Month. XLVIII. And the eleventh day of the fourth Month (wherein the Sun entereth the first minute of Cancer, to make the Summer-Quarter, as he riseth in the de∣grees of the Meridian) 47 mi∣nutes past three hours from Midnight, he maketh it the lon∣gest day in the Year (in this Lati∣tude,
and under the Horizon in which the Works of Wonder are to be fi∣nished and fulfilled) and then the Sun-setting is as long after the eleventh hour of the ele∣venth day (which is Noon, or Mid-day) as it riseth be∣fore twelve, to make an Evening of the day; accord∣ing to the hours wherein ma∣ny have been bidden, and are called and invited to a Feast, through the ANGEL of Strength, and Prayers of the JUST unto God, that He might send forth Faithful Labourers into his Vine∣yard.
XLIX. For that which is come into and on the Earth and Worlds, in its fourth part, or North-Quarter, will continue to magnifie and exalt the four destroying Angels of Strength, that are loosed out of the great River EUPHRATES (by which Europe hath been compassed about) until the end of seven Months and five days; though in the time of the soun∣ding of those Trumpets, the Winds have been suffered to blow [on the Earth] by those that have held their corners, as four Angels standing on the four Corners [of the same;] and the
Spirit of God hath and doth yet strive with a Generation and Generations on whom the fierceness of Gods wrath (in the Plagues of those Vials) is to be poured forth, and is come. L. And the Creature Mankind imbodyed in this third Princi∣ple, in which he is called the Microcosm, or little World, is that third part of the Macrocosm, or great World, as it standeth divided into its four parts or Quarters, wherein the Eagle hath had Power over the North Quarter, or fourth part of the Worlds, where those Tryals
are manifest, under which the Lyon came first forth, with four Wings of the Foul on his Back, in which were Golden Fethers, with the names of 36000. Men in each Golden Wing, while the striving con∣tinued between the four Winds of the Heavens, on the great Sea, and from the loss of do∣minion therein, in the plucking of the Lions Wings, wherein came forth four other Beasts, and took head (in the Nature of that which separated the Man from the power in which he was first planted and placed) the King∣doms of the Earth and World became dispersed abroad the same.
LI. Until the great Bear or Leo∣pard (who hereby purchased the strength of those four Wings) had them also taken away; and the Man came to regain his dominion over all the Works of God's Hands, as Lord in the substance of what is already communicated to his understanding: and through those four first Beasts, that now have taken unto them (each of them) the six Wings of the Cherubims (every one in their order calling to come and see) the Mystery of what is come forth to the Tryal of the Year,
Month, Day, and Hour, over which they have Power and Dominion in their An∣gels, the Glory of the Father is hallowed, having in each Wing two thousand Fethers and names of Men, which makes the Glorious Hoast of God in the Heavens, Nu∣merable in their Tribes, and according to the Families of those scattered Nations, o∣ver the face of the whole Earth. LII. Which are the dispersed Army of God, and goodly company of that Mighty Hoast in the four Wings of
the living Creature, by which they stand figured forth 144000. (of the first Body, in which God hath his seal∣ed Number of Instruments, that are engaged in the Lamb's Battel, as the MEMBERS of what hath continued like unto dry Bones in the Valleys:) And for the exalting their Angels in the Heavens, their destroying power over the Earth and Worlds is loosed, out of the great River (over which the winds of the Hea∣vens have striven and blow∣ed, while their destroying Power was bound.)
LIII. But now are the Winds in the Hands of the Angels, to be with-held from blowing, and the Spirit of God from striving any longer with the Creature Mankind, (by the Prophesie of the Witnesses, or sounding of the Trum∣pets of God, committed to the Angels) and the whole Worlds shall be smitten with Plagues, through that which is thus loosed out of the bottomless Pit, wherein the Earth hath been covered with those Beasts, (called Locusts) and they have over∣spread
the same, in its third part smitten by the sounding of the five first Trumpets,) and that which is awakened by the sounding of the sixth Trumpet, hath command in and over those four Winds of the Heavens, to with-hold them from blowing as oft as they please, because God will not alwayes strive with Man, who is but flesh. LIV. And when the Earth is quiet and still, according to the silence that hath been in HEAVEN, for the space of half an hour, and the
Worlds begin to settle in the ease and content of the flesh; then remember what I say; for before this day, there hath come Wars, and rumours of Wars, and the smoake of the tor∣ment of those Men, (on whom Judgment hath rested under the Power of the Beast) shall be seen & known to be the SEAT of the Beast, in a fourth part of the great World, that hath yet hitherto escaped Death, in what came on that third part thereof, (in the little World Mankind) like the fume of a boyling Furnace, whence hath ascended the thick
Cloud of Darkness, that filleth the Heavens, and the Power of the DRAGON, who had delivered up his Seat and Throne unto the Beast, for the time he re∣mained bound in the bottom∣less Pit; (But that now is loosed in the sounding of the three last Trumpets) is a Spirit working Miracles in the Earth, in the execution of the three last WOES that are come thereinto, for the awakening and rising up of three therein, that do bear witness for GOD, of what hath been crucified and slain in the Streets of the great
CITY of the Worlds. LV. And into those Kings of the East (that have their Power again re∣vived, and their Heads healed, which is a second Beast come out of the Earth, with two Horns of a Ram, pushing three ways, to wit, West, and North, and South, shall enter those three Unclean Spirits of the Beast, Dragon, and Whore, like Frogs, through the drying up of the Waters, in the great River EUPHRATES, in the Worlds Sea) they shall come over the same, and into the place where God hath settled his glori∣ous
City, and they shall strive to defile and overcome the Holy Land (between the Seas) but the end shall come with an over—flowing Scourge, and great Flood; and out of the Mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, shall great things be performed and done. LVI. Yea, all these things have a lively Character of the Truth hereof, recorded in the Heavens, by the Verity of Just Measure in time and Place, for God is not to be limitted to time and place in his Work, or to the prescription of men; but he
hath a time and season for eve∣ry work, according to which he hath determined and de∣creed an order, wherein they are all to be fulfilled and brought to pass, according to the mea∣sure by which they are measu∣red and weighed in their day; and the times and Seasons of their fulfilling have been in the Fathers hands, until the hours thereof became made known to the Son of Man who is in Heaven, in that which commu∣nicateth the sence thereof unto, and in the World, in whose behalf he came to lay down his Life (in the Body of Flesh which he took up for the reconciling of the
World unto the good will and plea∣sure of the Father. LVII. And the Star that is fallen from Heaven (as an Angel that hath the Key of the bottomless-Pit) I have beheld, and do see the returning of such torment (come on those men that have the Beasts mark) on his Seat, that shall fill it with Pangs, and many shall blaspheme God, be∣cause of those Pangs that are come on them, that have defi∣led the Temple of God, created to be his House of Praise, though now made that over which the Great Whore hath reigned, that sitteth
on the Kings of the Earth; and this shall be known in the time that the beloved City becometh en∣camped about by the great Ar∣mies of the Aliens. LVIII. And concerning all these things, the times are coming that they are to be fulfilled, and in Eu∣rope will FALL suddenly a great Prince; but England be thou still in thy Dominions, until GOD come to exalt, and set up His TRUTH over all the Powers of Darkness; for thy striving for Conquest by the Sword, and to get into Dominion, is but vain.
LIX. In that the Powers of the Air must heighten their glo∣ry, before it can be seen what is smitten therein, under the Power of the Eagle, or King of the North (that hath reigned more years than the King of the South) and there∣in remaineth the Holy Seed; and let him that hath Wis∣dom number and count those days past, and yet observe that which is to be fulfilled to make up the expiration of the time; and let it not be hard to believe well, of that which crosseth thy expecta∣tions,
that thou shouldest be fil∣led with the distrust of GOD and his Goodness, and put an evil Construction upon that which answereth not thy Opi∣nionatedness. LX. And in the reading hereof, the God of Life and Peace open your Understandings, and bless and keep all in his Fear, that those Sparks that have been ra∣ked under the Ashes of what was once enkindled in a consu∣ming Flame, may be blown up into a second Flame, the Light of which I desire never more to see extinguished and put out, as
it keeps burning in and against Self; for it is nothing else that burns up the Combustible Mat∣ter that hath been brought into the Temple of God. And in this doth my SOUL continue praying to GOD: Amen, and Amen, saith Thy Friend in all Love, R. B.
A TABLE Of the Contents of the CHAPTERS. The First Part: Describing, Chap. 1. The Vision of the Wheels. Chap. 2. The Diurnal Motion in the Wheels. Chap. 3. The Mystery of the four large Hours in the Day, and the four Watches of the Night. Chap. 4. The degeneration of all Forms in Nature. Chap. 5. The Government of Nature, under the Power of four Beasts. Chap. 6. The seven Nations of the
World, as they came forth imbodyed in the Forms of Nature. Chap. 7. The manner how they became thus imbodyed. Chap. 8. The operation of the Vision, in the opening of the Heavens. Chap. 9. The exercise of the Power of God over the mind, wherein the Vision of these things wrought. Chap. 10. The power of the Waters in the Vision of the Wheels. Chap. 11. The nature of the World in its Principles. Chap. 12. The manner wherein those Vessels were beheld unbur∣dened, that arrived from off those Waters, separated into four Heads.
The Second Part. Greeting to the FOUR CHURCHES in EUROPE. Describing, Chap. 1. The coming forth of those four Beasts. Chap. 2. The motion of the Wheels in their seven turns. Chap. 3. The Forms of Nature, under the renewing Power in God. Chap. 4. The effect of the descending of Angels into the Forms of Nature. Chap. 5. The order of those four An∣gels loosed out of the great River Euphrates. Chap. 6. The Restauration of the Hea∣vens in the Worlds. Chap. 7. The form of the Temple which settled therein.
Reader, these material faults in the Printing having escaped the Press, thou art advised to correct them with thy Pen. IN page 21. line 8. for dark read black. p. 23. l. 6. for  r.  p. 27. l. 17. for  r.  p. 84. l. 6. r. a for the. l. 9. r. about 2 hours. p. 91. l. 21. r. forth for for. p. 106. l. 10. dele and. l. 16. d. as a. p. 107. l. 10. for the r. that. p. 124. l. 14. for Kisu r. Kisleu. p. 133. l. 11. d. Spi∣rit. p. 134. l. 5. r. thee in this. p. 154. l. 5. r. and in a great, p. 162. l. 1. r. in the hand of the Angel. & l. 13. for came r. run. p. 171. l. 2. f. nor r. neither. p. 173. l. ult. r. that which f. which that. p. 197. l. 8. f. though r. through. p. 206. l. 10. f. Elil r. Elul. p. 211. l. 5. f. Sagitarius r. Sagitars. & l. 12. for poyson r. potion. p. 234. l. 7. f. Atnium r. Ethaim. p. 240. l. 13. after Heavens, r. rod on the Rain-Bow. p. 241. l. 8. f. diveing r. dividing. p. 249. l. 17. r. and in the ground. p. 253. l. 4. f. yet r. that. p. 290. l. 3. r. rare∣ing f. raving. p. 294. l. 10. r. put (it) on, &c. & l. 17. f. own r. once. p. 291. l. 1. f. each r. the. p. 359. l. ult. f. ome r. come. p. 365. l. 12. f. known. r. sown. p. 370. l. 19. f. towards r. from. & l. ult. f. Aries r. Leo. p. 379. l. 3. dele which. p. 384. l. 3. r. in or before. p. 371. l. 13. f. nineteen r. thirty nine.
The Introduction. I. IN the year 5594, according to the most just and true account of the Creation of the Worlds in Adam, and in the thirty-se∣cond year, after the thirty-second JUBILE, since the finishing of the Testimony of that great Prophet, in his Body of Flesh, who came forth in∣to appearance and manifestation from the Worlds account, 1664. being the year of his Incarnation, who was the Glory & Welbeloved of the Fathers Soul, conversing with men in the substance of that Power, in which all the Works of God were finished from the beginning, the perfection of whose Nature, had glory, in what was effected in the SIX dayes work
of Creation, through the glorifying cause of all beings in Nature. II. In the year aforesaid, the REVE∣LATION of JESUS, the Son of the living God, came unto me, even unto me, a Native of England, so∣journing among the scattered Nati∣ons and ungathered Families of the Captivity of Judah, waiting for the Earths return, to bring forth new fruit unto God, throughout the four Quarters thereof, which I am com∣manded of God, to communicate to the Generations of the Worlds amongst which I am fallen. III. Unto whom be Greeting and Sa∣lutation, from your Brother in Tri∣bulation, and Companion in all af∣flictions (for the Seeds sake) whom Bonds have daily attended, both in∣ward
and outward, while for the sake of many and great Nations, the tra∣vel of my Soul continueth, that my groanings and labour in the Lord, may procure the joy and rejoycings of as many as have a heart open to receive the benefit of what is brought forth through great conflicts. IV. And from the Spirit of Jesus, is my Souls enlargement, to the discon∣solate Babe of Hope, and in the Au∣thority of God, I have a hand reach∣ed forth to the helpless, towards whom my tender Bowels are moved, that they may partake of this VISI∣TATION, which is given for the sake of many and great NATIONS; This great Salvation of God being revealed to all them that are made partakers with him in the Faith of God's Elect, in which the like preti∣ous Promises do work.
V. To all the People of God, whe∣ther gathered or ungathered, my love reacheth forth; though most especi∣ally to the scattered Nations over all the Earth, that are the Houshold of Faith, in which it is not only given them to believe, but also to suffer for his Names sake whom they profess: Love Mercy and Peace, together with all fruits of the Spirit of God, to the Brethren of him, who is come to possess the Life of Patience, under the sufferance of the Spirit of this World, through the Revelation of JESUS the Son of God, by whom the whole Glory of the TEMPLE of God was brought forth, into which entered the Hoast of the Heavens, the SEVENTH day, wherein God came to rest in the finished settlement of that in which all labour ceased, as to the working power of his Spirit, in
the frame of the Creature and Crea∣tion, that is become the workman∣ship of the Father. VI. I am filled, I am filled, with the motion of his Power, in the workings up of his informing Spirit, that send∣eth forth its sound through an Ear∣then Vessel; and in as much as its concern is Universal, the peculiar re∣lation and respect which it hath un∣to People of those Generations, is the breathings of Life from a follow∣er of the Lamb of God; And the Life of the JUST, in his Name that is faithful and true, and full of long-suffering; and that which is certified concerning these things, is what will assuredly be fulfilled, and shortly come to pass. VII. Therefore blessed are they that can
read or hear, and in whom there is a heart inclined to understand the MYSTERIES herein, wherein the Testimony of TRUTH is confirm∣ed amongst the CHURCHES, in the Spirit of Jesus; unto which Churches in the WORLDS, in their divided quarters, JESUS (who is the Author and Finisher of the Faith of God's Elect, whose Nature had glory in rai∣sing up that Body out of the Grave, and from the power of Death and Destructi∣on, in three dayes) is now dispersing bowels (in which are the Fountains of all good) that have been sealed and shut up, but are now freely set open for sin and for uncleanness, for Ju∣dah and Jerusalem. VIII. And thus saith the Antient of days, the AMEN, the FIRST and the LAST, (who hath glory in the Work of God, through the Redemption of
Souls up unto himself) come wash and be clean, for he that is faithful and true, hath yet a little while a gather∣ing Hand and Arm stretched out to∣wards you all; & the Bride saith, Come, as hath been the Voice of the Spirit of God, which by many hath been rejected; But yet hear what the Spi∣rit saith unto the CHURCHES. IX. Unto the Churches of ASIA, and the ANGELS of these Churches, saith the Beloved of God; O yet ga∣ther, if it be possible, and behold, the Wing of Mercy and everlasting Salvation hovering over you! your works have been tryed in the fire, and hitherto they have not made weight in the Ballance of Gods Sanctuary; nei∣ther are they able to stand before him, but are like the STUBBLE in his way, and are driven before the Bow of his Fury.
X. Yea unto thy PRINCES, saith the AMEN of all Glory, in Heaven and Earth, bend your Necks to the Yoak, and learn to Plow, else sorrow wil be your portion. To thy PRIESTS I say, Howl & Lament, and be thresh∣ed upon the FLOOR, by him that can handle the FLAIL; to thy PRO∣PHETS, I say, Take the Cup and drink a mighty draught; for as ye have had your fills of Pleasure on the Earth, so shall you drink your full Portion of sorrow, howling and la∣mentation. XI. I know all thy works and thy do∣ings, for the secrets of thy Heart are not hid from me, thou exalted HORN of ASIA; PERSIA and MEDIA, are the strength of thine ARM; ye Daughters of K'TURAH,
therefore be ye wakened in time, and behold how the ASSYRIAN is bro∣ken on the right Hand and on the left. XII. And unto the ANGELS of the Churches (Mystically) in AMERI∣CA, in thee are a People whom God will yet gather to his Praise, but thou wilt be broken as a Potters Vessel, and turned on a fiery Hearth; Thou hast of the Captivated TRIBES and scatterd-broken-off-branches bound in Chains under thy quarter; let them forth, for the mighty Day of God is Proclaimed, and come. XIII. Unto the Angels of the Churches in AFRICA, write what is ready to befal them, in the Day and Hour of their Exaltation; Since thou wast lifted up, thy day is measured, and when thou wast cast down, thou hast
been warned. Yet once more hear; pitty the Captives, and give of thy Bread to him that cometh under the smiting of the South Wind, lest when the awakened North Wind returns its blown Breath out of the Bellows of the Almighty, it make thy burthen more then thou art able to bear. XIV. Thy Feet must tread on Mire and Clay, and in like manner will Feet be set over thee; But thou the darkest of Countreys, I have many NAMES to be gathered out of thee, therefore hasten and return, when thy WORK is done; and remember that thou art warned of what shall come to pass, lest on the one hand thou shouldst be heightned in the day of thy Exaltation, or left without information of that which will befall thee when thou art cast down: for as thou dost unto o∣thers (to wit, the Captivity of the North)
so will it be done unto thee, in the re∣turn of measure and weight. XV. Say not any more, I am strong, for one of thy PRINCES is strong above thee; and the Daughters of thy Land, that have made up thy agreement with the King of the North, will not retain the ARM, nor prevail in thy strength and Dominion, though thou carry away Captive the Inhabitants of that Land, whose King hath reigned more years then the King of the South. XVI. Repent therefore quickly, is the Voice of the Angel, lest I come and smite thee unawares; and remember when that is loosed and awakened, which hath been compassed about by PI∣SON and GIHON; he that inva∣deth a strange Land, shall place his
glorious Habitation between the Seas, that the scattered TRIBES may be∣hold the Glorious City, which they have been seeking, and come forth into the NORTH, to see a place pre∣pared in the Kingdom by the Father; for ASIA hath faln, and is turned to Idols, and hath given heed to lying Vanities. XVII. But both of you shall be purged together in a fiery Furnace, until your supplication for Mercy be made able to prevail; therefore let thy Princes consider, for whom the controversie betwixt two great Kings doth work; and thou that wert raised up for the making known the Power of God, and the Vessels fitted for destruction, know that thy time is numbred to fill up the TWELVE years, wherein the King was subject to K'DORLAOMER.
XVIII. I counsel thee therefore, in the Seed capable of gathering, that thou come forth from among the Rob∣bers and Spoilers of my People; and let not thy horn be exalted, because of the King of the North, that is de∣livered into thy hands (for a season) for both your hearts have been set to do mischief, and ye have spoken lies at one TABLE; but that little space that is given thee to repent, is to hum∣ble thee, that thy Soul may live, and thou not die in thy Iniquity. XIX. Now let him that is hungry come, and let all that are thirsty come and drink a mighty draught, at the Foun∣tain of endless Mercy; for this is the day of Mercy proclaimed towards a stiff-necked People, a Rebellious House; This is your day and hour to repent
and return to God, and there is not another season for Mercy, or to mend that which is amiss; for ye are be∣come a wicked People: but he that hath an Ear may hear, though the hardned must remain in their guilt, and the unclean be unclean still. XX. For the spot of the LEOPARD cannot be washed off, nor the skin of the Aethiopian changed; and the filthy must have time to fill up their measure, that it may be known that they are left without excuse, who have slighted timely warning, when the hour is come that they are con∣cluded in the WILL of that which continueth filthy still.
The FIRST PART. CHAP. I. The beginning of the REVELA∣TION; describing the Vision of the WHEEL in its Motion. I. ACcording to the space of time (before mentioned) as I was waiting upon the Lord, with my heart deeply exercised, in his fear and dread, the glory of what for a long season I had been visited with, descended up∣on me in a Tempest and WHIRL∣WIND; and I beheld until the Tem∣pest was over, yet the Whirlwind re∣mained, whilst I was taken into the
Habitation of Wonders; and the Glory of the Angel of God compas∣sed me about, in the form of TWO WHEELS, moving one within the other, as a Wheel within a Wheel. II. By which means I came to the sight of TWO WORLDS, standing the one in the other, in the manner and form of the Wheels, moving the one in the other, as a World within a World; And while I was thus behold∣ing the Vision thereof, the Power of the LIVING CREATURES, that moved in the Wheels overcame me; for the Spirit of the Living Creatures that moved in the Wheels, was in the Wheels; and it rested on my left Arm, in form of a STAR, and qui∣vered in the Blood of my Body, be∣twixt the skin and flesh of my left Arm, for many dayes continuing thus upon me.
III. For in that in which the Worlds were setled and sought rest, there was a continuance and abiding under sub∣jection to such Power, though faln from what it was in the first work of Gods Creation of all FORMS into being, (for the first FIVE dayes, I thus beheld it) and in every of these five dayes, I saw a change and altera∣tion in the Face of the HEAVENS, which was like unto WATERS. IV. Whose way and course I observed, until the whole frame of the Worlds became like unto a SEA of GLASSE mingled with Fire; and in the midst of these Waters broke forth a CLOUD, which moved up and down like a Mans HAND; and the Form of a Man was wrought up through the Cloud, travelling in the Heavens with his Hands on his Loyns;
in whom was a sence of pangs and hard labour, from whence I beheld a strugling and striving on the Face of the Waters, as from the WOMB of ETERNITY, of TWO NATI∣ONS to come forth into appearance and manifestation. V. And from the Heavens, I heard a cry of pangs and hard suffering, be∣cause of the labour and travel which the Body of NATURE was subject∣ed under, for such sufferings sake; which was like to the sorrow of a Child-bearing-WOMAN, who had brought to the Birth, but had not power to bring forth, until the ap∣pointed time of deliverance from the Father was come. VI. But as the Womb of Eternity be∣came eased of its suffering and hard
labour, the strugling and striving rested, and seized on the Body of Na∣ture, wherein the Travel remained and continued until the END of TIME and PLACE; For on the Face of the Waters, on which the SPI∣RIT of God did breath (while a Cloud of darkness was over, and co∣vered the face of the mighty Deeps) was hidden the form of all CREA∣TURES, thus come forth. VII. And the Womb of NATURE was also opened in and before me, in which instant was made intelligible to my understanding, the working of all forms in Nature, that strove to come up in the bodily Frame and Temper, that stood in the ground and cause of such suffering. VIII. And the NAME of the FIRST
DAY was called LIGHT, because in it the Light and Darkness were se∣parated and divided; and in this day came forth all that stood hidden in the Womb of Eternity, in the form and likeness of WATERS, that were of a distinct quality and operation in the creaturely being, until the Word of God had commanded them into form through the work of Creation. IX. For as the division and separation of such Powers-work through the WORD of God, wrought up the Will of the Worker into appearance and manifestation, the WATERS had their enlightning quality and pro∣perty in the separated beings, shining out from the Face of that which ga∣thered together in the Heavens, from the three that therein bare Record; yea and in the work of the first dayes separation, which was betwixt Light
and Darkness (in these Waters on which the Spirit of God breathed in the light-part of the Waters, which was the Face of the Heavens therein) there became exalted the HEAD and FACE of a Man (for a season;) and in the darkness, or dark parts, which is the dark parts thereof, I saw work∣ing hiddenly the form of a FIRE-DRAKE, or Serpent, called Satan, and the Dragon the old deceiver of mankind, who was got behind God, in the coming forth of his Glory in his Son or Image. X. And the Waters that came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, out of which sunk all forms in Nature, that took being in the earthly frame and form, being gathered together into one PLACE, became an overflowing scourge and inundation of miseries, and were like unto a great SEA,
which was the gathering together of all that came forth out of many Foun∣tains and Rivers (of Water.) XI. Which thus I beheld, until the SE∣COND DAY was passed over, wherein was made a separation be∣twixt Waters and Waters, that thus came forth out of the Womb of Eter∣nity (in a Mystery.) And in the Womb of Nature was the MATRIX of conception brought into a work∣ing frame, wherein the SPERMA∣TIC Vessels of the SEEDS ingen∣drings opened the Gates of Glory into an inward world, where the Kings Daughter was, whom I saw all Glo∣rious within. XII. And the separation that was made betwixt those Waters, was a Power of firm glory in its working frame, as
a FIRMAMENT placed in the out-spread Air, wherein every thing came forth in its DUALL number, through divided qualities; and the name of the SECOND DAY was called EXPANSUM or , be∣cause of what came thus forth in the out-spread Firmament. CHAP. II. A Description of the DIURNAL Motion in the Wheels, in the coming forth of all forms in Nature into manifestation. XIII. THus beheld I the form of the Heavens, like unto WATERS, but of a more CHRISTALLINE and transparent brightness, than the SUBLUNARY Waters; for they
were not Waters of such a gross and terrene Body, as is centered in and on the EARTH, in the harshness and astringency of depraved Nature, fallen under the power of Corruption; but they had a peculiar quality (in the HEAVENS) through the work of Separation, in the Principles of the WORLDS, being of an enlightning Nature in which the POWERS of all Caelestial Bodies were moved and BURNED over me, as an inkindled flame, mentained in the UNCTU∣OSITY of the lifes Operation, in the Body of Nature. XIV. For the ground of all being in the Creature and Creation of God, in its sinking condition, became corrup∣tible EARTH, in the fallen state and condition of the imbodied being of Creatures and Things, wherein the Earth centered and setled its rest in
the Creature of God, in what stood in and out of the WATERS; and out of the Bowels of the Earth issued FOUNTAINS and Rivers of Wa∣ters, which ran in the several Streams and Channels of the Earths  thus faln under the power of Cor∣on; And the whole returned and met in the Ocean Seas, which became the Womb of Nature, in that they stood in the wide and open courses of the Earth and Worlds, which notwith∣standing was drawn up into the Hea∣vens, through a purgation by fire. XV. But as all PROPERTIES and Principles came into the Womb of Nature, in which the contest wrought betwixt THREE, that laboured to come forth imbodied in form in the creaturely being, I beheld the Womb of Eternity shut against the Third and LAST, that was in the cause of such
strife and contest, who notwithstand∣ing wrought up his way to come first forth out of the Womb of Nature. XVI. And in the Heavens I beheld the form of a great RED DRAGON, sucking into his Belly the HEART of these Waters, which was their Fat∣ness and Unctuosity, like a River of OYL, wherein was an inkindled fire that burnt inwardly, and was men∣tained and strengthened by the oyli∣ness and fatness thereof; together with the combustibleness of the ma∣terial qualities, ingendred under the Power of Corruption, for destructions sake. XVII. And in the light of what continu∣ed thus burning and inflaming, I be∣held an innumerable company of divided ESSENCES, which shined in the Heavens like STARS above,
and PLANTS beneath; wherein was a tincture that wrought and mo∣ved in the Essence of each; the one in and by the other, as the Wheels wrought one in the other for TWO DAYES. XVIII. For in the contest in the Heavens were THREE, though onely TWO came forth imbodied in the creature∣ly being, out of the Womb of Nature, so incorporated into form, under the power of corruption fallen and sunk, that wrought up their way out of all the powers of the Heavens, so to come forth. XIX. And after the finishing of the third DAY, which was  BE∣GOYM, because of what came forth in the Dual number, I beheld a per∣fect separation made in the WHEELS motion, betwixt that which is DI∣URNAL and NOCTURNAL,
which was the motion in and of the inward Wheels, for in the Wheels was both a Diurnal & Annual Motion; and in the Power that wrought up its way and work through the course in and of Nature; All Principles of Na∣ture came forth in their separated and divided being. XX. In which I beheld FOUR large hours in the day, each hour contain∣ing three computed hours of the na∣tural day; And in the NIGHT were FOUR Watches, in the which the ANGEL and the Watcher came down, and the order of the Night-Watch I beheld, from the evening of the Day, until the first Cock-Crow, which was after the conclusion of the FIRST WATCH. XXI. At length I beheld until a perfect
separation was made in the Wheels, and between PRINCIPLE & Prin∣ciple in the WORLDS; And in the SECOND WATCH of the Night, which was Mid-night, an ANGEL and a WATCHER came down before me, in the form and appearance of a MAN; and with an Iron Instrument he smote me on the HEAD with both Hands, for he had the Face of a good man, and lifted up both hands to smite me. XXII. And I submitted to the Hand and stroak of the Watcher; and lay DEAD IN MY BLOOD until the Night-watch was over, wherein the HOLY ONE came down, (for it was the hour of the Bridegrooms awakening, and the coming of the Son of Man) and the conclusion of the second Watch was when the COCK had crowed TWICE: and in the DAWNING of the DAY the Womb of the
MORNING was opened in and be∣fore me; and after the THIRD Cock crow, all Powers in the Hea∣vens were shaken, and the Body of Nature was taken in a trembling state and condition, for it was the conclusion of the Third Watch. XXIII. Wherein all self-confidence became judged to be the TRUTHS denyal and resistance, after the Cock had crowed Thrice; because the day be∣gan to DAWN, & the DAY-STAR to arise in the Heart of the inward Worlds, whereby the stumblings had been raised, by that which became a ROCK of OFFENCE to both the Houses of ISRAEL. XXIV. And the FOURTH COCK-CROW, was after the Dayes break∣ing forth, wherein the Rock and
Foundation of true confidence in God was raised up, by turning Satan be∣hind the back of God's Glory, in the renewed day of the Son of Man, which brought forth the Keys of him that unlocked the Treasury in the Heavens; After the building of the CHURCH of God, became set∣led on that raised Rock, on which the LYON was made to tremble, by the Crowing of the Cock, before the Day dawned.
CHAP. III. Wherein the effects of the four large Hours of the Day, and the four Watches of the Night, in the inward Worlds, are described. XXV. AND in the HEART of the WATERS, which became like an inkindled flame, burning in the order of the Eternities holy Will and working Power, was HARSH∣NES in what wrought for Separati∣ons sake; like unto Fire mingled with Blood in a Mystery, which be∣came bound in the form of the Heart of a LYON, under which I saw the Bowels of Creation also compre∣hended in a state of Darknesse to
the VIRGIN in Nature, who sat mourning as one disconsolate, with an EAR of WHEAT in her right Hand; and the cry was from a solitary place. XXVI. The separation in the Heavens be∣ing made betwixt the two great Lights, by which the day & night was ruled, & the first that came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, into the Womb of Nature, had slain his Keeper; for he was a monstrous shape and form of the Beast in Nature, with the Head and Face of a RAM, the Neck and Throat of a BULL, the Wings of an EAGLE, the Breast of a CRAB-FISH, the Heart of a LYON, the Bowels of both MAN and BEAST, but downwards like a SCORPION. XXVII. And he sat on all the FORMS in Nature, which became this Beasts seat; who went THIRTY DAYES
backward in the Rings of the outward Wheel, after he had slain his Keeper; for by the strugling of TWAIN, the VIRGIN in Nature was slain, which the man should have kept alive, who was made Keeper of his Virgin, that had the Face of Man both Male and Female. XXVIII. And by him was slain the Face of a Man, who was exalted in the Prin∣ciple of Air, in the glory of Angels, in an Angelical Paradisical being and state; After the Virgin in Nature was thus lost and became slain, in the place of Conception and Field of Na∣ture, whereby the Creature Mankind became as made a little lower then the Angels, subjected in that state where∣in the Creation of God was brought forth.
XXIX. So that as NECESSITY came to work in a Mystery, through the ground of what was brought forth in the created Forms in Nature, it be∣came a LAW in Nature, under the power of which every Creature was brought, for the grounds sake, that thus stood under subjection to the Power of God; and that a man might be brought forth to till and tear up the ground (under which I beheld the subjection of all forms in Nature) after all the works of God were seen to be good. XXX. And then as the Keeper of the li∣ving had the glory of the Life of God in Nature subjected in hope, the groanings and waitings of the Crea∣tion became a longing expectation of God afterwards to be revealed;
whereby he that remained with his Face exalted in the Air, was made the Keeper of the Vineyard of his Brethren. XXXI. For as the Work of God became imbodied in the Creaturely being, from the Womb of Nature, I beheld the form of a Man (who was that GOOD Man that smote me on my Head) casting SEED into a Ground; in which I saw the working form and frame of all these things, and he af∣terwards fell asleep. And a SE∣COND man also came forth, and he likewise cast in Seed into a GROUND, scattering it in the Air towards the NORTH-Wind, of which some fell on the good Ground. XXXII. Whereby the Face and form of a Man, who came forth out of the
Womb of Eternity, became the SE∣COND, who was embodied from the Womb of Nature, and was slain in the Field of Conception, by the FIRST and LAST that became thus imbodi∣ed from the Womb of Nature; by which means the Face of FOUR Beasts in Nature became exalted in the Heavens; and the WOMAN was taken from him whilst he fell a∣sleep, though like a good man he had first sown his Seed, before the envi∣ous man came. XXXIII. Yet was it not then good that the Man should be alone, under the work∣ings of that NECESSITY, in the LAW of Nature, for he had neglect∣ed his own Vineyard, that was over-grown with Nettles, Bryars, Thorns, and Weeds, whereby sin and the con∣cupiscence of the Flesh took occasi∣on to work in the Members of him,
who was the Tiller and tearer up of the ground of Corruption, into which Death entered, who came first forth out of the Womb of Nature, because of his need for the MEET HELP. XXXIV. And this became the FOURTH day in Nature, but it was the first day in the work of Creation, in Coelestial Bodies, called TREM, for it was FULL time and tide in turning the Worlds about backward, wherein all that came forth imbodied from the Womb of Eternity, took form from the Womb of Nature, in the changeable being, through a Government that God had setled over all, that should come forth thus imbodied in form. XXXV. For the night came over all glory in the first Creation of God, so that the FIFTH day of the Work of
God in all forms of Nature, was the SECOND DAY of God's Holy Weeks; concluding a cessation from all labour, in what was brought on the Creation of God, by means of the Curse come over mankind, in his Exercise of these the Creatures of God. XXXVI. And there arose a WEST-Wind, out of which flamed a Sword of the Cherub, which drove the form of the Man (that I saw) EASTWARD; and he went his way, so that the FIRST which came forth out of the Womb of Nature, in which the Crea∣ture became thus imbodied into form, took being on the FIFTH day, in such state as the Creature and Creation was fallen under, in that form wherein he came forth.
CHAP. IV. How all forms in Nature began to degenerate, into the monstrous shapes of deformed Beasts. XXXVII. AND the ANGEL of God said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee the MYSTERY of all those WA∣TERS; and of that which came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, from whence all those Waters came, and whi∣ther they shall return; and until the end of the FIVE dayes, I beheld the working-frame of what stood manifest from the Womb of Eternity. And I saw all the Earth overspread with Creatures and things; yet nothing was moved out of the ground, under which it was subjected, by the Crea∣ting
power, that wrought for mani∣festations sake, until the end of FOR∣TY DAYES. XXXVIII. And there was also, from the THREE that bare Record on Earth, a SECOND great LIGHT that ru∣led the Night, in the glory of the Terrestrial Body, borrowing a lustre from the Suns clarity; For as I tra∣velled through a great trance of the minds perplexity, I beheld the whole frame of the works of God, from the beginning, to the END of time and place, as of TWO and TWENTY dayes labour, wherein I saw the Sun and Moon stand in a distance of course, two and twenty Degrees of the Suns Motion, that wrought up their glory in and through all the Powers of Nature, unto which the life of the Creature was subjected, under a change in time and place.
XXXIX. Which became the Glory of the Sun, of the day of the Son of Man, in and through all Coelestial Bodies, comprehended in the forms of Na∣ture, as a great Light, whereby the great and LAST day was ruled, and over-ruled, in which God is working up his Eternal Glory, through what is come forth into manifestation in time and place, dignifying the Creator of all forms into being, that is able to reveal the Mystery of satsfaction to Divine Justice, through what appear∣eth magnificent, in works of Won∣der. XL. For all Motion in Wisdom, from the beginning of FORM, through the WORD of Life, was the Creators Glory, without any consideration of
a dividual Will in Creatures, though sinking & fallen from the glory of the Creator of all forms in Nature, so sub∣jected under a state of Corruption. XLI. And as the FIFTH day became subjected unto the Government of that, under whose power all forms in Nature were brought forth; I saw a THIRD PART of the Stars in the Heavens, moved from the WEST to the EAST, for the Glory of the Sun in the midst of the Heavens, suffered the Motion of what drew TWO (and as it were both) WAYES, as the Clouds of Darkness came to inter∣mix their darkning quality, in the Air, between the Original Cause and Center of such Glory, in its shining Properties and Virtues, and the Crea∣tures sence, wherein the Lustre be∣came apprehensive.
XLII. And God beholding all Forms in Nature, in the state of Subjection, wherein they were placed in Creati∣on, as labour came to be felt, com∣ing up into the Body of Nature, af∣ter Gods forming and finishing of Work, on all that came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, he became moved for his Creatures sake, that se∣cond time, which creature remained subject, in the ground of the Lifes first motion, to the unmoveable pow∣er, from which SELF could not se∣parate him, without the yielding of his own WILL. XLIII. But the MAN in divided qualities, who was thus made Keeper of the Vineyard of his Brethren, came forth as a WAY-FARING Man and Pil∣grim in the Earth, whose Face was
exalted in the Principle and Region of AIR, and in the World was his Body afflicted, wherein he lost his way (as a stranger) to his Journeys end, (though attainable) and sought it with Tears, for Rests-sake. XLIV. Yet for FORTY DAYES was he tryed in that state, whether or not he could live without the food of that which drew the LIFE under the power of corruption; And for FORTY WEEKS was the form of Nature sub∣jected for Generations sake, (after it became thus degenerated into its Principle) for the replenishing the Earth anew, in the state under which the Worlds were fallen. XLV. For all that came forth from the Womb of Eternity in FIVE DAYES, took form from the Womb of Nature
on the FIFTH day of Gods Glory, in the Body of Creation, and came forth imbodied in the Creaturely form, whereby it was separated in its own Region and being, as a peculiar SOURCE in the SPHERE wherein it was brought forth, thus imbodied in form, over which the WHEELS mo∣ved, in their SEVEN TURNS and overturnings. XLVI. And all properties in the outward Wheel, came forward in the Annual Motion thereof, but that which came forth in its DIURNAL Motion, went BACKWARD from the first moving cause of all beings in Creatures and things, though it was also forward in the course and race which it had to run, which in reference to the IN∣WARD WHEEL, was SIDEWAYES from EAST to WEST, whereby the Wheels came to move through the whole
frame of the Heavens, both EAST, WEST, NORTH, and SOUTH, in its course, which was of thirty years, of thirty months, of thirty dayes, and thirty hours. XLVII. But the course in the Inward Wheel, was of TWELVE YEARS, mak∣ing a separation of all that came forth in the twelve hours of the day, in the light whereof it was given for man to work; and TWELVE HOURS of the night, (that came stealing on Men and all other Creatures) wherein no man can work; and of the Twelve MONTHS of the year, whereby the hours of the day became multiplied in∣to their number, separating between Winter and Summer.
XLVIII. And this was the ground of all ANNUAL Motion, in the Wheels, which from the fifth day came FIVE YEARS forward, wherein God had glory in the work of Separation, in its divided Properties and Qualities, that made SEVEN REVOLVES in a Week, a Month and a Year, of a natu∣ral Day, of TWELVE HOURS, di∣vided from the night.
CHAP. V. Describing the Government of Na∣ture, as it was brought forth under the Power of four Forms, in the first FOUR BEASTS. XLIX. THen I saw until the BEAST him∣self had taken unto him FIVE HEADS and NINE HORNS, on each Head was a Horn, but on the Head in the midst of the four, which was the fifth Head, were FIVE Horns; and over his Heads and Horns past THIRTY-FIVE DAYES, and a course in the Moon was exalted for a season, but the Beast was driven EASTWARD; and he came forth again, and received a Wound on the
Head, which was in the midst, but the Wound was healed up, and he was driven from the Face of the Earth; and I said, Whither is he gone? To which the Angel replyed, He is gone into the EAST, until THIRTY DAYS: divide what cometh forth in FIF∣TEEN YEARS. L. But Day and Night being separa∣ted in both Worlds, in which the Two great Lights were moved about in their over-ruling Power, the glory of the Power of Supremacy in GOD became manifest in both grounds (to wit, the ground and cause of both the DAY and NIGHT) for the man whose Face was exalted in the Prin∣ciple of Air in the Heavens, magnifi∣ed the sufferance of God, by his Spi∣rit for a season, against the Creature and Creation of God, which became a MARR'D IMAGE of the IDEA
in all Forms in Nature, though it was the Workmanship of his Hands. LI. And the Glory and Lustre of all STARS, distinguishable in their Ope∣ration and Qualities over Coelestial and Terrestrial Bodies, became exalted forms which had TINCTURE among the dignified Virtues in Natures Course, and Bond of Equality in Government, out of which the DRA∣GON made up his Tail in the divisi∣on of the Heavens, which were mo∣ved about, and drew the Creature un∣der the power of Destruction. LII. Though the Body of Light and Glory, through which the Suns Lu∣stre came thus to shine, was and is UNMOVEABLE, except thus in its suffering, wherein it did move as it was MOVED, and no otherwise; for
it was not moveable from the Eternal CENTRE in all beings, (which is unalterable) but from (or in) Na∣ture, whereby the fulness of all glo∣ry remained incomprehensible, but the WORKER was therein appre∣hended in a shaddow, and the glory of God seen darkly, as in a Glass. LIII. For after all forms in the work of Creation were finished, according to what I saw come forth out of the Womb of Eternity, the WHEELS came to move over these forms in Nature, which stood subject to the Power of God, in the CHANGE which was come into the WORLDS; and the name of the FIFTH DAYES work in God, was in the Heavenly Language, the ORB of MAHALALEEL, in which the QUINTESSENCE of life strove in a Mystery, among the forms of Nature.
LIV. But as the Worlds continued sink∣ing in their state and condition, where∣in I beheld all things and Creatures, thus brough forth; that THIRD which aboad exalted in the Region of Air, could not come into form in that crea∣turely being, without great hurt and wrong to the Body of Nature, there∣fore were all forms in Nature cor∣rupted into MONSTROUS SHAPES, through the striving and strugling which I saw in the Air. LV. And as that which came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, was brought FIVE DAYES forward, for manife∣stations sake, I beheld a Principle of Corruption and Destruction that came to be allowed, to work up its Power in a Mystery, through and over all forms that were come into being,
in the OLD WORLD, which re∣mained suffering under those THREE, and under that, through which these Two became imbodied from the Womb of Nature, (in the Creaturely form and being, in that FIFTH DAY) who were separated into the Principles of AIR and WATER thus made di∣stinguishable. LVI. For of the THREE that strove to come forth out of the Womb of Eter∣nity imbodied in the Creaturely form and being, there were but only Two that became incorporated from the Womb of Nature, though there was the MULTIPLICITY of FORMS and the variety of ESSENCES con∣cerned therein; And as I beheld the effect of what came forth, through the contest in the place of Conception, the BEHEMOTH possessed the SE∣VENTH PART of the Worlds, in
which the WATERS were held, even as LEVIATHAN possessed the Wa∣ters themselves. LVII. Yea through the drying up of the THIRD PART of the corruptible Wa∣ters on the THIRD DAY, that which aboad in the Air, in which the Fir∣mament was placed, became a migh∣ty and Potent PRINCE and GOD of the WORLDS, which impreg∣nated on, & blew up the stern-harsh-FIRE, in the enkindled qualities of Divine Justice against the Creature, by whom SIN took occasion to work up the power of Death (over the Body of Nature) through a Law in the Mem∣bers, wherein the concupiscence wrought, against the Law of the Mind, under which the Nature of all Creatures was brought forth and subjected, through the contrariety of the Spirit of Enmity, that tinctured
the ELEMENTAL qualities of the Worlds, with the harshness thereof, against the regulating power of order. LVIII. For that which sunk in the fall, be∣came imbodied again, in form anew, after I had beheld the dispersing a∣broad of all that came forth out of the Womb of Eternity, in its fallen Pro∣perties and Qualities, which setled in the Created being of all powers of Nature in the imbodied form, which was brought forward into BEING, under the power of Corruption, over which I beheld the motion of the WHEELS, until it became EQUI∣NOCTIAL. LIX. And it was SIX DAYES forward, and six dayes backward, in what was wrought up into FORM, through the operation in Properties and Qua∣lities of what was endless, in the
WORLDS, wherein the FOUR BEASTS which I beheld, came forth into manifestation; and these four had the Face of a LYON, and the Face of a CHERUB (or Calf) and the Face of a MAN, and the Face of an EAGLE; and they moved in the WHEELS, over all that came forth imbodied in FORM, while place and time endured. LX. And thus did I behold, until all that came forth thus FALLEN in the bodily frame, was again returning and centring in an Eternal Rest and Quiet IN THE LORD, where it became immoveable, stedfastly abounding in the good Fruit of Joy and Rejoy∣cing, wherein the Creator of all forms in NATURE had first planted it; and therein had God finished all work and labour in the beginning of CREATION, which is be∣come the Seventh DAY in NA∣TURE,
to that which remaineth ca∣pable of entring into Rest, that is formed therein, which is the ground of torment and disquiet to the Spirit of the WICKED ONE. CHAP. VI. Describing the coming forth of the first Seven Nations of the Worlds into the forms of Nature. LXI. THese are the Generations of the the WORLDS, in the day that God created the HEAVENS and the EARTH, when he beheld it with∣out form and void, for it was an Emp∣tiness and dark NOTHING, before he Created it into FORM; through the power of the Word of LIFE, in which God willed the coming forth
of that which was to replenish it in time and place. LXII. Wherein all that was brought forth, in the Dominion of Innocency; In ADAM, was a subjection to the forming part of the IMAGE that mankind was stated in, according to the Mind and Will of the Spirit of GOD in him REVEALED, whose conditions for Good or Evil, are con∣cerned in what he ruleth in and over. LXIII. For the Earth was not now, without form, nor in its voidness and empti∣ness, but was filled and replenished with Creatures and Things, which were created beautiful in their place and season; and the World was set in their Hearts, the beauty and glory of which, did wither and pass away, as the flowers of the Field; And all
that stood IMBODIED, under the power of corruption in time and place, was consumed, so that the Works of God in that STATE, could not be beheld from the beginning to the end thereof. LXIV. And the Government of God, through the power of all Properties (in the ELEMENTAL WORLDS) was manifest in those Four forms of the BEAST in Nature, wherein the effect of all produced from the FIE∣RY HEAVENS, was comprehend∣ed for Governments-sake, in the form of a LYON, and there came a Voice from the HEART of the fire, as from the Heart of the LYON, let the Earth keep silent, while the Islands renew their strength. LXV. For darkness came over all that
stood manifest in form (wherein the Creature sought to glory in the im∣bodied will of SELF-EXCELLEN∣CY) which was moved towards the PIT of perpetual SILENCE, to in∣habit the NOTHINGNES through such a REVOLVE in the turning about and overturning of the Worlds in the motion of the WHEELS. LXVI. And over the face of the mighty deeps was a thick Cloud, and over the PEOPLE, who are the unstable Wa∣ters, was the gross thick darkness, and the Nations of the Earth were angry, and moved at this coming forth of the Lord. And I beheld the Worlds in their divided Qualities and Properties, wherein was preparation for a NEW Heaven and a NEW Earth; and the Face and form of the MAN whom I saw, went both forward and back∣ward in the Heavens, according to
the form and frame of the Worlds, in the VISION of the Wheels, from those FIVE DAYES wherein I beheld the MOON striving to encrease her recovered strength towards NEW MOON, to the reducing of that which was lost in the KALENDS of the Months. LXVII. And until the end of NINE and TWENTY dayes, I saw the IDES of the Month in a Mystery, working up a form to the new created being of all things substantial in an eternal existence. And the Face and form of the Man, whom I beheld exalted in the Hea∣vens, was turned towards the South. For he was not able to behold the illustrious breaking-forth of the glory of the DAY that was risen upon the Earth.
LXVIII. And the form of the Man whom I had seen placed in the GARDEN, was divided into TWAIN, to wit, into Masculine and Feminine, through whom the Heavens came to multiply their forms in the Dual number over the Earth, whereby the strivings in the Earthly Womb came to be, through these Two NATIONS. LXIX. For by reason of a setled subjecti∣on in the ground of Nature, from which the Man took being, (to wit, out of the LIMUS of the Earth) there had not come forth a Man to till and tear it up until a Second mo∣tion from God did work and ope∣rate, after all his works were finished in the DIURNAL MOTION, which became the NIGHT of the FOURTH DAY in Nature, or FIRST DAY
of God's glory in the Coelestial Body, (betwixt the Principles whereof a Se∣paration was made) which had a great LIGHT to rule its darkening quali∣ties. LXX. And through the working pro∣perties in Nature, which had the An∣nual Motion, the preparation of a SECOND separated day in NATURE came up in the Resurrection of Glory in the JUST, wherein the partakers of glory in a FIRST Resurrection were planted together in what the SON of MAN wrought up into the World through suffering. LXXI. And the Motion of Separation in the Turns of the WHEELS, came forward, until the midst of FIVE DAYES; And I numbred the dayes of the continuance of the FIRST
MAN, that came forth imbodied from the Womb of Eternity (to keep and dress the Vineyard wherein he was placed) which were 930 days, or Two years and Seven MONTHS, which work was setled among the forms in NATURE, and therein made destin∣guishable. LXXII. And I beheld the course of the SUN, of the Glory of the Day of the SON of MAN, moved FIVE MONTHS backward, to bring forward the SEVEN MONTHS, under which the BODY of NA∣TURE stood subjected, for a change sake, in the separation of the THREE PRINCIPLES, that became imbo∣died in the Two NATIONS, that strove in the WOMB of NATURE, to bring into appearance and mani∣festation the WORKS of WON∣DER, through which the man tra∣l all the two YEARS and SEVEN
MONTHS, under the workings and motions of the power of DEATH. CHAP. VII. Describing the manner how those seven Nations, came forth thus imbodied in FORM. LXXIII. AND those SEVEN NATIONS, that strove in a Mystery, came forth in the Two GENERATIONS, that degenerated from the glory of his DAY, in which day his Sun was divided after that, of ONE, the MAN was become TWAIN, standing in the midst of that wherein he was brought forth, wherein I beheld the course of the Sun of his Day, steared through Two WORLDS, and the MOON became exalted thereby, in the
changeability of her way and course; by which the Body of Nature was afflicted, to the subjecting the Wo∣mans will and desire, to BODILY PANGS, in which was indurance and suffering to the Creature of God; And as the ORDER of Nature, grew un∣der corruptible courses in the WORLDS, the shining of Glory (in both WORLDS,) was a lustre in the frame, standing still TEN DEGREES, to bring back and recover what was lost in the course of Degeneration. LXXV. And on the Suns coming into Vir∣go, which is the Virgins Night-house, in the BOWELS of GLORY in the HEAVENS, of an INWARD WORLD, I beheld the form of Two SUNS placed in the Firmament of the Fathers Glory; for the ECLIPS of the Sun was very great, while this LABOUR continued in the Body
of Nature, wherein that which was divided from the Man, came forth in the midst of the FIFTH MONTH, (after the Works of God were finished) but counting those days wherein the Sun stood at a stay, and the five dayes wherein the Virgin in Mans form, was slain, it was the concluding of five MONTHS (under that which moved neither forward nor backward for a day.) LXXVI. And as the forms of NATURE stood thus divided and separated, I beheld the Woman travelling in the Heavens, to bring forth into be∣ing what became imbodied from the WOMB of NATURE; and the Body of Nature came under SUF∣FERINGS, by the twain with whom she was in labour, in the production of which, the one came forty five dayes before, and the other forty
five dayes after her forty weeks, un∣der which the course of Nature was sub∣jected. LXXVII. And for SEVENTY DAYES, did the Moon prevail again, in the Wo∣mans labour for strength towards a Second Birth, which was thirty dayes, after the Sun had recovered strength in the course, under which the WORLDS were subjected, in the frame of all forms in Nature, for it was the expiration of the FIRST YEAR; and FORTY DAYES after, the Woman again conceived a MAN, whose glory came forth in the SE∣COND YEARS WORK. LXXVIII. But in the conclusion of labour to the Creature; In the first year, the Body of Nature stood divided in the Creaturely Form, (wherein I came to
the Sight of the Mystery of what stood unrevealed to the World, under Cha∣racters of Blood) the wonderful frame of the Works of God (in the Book of Life) wherein he is well pleased, was thereby written in the sealed Testi∣mony of the Spirit of Prophecy, com∣mitted to the Hand of the Angel of Strength; And the course of the Sun wrought in a MYSTERY of di∣stance from the MOON, in the changeability of what it effects over the Body of NATURE. LXXIX. But the exaltation of Beauty, in the lustre of what the Creature was Planted in, (according to the Seed of its Birth) was a moveability in its GLORY, towards the Head of NA∣TURE, which broke forth in the Head and Face of a RAM; for after the Seal of God, on the day of the FOUR BEASTS in NATURE came
to be taken off the Book of Life, in which sence stood manifest, the vir∣tue of the Wonderful and Miracu∣lous frame of his Spirits working, (in its various dispensations) yet the de∣stroying power of the four Angels, that stood on the four corners of the Earth, was bound in the great River EUPHRATES, until their Year, Month, Day and Hour came to be revealed to the Glory of a Wonder-working-God. LXXX. And on the tenth day of the first Month of the second Year, the Sun came up again in his course, and en∣tered the first Point of ARIES; and as the Woman also recovered her strength, she was delivered of that for which she traveled on the second day of the second Month, as the Moon was entring her House of Exaltation; for that which she laboured to bring∣ing
forth, was five Nations, which stood separate among the forms in Nature, in the second years Revolu∣tion, which was thirty dayes onward in the year; and from the ground of destruction, to the first FORM in the Woman, was Seventy dayes; it be∣ing effected Forty dayes before the Revolution of the first Years. LXXXI. This was a fifth Man in his Na∣tion, come forth into Form in the Creaturely being; And on the first Day of the fourth Month, the Woman was again delivered of a SIXTH MAN, formed in his Nation in the Creaturely being; as the Sun came towards Can∣cer, (the Breast of Nature) in which the Moon stood exalted nine degrees in Taurus, before the Sun entred the first point of Cancer, in which the Sun was greatly Eclipsed.
LXXXII. But the last day of the ninth Month, the Woman was delivered of a seventh Man in his Nation, wherein the Bow-man was concerned, for he rode in the Chariot of NA∣TURE, as a great PROPHET, who continued a just year, and was not, for God took him to himself, (in the Revolution of the Heavens) until the times of Restitution came, for the delivering up of what had been re∣tained in a Mystery; and through the loosening of the Angels in the great River Euphrates, the Bow-Man came forth manifest, in the house of the Angels Exaltation, (to wit, the ninth House of Mansions in the HEA∣VENS. LXXXIII. And the eighth Day of the ele∣venth Month, the Woman again con∣ceived and brought forth an Eighth
Man, formed in his Nation, who saw the end of the old and first Worlds; And after the revolution of the Se∣cond Year, I beheld the Moon re∣gaining strength and glory from the course of the Sun, from which she borrowed her light; And on the second day of the fifth Month of the third year, the Moon was strong in her own House of Exaltation, whereby the Sun suffered a third Eclipse, on his coming into the Heart of Nature, which is the House wherein he glori∣eth as his own. LXXXIV. And the Woman was delivered of a ninth Man in his Nation, for the bringing forth of whom the first se∣ven were destroyed in their Nations, yet in him was a Seed preserved to replenish the Earth anew; and into the renewed Habitation of Wonders in the Translations of the Body of
Nature (working among the forms of Creation) the substance was taken and gathered, but from the Heavens was a Voice, The young Mans wound hath cured my hurt. CHAP. VIII. Describing the wonderful operation of the Vision, in the open∣ing of the Heavens, testified through the Judgement of God, against what came forth imbodied in Form, in those seven Nations. LXXXV. THrough the striving of three Nations, from the Womb of Eternity, two Generations of Men continued labouring under what was
degenerated into the imbodied FORM for Generations-sake; And between those three was two Months for the separation of each, in their Re∣volution, wherein the Virgin in Na∣ture suffered, by the power of Death, that entred the Creation of God. LXXXVI. On the last day of the Seventh Month, of the third year, died the first Man that became imbodied in FORM from the Womb of Nature, as the Virgin in Nature lost her Crown, and the Woman also come to suffer Death, in Two Generations of Men, concerned in the contest in the Hea∣vens; but the cause of such pangs and sufferings that rested on the Bo∣dy of Nature, was a fallen ground in the Earthly Principle, which stood in and out of the WATERS, as a fourth part of the Elemental Worlds; and it was the last FORM, under the power
whereof the Life of the Creature re∣mained suffering. LXXXVII. For the Seventh FORM in Na∣ture, that became imbodied in the Creaturely being, was exalted on the Earth, which proceeded from the FIERY Heavens, from whence the Man took his dominion, who was taken up unto God, and was not, on the last Day of the ninth Month, of the third Year; And the THIRD that proceeded from the Man, im∣bodied from the Womb of Eternity, and that took being amongst the Forms in Nature, died in that FIRST Principle, after the conclusion of the Eleventh Month, and was dissolved in the Earth. LXXXVIII. But those Two by whom the Wo∣man in Nature came to suffer Death,
who were slain by the hard labour, under which the Creature and Crea∣tion of God remaineth groaning, died also in the Earth, in the Fourth Year; The One on the Sixteenth day of the Second month; The Other on the sixteenth day of the Fourth month; And a Fifth Man imbodied in Form, died on the Thirteenth day of the Twelfth month; The Sixth, on the nineteenth day of the Seventh month of the Fifth year; And the Seventh, on the Twenty-fourth day of the Seventh month, which from the finishing of God's Work, into that wonderful frame, in the Genera∣tion of the Heavens, was the Seven∣teenth day of the seventh month. LXXXIX. For that which came Seven dayes and seven years Forward in the moti∣on of the WHEELS, was brought under five months tryal, both by
WATER and by FIRE, (being that which came forth manifest in five Dayes) and grew up under the Revolution of Seven Months, as the forms of Nature were moved back∣ward, under the power of Destructi∣on; that through the dissolution of that which came into being, fallen un∣der the power of Corruption, that which is Heir of Immortality might arise, and come to possess a Crown of Rejoycing in God, through the work of Restauration of those forms in Nature, into their Eternal Existence, that have a substantial being in the first forming cause of an IMAGE to the work of Creation. XC. And while the VISION of God was on me, and the ANGEL of God was talking with me, I saw the Man that was driven out of the Garden of God, (which is the Glory of the World in
its Paradise) came again onward in the way from which he went towards the rest of SELFS Annihilation, that had caused the bodily form to come under the power of death, who (not∣withstanding that he remained imbo∣died in Principles fallen and sunk un∣der the power of Corruption and Destruction in the forms of Nature, did yet abide in the WORLD, and the World in him, until Paradise, that was lost and died from him, and he from it, began again to spring up in the place and condition wherein he was put; as considered in that state. XCI. And from the Heavens I heard a Voice, Death and Destruction; I am become thy Grave, and O Grave, I am become thy Plague; But dread and fear compassed me about as with a Garment, for the miraculous workings of the Power of God in the Vision
had bended me, until all faculties of my mind became subject to that invi∣sible sence, from whence my Spirit received the Illuminations of that which sought to come forth, though for a tryals sake to my patience, the understanding of that which came up in the MOTION, was oft-times sealed before me, after I began to write thereof. XCII. For as I was amongst a number of people assembled to wait upon the Lord, I was taken in a TRANCE, and my knees smote together, trem∣bling, because of the fear of God in my Heart, and the terror of his Judg∣ments on my Spirit; But on that same night, as I lay on my Bed, I saw the form of a GREAT MAGISTRATE, and the Honour and Respect which he had, was different from all the powers of the Earth, for before him
went the form of DEATH, as a man walking on his Feet, and about him were great Attendance sounding Bells on every side; and they conti∣nued thus to ring these little Bells, till he ascended a place of Judicature, where he had great reverence and re∣spect. XCIII. And amongst the crowd that bend∣ed to his power, I was acted in the like posture; and being otherwise convinced in my Spirit, I was smote with great dread, and sought ease by weeping and mourning; and coming to sit down by the side of a Wall, I was awakened in a sence of the Ago∣ny which was upon me: after which the glory of the SUN, through which I beheld the Wonders of God in the Vision, came out of the HEAD of Natures Government descending to∣wards its HEART, (which was like the Heart of a LYON) the Glory of
which SUN, was exalted in the Head and Face of a RAM amongst the forms of Nature. XCIV. And in the night season, being perfectly awakened, I was brought into an inclosed ground, which was very dark, wherein boisterous storms and tempests were arisen, for I was led somewhat out of my way in the conflict; and drew towards a little Town, near my way, wherein I was cruelly dealt withal; and though it was late in the night, yet I gave up in patience, and drew towards a heap of straw in the way-side, whereon I lay down to rest me. XCV. And by the excess of Rain which began to fall, I was driven to leave that place also, and went into the Fields again, where there brake forth before me a WHITE LIGHT in the
shape of a SHEEP, so far as I could discern it, which being round about me in a flame, did surprize me with fear, whereby the form of the AN∣GEL vanished; and before him went a noise like the crackling of the rotten Hedge, which left me much in amaze∣ment, so that I could not find the way out of the Field, or Inclosure, in two hours time, till I had given up in my mind, and forgiven those that thrust me out, after which I found my way, and came quietly to the Journeys end. XCVI. After which the Angel of God led me about the circumference of the Worlds, to behold the surface there∣of; and he brought me into a green Field, where I saw the frame and form of the HEAVENS, and of the Natures of all Creatures in the Worlds, and the WHOLE was like
unto WATER; And there were a THOUSAND Hills, and a Thousand Springs of Water; And in the same manner, as I was acted under the exercise of the Vision, so appeared the form of the Worlds, wherein came forth a great Number of WO∣MEN, who at last were reduced in∣to SEVEN, and each of them sought to lay hold on me, but I fled in great fear; and lost the sight of the Angels Glory for a time.
CHAP. IX. Declares how I was exercised under the Power of the Vision. XCVII. AS I was carried by the Spirit of the Lord, into a great WIL∣DERNES, the Angel of God, by whom the Forms of Nature were thus awakened in me, brought up the appearance of that Wilderness-state, into manifestation, in which the Woman continued labouring in the Heavens, which Heavens did mul∣tiply all forms in Nature into their number and order, in which the pow∣er of Creation (in individual Bodies) was separated in its being, into two third parts of such forms, and the seventh part of the Worlds became corruptible Earth.
XCVIII. From which one THIRD PART thereof was dryed up on the third day, wherein Nature had its operati∣on over all Bodies brought into Form, in the Work of CREATION, which was the TENTH PART of that which remained under the exercise of TRYALS, both by FIRE and by WATER, and the two third parts of those WATERS were com∣prehensible in their Qualities, from the fiery Heavens, whence the cir∣cumference of the out-spread Fir∣mament was filled with Airy Bodies, and the Earth and Waters were re∣plenished with living Creatures, which came under the refining pow∣er of those renewing Faculties and Virtues in the forms of Nature, im∣bodied from those WATERS.
XCIX. But what came thus forth, in se∣ven natural dayes, came under tryal, in the operation of three essential days, wherein the power of God was manifest for the recovering of a SENCE in the Creature, of that work wherein God doth glory and is praised, which is the Resurrection of the Just, in the first and last power of Creation, wherein Majesty is Ex∣alted; and therein was manifest A re∣stauration to all forms in NATURE, fallen in the WORLDS, wherein the MAN, who had caused destruction to the Body of Nature, was called to account in the Tryal, while suffer∣ing remained in that third PRINCI∣PLE, in which he was imbodied. C. And as the WATERS were ga∣thered together in their Course, into
the seventh part of the WORLDS, which had form in the Earth, those two living Creatures, called BEHEMOTH or HENOCH & Leviathan, were sepa∣rated into their being, because it was so ordered in Wisdoms Counsellings, that they could not both live toge∣ther in one place; But according to the operation of the day in Nature, in which they were brought forth, they possessed each part of the Worlds, wherein the great WHALE had dominion in the moist part thereof, and the Behemoth caused the Image of Giants in the forms of Nature, brought forth in Woman, in the com∣ing down of the Watchers into the Creaturely conceivance (through that which possessed the Earth.) CI. For in the Firmament, placed be∣tween Waters and Waters, living Creatures were multiplied (in Airy
Bodies) from those Fiery Heavens; which Creatures possessed that third part of the Worlds, in which the Waters were dryed up from the Earth sixty thousand furlongs in its circum∣ference, which is the fourth part of what remaineth measurable in the forms of Nature, wherein one third part of the Waters is comprehended. CII. And as the way and course of what was Generated from the HEAVENS above, and Earth beneath, was tra∣ced in the HEIGHTS and DEPTHS of the WORLD, there appeared pourtraied forth (through the moti∣on of the Wheels) in the Vision, a GREAT CITY built on seven Mountains, which were seven Foun∣dations on which it setled, and the Mountain in the Midl of the Seven, which was the Seventh, stood higher then the rest, on which was built
and founded the tenth part of the Ci∣ty which I thus beheld. CIII. In which place it was compassed about with Fowls of the Air, and wild Beasts of Prey, wherein the Enemy, who is the power of Destruction, went about continually seeking to betray and devour; but I could not conceive that those BRUIT Crea∣tures did build and rear up the Foun∣dation of that City; therefore I con∣cluded in my mind, that some Men had been there to build its Foundati∣on, though their Houses were left un∣to them DESOLATE; And as I was thus musing in my mind con∣cerning these things, I came to ap∣prehend my self a wayfaring Man, and a wanderer in the World, groaning in Spirit to see the issue of what was thus visioned for; I came again to behold the form of the Woman in
the Heavens, that continued in labour and travel, in that Wilderness-state, until the time of her deliverance was come. CIV. And as she had conceived the Birth of Life, under the power of contra∣riety, that wrought in the HEA∣VENS, through two Nations, on which the blessing of God began to rest, the Woman prevailed in the World, for their bringing forthout of the WOMB of Nature, though the forms in Creation remained fallen & sunk, under the Image of the Beast (on those that have received his Mark, or have his Name and number) while the Woman remained cloathed with changeable rayments. CV. And on the tenth day of the fourth month of the fifth year, I beheld a great Eclipse of the Moon also, which became divided in Cancer (the
Breast of Nature) for the burthen of struglings and strivings in the Hea∣vens, that had rested on the imbodi∣ed being of the shoulders of Nature, wherein the Man took form, came into the Breast of the Created being, wherein he stood imbodied, though driven from the face or first beauty of the Earth, in that double-bodied Form, against whom the flames of the Cherub turned every way, to pre∣serve the way of the Tree of Life. CVI. While the Face of the RAM in Nature, stood behind the Man, who was created LORD in that Domi∣nion, that form in Nature became therein, a House of Exaltation, (to the Sun of his dayes Glory:) and while the Vision hereof continued, and that the Angel of God was thus talking with me; I was pursued by those living Creatures, in the form
of Women, and I took my flight over the Mountains, the entrances of which were wide and very broad, at my going forth thereon, but in the conclusion they grew very nar∣row in the World (about the circum∣ference of which I was led.) CVII. But the forms of those Women were dispersed and fled into dissolu∣tion, as I was in a great strait of my mind, through which the en∣trances led me (in my passage,) and they were reduced into one in num∣ber, as I came through those straits, wherein I beheld the parting of the great Seas, my way was so narrow, that I could not pass any further, but in great danger of falling. CVIII. For the Precipice was very steep, (as I looked down toward the
ground) which was like a WALL of Stone; And being made sensible of the danger wherewith I was beset in my way and passage, I was taken in great fear, and trembling seized me, because of the terror of the Lord on my Spirit, until I came to sit down on the dust of that Hill or great Mountain, in that I could not go on any further, with security of life, and therefore sought to ease me, by mourning alone; and there broke down and fell on my left HAND, the form of a tottering Wall, whereby I came to the sight of a Pleasant Field, and therein continued for a time.
CHAP. X. Describing the Power of those Waters in the Vision of the Wheels. CIX. AND as I continued separated from the comfort and enjoy∣ment of good, in the visitation of the Angel, there appeared before me a great and deep Pit, which was very Green, yet like unto WATERS, and as I climbed up to the top of these Waters, they appeared to be a great Mountain, that stood on HEAPS above the Earth, though they still bore the form of WATERS, whose concavity swelled under me, turning its hollowness into that Mountanous shape of Waters, (as I came to stand
upright on the top thereof.) CX. Wherein I beheld my pass ge over all these WATERS, and had nothing to support me, but a Line in the Hand of the Angel, by which I was born up and kept from falling; and the Angel of God brought me a LADDER, which he lifted up towards me, while I came to see my self as on the top of a high House, driven thither by the Womans fury and rage, whereon I rather chus∣ed to dwell, then to come down un∣to the Ground, and possess the Pal∣lace with the Brawling Woman; yet was there a WO remaining on the World, in the state wherein I beheld it overtaken with afflictions. CXI. But I was to come down on the Ground, and the place whereon I alighted, was like to a great CITY
that stood beyond the Waters; and in the night season, as I was layed down to take my rest, the form of the Woman was again awakened be∣fore me, and there stood near her the appearance of a Man of fierce countenance, with very long Hair, whom she instigated to disquiet me from my rest, because I lay not streight in the Bed, and accordingly by violence I was pulled out of the Bed, and was both Naked and Hun∣gry, and mourned in Spirit at the sight of her Discourtesy. CXII. And because she proffered to turn me out of Doors, & to dispossess me of a Habitation, it was very irksom for me to come forth; but with yearning Bowels I bemoaned the state under which I was fallen by her dis ourtesie, and refused to depart WILLING∣LY, without leaving the sence of
my wrong upon her; after which I was brought forth towards the place of my ABOAD; and as I came be∣fore the Posts of my Door, there was inkindled a great flame, & a fire broke forth, in the midst of which was a Brass Pan, and under it was a Morsel baked, with which my Body was refreshed, and I had a place of accomodation suitable to my neces∣sity. CXIII. Thus was the truth of the Angels Visitation confirmed to me with signs of deliverance, though a se∣cret incredulity wrought against my lifes peace and satisfaction (in the conflict) with the sence of which I was daily beset, yet durst not any more ask a sign, or tempt the LORD my GOD; but I afterwards beheld a great flame towards the South, and towards the East, and it being at a great distance from me, the Angel
of God lifted me up from the ground to behold it, and my Head was born up as with a Mans Hand, and I had the sence given me (secret∣ly) of great calamities that should come from the South; And I again saw the form of a fiery Furnace, in which was the Fat of fed Beasts, which boiled up with a great scum, and it arose over the Furnace, and inkind∣led a great flame in the House, which I expected to see consumed, but it was miraculously preserved, and I had no hurt therein. CXIV. And the day from whence I be∣held the multiplying of all forms in Nature from the Heavens, was a day of gloominess and darkness, and thick Clouds broke forth from the awakened tempests and storms, until the Earth was overwhelmed with the scourge, that covered the same in the
overflowing of its deluge, from the Fountain of great DEEPS that were opened, and the great City that I saw was overspread, even unto its tenth part, wherein the WORLD stood six parts under the WATERS, and that sixth part was a tenth from the Heavens, in which all forms in Na∣ture became more narrow (to the Creaturely sence) through a palpa∣bility in the WATERS. CXV. In which time the Waters prevail∣ed over the Earth sixty thousand Fur∣longs, and they abode thereon for the term of five Months, and Blood pre∣vailed for sixteen hundred Furlongs, unto the Horse-Bridles, from the Wine-press of the great City; For after I came to see the appearance of two Moons, (in the Firmament of the Heavens) I beheld the Worlds moved two wayes, for the bringing
forth of those two Nations for which the Woman was in Labour, (in Her two dayes Travel) and there were two dayes difference between them, as they thus came forth in that which brought all forms in Nature under a power of Corruption and Destructi∣on. CXVI. Of the One she was delivered on the tenth day of that fourth Month, and of the Other, on the twelfth day of the same Month, which through a backward drawing in the Worlds, did cause the Month to be divided in the account of dayes; for he that came first forth, drew the power of the Heavens Northward, whereby the second, who came under the power of the Awakened South wind, and whose Face was Southward, drew the Worlds under the power of the Wa∣ters, through which that second Man was exercised in his Dominion, by
the Increase and Decrease of the Wa∣ters, for the full term of a Year, which I beheld in the accomplish∣ment of that sixth Year. CXVII. And in a Month and twelve dayes did they increase to their height, though they continued prevailing on the Earth for five Months, and for seven Months did they fall backward, the conflict of which Year I beheld, in which time I saw the form of the two Men in their Nations, awakened in the Worlds, and wandering in that Wilderness, both under the Deno∣mination of VAGABONDS, for they appeared like Wanderers and Way∣faring Men in the Earth; and there was a third Man in form, that came forth in the condition of a Wanderer or Vagabond.
CXVIII. The one of them I beheld flying from those Wild Beasts of PREY that possessed that desolate Place, and that which he fled from, was the danger of pernicious wayes under the Beasts power, who made hast to flee out of Babylon, lest he should partake of her Plagues; and thus flying, he sought another and better Countrey and City; but the other, by means of a discontent with the pleasure and delight, in the state of the glory (in which that City and Countrey was first Planted) hunted after another and better state then that (in which was the first blessing of God) and so wandred from, and lost its first Habitation, which was defaced under the Enemies power, and be∣come fallen under the workings of corruption and darkness; and thus by conforming to, and complying
with the Enemies Power, he became really a VAGABOND from the Lord, and from the Glory of his City and Habitation, though in the World he may have a Habitation very Glorious, and be Lord of a City in the Earth. CXIX. But the third that I saw, bore the AFFLICTIONS, and abode in the CAUSE thereof, until he became hardned under the Enemies Power, and suffered the sting of that which overtook him in the Wilderness, which rested in the GROUND of DE∣STRUCTION to the first Beauty and Glory of God in the Work of Cre∣ation; for having neglected his own VINEYARD, whereby his BRO∣THER was SLAIN, (who was made keeper of his VIRGIN) and his Garden being thereby overgrown with WEEDS, and Nettles and Bry∣ers, (the Thorns of Corruption) he
was made Keeper of the VINE∣YARD of his BROTHER; and the Keeper of the Living LAMB of GOD, and SHEEP of that ever∣lasting sold, having his Life made a Sacrifice unto GOD, as Inquisition came to be made for Blood, when the Voice came, Where is thy Brother? and he replyed, Am I my Brothers Keeper? CXX. And so came the Man that was thus made a Steward over that which was his Brothers right, (as his Birth-right therein was lost and forsited) over which Vineyard he was appoin∣ted as a Keeper and Dresser, as a Ser∣vant in the Minority of the Heir and owner thereof, (in the Resurrection of that which was first and is last, the Elder Brother of all that believe in the Spirit of the JUST) to Challenge a SELF-INTEREST & PROPRI∣ETY
therein, and refused to give the Owner Due and Right, but did beat the SERVANTS that were sent for the Last Fruits thereof, and sent them empty away, and in the end slew the Lamb and Son himself, and scattered his Sheep from the Flock and Fold of Everlasting Rest, which became a daily Sacrifice unto God, in the suffering State and Principle, to reconcile the WORLD unto him∣self, through the destruction of the evil therein, in that Nature that saith SECRETLY, Come let us kill the Heir, that the Inheritance may be ours.
CHAP. XI. Describing the Nature of the World in its faln Principles, through the Bondage of the Power of Corruption. CXXI. FOR while I beheld both these Wayfaring Men, in that WAN∣DERING conditon, the WATERS did MULTIPLY in abundance, and became a GREAT SEA, and the Angel of God shewed me a VESSEL that was erected and built in the Heavens, in four Months, in which was the Pattern of that Heavenly Form, which through the Government of God was manifest, in the Heavens of an Angelical World; in that all forms in Nature fell under the Power
of Corruption and Destruction, (while I beheld Gods and Lords many concerned in the dominion of those THREE PRINCIPLES in Na∣ture) because of dishonorable USES in which their LORD imployed them, though the whole three were com∣prehended in that which was built and erected in the HEAVENS. CXXII. And the Lord-like Mind and Spi∣rit, that could not suffer any thing to be equal with it, or to ballance that self-conceit (through which he sought to subject all to his own Will) was betrayed, and is the Betrayer; from the lovely TENT of the Plain Man, whereby he weighed and measured (in that selfish-will) what was proper to his state, that would rule alone, and purchase an Authority and Dominion that was absolute, that he might be chief in
the WORLDS, though (for prehemi∣nence sake) he ventured the destru∣ction of Glory (in that state) under the workings of which, the FIRST PRINCIPLE in Nature led the Man that was first brought forth under a suffering condition. CXXIII. For the MAN who was become PLANTER of a Vineyard, under the Power of Corruption, grew sloth∣ful therein; and as he was surfeited with the Fruit thereof, I beheld his nakedness in the TENT wherein he was placed, though self was exalted and rejoyced, because of what was brought forth from the Ground of CORRUPTION, that was thus tilled and torn up (under the power of the Enemy) for Materials, wherewith the CITY was built, thus pourtraied forth in the Vision; therefore was that CI∣TY called by his Name HENOCH,
or the Son of Man in those fallen Principles, who was become a disco∣verer of the nakedness of that (and of himself therein) which was by Nature his FATHER, and a Re∣vealer of the SECRETS thereof, in the Forms of Creation, possessing a REGION in the Seventh Part of the WORLD, that is separated from the MOYST. CXXIV. And this Third Principle in Man, and Third Man in those three Princi∣ples, who were in the cause of De∣struction to the GLORY of the CI∣TY which I saw, (through whom notwithstanding it became Built, un∣der that POWER of Corruption) was acted in and under the POWER of both Good and Evil, while the World continued in that State, wherein was Winter and Summer, and Seed-time and Harvest; But in the State under
which the Worlds were FALN, and under which all Principles in Nature were subjected, in the Dominion of the BEAST over mankind, thus de∣generated from the Image, in which he was planted; there remained a Second WO on the Creature, who be∣ing found flying away, fled on (and from) the Sabbath Day and Rest of God, through that which sought to avoid afflictions, and shunned to keep in the Way wherein a sence of suffer∣ings grew, on that which was come on the Body of Nature. CXXV. And a THIRD WOE remained on the WOMAN that was with Child, and upon her that was giving SUCK, though the time had been wherein the SHEPHERD carried his Lambs in his Arms, and gently drove those that were with young, until he became SMITTEN for the sake of his Flock,
(from whom he durst not fly in the Winter, or because of the WOLF) and through the Life which he laid down for his SHEEP, prevailed with the Father, against that which had hindred the Creature from its entring into the REST of God, whereby a DART was struck through his SOUL, that every Man might be driven to his OWN; and that the thoughts and secrets of many HEARTS might be REVEALED; for he could not draw back in a time of DANGER, but indured the contradiction of sinners. CXXVI. And as I came to behold a strong ANGEL of God, with a Sealed Book in his Hand, he placed one Foot on the Earth, and the other on the Wa∣ters, and stood on both, between the Banks of HIDDEKEL, and the great River EUPHRATES; and he
lifted up the little Book unto the Hea∣vens, and went backward to the part∣ing of the great SEAS, where were two great PROPHETS cloathed in Sackcloth, whose Prophecy was (one thousand two hundred and threescore dayes) a TESTIMONY of what re∣mained under suffering, to the pre∣paring the way of the JUST, that the Son of Man might come to inhe∣rit the Glory of his Temple, and un∣seal the Mysteries of the Lambs Power, in opening the Book of Won∣ders written in the Heavens, while I beheld the prevailing of the Waters, until a third part of the EARTH was covered thereby. CXXVII. In which time the WATERS were decreased from off the Earth, and the Angel of God gave me a Reed of a measuring Line, to measure the Waters and the Earth, over which
they prevailed (in the World;) and I measured the Waters at the highest, ten Cubits over the Earth, and five Cubits under the Earth, in the cir∣cumference of which a Man might Swim as in a great RIVER; And from the Heavens, as all forms in Na∣ture were multiplyed, I beheld on the great Seas, until there appeared the number of seventy Vessels sayling over the same; in the front they were seven, and in each row ten, and in the midst of the six stood that seventh Vessel, which was the first, into which was gathered the Patterns of all forms in the Heavens, where the Creation of God did multiply. CXXVIII. And the VESSELS that I saw were born up above the rage and fury of the WATERS, from whence the out-spread Firmament was inlarged in the Air, seven Cubits upward, and
ten Cubits from the Waters down∣wards to the Earth, on which it cen∣tered, which was sventeen Cubits to the Head of the Image which I be∣held, that stood before the seventh Vessel, which was in the midst of the six, in the front of the seventy; And behind the Vessel was the form of a DOVE, with golden Wings stretched abroad in the Airy Firma∣ment, and the Image glistered like the Sun, and had the tincture of fine Gold, where the property of the Heavens beautified the Feathers, that took form in Nature on the living Creature. CXXIX. And from the face of the Waters, as they prevailed over the Earth, was fifteen Cubits to the Center of the Earth, in its sinking state, and it was two and twenty Cubits in the cir∣cumference of the height, wherein
the WATERS prevailed for the space of these five months that they covered the Face of the EARTH, after which I beheld them divided into four HEADS, as they came to be dispersed (by an East-Wind) which compasseth about the whole EARTH, in its divided QUARTERS. CXXX. And as the Vessels thereon became eased and delivered of their Burthen, in that which fell under the Power of Corruption, in the contrariety of all Elemental Properties, imbodied in the Forms of Creation (wherein I beheld the perishing of the first WORLDS glory in natural MAN, through that faln state) the Heavens also were discharged of Labour and Travel, under which the BODY of NATURE suffered (in those forms) wherein that which caused the Sun to go back ten Degrees, became mani∣fest
(among those forms in Nature) through the corruptible Ground. CXXXI. And in the separation of the WORLDS, over which the Waters (that were driven in HEAPS West∣ward) prevailed for the space of their five months, the falling back of those WATERS, (driven by an EAST WIND) was North and South, wherein the VESSELS arrived in their order place and number, but eve∣ry thing that the Enemy had power over (in that Corruptible state) perished in the WATERS, yet was a SEED preserved through all those Storms and Tempests, (the strength of which continued a Month and twelve Dayes) to replenish the Earth in its renewed state, which was five dayes backward to the Months Nones, and seven dayes forward in its IDES, from the seventeenth day of that seventh month,
to the twenty fourth day of the Month. CXXXII. For from the New of the MOON in that seventh month, (wherein the Waters brake first forth) to the new of the MOON in the eighth month, was twenty nine dayes; which month called BUL or a BUBLING, because of what again sprung up in the WORLD (after the falling back of the WATERS under the Power of Corruption, through which the Fruits of the EARTH perished) was the Month from whence the Hea∣vens began to manifest the multiplyed Forms in Nature, under a corrupti∣ble State, which is MARCHESHU∣AM in the falling away, but in the bubling up of all forms of Nature in the New-created-Being, and renew∣ed State of the WORLDS, (in that same place) it is the springs of the WORLD, that are refreshing and re∣storative,
through the open Foun∣tain of an everlasting good. CHAP. XII. Describes the manner how those Vessels were discharged of their burden, (among the created Forms in Nature) as also the Four Heads of the River in the dividing of the Waters. CXXXIII. FRom the Tempests and Storms that I beheld, in the increase and prevailing of those WATERS, whereby the World was overspread and overwhelmed in its old corruptible State; the Heavens were darkned, and all forms in Nature remained under a Cloud, until each month in
the year had finished its COURSE in the Bodily frame, through the Revo∣lution and change that is wrought up in the Vegitative Being, wherein the TREE of LIFE came to bear twelve sorts of FRUITS, changing its Fruit every Month, until its Leaves came to heal the NATIONS. CXXXIV. For that which divided between Principle and Principle in the Worlds, said, let there be light in the Firma∣ment of the Heavens, wherein the Waters are gathered together unto their own PLACE, and Light shined from the Firmament of the Heavens in those Waters, in the Seperation of all darkening Qualities into its NIGHT of Obscurity, which notwithstanding was over-ruled in the hour of Dark∣ness, until the second great Light broke forth in the subjected Quali∣ties of that Spirit in the Body of Na∣ture,
by, which the Night hath been ruled. CXXXV. And those VESSELS that were fitted and prepared for the use of the Creator, from the Heavens, were or∣dained to the service of the LORD and MASTER by whom they were imployed, and it was the Creators Glory to suffer them to be raised up, whatever dishonourable uses they were imployed to; which falling under the rage and fury of the ENE∣MY, that first prevailed over the World, (by those Waters) the Ves∣sels (in which were God's Tents) were notwithstanding preserved, and discharged of their Burdens, in the manner following (through all op∣position in the fury of what the Waters were raised unto.) CXXXVI. And whatever the body of Na∣ture
travelled under, the WOMAN was eased of, in the discharge of what was carried on the Waters to a HAVEN of REST, of the burthen whereof the Heavens were discharg∣ed in the strength of the Storm, or according to the decrease of the Wa∣ters, wherein a third part of those Vessels which were drawn towards the SOUTH, came under a Tryal by fire, and the seventh part of the Earth was tryed by Waters; but that other third part that was drawn to∣wards the NORTH, was reserved to a Tryal (in the third and last day) by the strength of Judgment in both. CXXXVII. Of the first Vessel, the Heavens were eased and unburdened on the first day of the ninth Month, whereby the World was first planted, in that which hath overspread its QUAR∣TERS; and the time wherein I be∣held
the Heavens to be discharged, was two dayes after the last quarter of the Moon, in the eight month, where∣by the Work of God, in the seven dayes, wherein it was finished and setled, recovered the Ides of that Month, after new Moon; and on the last day of the ninth month (which was the first day after the first quarter of the Moon) the Heavens were un∣burdened of a Second NATION, in bodily Form, into that second Ves∣sel; And in the conclusion of the ninth Month (called KISU, because it did bring Tempests before it) the Waters were fallen back in the De∣grees whereunto it overflowed by measure. CXXXVIII. And on the third day of the ele∣venth month (vvhich vvas the third day after new Moon) the Heavens vvere unburdened of a third Vessel;
but the tenth month being concluded, vvhich vvas called THEBET, be∣cause of comfort in bad times, Israel (began to forget the dayes of her MOURNING; for the name of the Angel of God vvas called HEBER, that had the conduct of that third Vessel; and the name of that eleventh month vvas called SHEBAT, because a Judge vvas brought up in that Ves∣sel in the midst of the seven, that svvayed the Scepter in ISRAEL. CXXXIX. And on the second day of the twelfth month (vvhich vvas two dayes after new Moon) the Earth and Worlds became divided, in the di∣spersing abroad of the Waters, vvhich continued decreasing, until the end of seven months, vvhereby the tops of the Mountains vvere beheld, and the Worlds came forward to their day of Tryal, vvherein the WATERS
setled about the form of the Earth. CXL. For from the time that the WA∣TERS decreased, I measured them up to the Neck of the GIANT in the Forms of Nature, after the measure of a Man, which is the Angel; And I observed their order in the falling back, wherein the first Head of the River (called PISON) compassed about the Land of HAVILAH, in∣to which fell the Golden Head of the Image; (after the River was divided into four Heads) And thence came forth the ASSYRIAN, in the di∣spersing abroad of those seven Na∣tions that came out of the seven Vessels, according to the seven Months of the YEAR, in which the WATERS de∣creased, wherein the Revolution of all Powers in Nature (thus imbodi∣ed) came under a second Tryal by Fire.
CXLI. And according to the NATURE of the EARTH, in which the Worlds were setled (in their sinking condi∣tion) there was GOLD and BDEL∣LIUM and the ONIX STONE, and that Gold was good, for it was Gold of OPHIR, wherein was dis∣covered the Beauty and Luster of what first fell, in the WORLDS backward course, and now was come forward for manifestation sake; And under the second Head of the River, called GIHON, which compasseth about the Land of Ethiopia, that hath its Spiritual signification among the Names in Nature, fell the Silver Breast of the Image. CXLII. But on the fifth day of the first month (which was five days after new of the Moon) a fifth Vessel came for∣ward,
in which the Heavens were unburdened, of that which came forth manifest (in the Line of Bles∣sing) to the discharge of the Powers of NATURE in God, for whom the Bowels of the Earth were torn up, that the replenishing forms in Nature might over-spread it, (in the New Created Being) and the name of the twelfth month was called ADAR, be∣cause of an excelling Governour, that came forth to sway the Scepter in Israel. CLXIII. And on the fourth day of the se∣cond month, (which was five dayes after new Moon) a sixth Vessel was unburdened (in the Heavens) through the discharge of the Power of God in the Body of Nature; and he came forth under the conduct of a strong ARM, wherein was displayed from the Heavens a Banner flying; and the name of the first month was called
JEHOVAH NISSAN, but among the forms in Nature, it had a name in the Earth  because of the Green Ear. CXLIV. For on the third day of the third month (which was the fourth day af∣ter new Moon) there was beauty on the new Created EARTH, among the Forms in Nature, because of the Flowers that did shine bright, (in the finishing of that second month, which was called ZIV. because of the lustre (in the Heavens) but in the Earth it is Jar, because of the Vail and Covering preceeding. And I turned me towards the place, in which I beheld the Form of the Image; and I beheld the falling of the BRAS BELLY, under the third Head of the River, (called HIDEKEL) and there was nought remaining but the stumps of the Image, which fell under the fourth HEAD of the
River, called EUPHRATES, in which it was bound down in my sight with an Iron Bond, for the stumps remain∣ed in the Earth, until seven times past over my Head, in which the Wheels were moved about, in their seven Turns and overturnings.
THE SECOND PART. With greeting to the four Churches in EUROPE. I. SInce the WORLD is faln un∣der the power of Corruption, and Affliction hath overtaken the Inhabitants of the Earth, (in its divided Quarters) let this Epi∣stle be sounded throughout thy Bor∣ders (O ASIA!) wherein is Power communicated to an Instrument in the Hand of God, to raise up and
awaken the sence of what hath over∣taken thee, (in the Glory of thy se∣ven Churches, now dispersed abroad over the Earth) that it may be known throughout the whole Land of JU∣DEA, that our God is King in Is∣rael, who is come to Rule and Reign in RIGHTEOUSNES, and is arisen as a Giant refreshed with WINE; for he hath taken unto him VEN∣GEANCE for a Cloathing, and is cloathed with ZEAL as with a Cloak; before his face goeth a consuming Fire, and it is very tempestuous round about him. II. For he hath raised up unto himself a Horn of Salvation, which is a Wit∣ness awakened out of the Dust, and from the Holy Place wherein it hath slept in the Earth, and hath com∣mended his love unto us (while we were yet sinners) having laid down his Life for his Enemies, that he again
might come to take it up, in as many as are willing to joyn to his SPIRIT in the Work of Redemption and Reconciliation of the WORLDS to himself. III. Whereby the Worlds are con∣vinced of their SINS and their RIGHTEOUSNES, in that Life of Sufferance, wherein the Spirit of Reconciliation is mani∣fested as a witness against the Spirit God and Spirit of the World (in se∣veral sorts of Judgment) for which the World is reproved, that remains in unbelief, and continues joyned to that cursed Spirit of Enmity, being subject to sore Tryals, (of Bondage and Captivity to the Spirit of Dark∣ness) in which the Curse first wrought, and therein is caused the groaning and waiting of the whole Creation of God.
IV. And thou O Europe, let this have its free passage throughout thy quar∣ters, lest I tear thy flesh with Thorns, saith the Mighty One, that is High and Holy in the midst of this the day of his Exaltation, as his Beloved be∣cometh raised out of the dust, (a beautiful Daughter of dejected Zi∣on, whose glory hath been covered with Ashes, while she hath sat mourn∣ing on the Floar of Corruption) and all that are Enemies to my WORK, and stand in my WAY, shall be made like unto ZEBA and ZELMANA, saith the FORMER of great Nati∣ons, mighty and strong; for by the Breath of his NOSTRILS, and through the BRIGHTNES of his Appearance he will consume and de∣stroy the Man of Sin; and where will the WICKED appear? since the Day of God is come on all the
pleasant PICTURES, and upon all that is lifted up above its SPHEAR and ORB, to the staining of the beauty and glory of all FLESH, that all high Oaks and sturdy Cedars, in LEBANON, may be made to bend to the Power of God, which is the subjecter of all forms in Nature to their first servitude. V. And unto the ANGEL of the Churches in EUROPE, write these things, (saith the first born of every Creature under the Heavens) The day and hour of thy Tryals is come, therefore let thy Rulers hear, and let thy Priests give ear, for their Sacri∣fice hath been defiled, while their Hands are full of Blood; in the right Hand of thy Prophets is a lie, and they feed upon Ashes: Remember there∣fore the Day of God, that hath mea∣sured the Ground, in which thou
hast been exalted in a time of pro∣sperity, because of the night that hath overtaken thy Glory; and say no more, I am prosperous in that strength which is the help of Nations. VI. For because of transgression in JUDAH, the Land doth mourn, and through the iniquity of BENJA∣MIN, they are scattered in ISRA∣EL, and the ten Tribes have lost their name, wherein the Glory of SAMARIA is rooted out of the Earth; Hear therefore you that can, for if your breaking off was that which made way for the reconciling the World unto God (in the Life of the Sons Glory) what will be your re∣conciling again, but life from the dead? Oh alas that I am born to see your Rebellion! ye stiff-necked peo∣ple, and gainsaying house.
VII. Ye have cast others out of your Synagogues and places of Worship; and now are you cast off by all, and made a scorn to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and are become a Song of the Prophane: for wherein you have despised the Servants of the Lord, and slighted his Messengers that were sent unto you, rising up early, because the Lord did send them, God hath given you up to be tormented by that Spirit of despite: Yet are his Bowels again turned to∣wards you, and though you could not come up unto him, nor receive him that came down unto you, (to suffer your contempt in a Servants state) yet in the last day of the Worlds visitation, he hath taken notice of your calamity, and hath prepared a way for your return, through the everlasting Gates of Glory set open,
that the Nations of the EARTH might enter in thereby. VIII. And unto the Angel of the Churches in ROME, (saith the searcher of all Hearts) what hast thou done? for thy nakedness is discovered, and thy shame is seen, though thou hast im∣boldned thy self in the calamity of Nations, and in the destruction of migh∣ty People (great in their Generations) Alas for thee! that hast been cast out of the fellowship and community of a People that were more antient in Name to God, (then thy self) and in like manner hast thou been found casting out of thy Temples, and ex∣communicating from thy Church-Fel∣lowship, such that for Conscience sake could not conform to thy in∣vented and superstitious Ceremonies.
IX. But now what is come upon thee, that art rejected by thy lovers? For although the time is come that God will laugh at thy calamity, and mock when thy fear cometh; yet is there pitty to a handful of People (that are in thee) and the yearning Bowels are towards that which is ready to die under such Oppressors, (that are found in the cause of what hath stain∣ed the Day of thy Excellency) my Heart, my Bowels! I am pained for thee, in whose currant are centring all the divided streams, that have been boasting themselves in what hath caused the breaking off the Branches from the Root, in which they were first planted; but they run in that wide and open way that leads to everlasting destruction, that are boasting against the Root which first bore them. Oh that thou mightest be yet helped.
X. But you have hardned your selves in the way that leadeth thither, and therein you are become blind, and cannot see the danger before you; Is Italy strong enough to support thee? or what defence is the House of Au∣stria to that which is broke forth a∣gainst thee? See you not the flames! the flames thereof in the Heavens? and the glory of its brightness amongst the Stars in their Constellations? I am weary, I am weary of your ways (saith the Lord,) but what shall I do unto such a People as this? And therefore let the German Princes pre∣pare, for he is come forth that hath measured thy day, the glory of Im∣perial Support cannot any longer de∣fend the PAPAL Throne, on which Foundation thou hast been raised up in great Excellency, and exalted in mighty Pomp. Oh! how hath thy
practice clouded the Glory of thy Profession? and because of a Spirit of Cruelty, that hath possessed the strength of thy Zeal (in a mis-inform∣ed mind,) how hast thou laid a stum∣bling block in the WAY of the sim∣ple and caused the Ignorant to de∣spise the truth of sound Doctrine. XI. Dost thou believe Purgation of the Body of Nature, from the cause that hath held it down under the Power of Death, wherein the Souls of the Righteous have remained crying and groaning under the Al∣tar of God? Why then continue ye in the enmity and Spirit of Cruelty to the life of the Just (both in your selves and others?) for where that Life is not refreshed and nourished, it dieth for want of strength, because it is the Souls strengh to be fed with the Bread of Comfort in God, where∣in
it receives all blessing from him; and the Body also without that Spi∣rit is dead. XII. It is the living therefore that can praise God aright, in that power that entereth the Ear of the Dead, for whom they stand in Jeopardy every hour, making their Supplications unto God, (in his Spirit) that break∣eth open the Prison Doors, and is come to Preach to the Spirits in Pri∣son, comforting the sick and weak, that lyeth languishing under the Power of Death and visiting the needy, in the day of its distress and calamity, through which the dead becometh again raised up to life and immortality in GOD. XIII. Many things I have to say unto thee, because thou mixest thy inven∣tions
with the Doctrine of Truth, and hast exalted thy self in the su∣perstition of those gain-sayers that perished before thee; great are the Tryals that have overtaken thee, and that which is come upon thee cannot be parallel'd because of the end of all things that is come up before the LORD. Have I not seen the going down of thy Glory, among the Stars of the Night? surely it is set in the WEST, and it hath a SOUTH Cloud over its Beam; but from the EAST is the Morning broke forth, and towards the NORTH doth the Star shine, that hath burning flames mentained in the dissolution of such forms of Nature, that have caused an exhaling in the excremental parts of the fiery Heavens. XIV. And unto the Angel of the Churches in the separated Islands in the North,
the transplantation of Europe) thy Names are many, and divers art thou in the perswasion of thy Judgement, in the Doctrinal part of Truth; And these are become the Horns on the Heads of the BEAST in Nature, which shall hate the WHORE, that hath exalted SELF, in the destructi∣on of the glory of two Tribes; for ten Tribes shall return to behold that which hath been healed up deceitfully in the appearance of the RAM from the EAST, whose coming forth is to ex lt his Horns, wherewith he shall be found pushing three wayes, to wit, WEST, and NORTH, and SOUTH. XV. And there will be striving in the EARTH, until a HOLY PEOPLE cometh to sit down in their own Land, for God is come down into the forms of Nature, and will work as in the dayes of old, and every on that see∣eth
him, shall be affected with his LOVE, and shall mourn bitterly over him, as his beauty cometh to be seen in the Earth, and overspreadeth the Worlds; but none shall be able to a∣waken his displeasure against others, though he will cut off great and strong Nations in his way, in his own time; and not for the sake of the Wishers of mischief, that may inkin∣dle a fire in the Center of the ground; from whence their life doth spring. XVI. But the Angel of my BELO∣VED, hath given in charge unto the Daughters of SION, that they awake not Gods displeasure, neither stir up the Beloved desire of the wel∣fare of all Nations before he please, for you that profess zeal against Su∣perstition, see that you stand not a∣bove the ground of Humility, from whence charity doth spring unto the
distressed, which worketh the WILL of God, in the manifestation of Glo∣ry, through the LIGHT of his coun∣tenance, that is lifted up over the Nations, by the arising of the Sun of Righteousness, with healing in his WINGS. XVII. For I am well assured of the love of God to his despised Remnant and handful of little Ones, trampled on by all, and now set in the Front of the BATTEL, in which Gods Cause hath engaged them; though by the Mighty they are deserted, (as left to the rage and fury of the Devouring Enemy,) And I have beheld also such that have plenty in their own Houses, yet are they found covetously lusting after one EWE-LAMB of the POOR; And shall they prosper? saith the LORD, since his Sword (which he hath not drawn in vain) shall not de∣part from their House until Jerusa∣lem
become a quiet Habitation for e∣vermore; for an exercise hath sprung from their own Bowels, through a Rebellious Seed that flattereth in the WAY. XVIII. But the ground of all this awaken∣ed Fury, did break forth in the Spirit of the WORLD, in the Nature of sensual Separations, in the dispersed forms of the Apostatizing Spirit from its first Love, by which the Faith of Gods Elect worketh. But Gods inten∣tion is to purge his own House and Sanctuary first, that his People may be white and clean from the Worldly Spirit of enmity and bitterness, which springeth from the covetous Root, that standeth in the lusting ground, wherefore the BEAST hath power to exalt his HORN for a sea∣son.
XIX. Therefore cease, Oh cease! ye MIGHTY of the EARTH, to strive against the Lord, for ye have been contending with one another (in selfs concernment) until your time of healing is well nigh spent in contro∣versies; and now hath God taken his own cause into his HANDS, and hath it in consideration, which he will plead for the Meek of the Earth, in the Heart of their Enemies; And notwithstanding many things are suf∣fered for a Tryal of their FAITH to God (who profess his Name and Truth,) yet is it not to destroy them, but to purifie and refine them, where∣in Judgement is still strengthened a∣gainst that part which hath given way to the power and work of the Ene∣my, either in the Particular or Gene∣ral; And I am assured deliverance will come in Gods time, which is,
when his People are so sitted there∣by, that God can get himself a Name in their Salvation. XX. And alas! you Professors of Cristi∣anity, that are quarrelling with each other, about the formal part of your Worship; how have you lost your day, until you are overtaken with a power of Darkness? have ye not been afraid of those that should change your Laws and Customs, and bring in contrary Orders, wherein the ROMANS Power was working to take away your Place? And there∣fore cast out you have, and cast out you are, which is the ground of your fear; but you are not in that Power, which can separate any from God, and excommunicate such from the injoyment of his presence (who have seen the end of Mans dayes Glory) though by continuing in the Ground
of Hardness, you may be in that which may separate your selves from the injoyment of good in that God which you profess. XXI. But oh ye hard-hearted! that have waited for the destruction of the In∣nocent, that for Conscience-sake can∣not bow to your Haman-like wills; what have you to answer before God in this kind? that have caused any to stumble and turn aside through your cruelty; I am burdened and grieved hereat saith the LORD, and my Soul is weary with waiting to do good to such an unthankful people; therefore shall distress come on di∣stress, and captivity will follow cap∣tivity until ISRAEL come to know her self to be the WOUNDED that is fallen among THIEVES, wherein the Priest and Levite have passed by, but a poor Samaritan hath proved the good Physician, as a healer of the
Breach, and restorer again of a Path to dwell in. XXII. For in the coming forth of all forms in Nature, I have seen thy state and standing, thou poor and distressed People over the face of the whole Earth; and though there is a Ground, wherein a fourth Beast, with the face of an Eagle, hath exalted power in the fourth Angel of God, that hath stood on the North corner of the Earth; in that which hath called to his day, Come and see, yet a DANITE hath slain the Lion that was found in the way of the Phi∣listines, wherein I have seen awakend in all the powers of Nature a sence of such Labourers under the Power of Corruption, who have swarmed to∣gether unto the dead Carcass, until it hath been filled with the sweetness of the Conquest; yet lest self should thereby become imboldned, a greater
glory is raised up in the LYONS day, and an Angel of the Sun hath pro∣claimed the Summons to all Fowls in the Heavens, in the Tryal of that which is brought out of the Heaven∣ly Ark. XXIII. And from the Heavens is inkind∣led a fiery Constellation, flaming in that which is sunk into the Creature∣ly perspection (from the highest Hea∣vens) that causeth a burning disco∣very of that which dissolves the Ex∣cremental properties, ingendered as a Star among the Powers of Nature; and through a discovery of the Even∣ing Wolf, (or little Bear) who is got before the LYONS Face, all shall be effected, which pertaineth to the Ministration of Severity, in the ap∣pearance of Glory (by the second Re∣surrection of what hath slept its time) And where the Carcass is, thither do the
Eagles resort; let not Ephraim there∣for envy Manasseh, though she be not called to go up to Battel against the Midianites; for the Gleanings of Ephraim shall be better than have been the green Fruits of Manasseh. XXIV. Neither ought Israel to quarrel by the way, for before God hath effect∣ed the glory of the work he hath be∣gun, every one that maketh mention of his NAME, shall know himself, what he hath been in his own strength, and there will not need any fierce drivings in the Camp to scatter every one to his own; for before Light shall shine out of any Vessel, the Pitcher must be broken; in which Case, it will be Israels safety to take out a Lot from the URN (wherein are three hundred bended Instruments) before thou aspire to put forth thy Torch; for so did Israel of old, whom the Father drew, through the catch∣ing
of the Foxes that were tied Tail to Tail, that the fire-brands which are between, might be the Executi∣oners of Gods fury on his Enemies; a great WOLF grew up in their stead, as a Constellation, in which three hundred STARS are commanded from the little BEARS Tail, in the Motion of the Heavens. This there∣fore is the Sentence of the Angel of God to thy Northern Quarters, and inhabited Islands of Europe and Asia, God hath beheld your state, and you must be tryed yet under the SOUTH Wind, but the glory of the day will return to the KINGS of the EAST, it is done, saith the Lord, and their work shall end in that which prepares the way before my Face.
THE SECOND PART. CHAP. I. Wherein is described the coming forth of the FOUR BEASTS in the Forms of Nature, in the loosing of the Seven Seals from off the Book, &c. I. NOW that seventh Vessel, which had the fourth place among the forms in Na∣ture, was that from whence sprung the Glory of the Heavens, in
the created being, whence ASIA took ROOT, through what fell in the Earth; And as the Worlds be∣came overspread, the Waters which compassed about ASIA, on the left hand, inlarged their course, where∣by the Land of EUROPE (in the same Continent) was compassed a∣bout on the right hand by the great River EUPHRATES, which became manifest in the decrease of the WA∣TERS. II. And I beheld on the four Corners of the Earth, the appearance of four Angels of God, that held the four Corners of the WINDS, and they had power to with-hold the Wind from blowing, and to smite the Earth with Plague; but their Power had been bound down in the great River EUPHRATES, until the loosing of the Dragons Power (out of the bottomless Pit) who had been also bound there∣in
for the space of a thousand years, in which the Holy Nations did arise in their Glory and Order; and those four Angels were prepared for an hour, a day, a month, and a year. III. And from Assyria (in whose fall arose the Mede and Persian, which are the two Horns of the RAM in Nature) the Ishmalite took root in the fall of the Silver Breast of the Image, for there was substance in the Neck of Nature in that which descended from its Head, wherein the Face of the RAM was seen; but the Yoak being cast off, the Spirit of God was made to suffer that which rested as a BUR∣DEN on the Shoulders of the imbo∣died Form; the sence of which came downward in his Creature and Creati∣on, and entred the Breast of the Cre∣ated Being.
IV. For from the Heavens of an in∣ward World, descended into the Bo∣dily Frame a pierced HEART, and from the multiplyed Forms in Na∣ture, there was moving on the Wa∣ters, the great VESSEL that I saw, which rested in the EAST, where the Waters first prevailed, wherein was the seventh part of all forms in Nature, brought forth in that middle Row, to replenish the new Created Earth; And in the Hand of the Lyon was the Sealed Book, and the Seal of God was on his day, (to wit, the Ly∣on of the Tribe of Judah) while the strong Angel of God proclaimed with a loud Voice, Who is worthy to open the BOOK and loose the Seals thereon, wherein the Wonders of God were written within and with∣out.
V. And in the opening and loosing of the first Seal on the BOOK, and on the day of the first Beast in Nature, I beheld the coming forth of the great LYON, that stood Rampant in the WHEELS, among the forms in Na∣ture, and he called to his DAY, Come and see; And I beheld on the back of the LYON four Wings of a Fowl, in which were thirty six thousand Fe∣thers in each Wing; and therein were written so many names of Men, for the Wings were of Golden Feathers, and his Face was towards the WEST. VI. But on the coming forth of this first BEAST, the Winds were moved, and greatly strove on the face of the WATERS, which were gathered toge∣ther in heaps on the great SEAS; And in the Night season, there broke
forth flashes of Lightning and Fire, under the Roof of the House, where∣in I was exercised with the Vision of the WONDERS of God and his Glory which the PEOPLE saw, but understood not the Mystery thereof; and great fear fell upon them, being not usually exercised with things of that Nature; but I laid up all these things in my Heart, until I came to know the meaning thereof. VII. And I cryed unto the Lord with a loud Voice, What is the Mystery of all these things that I have seen? For loe I am become weak and feeble like a little Child, and have beheld until nought was remaining in the Hea∣vens, but a Sealed Book under the Power of a Strong Angel of God; and it hath been taken to the Learned to Read, but they said, Lo it is Sealed, and we cannot read nor open
the Book, or loose the Seals thereon, and also to the hands of the unlearn∣ed it hath been communicated, and they say, We are not learned, so that through the power of the Lyon it hath been shut up for a long season, that hath caused weeping in the Hea∣vens. VIII. And through the loosing of the Seals of God from off the Book of Wonders, that was taken out of the Angels Hand, at the appearance of the Lamb of God, that taketh away sin from the WORLD, (and that was slain from the Foundations there∣of, that in the Fathers time he might come forth a Witness of the fulfilling of the daily Sacrifice unto God) I beheld the Lamb with his seven Horns full of Eyes, as the seven Spi∣rits of God, that walketh among the seven Golden CANDLESTICKS, and are like unto seven Lamps of fire
burning, which are seven Stars in the Angel of God, whose form is like unto the Son of Man, and who travelled among the Churches (who are saluted in their seven Angels) un∣til a second Seal on the Book became loosed in my sight. IX. And the second Beast, with the Face (and in the form) of a Cherub or Calf, called to his day, Come and see; and I beheld on the EARTH the form of a great BULL, and he came at his Liberty, and came to∣wards me with Violence, breaking over all bonds in his way; and though I had by me a Weapon of Defence, yet had I not power to use it to that end, but was otherwise preserved from hurt of that Wild Beast: But as the West Wind was reproved, as the Waters were moved on the great SEAS, by the striving of the Winds,
the second Beast roared, rearing him∣self on his hinder Legs, whereby he stood upright, which was terrible to behold. X. And I said unto the Angel of God, How long shall this continue? Then I beheld the BULL cast into a deep and dark Pit in Nature, while the fourth Beast in the forms of Govern∣ment, in the Body of Nature, was set to watch over him, (by the third Beast, with the Face of a MAN) for as the third Seal on the Book came to be loosed and taken off, the third Beast called to his day, Come and see; And I beheld from the Face of the Heavens, (wherein a course of Glory in the Sun of the day of the Son of Man, was comprehended in the Heart of the Lyon) that night which was come into the Body of Nature, was dispersed, and the power of the Heavens, over the forms in Nature,
were divided into four Parts, in the coming forth of the Worlds into manifestation. XI. Then appeared the form of a little BEAR, that arose on the LYONS side, and he took three Ribs out of the Lyons side, and held those three Ribs in his Mouth for a long season; And from the Tail of the little Bear, (among the Signs in the Heavens) the Power of the DRAGON was loos∣ed, and appeared among the Forms in Nature, who made up his Tail out of a third Part of the Stars in the Heavens, which were drawn to∣wards the NORTH. XII. And I beheld until the LYONS Wings were pluckt from him, and he stood on the EARTH like a Man, and a Mans HEART was given unto
him, for out of the EAST came the form of a RAM, with two Horns, and his pushing was three wayes, to wit, WEST, and NORTH, and SOUTH; and when he had lifted up the BULL out of the PIT, he was caught by his Horns in the Thick∣ets of the Earth; And in the Heavens was the form of the WOMAN, ex∣alted in the Bulls Eye, (called Oculus Tauri) And she had in her Hand a Crown of twelve Stars, which was taken from her Head, and put on the Head of the Lyon.
CHAP. II. Describing the Motion of the Wheels, in their seven turn∣ings, over all that came forth into manifestation, in the loo∣sing of the seven Seals on the the Book, &c. XIII. BUT as the fourth Beast called to his day, Come and see, (through the loosing of the fourth Seal on the Book) I saw the Face of an EAGLE in the Heavens, in whose right Eye, the form of the VIRGIN in Nature was exalted among the Forms; and the second great light in the Hea∣vens, was comprehended in the Breast of a great Bear, who had also
the four WINGS of a Fowl on his Back; And the Winds again strove on the great Seas, wherein the WA∣TERS were greatly moved in the coming forth of this fourth Beast. XIV. And as the MAN prevailed in the Heavens, I beheld all consumed, which stood under the Power of the Waters, and the Name of the third Month was called SIVAN, in the Nature of what was produced from the Heavens, whence came a Voice from the Heart of the LYON in the fiery Heavens, Let the Light shine into the Earth, that that which is done may appear and be seen; And the form of the Heavens stood divided, in a dou∣ble Relation of that which is compre∣hended in Day & Night, wherein the Day in Nature had its two-fold Ope∣ration over all forms subjected into being in that State, and the Clouds
of the Heavens were folded up toge∣ther, wherein I saw the form of the RAM coming down out of the Head of Nature, descending the right Arm of the Man (in the forms of Nature) and there went up towards his Head the form of a HEE GOAT, mighty and strong, and there was labour in the Heavens, for the space of sixty one Weeks, from the time that I be∣held the prevailing of those Waters on the Earth. XV. For as the Heavens were discharg∣ed of this third Man in the Forms of Nature; there was a great change and revolution in the Worlds, where∣in the Winds came again to strive, and the Storms and Tempests pre∣vailed on the great Seas, and I beheld until there arose an uncontroulable Wind, called EOLUS, which caused the Foundations of the House, where∣in
I lay to shake; and the Fowls of the Heavens made a groaning noise like a young Child, for the place was beset with terrors of the Night; but the sound of the Voice, was like unto the Ringing of BELLS under my Head, as I was laid down to rest; And I was charged by the Angel of God, not to move from the PLACE where I lay, in which I was preserved from hurt, until I beheld the Tempest over. XVI. Then I was led by the ANGEL of God, to a very high Mountain, on which I beheld my self riding over the Land; and in the bottom thereof stood a great CITY, at some distance towards which I was travelling, and there came forth the Hee Goat of a year old, who was driven towards the WEST, in which I beheld him a scape Goat, (for the yearly Sacrifice) and behind the form of the Man that
I saw in the Heavens, the RAM pre∣vailed, (that was caught by his Horns in the Thickets of the Earth) who be∣came a daily Sacrifice for the Sins and Transgressions of the first Covenant, which were committed in the times of Ignorance, wherein God winked at them. XVII. And the scape Goat also grew, and became mighty and strong, and came forth out of the WEST, pushing three wayes, to wit, East, and North, and South, and he broke and stampt in pieces those two Horns of the RAM, whereby the BULL was lifted up out of the dark Pit in Nature; and as I was enquiring of the Angel of God, how long also this should con∣tinue? He replyed, Until the Heifer be yoaked, and hath learned to tread out the Corn, that it may be known the House of Jacob is like a fire, and that the House of Joseph is the flame, and
the House of Esau the stubble, whom God will leave, nor Root, nor Branch; for Ephraim shall learn to tread out the Corn, as one that is taught to Plow, and Judah shall be inlarged in him, while God doth ride and is ex∣alted, but Jacob shall break the Clods in pieces. XVIII. And while I was beholding the Glory of the ANGEL, I was dis∣mounted from the BEAST whereon I Rode, and sought to turn it down before me, as I apprehended my self walking down the steep of the Hill; but the Beast could not go any fur∣ther, either up or down, and striving to turn him about, he fell to the bottom of the Hill, which was very steep and terrible to behold; yet he came to the ground without hurt, which was much more Admirable, and he ran towards the CITY that I
saw with great speed, leaving me for a season to wander on the Mountain, which was on the fourth Month of the seventh year, for which the Vi∣sion was set, and there did sit the form of Women weeping for TAMUZ, , which is the Name of the month, in the discharge of the Heavens, but in the Earth it is called Mazah. XIX. But through the opening and loo∣sing of a fifth Seal on the Book of Wonders, (taken out of the Hand of the Angel of God) which was on the Temple or House of God, which had been made the seat of the BEAST in Nature; I saw and heard from the Throne of God and the LAMB, a great cry and lamentation, How long Lord God, holy and true, wilt thou suffer the Members of Christ to be joyn∣ed to an Harlot, and the Temple of thy Holy Ghost to be defiled, that our Blood
may be avenged on the Inhabitants of the EARTH; for from the Blood of Righteous ABEL, until the Blood of Zacharias the Prophet (who was slain between the Temple and the Altar) Blood hath cryed in thine EAR, to be avenged on such a wicked Genera∣tion. XX. And there was also a Seal on the Sun of the Day of the Son of Man, which was taken off in the opening and loosing of a sixth Seal of the Book; And all that was in the Tem∣ple of God was smitten thereby, until I beheld the Sun turned into Dark∣ness, and the Moon into Blood, and the Stars of Heaven withdrew their Light, being shaken as with a migh∣ty Wind, and they fell unto the Earth, as a Fig-tree that casteth her Leaves; and all dominion in the Powers of Nature was terrified, by which that
subdued the Government of all Au∣thority, in the Kingdoms of the Earth, wherein is the signification of the Birth of Kings and Captains, and mighty Men, and Noble Men, and Bond and Free, that fled to the Rocks and Mountains of the EARTH to hide them, and crept into the Clifts and Dens for shelter. XXI. Then saw I the first turn of the WHEELS, which made a perfect division between property and pro∣perty of all SPIRITS, thus fallen under the Power of Corruption, in the imbodied being of what standeth manifest in three Principles of Go∣vernment over Nature (in time and place) for after I had beheld destin∣ction of Motion in the Rings of the WHEELS, and the separation of each, I beheld their order in their turns, over all that became imbodied
in the Ground of Corruption, as it came forth out of the WOMB of Nature. XXII. And in this sirst turn of the Wheels, all that came out of the Womb of E∣ternity rested in the Womb of Nature, though therein was a continual Mo∣tion, (while time and place indured) whereby the VIRGIN in the Forms of Nature, came under the sufferance of the Power of Death, and indured the bodily pangs, that were opened through the way and course of Cor∣ruption, which caused the FIELD of Nature and Place of Conception, to become a field of Blood, (through that which strove there) in which state was placed the Man that was formed to be Keeper of the Vine∣yard that he possesses in that corrup∣tible state; so that in the second Turn of the Wheels, all came forth
distinguishable in that separated be∣ing of fire, Air, and Water, that had received a tincture of Glory in each Principle. XXIII. Which according to those three PRINCIPLES, was in the Forms of Nature, wherein the Man had both Soul, Spirit, and Body, formed un∣der the Workings and Motion of an incorruptible and immortal Power, to the renewing of all faculties of the Mind, wherein Man is imbodied; And as it sought to settle under a Power of Corruption, I saw, where∣in it became a ground of all Motion, though a stilness and silence was in the Original Center of all Creaturely beings, whereby the four destroying Angels of God, were bound down under a course of Corruption, in which the Enemy prevailed to ripen and hasten the day of everlasting Tryals, (in the sufferance of God's
Spirit) and they were prepared in time, that came up in the Hours of the day, and dayes of the Month, and months of the year, into Number and Order, wherein the substance of what Nature was ordained to manifest, is become measurable and intelligable. XXIV. For herein is made manifest a Go∣vernment springing up from the Head, and Heart, and Womb of Na∣ture, through which the Body of Na∣ture was placed in subjection to an unchangeable and everlasting Pow∣er of renewing in God, whereby I came to discern of those three in Hea∣ven that bear Record, to wit, the FATHER and Creator of all Spirits and Principles of Nature into being, and the WORD through which the Creature was brought into the love∣ly form of Sonship, and the Holy Ghost which is the Power of the
Word in the Creature (as he is acted in the Will of the Creator) and these three are one witness for God in the Heavens, as a Sun of that Glo∣ry whereby the Creation of God is enlightned. CHAP. III. Describing the Forms of Nature, as they are wrought up in the the changings of the renewing Power in God. XXV. AND this was manifest in Ter∣restrial Bodies, through the three that bear Record on EARTH, to wit, the Spirit of God which first breathed on the WATERS, which is a power of all individual Spirits in Natural Bodies formed, and the Wa∣ters
themselves, on which it thus breathed, and the BLOOD inkind∣led in the fire of Life, through which those Waters do ebb and flow, to the Creature that hath the imbodied be∣ing of Soul and Spirit; And those three also agree in one, and are one Witness for God in Terrestrial Bo∣dies, wherein the MOON hath pre∣vailed to dignifie her course that turneth Waters into the Blood of the Spirit of Life, in that borrowed light wherein she hath exercised her domi∣nion under the Power of Corruption. XXVI. This therefore did I observe in the Motion of the WHEELS, that the ground of their Motion was everlasting, whereby that which had not any be∣ginning in the Will and Wisdom of Eternities Power of Existence, took being in time and place, wherein eve∣ry thing that was created into Form,
became conceiveable and compre∣hensible in the imbodied being of NATURE, as it stands thus fallen under the Power of Corruption, wherein the Work of God hath been narrowed to the sence of the Creaturely capacity; and from the CENTRE, in which is an eternal stilness, will every man receive his reward according to his WORKS, and to what he hath sown in the Bo∣dy of Nature, thus fallen under the tryals of a cross to the Creaturely af∣fection. XXVII. Though every thing is brought forth in its order, which is again to be reduced into its Center, as all Powers of Nature come to run their race, in what is awakened and come forth in time and place, to the judg∣ment of Eternity, against all such Powers of Darkness; wherein I be∣held the EARTH standing in and
out of the Waters from whence the Light shined in each principle, in which the separation was made be∣tween the Darkness, which was ex∣pelled from the new Created Forms in Nature, and driven into its Cen∣ter, wherein the Creation remained groaning under its NIGHT of sor∣row, as in the fallen Properties that proceeded out of the Womb of Na∣ture, (in which Self became imbo∣died in the Creature of God) which was and is the cause of the fall, and of all degeneration in Spirits and Pro∣perties of Nature in those Principles. XXVIII. And out of this EARTH, sprung up all that lay hid under the Power of Corruption, thus formed into being in time and place, which was a fourth part of the WORLDS in form, as its two third parts were separated in∣to the Waters above, and under the
Firmament, resting under the Go∣vernment of those four Beasts in the forms of Nature, over which the Wheels moved their third turn, se∣parating between all Creatures that abode in the Region of Air, and those that rested on the EARTH, and in those Waters under the Firmament, who were enlightned by the three Glories of the Father, that shined from the Heavens above the Firma∣ment, wherein the Worlds stood ma∣nifest in their renewed Principles, after this third turn of the Wheels. XXIX. For the Seal of God being on his peculiar Number of faithful Ones (though little in the Eye and esteem of the World) a Cloud of Darkness remained over the day in which they had glory, until the seventh Seal of God was taken off from the Book of Life, in which their names were
written among the WONDERS of God, whereby I beheld each Beast in the Forms of Nature, take unto him six Wings, in which were six thousand Feathers, and six thousand Names of Men on each Wing; and on each Beast were thirty six thousand Feathers and names of Men, which be∣came a great Army in the Heavens, of one hundred forty four thousand names of Men, according to the four Wings of what came forth first manifest on the Back of the LYON, wherein each Wing of the Army in the Heavens, was dispersed to its Quarters on the Earth. And the Wheels were moved about in their fourth turn, over all Principles in Nature, thus come forth into form, in its time of Tryal. XXX. Which was very miraculous to be∣hold, that through all this striving and contest in the Heavens, not one
Fether of those Beasts, was diminished though the Wings of the Beasts in those forms of Nature, were suffered to be pluckt, and were taken from off the Back of those living Creatures, on which they sought to rest and settle; And after an Angel of the Sun came forth in the Glory of the Son of Man, there stood a second Angel of God, who daily ministreth at the Altar of God, & hath power over FIRE, and he rode on a WHITE Cloud; and I heard a voice from the Heavens, the number of Gods chosen are Sealed, and they are faithful Witnesses and Fol∣lowers of the LAMB; and I beheld out of the Temple of God, Trumpets sounding forth Praises and Hallelu∣jahs to him that Rules and sits on high, until the four Angels of God became loosed out of the great Ri∣ver EUPHRATES, and stood on the four Corners of the Earth, and held the four Corners of the Winds from blowing.
XXXI. But the Earth was exercised with great afflictions, and the Waters also, and all that lived therein and moved thereon, were come under sore Try∣als, (in one third part thereof) and the cry was very grievous, because of the burning Coals that were taken from the Altar of God, and flung on the Earth, which caused Tempests therein, and from the Heavens pro∣ceeded Thunders and Lightnings, and great Hail, after all motion there∣in began to cease, and that I had be∣held a silence in the Heavens, for the space of half an hour. XXXII. For as the WINDS of the Hea∣vens were at rest, wherein the Spirit of God ceased to strive any more with his Creature, neither suffered the breath of its Almighty Power
to blow any more on that fourth part of the WORLDS, wherein the whole Earth had corrupted its way before the Lord, that which bound the Nature of the Heavens, from stri∣ving any more with mankind, gave way to the power of destruction (in a Mystery) to increase its swelling Tempests over a third of the Earth, out of which the forms of Nature were imbodied in the divided quar∣ter or fourth part of the Worlds. XXXIII. And I beheld until the seventh year past over my Head, and there appeared an Angel of the Waters, whose power began to be prevalent over the South Wind, and seven Kings of the South fell, and the KING himself, under whom the South Winds wrought, was subject∣ed by the dispersing abroad of those seven Nations of the Worlds, through
whom the Generations of the Hea∣vens were multiplyed; but two dayes before the expiration of the seventh year, the Hands of the Angel grew weak; for he went backward unto the parting of the great SEAS, and brought up the Vessel that stood in the midst of the six, in the front of the seventy, which was born about by twelve Bulls, six on the one side, and six on the other. XXXIV. And the Sun recovered the strength and glory of that which stood still in the Heavens, to manifest judgment over a backward course in its Worlds, according to the degrees therein, by which the Enemy pre∣vailed over the Body of Nature, to move the frame thereof under the Power of Destruction; And from the expiration of the seventh year, was fifteen dayes, that the Vessel was
subjected in the strength of the An∣gel; for after I beheld the appear∣ance of a second Angel, with the Garment of the high Priest, on whose Head was a Crown, and on the Crown a Cross, the form of the Crown was turned about, like the Moon in its second Quarter, and had two Horns like unto the Letter X, wherein the Leter X stood in the midst of the Crown, like unto two V A or V and A, and I did read it one hundred and ten, as though I had read in a Book. XXXV. For from the beginning of the ap∣pearance of the second Angel, was seventeen dayes; After which I be∣held raised up out of the Earth, a Wall of Brass, and its Foundations rested on two and twenty Pillars, that had on them two and twenty names
of Men, and the two and twenty Let∣ters in the Hebrew Alphabet; And on that WALL were twelve Towers, on which Towers were placed twelve Angels, each Tower stood between two Pillars, and the Wall stood four square, wherein there were three Gates on each side of the WALL; But the Tower on the North-side of the Wall, towards the East Corner thereof (whereon was exalted an Angel, who sat on a Beast in the form of an EVENING WOLF) had no Pillars for its Foundations, for its foundations fell in the raising up the structure of the WALL, and I be∣held until the Foundation of the whole was removed. XXXVI. And an Angel came down from his Tower, on the East side of the WALL, towards the South Corner thereof (who was exalted on the first
Beast in the forms of Nature, like unto a RAM) and he had made a breach on the WALL, against whom an Angel (who was exalted on the form of a Beast, like unto an ASS) smote his Foot; And the Glory of the Angel on the North Corner of the Wall EASTWARD (who was exalted on that Beast in the form of an Ass couching down between two burdens) saw that rest was good to the heavy laden, and they alighted from off those Beasts whereon they were exalted.
CHAP. IV. The effect of the descending of ANGELS into the Forms of Nature. XXXVII. FRom the middle Tower on the Wall Eastward, did the Angel prevail in the HEAVENS, who was exalted on a BEAST in the form of a LYON, until the Angel that came from the South Corner of the Wall, was held in a dark place, because that self-will slew a man to dig down the Wall of Separation to ISRAEL, from those Nations of the Earth, that were fallen into Idolatry, where∣by they caused their Seed to pass through the Fire to Molech and Ash∣taroth, and followed the invention of
the HEATHEN, who thus continu∣ed worshiping in the Fire. XXXVIII. For wherein the West-wind prevail∣ed, I beheld the form of the Cherub set up to be Worshiped in the WIL∣DERNES, whereby the TABLES were broken that were wrote there∣in, by the FINGER of God, that his Hand might more eminently ap∣pear through that which was engra∣ven the second time: for the Angel that was exalted on this Beast, came off from his Tower; and there ap∣peared another Angel that came off from his Tower, on the East Corner of the Wall Southward, that was ex∣alted on a little Lyon that roared to∣wards the North, and the Woman that had on her Head a Crown of twelve Stars, cast it down at the Foot of the Angel, that rode on the Beast in the form of a CALF, and I beheld un∣til
it was put on the Head of the Ly∣on. XXXIX. And the Woman was exalted QUEEN of the South, but the Vir∣gin Daughter of the NORTH, stood afflicted in her Seed, sixty one weeks and three dayes, while the Daughter of the SOUTH, made her self great towards the four Winds: And for sixty eight weeks and four dayes, I beheld the four Winds striving in the behalf of the Daughters of the North, and the form of the Temple that God had builded and finished in the HEAVENS, descended in a Cloud into the City that I saw, erected un∣der the Power of Destruction, and in seven dayes was its Foundation setled therein; in which time I be∣held the form of the Wolf, who was got before the Lyons Face, enlarging himself in the power of the Lambs suffering, whose Angel prevailed
therein, until I beheld the form of the Beast driven into the Wilderness, in which time I saw the linnen E∣PHOD Worshiped. XL. And an eighth Angel came off from his Tower, sailing towards the Land of Rest, to a Haven of Ships; and there was also a ninth Angel, who had in his right Hand a Cup filled with goodly dainties, with which those that travelled over the Deeps were refreshed; after which appear∣ed a tenth Angel, exalted on a ROE∣BUCK, who came leaping and skip∣ing over the Mountains, with glad Tydings to them that dwelt in the Valleys; for he proved a good Hind, and came home betimes, giving goodly words; And I beheld until there stood only TWO Angels exal∣ted on their middle Towers, (North and South) and I looked towards the
Fields of the Earth, which were white unto Harvest, and ripe for the gathering. XLI. And the Angel led me into a Gar∣den inclosed, (which was the Garden of my Beloved) and I beheld how the Spiknard budded and grew up, and how the Vines put forth their tenders Branches, and the Pomegra∣net, and all Spices flourished, as the North Wind came thereon, (after the South Wind had blowed) and the Daughter of the South had wandred from the Garden, after the bewitch∣ing Vanities and Pleasures of the WORLD, as one charmed among Wild Beasts of prey, and stung by fiery flying Serpents, and the de∣vouring Creatures of that Field, which afterward became healed by the lifting up of the BRAS, and those Women came forth to reap the Fruits of the Earth.
XLII. And from the Captivity of the South Wind, did deliverance spring up to the Daughter of the North, on whose back rested the two WINGS of an EAGLE, wherewith she had fled into the Wilderness, wherein she had a place prepared from the rage and fury of the DRAGON for time, times, and the dividing of times; for as the North Wind came to pre∣vail, the Queen of the South was re∣moved out of her own Land, who wrought by craft and much subtilty, to corrupt the Seed in the North; for therefore was the Daughter of the SOUTH given to the King of the NORTH, wherein the Enemy pre∣vailed over the Daughter of the North, forty and two months, that the Holy City was troden under foot, in which time the TWO WITNESSES finished their Testimony, of one thou∣sand
two hundred and threescore dayes, wherein they prophesied in Sack∣cloath. XLIII. Yet the King of the SOUTH did not retain the Arm, for one of his Princes was exalted above him, (a man of fierce speech and dark coun∣tenance) though a vile Person, who stood up in his stead; but the Hearts of both those Kings, (to wit, of both North and South WINDS of the Heavens) were set to do mischief, and they spoke lies at one Table, whereby the fourth part of the Worlds came under fiery Tryals, through this fourth turn of the WHEELS, which I beheld over the forms in Nature, thus brought forth under the Power of Corruption, wherein the Waters had prevailed that were smitten by those Tryals.
XLIV. And through the sounding of the Trumpets, the Earth was smitten in its third part, wherein a third part of its Fruits withered and died; And I beheld until the form of that third part became like unto a burning Mountain cast into the Sea, which made its Waters like unto Blood, and there was Thundering, and Light∣ning, and Tempest, (while the Moun∣tain continued burning, with Bounds placed about it) so that no Beast could come near it, but if he touched it he was struck through with an Iron Dart that he died; neither was any to gaze thereon while the fury conti∣nued. XLV. And on the Rivers and Fountains of WATER also, which did run in the several Streams and Channels of
the Courses in the Worlds (in their renewing state) fell a STAR, called COR LEONIS, (the Heart of a Ly∣on, or WORMWOOD) and those Waters were made BITTER, and darkness came on all Celestial Glory in the Heavens, wherein both Sun and Moon, and Stars of Heaven were smitten in their third part, which became black, like Cloth of Hair, and Fire mingled with Blood, and those Lights shined not in their third part. XLVI. And there fell from Heaven a se∣cond Star, called Sagitarius, who descended on the bottomless Pit, in which the Power of the great Red Dragon and old deceiver of mankind (Satan, and the Devil) had been bound, by the Chain in the Hand of the Angel, and the Seal on the Pit, which a strong Angel of God had
put thereon (who had bound him down for a thousand years) was ta∣ken off, in which time I beheld the Resurrection of the first Fruits of the Work of the Spirit of God, which followed those that were made par∣takers of that first Resurrection, over whom the second death had no Pow∣er, though the Devil went about to deceive those Nations of the Earth, that he had power over; And the WHEEL moved about its fifth time and turn, over those properties of Life, wherein the forms of Nature remained imbodied (subjected to a Power of Corruption) in which those four Angels remained bound, in that great River EUPHRATES. XLVII. Then came up on the Earth, the form of Beasts like unto GOATS; and their Faces were like unto the Faces of Men, and their Hair like
unto the Hair of Women, and they had Tails like Scorpions, and Stings in their Tails, and their Power was over a third part of men (imbodied in the Creaturely Being and forms of Na∣ture) the exercise of which Beasts was for the cleansing Gods Sanctua∣ry, and therefore had they power to exalt to Horn, that the Wound of the Daughter of ZION (which had been healed up deceitfully, & daubed with untempered MORTER) might be throughly searched into; for the separation of that and those over whom the Beasts had Power (on whom was his Mark) into their My∣stery, in reference to what was effect∣ed in those five Months; through which the Wheels came again to move about (in their SIXTH time and turn) for the loosing of their Angels, out of that great EUPHRATES; and the name of that fifth Month was called A B
XLVIII. Yet had not the BEASTS power to kill those men, in whom their do∣minion was exercised, but to Torment them for those five Months, whose Wound was like unto the biting of an ADDER in the Way, or sting of a Serpent (as when a Scorpion striketh a Man) wherein the bruise on the WOMANS Heel was felt; for as the Horse Heels (the Beast on whom the destroying Power of God in the Heavens, was exalted) became bit∣ten by the SERPENT, its Rider fell backward, and they lost the first shape of Men; and through the Pangs of those Men, a night of sorrow came over all their WORLDLY Glory; and I beheld their Wound like unto a Plague-sore, which came on the THIGH of Nature, whereby many were made to seek Death (because of their PANGS) but it fled from
them, and they could not find the way of Dissolution, though they sought it; for the Darkness that was on the SUN and on the AIR, was like unto the smoak of a Furnace, and it was the Fume of the Bottomless Pit, out of which the Nature of those BEASTS called Locusts, was imbodi∣ed in FORM.
CHAP. V. Describing the order of those four Angels, that were loosed out of the great River Euphra∣tes, and came forth exalted on the four Horses of several Colours in those forms of Na∣ture. XLIX. THrough the sounding of the sixth Angel, on the great River EUPHRATES, the power of those four Angels became loosed on the Earth, towards the four Winds, as it stood divided (in its four Quar∣ters) and the destroying Power there∣of (in which Death became Potent)
was a strength in the North Winds of the Heavens, over that fourth or North Quarter of the Worlds, as it stood thus separated in its continent, over which those Winds were with∣held from blowing or striving therein (with his Creature;) and through the loosing of those four destroying An∣gels, I beheld wherein their Power was bound, in that fourth part or quarter of the WORLDS (com∣passed about by the great River Eu∣phrates) for the space of five years and five months, and five dayes, and five hours; wherein each ANGEL became exalted on his Beast, in the forms of Nature, and those Beasts guided the Chariot of Nature (where∣in the ANGEL was exalted) ac∣cording to the time for which they were prepared, and wherein they were loosed, an hour, a day, a month, a year.
L. For in the year for which those Angels were loosed, I beheld seven Months, wherein the dead were left to bury the dead; And from the ex∣piration of those five months, was thirty dayes, wherein the Angel that was loosed for his Month, prevailed under the power of Destruction, and the name of the sixth month was called ELIL, because of the Fields that were Reaped, wherein there was nought found; And I beheld the ANGEL, who was exalted through the appearance of the first Beast (in the form of a Lyon) that came forth on his White Horse, on which he rode, in the form of a MAN, with a BOW in his Hand, conquering and to con∣quer. LI. And the afflictions that followed,
came over that third part of the Worlds, that the Dragon prevailed in, and had power over, through the Stars of Heaven that he drew after him (wherein he made up his Tail from a third part of the Heavens) And the Angel that was raised up in form, through that second Beast, (with the face of a Cherub) rode on a red Horse, wherein he came forth exal∣ted in the Heavens, and he had a SWORD in his Hand, and came to take Peace from the Earth, through the occasion of the fall of that first Star, on the Rivers and Fountains of Water, which made a sharpness in the Springs of VIRGIN Earth, in the Bowels of Nature. LII. And through the fall of this second Star, the face of a MAN became exalted in the Heavens, in which third Beast the Angel of God came
forth, riding and exalted on his Black Horse, with his Ballances in his Hand, wherewith the Fruits of the Earth were weighed and measured forth to the Inhabitants thereof, (who were found labouring therein under the power of Corruption) by just weight and measure, according to every Mans works and doings in the Earth, a measure of Wheat for a Penny, and three measures of Barley, and the Wine and the Oyl was not hurt, until a fourth Angel of God, who was ex∣alted through a fourth Beast (in the forms of Nature) with the Face of an EAGLE, had finished his work that he had to do in the WORLDS. LIII. Who had power over a fourth part of the Earth, and he came forth on his Pale Horse, like unto Death, and Death and Hell followed him, wherein his power was executed by
Pestilence, Famine, and Wild Beasts of Prey (on that fourth part of the Worlds) until the whole power of the Heavens, became subject to the first former; And I said unto the An∣gel of God, How long shall this con∣tinue, and the power of this Beast pre∣vail in the HEAVENS? To which the Angel replyed, Until the EA∣GLES Eye be pluckt out, and he be made blind as in the day that he was created. LIV. Then shall the Accuser of the Just, be cast down out of the Heavens, and all Power in Heaven and Earth, shall be delivered up unto the FATHER. And I beheld until that fourth Beast came to deliver up his Power unto the seven Angels of God, vvhich vvas se∣ven Golden Vials filled vvith the Wrath of God and the Lamb, (to vvit, the seven last Plagues to come on the WORLDS) and they came
forth out of the Temple of God, in the sounding of the seventh Angel, on the AIR, whereby were finished the Mysteries of God's Kingdom: And therein I beheld in the Vision, an apparition of the Horses, very dread∣ful and terrible, with Brest-plates of fire and Jacinth, and their breaking down was as with an Iron Rod, break∣ing and stamping in pieces strong Na∣tions, mighty and great; and out of their Mouths and Nostrils streamed forth fire, and Brimstone, and smoke, and their Power was in their Mouths, and in their Tails (which had Heads like the stings of Serpents) where∣with they came to hurt and destroy. LV. For they had Wings like a flying FOWL, and did fly along in the AIR, making a great noise, like un∣to the ratling of Chariot Wheels, and on their Heads were Crowns of
Gold, and they had Teeth like unto Lyons, who were called DAN'S Horses, (through a sence of the bruise on the WOMANS Heel) but their Riders were like unto Sagitarius, or men that had lost their shape and were fallen backward, for they had not the use of their Legs; and the Captain of the ARMY that I beheld in the Vision of the Heavens, had a name which signifyeth a POWER in the DESTROYER, or a POSION; wherein I beheld his Followers, a great number, being thousands of thousands, which no man could num∣ber, and until the end of those months, they were not to hurt any Herb or green thing; for four Woes were past, and two were yet remaining. LVI. And there was also of the LAMBS Followers, sealed a great number, which could not be counted, who
came through those two WOES to the Inhabitants of the Earth, in its fourth part, wherein the Eagle had power, of which he was discharged; And the Angel that I saw, had in his Hand, the Keyes of the Covenant of Love and Mercy, to the Faithful and Chosen of God, who took unto them their Golden Harps, and stood on Mount Zion with their Harps harp∣ing, and singing and praising God, who had brought them out of great Captivity, whereby their Garments were made white (that were washed in the Blood of the Lamb) whose names were written in Heaven, in the Book of the Lambs Life; for they were preserved from the hurt of what was come into the Earth. And the Angel had also in his Hand; the CHAIN wherewith the great Red DRAGON had been bound down for this thousand years, out of which Pit those living Creatures were loo∣sed.
LVII. And as I beheld the BODY of Nature, in its afflicted state, I came to hear the Voice of seven Thunders thundering; and their thunderings were to prepare a ground in which the sence of things wrought; the first Thunder was from the unconceivable WOMB of Eternity, which prepa∣red a ground for the sence hereof in the WOMB of Nature, which con∣tinued everlastingly thundering over the cursed Ground, (in which the eed of Enmity had entered the Creation of God) And there ap∣peared the form of a VIPER, who had gnawed his way out of the Womb of Eternity, to come into the Womb of Nature; yet was he shut up in the place of Conception, as a third Princi∣ple of the Man, imbodied in the Creaturely being, of whose birth was made a Separation in one hour,
wherein came forth a Generation of VIPERS at once in Mans form. LVIII. And the Angel of God led me a∣side, into the great Wilderness, and I there beheld the WHORE magni∣fying her self for a season; and she rode on the scarlet coloured Beast, with seven Heads and ten Horns, which were ten Kings, who had power with the Beast for an hour, (because of the Wound on his Head, which was heal∣ed up again) by the coming forth of the Ram, from the EAST, who pushed three wayes, after I had be∣held five Horns fallen from a fourth Head (that stood in the midst of five) and unto this Beast did the Dragon give up his Power, and also the first Beast, and the WHORE, which were the three Ribs, in the Mouth of the Bear, in the NORTH, and they became three unclean Spirits, like
Frogs that entred this second Beast, who caused the Image of the Beast to be again revived, and to be worship∣ed, that all men might receive his Mark, else were they not to buy and sell with the Nations of the Earth, who received his Mark and Names, and Number, on their right Hand or forehead; and they were an∣gry with those that could not bow down with them. LIX. And this was the Spirit of Devils, working Miracles in the Name of God, and thereby they caused the Generations of the World to fear and dread; for the Nations of the Earth repented them not of their great evil and wickedness, and sorceries, and thefts, and murders, and worshiping of Devils, and bowing down unto Graven Images, and of all Idolatry and Uncleanness, notwithstanding
those afflictions that were come into the Worlds: But a second Thunder also thundred from the Throne of God and the Lamb, which came in∣to the Temple of God, wherein God had placed a Government over Na∣ture, in those four forms of the Beast, and all Foundations in HEAVEN and EARTH were shaken, for the preparing and raising up a Ground for that immoveable Rock and Foundati∣on of many Generations. LX. And a third Thunder also thunder∣ed from the great River Euphrates, out of which those four destroying Angels of God were loosed, by which those afflictions came on a third part of those Men, who had not on them the Seal and Mark of God and the Lamb, in whom a ground was awakened and raised up, which made sensible of that which
was come into those parts of the Worlds: And a fourth Thunder thun∣dered also from the Wilderness, in which the Woman had remained tra∣velling in sorrow, for the forty two Months, wherein the Holy CITY was given into the Gentiles hands, to be troden under foot, wherein the great DRAGON stood before her, ready to devour that for which she was in Travel, which was a Man-Child (who was to Rule the Nations of the Earth in a Rod of Iron) whom he sought to destroy.
CHAP. VI. Describing the Nature of the WORLDS, in their raised and renewed state, through a Re∣stauration of the Heavens, &c. LXI. AS I came to behold the daugh∣ter of the NORTH, returning from the Wilderness, (in which was her travel and hard labour) I saw TWINS of which she was delivered therein; and the Children were nou∣rished, for the space of forty dayes, by the WOLF, who had fled there∣into, wherein they became great: And the Queen of the SOUTH, who was come out of her own Land,
(wherein she had been fruitful and was exalted in the Bulls Eye) being delivered of a FEMALE Child, her Seed was dispersed into the North, and over the four Quarters in the World, wherein the Waters had pre∣vailed over the Earth. LXII. And as she came to settle her self in the pleasure and ease of the Flesh, and to delight her self in the Worldly Spirit, wherein she sought satisfacti∣on, she overlaid and slew the Fruit of her Womb (in the Seed of Life) through a drousiness and carelesness that came over her Spirit, whereby she became dead while she lived; and there appeared the form of two Chil∣dren sporting themselves in the Field of the World, for they vvere scatter∣ed from the House of NATURE, vvhom the EAGLE beheld from his Nest, and the one of them vvas
caught by the Eagle, who envied the Eye of the Child, and by his Bill (vvhich vvas renevved) he pierced the sight of the BABE, and made it blind, but he vvas frighted avvay, vvhile there vvas yet life in the Child. LXIII. And the Women met in the Wilder∣ness, vvherein the Queen of the South, sought to compass a Man (in the Seed of Life) under the Povver of the North Wind, because of the Brass Belly, in vvhich the ETHIOPIAN vvas separated, that had cured the Wound of those that had looked up∣on it, the Remnant of vvhose SEED vvere multiplyed over the Quarters of the World, that had escaped the sting of the Serpent in that WIL∣DERNESS, vvherein Generations had perished, and the Face of God vvas tovvards his Israel, to gather and deliver them from the Hand of
the ASSYRIAN, the second time. LXIV. For as those Women were sound striving about the living Child, who had escaped the fury of the EA∣GLE, though it grew blind under the same there arose the wisdom of a King in Israel to decide the matter through sound JUDGMENT, that divided things aright, for the distin∣guishing of the true Mother, whose Bowels yearned in tenderness over the Birth, in the time it stood under the censure of Separation, wherein the HARLOT manifested her cruelty; And the venom rested in the Eye of the Eagle, like unto the poyson of Asps, though therein he grew sharp and quick-sighted, while his Wings overspread the Body of Nature in the Heavens, from whence I beheld him exalted in the Air, with two Heads, in which the Seed of the
North prevailed, though the Daugh∣ter of the South enlarged the domini∣on of what proceeded from the Fe∣male Child; and she was established Queen in that strange Land. LXV. And I beheld how the Image that had fallen in the Earth, grew secret∣ly invisible, under the power of Cor∣ruption, which increased its strength; in the changeable wayes and courses of the WORLD; wherein the Head of the RAM stood exalted in the fiery triplicity of the Aerial Heavens, compassed about under the Waters, that suffered the Power of Corrupti∣on, over which the Heavens were moved, while from the Neck down∣ward the Body of the Earth strove, to reign in dominion over its Head, and in the Heart of the Earth, was inkindled a flame from the Fiery Hea∣vens, as it stood moved about in the
midst of the Body of Nature, which had the lower parts of the BEAST downward, but the Legs of a Man, which stood at a distance in the form of the Letter A, as from the Shoul∣ders upward, there did reach toward the Heavens, the form of the Arms of a Man, and both Arms and Legs, were partly Iron, and partly Clay. LXVI. And among the forms of all build∣ings which I had seen erected from the Heavens, and standing in the Na∣ture of the WORLD, I beheld un∣til the Temple (that in its first appear∣ance was very glorious) was defiled with the Nature and Spirit of the WORLD, and it became the seat of the Beasts, which inlarged its power, in that which overspread the Foundation of the Earth, wherein the great City (that I had seen) had begun to rest and settle its first glory
(in which the Worlds were planted) and the weight thereof, was the stru∣cture of the Temples Beauty, which setled that which was therein finished on those seven Mountains or high Hills, that became its Foundations, and they had an eighth Mountain. LXVII. These are the Mountains on which descended the Form of what ever was first built and erected in the Heavens, setled among the forms in Nature, wherein the fashions of all glory in the Worlds are decaying, and are rea∣dy to pass away, though it seemeth to be adorned with magnificence, with Towers great and strong, and its situation very pleasant and beauti∣ful, while the antient breach that hath been made thereon in its ruinated state, many are seeking to prop up, by worldly inventions; the discove∣ry of which is become the torment
of the Worldly Spirit that hath sought a Life therein. LXVIII. And the Angel of God shewed me the whole frame of this building, and bid me tell its Towers, and count its Foundations, and number its Moun∣tains, and behold its Situation, that it may be said in Generations to come, This is she of whom we were for∣warned: And while the Angel of God was thus talking with me, I be∣held the appearance of a living Crea∣ture, that weaved out of his BOW∣ELS, the form of the Heavens, and it stood in the Firmament, placed be∣tween Waters and Waters, as be∣tween the Heavens and the Earth. LXIX. As to the living Creature, he had eight Legs, and through the Clouds of the Heavens (which were over
the face of the Waters) he weaved out of his Bowels, Coverings, like unto the Spiders Web, which had their course and motion, according to the frame of the Worlds, in their Corners and Quarters, wherein his labour was in the Night, in the di∣stance of Degrees from the Sun of the Glory of the Son of Man, form∣ed in the Clouds of the Heavens, which went before, and came after the Sun of such Glory, (in which the Creation of God was first formed and brought forth) who had his Star called HESPER and VESPER, as Morning and Evening Stars; And I beheld and hearkened, until a Voice came from Heaven, like unto those four Thunders which passed before me, which had an interpretation a∣mong the sounds in Nature; and the Voice was, Over hundreds they have moved a hundred times, as over ten thou movest, because of Wages that have
been changed ten times, but over one I am once moving; and the dividing of times hath discovered a time that was Mans glory to see and behold, while good followed the WORLD, in the state wherein it was planted, though times are past, in that wherein the Wheels have made a difference. LXX. And the fifth Thunder thundered, from the New Jerusalem, that de∣scended from above out of Heaven, as a BRIDE that is readily adorned for her Husband, the Voice of which did reach into the great CITY, that is Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord lyeth Crucified and Slain; Wherein I saw the fall of that which was setled on five of those Mountains, and the sixth Foundati∣on was also shaken, that the seventh might come up and be revealed, and in that seventh, were the seven ma∣nifest,
from whence the WORLDS had bubled, through the renewing of all forms in Nature, which were try∣ed by Tempests, until Gods goodness came up through that which swayed the Scepter in Israel, and brought forth Judgment in the power of the Heavens. LXXI. For those seven Mountains, had the names of seven Months in the Years in which God was manifest (in the work of Creation) according to the Power of his WORD in Na∣ture, by which the works of Won∣der in GOD, are established through that which wrought in a Mystery; And they are the Months in which God discovereth the going forth of the WORLDS, as they have their Foundations in the EARTH, setled among the forms in Nature; and the Towers which setled, in that
which adjoyned to the Body of that Temple (as Heads of the Beast) had the name of the seven dayes in the Week. LXXII. Wherein the beginning of Beauty and Glory (revealed through the Foundation in which it setled) rested its ruines on ASSYRIA, through which the forms of the Towers were put forth, as a Banner displayed to∣wards ASIA, and the name of that first Mountain was , whereon stood a Man with both hands dipt in BLOOD, and in his right Hand was a Sword, but I beheld until the form of the Man vanished, and there was nought left but the Head and Face of the RAM, wherein was erected the form of the TOWERS and from the second Mountain, which had the name of the second Month called , proceeded splendor and brightness,
as the flowers of all increasing pro∣perties in the power of Nature, and from the third Mountain, which had the name of the third Month (called ) proceeded the Vail and Cover∣ing of Green Leaves. CHAP. VII. Describing the form of the Tem∣ple, which setled its Foundati∣ons on SEVEN MOUN∣TAINS of the EARTH. LXXIII. ON four of those MOUNTAINS, rested the Body of the Tem∣ple, according to its Foundations, and the names of the Months, by which they were called, which stood in the fourth part of the WORLD,
(with its Corners and Quarters, East, West, North, and South) according to the four Winds of the Heavens that were moved from thence, with their four Angels exalted on their Towers from the sounding of the sixth Angel on the great River EU∣PHRATES, through that which pre∣vailed in the fiery triplicity of the Heavens, over the Earth and Wa∣ters, in their third part. LXXIV. Wherein the Vernal Quarter was Manifest, in a fourth Mountain, from whence all Fruits of the Earth came under fiery Tryals, to the scorching and consuming all that stood on that foundation (in the Ground of such a Nature) whence it received the name of the 4th Month (called THA∣MUZ) and on the fifth Mountain, which had the name of the fifth Month (called AB) was manifest the
Image of Jealousie, from whence proceeded the fiery Zeal of that con∣suming power, which prevailed over the Fruits of the Earth, until they became reaped, after which was nought found, through the appear∣ance of a sixth Mountain, which had the name of the sixth month called ELVL. LXXV. And in the Temple there appeared the form of a WOMAN exalted in the Heavens, on whose Forehead was written JEZEBEL, the Mother of Harlots; and I beheld until nought was remaining, but the Palms of her hands (which the Dogs refused to eat) yet did she reign as Queen of Nations, and had power over the Kings of the Earth: & there appear∣ed the Scarlet coloured BEAST, on which her form was exalted, who was very gloriously decked and
adorned with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, and Purple, and delicate aray, and on her forehead was a name wrote, MYSTERY BA∣BYLON, the Great, the Mother of all Fornication. LXXVI. And she was carried into the Wil∣derness, whither I was led by the An∣gel, who shewed me her Cities of Refuge; and there was a very great City, in which the sixth Thunder thundered, from the power of all Motion in the WHEELS, which came on the ground of all Principles form∣ed in Terrestrial Bodies and beings, wherein all powers of Nature were shaken, and moved about in the Wheels, which carried every thing about swiftly, to its appointed place; And there was a great Earthquake, through which the foundation of the City was shaken, and a tenth part of
the City fell, wherein were slain the names of seven thousand Men, that those who escaped, might give glo∣ry to God on high. LXXVII. And on the seventh Mountain, which had on it the name of the se∣venth month (called ATNIM was manifest the Angel of strength, over new Wines that were in the Cluster; And I beheld until the EAGLE had given up his power, which were the seven last Plagues to come on the Earth; and the power which that fourth Beast gave up, rested in the Angel of strength, wherein there came forth TWO WITNESSES of God, which are the two Olive Bran∣ches, and two Candlesticks, who pro∣phesied before the Kings of the Earth, cloathed in Sackcloath for the space of one thousand two hundred and threescore dayes, and their power
was to open and shut Heaven, until the dayes of their Prophecy were finished. LXXVIII. Whereby the way of God was prepared into the HOLIEST of all, and the Witnesses were cloathed in White, signifying that God was come into his TEMPLE, and all sorrow was fled away, yea the times of mourning were come to an end, and all Tears were wiped away from their Eyes, neither was sighing to be heard in that land; but there was a separa∣tion made between the Courts there∣of, where was both inward and out∣ward glory, according to its course, wherein the Witnesses had prophesi∣ed, for the time that it was given in∣to the Gentiles Hands to tread under foot, accomplished in those forty two months.
LXXIX. And as the Towers were shaken, in which the dayes of the week were multiplyed, into number and order, there was manifest the substance of time, wherein was the Week in which the Witnesses thus fulfilled and gave up their Testimony to the Father, and in the midst of the Week they came to seal their finished Testimo∣ny, and ascended to Heaven in the sight of their Enemies, and great fear came on all flesh; but from those Mountains, in which a third part of the Earth was separated, in the tryal by fire there sprung Flowers of Vir∣ginity, from the bowels of TERAH, in that created form, in which the WORLDS were planted, whence the frame of the WORLDS were overspread in those seven Nations, that were multiplyed from the Hea∣vens, in that vvhich escaped the rage
and fury of the WATERS, as they came to prevail over the Earth, until a barren Wildernesse was become a∣gain a fruitful Field unto God, and a fruitful Field suffered barrenness in such that savv not the danger in their vvay, vvherein they vvere overtaken. LXXX. For vvhere I had seen the Angel of God, vvith a Golden CUP in his hand, filled vvith goodly dainties, he suffered the WOMAN that vvas glo∣riously decked on the Scarlet-co∣loured Beast in Nature, to take from him the CUP vvhich she took into her Hand, and filled vvith Fornicati∣ons, & all abominations of filthiness, with vvhich she made her self drunk, and there vvas mixed with her Sor∣cerers, the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of God, vvho vvere slain for the Word of God, and Testimo∣ny that they held; and the Angel of
God said, Come up hither, & I will shew thee the judgement of this great Whore, who sitteth on many Waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth have com∣mitted Fornication, and with the Wine of her silthiness have made themselves drunken, from the Golden Cup which she reacheth to their Head. LXXXI. And there came a Voice from the HEAVENS, unto the Mountains on which the Whore sat exalted, Arise and stand on your feet; and they ap∣peared like unto a MAN, standing on the great River EUPHRATES, and from thence moving about the form and frame of the Heavens in the Worlds; and the seven Angels of God came out of the Temple, and took the seven last Plagues, (which were the seven Vials filled with the wrath of God, &c.) and they poured them forth on the whole frame of the
Worlds; and there was a great noise in the Heavens, which became divi∣ded into three parts, and she came into the remembrance of God, and the Whore that was exalted in the midst of her, was discovered, and her skirts seen. LXXXII. And there was joy and rejoycing in the Heavens, and thence proceed∣ed Thunders, and Lightnings, and Earthquakes, and great Hail, the weight whereof slew those on whom it rested, and such an Earthquake was not since the World began, to the moving and removing of all Foundations: And the appearance of the Angels that came out of the Temple, was sparkling, like the fiery Heavens, and they were cloathed as with fire, and their Rayment shined like unto fine Gold, and on their Heads were Crowns, and their Paps
were girded as with golden Girdles. LXXXIII. But the seventh Thunder sounded through the AIR, the efect of which descended on that great CITY, in which Babylon was erected; where∣in the seven Angels of God, that had sounded the seven Golden TRUM∣PETS, and who had power over the Worlds, came forth from the holy Place, cloathed with Heavenly Glo∣ry; for an Angel of the Sun, who was manifest in the fiery TRIPLI∣CITY of the Heavens, together with all the glories of the Father, un∣til the Clouds of HEAVEN became dispersed, in that which was manifest in three Principles of the WORLD, wherein the glory of the Womans return from her travel through the WILDERNES, was revaled among the WONDERS of Heaven, to be the Coelestial beauty of a third Princi∣ple
in which she was cloathed with the Sun, and had the Moon under her Feet, and on her Head was the Crown of Twelve Stars (that are moved about in the ZODIACK of the Heavens of an Inward World.) LXXXIV. For TWO WOES are past, in the diveing of the Worlds, in their six Principles, into two third parts, where∣in five are comprehended in one third part of that which is past, and they are fallen for the revealing of the SAMARITAN, in that which is come forth against ASIRIA the second time, in which the Woman con∣tinued joyned to one that had buried five, yet was he not the HUSBAND to the five wise VIRGINS, but he remained married unto her, in that foolish state wherein the Law had dominion over the MAN as long as he lived, in whom the foolish Virgins
are concerned, to reveal a sixth that is past, and seventh that is come, for the bringing forth of whom the Crea∣ture suffereth death all the day long. CHAP. VIII. Describing the Power of God, manifested in the execution of the seven last Plagues to come upon the Earth. LXXXV. THE BEAST himself, who is the Eighth, and who is the Son of Perdition, is now revealed, in her that shall bury SEVEN, wherein the Harlot hath lurked, unto whom the Man hath remained joyned in one Spi∣rit of the Beast, while the Temple of God hath been defiled, in such wor∣ship
and bowing down to the Spirit of defilement, and the glorying there∣in, is become an incestuous BED that procureth torment; because of the Resurrection, in which none can remain joyned to that Spirit, and possess the Glory in God's Temple, who is come to destroy the defiler thereof. LXXXVI. For the three Angels of God, that have power over that which came on the Worlds in their third part, through the sounding of the seven Trumpets of God, that awaken the executi∣on of Justice from the Heavens, are now manifest in the three remaining Principles, that have a fourth part in their Quarter reserved to those fiery Tryals, effected in that which mani∣festeth the end of all gloryings in the dominion of the fourth Beast in Na∣ture.
LXXXVII. Wherein the fiery Triplicity in the Heavens, through which those An∣gels are revealed, hath been covered as with a Cloud, until the Son of Man came to be revealed, riding on the White Clouds of the Heavens, and cloathed with incomparable Beauty, before whom three Angels have been found flying through the Heavens, proclaiming the everlasting Gospel of Peace and glad tydings, and the destruction of Babylon, in her great CITIES, which were come up be∣fore the remembrance of God, warn∣ing the Inhabitants of the Earth to come forth from her, and flee out of her glory; lest partaking therewith, they came to partake with her in those Plagues that were upon the Earth.
LXXXVIII. These three are the Witnesses of God in Heaven, filling the Heaven of Heavens with Glory, in one power that comprehends all Principles in Nature, which are swallowed up in its immensness. Greater testimony of God hath none; for since God hath a Witness on Earth, how much great∣er is that in and from the Heavens? wherein an Angel hath come forth out of the Temple, in which the first Witness of God finished his Testimo∣ny; and beholding the Fruits of the Earth, that they are ready for ga∣thering, and that the Harvest is White, he hath said unto the Angel that sit∣teth on the WHITE CLOUD, Thrust in thy sharp Sicle, because of the Harvest of the Earth which is ripe, and the Earth hath been reaped, until nought can be found, but that which hath
remained for a second Harvest and Tryal. LXXXIX. But he that hath lain slain in the streets of that great City (in which the Inhabitants of the Earth, have made merry over the crucified Life of the Lord of all Glory in Heaven and Earth) is now come forth raised and exalted on that White Cloud, from whence the Earth is reaped; And a second Angel of God is come forth out of the Temple, with his sharp Si∣cle in his Hand, and an Angel of the Altar (under which the Souls of the Righteous lie groaning) saith unto that second Witness or Angel that is come forth out of the Temple, Thrust in thy sharp Sicle also, and reap the fruits of the Vine, the Clusters of the Vine Grapes, and spare not the Olive Yards.
XC. This is he that daily ministreth be∣fore the Lord, and attendeth the Altar of God with the Prayers of Saints, which are daily offered up, with sweet Incense, put into his Gol∣den Censer, and his power is over fire, by which all untimely Fruits are scorched and consumed (in their third part) by the bright rayes of the breaking forth of the Summer, in the Sun of Righteousness, which is arisen, with healing in its Wings; though in the passing away of the Winter, and in the dispelling of Clouds of Darkness (which were over, and had covered the Face of the Earth) the Summer is broke forth, wherein many remaine unsaved from the wrath thereof, to come upon the ungodly World.
XCI. For in that which descended through the Clouds of the Air, the first beauty and glory of the Temple, (in that which was built in the Hea∣vens) is discovered to be moveable, though therein God was worshiped, as in the Ark of his Testimony, in the Covenant of Promise, which was car∣ried about from place to place, while the Temple remained under a Cloud, in which are the more lively things themselves, then that in which the forms of Nature were gathered, as patterns of what remained under a Cloud, until the time of the restitu∣tion of all in the Heavens was come, wherein hath wrought the Power and Spirit of Preparation, in the Spirit of Creatures, to the perfect∣ing the Work of God, and bringing into the unity of the Spirits of just Men made perfect in God, until all
becometh compleat in him that hold∣eth the HEAD, unto which the Body is knit, in several Joynts and Mem∣bers. XCII. Yet in this time of ISRAELS sojourning through the Wilderness, the Power of God hath been mani∣fest, to those strangers in the Earth, in that strange Countrey, through which they have their passage, and therein have pitched their moveable TENTS; though Beauty and Glo∣ry hath shined through such Vessels, in the time of their preparation from transgression, that came under the Judgment of the great Day of God, in the ground wherein God first chose a People to himself, and to be called by his Name, until the Glory of the Earth is become laid wast; the third and last WO is come into the World, discovered in the pouring
forth of those seven Vials, to the ut∣ter consumption of the Spirit and Power of Darkness, ruling and reign∣ing in the God of the World, where∣in Death and Hell are conquered in their full strength, & the Enemy of all Souls vanquished and overcome in that which is come to destroy the ground of Destruction by utter dis∣solution. XCIII. And the sence of these things was manifest in the World; in that which came on the Earth and great SEAS, and all Rivers and Fountains of WA∣TER, and all that lived therein or moved thereon, and on Sun and Moon, and Stars, and the seat of the Beast, and great River EUPHRATES, and on the Air; wherein the Fruits of the Earth withered and were de∣stroyed, and the Waters became like unto the Blood of the dead, and on
Men fell a noysom Plague-sore and Headly Wound, because of the in∣fection of the Air, wherein was Hail ike unto Fire mingled with Blood, each being of great weight, and at the appearance of God, there was wrought up through the EARTH, a burning Mountain, under which fell the Powers of Nature in Earthly Forms. XCIV. And all the WATERS were dry∣ed up in the great River Euphrates, wherein the way of the Kings of the EAST was prepared, who gathered themselves together into a place cal∣led GOLGOTHA in the Hebrew Tongue, which is a place of dry Bones and dead Mens Sculs, on whom the Spirit of God had breathed, and they did live in his sight, and stand on their Feet like Men; and it was the Valley of Megiddon and of Hada∣drimmon,
even the Valley of Jeho∣shaphat, or the Valley of Slaughter, where RACHEL sat weeping for her Children, because they we not, and she would not be comforted but herein is manifest (in the Valleys ACHOR, which is given for a Doo of Hope. XCV. For God was descended into all the Powers of Nature, through his destroying Angels, changing all Powers, and Laws, and Customs of the HEATHEN and uncircumci∣sed, in the ground wherein destru∣ction wrought, and renewing the Created FORMS in Nature, into their first lovely Being (as into these Kings of the EAST, the Nature of the Beast had descended, which had his Power renewed in an eighth Head and Mountain) and they had the Power of the Beast and false Pro∣phet,
or Whore) wherein they were exalted to hasten the utter ruine and downfal of the DRAGON, and Beast, and false Prophet, yet wrought Miracles in the Earth, and incamped about the Beloved City, the New Je∣rusalem, which descended from above out of Heaven, and they caused fire to come down from Heaven. XCVI. But the Holy People waxed strong, and did exploits, although the Foun∣dations of all buildings, in the Earth∣ly Principles of Nature, suffered great shakings, and an utter over∣throw, wherein darkness filled the Seat of the BEAST, and every Mountain was removed out of its place, and great BABYLON fell, as the nether Milstone that is cast into the Sea, and every Island fled away be∣fore the Face and Presence of the Lord, and were cast into the deeps
of Waters, that were drying up into their Anihilation, and the smoke of the Torment of those Men that had the Mark of the Beast ascended up∣ward, as a place of Torment to the Spirit of the WORLD, incorpora∣ted into the form of the Image. CHAP. IX. Describing the Glory of the New Jerusalem, in the renewing Power of God, which wrought up the efficacy of its change in the Forms of Nature. XCVII. AS all forms in Nature, were subjected under the Power of God; there was manifest a Spirit of ZEAL, in the Qualities wherein the
Creature became imbodied, through which the change was wrought; for the ten Horns of the BEAST, did hate the WHORE, whose flesh they consumed with fire; and the Min∣strels were all turned out of Doors, because the Damsel was raised; and the Bridegroom was come at Mid∣night, wherein the Wise Virgins had prepared Oyl in their Lamps, which were lighted and trimed, burning in the flame of that which was gathered and reaped in the Earth, by the An∣gel; but the Apples of Sodom, and Grapes of Gomorrah (after which the Souls of many have longed) became unpleasant Fruit, because of the sound of the Milstone, which could not be heard, neither was there any Voice of the Turtle, or the singing of Birds. XCVIII. Nor did the Light of any Candle
shine therein, but the sound of the Tabret, and the Viol was departed out of the Land, and the Sun ceased any more to shine, while there conti∣nued a cry for want of Oyl among those that were foolish, and at the Voice of the Grashopper, the Aged rose up and were afraid (as the Pil∣lars of the House were shaken) and the Windows grew dim, the Grinders failed, and the Pitcher that went oft to the FOUNTAIN was broken, and the limit of the circumference of the Waters, which were bound in that great River, was loosed and in∣larged, and the Streams of Corrup∣tion dryed out of the same wherein it had compassed about the frame of the WORLDS, like unto the Arms and Legs of a Man; for every thing perished in its corruptible state and course, until the form of the World became thus changed, and the Dra∣gon
and Beast, and false Prophet (who had deceived the Nations of the Earth) were laid hold on, and bound down by the Chain in the Hand of the strong Angel of God, never to rise again. XCIX. And Death and Hell was cast into the Lake of fire, and a Seal was set on the power thereof, that it never more should appear in the Worlds, to marr the Workmanship of God, and form of his Image, and all forms of Na∣ture shined out of the Glassy Sea, (on which the redeemed of God stood Harping and Singing, and Praysing God) which was sprakling like fire; for the Heavens were rolled up toge∣ther like a Scrole, and the Elements were consumed with servent heat, wherein was no more Sea, but that Sea of Glass, or first Waters, in which was a new Heaven and new
Earth, and therein did Righteousness dwell, for ever and ever. C. For former things were remem∣bred no more, but the former Hea∣ven and Earth was passed away, and there was a Voice from the New Heavens, Behold the Tabernacle of God is among Men, and he is come to dwell in them, and to walk among them, for ever and ever; who hath wiped away all Tears from their Eyes, and sorrow and sighing is gone into perpetual si∣lence; and beautiful was the Coun∣tenance of him that came from Mount TIRZAH, clear as the Sun, and bright as the Moon, and terrible like an Army with Banners, where∣by the power of the second Death was Conquered, and came not into the new Heavens and new Earth.
CI. And there was the CITY of God, which was placed between the SEAS, in which was no need of the Sun by day, nor of the Moon by Night, nor was there any need of the light of a Candle to shine therein, but the light of the Moon, was as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun, as the light of seven dayes; and all labour in the Earth ceased to be, neither did it Travel and bear its former bur∣dens, but the Lamb & the Lord were the Light thereof, for ever and ever; and all things brought forth as in the beginning; wherein the WOMAN was redeemed from sorrow and la∣bour of Child-bearing, and brought forth her SEED as Angels of God, nourished in the Womb of Health, wherein saving blessings were sprung up to heal the Nations; and from the place of Conception, from whence
sorrow was removed, did life break forth into being, and the birth there∣of was glorified in the sight of GOD; but time and place were no more. CII. Sing therefore, O ye Heavens! and let the Inhabitants of the EARTH rejoyce, because time is changed in∣to Eternity, and the WOES are re∣moved out of its Quarters; Death and Hell are Conquered in its domini∣ons, and the Sea and Grave have gi∣ven up their slain; the dead are come forth out of the secret Chambers of LEVIATHAN, and the BEHE∣MOTH is overcome by him that sitteth on his WHITE Throne, and rideth on his White Horse; and the Walls of Brass and Iron are broken down, and the Word by which every thing was created, saith unto the hard Rocks, Be ye soft, and unto the high Hills, Be ye bended down.
CIII. The strength of the strong is bound in CHAINS, and the Power of Mighty binders is loosed from Iron Fetters; and the King over NATI∣ONS, hath said unto the Power of FIRE, Be thou kindled into a burning flame to consume, until Consumation be∣come reproved, and devouring flames are quenched; the forms of Nature are comprehended, under the re∣newing Power of God in the HEA∣VENS, and all things that have be∣ing are changed through dissolution. CIV. For the God of Life is come into his Holy Place, he is come forth from the midst of burning flames, and hath descended through the Clouds of the Heavens; the Mountains of the World do tremble, and the form of the whole Earth doth shake in his Presence, before his Face they are lightly MOVED, that stand in his
way; for a devouring fire accompa∣nieth his progress, and it is very tem∣pestuous round about him; because he ariseth as a Giant refreshed with WINE, who hath took unto himself Vengeance for a cloathing, and is cloathed with Zeal, as with a Cloak; under his Shooes are high Hills be∣come like unto dissolving Snow, and he that treadeth thereon, hath his Feet like unto sparkling Brass, come out of the Refiners Furnace. CV. His Eyes are like a flame of fire, and his Face shineth as the Sun in its full strength; he subdueth great Na∣tions with the Breath of his Lips, and when he speaketh the Word, all things are done at his command; for in his Mouth is a sharp two-edged Sword, and therewith are his Ene∣mies slain, and brought down to be his Foot-stool: Who would not but
fear before him; for when his dis∣pleasure is moved, his Foes are con∣sumed with anger; and when he comes to be awakened, before he please, who can stand in his Way? when his Wrath is but a little kindled, Blessed are all they that trust in his Name, for those that flee from the LYON, are overtaken by a BEAR in the way, and a BASILISK doth bite those that would lean on a Wall. O Heavens! hear, and O Earth give Ear, for the Lyon is come forth out of the Thickets, and the Destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way. CVI. And while I was thus beholding the Angels glory, I was again led into the Wilderness, until the Myste∣ry of all those things came to be ful∣filled, in the number of dayes; for the space whereof the Worlds abode under sore Tryals, for the manifest∣ing
of what hath relation to the King∣dom of God, and Glory of his Power. And I observed the result thereof, until eighty five dayes were past over, for any longer I was not able to see and perceive for glory; but I rested greatly astonished to behold the effect of that which came forth in those dayes, until faintness of Spirit over∣took me, and I was not able to stand upright on my Feet any longer, be∣cause of the Temptations of the De∣vourer, which became very prevalent, (through Darts that were shot against my Soul in secret) wherein he la∣boured to betray my Life under his Snares and Baits. CVII. And I stood before the ANGEL of God, as one cloathed in vile RAI∣MENT, and as I came to present my supplications unto the Lord, the Devil came also into his presence, as
one ready to resist me; for he having a desire to sift me (as one would win∣now Wheat) I was delivered into his Hands (as into the Hands of the Tor∣menter) whose power was for the de∣struction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved alive in this day of the Lord Jesus: And I appeared as one destitute of a Habitation in the EARTH, and cast out into the open Fields, as in the day that I was born, striving in my Blood; yet was my right Leg bound with fear, and on my Shoulders I bore the Yoak, from whence Blood ran down on my Gar∣ments, defiled and torn, in medling with the Worldly Spirit, before which I was thus seen to bear my reproach. CVIII. Yet while thus in my Blood, and gasping after the Breath of Life, God said, Thou shalt live in my sight to feel the Infirmities wherewith the World is
touched. Then cryed I out unto the Lord, Wonderful are all thy wayes and works, which my Soul knoweth right well; for in three times five years, thou hast brought me through very great Tryals and Alterations in my condition, but what I now see and behold is of great concern, through the Vision of Wonders that hath seized my Spirit; and the Glory of God resteth weightily on me, though I am oft ready to con∣clude, it had been more happy for me that I had been prevented by my Mothers Knees, and that her Paps had never suckled me, then to see this day; for then had my Soul never grown up under the sence of such sorrow as I have passed through, nei∣ther had I been pursued for my Life by those that seek it for a prey.
CHAP. X. Describing the time for which the Dragon was loosed, until the Mystery of that which is seen in the Vision came to be fulfilled. CIX. VVHile I continued thus Praying and making Sup∣plications unto the Lord, I was touched in the night season, by the Angel URIEL, and my Bowels were moved towards the Lord, and roul∣ed within me, and I was carried by the Spirit of God, on the WATERS where the WOMAN sate; and there came a Voice from the Heavens, Be∣hold now, thou art not born for thy self,
but to be tryed in the behalf of thy Peo∣ple: and while the Angel was com∣muning thus with me, TEMPESTS arose & continued in the WORLD, and over the same did the WATERS swell and rage, until I came safely to arrive at the Haven of Rest. CX. And being again beset with the Rage and Fury of the Woman, I came to pass through great build∣ings, which were reared up sumptu∣ous and fair to the Eye, and I was led about its MANSIONS, though the rage and fury of the WOMAN followed me for hurt, causing grief and mourning on my Spirit; And I said unto the Angel, What evil have I done unto this envious WOMAN, who is seeking to betray my Life? But he quieted my SPIRIT in a moment, saying, Fear not those that seek thy Life, for I will smite thy Foes in my
fury (as already thou hast seen them smitten in their enterprizes) but conti∣nue thou still, and humble thy self dai∣ly before the Lord, with fasting and prayer, and therein shall thy abstinence be accepted. CXI. For when thy Heart is lifted up a∣bove the sence of what is thy preserva∣tion, deliverance cometh to stand afar off, and in the needful time and hour thou mayest cry out for help, when strength is departed from thy HEAD, and none is found near to put forth an assisting Hand and Arm to restore: And I again said unto the Lord, Though I have not a Habitation and certain dwelling place on the EARTH, I cannot be discontented at thy dealings O God! And why should I murmur and repine at thy disposings? Though in the WORLD I am comfortless, since thou, O Lord, art good in all thy wayes,
and thy Mercies are over all thy works. CXII. Then appeared there great prepa∣ration for WAR; and I beheld ma∣ny go forth to the BATTEL, while I continued exercised under the be∣setments of the WOMAN, until she vanished, and I saw not any more her form to disquiet me; but through the WILDERNESS, in which the WO∣MAN sate exalted, (on the Scarlet-coloured BEAST) I beheld the plea∣sant Field and fruitful Garden, work∣ing up the form of what indured and continued patient under those fiery Tryals, until they became past over; though many therein did dwell on a barren Heath, who could not see when good comes, whereby they perished in the Night of Obscurity and worldly sorrow that overtook them (in their way) wherein the power of DEATH wrought and
became strong in the WORLDS. CXIII. And in the place of the fifth Head of the Beast (in the midst of four) which I had beheld Wounded as it were unto death, were sprung up three other Heads; And the Horns on that fifth Head (which had recei∣ved that deadly Wound) were in∣creased, through the healing up of the Wound, wherein a little Horn that sprung up between the Eyes of the Beast, received Voice, and began to speak great swelling words, against the God of Heaven, and his SAINTS that dwell on the Earth, and the little Horn waxed strong towards the four Winds of the Heavens, wherein the BEAST appeared with seven Heads and ten Horns, (which had Power in in the Beast to reign with him as Kings for their hour.)
CXIV. And whereas (after I had seen the fall of five Horns, on that fifth Head of the Beast) I beheld remaining four Heads, from whence sprung up four Horns, in the dispersing abroad the Kingdom and Power of the BEAST, under the four Winds of the Hea∣vens; so in the reviving of his pow∣er, that which became exalted in the reducing of four (to its first sub∣jection) ruled over five (in which the wound was received, and wherein the Beast came forth first manifest) and in the discovery of both the rise and fall of the BEAST, though through the great Horn of the Hee-Goat, who did not touch the ground, until he had accomplished his design (after he had power given him, in the awakened fury of the West-Wind) the two Horns of the RAM from the EAST, were broken and stampt in
pieces, that great Horn was also bro∣ken, when its fury was accomplished. CXV. Yet was the power of the four Horns on those four Heads of the BEAST, bound down in the four Heads of the great River, until the time of the loosing of their four An∣gels, that stood on the four Corners of the EARTH, to hold the four Corners of the WINDS from blow∣ing on the EARTH, while the little Horn was magnified, whereby the third Head which sprung up in the midst of the seven, recovered four Horns, from that which was disper∣sed under those four Winds of the Heavens; and on the other six Heads, were manifest six Horns. CXVI. Thus was the BEAST more mon∣strous then all those other Beasts that
passed before him, with Iron Teeth, by which he did break and stamp in pieces; And his Face was like unto a Leopard, with the form of a third part of the Stars in the constellation of the HEAVENS on his Back; but he had the Feet of the great Bear, and discovered his power through the four Heads of the great River EU∣PHRATES, in the loosing of those destroying Angels, who came first out from the WATERS, but the re∣viving of his strength (from those de∣ceitful healings) proceeded out of the Earth, through the power of the RAM in Nature. CXVII. And in the time of the sounding of the sixth Trumpet, this BEAST came forth, through the loosing of those destroying ANGELS out of the great River; and through those earthquakes and shakings that were
come into the WORLD (wherein fell that tenth part of the great Ci∣ty) God had returned unto him∣self his Tenths, to be eaten as a Teyl-Tree, and as an Oak, whose sub∣stance was in it; these were the rem∣nant of the Holy Seed, who worship∣ped the Lord with a pure Heart, even in Spirit and in Truth, and whose Garments were washed White in the Blood of the Lamb. CXVIII. For they came to pass through great tribulations and Tryals in their WAY, because they could not Wor∣ship the BEAST, nor receive his Mark, but they were preserved blameless before the Lord in that hour wherein Iniquity was not found in their HEARTS, neither was there guile in their MOUTHS, to be utter∣ed with their Tongue: And I beheld until the sin of MANASSEH be∣came
ripened, and was filled up, and the high Altars (in both Courts) whereon had been offered Sacrifice to IDOLS, and Incense burnt to strange Gods (which neither we nor our Fathers have heard of) were pul∣led down, because of the God of FORCES who was worshipped, nei∣ther was the desire of Women regard∣ed. CXIX. And after I came to see the WO∣MANS deliverance, from the rage and fury of the great Red DRA∣GON (who had cast his floods of Water after her, in the time and times wherein she had been helped by the EARTH, and sheltered by the Wings of the EAGLE, with which she had fled into the Wilderness) as the Dragon came to give up his Power to this monstrous Beast, the remnant of her Seed was persecuted in the
World, for the space of full forty dayes: And wherein the Sun had gone back ten Degrees, for the pro∣longing of Life in the Just, after he came to discover and reveal the glory in which was his safety, before Baby∣lons King, (who wrought by subtilty and much craft) whereby fifteen dayes were added to his dying state. CXX. Those dayes were again doubled, in the renewed Zeal, wherein the Fa∣vour of God was multiplyed (to the purging his House and Sanctuary) ac∣cording to the fifty-five dayes, where∣in Manasseh had caused the Israel of God to err in following after Idols; And for ten days the Devil had pow∣er to cast many into Prison, that they might be tryed and sifted by his cun∣ning devices, until their Garments be∣came thus made white in the Blood of the slain Lamb of God.
CHAP. XI. Describing the Form of the WHEELS, in the VISI∣ON, according to their MO∣TION, wherein are numbred the dayes that the BEAST hath yet to reign and continue on the Earth. CXXI. AS to the form of the Wheels, as they wrought and moved one within the other (as a Wheel with∣in a Wheel) like unto the form of the Worlds, (which are mo∣ved the one within the other) the WHEELS never rested, but went streight forward towards Eternity,
wherewith they were tinctured, and moved (in the power thereof) as though they crossed, each other, and yet there was no crossness, in the Will and Wisdom of Eternity from whence they were moved, in the power of him that first wrought and laboured in the motion thereof. CXXII. For all crossness that appeared in the motion thereof, wrought in the Earthly ground, wherein the Worlds laboured to Center in a Glory be∣low the power of Eternity, from whence every thing first proceed∣ed, and was brought forth (to a day of Tryal) in the FRAME un∣der which the Body of Nature was constituted to exercises, from the Glory of the HEAVENS, wherein the Will of the Creature was subject∣ed to a change, through vanity that entered the WORLD (in a state of
corruptible Glory) which was suffer∣ed to work in a hidden ground, to manifest the deceit of the TEMP∣TER. CXXIII. And Nature had not a Will of its own, to move about the Wheels in the Power of the Heavens, that wrought on and over Creatures, that took being in time and place (accor∣ding to the form and frame of the Worlds in which all Glory wrought) without the ENEMY, neither was the Enemies power any thing preva∣lent, but through a subjection in the Will of the Creature, in that Power wherein he was made able to resist him; but time and place became mea∣surable from the Heavens, wherein the comprehensible course of all forms in Nature had their end come up in the World, in that which was manifest through distinction.
CXXIV. But Number and Order remaineth manifest among the forms in Nature, in which every thing cometh forth into being, according to the Figure of its Birth, constituted in the power of the Heavens, in respect to the dig∣nification of the Mind, in the thing wherein it delighteth, through which the Man cometh to sow the Seed from whence he expecteth to reap Fruit answerable thereunto; though in the flesh of Creatures, there is that already sown and spred a∣broad, which worketh in the Mem∣bers, against that which dignifieth the mind, that remaineth as a Thorn in the flesh, to make sensible of its pricking pangs, when the Creature goeth forth into self-exaltation, be∣yond or above the measure of power and ability which he hath received from God.
CXXV. And this is to humble the Crea∣ture, and make him sensible of the need he hath of the preserving Pow∣er of God, in that which keeps open the Eye of the MAN, at all times to see himself upon the Watch; for eve∣ry Principle of Nature hath a contra∣riety attending that which is formed in its Birth, according to the Diur∣nal and Annual motion in the Wheels; wherein that which causeth a change in the state of the Creature, multiply∣eth dayes and hours in the course through which it is manifest, accord∣ing to the sufferance, or according to the delight of SPIRIT, in which he is attended. CXXVI. This do I see in each Birth, and moreover I observe how Nature ri∣peneth that which the Man reacheth
after, in the number of hours or dayes, according to which the mind standeth afflicted thereby, wherein nothing can exceed the number thirty, (in the course of Nature) for that which is changeable returneth to the beginning of the WORK, by which it is Judged, to be manifest in its Birth; And thirty years are the largest extent of motion (in the Rings of the outward Wheel) as thirty dayes accom∣plish the race of the swiftest motion in the Wheel's Rings, according to their Orbs in the Heavens. CXXVII. And in like manner, as in twelve hours, a day in Nature is compleat, in that which divideth it from the night, so in twelve years, that which moveth in the most equal ORB (a∣mong the forms in Nature) return∣eth to the Center from which it was moved; though it be streight forward,
that the Wheels are moved in the Hea∣vens; for all that hath its Period in time, Centereth and endeth its course in the Will, and under the power of God, in that which is suffered to labour and work up the form, over which Death and Dissolution hath had power. CXXVIII. But the Inward Heavens being tinctured with the love and delight of God, all BEAUTY and glory cen∣tereth therein, and shineth therefrom, as from the FIRE of Gods Jealousie, whereby his honour is mentained, in that which hath kindled and inflamed a desire burning after the highest good, which hath its similitude in the WA∣TERS, wherein Nature is moved in its Principles, according to the seve∣ral ORBS and Sphears, in which the Power of the Heavens doth labour and work.
CXXIX. Wherein the Heart of Eternity in∣flameth through the forms of Nature in a yearly course, under which the Heavens have doubled the effect, of that which riseth up inkindled in the ORB, which breaketh all essences in form, and maintaineth War in the source in which the RAM hath ta∣ken Head, distributing power under the four Winds of the Heavens, in which the Elements of Nature stand divided, and under the same came forth the faces of the four Beasts, according to the third Ring in the Wheels, through which the fourth BEAST, is become exalted in his do∣minion, over a fourth part of the WORLDS. CXXX. For the course of motion in this Ring of the WHEEL, is forty nine
Weeks, to regain that which is lost in form, through the Beauty & Glory of what was finished in seven dayes, from whence the Heavens have multiplyed all forms in Nature, until the day and hour under which Death is disposses∣sed in its dominion (for the separation of day and night in Nature) met in the Power of the Heavens, through that which discovereth the Period of all changeable Courses, in which the Moon hath strengthened her Revolu∣tions, while Winter and Summer, and Seed time and Harvest continue. CXXXI. And while I thus beheld the mo∣tion in the Wheels, there came forth out of the Heart of FIRE in Nature, an ANGEL of the Sun, cloathed with the Rain-bow of the Heavens, and he rode on all the Powers of Nature, proclaiming with a loud Voice, a Feast that was prepared for
the Fowls of the Air, which were ga∣thered together under the conduct of the EAGLE, and they were a great Multitude and very numerous; and on my other Hand stood the ARK of God, which was taken in BATTEL by his Enemies, wherein Glory was departed out of the Tents of those that God had first chosen to be his own. CXXXII. For the Aged departed in Sorrow, and the Old Man died full of Grief, and pained in Heart, until there came a Voice from the Heavens, Behold the result of Israels deliverance, from their Enemies Hands, wherein the Servant in Gods House (in his good Old Age) hath his Eye open to see the Salvation of God, and is inabled to depart in Peace; And henceforth shalt thou no more count an Infant of dayes, nor Old Man full of years, because of the sinner that dyeth accur∣sed,
but a Child shall die a hundred years old, where the Hoary Head is not reverenced, nor the tenderness of youth respected. CHAP. XII. Wherein the substance of the VI∣SION is concluded, in a PROPHECY of that which is yet to come to pass, directed in an Epistle, (to all that are se∣parated into several Fellowships) concerning the third part of the Book. CXXXIII. AS I beheld the Ark of God's COVENANT, which was made with many People and great Nations, brought up from the Wa∣ters,
in the new Created HEAVENS, wherein the forms of Nature stood MANIFEST in their Figure and or∣der of Number; Among three hun∣dred URNS or earthen PITCHERS that were broken, (that Light might spring forth from the Power of the Heavens, whereby the Enemies of God were discomfited) there remain∣ed onely two of those Vessels in the forms of Nature, wherein every thing in being was doubled, and the Heavens were drawn both wayes, through a fiery Constellation therein inkindled. CXXXIV. And in one of those Urns were the Names of the twelve Tribes of IS∣RAEL, but in the other was a par∣ty-coloured Blank, on which was wrote PREROGATIVE, to which the ANGEL said, This is Israels de∣sire, and therefore hath Benjamin had
a Prerogative to be higher then his Brethren by the HEAD, and his raving up hath been like an evening Wolf, while Israel hath sought the Rule and Dominion of other Nations of the Heathens; for from the seven Families of FATHERS, the Lot resteth on an eighth Head, who is dis∣covered by his ANGEL, wandring after the lost Asses, who have a month to be tamed, in the power over which he is set to be their KEEPER. CXXXV. After whom came the lowing of the OXEN, and bleating of the SHEEP (in the restraint of Fodder) of the KING of Gods Enemies; Then said I, What must be done? Or hath this fault been in one onely, that Iniquity should rest on his TRIBE? For lo, Israel standeth before the ARK, en∣quiring into the MATTER: And
there was in the hands of the Angel, (over whom inquirie was made) a Signature; in one Hand was a CROWN dipt in Blood, and in the other Hand a ROD, touched with Hony, concerning which the Angel bid me chuse, wherein I was covetous of both. CXXXVI. And while my Tongue touched the Hony, it was in my Mouth sweet; but immediately was the form of the ANGEL divided, and there remain∣ed other Signatures in each Hand of the form of the living Creature, like unto a suite of tryed Armour, and Sheet, in which was tyed the form of every living Creature under the HEAVENS, according to the Cor∣ners of the Heavens from whence they were let down bound. And as I was trying the ARMOUR, finding it cumbersom, as that in which I was
not accustomed to wage War, there∣fore thought I hastily to cast it off, that I might take hold of the Sheet, in which were those living Creatures, there came a Voice from the Heavens, as from the Angel, whose form was again united in a Body, Thou hast cho∣sen that which will make thee a Wonder in the World. CXXXVII. And he yet cryed aloud, The bit∣terness of the Miracle is in thy Belly, for know thou assuredly, thou hast Part and Lot in this Matter; And to my astonishment, the Body again revived instantly before me, and it was made to stand up before my Face; And there came a second Voice from the Angel, Is it a time to be delighted, with sweet∣ness in the midst of Battel? Or to feed on Hony while Enemies are on the pur∣suit? And I was afraid I should die, and durst not any more ask any Que∣stion
in this matter: But after the Voice from the Heavens, became in∣telligible, wherein an Angel of God said, Arise from thy slumber, thou that art glutted, in that which thou hast killed and eaten, for therefore is thy Head filled with Wonders. CXXXVIII. I beheld until the forms of all those living Creatures were again awaken∣ed before me and they came forth to make WARR in my way; and be∣fore me stood the unsealed Book of Wonders, which the LAMB of God had taken out of the Hand of the ANGEL, for the loosing of the Seals thereon, which was like unto that which I had eaten, from what was tendered by the ANGEL: And while I beheld the Book lifted up un∣to the Heavens, I was mourning in Spirit, and said in my Heart, Where∣fore
hath my life been prolonged for such exercise as this? For now I am become the scorn of cruel Enemies. CXXXIX. And I returned to the Angel of him that I had seen divided, and who was again united before my Face, and found him cloathed in the Ar∣mour, as one riding forth to a Bat∣tel, unto whom I said, Boast not thy self in putting on, and in thy go∣ing forth to War, as may he that put∣teth it off, and returns a Conqueror; for twice hast thou deceived me, let therefore my wrong rest on Thee (that coverest a WOLF) according to the time I have become a stranger to my own FAMILIARS, when dri∣ven forth as among the BEASTS of Prey. CXL. My Hair was like unto the Plumes of a FOWL, and my Nails like un∣to
the Tallents of a BIRD, and be∣cause of the Vow on my Head, I was as one forlorn; for thou hast counted the hours of my mourning, and know∣est the dayes wherein pleasant Bread came not into my Mouth, under which my Spirit was ready to faint, but let the Issue be glory to the High∣est; Turn again therefore my re∣proach, I pray thee, that I may know and be assured that thou hast taken notice of the innocency of my SOUL in thy sight, and that thy love is yet towards me. CXLI. And the Angel of God, again took me into the Habition of WON∣DERS, where I heard an interpre∣tation of the Mystery of the seven Thunders, and he said unto me, These have made way for the preparing a ground, wherein is revealed what was opened and loosed from the BOOK in
the Hand of the Angel; and the time is come that nothing hidden shall re∣main in its secret Chamber, but the Seal of God shall be taken off from the Spirit of Wonders, and Truth shall have its common recourse, in the fel∣lowship that publisheth abroad the say∣ings and report of Wisdom: Therefore prepare thee to write, for thy Prayers are come up before the Lord, and thou shalt yet PROPHESIE before the Nobles of the Earth, and thy sayings shall terrifie Kings and mighty Men, as in their appointed season they become fulfilled. CXLII. And unto the Angels of all Fellow∣ships of People write these things saith the searcher of all Hearts, before whom my desire hath been granted, and he an∣swereth daily my request, revealing the Mystery of all depths concerning the
glory of Gods Kingdom, and the sum and substance of all Prophecy in Words is transferred to the sensible Reader in a Figure, until the substance there∣of become fulfilled, on a Generation of Men, through which it will be made to speak, in an Universal Cha∣racter of good to Nations, in the ge∣nerous Spirit of that love, in which many suffer despite. CXLIII. I know your Thoughts, from the greatest to the least, and you all are expecting alterations and changes in the Government of Nations, and state of publick affairs; but believe it, tru∣ly, it will not come in that way you ex∣pect it, who would gladly see your Enemies destroyed, and utterly con∣founded, that you might not hope in vain; Alas! the Life of Creatures is pretious in Gods Eye, and God hath de∣termined
no other Judgment to the Wicked, then that which remaineth to be the utter Consumption and Destructi∣on of the Spirit of ENMITY (in the Man of SIN) by which NATI∣ONS are oppressed under his Power, whose destruction cometh to be of them∣selves, in chusing that which leadeth and guideth under that which of ne∣cessity must fall on the World, in a wicked state. CXLIV. But God is not the Author of all the evil and mischief that is expe∣cted to befall NATIONS, in such a Case, though his displeasure may be AWAKENED, against a People or Nation, and in his sufferance are de∣stroying ANGELS loosed out of the great River of the WORLDS Sea, and often is he stirred up, to that
which he delighteth not in, even to ap∣pear like unto a LYON roused up be∣fore he please, and as a Giant disturbed from his sleep; yet will great Altera∣tions and changes come into the World, and they will happen unto the secure, like Events determined from an over∣ruling Power.
THE THIRD PART. CHAP. I. Wherein is opened the Mystery of what came forth in the Worlds, in the form and frame of the Heavens, from whence the Vision had power to work up its discoveries. I. THE principles of ETERNI∣TY in God, or God in his eternal existence, is the fire of Life, burning in jealousie (over
his own Honour and Glory, that gave being to Love) in which remaineth he Original Center of all good from whence his preheminence is main∣ained (in and over his Creature) through that which he first inkindled n the Ground and Center of Na∣ture, in which is both a good and an evil; But Waters are the first and all Principle in NATURE, through the sinking frame of the WORLDS, into and under palpability, wherein EARTH took form, as a third Prin∣ciple in Nature, separated into being on the third day, from whence all Creatures became imbodied in the substantial form of Palpability. II. And all separated qualities re∣main in the ground of substantiality (while time & place endureth) where∣in the Life of the Creature center∣eth, in that which is come forth in∣to
its individual being, among the forms of Nature, according to the source it possesseth and inhabiteth for these beings are formed in and from the Earthly Principles, which are separated from the Heavens (in what remaineth sinking under a power of Corruption) wherein thre do bear record for God, which are the glory of Terrestrial Bodies, Essentially forming Nature into be∣ing, in that which continueth breath∣ing through the out-spread Firma∣ment of the Atry Heavens, under the Waters. III. As also from the fiery Heavens, (from whence a third part of the Wa∣ters was dryed up from the Earth in their Principle) on the third day, and by a third dayes work of God there∣in manifest, the three Glories of the Father do shine through all Celesti∣al
Bodies, to wit, one Glory of the SUN, which is a great LIGHT, to rule the DAY; and another of the MOON, which is the lesser LIGHT, to rule the NIGHT; and another of the STARS, according to their differing Glories, in which the over∣ruling Power of the Heavens, sub∣jecteth the forms of Nature, in their several Constellations, that gives life to the Creatures being in the Earth. IV. In this respect, God is considered and become the cause of all causes in ETERNITY, and ground of all be∣ing in NATURE (as Palpability is the ground of Corruptibility) where∣in he is called a consuming and ever∣lasting FIRE; and yet as substantia∣lity is not without the Creature, he is absolutely the cause of nothing, as well as of all things, where nothing (without God) is God without Na∣ture,
which is a cause of both good and evil, wherein the Worlds do re∣main unmanifest, but in Nature, and wherein the work of God is compre∣hended in the forming qualities of that which is brought forth in the effect of labour in seven Natural days. V. Therefore (said the ANGEL of God) these WATERS that thou sawest, are those on which the mul∣titude of the WORLDS and great Nations are moved and carried to and fro, according to the course of time and tide, the WOMAN remained exalted on them who allured ma∣ny into those Vessels, that begin to swim pleasantly over the streams of Corruption (singing a Requium to their Souls) that they might not re∣member the danger in their way, wherewith they are daily beset, and
they are called the PEOPLE, and Tongues, and Nations (of the Kin∣dreds of the Earth) that are divided under the four WINDS of the Hea∣vens, tossed up and down, through the boysterous Storms, and swelling Tempests, that are again gathered to∣gether in HEAPS, over the main Sea and Ocean of Trouble, in which is the Lake and Bottomless Pit, from whence all Monstrous shapes in Crea∣tures are come forth to cover the Earth. VI. And the Vessels that thou sawest carried thereon, are those which were first built and erected from the Hea∣vens, into which the Patrons of all Earthly forms were gathered in one, and were again distributed through many, according to the Nature of the BEAST, wherein wrought the confusion of Languages, in the pre∣vailing of the MOON over Woman,
in the changeable wayes and course of the WORLD, under which the Heavens stand thus divided. VII. In seven they took Head, and in ten was each Horn exalted, over nine, which is an intricate number (among the Figures, in forms of Nature) wherein those seven that thou sawest come forth into the Creaturely be∣ing, first imbodied under the power of Corruption, are the seven forms of Nature, subjected under a power, in which the Heavens and Earth are multiplyed, in and according to their Generations, generating Nature and name to the being of each form Cor∣poral.
CHAP. II. Describing the Nature of the de∣generation of the WORLDS, in those Principles wherein the Creature became imbodied in time and place. VIII. FOR answerable to the time and place wherein all Created Prin∣ples (in the forms of Nature) remain∣ed sinking under a Power of Corrup∣tion, working properties in the Hea∣vens, prevailed over the bodily frame to afflict it with labour, according to the motion in the Wheels (in which those Principles suffered and were acted) and that which suffered the glory of the frame of the WORLDS
to work up the gross form of Palpa∣bility, in the way and course the Bo∣dy of Nature became acted by a motion in the Heavens, was subject to Corruption, that came into time and place, through the change of the frame in the Worlds. IX. And agreeable to the Name and Nature of those Men that were FA∣THERS in their Generations (through whom palpability prevailed, in the Waters) whereby the Worlds were first overwhelmed in the deluge and overflowing scourge; the glory of the World, imbodied a form in Na∣ture for the Seed of Life to work up the first Beauty of CREATION, ac∣cording to what was manifest in time and place, wherein each day had its year, multiplyed in Nature from the Heavens, as each Month hath its Hour, in what is divided to every par¦ticular
state and condition of the Creature, under which Death and Afflictions have increased their domini∣on over the ends of the Worlds. X. And as from the Womb of Eterni∣ty, the BEAST in the forms of Na∣ture, prevailed in a backward course, under which the Heavens were sub∣jected, for the manifesting of each day in Nature, wherein the Princi∣ples of the World were acted and wrought, in a frame that discovered its revolutions; so according to the years, wherein the multiplicity of such forms increased, the WATERS prevailed in the months thereof, un∣til the seven Mountains could be seen (on which the great CITY was erect∣ed) through the decreasing of the Waters, in what remained falling backward for the space of seven Months.
XI. And the CITY that thou sawest, built and setled on those Mountains and high Hills, which became the Foundations of all that fell into and under the palpability of WATERS, is the City HENOCH, which the first born of Nations erected under the power of Corruption, from the ground which he became the Tiller and tearer up of, when driven East∣ward from the Face of the Earth, and Presence of God, into that Land where he took his Wife, that he might call the name of his Buildings, after the name of his Son, for whom it was built. XII. For he possessed the seven forms of NATURE the number of years, according to which the year increased its dayes, and hath all the properties
of the Heavens, through a Transla∣tion wrought on the Body of Nature, in what came forth mamfest in each line of the Fathers, resting in LA∣MECH (whence two Wives prevail∣ed over the Man) five years short of a sight into the destruction, which pre∣vailed over the Worlds, in the state it was first planted. CHAP. III. Describing the property of E∣nochs Prophecies. XIII. THose seven forms of Nature, whose Characters are Figures in Hieroglyps, have the property of Prophecy, among the Works of Won∣der, which cannot be understood in the Creaturely Capacity, but through
the translations of ENOCH, for whom the ground of conceiveability was torn up; and no less power is requisite herein, than that which smiteth the World, in its third part, of both Earth and Waters, and all that lives therein, or moves thereon; wherein the Beast hath had his Seat as a Temple, in which hath shined the glory of Sun, and Moon, and Stars. XIV. And for the revealing the true ground, from whence all those glo∣ries may come again to shine (in the Principles of Nature) as in the be∣ginning, consumption and darkness must come before his Face, who ri∣deth in the Chariot of Nature (where∣in those glories are smitten in the third part) until the sounding of the sixth Angel on the great River EU∣PHRATES, which compasseth about the fourth part of the WORLDS,
over which the EAGLE hath pre∣vailed. XV. And though as those Angels stand manifest in the Heavens, they are se∣ven in number, according to the se∣ven forms of Nature, through which are sounded the Mystery of God's Works of Wonders from the seven Golden TRUMPETS; yet is their destroying power bound down in the four last forms only, in which the Ele∣ments of Nature have spheared into Corruption, for the discovery of the Lake of Fire, that is hidden in the great River EUPHRATES, from what is thence loosed. XVI. But the Witnesses hereof, are only two, manifested in each three Princi∣ples (of both Heavenly and Earthly being) in which the AIR is command∣ed,
until FIRE and WATER is be∣come united in its ANGEL, that hath one Foot on the Earth, and hath his other on the great Seas; for the An∣gel of the Waters, saith, It is done, but an Angel of the Fire, who con∣tinueth alwayes ministring before the ALTAR, hath touched my Tongue with a live Coal he hath brought from thence, wherein I am made able to declare of what he hath flung on the Earth. XVII. And beholding the seven Moun∣tains of the Earth, on which is setled the Foundations of that great City which reigneth over the Kings of the Worlds, in the in kindled Fire burning under its Foundations, I see terrible shakings that are yet to pass through the Worlds, & over all buildings there∣in, after the tenth part of the CITY is seen become fallen, in the assend∣ing
up of the Witnesses unto Heaven, in the sight of their Enemies, wherein the ten Horns of the BEAST shall hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with FIRE. XVIII. Then shall be seen the seven Horns of the LAMB, full of Eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, which do walk among the seven Golden Candlesticks; and the Books shall stand open, on which hath been put those seven Seals, that he may be known come into the Worlds, that holdeth in his right Hand a Crown of seven Stars, as seven golden Lamps burning before the Throne of God and the Lamb, and lighting the whole Earth with his Glory (in the form of the Pleiades) for the seventh Trum∣pet shall sound forth the Mystery of what is thus unsealed over the mighty deeps, which have filled the Worlds
XIX. And in the finishing of this great Mystery, all Nations of the Earth shall be gathered to their appointed place, that the Spirit and God of the World, may bear the wrath of Indignation of what is poured forth (on the frame of all created Princi∣ples into form) without mixture, which is the second Death, executed in the seven last Plagues, wherewith the se∣ven Golden Vials are filled, wherein God will appear in ten thousand of his Saints.
CHAP. IV. Describing the ground in Na∣ture, from whence the Wheels are moved about the frame of the WORLDS. XX. THe seven spirits of God, are mo∣ved about the frame of the WORLDS, according to what doth operate and work up the way and course he is manifest through in the Seven forms of Nature (which are become the Seven heads of the BEAST, and the Seven Mountains of the WORLD, on which the City is built wherein the WHORE doth sit exalted;) and therefore is God manifest (in the Spirit of Judgement)
in those Forms of Nature, that every thing may come forth tryed unde the motion of the WHEELS. XXI. But though the BEAST hath ta¦ken Head in these forms of Nature Nature is again returning to its firs subjection, in the utter consumption and destruction of the power of the Dragon, Beast and False Prophet (ou of those forms in Nature; for now are the Wheels moving over the grea River Euphrates, on which the trum¦pet of God hath sounded; and thence are loosed his destroying Angels which cause thunders and lightning in the Heavens. XXII. And the Clouds of Heaven are al∣ready tinctured, with that which A¦scendeth upward, to prepare its moti¦on in the Air, whence his appearance
is expected, who judgeth the Prince thereof, and casteth down the Ac∣cuser of the Just (from those Airy Heavens, wherein he hath been ex∣alted) though the Seven Forms of Na∣ture, which are moved about the hea∣vens of the Worlds, attend the first mover, wherein the Work of God is manifest in the Seven Spirits of Na∣ture. XXIII. For this center of the Inward WORLD, which was thus unmova∣ble, had a power in and over all that was movable and changeable, which became a cause in the motion of the WHEELS, that was over-ruled by the wisdom and power of the first mover, wherein all Glories of the FATHER, shined in the Firma∣ment of his POWER, in which he remained unalterable, and unchangea∣ble, the same, without any shadow
of turning or variation. XXIV. Yet is it only in Nature that God is become thus a cause of moveabili∣ty, because God is the unchangeable being of Love & Delight in REST, in the Center of all that is good; and Nature is that into which good and evil hath entered, from whence its TREE hath sprung up and doth grow, which the Creature (who is the cause of work and labour in God) hath fed on, that hath brought the sence of pangs and misery into the World, where is the worldly sorrow that worketh and bringeth under the power of Death, and all other afflictions they meet with in their way.
CHAP. V. Describing the Form and Order of the WHEELS in their MO∣TION. XXV. FOR God is the cause of nothing without NATURE, though in the Wheels there appeared two Moti∣ons, whereby the cause of moveability was kept from centering in the ground of Corruption and Mortality, under the power of which the Creature of God was thus fallen in a NATURAL Bo∣dy, through that which was sown in Weakness; therefore in what ever the Creature was betrayed under the power of its guidance, it was a CROSS to all proneness and adiction of Moti∣on,
that did arise from the ground of Corruption. XXVI. And about the CENTER, in which stood a Heart inflaming, was made a Diurnal Motion in the Wheels, which moved at a distance in two Rings of the inward Wheels, wherein the third and inward Principle, moved equally with the ground of Motion, from the first CEN∣TER; and the two outward Prin∣ciples of the inward World, acted according to what was formed in a third Principle, by which those three Principles came to manifest their CENTER in Nature. XXVII. But in the WHEELS, there was also an Annual Motion, that moved
round that which stood fixed in the Center, and this caused a ground without the Center (as it stood mani∣fest through the inward Motion) to be corruptible, and to Center under a power of Corruption, though in those inward Rings of the Wheels, there were kept and preserved a tin∣cture of the first Motion. XXVIII. Yet having let in another Tincture from the power of Corruption (under which the Worlds were labouring to Center) what ever came forward un∣der its motion, must again be brought back, into the sence and feeling of that which it reacheth after, through DEATH, to the cause of all labour and pangs, wherein the Body of Na∣ture standeth afflicted. XXIX. For there was neither East,
West, North, nor South, from the Cen∣ter, in the inward Rings of the Wheels, though it appeared to me in the ground, whereon I lay (for the behold∣ing of the Vision) that as the outward Rings in the Wheels were moved in a power of the four Winds of the Hea∣vens, the inward motion was from East to West, and the Wheels went side wayes in all courses of the World. XXX. In which the three Rings of the outward Wheels did move and were moved, according to the frame of the Worlds, wherein centered the Principles of the whole; but the in∣ward Wheels moved by reflection, the CENTER being unmoveable, where∣in two Rings only were discerned at a distance (in that inward Wheel) though in the Principles of each and both Worlds, there were moved about three Rings in each Wheel.
XXXI. And though in the outward Ring of the Inward Wheel (in its Diurnal Motion) the Heavens did move, and were moved, in what stood fixed to∣ward the CENTER, yet the out∣ward Ring of the outward Wheel, standeth  in the  distance of years, from the motion in the  as doth the inward Ring of  in∣ward Wheel, from the revolution of the Moon, in the Annual Motion of the Wheels: And in the second Ring of the outward Wheels, the Heavens were mo∣ved about, in their Annual Motion; at the same distance from the Center, as they were in the second Ring of the inward Wheel, in their Diurnal Mo∣tion.
CHAP. VI. Describing the MYSTERY of the sounding of the seven Golden TRUMPETS, and the seven THUNDERS, that are for the preparing a ground in which the Judgement of God is manifest. XXXII. ON the Ground and Principles of a third part of the Worlds, into which the DRAGON drew a third part of the Stars of Heaven af∣ter him, did five of these Golden Trum∣pets sound forth the Judgment of God, in what is loosed and unsealed from the BOOK of WONDERS in the Heavens, wherein the four
BEASTS were manifest each in their day, calling to come and see what lay slain under the ALTAR of God (in his Temple and House) wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars of Heaven did shine, through that which was smitten in its third part. XXXIII. And herein is discovered the seat of the BEAST in Nature, whose tor∣ment is awakened out of the bottomless Pit, though as yet the number of Horsemen and Riders do multiply on the Earth, through that which is awakened from the sounding of the sixth Trumpet on the great River EU∣PHRATES, in which hath been bound the four Angels (that were prepared according to the time in which stand∣eth the Execution of their destroying Power) in with-holding the Winds from blowing on the EARTH, as they are seen come up exalted on the
four Corners of the same, holding the four Corners of those Winds. XXXIV. Wherein each of those four Beasts, in the forms of Nature, recovereth six Wings, according to the six Spi∣rits of God, in which the seventh un∣changeable Spirit of Rest (in him) is begotten into the Creature and Crea∣tion, that are become his Workman∣ship; and they cover the living Crea∣tures, who day and night are crying HOLY unto the Lord and by the lifting up and letting down of their WINGS, is the whole Earth and Worlds darkned or inlightned with GLORY, XXXV. And the Mansions or twelve Houses of the Fathers GLORY in the Hea∣vens, have their form defended, with the WALL that is raised up on
its antient Foundations, wherein are twelve Pearls on its twelve Gates, and under it are the twelve Foundations, setled in the Refining Power, through which are to be brought other three parts of a new World, in its Heaven & Earth, in the destruction of a fourth part, over which the fourth BEAST hath ruled with the Face of an Eagle, who is come forth on his PALE HORSE, like unto Death, and Death and Hell follows him. XXXVI. Whose Power is by Famine, Pesti∣lence, and Sword, with WILD Beasts of Prey, in all that lives in, or moves on the GROUND and PRINCIPLES, over which the se∣ven THUNDERS are awakened to Thunder, from those Places wherein Life doth strive, to break forth and come into the CENTER of the crea∣turely being, where every Birth hath
its SIGNIFICATOR, and the twen∣ty four Wings of the four Beasts, are the Army of the HEAVENS, ac∣cording to what came forth first MA∣NIFEST in the four Wings of the FOWL, that was stretched forth over the LYON, in what strove to come up, under the four Winds of the HEAVENS, wherein the Hea∣vens contended.
CHAP. VII. Describing the MYSTERY of the four Beasts, in the seven Forms of NATURE, and of the Beast himself, who is the Eighth. XXXVII. FRom the THUNDERS in the Heavens, I beheld a prepared Ground, unto which the Gates of Eternity were opened; and from the Elemental being, in which four Gates were opened into the Worlds, whence strove the four Winds of the Hea∣vens, I beheld the coming forth of the four Beasts in the seven forms of Nature, wherein their Power was first manifest; after whom arose those
other four Beasts, in the dispersing a∣broad of the powers of Nature, through the plucking of the Wings from the LYON. XXXVIII. Wherein the Power of the RAM in Nature (who came forth first ex∣alted, through the plucking off the LYONS Wings, and dispersing a∣broad of the power of five Kings that were fallen) had his HORNS first broken, in the separated power of the Heavens, under the striving of their four Winds, and he is the last Power in Nature, under which the Heads of the Beast have been healed. XXXIX. For through the appearance of the ANGEL of God, in the forms of Nature, I beheld how the whole Earth was lighted with the Glory of that which is broken forth into
the Worlds; and there came unto me one of those seven Angels of God, who had the Golden Vials, that were filled with the seven last Plagues, even the wrath of the Lamb, ready to be poured forth on the wicked and ungodly world, and he talked with me, as doth a Man with his Friend, and said unto me, This is the Mystery of that first Beast thou sawest come forth with five Heads and nine Horns. XL. These are nine Kings, five against four, who served and were subject to one King twelve years, and in the thir∣teenth year they rebelled; and in the fourteenth year his power was again revived, in what had received that deadly wound, wherein was broken the first five Horns, from the fifth Head of the BEAST, whose Seat was in MALE, called ELAM in the Hebrew Tongue, which you read
backward, and his Name is KEDOR∣LEOMAR, in SHINAR of BA∣BYLON, where is the VOICE of an ANGEL, I-AM-RAPHEL, revealed in TIDAL (LAD it) KING of Nations. XLI. This therefore is the Mystery of all those Beasts, and of what thou hast seen come forth, according to the times in the Vision, for which it hath wrought; the LYON is the Heart of that Nature, in which the first ADAM was Created, from whence the RAM in Nature hath Head and Face, which is the first House among the Mansions in the Heavens, of the Father's Glory, and the CALF is the Neck and Throat of Nature, which is the second House of the Fathers MANSIONS in the Heavens, whence the scape GOAT took form, through the bended KNEES of
what descended from the Heavens, in the state of subjection, under which Nature was framed. XLII. And in those two first Houses of the Heavens (wherein the Glory of the Sun and Moon, of the Son of Man, in the FIRST ADAM was exalted) the fiery Heavens had tin∣ctured the forms of Nature, in the double Bodied being (through a se∣paration made between Day and Night) wherein the Man was op∣pressed, that bore the weight and burthen of the wrong in the Fall, on the shoulders of the created Body, over-ruled through its two great Lights, whereby his ARMS were spread abroad, as the appearance of his form, wrought in the Clouds of the Heavens, whence those Beasts did both ascend and descend.
XLIII. Which stood manifest on the EARTH, whence the HEE-GOAT ascended, through the Mans suffe∣rance, who had the face of the third Beast, among those forms in Nature, for the Arms and Shoulders of Na∣ture, is the third House of MANSI∣ONS in the Heavens (as the fourth BEAST in the forms of Nature, with the face of an EAGLE) wherein the four Angels are exalted on the Earth, in the sounding of those Golden Trumpets out of the TEMPLE, by their ANGELS in their forms of Nature.
CHAP. VIII. Describing the Ground in Nature, wherein other BEASTS took Form, then those FOUR in which the Creation of God was FIRST planted in its Government over the BODY, wherein Man hath a Being. XLIV. THe IMAGE of God, in which was the Mans Dominion, had power over all those Earthly FORMS in Nature; though as ADAM was created an earthly Man, he was of the Earth earthly; for that was first, which is earthly; and yet in the similitude he bore of his Maker, there was a Government settled, to rule and have
authority over the Nature of the BEAST (which made subject to Va∣nity, and a Power of Corruption) through a Generation and Generations that liked not to retain the KNOW∣LEDGE of God in their MINDS. XLV. Therefore did they change the Image of God into Gold and Silver, and four-footed BEASTS, and creep∣ing things, with Wood and Stone, and things graven out of the Invention of Man, which they have fallen down unto, and worshipped; because after they knew God (or rather were known of Him) this MYSTERY of Iniquity began to work HIDDEN∣LY, wherein they were given up to a reprobate sense, in the UNBELIEF of the Truth, that caused the Con∣demnation.
XLVI. And their DAMNATION slum∣bereth not, who believe a Lye, to the marring of that Form in which the MAN was an Image of his Maker: This therefore is prefigured forth to thee, that thou mayest apprehend the Generation of MEN on whom God hath set a Mark according to the IMAGE they bare, to distinguish them in their NATURE. And as the LION (whose Government is in the HEART of Nature) and CALF, whose government (in Nature) is the Neck and Throat of the untamed Will (that acteth the BODY) are the FIFTH and SECOND Houses of those Mansions from whence the SUN is moved, and wherein the MOON is EXALTED) so the RAM and HE-GOAT, who are the FIRST and TENTH Houses among the FORMS (in Nature) are those
BEASTS in Nature, wherein a falsi∣fied Glory entred those FORMS in which the MAN lost Dominion, though the Light of the SUN of his day was and is Exalted in that FIRST House, as it fell in the TENTH. XLVII. And therefore in the sinking State under which those forms of Creation continued, Light was Exalted in the Reins of Nature (which is the SE∣VENTH House) whence came forth and appeared the Face of that THIRD BEAST like a MAN, with the BALAN∣CES in his Hands, whereby every thing was weighed and tryed by just Measure; though under him lurked the Form of a Leopard or great Bear, with four wings of a Fowl on his Back, and through him sprung up FOUR notable HORNS on the HEAD of the GOAT, in the dispersing abroad KINGDOMS of the EARTH, under
the FOUR Winds of the HEA∣VENS. XLVIII. But in the dividing of the Hea∣vens, whence came to be exalted the Spirit of Sound and Tone, uttering its Voyce in the sound of seven golden Trumpets, as the WOLF or little BEAR, that hath for his Seat the Breast of Nature (which is the fourth House among the MANSIONS in the Heavens) got before the LYONS Face, who is the Heart of Nature, in that fifth House of Mansions, (wherein the SUN hath its seat) the Moon came to exalt her borrowed Light from that fourth House (which is become her seat) in the second House, (which is her House of Exaltation.)
CHAP. IX. Describing the Properties of the IMAGE in the FORMS of Nature, that fell in the WA∣TERS. XLIX. THe Head of the IMAGE, which was Gold, was the LYONS four first Golden Wings, wherein the strength of ASSYRIA was broken, the first time, in what was pluck'd from the LYON, according to that which fell in the WATERS; and the Silver Brest (which was the two Horns of the RAM in Nature) is the strength of the MEDES and PERSIANS, that were broken by the Power of GREECE, whereby BABYLON
spread abroad her Kingdoms (in the rising up of the little BEAR on the LYONS side) wherein was that second great LIGHT comprehended. L. But from the NORTH did he move about the Heavens through his TAYL, wherein Centred the Meri∣dian point thereof, holding in his Mouth those three Ribs that were ta∣ken out of his Side, in his rising up to devour much Flesh, Furthermore, said the Angel of God, The great BEAR or LEOPARD that thou saw∣est, is that in which a third part of the Stars of Heaven are comprehended, that have fallen unto the Earth, which is the brazen Belly of the IMAGE in the FORMS of Nature, even the Pow∣er of GREECE, in that which is dis∣persed under the Four Winds of the Heavens.
LI. This is a Power of the South Wind wherein the brass Belly of the Image remained bound down with an Iron Bond of the NORTH Strength, from which it could not be loosed (in the four destroying ANGELS of God) until that was ripened to the Day of Destruction, wherein the Wound of the BEAST had been healed up deceit∣fully, though three Horns were pluck∣ed up by the Roots, while the stumps of the IMAGE continued fallen in ASIA, for the discovering of the four Heads of the Beast, in which he bore the form of a Leopard or GREAT Bear; but the LITTLE Horn waxed strong, and became GREAT towards the four Winds of the Heavens. LII. For as I beheld the Throne of God placed in his Holy Habitation, the
Ancient of Dayes was sat thereon, wherein appeared his burning Wheels and the signs in the WATERY HEAVENS discovered that which rested in their TRIPLICITY from the Zodiack, whence those Houses of Mansions have their Constellations; And though the RAM in Nature had the first Form in the Fiery Triplicity, and was the first House of those twelve Mansions (as is the CALF the first Form in the Earthly Triplicity, and se∣cond House in those Mansions) yet through the WHEELS the HEAVENS and EARTH were moved toward a Change, throughout the seven forms of Nature in EACH Triplicity. LIII. Wherein the Lyon hath the Face of the first Beast among the FORMS in Nature, though in his fifth House that which shineth (from his Seat) is exalt∣ed in the Head and Face of the Ram.
But both the Created and Uncreated Beings, having their generated Forms in the Body of Nature, the first Form in the Airy Triplicity, hath the Face of an EAGLE (exalting that which is generated into the Double-Bodied-Being) to be his House, that is shelter∣ed under the Wing of Favour (in that fourth Beast) through whom Death strengtheneth those Accidents that are drawn from the FIRST Form in the WATERY Triplicity, from whence all changeable Courses do work up Life in the Brest of Nature, wherein the SPIRIT of the Creature doth move, which is the Candle of GOD, through which Glory is put forth in those borrowed QUALITIES of Light. LIV. Though from Barenness in the world∣ly Nature, wherein the Glory of the Virgin hath been stained, cancered &
crabbed Qualities have infected the Body, whereby it hath sprung up and grew, until from the second Form in the Earthly Triplicity, the VIRGIN (who hath sat in a dark place, even the Bowels of Nature, which is the sixth House in the Heavens) came to put off her night Robes for the Glory of the Birth exalted in the separation of all mixt Qualities, which is HEIR of everlasting Renown. LV. Yet in the Watery Triplicity, where in the Bodies Courses have been defi∣led, through that which hath lain se∣cretly lurking in the Members, where∣by the FORMS of Nature have pow∣er to generate an IMAGE of the Minds Delight, the Womb hath open∣ed to the Power of Death, and letting in Sorrow into that which is possessed in the Eighth House, whence the WORLDS are generated under a Power
of Corruptian; the Nature of the SCORPION stingeth in the Habita∣tion of that second Form (in the Wate∣ry Triplicity) through the Pleasure under which its Subjects are allured, for the multiplying of what is gene∣rated to secret content.
CHAP. X. Describing the MYSTERY of the Four Horses of four se∣veral Colours, on which the four ANGELS that are loosed, &c. are come forth exalted. LVI. THrough the coming forth of the Son of MAN, in the CLOUDS of Heaven, who was cloathed with a Rain-Bow, in which are all the colours of the Heavens in their pure Element, as the Powers of Nature became sub∣ject to the exalted of God, he rod on those CLOUDS that were dispersed abroad under the Four Winds of the Heavens, as on the Rain-Bow in the Firmament, whence every Angel of
God is seen in his Beauty and Glory, bending to the Son of his Love and Favour, through whom he manifest∣eth the Life of Delight, according to the source they possess and inhabit from the eleventh House of Mansions (in the third Form of the Airy Tripli∣city) like unto HORSE-men that guide the Chariot of Nature. LVII. For the preparing of which DAY in its time, those Goats have been suf∣fered to come forth imbodyed (in that which is loosed out of the bottomless Pit) whereby the Earth hath been co∣vered with Locusts, wherein pangs have rested on those Men that have the Mark of the Beast. Therefore saith the Angel of God, In that third Being in the FIERY Triplicity, wherein the form of the Son of Man is come forth exalted in the Clouds of Heaven, (through that which smiteth the
EARTHLY Triplicity in its third part among the Forms of Nature) the BOW-Man is riding on his White Horse, and over the White Clouds of the Heavens; he hath spread his Glory from the North, because of those flying Goats in his Way, whose ratlings are like the Chariot-Wheels of the FURI∣OUS Drivers. LVIII. And in the Watery Triplicity the burning Mountain continueth in fla∣ming from that which is cast into the Sea, which doth rage and swell be∣cause of the disquiet that is come into its part of the Triplicity (in that Watery Form) over whom the Glories of the Heavens do not shine in that third part, and wherein both Earth and Waters, and all that live there∣in, or move thereon, are smitten in the aforesaid third part, that resteth its torment on the seat of the BEAST,
into which Glory hath shined from the Heavens, in the operation of those Signs of the Times. LIX. From whence I see great Alterati∣ons and Changes, attending the WORLDS in their Generations; where wild BULLS of Bashan are reared up to push and devour each other, and from DAN there is in mine Ear the snorting of Horses, and ratling sound of the Chariot Wheels, like rumblings in the Air, hurling up and down, for REST from noise: And what is herein written, is of things past, present, and to come, which are all to be fulfilled in their place and order, (according to the Dayes and Hours for which the VISION doth work, and is made to speak) in what is narrowed to the Creaturely Capaciiy, through him that hath cut the Work short in Righteousness, that
is manifested throughout this la l and Age of the WORLD. LX. For from the great River EU∣PHRATES which compasseth about EUROPE (in its fourth part and Quarter) is the destroying Power of God loosed, for the Execution of Di∣vine Justice on those Men that have the Mark of the Beast, on whom the torment of those Months is accom∣plished; to the finishing the work in which Death hath Dominion over that Nature wherein the WORLDS are imbodied in its Quarters; therefore is the time near at hand, wherein the Worlds will suffer very great shakings, and Earthquakes will break forth in divers parts thereof, to the overturn∣ing of many Foundations, and chang∣ing of Laws and Governments of Men, (whereby coldness of Spirit and dead∣ness
hath over-taken the Multitude in a dull and secure state) and after∣wards will follow a great Power of HEAT, in kindling its FLAMES of DESTRUCTION through∣out the BODY of the ELE∣MENTS.
CHAP. XI. Describing the MYSTERY of Time for which the Vision is set, &c. LXI. Concerning the TIME for which the VISION is set, it is now near the expiration of one hundred and twenty days, since the finishing of the fifteen years, wherein I beheld the prevail∣ing of the Waters over the Earth (in the fifth year that I saw the fall of the Worlds, under a Power of Corrup∣tion) through which the Waters be∣came smitten in their third part, un∣der which the WORLDS stand divi∣ded (in their four Quarters) in the dis∣persing abroad of the FLOODS, on
which the People were moved and tossed up and down, as the Waters fell BACKWARD into their four Heads by which every thing hath been tryed and carried into its appointed Place, through the Tempests and swelling Waves of awakened Storms that are come into the Worlds. LXII. For from those TWELVE Years wherein the Nations of the Earth were subject to one KING, a Spirit of Rebellion against the Power of the Beast, entered four Kings of the four Winds of the Heavens, who fell be∣fore five in the Vale of Siddim (that is full of slime-pits) whereby the re∣mainder of those that escaped were reduced to the Mountains on their flight; yet the thirteenth year (which was the year of their Rebellion) was it in which the Power of the BEAST stood dispersed in the striving of the
four WINDS of the Heavens on the great River EUPHRATES, out of which their Power is again revived and loosed; though from the Seat of the Beast (which is the BOTTOM∣LESS-PIT, from whence proceed∣ed those living Creatures called LO∣CUSTS, that I beheld in the Vision, in the form of Goats, &c.) Life again entred that, on which rested the First Wound in Nature. LXIII. And as the LEOPARD or Great BEAR came forth manifest, with four Wings on his Back, like the Wings of a FOWL, his Kingdom stood disper∣sed abroad the Earth and Worlds, and in the place of the Great Horn of the RUFF GOAT of GREECE, which was broken by the power under which the Worlds stood divided, those Four notable Horns were seen, that became exalted towards the four Winds of the
Heavens, which are the Power of four KINGS, and four Heads of the Beast that did spring out of the first Breach (whose Kingdoms are not so mighty as the first) wherein the Little Horn came forth between the Eyes of the Goat, &c. LXIV. And that little Help through which the fifth Head in the midst of four (on which sprung up five Horns that were broken, and fell in the first King) re∣ceived that deadly Wound, &c. is a Power in the North Wind of the Hea∣vens, under which the Wound is be∣come again healed up, that is, the Feet of the Image, which is partly to break, and partly to be broken, for it is both Iron and Clay: And this is the King of the NORTH, who may be ma∣nifest in the Person of a Man of fierce Speech, and dark Countenance (as he is indeed manifest through many in
whom a Power of the North Winde hath been dignified, as Kings in that REGION) wherein is a cold bind∣ing Climat of dark Air. LXV. For since the fourteenth year where∣in the South Winds of the Heavens were reproved and corrected for their Rebellion (in those four Kings whose Kingdoms were enlarged in the dispersing abroad of the Power of four, that sprung out of one, who re∣tained not the ARM) that which grew up towards its tryal by FIRE, was separated into its Mystery, in what was effected through the fif∣teenth year, from whence the Worlds have been warned one hundred and twenty days, (according to the days of the Life of Man) of that destruction and desolution, by the over-flowing Scourge) wherein the Waters have exercised a Dominion that is ome un∣der
the smiting of the four Winds of the Heavens. LXVI. And wherein both the HEADS and HORNS of the Beast are KINGS and POWERS in Nature that have their Form in and on Men; yet the King himself of that North Wind is not the Person of any ONE Man, but a Pow∣er in One as well as in Many, that are wholly under the Dominion of the Beast, or that have his Mark, &c. ac∣cording to the Power of the Constella∣tions, under which the period of all Signs in the Heavens are moved, and do work over such that have their concern therein, in a mystical and spiri∣tual sence to all NAMES in Nature; but now is it manifest that the MY∣STERY of Time is compleat in the Figure of the FORMS in Nature, wherein every thing that is either past, present, or to come, remain∣eth
MEASURABLE and DI∣STINGUISHABLE, accor∣ding to that Spirit under which all Powers in Nature doth WORK, and and whereby all that is wrought (in its BEING) is come forth into FORM. LXVII. Yet Nature that is Creatable, suf∣fereth through all Changes and RE∣VOLUTIONS that are MA∣NIFEST on and in the BODY of ELEMENTS, subject to Va∣nity, and a Power of Corruption, both the Good and the Evil (of which the MAN hath tasted in the exercise of his Sence, according to the operation of Qualities that are predominate in his BIRTH) though nothing is absolute (in time and place) to the MAN, but in the Power under which his Life is concerned, operating in all the faculties of Nature (in which is the
holy and glorious Land) whence ti∣dings shall come out of the North, and from the East, which will trouble the NATIONS and Inhabitants of the Earth (who are yet to be disquieted and unsettled from their Lees) where∣by Destroyers have been suffered (in the Way) that are come on the Holy People, where they are scattered in the North Country situated between the Seas.
CHAP. XII. Describing the MYSTERY of Time, according to the end for which the FORMS of Na∣ture came forth into Manifesta∣tion, on which Consumption and Desolution hath over-taken the Abominations, for which the WORLD is made desolate in this last day and Age, &c. LXVIII. AS to the Time for which the VI∣SION is made to speak, it is from and of the Beginning, and to the End of Time and Place, whereby eve∣ry thing standeth manifest (under a Figure) according to the Days and
Years under which all FORMS in Nature do labour and work, which have their Hours and Months in the measure of Time, &c.) wherein the Frame and Form of the Work of God (in the power of Creation) was laid in the Line of ADAM (in his Genera∣tions) answerable to the Years of his Life, in which the Days of the VISI∣ON do manifest the whole WORK, raised up from that in which it was sown. LXIX. For, as from the Creation of the Worlds (according to the most just and true accompt of Men) is three thousand years to the finishing of the TEMPLE which SOLOMON built, (in which the first Glory of the Work of God stood manifest) and from the finishing of that Temple (which was built and erected in seven years) to the Birth and Incarnation of the Son of
Man (through the Power of the SE∣COND ADAM, a quickning Spirit, &c.) was nine hundred and thirty years; so doth all things stand manifest (in NUMBER) under the same figure in the coming forth of the WORLDS, which in seven days was brought into form, according to the sence of the first Man ADAM, through whom the Works of GOD was comprehended in Natural Body, wherein the seed of Life was known, by which his li∣ving Soul became apprehensive, in the breathings of the SPIRIT, and Breath of GOD. LXX. Whereby NATURE multiplied in its Forms, according to the course they were subjected under, in that Dominion, wherein the MAN was made LORD over all the Works of GOD's Hands, answerable to the sensibility that was wrought up
through the seventh Form, descending; in which HENOCH continued imbo∣dyed as many years as are days in the year; and all the days of YEARS wherein Adam continued imbodyed in that first Form, are reckoned nine hun∣dred and thirty, which is two years and seven months, according to the ac∣compt of Time, wherein the Forms of Nature do stand numbred (in a figure) under which they are multiplied (a year for a Day.) LXXI. And concerning the Time for which the VISION is made to speak (in what is formed for a conclusion of the matter) and wherein the Nature of that which worketh standeth figured forth to the bringing the WHOLE under its Day of Tryal; as it was one thousand six hundred fifty and six years from the Creation of the Worlds (into time and place) to the over-flowing
Scourge that followed them therein, and over-took the Forms whererein they were created with the Deluge, and from thence until the dayes wherein Moses became manifest in flesh, &c. was seven hundred seventy and seven years, who continued there∣in one hundred and twenty years; so it was twenty eight Jubilies from the be∣ginning of those Services, which rest∣ed under the Goverment of JO∣SHUA that succeeded him, in that sixth YEAR to the anoynting of CHRIST to his Office, that put an end to all those Offerings and Sacrifi∣ces, &c. thus typified out in JOSHUA, which signifieth JESUS, or SAVI∣OUR. LXXII. From which time there is past the number of YEARS in thirty two Ju∣bilies and thirty two years, to this year of the Worlds accompt, 1665. And
as from the finishing of the Temple, in which those Services stood accepted under the Law, &c. to the destroy∣ing thereof by Fire, was four hundred twenty and three years; and after six years was the King of BABYLON established in his Kingdom and Throne which made him say, Is not this great BABEL which I have built? so unto that eleventh year wherein the HOLY ONE and the WATCHER came down to shew him the end of those Visions of the MONARCHIES of the Worlds, and the state into which he should be driven (among Beasts of prey) was four hundred thirty and four years, which is the number of sixty and two weeks of days.
A Conclusion To the whole WORK. I. BUt in the time before-mentioned Life was prolonged in the Govern∣ment over ISRAEL, in its dying state, as it received in the sence of the Wound come on a third part of its Glory that
was smitten, and the shadow of the SUN went back ten degrees on the Dyal in which the forms of Nature stand manifest (according to the Sig∣nificator of the Birth concerned there∣in, wherein the SUN hath recovered the first point of ARIES, from the tenth day of the first month, in this sixteenth year; for from the period of fifteen years, the Pangs and Sufferings that came into the WORLDS in their third part, hath rested in the Seat of the Beast, on those MEN that have received his Mark. II. And after the MOON hath pas∣sed her Course through the Signs in the ZODIACK (of an Inward World) wherein she will be descend∣ing towards the House of her Exalta∣tion, in the year One thousand six hun∣dred sixty and six, and will renew her Entrance through ARIES, on the
concluding of the YEAR; the effect of that which hath rested on those Men who are come under the smiting of the Beasts Power for those five Months wherein pangs have proceeded from his Seat, will be seen in the WORLDS; for from the conclu∣ding of that year is thirty days, where∣in the SUN hath his Passage through LEO, the Heart of a Lyon, which is his own House, who entered the first point of Cancer, (wherein the Sum∣mer Quarter is manifest) nineteen days before the concluding of this year, 1665. III. And as the number of years for which Jerusalem was rebuilt the se∣cond time, was sixty two Weeks, un∣til the MESSIAH was anoynted to his Office, after the finishing of the se∣cond Temple, in seven weeks, which was for a Week, and in the midst of that
Week was the Prophet and SON of GOD cut off, (though not for his own transgressions) so it was sixty two weeks more: or an hundred thirty four days, from the birth of JESUS, that great PROPHET, through whom the par∣tition Wall was broken down be∣tween two Nations, to the thirtieth year of the Reign and Exaltation of the Kingdom of Mystery BABYLON, over the Kings of the Earth. IV. Whose King spoyled the Glory of JERUSALEM, and led away Cap∣tives from thence, taking unto him∣self the VESSELS of Silver and Gold that were in the House of the Lord, in the nineteenth year of his Reign over Assyria, and in the twenty fifth year of his Establishment in Media and Persia, saw the four Kings in whom the Image of Glory became manifest in the WOLDS, while the STUMPS
thereof remained bound down in the Earth with an Iron BAND, after se∣ven times had passed over his HEAD, which was wet with the Dew of the Night. V. Wherefore from the time wherein the dayly Sacrifice was made to cease (after the restoring of that breach on the Walls of Jerusalem) to the finishing of the out∣ward Court of the Holy City, (which was given into the hands of the Gen∣tiles to tread under foot those forty & two months, or an hundred and forty two days) being the con∣cluding of a time, times, and the dividing of times (which is seventeen hun∣dred
and fifty days, wherein the Woman hath been nourished in the place that is there provided for her, for the space of one thousand two hundred and three∣score days, that the two Witnesses have appointed them to finish and fulfil their PROPHECY in sackcloth, in which time the Earth doth help the WOMAN. It is now eighteen days since the Command∣ment of God came forth for the re∣building and restoring those outward Courts of the CITY. TIME on a Prophetical account, wch is the Lan∣guage of the holy Scripture is five hundred years, accor∣ding to the life of Noah, before he be∣gan to build his Family in the EARTH (which was saved in the Ark of God)
and so long is ac∣counted the days of Shem, after the Flood of Wa∣ters, as the mysti∣cal Number in which is contain∣ed ten Jubiles of years under the Law. VI. And after thirty one days it shall be finished, then shall be a WEEK to re∣new the Zeal of God, and expiate sin, (to the sealing and binding down the
power of the WICKED for ever∣more) and in the midst of that Week those Witnesses shall seal their Testimo∣ny concerning the Life of the Lord of all Glory in Heaven and Earth, who hath been crucified, and lain slain in the streets of that great City, spiritually cal∣led Sodom and Egypt, but after three days and a half (which is the conclu∣ding of the 1290 days) they shall be seen to ascend up into Heaven in the sight of all their ENEMIES. VII. For it is now eighteen dayes since the WOMAN hath regained a sence of her deliverance from her great Captivity (in that WILDERNESS-State) in which the forty two months of her travel are expired, and the Birth is brought forth in the EARTH, which hath been preserved and delivered from the fury and rage of the great red Dragon (by the Floods of Water which he hath cast out of his BELLY after
her) in the one thousand four hundred, and forty and four thousands that are found standing on Mount Zion, with their Harps harping, but until the end of two days the Judgment of God set up in ISRAEL shall quicken the sealed number of Gods chosen and holy Ones, who have remained as dry Bones in the Valley of Jehosaphat, where the spirit of God hath breathed on the slain, that from the third day will be found to live in his sight, to seal the testimony of that birth, which hath thirty days more to ac∣complish its growth, into the power by which it is anoynted to finish that great Work, in that Week wherein the dead are made able to stand on their Feet, by the sound of the seventh and last Trump. VIII. And he that hath WISDOM, let him count the time, and number those days, from whence the number of the BEAST, (which is the number of
a MAN) is compleat DCLXVI, for from that day will the four destroying Angels of God stand loosed out of the great River EUPHRATES, accord∣ing to the hour, day, month, and year, for which they were prepared, which after a month (wherein those five months will be expired) will leave se∣ven months for the Dead to bury their Dead, in the concluding of the year, wherein Destruction is come forth a∣gainst the WICKED. IX. Therefore count thou from the year 1656, wherein the Devil did exercise his power for ten days, by ca∣sting many into Prison, since the expiration of the WOMANS Tryals, and sore TRAVEL, that the forty days wherein the Seed of the Woman was left to be persecuted and tried by the fury and rage of the Devourer and his Angels (that great Red DRAGON,
will make way for the power of God to be glorified, after the third day, in ten thousand of his SAINTS; for from the expiration of those months (wherein the striving continued be∣tween two Nations) the King of BA∣BYLON (who had looked into the Glory of the Temple which God hath built in Israel, wherein are many goodly Vessels of Gold and Silver) hath been letted from spoyling and laying utterly waste the HOUSE, in which are ap∣pointed those rich Treasuries about his Sanctuary. X. Yet the Daughter of the NORTH suffereth Oppression under a strange KING, unto whom the QUEEN of the SOUTH is joyned, to corrupt their Seed; though unto them the Mystery of that which pertaineth to the KINGDOM of GOD is opened (in those that run to and fro to in∣crease
in knowledge,) and from the extirpation of the fifteen years, from whence the WORLD hath been warned one hundred and twenty days, and wherein the EXECU∣TION of that which was detained from the Earth and WORLDS (in their third part) to the prolonging of Life in the Government of Nature, in which ISRAEL had their choice is to be MANIFEST, the sub∣stance of what standeth in the end of time and place, which is near to be revealed. XI. Therefore for the purging forth the Sin of MANASSEH, through whom the HIGH ALTARS were erected in both Courts of the City (for those fifty five days wherein the num∣ber seventy was accomplished in the concluding of fifteen years, which discovered the Judgement that revi∣ved
and was come on the Worlds, that on whom the Image of JEALOUSY came forth manifest;) forty five days are yet determined from the midst of the WEEK wherein the Testimony of GOD will receive its everlasting Seal, and it shall be the Joy of many to understand the Mystery of what is concluded in one thousand two hundred and ninety days; but blessed are those that live & attain to the end of those eighty five days, which are the concluding of one thousand three hundred thirty and five dayes, from those ninety five days before the Sa∣crifice was offered up, (wherein the ROMANS obtained their Conquest over JUDEA, and throughout ASIA, in which the Jews were scat∣tered) which was sixty two days be∣fore the BABE was brought forth, through whom it became accepted.
XII. For from the Conception and Birth of the MAN-CHILD, through whom the LIGHT of GOD broke forth, with which the NATIONS of the EARTH, and REGIONS of the WORLDS, that have sat un∣der the SHADOW of Death, are ENLIGHTENED, on whom is come the GLORY of GOD to the GENTILES. Their number is fulfilled and compleat, wherein TIME and TIMES are past, and HALF A TIME is divided (in those Figures 1750) and yet the EXPIRATION of those SIXTY TWO Weeks, wherein the GENTILES had power to erect their GLORY in the OUTWARD COURTS of the CITY, in which the holy BUILDINGS were defaced for the FORTY TWO MONTHS,
is accomptable from the TIME wherein was brought forth a TES∣TIMONY of that LIFE in which the DAYLY SACRI∣FICE (under the LAW) was made to cease.
THE MEASURE OF TIME: Ballancing all Actions in the Hand of the Angel. I. THus saith the Angel of God, Seal up the Vision according to the ap∣pointed time, for which it is set and is made to speak: For in the fifth month called JULY, (wherein JULIUS CAESAR was made the first Dictator in ROME, will be the finishing of that
Roman Monarchy, in the year 666; and a great PRINCE will fall in Eu∣rope in the first month, according to the expiration of the Prophecy of the two Witnesses, who then will put off their Robes of Sackcloth, and they will stand clothed in WHITE Garments, where∣in the sixty two Weeks, that the Power of the Gentiles prevailed, will disco∣ver the Mystery of DAYS in the number of Years that the Beast esta∣blished his Throne, in what went be∣fore the Face of the God and Lord of all Glory in Heaven and Earth. II. And in the sixth month, called Au∣gust, (wherein Augustus Caesar was made Consul) that Imperial Throne will be made subject to a Power of the Kings of the East; but number thou a month of years, according to the days of the year, whereby the VISION is made to speak forth the
Mystery of those forty two years, wherein the Seat of his Imperial Dig∣nity was exalted, and then propose thy sayings before the Wise, count∣ing from the Creation of the Worlds, in the Generation of ADAM, that which standeth figured forth in the Mystery of the Number 62. according to the WEEKS in which the Power of God wrought in the work of Re∣storation. III. But from the FLOOD of WA∣TERS which prevailed over the Earth, are fifty two Generations of men, to the birth of him in whom that work of Restoration standeth manifest, which are the Number of Weeks in the Year, through whom the Worlds have multiplied that which is come forth in time and place: And from the days of Abraham, whose Seed he took on him, rather then the nature of Angels,
are forty two Generations, every Gene∣ration signifying the Change that is come into the WORLDS, through the operation of the Moon over the Body of Nature, wherein the Woman hath stood afflicted, in her Seed, for the destroying of that which corrupt∣eth the way and courses under which the Worlds are generated, until all things become changed into ETER∣NITY, and the everlasting Body re∣cover its first beauty and glory, through all those Revolutions and Changes that are come into the World. IV. And in the beholding of the glo∣ry of the ANGEL of God (while he thus talked with me) I saw his Eyes sparkle like flames of FIRE, and he gave forth his Testimony con∣cerning the Covenant of God, that is confirmed with many and great
Nations, ratified in the BLOOD of that Life which hath entered the WITNESSES of GOD, who are made able to seal their Testimony herein; after which followeth an ut∣ter consumption on all the Enterprises of the ENEMY, wherein the end of Time will finish the glory of God in the destruction of that Spirit, in which the abomination of Desolation hath wrought in a Mystery, and the consummation will make the Worlds desolate in the forms of Nature, that will come into dissolution, for the re∣covering Beauty in the Image of the first and last Element, like unto the Glassy Sea of Transparent Glory, out of which the Power of God will shine in subjected Nature. V. For the KING of BABYLON, who hath seen into the glory of the House of God, wherein are many
goodly Vessels, shall not be able to remove thy Diadem (O thou afflicted Daughter of a Land which God is lay∣ing waste!) out of the place wherein GOD will settle his Delight in the midst of thee, until the transgressions of those that have sought to bear rule over thee, by rigor and const aint is fully ripened, and come to its end wherein God will purge forth all ini∣quity out of his own HOUSE and TEMPLE, on which Judgement is first begun; and thou that hast been tributary to KINGS of a strange Land, fear not though thou art tos∣sed up and down, for thou art not forsaken, and God will comfort thee in his due time. VI. Who is come to lay all thy stones in fair colours (though the House of God hath suffered defacement in its first and primitive beauty) but the Glory of the
later House shall be greater then the Glory of the first; for thy Gates are CARBUNCLES, and thy Windows are AGATES, and thy inward PARLOUR is paved with LOVE; and when I look unto thy Galleries, I behold crowned KINGS rejoycing in the upper ROOMS, and the best Wine is kept until now (because of the last Glory of him that is bringing into the Wine-Cellar) in exchange of FLAGONS, with which the sick of Love hath been stayed. VII. And from the Feast in the Wilder∣ness, wherein was a Table spread, and FAT things prepared (MAR∣ROW and WINE from the lees well refined) he is bringing to the WED∣DING and LAST SUPPER of the Marriage of the LAMB, where are all the Varieties in the Banquetting
House, and his Banner over them is LOVE: Speak that my Soul may be refreshed, and keep thou no longer silence, O my Beloved! And as the VISION receiveth Voyce, let it testi∣fie of thy Authority in the Heart, by that which is ready to be fulfilled. VIII. For the DAY is come, and yet cometh, that the Power of God will so appear and break forth through his chosen VESSELS (in whom he taketh delight to manifest his good pleasure) that nothing shall be able to stand before it, and obstruct the WAY thereof; but IRON BARS and BOLTS shall be broken and snapt asunder, as a Thred of Flax, and PRISON DOORS shall fly open be∣fore them that dwell in the power in which God is enlarging the Hearts of the Poor and Upright; yea, great Seas
shall be divided, and stand on heaps, when they move forward, and the Wa∣ters therein shall be dried up, for the KINGS of the East to pass over. IX. And there shall be no need of out∣ward Laws of Men to restrain Vice and Wickedness, neither shall any co∣vet high Places of Renown, and condi∣tions of that State unto whom Trust in Government is reposed; but rather shall say, In my House is neither bread nor cloathing: make me not a Healer, nor let not the breach of Ruines rest un∣der my Hands, for I came out of Prison, and have the Garments of Captivity; how then can I govern Nations, but like unto a Child? And wo be unto that People, because of a KING in Wo∣man, that setteth the Beggar on horse∣back, while the PRINCE doth walk on his Feet; yet he will raise up the
Poor from the Dunghil, and exalt him of low degree, when the Image of God doth so appear and break forth on the Heads of his Beloved and Cho∣sen, that it shall be able to raise a Wit∣ness in the worst of Men. X. But under the Anger and Fury thereof, they shall not be able to stand, though it hath not any other compulsive Power, but what is exerci∣sed in the Conscience, because it will either cast out or conquer the Unclean Spirit that acteth evil, and detaineth Right from the Oppressed, or destroy the MAN that remaineth joyned thereto, though it delighteth not in the Destruction of Creatures, or to be avenged on the WORKMANSHIP of GOD; but is constrained by the necessity of a LAW in Nature, under which Divine Justice seeketh to be
magnified, when the patience of God hath discovered the end of the work of his Spirit, which doth all to praise him, even by his own Work out of the Mouth of the Babe. XI. Which is the Sword in Gods Mouth, and Breath of his No∣strils, the Word that proceedeth from the holy Lips, whereby the Nations shall be consumed and destroyed, that stand in his way, and remain in opposition to his Power, because he is a great and mighty KING and GOD, above all LORDS, that are many in the Earth, who wil conquer and destroy the Power of DEATH,
and remove the GRAVE into the Land of forgetfulness, that his Will may be done in Earth as in Heaven, and his Work ef∣fected on the BODY of Na∣ture, in both outward and inward WORLDS, through the power of Redemption and Restoration of all created Principles in Nature, unto their first Beauty and Glory, where is no more SEA, but the SEA of pure Water, transpa∣rent, in the reflection of its Ele∣ment. XII. Before which time there shall be seen many signs and Wonders
in the Clouds of the Heavens, and the work of God will appear and break forth from thence; and in that Power shall a People whom God is gathering to him∣self from the ends of the Worlds, dwell for evermore, and the firmament of both outward and inward World, shall be filled with Stars, that remain fixed in their glory and luster, as Morning-Stars that sing together, and Sons of God that shout for joy; and out of all the Glory, Pleasure, and Profit of the Worldly Spirits Inte∣rest, their Hearts shall be re∣deemed, and from the Allure∣ments of the same shall be found dayly dying, and then dead;
whereby they will be the Terror of the NATIONS, when in the power of God, (who hath kept the Creature poor, and low, and weak, that God alone might inrich the Soul in his due time) the Life ariseth in glory, in that sence of Poverty of SPIRIT, from whence the Power that is able to make many Rich, breaketh forth. BLESSED, BLESSED, and Everlastingly HAPPY therefore are all those that wait for, and throughly believe in, the redeeming Power of the Work of God by this Spirit that is broke forth, and come into the
Worlds, to the destruction of that Evil One, the Man of Sin. Lord, Let thy Will be done, yet ha∣sten thy WORK, to cut it short in RIGHTEOUS∣NESS, wherein thy Name may be exalted in Mercy, that delighteth not in the destructi∣on of Creatures, and Souls of Men. Come quickly, saith my Soul, that causest Joy in thy holy Way. Amen and Amen. THE END.
