B235 12256015 57489
A TRUE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM VIENNA, September the 2d 1683. N. S. By an Eminent English Officer under the Duke of Lor∣raine, to his Friend in London, Declaring the rasing the SEIGE and the Total Overthrow of all the Turkish Army. Dear Friend, I Cannot but think it will be grateful News to all Christen∣dom to hear of the Overthrow of the Turkish Army, therfore I make bold to send you this Letter to let you, and my Friends in England understand, as well as of my self, the preservation of a great part of Christendom, from the fury, rage and threatning Ruine, of that implacable and universal Enemy the Turk, who under the Command of the Grand Visier, with a very powerful Army, consisting of near an Hundred and Fifty Thousand men, had a very considerable time seiged the Imperial City of Vienna; for the relief of which the Emperour had con∣federated all the Friends and Allyes he could in all the adj Territories, among which indeed I must say the chiefest was the King of Pland, whose Conduct and Valour had been sufficiently proved against the Turks, by the several considerable overthrows he hath given them, in Defence of that small Kingdom of Poland, and together with him the Dukes of Bavaria, Saxony, and others of the Princes; of the Empire had joyned as they were able to bring up their Forces so that in effect, they amounted 80000, Fighting men, the King of Poland commanded in Chief, and the Duke of Lorrain with him led the main Body. The Elector of Bavaria and Prince Waldecke Commanded the right Wing, and the Elector of Saxo∣ny and Duke of Saxe Lawenburg the Left. And thus we marched on to try what could be done, the King of Poland having desired First, that he might be a little acquainted with the posture of the Enemy, to that pur∣pose drew out a considerable party of Horse, and marched on till he came within view of their Leaguer, the Army, especially of Horse, follow after with all diligence and Expedition, so that the Turk, having by his Scout
and Spies Intelligence, that there was a powerful Army approaching him, he made hast out of his Trenches, dreading, great Opposition, especially because he was informed of a strong body of the Bours of the Country, who had gathered to an Head not far from him, Now indeed these poor people having been so long oppressed, and driven from their Habita∣tions by the Turks, ever since they came before Vienna, hearing of the Conjunction of so many good Christian Princes, drawing towards Vienna to relieve it, thought it was now time, not to hide themselves any longer in Holes, and therefore addressing themselves to some old Commanders, who were in an equal condition with themselves, they joyned themselves to the Forlorn-Hope of the Christian Army, and so marched towards the Enemy, ho supposing these the greatest Force coming upon him, sent pre∣sently a py to dissolve them, which fell with such Violence upon these poor Men, but half armed, and at the First worsted them, and as is sup∣posed destroyed above 1500 on the place; but just at the same Instant the King of Poland, and the others, with a full Body of resolute Horse, fell vi∣olently upon the Turks Army, who by this time had clearly left their Tren∣ches, and fell upon them with that Conduct, valour and resolution, espe∣cially upon the Janisaries, that they were soon disordered, and in a short time became a Prey to the Sword, by which means the Turks main Strength and relyance was quite disabled, and all the rest, who were very numerous, being now bravely assaulted on all hands, (for by this time the Bours, who had before suffered, some little discomfeiture, by the conduct and advice of their Leaders had rallyed and made considerable Oppositi∣on) submitted to a General defeat. Tho I mention onely the conduct of that Heroick King of Poland, whose Honour can never be enough ap∣plauded, yet famous was the valour of the Duke of Lorrain, as also seve∣ral Princes of the Empire, whose Catalogue would swell my Letter to an unpleasing length. It is not computed to be a less Number of the Turks slain than 100000, amongst which is the Grand Visier himself, and so many of the Janisaries, that 'tis beleived there will hardly escape an Hundred of them to carry the News to Constantinople, to comfort the Grand Signiour, the pursuit is violently Prosecuted, and all the passages warily Guarded. There are 700, of the Turks, Cannons and 60000, Tents taken and inumerable taken Prisnors. In the Grand Visiers Camp was found 2 Millions of Dollors, and his Tent computed to be worth 40000 l. The King of Poland had been gone 7 hours in the pursuit of them, and not return'd at the Writing this Letter. The Christian Army has not lost as is computed above 3 or 4000, Men, among whom is the Duke of Saxonys Brother and the Town is in an entire liberty. This News arived by the French Post late on Saterday Night, and on Sunday Morning two Mails arived from Flanders, in which the Letters Mension the Turks have received a great Overthrow, and that Bonfires had been made and Publick Thankes offered in that Country, for the Vitory of the Christian Army against the Turks before Vienna, it being most certain that all Letters agree the City is Relieved and the Turks have quitted the Seige, being forc'd with considerable loss so to do. Not without great loss on the Christians side of which every Minnuit a more perticuler Account is ex∣pected. Your most Loving Friend and Servant B. W. LONDON, Printed for John Cox, at the Blew-Ball in Thames street over against Baynards-Castle. 1683.
