B410 R5497 12190844 55864
THE DOCTRINE OF FREE-GRACE, NO DOCTRINE OF LICENCIOUSNESSE. OR, That Gods Free Unconditionall pardon∣ing of Sinne, is the best way to Mortifie the Power of Sinne in Believers. Asserted and Cleared, By Edward Bagshawe Student of Ch. Ch. LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller for the Author, and are to be sold by the Booksellers in Pauls Church-yard. 1662.
THE PREFACE. AMong those many False and Dangerous Opinions, which in this Age are let loose upon us; there is none that is either more De∣structive of the True Nature of Christian Religion, or more likely to be imbraced by some seemingly zealous and devout men, than the Doctrine of Free-will: whereby the Grace of God is rendred either altogether Needlesse, or at best only a Coadjutor and partial Assistant to Mens Salvation. Were not men Naturally willing to follow that which serves to puff them up, and begets an opinion in them, that they are like Gods: I should wonder how the Opinion of Free-will could ever finde any Learned Assertour; since the Reasons against it, ever upon a Philosophical account, are such as no Wit of man is able to answer. For the subordination of Causes, and the Necessity that every Effect, should have a Cause, which did produce it, is so strong an Argument, that the Will of man is subject to the enfor∣cing influence of the Causes which move and determine it; that the most Learned of the Heathen, did upon this score altogether re∣ject Free-will; and yet this supposed. Fatality in every Action, did not at all lessen or abate their strict adherence to, and prosecu∣tion of Virtue: None having been more famous in this kinde than the Stoicks, which were the Known Assertors and Maintainers of Necessity.
But without entring into any such kind of Dispute, the Apostle having already forbidden us to medale with things which we have not seen, and it being according to him plain folly to affirm too positively about things we know not: I shall not scruple to admit that, as to things of meerly Civil Conment, God hath endued the will of every man, with a Liberty  justify himself; and that we are not so tied up by the Concurrence of Causes, but that a man hath power over his own Will, to embrace or to refuse any thing tendred to him, with or without Reason, as he himself pleases. While I say I am content to admit this, my meaning is not that I understand how this can be done (for I must professe it is to me altogether unintelligible) yet because it contradicts no Article of Faith, and likewise serves best to demonstrate the Equi∣ty of Humane Laws, which are all founded upon that supposition; I think it altogether a Needlesse thing to dispute about Free-will in Moral Actions, and a very Absurd thing to deny it. Since in matters which are capable of Contrary Reasonings, to follow the Ʋncontradicted and Ʋniversal Assent of Mankind, is much more Safe and Prudent, than to tread in New paths; there being but little difference, as to the Effect, between an Apparant Error, and a Suspected, because Ʋnnecessary Truth. But how desirous soever I am to comply with the Common Pro∣lepsis and Inbred Notion of Free-will, as to Humane Actions; yet as to the things of God, I must altogether deny it. For it is so clear, That the Things of God, none can understand, and con∣sequently not Practice, but the Spirit of God, and those, to whom that Spirit makes them both Plain and Easie; that the A∣postle urgeth that Sentence, not as a Truth then newly discovered to him, but as a Principle founded in Nature, and apparent by its own Equity and Reasonablinesse: And what the Scripture every where mentions concerning the Actings of the Spirit upon Believ∣ers, the Experience of all Believers that ever were in the World, is able to evidence; since such must needs confesse, that there can∣not be a more dangerous Enemy to the Truths of God, then the Understanding; nor more Rebellious to the Precepts of God, than the Will of Man; untill the Spirit of God hath enlightned the one, and by his own Immediate Worke, mightily overpowred the other.
For the proof of this, I might content my self with what I find conteined in the bare letter of Scripture, to which, if we are what we professe, we ought to captivate our own Reasonings; but since many men, and those not of least Note even in our own Church, plead for that Idol Free-will, from the many Absurdities which would follow, should it not be granted; I shall undertake to de∣monstrate, that much more pernicious Consequences will follow, should it once be admitted. For First, It totally destroyes all belief of Gods Power and Provi∣dence, in his ordering and guidance of Actions according to his own Will: For who is there, that understands any thing of Gods Sovereignty, but must needs acknowledge, that he foresaw and predetermined every thing long before it was actually in being; but were there such an Independent and Absolute Free-will in Man, as some contend for, how the motions of his Will could be fore-seen is altogether Inconceivable: Socinus therefore, who saw how much this Argument did presse him, did make no scruple to deny Gods Prescience: thereby doing that very thing, which Austine com∣plained of in Tully, Dum fecit liberos, fecit etiam Sacrilegos: While he made Men Free, he did most sacrilegiously rob God of his chief Prerogative, and that is, his Omniscience: The Arminians therefore, who grant both Prescience in God, and Free-will in Man, do admit both parts of the Contradiction to be True; and so not onely thwart the expresse Revelation of Scripture, which every where inculcates Gods Absolute and Irrespective Election, but likewise speak that, which, in Reason (to which they pretend so much) neither themselves nor any one else can possibly under∣stand. Secondly, The Opinion of Free-will utterly cuts off all manner of Prayer: For whereas the greatest Argument of Prayer ought either to be for Pardoning or Preventing Grace; with what face can he aske for Pardon, who by owning himself to have a sufficient Power to do Gods Will, doth thereby acknowledge all his sins, not to proceed from Surprize, Inadvertency or Weaknesse; but to be sins of his Will, and therein himself to be a Wilfull and a Malici∣ous Transgressour? The Saints of old did use to plead for them∣selves, their Rashness and Haste, as David; their Ignorance and Unbelief, as Paul; their Incogitancy and Unmindfulness, as John;
but he that holds Free-will; makes all those Apologies to be vain and uselesse, since every offence in such an one must needs arise from his own Resolved and Designed Pravity; and sins of Infirmity in others, in him are sins of strength; because he might have avoided them, and would not. which discovers so grosse an Enmity and Op∣position against God, that all the while, that sentence remains upon Record, If we sinne wilfully after we have received the knowledg of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sinne; it will be impossible for such an one to look up with Faith, and believingly to sue out his Pardon. And as with Pardoning, so likewise will it sit with Preventing and strengthning Grace; Free-will makes the one Desperate, and the other Ʋselesse. For what need I pray for that, which I have already by me; nay, which I am sure shall never, so long as I am a man, be taken from me. No man prayes for the Money that is in his Chest; nor for those goods, that he stands possessed of: So neither can we, without being guilty of Vain-babling, pray for strength to do Gods will, if we think every man Naturally hath a power to do it, I will pray (said one of the most learned Assertors of Free-will,Tully. for Fortune and Riches, for these are in Gods Gift; but not for Virtue, for that I can give my self. Whereas he that knows he stands by Grace; that he cannot doe any thing well, but as the Spirit of God doth act him: and that the Actings of the Spirit, are Arbitrary, not at ours, but at his own Disposal; he will find a Necessity upon him, to be often begging for that strength, which he sees he wants, and God alone can furnish him with. Thirdly; Another Inconvenience of this Opinion of Free-will is, that it must needs betray poor Sinners to a delaying and putting off their Repentance: For he that finds it written, how ready God is to pardon upon Repentance; and is told withall, that it lies in his power to Repent, whenever he pleases; cannot be wrought upon by any Argument that I know of, to forbear his sinfull pleasures for the Moment. At least, why he should make such haste, as the Scri∣pture doth presse us to, there can be no Imaginable Motive. For if I live according to this Doctrine, I shall be sure to give my self Repentance; because I have a Natural Ability to do it; and that any man now living should be so suddenly strook, as not to have time enough for that Work, (which whenever it is done, it is done in a
moment, though it may perhaps not be evidenced so soon) is so much ods, that any Sinner may safely venture to try a little longer the pleasures of Sinne, before he resolves by too sudden a Repentance to leave them. Whereas he that owns every good Motion inviting that way, to be, not the Impulse of his own Heart, but the Calling of Gods Spirit; which, like light, may shine for a time, and sud∣denly be withdrawn again; he will find himself engaged to An∣swer at the first Call; least, while he tarries, God leaves off to call him, and gives him over as unworthy of Mercy, because of his Stubborn Refusall. 4. It is impossible but those who are leavened with this Do∣ctrine, must needs be swelled with Pride; and puffed up with con∣ceit of themselves, above all other men: since they imagin all their Graces, to be purely the result of their own well managing and improving their Naturall Abilities. This was the Temper of the Pharisees heretofore, who justified themselves and despi∣sed others; for as Josephus tells us, they were extremely addi∣cted to the Opinion of Free-will; and it appears in that they so much overvalued their own Power, that they would needs be more Holy and Righteous than the Law of God commanded; and there∣fore found out. New Ceremonies, and many self-invented Forms of Devotion, which were their Works of Supererogation: which Humour still reignes, as a Naturall Effect of it, among all those severall Parties, where the Opinion of Free-will is entertained. Whereas the Acknowledging that Gods Grace onely fills the Soul, and we, like Empty Vessels, have nothing but what we daily re∣ceive, will keep the Mind humble and Thankfull as to God; and likewise Tender and Compassionate towards others, who may for the present want the same Mercy which we enjoy. Lastly, I might adde, that the whole Practice of Will-worship, whether it relates to the Inventing of uncommanded Methods in Divine Worship, or to the Imposing of such usages upon others, is altogether founded upon a supposition that every Man hath Free-will; and therefore Magistrates conceiving it doth not arise from Tenderness of Conscience, but meerly from an Affected Obstinacy, that Men submit not to their Injunctions, it makes them more Harsh and Rigorous in exacting Obedience, than otherwise they would ever attempt to doe; which thing alone makes the Belief of
Free-will in Religious matters, altogether inconsistent with and destructive of the Peace of Christian societies; as every age, where∣in there hath been the least dawings of Spirituall Light doth abun∣dantly evidence. All the sufferings of the Saints, having been in∣flicted upon them upon this single account, in that when they refu∣sed to Worship the Beast or his Image, their Persecutors thought, it lay in their Power, to doe him that Homage; whereas indeed it did not, it being impossible for any to avoid or forbear acting ac∣cording to the Dictates of a Well-grounded and Conscientious Per∣swasion. But when as in opposition to all this, the maintainers of Free-will, doe urge that the Contrary Doctrine of Free Grace doth open a door to all manner of Licentiousness, since by leaving no∣thing in mans power, it leaves them free to doe nothing; and likewise, that it makes void and Ineffectuall all Gods Com∣mands, which suppose a Power of Obeying in us, or else they had been given in vain: which Objections being managed by per∣sons of much Rhetorick, and outward Sanctity, doe make a great Impression upon a Slight and Ʋnwary Reader: I have therefore in this Treatise, fully, at least to my own satisfaction, answered both those Objections; and have as I hope sufficiently demonstrated, that nothing doth more incline the soul to a Cheerfull Obedience, than a right Ʋnderstanding of the Doctrine of Free-grace; which be∣cause it is the business of this Book to evidence, I will no longer detain the Reader from it, but recommend It, for its Success and Issue, to the same Grace, which first gave it Birth and Beginning. June 11 1662. Edward Bagshawe. Errata. Page 4. line 24. dele but. p. 19. l. 28. read but by the. p. 30. l. 23, 24. dele () p. 35. l. 4. r. Affections. ib. l. 17. r. .
THE Doctrine of FREE-GRACE no Doctrine of Licentiousness. Rom. 6.1, 2. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sinne that Grace may abound? Farre be it: How shall we that are dead to sinne, live any longer therein? THese are the words of the Apostle Paul, brought in by way of Ob∣jection, against; and of Answer, for, that Doctrine of Free-Grace, which he doth in this Epistle ex∣presly handle: For the understand∣ing of his Discourse, we must have recourse unto Chap. 3. where after a long and accurate handling of this Question,vers. 28. How a man comes to be Justified in the sight of God? the A∣postle concludes , We inferre therefore, or, Argue from the Premises (as the word signifies) that a Man, is justified by Faith, without the Works of the Law. The reason and ground or which Assertion is this,vers. 20. Be∣cause by the Law is the knowledge of sinne, i. e. A strict and impartiall view of the Law, in its latitude and spirituall
significancy; and comparing of our Lives with it, is so farre from discovering the Rectitude of our Nature and Actions, that it rather serves to manifest the Obliquity and sinfullness of them both: And therefore there must be some other expedient found out to Acquit or Justifie men in the sight of God,vers. 27. than an appeal unto the Law of Works; and that is, the Law of Faith, as the Apostle speaks, The Righteousness of God, (i. e. which avails be∣fore God,vers. 22. and is accepted by him) is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference. For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, (whereby is meant, either the Graces which God requires, or the Happiness which he promi∣ses: Men were not of themselves able to perform the one, and therefore had no Right or Title unto the other) whereupon it follows, that all such as are Justified, are Justified Freely by his Grace, through the Redemption, that is in, or by Jesus. This Doctrine, which doth so levell the Pride of man, by putting his Salvation quite out of himself and therein is utterly contradictory to humane conception, the A∣postle foresaw, would meet with great opposition, and therefore that he might Assert and Clear this Fundamen∣tall Truth from all possibility of Cavill, he urges and an∣swers three of the main Objections, which either are or can be alleaged against it. The first Objection is taken from the Example of A∣braham, concerning whom the common opinion of the Jews was, that he was Justified by Works; which they gathered from Gods renewing his Blessing upon him, after his signall obedience in attempting to offer his sonne. For now I know,Gen. 22.12. saith God, that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy sonne, thine onely sonne from me. And
again, Because thou hast done this thing,vers. 16, 17. and hast not with∣held thy sonne, thine onely sonne; In blessing I will bless thee. Whereupon the Apostle James seems clearly to Affirm, that Abraham was justified by his Works, in that Question, Was not Abraham our Father Justified by Works, when he had offered Isaac his sonne upon the Altar? To this Instance,Answ. the Apostle answers by directly deny∣ing that Abraham was Justified by Works; for proof of which, he quotes a place out of the Old Testament,Gen. 13.6. That Abraham believed in God, and it, i. e. that Faith of his, was imputed to him for Righteousness. Which was spoken of Abraham, long before he had received Circumcision, and done that Signall and Heroick Action, by which the Sincerity and Truth of his Faith was evidenced. So that the Apostle James words cannot be understood, as if he intended to decide whether Faith or Works did Justifie; but onely that he determins what kind of Faith it was which Justified, viz. not a Naked and Barren, but an Effectuall and Working Faith: And that Abrahams was such a kind of Faith, he manifested afterwards, in undertaking so Perillous and Dangerous a Task, meerly in obedience to Gods Command. From whence it fol∣lows, that if Abraham, who is stiled, the Friend of God, did attain to the esteem of being reputed Righteous before God, meerly upon the account of his Faith; then all o∣thers, whose highest commendation is onely to be the Followers and Imitators of Abraham, have no other way of obteining True Righteousness, but by treading in the same footsteps of Faith, which the Patriark Abraham walked in: as the Apostle concludes,Rom. 4.23, 24. It was not written for him, i. e. for Abraham alone, that it was imputed to him: But to us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on
him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the Dead. The second Objection against this Doctrine, is taken from that seeming Absurdity and Contradiction, which would follow, should men think of being saved by the Righteousness of another: For as every man is to be condemned, onely for his own sinnes; so it seems to be most Just and Equall, that every man should be saved onely for his own Righteousness: according to the Rea∣soning of God himself, who doth not onely say, that the Wickedness of the Wicked,Ezek. 18.20. but likewise that the Righteous∣ness of the Righteous shall be upon him. Answ. 2.To this Objection, the Apostle excellently answers throughout the whole fifth Chapter of this Epistle, by drawing a parallel between Adam and Christ; who were the two great Heads and Representatives of all Mankind, in their severall Estates. Now if it shall appear that A∣dam destroyed his Race, by the Imputation of his sinne; then it cannot be Unreasonable to believe, that Christ may save his Race, by the Imputation of his Righteousness. But that Adam destroyed his Race, by the Imputation of his sinne, appears clearly from hence, in that Death, which is the Wages of sinne,vers. 14. doth actually ceaze those, who never Actually sinned, and therefore could be but liable to it, onely upon the Account of Transmitted, Derivative and Imputed sinne; as he Ar∣gues, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams Trans∣gression, i. e. over Infants. From whence he inferres, As by one mans disobedience, Many (i. e. All who des∣cend from him by Naturall Generation) were made sin∣ners: so by the obedience of one man, Many (i. e. all who are related to him by Faith, and supernaturall Regenera∣tion) shall be made Righteous. Nay by how much Christ
is a greater Person than Adam, (the one being formed from Earth, the other:1 Cor. 15.47. being the Lord from Heaven) by so much shall the Obedience and Righteousness of that One, more avail to Save, than the Unrighteousness and Sinne of the other did to Destroy. And this the Apostle clears in two Particulars: 1. In Extent of the Pardon; which is to many sinnes, whereas the Condemnation was onely for One. For, saith he, the Judgment, or  Guilt was by one. i. e. Offence, to Condemnation; but the free-gift is of many Offences,vers. 16. unto Justification. In Adam, one sinne, and that of the lesser sort, stiled  a slip or so, was sufficient to un∣doe a World. But in Christ, Many sins, how aggravated and circumstanced soever, shall not be sufficient to de∣stroy one Soul, 2. In the Excellence of the purchase: Adam, by his Sinne, purchased Death and Damnation; which is, like a Motion down-hill, very Naturall and easie to be concei∣ved: For that a Creature, should die; that a Sinner, should be sentenced, may without any Difficulty be ima∣gined: But Christ purchased Life Eternall, which is like a Motion up-hill, very Hard and exceeding Difficult to be comprehended. From whence the Apostle concludes, that where Sinne, i. e. the Guilt or Demerit of Adams Sinne, abounded, there Grace, or the Gift of Life by Christ, did much more abound. The word in the Originall, signifies something more than enough; something,. that was above and beyond what was sufficient, to Antidote and to Expell the Contagion of Adams sinne: Just as if a Man should let in a Sea to cleanse a sink; so abundant was the Overflow of Christs Righteousnesse, for the Pu∣rifying of those Natures, which Adams sinne had in∣fected.
The third and last Objection is conteined in the Text, and the sense of it amounts to this: Some may say, If the Merit of Christs Death, doth so infinitely transcend the Demerit of Adams Sinne, as the word  im∣ports; then, will it not follow from hence, that the Go∣spell will be a Rule of Strictness and Severity of Life, no longer; but rather set open a door to all manner of Im∣piety, since this Conclusion may easily be drawn: Since Gods Goodness is so Free, as well as full; since Christ, in the most proper acception, did die for Sinners; will it not follow, the greater Sinners we are, the more accepta∣ble we shall be to Christ; and the more Offences we com∣mit, the better will his Goodness in pardoning them ap∣pear: As to run upon the Score, is the best way to set out and to adorn a Creditors Munificence. Come on then, will wicked men say, Let us sinne that Grace may abound. Answ.To this Odious and Unworthy Inference, which yet, so corrupt and disingenuous it our Nature, most men are ready, not onely to Reason, but to Live by, the Apostle returns a double Answer: 1. In a Phrase of Abhorrency, : He seems, as it were, to start and to blush at the bare mention of such a supposall,; and therefore hastily cries out, Farre be it, that any should be such a Wretch, as to make Rich and Undeserved Mercy, a Motive of his Contumacy; that any should therefore presume to Offend, because God is Willing to Pardon; that any should therefore spurn their Heavenly Father on the Bowels, because they are Tender and Yearn toward them: This doth not use to be our manner of dealing with Men, and therefore Farre be it, that any should thus deal with God. 2. He answers by instancing in the Life of Himself, and those Believing Romanes, to whom he writes; As if he
had said, Farre be it that any should make such Impious Conclusions, from so Holy, and so Gracious Premises; that any should presume to Poison themselves, because there is an Antidote so neer them: If any doe so, it is their own Fault; for we have experimentally found this Doctrine of Free-Grace, to have had a clean contrary Ef∣fect and Operation upon us; and instead of Exciting us to Sinne, even to cut up and root out in us, not onely the Acts, but even the Habit of Sinfullness: How then, saith he, shall we that are dead to sinne, live any longer there∣in? Which being the Full scope and Design of the Apo∣stles whole Discourse, it affords us this usefull Obser∣vation: That the best and most effectuall way to mortifie the Pow∣er of In-dwelling sinne, is to consider how free, how Absolute, how Unconditionall Gods Grace is in pardoning it. Before I proceed to handle this, I must needs take no∣tice of the Objection, and from thence observe; That Corrupt and Curious Wits, doe usually draw perni∣cious and destructive consequences from the most Precious and soul-saving Truths. For Instance; What Doctrine can be more Winning, to a Desperate; or more comfort∣able, to a Despairing Sinner; than to hear, that Christ hath already fully satisfied for Sinne; that God is willing to be reconciled; that, notwithstanding his Greatness, he even woes us to be at Peace with him; and, in token of his Readiness, he offers us Peace and Pardon, unclogged with any Condition; he requires nothing but Faith, i. e. a Naked and an Empty hand, to take what he is willing in Bounty to bestow. Yet the Disputer in my Text, labours to make this Sweet, appear to be very Unsound Do∣ctrine; and would fright men from embracing their Cor∣diall, lest by accident it should heighten and encrease their
Distemper, Thus it hath fared with all the Abstruse and most Mysterious Points of our Religion; the Incar∣nation of the eternall Sonne of God, the Resurrection of the Body, the Assistance of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of Believers, have been all attaqued and set upon by mens Irregular Fancies, and each Age hath produced some Sect or other, who have made themselves Famous by di∣rect opposition unto those forementioned Truths. But to omit them, I shall content my self with those Instan∣ces which the Apostle makes in this Epistle, Chap. 3, He layes down this Conclusion: That God in the Wisdome of his Providence, so orders and manages all Events, as that out of Evill, he doth extract Good; and makes even our Unrighteousness,vers. 5. to set off and to illustrate his Righ∣teousness: From whence one presently inferres, then is God unrighteous, who taketh vengeance, i. e. who punisheth men for that, which at last doth redound to the Advan∣tage of his Glory; and then goes on, Let us doe Evill, that good may come of it: i. e. Let us Sinne, that Gods Glory may be promoted. Which Impious Deduction, whereby Gods Providence is made to countermand his Precepts, the Apostle confutes in that sharp Expression, Whose Damnation is Just, i. e. such who will not actively Glorifie God, by their Obedience unto his Revealed Will, God will get himself Glory of them, by Punishing their Disobedience. Again in that Great Business of Gods Absolute and Unconditionall Electing of some unto Eter∣nall Life,Rom. 9. the Apostle instanceth in the Examples of Ja∣cob and Esau; who, when as yet neither of them had done Good or Evill, yet one was preferred before the other; or which the Apostle gives no other reason, but this; That the Purpose of God, according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calleth. Against which
Unmerited and Irrespective choice,vers. 14. there is One in that place objects, Is there not then Unrighteousness with God? i. e. Is not God Partiall and Unequall in his determinations concerning Man, thus to chuse and preferre one before another, when as by Nature, All are Equall? To this he answers, by alleaging God's Soveraignty,vers. 15. who in the case of Pharaoh, affirms of Himself, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy; and the Apostle inferres from thence, and whom he will he hardens, i. e. he showes no Mercy to, but leaves them in their Naturall Hardness and Impenitency. And when the Objector is not satis∣fied with this, but cries out, Why doth he then find fault? i. e. why doth he reprove and seem Angry against sinne and sinners? for who hath resisted his Will? The Apo∣stle then in stead of answering any further, asks a Que∣stion, which the Bold Disputers of our times will never answer, and that is, Who art thou O man who disputest against God? by which way of Procedure, he sufficiently shews, that in the opening of Divine Misteries, nothing is more hard, than to stop a Disputers mouth. And the Reasons are First, Because Men doe usually sound the Depths of God, by a very False and Imperfect Line; and that is, by Naturall Reason: There is indeed a Reason given to man, which is capaable of the Highest Misteries; this in Philosophy, is called Right; in Scripture, Enlightned Reason; i. e. such a Reason as stoops and submits to Faith, and dares believe God in spight of all contrary suggestions. But all the while our Reason, is in its Na∣tive and Unreclaimed estate, like a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, it kicks at every thing which it cannot com∣prehend. Thus even the most Holy men, while they did quit their safe Rule, which is Gods own manifesta∣tion
of his Wayes in Scripture, and ventured in their own Reasons to argue about Divine Providence;Psal. 73. Jer. 12. Hab. 1. the Prosperity of the Wicked, was so Obvious, and withall so Great an Objection, that they were unable to resolve it; as appears by the Complaints and Inquietudes of David, Jeremy, Habakuk, and others upon this Subject. That alone which silenced Job, in the midst of his bold Expo∣stulations, did likewise satisfie them; and that was, a distinct and clear Discovery of Gods uncontrolable Sove∣raignty and Dominion over all his Creatures; which ought to be admired at a distance by us, and not too cu∣riously pried into, least so Wonderfull and Amazing an Object doe strike us Blind. Those Tenets, wherein Gods Honour is mainly concerned, such are, His managing of all Events,Act. 1.16. & 3.28. even the Sinnes of Man (as the Scripture tells us he did pre-ordain the Treachery of Judas) with∣out any Imputation to his Holiness: His disposing of all Persons, absolutely to their respective Ends, and without any Imputation to his Justice—Such things as these, the Apostle hath taught us to call  Untraceable Paths,Rom 11.33. in which onely an Humbled Soul can walk. Here if we will goe, we must goe groveling, with our Faces in the Dust, least if, like Moses, we draw neer to pry with too much curiosity, his Dread doe fall upon us, and his Terrors make us afraid. Till Humane Wisdome be throughly abased, and all the Pride of Earthly Know∣ledge be purged out, the more we strive to understand the things of God, the more we are entangled; till at last we come, not onely to Reject, but likewise to Revile them. The second Reason is, Because men are not onely Shallow in their Apprehensions, but Rash and Hasty in their Conclusions: We are Naturally of Proud Impa∣tient
Spirits, and apt to range abroad, in quest, not of Truth, but, as those at Athens, of something that is New;Act. 17. without pursuing those firm grounds, whereupon to bot∣tom and to fix a Perswasion. It is therefore the most common cause of all Practicall Errors in the World, that Men doe usually fasten upon that part of a Tenet, which favours them in their Lusts, without taking notice of the whole Compass and Latitude of it. Thus when a Sin∣ner hears that God is Mercifull, he presently cries out, This is good News for me, for I am already, and resolve still to be a Sinner; never considering, that Mercy leads to Repentance; and it can no farther be pleaded, or pretended to by any, then as it doth influence us to return from Sinne to God. So perhaps some may argue, If I am predestined to be saved, I shall be saved; and what need I then trouble my self with Holiness? Whereas the End is never designed by God, but with Respect of and Sub∣ordination to the Means: And all the severall Stages in our Journey to Heaven, are appointed in the same Eter∣nall Register, wherein the place it self is designed for us. In short, as in a Chain, when men catch hastily at the Link that is next them, without taking notice of the con∣nexion and series whereby many are joyned together, the whole chain is apt thereby to be disordered and dis∣composed: so is it in Divine Truths, if we look not at the whole contexture of them, and that admirable de∣pendance which each part hath upon the other; we are apt to be led away by our own Prejudices, and to draw Absurd and Monstrous Consequences, which, had we leasure to take a View of the Whole Body of Sacred Truth, we should not have adventured to doe. Herein mainly consists the Difference between Truth and Error: Error is then strongest, when it is considered Single;
but the strength of Truth lies in its standing linked and confederated unto other Doctrines: Therefore to single out any one Opinion, how true soever, and handle it apart, is, like the cutting of Sampsons Hair, it makes it less strong, and more liable to mis-construction: It robs it not onely of its Strength, but likewise of its Beauty. The Use hence is to Advise all, not to judge of any Opinion or Party of Men, by those Prejudices wherewith they are loaded, or by those Ill-favoured Consequences which may be wrested from their Doctrine; but let us labour to discern every thing, as it shines in its own Light, by the clearness of Scripture-discovery: All Truth, e∣specially Divine, must be tried by its Evidence, and not by its Consequences. When we have tired out our selves and others with needless Objections, one Scriptum est, wherewith our Saviour answered the Devill, with stand like a Rock, and abide all those Waves of Opposition, which don't so much Batter Scripture, as Dash and Break themselves upon it. And if ever this Advice were neces∣sary, certainly this Age, wherein we live, doth most of all require it; in which, whatever may lessen and undervalue Scripture is let in and broken loose upon us. For what by Humane Additions, on the one side; and by Pretences to more Immediate Revelations on the other; the Scri∣pture, which is the undoubted Word of God, is robbed of its Sufficiency and Perfection; and harder Conditions are required of us, for the attaining of Eternall Life, than those which our Saviour hath enjoyned us, viz. To Be∣lieve, and to Obey him alone. Let us therefore bring both our own, and all other mens Opinions, unto this Touchstone; and when we have found a Sic dixit Deus, the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, for any thing in con∣troversie, let us stick to that Declaration, without ever
troubling our selves with Consequences, which are but so much Dust thrown in our Eyes, to keep us from dis∣cerning our Duty. Should we ever quit this hold, I can see nothing before me but Sea and Aire, i. e. a Wide and Endless Labyrinth of Inextricable Error: But while we stick fast to this Rule, we may indeed erre in the Com∣ment, but we are sure the Text is Infallible. And the more Submiss and Silent our Reason is, in things which may at first blush appear Strange and Contradictory, the more, I will not say Meritorious, but Pleasing and Accep∣table is our Obedience. Having thus dispatched that Observation which the Objection in my Text did lead me to, I come now to the Doctrine which I first raised, and which takes in the whole Scope and Design of the Apostles arguing, viz. That the Best and most Effectuall Way to mortifie the power of Indwelling Sinue, is rightly to consider how Free, Abso∣lute and Unconditionall, Gods Grace is in pardoning it. In which there are these three Points to be explained. 1o That, Gods Grace in pardoning Sinne, is Absolute, Free and Unconditionall. 2o That, A Considerate and fixed Belief of this, is the best way to mortifie the Power of Indwelling Sinne. 3c That, A Believer, must never think he hath arrived to the Truth of his Profession, till Sinne is mortified in him: or, in the Apostles words, Till he is dead to Sinne. The first Point is, That, Gods Grace in pardoning Sinne, is Absolute, Free and Unconditionall. I mean, re∣specting nothing in, requiring nothing from the creature, as that which may merit and deserve such Favour. Thus all the Promises run, I will take them, saith God speaking of the New Covenant or Gospell-Times, to be my People,
and I will be their God:Jer. 31.33. For I will Forgive their Iniqui∣ties, and I will remember their Sinnes no more. So speak∣ing of the same Covenant by the Prophet Ezekiell,Ezek. 36.25. I will, saith he, sprinkle clean water upon you, and from all your Filthiness will I cleanse you. Which gracious Promise, least it should seem to respect any thing in them as meri∣toriously exciting it, God doth expresly premise, I doe not this for your sake,vers. 22. O house of Israel, but for my ho∣ly Names sake. And again concludes it thus; Not for your sakes doe I this,vers. 32. saith the Lord God, be it known unto you. Therefore in that Form of Words, which God pre∣scribes unto Returning Backsliders, he commands them to say,Hos. 14.2. Lord take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously. To which God presently replies,vers. 4. I will heal their Back∣slidings, I will love them Freely. But besides what may be deduced from the whole Tenour and Current of Scri∣pture-Promises, this will yet farther appear from these three Considerations: First, From the Nature of God who pardons Sinne, who cannot be moved or altered by any condition in the Creature, since he himself is the sole Author and Be∣stower of whatever good condition the Creature is able to perform. For according to the Question of the Apo∣stle Paul,Rom. 11.33. Who hath first given unto him, and it shall be re∣compenced to him again? or, as the words are in Job, from whence the Apostle took them,Job 41.11. Who hath prevent∣ed me, sc. by doing for me, that I should repay him? Here∣by intimating, that none hath or is able so to doe any thing for God, as that he should thereby challenge any thing from him, by way of Recompence: As the words following in that place imply, For whatever is under the whole Heaven is mine. When therefore the Holy Men doe begge pardon of Sinne, their finall resort is to Gods
Mercy or Power; as Moses when he intercedes for Is∣rael; And now let the Power of my Lord be great,Numb 14.17. accor∣ding as thou hast spoken, saying, the Lord is long suffering and of great Mercy, forgiving Iniquity and Transgression. And so he goes on, Forgive I pray thee the Iniquity of this People, according to the greatness of thy Mercy.Mic. 7.18.19. So the Prophet Micah, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardon∣eth Iniquity, and passeth by the Transgression of the Rem∣nant of his Heritage, because he delighteth in Mercy. Whereas did consideration of any thing in the Creature, move God to shew Compassion; Forgiveness from him, would no longer be Grace but Debt; and God in pardon∣ing Sinne, would not exert an act of Power, but an act of Justice: and Men might challenge not onely Pardon of Sinne, but likewise, Heaven it self, as a Reward of their Performances. Which is quite contrary to the whole Current of Scripture, and to all those Conceptions, which the Majesty and Greatness of God, together with the Vileness and Despicable meanness of the Creature, must needs enforce upon all Rationall and Considerate Men. Since therefore the Promises of God run Ab∣solutely, since the Nature of God is Inalterably, i. e. Freely Gracious; they neither consult Gods Honour, nor the Comfort of doubting Christians, who interpose the Clog of any preceding Condition. They are very unfaithfull Embassadours to the King of Heaven, who streighten their Commission; and speak Peace and Pardon in Terms less generall, than they have received. Secondly, This will appear yet farther from Consi∣deration of the Price, which was paid for Sinne. For though God pardons sinne Freely, in reference to us, since we neither did nor could deserve it; yet it was not Free in reference to our Surety; by Christ this was dearly
bought, and whatever we enjoy thereof, was first sealed, and comes down streaming to us, in the Blood of the Me∣diator. Now to know the Greatness of the Price, the best way will be to consider the Greatness of the Person, who paid it.Joh. 1. In the beginning of Johns Gospell, we read of one, whom he there stiles , i. e. Reason or the Eternall spring of Wisdome, of him it is said, that he was with God, nay that he was God; and as God did make the World. If we look a little farther, we shall find that this very Person, this , i. e. became Flesh, or frail Man, and laying aside the Glory of his Divinity for a time  Tabernacled, or pitched his Tent among the sonnes of Men. It was this , this assumed Nature of his, which he sacrificed as a Victim to appease his Fa∣thers Anger, and to expiate the sinnes of the world; ac∣cording as he speaks himself. The Bread that I will give you,Joh. 6.51. is my Flesh, or my Humane Nature, which I will give for the Life of the World. Where by World is not, nor cannot be meant, the Generality of Man-kind, of which the greatest part perish, which could not possibly be, had Christ actually shed his Blood for them: but, as our Sa∣viour explains himself in another place,Joh. 10. &c. 11. v. 52. His Sheep, or the Generality of Believers scattered throughout the world: so that the word World, is of the same Extent with the word Many,Mat. 20.28. which our Saviour else-where useth. As in Matthew,. Mat. 26.28. the Sonne of Man came to give his life a Ran∣some for, or, in stead of many. And afterward, This is the Blood of the New Covenant, which was shed for Many, for Remission of Sinnes. That we may know the inestimable value of this Blood, it is called by the Apostle Paul, and that without a Figure the Blood of God,Act. 20.28. i. e. which the Sonne of God shed in that Humane Nature, which he had united unto himself. Who is there then that will not
think such Blood sufficient Ransome? For as the Apo∣stle argues excellently,Heb. 9.13. If the Blood of Bulls and Goats sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh; How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternall Spirit, of∣fered himself up to God, purge our Conscience from Dead Works, i. e. Cleanse our Souls both from the Leprosie and Guilt of Sinne? So that to eek out this Sacrifice, by mingling with it any Vain Oblations of our own, is nothing else but to lessen its value, as they, who light up their Candles at noon-day, doe onely Affront and Prejudice the splendour of the Sunne. When such a Price is already paid, for any to appear Nice and Dainty, to cry out they are not Humbled, not Sorrowfull, not Thankfull Enough, and therefore neglect to make use of it, this is nothing else, but either Peevishly, to refuse offered Comfort; or else Proudly, to think we are able by our delay to make our selves worthy of it. Thirdly, The last Argument may be taken from the Impossibility there is, that we should be able to perform any thing acceptably unto God, till we are come within the Terms of the Covenant; Then are we within the Covenant on Gods part, when we have accepted it on ours: but till then, we are under the Law, all our Works are Legall Works, and our Repentance it self is to be re∣pented of; as being infinitely short of that Perfection which the Law requires. Besides, upon supposition that such a measure of Humiliation, Sorrow, Contrition, or other such like Acts, were prerequired to capacitate and make us fit for the receiving of our Pardon; what infinite disquiets must this needs beget in every Sinner, that is now upon the point of his Conversion; for who shall be able to fix a just Proportion? or assuredly tell him, that he hath grieved and mourned enough? since there
can be no Proportion between our Sinne and our Sor∣row, and likewise our Bodies may be wasted with Grief, and our Eyes fail us with weeping, and yet all our Fears, prove onely an Idle and a Fruitless Expence, as Cains and Judas did. There can be therefore no better or more warrantable Advice be given unto a poor lamenting Creature, than to bid him leave off his Works, and throw himself immediately into the Arms of Mercy: since who so rests upon his own Endeavours, labours in the very Fire, and undertakes a Task beyond his manage, in thinking to Fit himself for Mercy; whereas it must be Mercy, already in some measure apprehended, which must qualifie and fit us for the receiving more. Against this it may be objected, That the Promise in the Gospell runs,Mar. 16. He that believeth, shall be saved; and the Command by the Apostle is,Acts 3, 19. Repent that your sinnes may be blotted out. From whence it may be gathered, that Faith and Repentance are required as Conditions to Re∣mission; and that Pardon of Sinne is not so Absolute on Gods part, but that still something must be done on ours, to qualifie us for the receiving it. But I answer Answ.1. For Repentance, that is no distinct and separate condition of it self, because it alwayes follows Faith, and can no more be severed from it, than Motion from Life: whence it is that the Apostles doe promiscuously use one for the other; as Peter, to those who were wrought on by his Sermon, and came to him for Direction, he bids them Repent;Acts 2.37. but Paul, to the Jaylor who was in the same case, he commands him to Believe; and our Saviour joyns them both together, in that Epitome of his first Sermon, Repent and believe the Gospell:Mar. 1.13. thereby intimating that one could not be without the other.—Therefore 2. Though Faith be required as a Condition to the
receiving of Christ and Pardon by him, yet it is such a Condition, as takes nothing at all from the Freeness of Gods Gift; no more than Emptying the Hand, and ta∣king an Almes, doth lessen his Bounty that bestowes it. For Faith is nothing else but a Naked Hand, and hath no influence at all upon Gods Gift, to make it more or less Free; but all its influence is downwards, by applying and appropriating of that Gift, to make it Ours. And therefore in Scripture-language, to Believe in Christ, and to Receive Him, is the same thing: As John speaks,Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sonnes of God, even to as many as believe on his Name. As a Medicine may be given gratis by a Physician, he may ask nothing for it, yet except the sick-man take it, it will not cure him: So God offers Christ and Mercy freely, but unless we Believe i. e. Receive him, he will not profit us. And in this, and no other sense is Faith a Con∣dition. But 3. Even in this signification, as Faith signifies not a power of Acting, but meerly a power of Accepting, yet so it is a Condition, onely of Gods bestowing, and not of Mans procuring. Thus our Saviour:Joh. 6.44. vers. 35. None can come unto me (i. e. believe on me, as he there explains) except the Father which hath sent me draw him. And again, He that hath heard, and learned of the Father, he cometh unto me; so, No man can come unto me,vers. 45. except it were given to him of my Father. All which places show, that Faith, which is a coming to Christ,vers. 64. is not wrought in any but peculiar Power and Influence of God. And accordingly, the Apostle Paul, By Grace, saith he, are ye saved,Ephes. 2.8. through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God, i. e. That Faith by which ye are enabled to receive Christ, is as much the Gift of God, as Christ himself who is received
by it. Therefore he prayes, that they may be streng∣thened by the Spirit of God,c. 3.16, 17. in the Inner Man, that so, Christ might dwell in their Hearts by Faith: intimating, that, without such Supernaturall Assistance, they neither could nor would Believe. Against this it may be objected again, If God alone gives Faith, why then are we commanded to Believe and to Repent, for this presupposes a Power in the Creature to Obey, or else the Command would be in vain. Answ.I answer, That Gods command doth not alwayes pre∣suppose a Power already existing in the Creature, but being a Word from God, it gives that Power which was not there before. As when God said, Let there be Light, there was no activity in that Dark Chaos, suffi∣cient of it self to produce it, but God by his Word at the same time created what he did command. To which Action of Gods, the Apostle compares his bringing any to the Knowledg of Christ;2 Cor. 4.6. God, saith he, that command∣ed Light to shine out of Darkness, hath shone into our Hearts, to give unto us the Knowledg of his Glory in the Face of Christ. So in the New Testament, when our Saviour commanded the Sea to be still, the Blind to See, the Dead to Rise, &c. there was no Ability in those Creature to Obey his Commands; but his Command, going out with Di∣vine Authority, gave unto them Power: so when the Ministers of the Gospell command Sinners to Believe, and to Repent, the word goes out in the Name and in the Strength of God, and, whereever it is effectuall, it con∣veighs that Power, which was not there before. And this is it, which makes Preaching necessary unto the worlds end, because the Spirit of God doth cooperate with it; as the Apostle hath it, when he commands a Minister to be Meek, and ready to Teach even those that set them∣selves
to oppose the Truth: if, saith he,2 Tim. 2.24. peradventure God will give them Repentance: We Preach to, and Pray for Sinners, onely with a Peradventure; perhaps, God may work some good by us: but if God doth not work, our Words cannot, and the Sinner himself will not. This may serve to teach all those, who begin to be troubled for their past Sinnes, which way they must take to arrive unto Comfort and satisfaction. There are some Ignorant and Unskilfull Physicians of the Soul, who prescribe Fasting, Pennance, Uneasie Postures of Prayer, and the like, which are at the best but Bodily exercise,1 Tim. 4. which Profits little, because it reacheth not to the Core of Sinne, that lies within. Such kind of Methods as these, doe onely prune and lop the Branches of Corruption, but leave the Root entire; Men may in a needless Rigour starve their Bodies, and all the while doe nothing else but feed their Pride. My advice rather is, to a disconso∣late Sinner, that he would presently lay hold upon his Pardon: And my grounds for this Advice are these two. 1. Nothing doth more engage us in a Wilfull and De∣liberate Course of Sinning than Despair of Pardon. When once Cain cries out,Gen. 4. that his Sinne was greater than could be forgiven; the next News we hear of him, is, That he went out from the Presence of the Lord. Thus when God summoned the People by his Prophet Jeremy;Jer. 18.12. to return from the Evill of their Wayes, he brings them in saying, There is no Hope; and then it presently follows, but we will walk in the Imagination of our own Hearts. The Apo∣stle Peter therefore exhorting those to whom he writes, to make a Progress in Holiness, by adding one Grace to another,— But he, saith he, who wants these things is blind,2 Pet. 1.9. forgetting that he was cleansed from his old sinnes; thereby intimating, that as Presumption begets Confidence, so
Despair begets Carelesness in Sinning. As we read of some, who have died for fear of Death; so is it in this case, when men dare so much wrong Gods goodness, as to imagin, that he will not make good his Promise to them, though it runs Indefinitely, they runne so farre in Sinne, till at last they dare not think of Returning; which seems to have been Davids case, when he cries out, Innumera∣ble Evils have compassed me about, mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up, they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fail∣eth me. While he stayed and forbore to pass the Ford which Mercy had shallowed for him, his Sinnes like a Torrent, began to overwhelme him with horror and a∣mazement. 2. Pardon of Sinne—for the time past, and Power against Sinne for the time to come, goe both together. As when a Judge doth free a Prisoner, at the same time he gives him Liberty, he knocks off his Chains; so when God intends to doe good unto a Sinner, he never severs his Gifts, but compleats the work of his Redemption, by Purifying and strengthening Grace at the same time. As he speaks by the Prophet,Ezek. 36. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: then he presently adds, A new heart also will I give you, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my wayes, and you shall keep my Judgments and doe them. And the reason of this is clear, because when a Sinner hath once received his Pardon, he may boldly goe to God and Christ, and by Prayer engage their Power in his behalf; but till then, he is not able to doe any thing; he cannot pray in Faith, be∣cause he hath no Assurance that he shall be heard; he can∣not act in Faith, because he hath no Promise that he shall be assisted; but when once he hath taken, what God
offers, he hath a certainty of both. But some may object, That were their Sinnes less,Object. then there was some Hope; but their Sinnes have been so many, and so strangely aggravated, that they must needs sit down under the sorrow, as being in an hopeless condition. For answer, I wish all those who make this Objection,Answ. (as indeed none ever thinks of returning to God but he meets with this Lion in his way) would seriously ask, whether they find themselves as Willing to forsake their Sinnes, as they pretend to be sorry for them. And if they doe, then let them consider these three things: 1. The Latitude and Extent of Christs Death; I doe not mean as to the Universality of the Persons (for I find no ground for that) but as to the Qualifications of those for whom Christ died: And we shall find it was for Sinners, for the Ungodly, for Enemies;Rom. 5.6, 8, 10 from whence a Repenting Sinner may thus argue; If Christ died for Sinners, then certainly he will not refuse me because I have been a Sinner: If he died for Enemies, then sure he will not cast me off, if I am ready to lay down my Wea∣pons, and be reconciled unto him. This was it which comforted Paul, It is, saith he, a Faithfull saying,1 Tim. 1.15. that Christ came to die for Sinners; among which I am chief: he confesses as much Guilt, as could possibly stick to him, and yet takes comfort in that generall Truth, that Christ came to die for Sinners: And then proposes his own Ex∣ample, For this cause I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everla∣sting. We must take heed how we frustrate the Grace of God, for, as the Apostle argues, If Righteousness, or Justi∣fication had been by the Law, then had Christ died in vain:
So if Sinners, who are desirous above all things to come unto Christ, should therefore be driven out from him, be∣cause they have been Sinners, then would Christ have died in vain. 2. Consider the Freeness and Liberality of the Invi∣tation: There is no condition so sad, but there is some word of Invitation or other, which particularly concerns that condition:Prov. 9.4, 5. Isa. 55.1. Mat. 11.29. Rev. 22.17. The Foolish and simple, in Proverbs: The Hungry and Thirsty, in Isay: The Weary and Heavy∣laden, in Matthew; and, which is beyond all, Whoever will, in the Revelations; Whoever will, let him come and drink of the Water of Life freely. There cannot be any thing more free and more inviting than this, that whoever will, may be sure of Well-come, I doe not say, that any Man hath this will of or from himself; but this I say, that he who hath a Will, hath a Warrant; and may boldly come to Christ, and claim the benefit of his Pro∣mise. Especially since Justification dependeth not at all upon our Working, but upon our Willing; as the A∣postle hath it, to him that worketh not (that is, that bring∣eth no meritorious works along with him) but believeth on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness, Lastly, Consider the Tender and the Compassionate Nature of Christ, how he never refused any that came unto him: And therefore Lepers, the Blind and Lame, Publicans and Sinners had on earth most both of his Pre∣sence and Power: The same Promises which, brought them, he hath left to encourage us—when he sayes—Eve∣ry one that my Father giveth me will come unto me; and He that cometh to me,Joh. 6.37. I will in no wise cast out. He that saith of himself, He came, not onely to save, but likewise, to seek that which was lost; will not be harsh to any, who
are now upon the point of returning to him. Hence we read that Peter, who denied; Paul, who persecuted; the three thousand in the Acts, who crucified him, were all up∣on their Repentance received by him. Our Saviour hath the same Bowels still, and though he hath changed his Place, yet he hath not changed his Nature;Heb. 4.15, 16.—Where∣fore, in the Apostles words, since we have not an High-Priest, which cannot be touched with our infirmities: Let us come with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time of Need. And so much for the first Point. The second Point to be handled was this; That, No∣thing is more effectuall to mortifie the power of In-dwelling Sinne, than to consider how Free and Absolute Gods Grace is in pardoning it. By Free here, that I may repeat what I mentioned a little before, I doe not mean Free, as ex∣cluding Christ, in consideration of whom, God is thus Free to Pardon (as the expressions run,2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. And,Rom. 3.24. We are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus. And, In whom, i. e. in Christ, we have redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sinnes, according to the Riches of his Grace. But I mean Free, as excluding our selves, or any thing we can doe, either as a Cause procuring, or as a Condition qualifying us for receiving this Grace. In this sense, that the Freeness of Gods Grace, is the best way to mortifie the Power of In-dwelling Sinne, will appear 1. From Instances. 2. From Reason. 1. For Instances; here is one occurres in the Text, How shall we, i. e. Believers, who are dead to Sinne, live any longer therein? i. e. In us, this Doctrine, being rightly un∣derstood, hath wrought to the killing of Sinne; since we
now learn how much we are indebted to Christ, and therefore something must be done to express our Thank∣fullness; which he prosecutes throughout the following Chapter; and uses an Argument to draw them off from sinning, which at first sight may seem Harsh and Incon∣sequent, but indeed is most demonstrably efficacious: Ye shall not sinne, or sinne shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law (which like Pharaohs Task-masters, requires the whole tale of Brick, and allows no straw) but ye are under Grace (ye now stand in those termes with God, that he gives strength, and accepts of what you doe in proportion to that Ability which he be∣stows) and for this Reason Sinne shall not have dominion over you. So again the Apostle in his Epistle to the Gala∣tians, handling the same subject, he layes down this Po∣sition,Gal. 2.16. That a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ: Against which he brings an Objection, But if, saith he, while we seek to be justified by Jesus Christ, we our selves also are found sinners, is therefore Christ the Minister of sinne? i. e. If we, who profess to be justified by Christ alone, doe notwithstand∣ing sinne daily, will it not thence follow, that this Do∣ctrine makes men careless, as if thereby they might take occasion to sinne more freely. To this the Apostle an∣swers as he doth here, first , Farre be it! and then he urgeth to the contrary his own example— I am crucified together with Christ;Gal. 6.14. and in another place, Farre be it, that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ, by which the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. And what he affirms of himself, we find him, in another place, ascribing unto all Believers—of — They who are Christs,Gal. 5.24. i. e. who by Faith have received and are united to him; have crucified the Flesh, (i. e. their
corrupt and sinfull Nature) with the Affections and Lusts, i. e. have rooted up as it were the very Fibres and lesser particles, by which sinne was fastned and incorporated into them. And the Reason of this is clear— Because, He who is once truly in Christ, i. e. who hath rightly apprehended him, forthwith becomes a New crea∣ture, as the Apostle argues; Christ, saith he,2 Cor. 5.15, 17 died for All i. e. Believers, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them: From whence he inferres, Therefore if any man be in Christ be is a New Creature: i. e. he is altogether another kind of person than he was before. What the meaning of those words New Creature are, will best appear, by comparing two places of Scripture together: In one place it is,Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature; which in another place runs, In Jesus Christ,Gal. 5.6. neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which worketh by Love. From whence it appears, that, in the Apostles sense, to be a New Creature, is nothing else, but to have a Faith working by Love, which, our old Nature, is no more capable of, than Darkness is of Light; but as soon as ever the Spirit of God begets Faith in the Heart of any, that Faith presently produceth Love, as Fire be∣gets Heat, and then Love enflames and quickens to Obe∣dience. As the Apostle Paul found it in himself, when he sayes, The Love of Christ constrains us;2 Cor. 5.14. since none can apprehend such an Excess and Overflow of Undeserved Love, but must needs think himself obliged to return all Acts of Love, whereby he may express his complacency in, and desire of a streighter Union. As the Apostle John argues, we love him, i. e. God, because he loved us first.1 Joh. 4 19. Since then our Lord Christ is pleased with nothing more, then
with the Crucifying of those Lusts, and Mortifying of those Sinnes for which he died, it must needs follow from hence, that every Believer, and therein a Lover of Christ, will find himself sensibly stirred with the Hatred of Sinne, as often as he reflects upon the death of Christ; as men use to detest and abhorre the sight of those Weapons by which their Friends were Murdered. For since every Believer must needs know that he hath no otherwise any Title to Pardon, than as he is purified by the Blood of Christ,Heb. 9. without the shedding of which there would have been no Remission: hence he dares not, nay he cannot goe on to live in Sinne, because by so doing, he shall adde New Wounds, New Sorrowes, New Marks of Disho∣nour to Christ, by whose Stripes alone he must expect to be healed. Adde to this, that the Spirit of God, which, by quickning the Immortall Seed of the Word,Psal. 51. begets Faith, is a clean Spirit, and will not suffer Sinne to cohabit with it self, but Mortifies, Subdues and Quels it, according to that of the Apostle,Rom. 8.9. Ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, i. e. Ye walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spi∣rit, if so be the Spirit of Christ dwelleth in you: and again, If Christ,vers. 10. i. e. his Spirit, be in you, the Body is dead, by rea∣son of Sinne,vers. 13. i. e. it dies to sinne: And, if by the Spirit ye mortifie the deeds of the Flesh, ye shall live: All which pla∣ces imply, that it is the Spirits proper business to Morti∣fie Sinne, there is no True Life without it. So that put all this together; Since 1. Gods pardoning Sinne for the sake of Christ, is the highest expression of Love imagin∣able;1. Joh. 4.10. as the Apostle John cries out, Herein is Love! i. e. Love to an Hyperbole, Love beyond any degree of comparison; not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Sonne to be the Propitiation of our Sinnes. 2. Since this expression of Love on Gods part, cannot
be embraced by Faith on ours, but it must needs beget Love again; as the Sun beams cannot fix themselves di∣rectly upon the Earth, but they will conveigh Warmth and Heat together with themselves. 3. Since whereever Love is engendred, it is always Active, carrying out the Soul with unquiet longings after Union with, and till that can be compassed, of Likeness to the Object it loves. As the Earth no sooner conceives Heat, by the Action of the Sunne, but presently returns and reflects it back again. Lastly, Since the Spirit of God, which dwells in a Believer, is alwayes actuating and blowing up this Love, and improving the strength of it, especially in the subduing of Sinne, upon this consideration, because Sinne is contrary to the Nature of God, and to the Me∣rit of Christ; from hence it demonstrably follows,—that the best way to Mortifie Sinne, is rightly to conceive of the Freeness of Gods Grace in pardoning it. This may serve to show us the True Nature of Justi∣fying Faith: To think, as perhaps some careless men doe, that Faith is nothing else but a Confident Perswasion, that our Sinnes are pardoned for the sake of Christ, with∣out any other notable Effect upon us; this is, at the best, an Ungrounded Fancy, which will in the end deceive us. From what I have said, it may appear, that True Justify∣fying Faith carries along with it these two Inseperable Effects; 1. It pacifies the Conscience, it begets a Calm within. When a Sinner first begins to be troubled for Sinne, there must needs be a kind of Earthquake and Tempest in the Soul; as God saith of the wicked, that he hath no Peace, but he is like a troubled Sea, which cannot rest.Isa 57.19. A wicked man is not more Eager and Impatient to commit Sinne, than he is troubled and disquieted after it, for whenever
he cools and can be at leasure to consider what he hath done, he can propose nothing to himself but matter of Anguish and Vexation; without, there is the Law com∣plaining, and God sentencing; within, Conscience accu∣sing, and Sinne condemning. In this Tumult and Hurry of Thoughts, if there be but dropped into any, so much strength of Faith, as to lay fast hold upon Gods generall Pardon (like Easther catching at the Golden Scepter, when it was stretched out to her) presently the storm is laid, and a marvellous calm ensues. As the Apostle hath it,Rom. 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. I doe not speak this, as if I thought that Faith did exclude all manner of Doubting; but that it doth expell Distraction. For to doubt is so much con∣sistent with Faith, that I take it for granted, there never was, nor ordinarily can be, any True Faith without it. As at the Creation, Night did precede Day, so in Conver∣sion, Darkness and Ignorance did precede the Enlight∣nings of Faith; and Doubting, like a Mist, doth still at∣tend it, because our Faith, like our Knowledge, in this life neither is nor can be perfect, for then it would no longer be Faith but Fruition. Yet this Doubting, which, like an Allay, God suffers to be mixed (with the strong Wine of Faith,) need not at all disturb our Peace of Conscience, but rather is left, as the Canaanites were, to teach Israel to warre,Jude 2. to quicken our endeavour, and to make us diligent in the use of those means, whereby we may be yet more confirmed and setled. 2. True Faith, as it Pacifies the Conscience, so it Pu∣rifies the Heart;Acts 15.9. as the Apostle Peter speaks, that God did put no difference between the Jews and Gentiles, be∣cause he purified their Hearts by Faith. Which is so inse∣parable an Effect of True Faith, that though Justification
be not Sanctification, yet it is never without it; and therefore they are sometimes put one for the other, as he that is just, , let him be justified still. i. e. let him goe on to be more Holy.Rev. 22.11. And to the Corinthians— Ye are washed, ye are Sanctified,1 Cor. 6.11. ye are Justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. So—By his mercy he saved us,Tit. 3 5, 7. by the washing of Rege∣neration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; That being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs. Where Holiness, which is an Effect and Fruit of Justification, is made to precede it; onely to show the Fixed and ne∣ver-failing union betwixt them. Now Faith produ∣ceth Holiness, not onely because it is begot by the Spi∣rit of God, which is a Spirit of Purity; but because it entitles us to all the Promises, which are alwayes urged as Motives unto Purity. Ye are clean, saith our Saviour to his Disciples, through the Word i. e. of Comfort,Joh 15.3. which I have spoken to you: and the Apostle having alleaged the Promise of God, wherein he said,2 Cor. 7 1. he would walk and dwell in his People; from thence he inferres, having therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit. So Peter, God hath given to us many Rich and Precious Promises,2 Pet. 1.4. that thereby we might be partakers of a divine Nature, having escaped, or fled from that corruption which is in the world through Lust. And John telling us that hereafter we should be like to Christ, because we should see him as he is, i. e. in his utmost radiance and lustre of Glory,—He then, saith he, that hath this Hope,1 Joh. 3.3. purifies himself as he is Pure. A right Believer enters into Heaven with Christ, and labours to live as a Citizen, not of that world he is in, but of that to which he belongs; and pre∣pares himself for the Reception of Glory, by cleansing
his Soul with the Infusions of Grace.Jac. 2. Let every one then, who would pass for a Believer, follow the Apo∣stle James Advice, and try his Faith by his Works; for as Water savours of the Vessell, so all our Actions have a Tincture and Relish from Faith; if that once be True and Sincere, it influences all we doe; and he that indeed believes in Christ, lives onely in and to him. But if our Faith be False and Counterfeit, then we have crooked Ends, we presently vary our Walking according to the worlds Compass, and lye at catch for such Gales to drive us,Rev. 3.1. as are blown upon us by Popular Applause. In short, like the Church of Sardis, we have a name to live, but indeed are dead. So that where we see one Unholy in his Life, we need not to dispute, but he is an Unbelie∣ver in his Heart, and all the while he is so, he ought to conclude himself Unjustified. And so much for the se∣cond Point. The third and last Point, in the generall Observation was this; That a Believer must not think he hath arri∣ved unto the Truth of his Profession, untill he is Dead to Sinne. What it is to be Dead to Sinne, the Apostle explains afterwards,vers. 6. when he calls it a crucifying of the old man together with Christ, that the Body of Sinne may be abolished;Col 3.6. and in another place, a Mortifying of our Earthly members: the importance of which Phrases a∣mounts to this; that a Believer must keep no truce with, nor give any Quarter to Sinne; he must not one∣ly not hearken to its Motions, but strangle them in the Birth; and labour to bring himself unto that Temper, that he may have as little appetite to Sinne, as a Dead man to doe any Action of Life. And the Reasons are, First, Because there is to be a conformity between
Christ, and a true Christian; As all the parts of our Sa∣viours life, are written for our Example, so his Death too ought to be Ours, in Resemblance and Imitation; we must, in the Apostle Pauls language,Rom. 6.5. be planted to∣gether into the likeness of his Death; and that is by cru∣cifying our Old man, i. e. by gibbeting those Lusts, which are the shame and Ignominy of our Nature;Phil. 3.10. Paul therefore tells us, that he laboured for nothing more, than to attain unto a Fellowship in Christs sufferings, be∣ing made conformable to his Death: which consists not onely in suffering for him, but in dying with him, in that Part, which is onely our Clogge and Hindrance; and, as a Mudwall keeps off the light of the Sunne, so doth this Flesh onely stoppe the Entrance, and hinder the actings of a Spirituall Life: Therefore the Apostle,Rom. 6.10. drawing a Parallel between Christ and a Believer, en∣forceth it thus; As Christ died and rose again, so reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed to Sinne, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord. So that the Death of Sinne, is the Life of the Soul; and therein a fit resemblance of a Risen Saviour. Secondly, The Promise of a Crown, is onely made to Conquerours: To him that overcometh,Rev. 3.21. will I give to sit with me on my Throne: Now to Conquer, is not to fight or skirmish a little, but to renew the combate, and pursue it, till we have got the Enemy within our Power: So our Duell with Sinne, should be ad Internecionem, to the utter ruine and extirpation of it: Since the Price is our Souls, which we have no way to save, but by killing this Adversary.Heb. 13.4. The Apostle therefore exhorting the Hebrewes to endure Afflictions, useth this as a Motive, Ye have not as yet resisted unto blood, fighting against Sinne. As if he had said, Ye have as yet done just no∣thing,
for this Warfare against Sonne, is never to be en∣ded, but with the Death and Destruction of one of the Combatants. Lastly, When we have done all, Sinne will still be in us.Rom. 7.20. So the Apostle Paul found, when he complains, that it is no longer I which doe these things, but Sinne which dwelleth in me: And then presently cries out in great passion, like a man half distracted, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sinne and of Death?vers. 24. meaning thereby those Reliques of Originall Corruption, which like a Fatall Poison; will not in this life be so totally emptied out of the Soul, but still some drops will remain behind, to embitter our Lives, and to exercise our Graces, The most we can doe, will be to disarm this Enemy, for we cannot  him; to pull him from the Throne, since we cannot cast him out of the House. For it alwayes lies within, like Leaven, spreading its infection; or like Fire; if not watched, enflaming our whole man, being it self first inflamed of Hell. Sinne may lye quiet in the Soil, like sparks raked up in Ashes, which, upon the Addition of new Fuell, onely rageth the more There is saith Job, Hope of a Tree,Job. 14.7. when it is cut down, yet if the Root abide in the Earth, by the Sent of Water it may flourish and spring afreshe, so there is fear of Sinne, because the  of the ter abides in us, and is alwayes restless and importunate in its Actings. As a Cloud, however Thin and Empty at first, yet if there be a rough Wind to scat∣ter it, it soon over spreads the whole Face of Heaven; so Sinne in the Soul, hath alwayes a Furious and Eager Spi∣rit to blow it up, which should make us carefull to throw out the evil Firment least it should sowr the whole Mass, and by its corrupt quality, infect whatever it mixeth with.
This may serve to rectifie their mistakes, who think it a very facile and easie matter to be a Christian. Were there indeed no more required, then to keep modum pec∣candi, to regulate our vile Actions, and to preserve a mean in sinning, this would not at all be hard; such a measure is atteinable by meer Morality: The Heathen, whose Lives we read of, had many of them this degree in great Perfection; whose best virtues were onely vitia temperata, well mingled and Allayed Vices. Their light, how glorious and great soever it seems, was nothing else but Coloured Darkness; and their best Heats, one∣ly rebuted cold; sufficient to satisfie the world, and to get Applause with Men; but as for Inward Purity, and Heart-Mortification, that was a thing they never dreamt of; this was a task reserved for our Saviours followers. He hath not minced the matter, when he tells us, that the way to Heaven is a Streight and , i. e. a squeezed, pressed and Narrowed way; so pent up,Mat. 7. and very streight, that no Wind of Ambition, no Tumour of Pride, no running-Sore of Lust will enter there; he tells us plainly, that we may take our choice, either cut off our Hands, i. e. abridg our selves of our most Usefull and Pro∣fitable Sinnes, or else into Hell fire; it will certainly be very dreadfull to endure the one, and it must needs be painfull to doe the other. Hence Fear and Trembling. Watchfullness and Sollicitude are so often called for; we must be alwayes upon our Guard, because ever in a fight∣ing posture, which is a very uneasie service. And these being the Termes, upon which we are to follow Christ; it is very sad to consider, what a Liberty, both in Life and Language, even Professors of Religion doe take, as if they had a mind to try, how neer they could come to Sinne, without actuall Sinning. We use to be afraid of the
shadow of a Lion; and in a bodily distemper, none wil∣lingly would venture upon a little Poison, least by acci∣dent it should prove Mortall. Why we should not be as carefull to avoid those Sinnes, which none but fools count Little, is a Question we cannot assoil, if we either value our Souls, or prize our Peace with God, with whom to break in little things, is great Presumption. It will be to no purpose to scape greater Corruption, if less may be sufficient to damn us.Rom. 6.14. One Chain ties the Slave as fast to his Oar, as if he had a thousand; so doth one Lust bind up the Sinner unto Satans service; since all the while it reigns, it proclaims that Sinne is our Master. To exhort all Believers to set upon this Duty; as for others, they have no skill in it; it is a peculiar Task for such, as have the Life of Faith; and this they ought so much the more earnestly be excited to, in that, all the while they allow themselves in any one Sinne, they are Estranged from the Life of God;1 Joh. 1.7. if we expect to have fel∣lowship with him, we must walk in the Light, as he is in the Light: As Darkness, is nothing else but the Absence of the Sunnes Light; so Sinne, which the Apostle calls Spirituall Darkness, is nothing else but the Absence of the Light of Gods Countenance, which while it shines up∣on the soul, it preserves it not only from Discomfort, but likewise from Dangerous stumblings. It is indeed very possible, for a True Believer, through heedlesness and inadvertency, to fall into some Gross Sinnes, as David, Hezekiah and Peter did, but yet as while they lye in them, their condition seems little to differ from that of Reprobates; so when they begin to recover out of them, we may learn from the Practice of those foremen∣tioned Saints, that their Peace with God, and Assurance of his Favour is not recovered without great Expence of
Tears and Sorrow. Every Sinne therefore is to be mor∣tified, if for no other respect, yet for this, in that any one allowed and countenanced in the Soul, will cast a cloud upon all our Graces, and hinder us for the time from discerning the Truth and Sincerity of any. As we therefore prize our own Peace, and Sense of Commu∣nion with God, so must we bestirre our selves, to keep every Corruption from breaking out and prevailing. For the effecting of which, the observing of these Rules will be very necessary. 1. Distinguish carefully between the Naturall and the Sinfull Desires of the Soul. There are some Desires, viz. of Food, of Rest, of Raiment, &c. which as they are Naturall, so they are Innocent too; Our Saviour him∣self was not without them, the Apostle saith,Heb. 4.15. He was tempted in all things as we are, i. e. with Hunger, with Cold and Nakedness, yet without Sinne. The Body, as it is a creature of God, is good and must be provided for; and therefore the Mortification of the Body, consists not, in denying it the Necessaries of Life, but in Abridging it of its Irregular and Sensuall Appetites.1 Tim. 6.8. Having Food and Raiment, saith the Apostle, let us be therewith content: from whence it follows, that either through Want, to be Destitute; or through Will, to deprive our selves of Food and Raiment, is our Misery, and not our Mortifica∣tion. They that are in the Flesh cannot please God:Rom. 8.8. The meaning is not, they that are in the Body, cannot please God; for so it is our duty to please him; but, they that walk in the Vanity and Sensuality of their Fleshly Mind, cannot please God: Such as commit those Actions that the Apostle hath branded with the Name of Works of the Flesh; as, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,Gal. 5.22. Drunken∣ness,
&c. these cannot please God, because they walk in Wayes directly contrary to the Holiness and Spirituality of his Commands. But where the Appetite is hedged in and bounded within those limits, that God hath appoint∣ed, there to come Eating and Drinking, as our Saviour did, may more redound to the Glory of God, in our thank∣full Using of his Bounty, than any Forced and uncom∣manded Abstinence. So that all those Wayes of Morti∣fication, which are now prescribed in the Church of Rome, and too much doted on by men that love to be talked on for their Sanctity, are but the Old, Needless and Sinfull Methods of the Pharisees, revived with greater Rigour and Austerity; which consist, as the Apostle hath it, ,Col. 2.23. in Unmercifullness to, and not sparing of, the Body; and seem to have a Face of Wisdome and True Holiness, but indeed are meer Folly; as nei∣ther reaching to (pull out the Core of Sinne, which lies within; nor being able to keep the practisers of them from Exchanging a Carnall Lust for Spirituall Pride: and so instead of right subduing the Body, they onely swell and puff up the Soul. 2. Pray for the Spirit of Christ; without which we shall be too Weak to set upon and conquer this In-bred Enemy. Whatever is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, i. e. both Prall and Sinfull: and Flesh will never be able to subdue Flesh; the Spirit, which alwayes acts in Believers, must be set awork about it.Rom. 8.13. If by the Spirit, ye mortifie the deeds of the Flesh, faith the Apostle, ye shall live, i. e. ye shall live indeed, for it is this Spirit alone that quickens. And whoever thinks of mortifying his Corruptions, without this supernaturall Assistance, begins a Combate wherein he is sure to be foiled; since not onely his own
Nature, but likewise the Powers of Hell are violently bent against him; and how shall he scape the Malice and Wickedness of those Evill spirits; unless the Spirit of God, which will alwayes reside where his presence is sollicited, doth secure the soul and give us strength for the Victory. Lastly, Labour for the Assurance of the Pardon of your Past Sinnes: As he that runnes a Race, must first put off his Fetters; so whoever engages against the Violence of his Lusts, must first be satisfied, that his past offences are forgiven; or else the sense of Sinne unpardoned will lye, like a Weight upon him, and instead of exciting him to strive against it, betray him to its Assaults. For the Attaining of this, besides what the Spirit of God may immediately work, (which case falls not under any Rule, since the Spirit blowes where and when it pleas∣eth) there is no Method can be given better, than that which I have hitherto been insisting on, and that is to cast our selves upon Gods Free-Grace in Christ; which who so doth, is as certain never to miscarry, as the Word of God, and the Experience of all the Saints now Triumph∣ing in Heaven, can make him. FINIS.
