B5987 12259669 57815
THE CASE Of the PEOPLE Called QUAKERS (ONCE MORE) Stated, and Published to the World: WITH THE Accusations Charged upon them; and their Answers LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson.
The Case of the People (called Quakers once more) Stated, and Published to the World, &c. WE are an Afflicted and Suffering People in these Kingdoms at this Day. Mocked, Reproached, haled before Magistrates, violently Abused, and Imprisoned, and much Hard dealing exercised upon us: This is apparently visible to all People, and needs no further proof. But, whether these Afflictions, and Sufferings, Imprison∣ments, and Hard Dealing, be Iust, or Unjust, according to our Deserts, or out of the malice and enmity of our Adversaries, This is the Question to be enquired into; Unjust, and Un∣righteous, and out of Malice and Enmity, and not of due Desert (say We) are these Sufferings imposed on Us: But Iustly, and according to Desert, and the Laws of the Land (say our Adversaries.) Who shall be Iudge in the Case between Us? Even, the Law of God, the Gospel of Christ, the Scriptures of Truth, the Example of Primitive Christians, our Neighbours, and the Witness in every Mans Conscience. And to the Iudgement of all These we Appeal, and shall abide their Sentence. First, We are Accused of an Hainous Crime, and as if We deserved the Greatest punishments, Because we are Di∣scenting, and Differing from the Church of England, and cannot Conform to all Her Worships, and Ceremonies, therefore are We said to be Hereticks; Because holding, and practising Differing things from Her, &c. Plea. The Scriptures of Truth (which are according to both Law and Gospel) do Say, and Judge, That they who sometimes did Discent, and Differ from some of the Church of Christ, in some Principles, and Practices, and could not practice in all things, what some others did, as in Rom. 14.
where it is signified, That some of the Church of Christ believed they might eat All things; some others of the Church did eat Hearbs, some esteemed One day above Another, others esteemed Every day Alike; this kind of discenting, and dife∣rence, about Meats, and Days, and Ceremonies, were amongst the Members of the True Church; but What is the Iudgement of Scripture in this case of Difference amongst them? Not that the Discenters one from another should be Punished, and Im∣prisoned, and Banished, but ver. 5. Let every man be perswaded in his own mind. And One was not so much as to Judge Ano∣ther in this case of Difference, and Discenting; much less to Imprison one another for that Cause. And in Phil. 3. 15. it is there signified, That if any persons were discenting, and dif∣ferent in Iudgement, or in the growth in Grace, from the rest of the Church, every one was to walk in that measure of Truth, as he had attained to; And if any were otherwise-mind∣ed, (viz. Different in the Growth in the Grace of God) then God should reveal the same unto them; And notwithstanding their difference in Iudgement, whether in cases Substantial, or Ceremonial, yet, they were still to be in Love and Unity, and walk in their measures, to which they had attained, and they were not to be imprisoned and persecuted, as we are at this day: Hence, observe, That the Iudgement of Scriptures, which the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ are according to, is clear for us, and against them that hate us, that imprison us, and afflict us, for discenting and differing in some Doctrines, and Practices, from the Church of England. But Secondly, If we were indeed Hereticks, and Erroneous people; suppose so, which never yet was truly proved, of us, nor can be; What Iudgement do the Scriptures (which are according to the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ) give in that case? Not that we should be thus imprisoned, and afflicted, with corporal punishments; but according to Titus, Tit. 3. 10, 11. we should first be Admonished in love, and Exhorted once and again; and then, if we gain-say, and will not hear Reproof, to be Rejected, cast Out, and Denyed of the Assembly of Saints; But not im∣prisoned, and banished: and according to 1 Cor. 5. where it is signified, That some, in the denomination of the Church, did
Offend against Christ and the Church, and were Hereticks, and Discenters, because of their Evil deeds, from the True Church; yet, these were not to be imprisoned, and persecuted in their persons; but delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the Day of the Lord; they were to be Spiritually dealt withal; and they were to be cast out into the Wicked world, among the Ungodly, to have their portion from God, with the Wicked, to be delivered to Sathan for the destruction of the Flesh, that it might be destroyed, and the Spirit saved in the Day of the Lord. So, if we were indeed such, as these were, Discenters, and in difference from the True Church, because of some Wickedness, yet the Iudge∣ment of Scriptures is against our Enemies in this Case, who persecute, and imprison us; for thus it ought not to be done unto us, if the Church of England were the very True Church of Christ, and We in difference from Her, by False principles, or Evil conversation, or ▪any thing else. Thus you see the Iudgement of the Scriptures, and of the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, is against our persecutors. Thirdly, But suppose We doubt, That the Church of Eng∣land, and its Ordinances, Discipline, its Worships and Ceremo∣nies, be not according to the Scriptures of Truth, but are ra∣ther in the form of Godliness, without the power: suppose we, in Conscience believe this, and think we can prove it, which is the very truth of the Case, and therefore do deny Confor∣mity to Her, lest we should sinne against God, and wrong our own Consciences, at least, as we believe. What Iudgement doth the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, give, in this Case? We are exhorted, and commanded in Scriptures, 2 Tim. 3. From covetous men, and proud men, lovers of themselves, false accusers, despisers of them that are good, high-minded men, and lovers of pleasures, they that have the Form of Godliness, but not the Power, from all such we are to turn away. And there∣fore we believe we are Iustified by the Scriptures, in turn∣ing away for these divers Years past, (and till we be otherwise perswaded by sound Doctrine) from the Ministry and Churches that are in England, or lately have been, (and found Reason hath not been yet shewed us, to the contrary,
by you) because they are such, as the Scriptures Exhorts us to turn away from; and because we have judged, that they have had the form of godliness, but not the power; so we are not to be impri∣soned, and persecuted, though we differ, and disent, and turn a∣way from all them that are Coveteous, Proud, Boasters, lovers of themselves, despisers of them that are good, high-minded men, and such as have a form of godliness, but not the power. But we are Judged Just, and our Case not condemned by the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, and by the holy Scriptures, but rather such as inflict Sufferings upon us: And for any of our Principles and Doctrines that we hold, we deserve no pu∣nishment nor Persecution, because hereof; for we testify before God, Angels and Men, That we hold and maintain, no Principles of Religion, nor Practice of Worship, nor Doc∣trines of Gospel, but what are according to Scriptures of Truth. And we are ready to be tryed, and proved in that case, and to bring the matter to Issue, in faire proceedings with any man, that shall object the contrary; And thus the Judg∣ment of Scriptures are for us, as we suppose (at least), and if we are in Errour, either by denying any thing on the one hand, or affirming any thing on the other, we have not been hitherto, well proceeded against, in order to our Con∣viction. Secondly, We are accused as for a great Crime, and Im∣prisoned, because we meet together, in the Name and Power of Iesus Christ, to wait upon him, and to worship him in Spirit and Truth; in Prayer to God, and Exhortations one to another, to Righteousness and Holiness: But, what Iudgment doth the Law and Gospel, and holy Scriptures give, and our Neighbours also, between Us in this Case? Lets come all to their Barr, and receive just Sentence. Plea. First, The Iudgment of God's Law, Christ's Gospel and holy Scriptures, are not against our meeting together, but on the contrary, do command us, and exhort us, with promises of blessings, to meet together in the worship of God, and to wait upon him; And it was the practice of the primitive Christians, to assemble themselves together, in that form and manner as we do t this day, (to wit) in a private manner, and separate from the
multitude, and all the Iews Synagogues, as in Acts 1. 17. The Saints and Disciples, both Men and Women, to the num∣ber of one hundred and twenty, (which were far more than five) went into an upper Chamber, being a private place, and no publique Synagogue, and there waited upon the Lord in Prayer and Supplication, according as we do at this day: Thus the Scriptures justify the way and manner of our Meetings, and condemns them not. Again, in Acts 20. 8. the Saints and Disciples were gathered together in an upper Chamber, and Paul Preached unto them untill mid-night. Here was a pri∣vate Meeting, far above the number of five, and out of any publick Synagogues; and Christ Iesus said, Where two or three are met together in my Name, there I am, in the midst of them. And He and his Disciples, often met together in private places, apart from the Jews publick Worships, sometimes in a Ship, and sometimes in Desarts, and on the Mountains, and in par∣ticular Houses, and Preached, and Prayed; this the Scriptures prove. And also, in Heb. 10. 25. we are expresly com∣manded, not to neglect the Assembling of our selves together, but to exhort one another, and so much the more as the day approah∣ed. By all which Scriptures, with many more that might be quoted, it is Evident to all the world, That our meeting to∣gether for the worship of God, in that form and manner as practised by us, is according to the Law of God, the Gospel of Christ Iesus, and the holy Scriptures: And all these, give Iust Iudgment for us, and Iustify us, and therefore conse∣quently condemn such as do violence to us, for this practise of meeting together, for the worship of God. And thus, though we are Accused and Imprisoned as Evil drs; yet, such our practise of meeting is manifestly according to the Law of God, Gospel of Christ, Scriptures, Example of Saints, and President of primitive Christians; all which give Iudgment for us. Secondly, What Judgment do our Neighbours give in this Case? they say, concerning our Meetings, That they have known us to meet together in such manner, for diverse years, in their Towns and Villages, and never knew, nor understood of any m or danger herein, nor ever were any way prejudiced, either
in their Persons or Estates, by our Meetings. The very witness of God in all our Neighbours, doth Testify, and give Iudgment, that our Meetings have alwayes been peaceable and quiet, and that we came together in peace and good order, and parted in the same, and no person hath been harmed by such our Meetings; enquire of the Neighbourhood, and they will tell you, they believe in their Consciences, our Meetings are for good, and have good effects, and are not evil, nor brings forth any evil to any. And as for the manner of our Meeting and sitting together, 'tis orderly and decently, and of good report among men; and for any Doctrine that ever was there held, or heard by any, none can truly accuse it, to be either Error, or Heresy, or Sedition; but on the contrary, they know it witnesseth a∣gainst all Sin and Iniquity, and tends to the turning of peo∣ple from Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, to Truth and Holi∣ness: And many can tell, this is effected, by our Doctrine Preached in our Meetings; and our Neighbours can witnesse, that we part again in peace, and good order, and in convenient time; and they can shew you, they are not terrified, nor the Peace of the Land disturbed (on our part) by our Meetings, which are in God's fear, and to the Glory of his Name, which all sober men know, are according to the Law of God, and Gospel, and primitive Christians Example. And thus our Neighbours give Iudgment for us, and in their Consciences, do not Iustify them that Imprison us; For this matter of meeting together, which Gods Law, Gospel, Scriptures, and our Neighbours, do thus clearly Justify. Thirdly. We are accused, as guilty of a heinous Crime, and Imprisoned, because we refuse to swear at all, or take any Oath in any case. Plea. First, The Judgment of the Law of the New-Testa∣ment of God, and Gospel of Christ, and Scriptures in this cases is clear on our behalf. As in the express command of Christ, in his Law and Scriptures Recorded, Mat. 5. where he saith, Swear not at all, by Heaven, nor Earth, nor by Ierusalem, nor by the Head; but, let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is more comes of Evil. And again, Iam. 5. the
Apostle commandeth the Saints in these words, Above all , Swear not, by Heaven, nor Earth, nor any . And many holy Martyrs since the Apostles dayes,  all Swearing. Thus you see, the Iudgment of Christ  and of the Gospel, and of the Apostle, and of Scriptures,  far from Condemning of us to Imprisonment & Banishment,  our refusing to Swear, that we are Commanded and Ex∣d by them, not to Swear at all; and therefore conse∣quently, justify us in our refusing to Swear; and thus, give not Iudgment for such, as do Imprison and Persecute us for not Swearing. Come to the Iudgment of Christ, his Gospel, and ho∣ly Scriptures; Let you and us appear together before their Judgment Seat, whether they give Judgment against us, that deny all Swearing, or against you, that Imprison us for that Cause: And let the Lord God, Angels and just Men, give their Iudgment in this Case; we a poor afflicted people, do appeal to you, for just Sentence of Judgment, between us and our opponents. Secondly, Let our Neighbours give their Iudgment, though we do refuse to take any Oath, because of the Commands of Christ and his Gospel, as aforesaid; yet, what harm hath this ever yet been to any of our Neighbours, let them speak; or what detriment ought this to be to any of them, they will tell you: Though we cannot formally take an Oath, yet we are ready at all times to do the Truth, and to speak it on all good occasions, as uch as if we did swear upon a Book; and they can trust us upon our words, as much, if not more, than they can do any that swear upon their Oaths; and therefore they shall give judgment, that according to their best knowledge, we ought not to be Imprisoned and Banished; though we cannot swear formally upon a Book▪ being the Truth is not suppressed, nor yet the administrati∣on of Justice ought to be obstructed for our refusing to swear. Thus the Neighbourhood bears witness for us, and against such as deal hardly by us, and Persecute us because here∣of. Fourthly, We are accused as heinous Offenders, and Im∣prisoned because 'tis supposed, we do not submit to obey the known Laws of the Land, but break them, and will not conform to
the Church, pay Tithes, take Oaths, leave meeting together  though we know the Laws of the Land command these things. Plea, First, as to the submitting to all known Laws of the Land; This is known to God and our Neighbours, that our Principle and Practise is, and ever hath been, to submit to e∣very Government, and to all Lawes of men, either by  or by suffering; as at this day, we resist not the greatest of af∣flictions and Tribulations that can be imposed on us; and this is well known to our Neighbours and all people, that we are submissive to all Lawes of men, by patient suffering without re∣sistance, even when any Law requires any thing of us, which we cannot perform for Conscience sake, that Law we fulfil by patient suffering, resisting no man, nor rendring evil for evil to any. And the Iudgment of the Scriptures, which are accor∣ding to both Law and Gospel, and the presidents of Saints justi∣fy us in this Case, in chusing patiently to suffer the greatest penalties of the Law, rather than to obey by doing any such Law, as requires things contrary to our pure Consciences; as in the Example of the three children, Dan. 3. who were com∣manded to fall down and worship the Golden Image, at what time soever they heard the sound of the Musick, upon the penalty of be∣ing cast into the midst of the burning firy Furnace; which com∣mandment they could not obey, nor could Truth fall down to wor∣ship the Image. But rather choosed to suffer the penalty of be∣ing cast into the midst of the burning firy Furnace, which ac∣cordingly was done unto them; again, in the case of Daniel, chap. 6. who was commanded to make no Petition to any God or man for thirty dayes, save to King Darius, upon the penalty and affliction of being cast into the Lyons Den; But Daniel did rather chuse to suffer the penalty, to be cast into the Den of Lyons, than to obey the Commandment, and was cast into the Lyons Den▪ By these examples of holy men, with many more that might be given, out of the Scriptures tis evident, that righteous  will rather choose to suffer, than to obey any law of men contrary to their Consciences. So, the Law of God, and Example of Saint and holy Scriptures, give Iudgment for us in this case, of ra∣ther choosing to Suffer, than to obey Lawes contrary to our consciences; and consequently must needs condemn such that
Persecute and Imprison us, because they require obedience of us, in things against our Consciences. Secondly, Though we do disobey Laws, and cannot actively obey every Law of man, when it requireth and commandeth things contrary to a good Conscience; yet herein also we are Iustified, by the Law of God, Example of Saints and holy Scrip∣tures, and they give Iudgment for us, and consequently against our enemies in this case; and in particular in the two examples before-mentioned in Daniel, the three children were expresly commanded to fall down and worship the golden Image; and Daniel was also required by the Kings decree, not to pray to any God or man, save to King Darius; yet all these holy men of God, did absolutely disobey the Law and Decree, so requir∣ing of them, and did contrary to the commandment: for the three children did not bow, nor Daniel cease to pray to his God, but prayed as at other times, and yet were Iustified of God in so doing. Also, the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 18. were commanded to preach no more in the name of Iesus, but the Apostles did disobey their commandment, and went on and Preached in the Spirit and Power of Christ, contrary to the commandment of the Rulers, and appealed to them, whe∣ther it were not better to obey God than man? Many Examples we might collect out of the Scriptures, that the servants of God did disobey the commands of Kings and Rulers, and could not obey (by doing) any command contrary to God, but ra∣ther choosed to suffer afflictions, and death it self, than to o∣bey such Lawes and Decrees, as required any thing contrary to a pure Conscience; and this is our case at this day, we can∣not obey (by doing) any thing against our Consciences, but must break the Lawes of men, and disobey their commandements, ra∣ther than break the Law of God, and sin against our own Con∣sciences, whatsoever we suffer because hereof; and yet the ex∣amples of Saints, and Scriptures, Iustify us in this behalf. And let all our enemies cease to cry out Rebellion and Dis∣obedience to Lawes and Government; for we are not such as do willfully and obstinately disobey any Lawes of men, but for Conscience sake, and that we may not sin against God, nor offend his Witness in us; Therefore we cannot obey Laws con∣trary
to our Consciences whatsoever we suffer; which ∣sist not, nor rebel against any in this case: So that our ∣ciples and Practises, are to obey every Law and Gover▪ either by doing or suffering. And though we disobey such Lawes as are not according to the Law of God, and rather do chuse to Suffer; yet, herein we are justified by the Law of God, and the holy Scriptures. Thirdly, And as for our Conversations among men, in re∣spect of our daily walking and converse with them in our dealing, in respect of honesty, and faithfulness, and truth, and justness in works and words; our Neighbours shall give witness for us: We will not justify our selves, tis God that justifies us, and the Law of God, Gospel of Christ, Scrip∣tures, Examples of holy men, our Neighbours, and the wit∣ness of God in all mens Consciences, shall bear witness to us. And all these do give judgment for us in these cases, to whom we do appeal for Judgment. And, O Lord God Everlasting, do thou Iudge our Cause, do thou make it manifest in thy due Sea∣son to all the world, that we are thy people, that we love Thee a∣bove all, that we fear thy Name more than all, that we love Righteousness and hate Iniquity; and that we now suffer for thy holy Name, and Truth, and for thy Honour and Iustice, and for thy Truth and Holiness. O Lord, thou knowest we are resolved to perish, rather than to loose one grain hereof. Amen, Amen. Our Accusations and Answers, truly compared, and weigh∣ed in the ballance of Justice, and truth in every mans Con∣science, Let all the world Judg of the Case, Do we deserve to be Ruined, Destroyed, Imprisoned, and Banished, and that to be devoured of Wild Beasts, as our enemy threatens us he will do? Is it so, Are we Hereticks? are we Seditious? are we Drunkards? are we double dealers? are we such as the Law of God condemns? what evil have we done in the Land? do we hurt any body? are we not Innocent before the Lord and Men? we appeal to the just witness of God in all; let it be answered, & though no man will hear and consider our cause this day, yet the Lord will plead our Cause in his time and season, and make the world to know we are his people; in the mean time, we are willing to suffer the Reproaches of ungodly men, till the Lord work deliverance in the earth.
But now it may be Objected by the Magistrates and Ru∣lers, That we have now a Law against you, and you must Suffer; for we cannot but put the Law in Execution, according to our Oaths and Offices; and it is not we that Persecute you, but it is the Law of the Land by which you now suffer, and we cannot be blamed for your suffering, we onely execute the Law. And after this manner is the Reasoning of some at this day, &c. Answ. To all which I do Answer: It is true, there is a Law now Enacted against us, which is pretendedly made the ground of our suffering; but whether that Law be in it self Iust, or Unjust, I shall not now demonstrate, but shall leave it to the Iudgement of all Christian men that know us, our Prin∣ciples, Doctrines, Wayes, and Conversations, and let them judge whether we deserve the Penalties and Punishments therein described, for any Principle, or Practice held and maintained by us. And though there be A Law against us, yet the Magistrates that are Executors thereof, may execute the same with Moderation, or with Uiolence; with Discretion, or too much rigour; and it will be well for them to use mode∣ration and discretion in this case: Hereby may they save them∣selves from that weight of Anger, and Indignation of the Lord God, that will come upon all Uiolent Doers, who seek to destroy the Innocent, and rejoyce in the occasion Administred. And though This Law be Enacted against our Meetings; not ours, I may say, but such Meetings as are Dangerous to the Publick Peace, and to the Terrour of the People: But our Meet∣ings are not such, and therefore This Law may not Iustly extend in its Execution to the Breaking of our Meetings, nor to Banish us because of our Meeting together, which is for the Worship of God, and are Peaceable, and of Good Report among all good men; and are not for Disturbance of the Peace, nor Terrour of the People, and therefore justly free from this Law as aforesaid. And though This Law is pretended against us for to Ba∣nish us, and to ridd the Land of us, as some vainly suppose. Yet must it needs be Executed to the height of it, without Limitation, or Restriction? Must this Law be Executed to its height, more than some other Laws, that are as truly En∣acted,
and as fully in force as this Act can be: Yet some such Lawes there are, which better deserves Execution than this, yet they lie Dormant, as is visibly apparent at this day, as in 4 Iac. cap. 5. in these words: Be it Enacted, &c. That all, and every person or persons, which after Forty dayes next following the end of this present Session of Parliament, Shall be Drunk, and of the same Offence of Drunkeness, shall be lawfully Convicted; shall for every such offence, Forfeit, and loose five Shillings, &c. to be paid to the hands of the Church-Wardens of that Parish where the Offence shall be committed, who shall be accountable there∣fore to the use of the Poor of the same Parish. And if the said per∣son, or persons so Convicted, shall refuse, or neglect to pay the said Forfeiture, then the same shall be levied of the Goods of every such person, or persons, by Warrant of Precept from the Court, Iudge, or Iustices, before whom the same Conviction shall be: And if the Offender be not able to pay the sum of Five Shillings, then he shall be committed to the Stocks for the space of Six Hours. I pray you read the Statute at large, tis worth a sober mans pains to read over, and then Judge whether that Law be duly Executed at this day; and also, whether it deserves not more strict Exe∣cution than the present Act against us. Also the 1 Iac. cap. 7. in these words: That all persons calling themselves Schollars, going about Begging; All Idle persons going about in any Country, either Begging, or using any Subtle Craft, or unlawful Games, or Playes; or feigning themselves to have knowledge in Physi∣ognomy, or pretending that they can tell Fortunes, or such other like phantastical Imaginations; All Fencers, Bear-wards, Common-players of Interludes, & Minstrels, wandring abroad, Shall be taken, adjudged, and deemed as Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, and shall suffer such pains and punishments as is expres∣sed, 39 Eliz. cap. 4. (viz.) That every such person shall be stripped Naked from the middle Upwards, and shall be openly Whipped, until his, or her Body be bloody, &c. and shall be forth-with sent from parish to parish, &c. And read the Statute at large, and then consider how duly it is Executed now, and whether it deserves not Execution, as much as the late Act against us, though in some places, the one is more Executed than the other; where many of our friends, being honest sober per∣sons,
and of good Conversation, and yet are haled out of their Meetings, where they are met only to worship God, and for no other end, and sent to Prison, and persecuted to the very height of the said Act; when as idle persons, following unlaw∣ful Games, and Playes, and Bearwards, common players of In∣terludes, and Minstrells of diverse kinds, do wander up and down City and Country, and having their Play-houses publick, where their wickedness is acted; such persons, and such things, though appearing publickly, yet are permitted, and little or no notice taken of them by some of the Magistrates, so as to punish them for breach of the Lawes, for the preventing of these Evils; but such wickedness is too much suffered, though there be diverse Acts of Parliaments against such persons and such actions, as well as there is one against our Meetings, yet, the Act against us, is more put in Execution in some places for the breaking of our Meetings, which are for the Worship of God, than the good Lawes for suppressing wickedness, though there is better Law for the one, than for the other; diverse other Lawes and Statutes made for good ends, for the sup∣pressing of wickedness in the Land there are, which are but▪ easily Executed at this day; but here is one Act against peace∣able meeting together for the worship of God, which is violent∣ly Prosecuted and Executed upon Innocent men: and let all just men judge of these things, though there be a Law Enacted against our Meetings, so there is against Drunkards and drunk∣enness, and unseasonable tipling in Taverns and Ale-houses, and against Minstrells, Fidlers, Pipers and Players, Common-Players and Stage-Players, that go up and down the Countries, and have their Play-houses in publick Cities, which Statutes ought to be rather Executed, though they are not: but these things we shall leave to all sober people to judg of. And seeing that The Law against Us is more put in Exe∣cution, than these other Lawes, it doth appear that there is more envy against us, and our peaceable Religious Meetings, than there is against Prophaneness and Wickedness, Drunken∣ness, and Stage-Playing, and such like; and such Magistrates, wheresoever they are, are not excusable in the sight of God; though there is a Law against us, while they Prosecute it a∣gainst
us, and not these other good Lawes against proph ungodly persons and practises; and therefore seeing we d fer, we must say, It is not only because there is a Law  us, but it is also, or rather because, there is enmity, and  and wickedness in the hearts of men against us, which  main cause of our Sufferings at this day; and let the  strates compare this Law made against us, with that Sa in Doctor and Student, cap. 2. speaking concerning the written in the Heart, teaching every man what is to be  and what is to be fled: And (saith he) Because it is  in the heart, therefore it may not be put away, nor is it changeable by any diversity of place, or time; And therefore  this Law, Prescription, Statute, nor Custom may not prevail▪ if any be brought in against it, they be not Prescriptions, tutes, nor Customes, but things void, and against Iustice, a other Lawes; as well the Lawes of God, as the Acts of Men,  to be grounded upon the Law written in the Heart. And in  of the same it said; Every mans Law must be consonant wit Law of God, and therefore the Lawes of Princes, the Comm∣ments of Prelates, the Statutes of Commonalties, nor yet the dinances of the Church are not Righteous, nor Obligatory,  it is consonant to the Law of God. And we are sure the  God and holy Scriptures do justifie our Meeting together, as  is expessed. Also in the Statute 28 Hen. 8. chap 7. it is in these words, That no man, of what Estate, Degree, or C∣tion soever he be, hath power to dispence with Gods Laws, as  Clergy of this Realm, and the most part of all the Un∣sities of Christendom. And we also Affirm, and think  things truly compared one with another, We leave the the Judgement of the Law of God, Gospel of Christ▪ Scriptures, and our Neighbours; and let Truth determ So be it. By E. The End.
