C1887 12730428 66467
A Rod for the Fool's-Back, OR, DR. CHAMBERLIN And His PROPOSAL VINDICATED, From the Foul Aspersions of a Dirty, Scurrilous Scribler, who pretends to Answer the Paper of the Comparison, between the Doctor's Proposal, and Mr. Briscoe's. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by John Whitlock, in Statio∣ners-Court, near Stationers-Hall. 1694.
A Rod for the Fool's-Back, OR, DR. CHAMBERLIN And His Proposal Vindicated, From the Foul Aspersions of a Dirty, Scurrilous Scribler, who pretends to Answer the Paper of the Comparison, between the Doctor's Proposal, and Mr. Briscoe's. ON sight of this notable piece of Confidence, or rather Impu∣dence, that this Abusive Fellow does present his Reader withal, I thought, that both Doctor Chamberlin and his Project, as well as the Author of that Paper, whom he calls Pamphleteer, were ut∣terly to be overthrown and confounded at once, with unanswerable Ar∣guments, and those quoted out of the Doctor's own Books too, ay and the Paper examined by every Paragraph! Most certainly there is a full stop put to all the Doctors Proceedings now, and he must never dare to trouble Mankind any more with his projects: For our most discerning
Scribler conceiting that he hath found out, that the Author of that Pa∣per neither understood the Doctors or Mr. Briscoes Proposals, or does wilfully design to mislead his Reader; and knowing, that Mr. Briscoe is better emploied in Publishing, &c. He therefore intends to take upon him the task, to shew how notoriously the Author hath prostituted his reputation, by publishing most palpable absurdities, and no less notorious untruths. And by your good have Mr. Impudence, I shall tell you, that on farther scrutiny, I shall make it appear, that you are not able to perform the task you have undertaken; but that this task is most palpably too hard for your slender abilities. I cannot tell whether you have done this with the connivance of Mr. Briscoe, or altogether of your own head, for that you say, he is better emploied in publishing a Second Edition of his most Ingenious Book; (with most incomparable additions) such I warrant ye, as the like were never seen, heard, or understood before; because saith he, our Pamphleteer himself is forced to confess it to be such; there's a clincher for yenow that's unanswerable. Well Sir, I'le venture to ex∣plain the meaning of it, tho' it be without the Author's leave, and thus it is. The excellency of this Book, for which it is so commended, doth not consist in the Twenty several Proposals as he imagines, because they are all much worse and more perplexing to consider, than the Doctors; but in the management of the Arguments against the present Bank and Lotteries, which are such destructive ways of raising Money; all which hath been already hinted at in the Doctors, and others Answers to Books Written for the said Bank, which he hath more copiously handled in his own Book, and therefore it was called Ingenious, and may be applied to the Doctor's Proposal, as well as to Mr. Briscoes: For besides, the Doctor hath Written, though not Published, a compleat Book, being a large Manu∣script on this Subject, and it may be without exception equal to Mr. Briscoes, and therein hath fully Answered all Objections, and likewise hath made several Proposals of greater and lesser value, all which Mr. Briscoe▪ hath not only seen, but hath had some of them in his Possession for two Months together, and therefore knew the better how to frame his own by it. For before Mr. Briscoe was brought acquainted with the Dr. by Mr. Salisbury and Mr. Prime, he was altogether Ignorant, and wholly unacquainted with this project, or any thing like it; but was instructed by the Dr. therein, because he was recommended as a Man, that might be serviceable, after which time he accompanied the Dr. to a meeting of some Scotch Noblemen, Gentlemen and Merchants.
But Mr. Briscoe always was so crafty, as to diswade the Dr. from pub∣lishing any thing in Print, lest the World, said he, should be too much enlightned; and likewise he discouraged the Doctor from making appli∣cation to my Lord Rumny, or the Court, for that he was confidently assured, they would never encourage any thing of this kind; and yet at the same time was underhand, without acquainting the Doctor therewith, Printing this Book, and hath Dedicated it to the King, yet privy to all the Dr's. proceedings, and joined with him in a Proposal, which he undertook to bring to pass. Pray now, but behold what a Snake the Doctor hath cherished in his bosom all this while! But what could otherwise be expected of a Stock-Jobber. I can tell you just such another story of two Men, who may be named R. and B. You must know then, that R. was an honest worthy Gentleman, who communicated to B. a notable sharper, (tho' unknown to be such to R. till after tryal) a proposal, which might be advantagious, for which they must get a Patent: B approves of it, and promiseth all his assistance, on which with some others, as I remem∣ber, they agree to take out a Patent, but a little after, R. went out of Town on his own business; B. in the mean time gets the Patent to be engrossed, and the while R. unlook'd for returns, and by chance sees this Pa∣tent engrossing; presently takes it in his hand to read; the principal Clark, or Master of the Office seeing that, says to R. O Lord Sir, we had a particular charge from B. that you of all Men should not have a sight of it, and so goes to take it out of R's. hand; Nay says R. if you have a mind to go to Cuffs for it, withal my Heart; but I am resolved to read it now I have it; which he did, and saw that his name was no where mentioned, though he was and ought to have been the principal person concerned therein. And then R. having an Interest in the Court, im∣mediately procured a stop to be put to it, and some other things of the like nature have been practiced by the said B. Now the Doctor was not altogether so wary it seems. Next I shall proceed with Mr. Impudence by Paragraph. Paragraph First, I allow Mr. Impudence hath quoted the Doctor right, but pray observe what a notable Remark he hath made on the Pamphleteers disingenuity, or forgetfulness in giving an account of only how 8000 l. of the Doctor's 10000 l. is to be disposed of, but says not a word of the 2000 l. the Doctor hath reserved to himself.
And what of all this now? What occasion was there of mentioning of it in that place? When as it hath been told in the Doctor's Printed Proposal already, and the Paper being but a short Abstract; the Author of it would have been altogether as impertinent as your Worship, if he should have repeated any thing more of it in that place, than might serve his purpose. But of this Mr. Impudence shall say something more of it presently. It may be so, and I believe to as little purpose. For his Second Paragraph, It is also very right quoted, wherein Mr. Briscoe offers that the like current Credit be raised on Gentlemens Estates of 100 l. per Annum, engaged to pay 10 l. per Annum for ever. Now for the Remark. Why, says he, I find Mr. Pamphleteer, that you understand not that Mr. Briscoe proposes; for whosoever peruses his 16, 17, 18, 22, 23 Proposals will find almost Twenty several Proposals or Terms for raising Money These Proposals, I believe are like some fruitful Bitches, that carry half a dozen Whelps in their Bellies at once; and we may as well say of Mr. Briscoes Proposals, as of Hudibras his Tropes. No sooner he his Mouth did ope, But presently out flew a Trope. I suppose if his Book be more carefully perused, you may find Proposal in every line, or at least a great many more then may appear at first  I can't tell whether the Doctor hath so many Proposals ready cut and dry'd by him, tho' any Man may judge his Proposal may be varied many ways; but this I know, that this one Proposal alone of the Doctors, is worth much more than all Briscoe's numerous company of Proposals, and let him invent as many more as ever he can to boot. Farther he goes on, And this for ever, is no more then, that he who takes up Bills of Credit upon his Estate, must pay 10 l. per Cent, per Annum for ever, till the principal be paid, and that for ever may be in Twelve Months, if he pays in his Money at the Years end. Why then Mr. Briscoe ought to have said, till the Principal and In∣terest be paid in, as in the Case of Mortgages, that are redeemable, and not have used these words for ever, which were improper in that place; but Sir, Must it follow then, that the Author must be blamed for his want of understanding, when Mr. Briscoe did not use proper and intelligible expressions? For you allow the Author hath rightly quoted him, by your Repetition, and Explanation of Mr. Briscoe's meaning.
Paragraph the Third, But as this is a far less encouragement to the Free∣holder then the Doctors; so there is much more care and trouble to settle Estates according to Mr. Briscoes Rules. Remark, Prithee Mr. Pamphleteer do not you pretend to pass your judgment of what is more or less incouraging, you have acquitted your self so ill in this Paper, that no body will give a white Far∣thing for your Opinion. Now Mr. Impudence, wherein does it appear, that the Pamphleteer hath so ill acquitted himself; is it only because you say so, for we have none but your lying expression for it, for hitherto in all these Three Paragraphs you have not made it appear, that he hath either mislead his Reader, or shewed any Ignorance, or prostituted his Reputation, or published most palpable absurdities, or notorious untruths as you at first engaged to show; but hath acquitted himself very well with true quo∣tations: And what follows? VVhy Mr. Briscoes proposals lie before the Parliament, and they are more capable of judging then ten thousand such little scriblers as you are. This is  cum privilegio, truly Sir there is no body will dispute that point with you, and I do not doubt but in the end their judgments will , (if they shall think fit to embrace either of them) ; the first, because it will furnish them with more Money to pay their debts, if they have any, and encrease their Estates; the  that it hath past the approbation of two of their Com∣mittees, and Printed in their Votes as both profitable and practicable, and that Briscoes hath not. The Fourth Paragraph, So that an Estate of the same value yields to the  by the Doctors Proposal 6000 l. paying 100 l. per Annum, for 100 Years, which at 6 l. per Cent, raises 360 l. which is 260 l. more than the same Estate yielded before; and an 150 l. Yearly more then Mr. Briscoe pro∣poseth. Remark, Yes, Mr. Pamphleteer, you say true. That's much you will make so free a Confession Mr. Impudence, still here is neither absurdity, nor untruth in all this. But here now comes the Kill-Cow at last, and the principal matter, that destroys the Doctors project. Says he, And the same Estate might yield the Freeholder 96000 l. if settled for the payment of 100 l. per Annum, for 1000 Years; for if once, you come to exceed your Fund, and to say the 2000 l. Fund is a security for 10000 l. you may as well add another nought to it; and say, it may be a security for 100000 l. As to the parallel it is unintelligible nonsence.
There's for you now Doctor in plain terms, and unless you can un∣riddle this Riddle, and explain this great Mystery, or take this great stumbling-block out of the way, your proposal is lost for ever. But what doth Mr. Impudence make of the Committee at the same time, that past their approbation of it to the House, that it was both profitable and practicable? O! but this is an Objection, that he hath found out since. Very well Sir, since the case is so, I will undertake in both the Au∣thors and the Doctors place to Answer and Explain this mighty difficulty (though I doubt not but the Doctor is able much better to do it himself, if he shall think it worth his while to take notice of such a feeble Cham∣pion as you are) and make you appear as Ignorant, and absurd a fellow, and as great a lyar, as you would falsly represent both the Doctor and the Author to the World. For neither the Doctor, nor the Author do any where affirm that 2000 l. Fund or Value in Land is a Security for 10000 l. as you say they do; for though an Estate of 100 l. per Annum, by this most excellent Pro∣posal, does raise the value of 6000 l. to the Subscriber, yet it does not follow, that the Doctor says it is worth it to sell at the Market-price, or is a Fund sufficient for so much, if he had, you would certainly have quoted the Page: But this Mr. Impudence and Mr. Ignorance too, is your own false Notion, that you would fix upon the Doctor to render his Proposal ineffectual; as more plainly you tell us in the last Page, That the Doctor proposes four Millions, meaning for himself, for ever, which is as much as the 200000 l. per Annum Land proposed by the Doctor, for the security of the whole two Millions is worth, so that the Fund for the whole Sixteen Millions is in Nubibus. For in plain terms the Doctor hath made no provision for that. And farther a little lower, In the Third point we agree, only as I have said, I cannot come up to the Doctors Notion to make 2000 l. value in Land, to be a security for 10000 l. No, nor the Doctor neither, as you have told the story. But for that I hear several Men, who being not rightly informed of the Doctors Proposal, are apt to be drawn to an ill opinion thereof, by means of such as your Blockheads Idle suggestions: Therefore to undeceive them, I shall lay down the Doctor's words in his own Proposal, which are these, That any person, that hath an Estate of 150 l. per Annum, may sub∣scribe the same for the payment of 100 l. per Ann. for 100 Years, until the Sum of 200000 l. per Ann. be compleated; that on every such Rent of 100 l. per Annum, the Doctor by order of the Commissioners shall
Issue out Tickets to the value of 10000 l. and no more, whereof 4000 l. shall be to the Subscriber, and 2000 l. to some publick Joint-stock, but the profit thereof to the Subscriber, and the rest to other uses, &c. In all this, the Doctor says not a word, that the Rent of 100 l. a Year is worth, or a sufficient Fund for 10000 l. but what he proposeth is, that an Estate of 150 l. a Year, together with the 2000 l. Stock in Trade, is a sufficient security for the payment of a Rent of 100 l. a Year to the Commissioners, which does not amount to that great Sum of 10000 l. till an Hundred Years be expired; and this he might have added withal, that this said security does every Year grow stronger, as the Rent is constantly paid in; for when 99 Years are past, there will remain but one Year more, and supposing the Rent to have been con∣stantly paid, there will then be put 100 l. due, yet the said 150 l. per Annum Land together with the said 2000 l. Stock, is all still tyed to make good the payment of the said remaining 100 l. but then I know you are in haste to reply, How comes 10000 l. to be raised and lent on this 150 l. per Annum Land? For no Man will lend above 1500 l. at most on such an Estate, and 2000 l. is the usual price for an 100 l. a Year. This is the Mystery, which is thus easily to be made plain. The 10000 l. is not to be borrowed at Interest of any private Person, or publick Society; for then the Parliament must pay at least 8 l. per Cent, it being a tryed Case the last Sessions, when they borrowed 1200000 l. of a company of Men, who would not deposit the Money without 8 l. per Cent, and a farther contract, to be made a company of Bankers with privileges to give out Bills, that might be of advantage enough to make their Money and Bills together yield above 30 l per Cent at least; and incommode all the rest of the Nation to the ruine of many: But all this Money is to be raised out of a Mint, wherein Brass Tickets of 5 l. Value are to be formed, for which no Interest is to be paid; and the project, like a Mine, is able to support its own Costs and Charges; these Tickets when confirmed by an Act of Parliament, and secured by Land as aforesaid, are and will be full as useful to all In∣tents and purposes, as if we had discovered a Gold or Silver Mine. Now the Value of 10000 l. in these Tickets are to be made, and lent to the Subscribers, and other uses as aforesaid, and to be repaid, but not all at once with Interest, as in the case of all other common Mortgages, where the Creditor can call in both Principal and In∣terest when he pleases, but to be an Hundred Years in paying at an Hundred Pound a Year only, which in the end makes up Ten Thou∣sand
Pound; so that if any Subscriber is behind in his Rent but one Year, you seize the Rents of his Estate, of 150 l. and the profits of 2000 l. in Stock, and that certainly will quickly pay that Years Rent of an Hundred Pound, and then all is free again till another Years Rent be behind: So that the difference only consists in the manner of repaying it, which makes the Hundred and Fifty Pound a Year a good Security. Thus after the same manner, if you have an Inn, Rented at Eighty Pound, and a Ground at Twenty Pound, in all an Hundred Pound a Year, and the Tenant hath a Lease for Ten Years, which at the end of the term in all will amount to 1000 l. and perhaps all the Goods in the House are not worth above Sixty Pound, when this Tenants Lease begins, will you say, that this is a good Security for a Thousand Pound, or that this Man is to pay you a Thousand Pound? No sure; but rather he being an honest careful and obliging Man, he is good Se∣curity for a Rent of an Hundred Pound a Year in that Inn. For in such an Estate any Landlord will trust an Industrious Careful fellow with so much, tho' he be poor, when he will be unwilling to trust him with an Hundred Pound in Ready Money, and thus the Poor Man may pay a Thousand Pound by that time the Ten Years are expired; The case being truly thus: Then I say, That an Hundred and Fifty Pound a Year, whose Purchase is Three Thousand Pound, with the Two Thou∣sand Pound Stock, is a very large Security for Ten Thousand Pound to be repaid at an Hundred Pound a Year, without other Interest: And thus it may be a Security for Ninety Six thousand as he says, though being a most prodigious Dance he could not comprehend the manner of it. This point then, I hope, is sufficiently cleared, and you Mr. Impu∣dence proved most notoriously guilty of Evil speaking, lying, and slan∣dring. Now if the Doctor had proposed to raise a Thousand Years Purchase, on an Hundred Pound a Year, then the Sum would have been so great, that but few Subscribers could have the benefit of it, whereas by such a number of Years as an Hundred, there is room enough for all the Members of the House of Commons if they please, and Fifteen Hundred Men more to Subscribe, to raise such a Sum as Twenty Millions, out of which they may pay their Debts, and discharge their encumberances; besides a supply of Four Millions to carry on the War, and Royal Fishery, which Briscoe's Proposals say nothing of.
But to return to Mr. Impudence again, who after he hath declared himself a conceited lump of Ignorance, says, He is willing to pass by the unintelligible Nonsence, and Remarks the leaving out of the Doctor's Two Thousand Pound reserved for himself; which he begrutcheth the Doctor very much, of which more anon. Says by the Doctor's Proposal, the engaged Estate will be, after an Hundred Years, discharged from this encumb∣rance, and free for the like settlement, which being engaged for ever by Mr. Briscoe's can admit of no further improvement, and 'tis much better to raise Ten Thousand Pound on the same Estate, than Two Thousand Pound. Remark, In Mr. Briscoe's Proposals, Eighteen and Twenty Third, an Estate by his Method may be settled Five or Ten times over, for and Hun∣dred Years. Why, Mr. Impudence, I pray you tell me now the difference be∣tween Mortgaging an Hundred Pound per Annum, for Ten Thousand Pound to be repaid as per Doctor's Proposal, and Mortgaging of it for Twenty Years, and then pay it off, and so for another Twenty Years, till an Hundred Years be compleated, discharging the said Mortgage every Twenty Years, according to Briscoe's Proposal? Will not there be more than the value of Ten Thousand Pound paid in Principle, Interest and Charges by that time? And is not a greater Sum abun∣dantly more serviceable, than a Sum that's less by a Fifth part? For you your self confess it when you say a little after, you are sure it is better for the Nation to have an Hundred Thousand Pound raised upon an Estate, than Ten Thousand Pound, as is said. But Mr. Impudence proceeds. And with submission it is nonsence, I tell you again to raise Ten Thousand Pound on Two Thousand Pound Fund, and those you would have take your Brass Tickets will say the same. To my certain knowledge, Mr. Impudence, that's another great lye of yours, for that there are very many of them do know and say to the contrary, and for those that do not, I hope they will better un∣derstand it, when they have read thus far; Especially when they shall observe, that neither this Mr. Blockhead, nor his great Master Mr. Briscoe, from whom he hath his Instructions, doth make any differ∣ence between a Fund of Land settled for the payment of Ten Thou∣sand Pound presently, as they understand it, and Ten Thousand
Pound to be an Hundred Years in paying, as the Doctor proposeth. Every body knows, that according to the Market-price in England, Land is reckoned at Twenty Years Purchase, and then Ten Thousand Pounds buys Five Hundred Pound a Year; and if lent on a Mortgage, they will expect a Thousand Pound a Year to be tyed for Security, and yet reserve a liberty to call it all in, whenever they please, and therefore it's esteemed as Ready Money. Now since both the Blockhead, and Mr. Briscoe go about to confound the Doctor's Proposal with this false Notion, that Ten Thousand Pound in present Money, and Ten Thousand Pound that is an Hundred Years in paying, is equally the same thing, and of the same value, for so they most Fallaciously represent it, I would therefore ask both the Blockhead and Mr. Briscoe this one question; Suppose they had Ten Thou∣sand Pound to dispose of, and here are two offers made them, one of Five Hundred Pound per Annum, to be sold for such a Sum, and ano∣ther of a Hundred and Fifty Pound a Year to be Mortgaged for a Hundred and Fifty Years, the profits whereof does amount to Twenty Two Thousand Five Hundred Pound at the end of the said term, and as so much Ready Money according to their Notion, is to be valued, Which of these two offers will they let go their Ten Thousand Pound for? No doubt they would think it an hard bargain, if they were forced to take the Hundred and Fifty Pound per Annum for their Money; though according to their own way of reckoning it will raise 22500 l. One thing is very remarkable in all that write against the Doctor's Proposal, that they love dearly to repeat the same thing over and over again, as in one Jerry Squirt's Pamphlet, and others, as if they were all of the same Welsh Strain. So here again he hints at the said Two Thousand Pound reserved by the Doctor, though he mentioned it a Second time just before the Fifth Paragraph; which at last serves his purpose no more, than if he had only knock'd his heels against the ground. As to the Sixth Paragraph, I have not Mr. Briscoe's Book to peruse, for it seems he did not send any to the Doctor, or his Friends; and they are not to be had at the Booksellers, so cannot reply to it: But dare engage the Author will stand by, and make good what he has Written, notwithstanding in the close of his Remark Mr. Impu∣dence says;
And if this be not as I assert, I will give the whole World leave to account me as Impertinent, Prevaricating, and Falsifying a Scribler, as our Pam∣phleteer hath shewed himself to be. Very well Mr. Impudence! And the World may with very good Reason call you by these Names, and with many more, and worse Epithites, and yet do you no manner of wrong or injury in the least; for by your Scribble, you should have but little value for your Credit, or rather no Credit to save. He that Steals, or Picks a Pocket, may as well say, if it can be proved upon him, He will give the World leave to call him Rogue, and Thief; that being no more than the Title of his Profession, will not hurt him at all. And pray Sir, What matter is it, what the World says of such a sorry Fellow as you, that hath no Name and less Sense? If you had shewed any Wit, it might have attoned for your Rudeness, but Non∣sence and Railing can hardly deserve a Pardon? Paragraph the Seventh, Both this Paragraph, and the following Re∣mark, is particularly about the Doctor's reward for his Proposal: The design of the Paper, I find to be in an especial manner to lessen and destroy the Doctors Proposal, that by such a method they may the better advance, and promote Mr. Briscoe's Multitude of little Propo∣sals, which he hath filled his Book with all, in hopes, that some one or other of them may probably take, like an Adventurer at Lotteries, who put in Five Thousand Pound, in hopes of one Prize, though it fell out they were all Blanks, and I believe his will prove no better: But if either of them does take, then let him alone to benefit himself by it, though he says nothing of his reward there; for all that knows Mr. Briscoe, do well understand that he does not use to concern himself in any private or publick affair, especially those of the publick, without he can tell which way to get a large recompence for his pains. Now since they have endeavoured to expose the Doctor's Proposal of a Land Fund, to be both Nonsensical and Insufficient, I believe I have cleared that to full satisfaction: So that it appears the fault lies in their want of Brains and Understanding, which hath brought forth both this Libel and Briscoes Book, for otherwise Mr. Briscoe could have no occasion to Print so many lesser silly Proposals as he hath, wherein he hath entrenched as well on Mr. William Killegrew's Proposal off  some time ago to the Parliament, as on the Doctors.
I come now to shew one other little design of theirs, which hath no other end at all, unless it be to let the World know, that the Doctor hath carved out too large a Portion for himself, which alone hath a Fund as they say, and for the rest he hath provided no Fund, but what is in Nubibus; at which Mr. Impudence is much disturbed, as appears by his so frequent repetitions, and so much scribble at last together about it: Notwithstanding all which I have plainly de∣monstrated, there is provided a full and safe Security for it all, here on Terra Firma. And though the Doctor hath carved out such a good round Sum as Four Millions, yet it is not all for himself, for Mr. Impudence con∣fesseth, that he is to pay out of it the Lord Keeper, Master of Rolls, and Judges, to be at the charge of making all the Tickets, pay all other Officers, and Offices disperst up and down in every County, and after all these are paid, what think you may remain to the Doctor at last, you should have cast up that too, as well as Briscoes charges. Suppose the Doctor had a Million of Money left him, What is any Man the worse for it? That you have taken such repeated notices of it, Does any Man lose by it, or is cheated out of his right, or wronged any manner of way? Or rather will not every Subscriber (though the Doctor be so largely paid out of it) increase his Estate to above double the value, and gain much more by his Proposal, then he can or will by any of the best of Briscoes Proposals take which you will? And he have a great many, that are spick and span new, an whole Ware-House full of them, so that you may go in, and take your choice of all sorts and sizes, and of all manner of Prizes; but those of the bet∣ter sort hath several more in them, and they are marked, Sixteen, Seventeen, Eighteen, Twenty Two and Twenty three Proposals; 'tis very strange to me if the House of Commons be not quickly cloied with all this cluster of Proposals, especially if they are brought in the Spaeker's sight, he may be apt to call out to Mr. Briscoe in the same manner as was once spoken to a much Nobler Person at the Sessions of the Poets.
Put up your Trumpery good Noble Marquiss, And provide him some Straw in a Room that dark is. If the Doctor had contrived a project so much for the benefit of the Nation, and had left himself out, or forgot himself in, then you might have had much more cause to put him in the Dark Room, after he had been at so great Expences of time and Money: And why it should not be as much commendable in him, to provide well for himself and Family, as his Proposal will do for the Nation in general, if Enacted by Parliament; or why he should not be allowed to pay himself, when every Treasurer, or Man in Office doth the same, and that honestly too, I cannot tell. But this Impudent Booby does not know what he would be at. Oh but he saith, that the very Commissioners themselves, as the Lord Keeper, Judges, &c. must all come to him for their Salleries: And what if they do? What are they worse for it? Why may not they go to him, as well as to any of the Under Officers of the Exchequer? I suppose they will not stand much on that, who they go to; so as they can receive their Money whenever they go, or send for it. For therein lies the stress of the business. But after all, though the Doctor has laid down such a Method in his Proposal for himself to be Mr. Workman, and to have the payment of the Salleries, (as I think he hath most right to the management of it, that is the Inventor) yet it does not follow, that the Parliament are obliged and tyed to follow his Rules, any more than they are to do, as Mr. Briscoe does propose, or to raise no more or less Money than Twenty Millions; but it is left to their discretion to alter what they please, to make who they will Treasurer, and to give the Doctor something or nothing in consideration of his Proposal: However it was convenient and necessary, that some sort of a method should be laid before them, Or else how should they know what to do with any Proposal? Well then, since both the Doctors, and Briscoe's Proposals are before the House, you may ask a Parliament Man, in Case he were, or were not in Debt, which he would rather chuse, the Doctors that will supply him with 6000 l. or Mr. Briscoes that can raise but 2000 l. on the same Estate of 100 l. per Annum, to serve his occasions? And lastly, when Mr. Impudence comes to the last Page, there is but little beside a Repetition of what hath been said before, and not worth
a reading; only this is to be observed of him, that Billingsgate can hardly match his in ill Language. As for Mr. Briscoe, by what hath been said, I think, his behaviour does really deserve a reproof, which I shall give him in a Latin Sentence. Sat poenae est meruisse poenam. But as for Mr. Impudence, it is well for him, that he conceals his Name, for otherwise, there is no Gentleman that knew him, but what would judge him fit to be Kick'd out of all Civil Company for a Rake∣hell. While I was sending this to the Press, there was given to me another of Mr. Impudence's Lybels, which he hath Re-printed, with an impudent Preamble on the top of it; by which, I perceive that Mr. Briscoe, and the Blockhead are great Cronies; and so may they always be, for they are only fit for one anothers Company. And whereas he saith, He will take care, that Mr. Briscoes, and the Doctor's Books shall both lye ex∣posed at the publick Coffee-Houses, to the view of all Persons, that so they may see by the comparison, that the Doctor is not that Man of Sense, he would have the World believe him to be. I desire he will be pleased to let this Paper likewise lie there a long with them, that so they may the better judge of the matter, when they have read what all Parties have said: And whether he hath not Cause enough to be ashamed, if there be any such thing as shame in him, which is much to be doubt∣ed. And though he threatens another parcel of Nonsense in a Second Impression, yet perhaps he may alter his mind, after he hath perused this Paper, wherein the Case is laid so plain, that it's hoped the Scrib∣ling Dunce may be convinced that there is no fear of the Doctor's running his head against a Post; but rather, that this Blockhead being so void of Sense, and therefore so much resembling a Post, may run his head a∣gainst the Doctor, with design to overthrow his Person, as well as his Proposal. FINIS.
