C3897 18271813 107282
THE Chimney-Sweepers SAD COMPLAINT, AND HUMBLE PETITION TO THE CITY of LONDON, FOR Erecting a new CROSSE in the room of that Stately and Beautiful MONUMENT Voted down by the Long-liv'd Parliament, defaced and utterly demo∣lished by the hands of a tumultuous multitude of Factious SECTARIES. Also the Learned Conference between the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the Company, upon several occasions at their private meetings at Chimney-sweepers-hall in Old-street. With the Declaration and Resolution of the Maidens and merry Lasses of London to stand and stick to them in all things that shall be advantagious to their Occupation. LONDON, Printed for John Johnson, 1663.
The Learned CONFERENCE BETWEEN The Master, Wardens & Assistants of the Company of Chimney-sweepers, upon several occasions at their private meetings at Chimney-sweepers-hall in Old-street. UPon the seveal meetings of Mr. Black, Mr. Smut and Mr. Broom, Master and Wardens, with the Assistants of the Company at Chimney-sweepers-hall in Old-street, (being richly clothed in their black Robes and Hoods of the same) was a learned Conference before they agreed upon the Petition, the substance whereof was as follows, viz Black. Gentlemen and Brothers of this noble Society, the chief cause of our Assembling togather at this time is, to de∣clare the sad condition all the brethren of our once slourishing Occupation are in at this present, and the great burden and heavy pressure we have lyen under for many years, since the stately and beautiful Monument of Cheap-side-Cross was defa∣ced and demolished; therefore our design is to consult of a speedy way how to procure another Crosse erected in the room of that rich Ornament, that so we may (after our great
and intollerable sufferings) enjoy a constant place of standing, that our Occuation may once again flurish and we with our Wves and Falies be preerved from inevtable ruin. Smut. Truly for my part, I shall soon declare my opinion, and if you wll adhere to me, I know no way better then to draw up a Petition, and present to the City of London, who are best able to perform the work, and (knowing what a grace it is to the City, will doubtless effect it. Broom, I faith brother, that's the direct way to a Cows thumb Black. I tell you Brothers, that will do the feat, I know they'l hasten the vvork, for it was a stately Ornament to this famous City. Assistants. We all appove of that way, as the only Reme∣dy to cure our present malady; but when this is effected we are at a losse, if we do not get a Patent to hinder the Coffee∣men from sweeping their own Chimneys [which now is their constant practise] saving the Sut to mix with that hellish Ber∣ry to colour their cursed liquour, which is a great hinderance to those of our Occupation, who are deprived of their vailes which they sold to the Dyers, and gain'd a fine benefit, it being very good both for the Dying of Blacks, and all manner of sad Colours. Black. I approve well of your design, but cannot condisend to it at present; for in the first place. let us procure a constant place of standing erected, and then you need not doubt of a Patent to prevent such black-burn'd souls from abusing us; for I have an old Master, that's a Cook to a noble gentleman, would lick his fingers to see me thrive, hee'l stand my friend, so that I value the getting a Patent to plague such Vermine, no more then I value a whift of Tobacco, or the waging of a Dogs tayl. But what says the Journey-men to the businesse pro∣pounded. All. We say, we are so far from withstanding it, that had we a thousand hands more then we have; we would subscribe the Petition, and give your Worships thanks for contriving so good a way for the advancement of our occupation.
Black: Gentlemen we are so careful of your good, that (seeing your willingness) we shall with all expedition bring the buiness to a period; But what witness shall we get to prove our great sufferings, if we are examined about the pre∣es. Broom: Marry I think if we can get the Trumpeter upon the Standard in Cheap-side, none can be better; for he hath stood Centry eve since, and beheld all passages both in the City and Subburbs, and can well tell what trading we have had since the demolishing that stately Monument. Trumpeter: Indeed I can well tell what you have under∣gone since the loss of that Famous Ornament, whose glorious Golden Beams did give light in the darkest night, and whose demolishing hath been so great a trouble and grief to me, that I never enjoy'd the Comfort to sound my Trumpet since; yet have I stood and watch'd the City round, viewing all passages day and night, where instead of hundreds of your Occupation, who used formerly to rise every morning out of the tops of Chimneys like break of day now I can see but one, two or three in a fortnight, so that you must of necessity have a dead time of Trade, though my Water-bearers have ever since had full imployment. Black: I hope you will be pleased, what in you lyes to as∣sist us in our design. Trump. If your design take effect, I shall not be backward, but will promise to assist you, to which end and purpose I in∣tend to lock up my Conduit for a month, and make my Water-Bearers (who have had imployment enough) turn Labourers to assist you gratis in this work; in the mean time Fare∣well. Black: Come Clark draw up the form of a Petition accor∣ding to the directions in this paper. Mr. Collier the Clark drew up the Petition and delivered it to Mr. Black Master of the Company; who return'd it back again, and commanded him to read it over in open Hall; the Copy whereof is as follows, viz.
To the Honourable ever Famous, and Renowned City of LONDON. The humble Petition of the Mr. Wardens, and Assistants with the rest of the Brother-hood of the noble Company of Chimney-Sweepers. Humbly Sheweth. THat the stately, rich and golden Monument of Cheapside Cross was not only a graceful Onament to this Famous City; but also a piece of that excellent worth, that its fame was spread through the whole world, no Cross being Compara∣ble with it for richness and beauty. That it was a place b which our Occupation was much ad∣vanced, we having libety to wait thee every morning for im∣ployment, whether the London Lasses and Virgins of the City repaired upon all occasions (knowing it our constant standing) to make clean their Chimneys, and sweep the sut and dust out of all their private Corners, whereby we enjoyed not only good wages but man a good Break-fast of beef, bread, and beer, before their Mrs. were up, in such plenty, that our Trade was as beneficial as most Occupations about the City. That this Famous and stately Monument in the late unfotu∣nate warr, was by the Vote of a long-liv'd Parliament efced, pull'd down and utterly demolished by the hands of a tumul∣tuous multitude of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other factious Sectaries; whose sole delight is in nothing more then the de∣struction of all who will not submit to their Heritical and dam∣nable Opinions. That by the loss of this rich Monument, this Famous City hath not only been much dishonoured, but our Occupation to∣tally destroyed, we having never since been capacitated with a place of constant standing whereby we might be ready upon call of the merry London Lasses to do their druggery as formerly, but were forced to wander up and down like Hackneys day af∣ day, and week after week to little or no purpose, being
lookt upon like so many walking Spirits; by which we and our Familyes have been utterly undone, through want of imploy∣ment to defend them against the sury of Cruel hunger and cold. Our sufferings being so intollerable that we (without a speedy remedy) can expect nothing but utter destruction. In tender Consideration of these our great Grievances, our humble desires are. First, that some trusty Messengers may be imployed to dis∣cover and find out those persons who were Abettors, Fomen∣tos, and Contrivers of this horrible and unparallel'd Villany, and all those who have, or had possession of the Gold, Lead, Iron, Stone, or other materials belonging to the said Cross; that the may be forced to restore twofold towards the rebuild∣ing the Cross that shall be erected in the room of that Famous Monument Secondly, That a monthly Tax may be Levyed on all Ana∣baptists, Brownists, Antinomians, and other Sectaries, (who were the Original cause of the demolishing thereof) to carry on this great good and happy work. Third, that all those who are well-wishers to the honour and Credit o this Famous City, will freely contribute to the rebuilding of this stately Ornament; for the payment of all Artists, workmen and Labourours who shall be imployed in the work. Fourthly, That the work being finished, we may again have the freedom as formerly, to take up out standing there for the advancement of our Occupation, and the preservation of our Wives and Families from utter ruin And we as in Duty bound shall ever pray, &c. The Petition being read, there was a great shout made by the whole Fraternity; and great applause given to the Clark. In the Intrim came a Declaration with the Resolution of the Maidens of London, which was presented to Mr. Black, who gave it to the Clerk to read in open Hall, the Copy where∣of was as follows, viz.
We the Maidens and Virgins of the Famous City of London, having heard of the design in hand by those of your noble Oc∣cupation) do declare, that we are fellow-felers of you great sufferings, and are sorrow for the burden you have undergone; and that we are willing to condiscend to, and help forward with your design according to our powers, notwithstanding the weak∣ness of our Sex, alwayes provided that you be in readiness up∣on call to sweep cleanse, and brush away the Sut, dust and Cob∣webs, which (through your absence) hath ingendered in our Nooks and private Corners; And we shall according to our abilities contribute quarterly (out of our wages) towards the propogating that good work; our selves confessing that we have been at a loss, through your want of a constant standing, whereby you have been forced to keep at a distantial posture from us; we being compelled with great pain and labour to look you in Pick-hatch, Rotten-row, and Old-street. There∣fore we beseech you to go on and prosper, and our hands and hearts (who are well wishers to your Occupation) shall attend you, as persons who are of such yielding spirits to stand or fall with you in so good and just a cause, Signed by many thousand Maids in and about the City of London. This being read they appointed a day for signing the Petiti∣on, at which time they intend to appoint the most eloquent Orators of that Occupation to deliver the Petition, till when they adjourned and departed to their own Habitations. FINIS.
