C5208 T148945 9790577 44081
A Collection of the several ADDRESSES in the late King JAMES's Time: Concerning the Conception and Birth of the Prince of WALES. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The bumble Address of the Comptroler, and other Members of the Society of the Inner-Temple. PArdon us, Great Sir, if the fear of being thought ungrateful, for the greatest Bounty, puts us upon the hazard of being thought too bold, in approaching your Sacred Person, to offer our most humble and Hearty Tribute of Thanks, for your most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence; and continued to us and all our Subjects, your Royal Assent and Protection, in a free Choice and Exercise of our Religion; a Blessing that could flow from none but the Best and Wisest of Princes, whose Royal Thoughts are wholly taken up, how to make our Religion as free as our Proper∣ty; a Blessing which just Heaven (which ever over-pays all good Actions) has evidently Demonstrated to be Grateful and Acceptable, by showring down the Blessing of Fruitful∣ness on your Royal Consort. May the ROYAL ISSUE live to be the Joy of your most Sacred Majesty, the Delight of all Mankind, a safeguard to your Friends, and Terrour to your Enemies; and may Heaven continue its Favours on your Majesties, and your Sacred Posterity. This, Great Sir, is the Prayer of us, Your most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Sheciffs, Common-Council-men, Grand Jury, and Borough Jury, of your Majesties City and County of the City os Gloucester, from the General; Quarter Sessions there held this 2th day of January, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Dread Sovereign, THE Reason and Equity of a General Indulgence, for matters of meer Religion, is so manifestain it self, and so clearly Illustrated by your Majesties gracious De∣claration for it, tim to all that we can say on that Subject, can but resemble an Eclipse of the sun, by the Interposition of a meaner Light. Nothing then can be more our Du∣ty, both as Christians and Subjects, than first to render unto Almighty God, in whose Hands are the Hearos of Kings, our hearty Thanks, for putting it into the King's Heart to do so good Things for his People. Next, in all Humility, to express not only our Acquiescence, but height of Satisfac∣tion, in your Majesties so Pious, so Prudent, so Charitable, and Kind a Determination towards all your Subjects; to assure your Majesty of our united and utmost Endeavours, to Elect for Parliament, when called, such Members as we may reasonably hope, shall joyfully and readily meet and join with your Majesty therein; and likewise in the Re∣peal of the two Test-Acts, so subject to dangerous Interpretations. Yet, at last, we humbly crave leave, to Congratulate with your Majesty, the Blessing of your Royal Consorts CONCERTION, which we consider as the Reward of Heaven up∣on this your unparallel'd Goodness, and, with the most fervent Zeal, offer up our Prayers to Almighty God, that she may, to the unspeakable Happiness of all your Kingdoms, produce. you a SON, as much the Image of your Heroick Mind, as the Product of your Royal Body. Subscribed also by the said Grand Jury, and Burough Jury consenting, &c. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of your Majesties most Layal and Dutiful Subjects, of your Antient Corpo∣ration of Portsmouth. PResume humbly to hope, that our hearty Acknowledgments, tho' late, for your gracious Indulgence, may be honoured with a favourable Aspecr, since they give precedency to none, in Gratitude and Loyalty. The many and happy Blessings that vi∣sibly attend this your Royal Declaration, instruct us, that the Councils of Princes are no
less the immediate Concern of the Wisdom of the Almighty, than the Protection of their Persons is of his Power. This one Act, most Gracious Sovereign, has dispersed all the Fears and Apprehensions of Fire and Faggot, under your Majesties Reign, which the wicked Enemies of your Sacred Majesties Person and Religion, had maliciously distill'd into the Minds of too many of your credulous Subjects; this has confirmed to us our Liber∣ties and Properties; this hath established Peace and Charity in the Minds of the Dis∣senting Brethren in Opinion, and shaded all your Loving Subjects from the troublesom Heats of Persecution, under the Wings of your Royal Protection. In sine, Great Sir, it is an Act so transcendently Good, that, it seems to us, Heaven could not reward it with a less Blessing, than what it has been pleased to bestow at this present upon your Royal Consort; nor will we be wanting to contribute all that lies in us, to the perpe∣tuating of this Happiness to Posterity: For when it shall seem fit to your Princely Wis∣dom to Summon a Parliament, we do hereby engage our selves, to Elect such Mem∣bers as shall Vote for the Repealing such Laws as obviate your Gracious Intentions in your Declaration. Whoever now presumes to oppose and spurn at this your Royal Goodness, becomes not only ungrateful to their Country, but to Heaven also. And now, most Glorious Monarch, that the Eternal Providence may ever Guide and Pro∣sper all your Councils and Undertakings; that the growing Hopes of the ROYAL WOMB may blossom and flourish to a mature Perfection, and your Majesty enjoy a long and hap∣py Reign over us, is the hearty Prayers of all. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Grand Jury for your County of Buckingham, at the Assizes held at Ailsbury for the said County, the 5th day of March, in the fourth Year of your Majesties Reign, Anno Dom. 1687. Most Dread and Gracious Sovereign, WE your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects of the County of Buckingham, being deeply Sensible of the great Happiness we enjoy under your Majesties Reign and Government, tender our most hearty Thanks to Almighty God, in whose Hands are the Hearts of Kings, that he has been graciously pleased to put into your Roval Heart, the means which have effectually procured it; not doubting your late gra∣cious Declaration, for Indulgence and free Liberty of Conscience, to be the Copy of his Sacred and Divine Will, who has commanded us all to live in Peace and Charity with one another. The Blessing which Heaven has bestowed upon your Royal Consort, is to us a convincing Argument, that you have your Directions for the well management of your three Kingdoms, from that great Court; and we think we are obliged in Grati∣tude and Duty, to use our utmost Endeavours towards the removing those Impediments which may obstruct your Royal Intentions, tending so much to our Good and Welfare; which we cannot perform better, than (when you shall please to call a Parliament) by chusing such Men as are entirely disposed to take off the Tests, and the Penal Laws. This we in all Sincerity promise to do to the utmost of our Power, and shall with most fer∣vent Zeal offer our Prayers to Almighty God, that he would most graciously Please, not only to grant your Majesty a long and prosperous Reign, but that the Issue of your Royal Consort may prove a SON, which may inherit soon his Royal Fathers Virtues, tho' late his Throne. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Grand Inquest for the County of Stafford, at the Assizes holden at the Town of Stafford, the 3d day of April, in the Fourth year of your Majesties Reign, Anno Dom. 1688. May it please your Majesty, WE hope the lateness of this Address will not be attributed to want of Loyalty in us, since it comes with the first opportunity the Body of the County could be pre∣vailed on, having hitherto been detained from paying its Duty, by an over-ruling Par∣ty among us; we therefore, tho' late, yet with united Affections, come to offer the Tri∣bute of our humble Acknowledgments to your Sacred Majesty, for your Gracious Decla∣ration, Indulgent Distribution of your Dispensing Power, and, with Hearts full of Joy, Congratulate the FRUITFULNESS of your Royal Consort; which, as 'tis the hopes and expectations of all Loyal Souls, so may it frustrate the great Ends of the Factious, by the happy Production of a PRINCE of WALES. And whenever your Majesty shall in your Princely Wisdom think fit to call a Parliament, it shall be our study and care to promore
the Election of such Members as will, by their concurrence in Abolishing the PenalLaws and Tests, persect the great Work of Peace, so Graciously and Auspiciously undertaken by your Majesty. And that your Reign may be long and happy over us, are the Desires and Prayers of, Your most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs, and Citizens, of the City of Carlisle. Dread Sovereign! BEing now at liberty, by the late Regulation made here, to Address our selves unto your Majesty, we beg leave to return our late but unfeigned Thanks, for your Ma∣jesties most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence, which we will endeavour to maintain and support against all opposers: We likewise Thank your Majesty for your Royal Ar∣my, which really is both the Honour and Safety of the Nation, let the Teckelites think and say what they will. And when your Majesty in your great Wisdom shall think fit to call a Parliament, we will chuse such Members as shall certainly concur with your Majesty, in repealing and taking off the Penal Laws and Tests; and not hazard the E∣lection of any Person, who hath any ways declared in favour of those Conibal Laws. Surely they do not consider what a Sovereign Prince by his Royal Power may do, that oppose your Majesty in so Gracious and Glorious a Work! A Work which Heaven Smiles upon, and will reward with no less Blessing, we hope, than a PRINCE of WALES, that there may never want of your Royal Issue to sway the Scepter, so long as the Sun and Moon endure; that your Majesties Reign may be long and prosperous, and Blessed with Victories over all your Enemies, are the daily Prayers of, Great Sir, Your Majesties most Obedient and Dutiful Subjects. May it please your Majesty, WE your most Faithful and truly Loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Com∣mon Council, and Burgesses, of the Antient Corporation of Cambridge, do humbly cast at the Feet of your Sacred Majesty, our unfeigned Thanks for your most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence; which your Majesty hath been pleased with much Condescen∣tion to repeat, giving it a double strength by your Royal Word; so that none that are truly Loyal can doubt of the performance of your Majesties most gracious Promise, or refuse to make their thankful Addresses for it. When therefore your Royal Wisdom shall think fit to call a Parliament, we your Majesties most Loyal Subjects, intirely en∣gage our selves, and the utmost of our Endeavours, for the Election of such Members as will heartily concur with that Divine Principle of your Majesty; That Men's Consci∣ences ought not to be forced in matters of Religion, nor they distinguished, in the Service of their Country, by other Tests then that of Loyalty. Wherefore the many Blessings we enjoy un∣der your most Sacred Majesty, engage us in daily Prayer to Almighty God, that as your Royal Virtues exceed all Example, so your Reign, above comparison, may be the long∣est; nor may it end till a PRINCE of WALES, born of your Royal Consort our most Gracious Queen, hath learned, by a long experience, the most Heroick Greatness of your Royal Mind. In Testimony whereof, we have unanimously caused our Common Seal to be affix∣ed bereunto, this 28th day of May, in the Fourth Year of your Majesties Reign, Anno{que} Dom. 1688. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Common Council-Men, of your Ma∣jesties Town and Parish of Maidstone, in the County of Kent. Dread Sovereign, AMongst the many Favours under your Majesties Pious, Prudent, and Serene Go∣vernment over us, nothing more confirmeth our Hopes of lasting Happiness, than the suspending the Execution of those Laws under which many of your Loyal Subjects have most grievously suffered; having also for our future Encouragement, your Ma∣jesties gracious Declaration reiterated, that your Princely Resolutions are, that during your Majesties Reign over us (which God grant may be long) no one of your Ma∣jesties Subjects shall be punished, or disturbed, for matters of meer Religion, nor their Properties invaded; and that your Majesty will call a Parliament, where you have pro∣mised your Royal Assent to confirm it by Law unalterable.
For these undeserved Favours, Great Sir, (after our humble and hearty Acknowledg∣ments, with thankfulness to the Governour of Heaven and Earth, who hath brought you to your Throne, and perswaded you so to Rule as to allow Liberty of Conscience) We unfeignedly in all submission, as becometh good Subjects by Inclination as well as Duty, Present our most humble Thanks, resolving to use our best Endeavours to make an acceptable return of a continued Loyalty, Thankfulness and Compliance to your most Gracious Majesty in all your most Pious and Christian declared Purposes, Particularly in Electing of Members of Parliament for this Corporation, whenever your Majesty shall think fit to call a Parliament. And always shall be Petitioners to the Great King of Kings, that he will bless your Majesty with a long and happy Reign over us, and with a succeeding Issue to sit on the Throne of their Ancestors whilst the World endureth. In Testimony whereof we have affixed our Common Seal, the 25th Day of May, in the 4th Year of your Majesties Reign. To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of your Majesties Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Grand Jury of your City and County of Exeter, held at the Guild Hall of the said City, 23d of April, in the 4th Year of His Majesties Reign, being the Anniversary Day solemnized for your Majesties Coro∣nation. Most Dread Soveraign, SInce it hath pleased the King of Kings to bring your Majesty to the Crown, and seat you on the Throne of your Illustrious Ancestors, on this Day, we thought it our Duty, not only to thank the great God of Heaven for this Universal Blessing, which we did perform with Hearts unfeigned, full of Joy, and throughly sensible of that great Happiness which it hath Pleased the over-ruling Providence to bless us with, under your Majesties most Gracious and Merciful Government. But as we are bound to thank God for this great Blessing, so we judge our selves likewise engaged, by all the Obligations imaginable, to return our thanks to your Sacred Majesty, God's true Vicegerent, whose Actions have surpassed any thing that History could yet afford us, and whose Gracious and Unparallel'd Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, hath come up to that agreeableness of Divinity it self, who hath said of Kings, I have made ye Gods; that you, Great Sir, have exceeded all Princes in that high and transcendent Character; we crave leave, most Gracious Soveraign, to render unto your Majesty our most unfeigned Thanks for those fresh Obligations and Privileges lately granted to this your Ancient and Loyal City in our new Charter, humbly assuring your Majesty, that when ever you shall please to call a Parliament, we shall give our Assistance in choosing such Members as we doubt not will readily concur to perpetuate your great and good Work, which your Majesty to your Eternal Honour and Glory have so happily begun; may the great God of Heaven make your Majesties Reign long and prosperous over us, and grant your Majesty, and your Royal Consort, a numerous and lasting Issue, that as this Generation hath great cause to bless God for you, so future Generations may rise up and call you and your Royal Progeny for ever Blessed: So pray heartily your Majesties most Loyal and Dutiful Sub∣jects. P. P. of. W. was Born the 10th of June, 1688. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the Bailif, Recorder, Justices of the Peace, and Capital Burgesses, with other the Burgesses, Freemen and Inhabitants of the Borrough of Leominster in the County of Hereford. Dread Sir, BY the plainness of our Words your Majesty may read the Integrity of our Hearts, to a Prince whose only Aim and Desires are to revive the English Glory, both at home and abroad; a Prince as Zealous of the true Interest and Welfare of all his Subjects as ever Reigned; a Prince who imploys all his Cares, Actions and Treasures for the attain∣ment of those Ends, and the perpetuating these Blessings to us and our Posterity, by Establishing unto every one of us our Natural Birthright, Liberty and Property, both in Spirituals and Temporals, which, most Sacred Majesty (out of the abundance of your Royal Bounty) hath been pleased so often to reiterate unto us, upon all occasions, espe∣cially in your Majestyes late repeated Declaration of Indulgence, that should we admit of the least Doubt or Scruple of the Sincerity of your Majesties Intentions, we must de∣prive
our selves as Rationally, and become more Stupid than Brutes, or which is worse, more malicious than the Common Enemy of Mankind, nay, should we not most willingly concur with your Majesties most Pious Intentions herein, and contribute to the ut∣most of our Powers in promoting them, we should not deserve the Earth we tread on, the Air we breath in, nor any other common Benefit we naturally enjoy, wherefore, most Gracious Sovereign, in the deepest sense of our most profound Duty, we lay our Selves, our Lives and Fortunes at your Majesties Feet, acknowledging all these Transcendent Fa∣vours we enjoy under your Majesties Government, promising hereby that we will readily Sacrifice all that is dear to us in the promoting your Majesty's most Just, Gracious, Mer∣ciful and Godly Declaration, by Abolishing the Test and other Penal Laws, which have so long Tyrannized over, and Enslaved the Persons and Consciences of your Majesties Loyal Subjects, in Electing of such Members, for this your Majesties Loyal Burrough, (when your Majesty in your Princely Wisdom shall think fit to call a Parliament) as will heartily concur with us therein, as well as in our Prayers, which we all unani∣mously offer to the great God of Heaven, for the prolongation of your Majesties happy Reign over us until you see a PRINCE of WALES (whose Orient Beams we daily ex∣pect) in his full Glory, ready to Support the Crowns and Sway the Scepters of your Ma∣jesties Kingdoms, the Government whereof we humbly pray may continue in your Roy∣al Progeny, until the Consummation of all Ages. In Confirmation whereof we have hereunto put our Common Seal, and Subscribed our Names, this 16th Day of May, in the 4th Year of your Majesties Reign, Anno Dom. 1688. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of your Majesties Corporation of your City of Exeter. VVE your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects of your City of Exeter, in our Common Council assembled, do think our selves highly obliged to render Praise and Thanksgiving to the God of Heaven and Earth, the great Governour of the World, for the Birth of a Royal Prince, a Blessing inestimable, and one of the greatest to your most Sacred Majesty, and these Nations. Great Sir, we are sure that all Men may now be satisfied, that Providence hath not only favoured, but rewarded your Royal Conduct, by which Liberty and Peace have been promoted, and maintained under the Shadow of your Scepter; whose Reign as it has been without a Parallel the most Gracious, so may it be long and prosperous. May your Majesty live to a good old Age, to see the Royal Prince inherit all your Royal Vertues; and after your Majesties long and prosperous Reign, may he be (as your Majesty now is) a Blessing to these Nations. So pray your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are and always shall be rea∣dy to serve your Majesty with Lives and Fortunes, to the last drop of our Blood. In Testimony whereof we have, this 20th Day of June, in the 4th Year of your Majesties Reign, affixed our Common Seal. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Common Council and Burgesses of your Majesties Antient and Loyal Corporation of Berwick upon Tweed. Most Dread Sovereign, VVE your Majesties most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, though most remote in Place, yet as early and zealous in Proximity of Affection as any other, being struck with a profound sense of the due Acknowledgment we, as well as any other of your Majesty's Subjects, owe to the great God of Heaven, and your most Sacred Majesty as his Vicege∣rent over us, for your late and never too often to be Commemorated most Gracious De∣claration of free and general Indulgence, and the many Benefits and Blessings we daily receive thereby, do in most humble manner prostrate our selves at your Majesties Feet, with all possible Expressions of Gratitude. A Declaration which has brought a long with it, as it were, a new Charter to this our Antient Body, by which it hath incorpo∣rated the very Heart and Affections of every Member of it, and united them all as the Heart of one Man, which is the best and surest way of Regulation. A Declaration by which the most dark sullen Clouds of Jealousies and Fears in all unbyast Men, as to the free enjoyment of their Religion and Property are dispelled from our Horizon, and in which Your unparallel'd Grace and Bounty, like that Universal Charity of the Sun shines equally upon all, the Unjust as well as the Just; and by which, as in the Miraculous Preser∣vation of Government in the Ark, even Creatures of most contrary Principles live to∣gether in the quiet enjoyment of themselves, under the Divine Influence of your Pro∣tection.
Wherefore, Most Dread Sovereign, to give you the earnest of a greater Harvest, we hereby most heartily and sincerely declare, that we will on all Occasions defend your Majesties most Sacred Person and Government, with the utmost of our Lives and Fortunes against all Opposers whatsoever: And that whensoever it shall Please your Majesty, in your Princely Wisdom, to call a Parliament, we do hereby Testifie, and unanimously Agree, to chuse for Burgesses such as have your Majesties gracious Recommendations, and shall concur with your Majesties known pleasur, in Annulling and Abolishing the Penal Laws and Test; that so your said gracious Declaration may likewise be the true Sense of all your Subjects, in an Act of Parliament. And lastly, Great Sir, let us, amongst the first of your Subjects, upon the long wish'd for blessed Occasion, of the thrice happy Delivery of your great and Royal Consort, Con∣gratulate your most Sacred Majesties; not only wishing long Life, Health and Prospe∣rity to the Prince, a Blessing to these Nations, but shall also ever offer up our Prayers, that Almighty God will graciously bestow a Male Posterity, from the same Royal Line, to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms to the end of the World. In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto affixed the Seal of the said Burrough, this 16th day of June, in the Fourth Year of your Majesties Reign, Anno Dom. 1688. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of your Majesties Loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and all the Members of your Majesties Antient Corporation of Clisston Dartmouth Hardness, in your County of Devon. Dread Sovereign, WE Presume (full of transports of Joy) to throw our selves at your Royal Feet, heartily to Congratulate the happy Birth of the Prince, the greatest Blessing that good Subjects could desire, or Heaven could grant: And (as the best Obligation of Loyal Hearts) we sincerely offer up our Prayers and wishes, that he may enjoy a long and happy Life; That your Sacred Majesty, as well for his Sake, as for the invalue ble Good and Benefit of these Kingdoms, may live to the utmost Period of humane Life, to instruct him, by your gracious Example, in Piety, Prudence, Courage, and all the Royal Qualifications of a King, of which your Sacred Majesty is the most Perfect Pattern. And when you shall change this Crown for an Immortal One, may he then, with these your Dominions, inherit also your Royal and Princely Vir∣tues. And, we presume also at this time, to repeat our fixed and Loyal Resolutions of serving your Sacred Majesty on all occasions, with our Lives and Fortunes. And we sincerely offer you our hearty Thanks, for your late Declaration of Liberty of Conscience: And whenever your Majesty shall Summon a Parliament, we will chuse such Members as shall entirely, and without conditions, answer your Royal Expectation, in Repealing the Penal Laws and Test, not thinking it consistent with the Duty of Subjects, to make Conditions with their King. With so Gracious a King ! But as your Majesties Mercy and Indulgence is free and unlimitted, so shall our Obedience be. May your Sacred Majesty live long and happily; may all your Enemies either heartily Repent and im∣plore your Mercy, or suffer by your Justice; and may your Throne be Established in Peace. So heartily pray your Majesties Loyal Subjects of this your Antient Burough. In Testimony whereof, we have affixed our Common Seal; the 23d day of June, in the Fourth Year of your Majesties Reign, Anno Dom. 1688. The following was the first on the occasion of the Birth of the P. P. Wales. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble and hearty Address of the Mayour, Aldermen, and Burgesses, of your Corporation of portsmouth. Dread SIR, HAving received by an Express from his Grace the Duke of Berwick, the joyful News of her Majesties being safely brought to Bed of a Prince, we thought it our Duties, in the first place, to pay our humble and hearty Thanks to the Almighty Hand that hath bestowed this Blessing upon us, and hath Crown'd the Wishes of all your good Subjects, with that Act of Grace which they have so long and so earnestly pray∣ed for.
In the next place, we must not, we cannot omit, to Congratulate your Majesty, and your Royal Consort the Queen, in this great Jubilee of the Nation, in renewing and confirming to your Sacred Majesty, by all the outward Marks of an inward and real Joy, our true Allegiance to your Majestly and your Royal Successors. Permit us then, Great Sir, to make this our early Offering of Fealty, to the Royal Infant in his Cradle; and to present him here with the first Fruits of our Loyalty, our un∣seigned Wishes for his long Life and Happiness, that he may inherit with the Crown the great Virtues of his Royal Parents; and when old Age, the Publick Cares, and Troubles of a Crown, hath made you weary of this (word) Printed in the Gazette, instead of [World;] and when that Hand which gave you to us, shall take you from hence, to place you in a better, this young Prince may succeed you in you Throne, and sway your Scepter with the same Piety, Justice, and happy Temper, your Majesty hath hitherto done (and we not doubt but will always do) And since by Divine Providence we have been once more Taught our Duties, and Heaven seems to be in∣clined, by this Blessing bestowed upon us, to forgive the Nation its past Faults, we shall henceforth take more care never to provoke that God, that gave us our King and this Prince, but shall EVER say and pray, Long live King JAMES the Second, our Gracious Queen MARY, and the PRINCE. In Testimony of these our hearty Congratulations, and sincere Wishes, we have caused the Seal of your Majesties Corporation abovesaid, hereunto to be affixed. Dated this 12th day of June, Anno Dom. 1688. and in the Fourth Year of your Majesties Reign. July the 8th. the following presented to the King. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. WE the Grand Inquest for the Body of the County of Middless, having a deep Sence of your Majesties Grace and Favour, in giving us and all your Subjects Security and peace, by your Majesties most Gracious Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, lately repeated and confirmed to us; do, in all Humility, return our due and unfeigned Thanks to your Majesty for the same; and for your Royal and pious Endeavours and Resolution, to perpetuate the present Tranquility to succeeding Generations, for their exceeding Benefit, and your Majesties everlasting Glory. And we resolve, as much as in us lies, to contribute to so good and necessary Work, and join our most humble and hearty Endeavours, that all Penal Laws, in matters of Religion (save for the contempt and neglect thereof) and the unequal Tests, may be A∣brogated; That we and our Fellow-Subjects having no partition Wall between us, may unite in Love, Peace and Happiness, under your Majesties Gracious and Powerful Pro∣tection. We do most solemnly and heartily Congratulate your Majesties great Hap∣piness and Satisfaction, in the Birth of our high hopeful PRINCE, and account it no less Happiness to these Nations. And it shall be (as our Duty) our constant, zealous Care, to pray to Almighty God for the continuance of Life, Health, and Happiness, to his ROYAL HIGHNESS, and for a Blessing on both your Majesties in a numerous Issue, and with long Life, and constant Happiness and Success, in all your Majesties great and pious Undertakings; and subscribe our selves Your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects and Servants. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Council, of your Majesties Loyal City of Durham, July 2d 1688. Most Gracious Sovereign, WE your Majesties most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects of this Corporation, ha∣ving, in the first place, most humbly offered up our publick Praises and Thans∣givings to Almighty God, for the happy Birth of the young Prince; the greater Bles∣sing that could Possibly descend upon these your Kingdoms; do now hold our selves o∣bliged also to present our most humble Congratulations to your Sacred Majesty and your Royal Consort the Queen, upon this joyful occasion; and shall always pray, that your Majesties may be blessed with more Children, and more Sons, that there never may be wanting one of your Royal Stock and Race, to wear the Imperial Crown, and to sway the Scepter of these your Dominions.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Lord Lieutenant, Deputy-Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, of the County of Kent, at the General Quarter-Sessions holden at Cantorbury. the 10th day of July, 1688. for the Eastern Division of the said County. Dead SIR, WE your Majesties Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, having rendred to Almighty God our most sincere and humble Thanksgivings, for the ineffable Blessings bestow∣ed upon your Royal Majesty, your Kingdoms and Dominions, in the happy Birth of a Prince. We do now (Sacred Sir) esteem it our Duty and highest Obligation, pro∣strate at your Majesties Feet, gratefully to acknowledge, that your Majesties admirable Goodness, Piety, and Justice, have obtained from our most gracious God this so inex∣pressible a Blessing: The consideration whereof, as it ought, so are we confidently as∣sured, it will open the Eyes of all Men (who are not wholly possessed with the Spirit of Contradiction) to behold, with grateful Hearts, your Majesties most Fatherly and Pious Care for the welfare of your People: So that (when your Majesty shall think fit to call a Parliament) we shall all, to the utmost of our Endeavours, make choice of such Per∣sons to serve therein, as may unite your Subjects in Charity and Christian Correspon∣dence, by their unanimous Consent to the Repeal of those disuniting Penal Laws and Tests, whereby Divisions and Animosities have so long harboured amongst us. Great Sir, That Almighty God will grant your Sacred Majesty, your Royal Consort the Queen, and his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, long Life, Happiness, and Po∣sterity, is the most zealous Prayer of, Most Gracious SIR, Your Majesties most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Clothiers of the Counties of Devon and Sommerset. May it please Your Majesty, VVE cannot but in a due sense of your Majesties great Goodness to us, render our most humble and hearty Thanks, for your gracious Hearing our mi∣serable Complaints of the Exportation of Wool, and of your Majesties speedy, as well as effectual Redress thereof, in the issuing out your Commission for that purpose; by which your Majesty hath preserved and put a new Life to Trade, which, next to the great and glorious Design of Liberty of Conscience, is undoubtedly the best support of the Wealth and grandure of a Nation; and therefore we can now return with Joy to our respective Habitations. And as it has pleased God, to our great Joy, to Bless your Majesty with a Royal Prince, to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms after your Majesty, so we heartily pray God, there may never want of your Princely Posterity to sit on the Throne of your Majesty, and that he may, in due time, inherit your Princely Virtues, as well as the just Dominion over all your Kingdoms. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Grand Inquest at the General Quarter-Sessions of the Peace, held for the County Palatine of Durham, this 11th day of July, 1688. Most Gracious Sovereign. VVE your Majesties Loyal and Obedient Subjects, upon the first opportunity of representing the Body of this Country, hold our selves obliged, next to our publick Thanksgivings to Almighty God, to Congratulate your Majesty and your Royal Consort the Queen, in the most joyful News of the Birth of a young Prince, now Prince of Wales, May his Royal Highness long Live, and your Majesties be blessed with a nu∣merous Issue, and your Throne Established in all succeeding Ages; which is the hear∣ty and unanimous Desire of Your Majesties most Dutiful Subjects, &c. We the Lord Lieutenant, High Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace of this County, now present at the said Quarter-Sessions of the Peace, do concur with the Grand Inquest in this Address. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble and hearty Congratulation of the High Sheriff, Justices of the Peace, and Grand Jury of the County of Worcester, holden at the General-Sessions of the Peace, the 10th day of July. Anno Dom. 1688. PErmit, Dread Sir! amongst the loud Peals of Joy, that ring in every corner of this Kingdom, to join our Huzza with the rest of your Majesties Subjects, for a Bles∣sing,
bestowed on us, so long, so earnestly desired. Happy we that live to see a Prince of Wales from your Loins, and happy our Posterity, that live to be Governed by a Prince of such a Father. May your Majesty live long, to see those great Endowments Hea∣ven has enriched him with, and he live to outdo whatever History speaks Great of his Ancestor's Actions; and, if possible, even those of James the Second; whilst we contri∣bute, by a stedfast Loyalty, to farther all your just Designs, and not frowardly oppose you in any thing, since Heaven seems to grant what you ask! And that your desire may never receive denial, shall be the constant Prayer and Wishes of, &c. The humble and unanimous Congratulation of his Majesties Justices of the Peace for the County of Sommerset, at their General Quarter-Sessions held at Bridgwater, the 10th day of July, in the Fourth Year of his Majesties Reign. Anno Dom. 1687. Subscribed likewise by several other Gentlemen then and there present. Most Gracious Soverign. ALtho' we have, with all sincerity, made our respective Acknowledgment to Al∣mighty God, for the great Blessing he hath vouchsafed this Nation, by making your Majesty the Parent of a most Hopeful and Illustrious Prince, and have given us great and ample Demonstrations of our Joy for the same, in our several stations, as we were capable; yet nevertheless, we do not think our selves acquitted of our Duty, without an humble Congratulation, with your Majesty and your Royal Consort, up∣on this happy Occasion; and assuring your Majesty, that whenever the over-ruling power (by which Kings Reign) shall resume that Crown you now so justly wear, we will bear all Faith and true Allegiance to this Illustrious Prince; but that the commence∣ment thereof may be late, are, and shall always be, the Prayers of Your Majesties most Faithful and most Obedient Subjects. To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty. May it please your Majesty. THE Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, of your Majesties Antient and Loyal City of York, were transported with Joy, at the Birth of the young Prince: And after they had made what Demonstrations they could at Home of their Rejoycing, thought it their Duty to send, and have sent, some of the principal Members of their Body, to Congratulate your Majesty for so great and extraordinary a Blessing, both to your Majesty and your Subjects, The great God who, hath at sundry times miraculously preserved your Majesty both at Sea and Land, hath at this time enlarged his Blessings to your Majesty and your People, by giving us a Royal Prince, who, we pray, may live long to Inherit the Virtues and Crown of his Ancestors, and that there may never want one of your Royal Family to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms; for the sup∣port and maintenance whereof, we are, and shall always be ready, to Sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes. And that the God of Heaven would be graciously pleased to shower down his Blessings upon your Majesty, your Royal Consort, the young Prince, and the whole Royal Family, is the hearty Prayer of us Your Majesties most Dutiful, Obedient, and Loyal Subjects. To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The hearty Congratulation of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, of your Majesties City of Bath. Dread Sovereign, NO sooner did the happy News of a Prince being born, reach our Ears, but we thought it our Duty to Congratulate your Majesty for so great a Blessing; and knowing it is unjust to be silent on this occasion, we do therefore offer up our Thanks to the great Jehovah, for the sending of an Heir to your Majesty and your Kingdoms from your Royal Loins; which is that alone that can confirm our present Happiness under your Government, and give us a comfortable prospect of the continuance of it; and we, as far as in us lies, shall, in our Proper station, contribute to the Assisting your Majesty in your pious Intentions, in setling these your Kingdoms in Peace and Tranqui∣lity, whensoever your most Sacred Majesty shall in your Princely Wisdom think fit to require it of us. And we heartily implore the Almighty, to send your Majesty and us more such Royal Pledges, by your gracious Consort, and bless Your Majesty with long Life, to see our young Prince, by your Majesties tender Care, fitted to Govern all his people. These are the Prayers of us your Majesties most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects. In Testimony whereof we have hereunto affixed our Common Seal, this 25th Day of June, in the 4th Year of His Majesties Reign.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The. Humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs and Capital Citizens of the City of Carlisle, Great SIR! WE Your Majesties most Loyal Subjects, cannot but express our exceeding Joy (that if we may-say it) transports us above Mortals, and places us on Earth in a most Heavenly Condition, living under Your Majesties most Sacred Protection, a Prince Born for high Exploits, and the Peace of these Three flourishing, though lately distracted Kingdoms, as the whole Series of nine Years Revolution can testifie. Your Majesty in a most high measure hath been the care of Almighty God, whose Projects never fail, but ever in the end brings all humane policy that is contrary to Confusion; Witness your Miraculous Preservations at Sea amidst a number of unparalleled Dangers: Witness the easy Conquest You gained, or rather the just Punishment You inflicted upon Rebels, who durst oppose your Sacred Authority: But to close all, witness this Heavenly Blessing to compleat the Miracle. A Prince Born to the Worlds Astonishment, that gives us hopes of a nume∣rous Issue, an Heir (we question it not) that will Inherit as well as Crown his Father's Heroick Virtnes, (Qualities above the greatness of Constantine) and in Conclusion if need be, finish what Your Majesty, to make us happy, has so fortunately begun, for whose Safety we faithfully promise to spend our Lives and Fortunes, and will dally bless God, that has given You a Fruitful Consort, In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto affixed our Common-Seal the 2d Day of July, in the 4th Year of your Majesties Reign, Anno Domini, 1688. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble and unanimous Address of your Majesties Justices of the Peace, at the General Quarter-Sessions of the Peace holden at Leads, for the West-Riding of the County of York, this 12th day of July, in the Fourth Year of your Majesties Reign. MAY it please your Sacred to suffer us your most Loyal Subjects, moved by the most ardent Affection, profoundest Duty, and truest Interest, to Congra∣tulate You, our and the three Kingdoms Happiness, in the Birth of a Prince; humbly praying the God of Heaven, for Life, Health, and Prosperity to your Majesty, his Royal Highness, and your Royal Consort, with the addition of whatever may contribute to your and their Happiness here: And after a long Reign over us, may your Majesty inherit an Erernal Crown in a better Kingdom: And may there never want one of your Royal Line to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms, till Time shall be no more, is the most fervent, sincere, and unfeigned Prayer of Your Majesties Obedient Loyal Subjects To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Grand Jury for the County of Hertford, at the Assizes held at Hert∣ford the 23 day of July, in the fourth Year of your Majesties Reign, SIR, HAD not a Party averse to comply with your Majesties gracious Inclinations, been too prevalent in this County, an Address would have been sooner made to your most Sacred Majesty, for your most gracious Declaration of Indulgence; and tho we are too to late, yet we hope we shall not be unwelcome, in making a due and just return of our most humble and hearty Thanks, and grateful Acknowledgments, for your Ma∣jesties gracious Intentions to your Subjects in general, in Abrogating of the Penal Laws and Test. We will not (like others) go about thanking your Majesty for your particular Fa∣vours, of promising to maintain the Established Religion of the Church of England only, but do freely, willingly, and unanimously, give our best Thanks, general and without any restriction whatsoever. We are neither for designing Evil, nor for carrying it on when it is begun; there∣fore do promise our utmost Endeavours (when your Majesty shall, in your great Wis∣dom, think fit to call a Parliament) to chuse, and promote the chusing, of such Repre∣sentatives as will, in all respects, comply with your Majesties Desires. We all hear∣tily Thank your Majesty, for your late Proclamation against Swearing. And lastly, we do (with all the Joy our Hearts can wish, or Tongues express) Con∣gratulate the Birth of the Prince of WALES, a Blessing sent from Heaven for the per∣petual Estabishment of Liberty of Conscience. May all the Happiness of Heaven and Earth attend your Majesty, your Royal Consort, and the young Prince; and may we cease li∣ving, when we cease being Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of Your Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council, of your Majesties Corporation and Borough of King's Lynn, in the County of of Norfolk. Great SIR! WE Your Majesties Dutiful Subjects crave leave of Your Majesty, and Your Royal Consort, that we may join with Your Majesties, in offering our most humble and hearty Thanks to God Almighty, for sending Your Majesty a Son, and us a Prince; and further we beg of Your Majesties to accept our Cordial Thanks, for Your Majestles late Favours to the Body of this Corporation; as also for Your Princely Condescention and Affection, by both Your Gracious Declarations, not only extending to the Church of England; but to all other Your Peaceable and Loyal Subjects, assuring us by Your Royal Word, that You will stand by us, whereby we are not only obliged, but resolved, when Your Majesty shall think fit to call a Parliament, we will endeavour to Elect such Members as shall make Your Majesty happy, and Your Subjects easie. And shall ever pray for Your Majesties long Life and peaceable Reign over us. In witness whereof we have Fixed our Town Seal, the 2d Day of July, in the 4th Year of Your Majesties most Gracious Reign, Anno{que} Domini, 1688. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of several Members of the Corporation, and other Freemen and Inhabitants of your Antient City of Bath. May it please your Majesty, NO sooner did the happy News of the Prince's Birth reach our Ears, but we of this Place thought it our Duty, in a more especial manner, to be early in the return of our Praises to the Almighty, for so great a Blessing upon us and your Three King∣doms, and in Congratulating your Majesty and your Royal Consort, of being the joyful Parents of so good a Son; a Gift which the whole Nation ought to esteem as the Reward of Heaven, upon that continued Series of Goodness and Indulgence, which your Majesty hath ever since the beginning of your most Auspicious Reign extended to your Subjects; particularly that of your Compassionate Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, whereby as you are pleased to suspend the execution of all Penal Laws in matters of Re∣ligion, and the requiring of any Oaths or Tests from any; so do we, upon our Allegi∣ance to You our Sovereign, promise and engage, that whensoever your Majesty shall think fit to call a Parliament, such of us as shall have a power of Electing, will chuse none to serve therein, but who will give us full assurance, that they will endeavour the total A∣brogation of them. And that your Majesty may have the ready concurrence of both your Houses in these gracious Intentions, and enjoy the Comfort and Satisfaction of seeing the Fruits and Con∣sequences thereof, by a long and prosperous Reign in Peace and Plenty, (having sur∣vived the Murmurings and Discontents of a malevolent Party) the Prince your Son ar∣rived to Maturity of Years and Understanding, and a numerous Off-spring from your Royal Loins, which may perpetuate your Name and Memory, and even baffle Mortality it self, shall be the constant Prayer of, Dread Soveraign, your Majesties ever Dutiful and Loyal Subjects. To the KING and QUEEN's most Excellent Majesties. The Humble Congratulation of the Lord Lieutenant and Deputy Lieutenant, the High Sheriff, and the Grand Jury, with the rest of the Justices of the Peace of this County of Essex, holden as the Assizes in Brentwood, this 27th Day of July, 1688. Great Sir, WE your Majesties most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, having returned our most humble and hearty thanks to Almighty God for the Inestimable Blessing confer∣red on your most Sacred Majesty, your Kingdoms and Dominions, in the happy Birth of a Prince, Now (Dread Sir) assure our selves that it is our highest Duty and Obligation to lay our selves at your Majesties Feet, thankfully acknowledging, that your Majesties Goodness, Piety and Justice, having obtained this so unspeakable a Blessing from our most gracious God, will open the Hearts and Eyes of all Men, to behold with Loyal and Thankful Respects your Majesties Pious and indulgent Care of the Welfare and Happiness of all your People. And we are resolved, that when your Majesty shall, in your great Wisdom, call a Parliament, we will unanimously Elect such Men as shall answer your Majesties Expectation in uniting your Subjects in Charity and Christian Correspon∣dency. Great Sir, That the Almighty will grant your Sacred Majesty, your Consort the Queen, and his Royal Highness the Prince, a long Life Prosperity and Happiness, and
the most fervent Prayers, Dread Sir, of your Majesties most Dutiful, Loyal and Obedient Subjects. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the High Sheriff, Justices of the Peace, and the Grand Jury of the County of Oxon, at the General Assizes held at Oxford, the 28th Day of July, 1688. Dread SIR! AS we are sensible the best Addresses that Subjects can make, are thereturns of Du∣ty and Obedience to their Princes Commands, we should not have presumed up∣on this Application, but that full Hearts, like full Banks, will overflow: The Blessing God Almighty hath been pleased to bestow on your Majesty and this Realm, by sending a PRINCE of WALES, is a Happiness too large to be contained within the narrow com∣pass of our Breasts; wherefore we could not but join in our Particulars to the Universal Joy of the whole Kingdom. Rreceive therefore, Great Sir, the Congratulations flowing from Hearts full of Loyalty which your Majesty shall allways, find when ever Your Commands shall call us to a performance; and hope there will be none, who hereafter will dare to srown on Your Royal Designs, since Heaven Smilis on all Your Actions, whither we will send sresh our dally Prayers for Your Majesties and the Prince's long Life and Happiness; and hope by constant Solliciting the Divine Goodness, to obtain a Second Blessing to this Nation, that the Queen may have a Duke of York; for which, let the Three Kingdoms join till Heaven hears our prayers, and all concur with us in saying, Amen. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of your Majesties Justices of the Peace in this the North Riding of the County of York, at the General Quarter Sessions hold at North Allerton, by Adjournment, the 17th Day of July, 1688. Most Dread Sovereign, THough we are out done in Point of Time by some of our fellow Subjects, yet we may affirm none approach Your Throne with more joyful and grateful Hearts than We, for the great Blessing God Almighty hath bestowed on your Sacred Majesty, and the Kingdom, by the happy Birth of his Royal Highness the Prince. of Wales. We beg (Sacred Sir) leave to Congratulate with you for this blessing reveived and that We may pray and wish for his long Life and Health and for the enerease of your oy∣al Family, that After-Ages may know, and enjoy an equasity of that Peace and Plen∣ty under the Government of your direct Line, in which we, into your wise and just Government (to the envy of our Neighboars) now flourish. Having owned the vast Advantages we possoss, by your not yet equalled Justice, per∣mit Us, (Great Sir) being the best Return we are able to make, to all are you of our wil∣ling Submission, and ready concurrence, to all your design'd Points of Government, and particularly to that of taking away the Penal Laws and Tests, the best Expedient (we are satisfied) to make this Nation great and happy. To the KING. May it please your Sacred Majesty, IF the Yearly Duty we pay your Majesty in a general Meeting of Your Royal Purroughs had not called Us together at this time, yet we had (after thanking Almighty God in our respective Bur∣roughs for the Birth of the Young Prince) design'd to have met of purpose, for Acknow'edging the great. Obligation we owe Your Majesty in leagthning out, even beyond Your own Life, the Happiness and Quier which we justly expect, during the Prince's life: Nor do we doubt but that the Enemies of our Peace will, upon his Birth, find it necessary for them to lay aside all hopes which they entertained of being able to trouble our tranquility; and that with him God will be stow upon Your Majesty that devout Gratitude which prevails with his infinite Goodness: to bless You with the entire Submission of Your Subjects, and Your Subjects with the happiness of Your long and vigorous Life. Great Sir, Interest as well as Duty, does tie your Royal Burroughs to a more immediate Depen∣dance upon that Royal Authority, which gave them both their Being and Privileges; and experi∣ence has now obliged us to believe, that you make our Interest your own. And therefore we do now again renew to your Majesty, the sincere offer of our Lives and Fortunes, being much enlivened by the new hopes which spring freshly from this occasion. And to Testifie our extraordinary Joy up∣on it, we have sent your Majesty's Provost of Edinburgh (the chief of our Representatives, and one very much esteemed amongst us for Loyalty) to testifie beyond what Letter can do, that there are none of your Majesties Subjects more joyful. upon this occasion, than, May it please your sacred Majesty, Your Majesties most Humble, most Dutiful, and most Loyal Subjects and Servents, the Commissioners of the Royal Burrough of your Majesties Antient Kingdom of Scotland. Signed by Warrant of the Ge∣neral Convention of Burroughs, by our Praeses and Clerk our particular Subscriptions being Recorded in our Registers. Subscribed thus: Magnus Prince, Praeses, Ga. Rocheid, CI. Edinburgh July 7. 1688.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Clergy of the County-Palatinate of Chester, who published the late gracious Declaration in their Churches, for Liberty of Conscience. WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, well weighing what we, as such, ought to render to so Sacred and Gracious a King, reckoned we ow'd this, and higher Instances of our Obedience, in pursuance of which, and of Your Majesty's Order in Council, we heartily read the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, not repining that all other our Fellow-Subjects should enjoy with us a Portion of your Royal Favour. We are well aware that many have well deserved; and as to the other Number, towards whom you go the Courteous and Noblest Way-of Conquering, we hope your Mercy may be successful; or at least your Power will pre∣serve you safe. But if is Matter of the Declaration were not according to our Wishes, yet the establishing of it is according to our Duty, since it is issued out from the express Pierogative of your Supremacy over us; and we are required by what is Statute-Law, the Rubrick of our Liturgy, to publish what is enjoined by the King, or our Bishop, (whose Care herein was remarkable) as much as what is prescribed in the Rules of this Book. So that we cannot, but with Trouble of Mind, hear of the Proceedings of the Seven Bishops; who tho' they tenderly promised the Dissenters something, yet refused to do their part about the Declaration, lest they should be Parties to it; which Reason we, with due Modesty, (and relying upon a Higher Authority) esteem insufficient, see∣iag the Parliament of 62. did not think the Reading the Common Prayer was approving of it, without Assent and Consent publickly declared. We therefore, in all Submission, become earnest, tho' too mean, Intercessors to your most Gracious Majesty, in behalf of the Church of England, That the Faults of those, and others, may not be laid to our Charge, in whose Communion there are many, and we hope there will be more, who concur in promoting the Purposes of your mild Go∣vernment. We farther beg leave to make our Congratulations for the Happy Birth of the Young Prince, in his Hereditary Successive Kingdom. We in this Palatinate, are the first Lot of Inheritance to the First-born of our Kings; and as we have a greater part in him, so we have a more plentiful Joy, that he is born to us; praying a long Life to him, and the inheriting of his Royal Father's Crowns and Vertues: We hereby bind our selves to conclude stedfastly, Your Majesty's most Devoted, Obedient, and Firm Subjects and Servants. To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Gentlemen of the Grand Jury, for the County of Kent, at the As∣sizes held at Rochester, Aug. the 6th. 1688. Most Gracious Sovereign, IF abundant Duty in some, or too little in others, have hitherto retarded an Una∣nimous Address, and that just Tribute of Veneration, which all your Subjects owe, and most have chearfully paid your Majesty for a thousand Princely Favours; but a∣bove all, for your Universal Indulgence, and more than Fatherly Tenderness, even towards the most froward and undeserving. The Birth of a Royal Infant now opens all our Eyes, our Hearts and Mouths, to see and admire, and publish as well the pro∣pitious Conduct of Heaven over your Sacred Majesty, as your Majesty's over us; both which instead of resenting past Ingratitudes, go on still showring new Blessings on our Heads. Permit us then, Great Sir! to throw our selves at your Majesty's Feet, and prostrate, with all Humility, tender you, and your Royal Consort, unfeigned, tho' late, Congra∣tulations, for the inestimable Jewel you have bestowed upon us. Long may our Illustrious Prince live, Heaven's Darling, as well as ours; and, by inheriting the Heroick Vertues of his August Parents, secure to future Ages the Happi∣ness your most Serene Government has restored to ours. And indeed, what can hereafter trouble England's Peace, when, to its Impregnable, Native Strength, you shall have added the more Invincible, and, in manner, Supernatu∣ral Union of all English Hearts? That your approaching Parliament, Sir, may readily concur with your Majesty's Gra∣cious Designs, in order thereto, shall be the Great Endeavour, as well as the Fervent Prayer of. Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble and Congratulatory Address of the High Sheriff, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, and the Grand Jury of the County of Hereford, at the Assizes held at Hereford, on the 8th. day of August, in the 4th. Year of Your Majesty's most Happy Reign. Most Dread Sovereign, WE Your Majesty's Leige People must acknowledge, that it is our Duty to manifest our Resentment to your Sacred Majesty, after our Thansksgiving to Almighty God (by whom Princes reign) for such a transcendent Mercy and Favour from Heaven, as the Birth of his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, is, to Your Majesty and these King∣doms; especially, when we consider that it falls upon us after so many evident and gracious Signals of Divine Providence, not only in the Manifold and Miraculous Preser∣vation of your Majesty's Royal Person, but in the Establishment of your Majesty upon the Throne of your Glorious Ancestors: Insomuch that we may justly raise some Con∣fidence in our selves (except obdurate Malice prevails) the Eyes of most thoughtful Men will be opened to see the concurrence of the same Providence, attending your Majesty in those your Royal, Great, and Good Intentions, for the Honour, Welfare, Peace, and Happiness of this Nation, signified in your Majesty's late gracious Declaration: Humbly assuring your Majesty, we shall use our utmost Endeavours to elect such Representatives, as may comply with your Majesty in so Glorious a Work, and always remain Your most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects. To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Grand Jury, at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden for the Borough of Devizes in the County of Wilts, in the Guild-Hall of the said Borough, the 20th. day of July 1688, in the 4th. Year of Your Majesty's Reign. Great Sir, WE still enjoying the good Effects of your Majesty's Declaration of Liberty of Con∣science, do continue our Thanks to God for inclining your Royal Heart to do that, by which the Fears of many are vanished, and more than was expected is enjoy'd. And since it hath Pleased Almighty God to bless your Majesty with a Son, and us with a Prince, which we hope is an ineffable Blessing to this Nation, we can do no less, and by this we do humbly congratulate your Majesty and your Royal Consort on this Occasion. Now that Heaven may so preserve this Prince, that when your Majesty (whose Life God long preserve) shall fall asleep with your Royal Ancestors, he may sway the Sceptre of these Realms and Dominions, with such Wisdom, Justice, and Piety, that his Name may be eternized, shall be the Prayer of Your Majesty's most Loyal, and Obedient Subjects. We the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the aforesaid Borough, having seen the aforesaid Ad∣dress, do concurr therewith: And in Testimony thereof, have set our Common Seal of the Cor∣poration in the Guild-Hall, aforesaid, this 28th. day of July, Anno Domini, 1688. To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of Your Majesty's Ancient and Loyal City of Hereford. Most Gracious Sovereign, WE beseech your Majesty to suffer us (amongst the rest of your Loyal Subjects) thus humbly and publickly to express our grateful Sense of that happy Addition, which it has pleased God to make to the Royal Family, by giving your Majesty and your Kingdoms the desirable Blessing of a Prince to inherit your Royal Vertues and Do∣minions: And most humbly pray that your Royal Issue may grow more and more nume∣rous to succeed to your Imperial Crown in all future Generations. We likewise crave your Majesty's leave (once more) thankfully to acknowledge those invaluable Blessings we enjoy under your Majesty's most Gracious Government. And do most humbly assure your Sacred Majesty, that as this Place has heretofore been plunder'd and ransack'd again and again, for their unalterable Fidelity to the Crown, so we will ever owe Dutiful and Loyal Obedience to your Majesty, Your Heirs, and Lawful Successors. In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto put our Common Seal at the Guild-Hall of your said City
To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Council and Assembly of Your Majesty's Island of Jamaica, convened under his Grace the Duke of Albemarle. Most Gracious Sovereign, WE your Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects of this new World, warmed by the Be∣nign Influence of your Royal Beams, (from which no distance of Place can seclude us) do in all humble and grateful Manner acknowledge the continuance of that unparelled Blessing, the Protection of the Church of England, given to us by your Roy∣al Word at your happy Accession to the Crown, and also for the Toleration and gene∣ral Indulgence of Religion your Majesty hath been pleased to grant the rest of our Fel∣low Subjects. Royal Sir, We cannot conclude here without further acknowledging unto your Ma∣jesty the transcendent Honour done unto this Infant Colony in appointing so Illustrious a Prince to govern us; from whose Care and Conduct, with the continuance of your Majesties unparallel'd Favours towards us, we may justly hope for many Advantages promising on our Parts, (as we hereby do) a never to be shaken Loyalty to your Ma∣jesty, due Obedience to his Grace, and our heartly Endeavours, for the good and preser∣vation of this your Majesties Islands, Praying unto Almighty God for a long continu∣ance of your happy Reign over us, and that there may never be wanting of your Roy∣al Issue to sit upon the Throne from Generation to Generation. Amen. To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the major Part of the Grand Jury of Cumberland, at the general Assi∣zes held at Carlisle The 21st. of August 1688. May it please Your Majesty, WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, humbly beg leave that we may heartily Congratulate your Majesty, and your Royal Consort, and offer our most humble and due Thanks to God Almighty, for sending your Majesty a Son, and us a Prince, to be your Majesty's Successor to your Crown and Vertues, a Blessing not more joyfully received, than earnestly desired, to quiet and compose all restless and disorderly Spirits, That your Majesty, and the whole Nation, may reap the Benefit of your most Gracious Declaration: And we will use our utmost Endeavours to elect such Members for your Majesty's next Parliament, as shall make your Majesty most happy, and your Subjects ea∣sie. We do also cordially rejoice in the joyful Deliverance of the Prince from his late dangerous Indisposition; not doubting but God will bless him with a long and heathful Life, to the great Comfort of your most Sacred Majesty, and all your Loyal Subjects. May your Majesty enjoy the greatest and utmost Blessings this World can afford, with whatever is most dear to your Sacred Majesty, and also a long and peaceable Reign over us: So prays your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, as we shall ever be ready to manifest when Occasion calls with our Lives and Fortunes, in Defence of your Person, and your Heirs, in your Majesty's Prerogatives, against all Opposers whatsoever. To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the Borough of Sudbury, in the County of Suffolk. Great Sir. ALmighty God having blessed your Majesty and your Royal Consort our gracious Queen, with a Son, and your People with a Prince. We with all Alacrity agree∣able to the Happiness, and with Duty, and Humility which becomes Loyal, and Obe∣dience Subjects, do congratulate your Majesty. Such Blessings are from Heaven, the Re∣wards of Virtue, of which your Majesty hath given this Nation many and Signal Testimo∣nies, particularly, and for which we have brought our Hearty and Unfeigned Thanks, in that your Majesty hath been graciously pleased to declare, that you will Protect and main∣tain the Church of England, as now by Law Established, and all other your Majesty's Sub∣jects, in the free Exercise of their Religion, and in the Peaceable Enjoyment of their Civil Rights and Properties. And as your Majesty intends to entail these Blessings upon your People, by a Law; so we do assure your Majesty that when in your Princely Wis∣dom, you shall think convenient to call a Partlament, we will heartily endeavour to chuse such Members as shall concurr with your Majesty therein. And it shall ever be our Prayers that your Majesty's Reign may be long and prosperous: That our Prince may inherit your Inimitable Virtues with the Crowns, and both enjoy a Crown of Glory.
To the KING and QUEENS Most Excelient Majesties, The Humble Congratulation of the Lord Lieutenant, the Deputy Lieutenant, the High Sheriff, and the Grand Inquest, with the rest of the Justices of the Peace, and Gentlemen of your Majesties County Palatinate of Lancaster, holden at the general Assizes this 29th day of August 1688. Dread Sovereign, Nothing but the want of a more early Opportunity of representing the Body of this County, could have with-held your Majesties most Loyal and Joyful Subjects, from a more speedy Congratulation of your Majesty, and your Royal Consort, upon the Birth of the Prince of Wales; Succession in the Right Line has been the Care, and now immediately from your Majesty is the Joy, not only of us, but of all your Dominions, the transports of Eorreign Courts, upon this Illustrious Birth is an early presage, that his Fame shall be more extended, and his Virties more shining, than their Illuminations. May his Heroick Endowments fill all Europe with Terror and Regard, yout Majesties with Comfort and Satisfaction, and your Dominion with Peace, Security, and Happi∣ness, till time shall be no more, which shall be the faithful Endeavour, and lasting Prayer of your Majesties most dutiful Subjects and Faithful Servants. To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of your Majesties Corporation of Garstang in the County Palatine of Lancaster. Great Sir, IT has been the Singular Happiness of this Corporation, that how often so ever we have hither to approached your Royal Feet, with the tender of our Duty and Loyalty, we were always dismissed with the Comfort of your Majesty's gracious Acceptance: These former Encouragemeets, together with the Happy News of the Birth of the Illustious Prince of Wales, has doubled both our Duty and Diligence, to return again with Joy and Satisfaction to your Sacred Feet, humbly to congratulate both your Majesty and your Royal Consort of this Happy Occasion. May Heaven bleso both your Majesty and these Kingdoms, in fixing the Throne, and advancing the Crown, by a name pous Isse: the growing Virtues, and exemplary Conduct of his Royal Highness, in future Times add Comfort to your Majesty years, relieve the Cares and Toil of the Scepter, ingage the Affections, and fix the Loyalty. of your Subjects: So pray your Majesty's ever Loyal Subjects and Dutiful humble Servants. To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Lord Lieutenant, High Sheriff, Deputy Lieutenant, Justices of the Peace, and Grand Jury of the County of Northumberland, assembled at the Assizes held at the Castle of Newcastle for that County the 13th day of August 1688. Great Sir. HAving already with most sincere Devotion pald our Acknowledgments to God Almighty, the Father of Mercies; we come now most humbly Prostrate at your Ma∣jesty's Feet, to offer our hearty Congratulations, to your Majesty and Royal Comfort, for the inestimable blessing of a Prince of Wales, a Prince given by divine Providence, to the Prayers of your Kingdoms, to perpetuate your Majesty Glory, and our Felicity: May he so thrive, (and we doubt it not) under the Great Examples of your Maje∣sties Piety and Prudence, that you your self may live to see him consummate in all the true Arts of Government. We further promise with the best of our endeavours to send such Members to the next Parliament, as will Co-operate with your Majesties gracious Intentions, (according to your Royal Declaration) in repealing the Penal Laws and Test, as Obstacles to your Majesties Glory and equal Justice, as well as to our Ease and Happiness, well knowing that your Majesty will heal us as a most Indulgent and Impar∣tial Father doth his many Sons, giving every one a share in his Esteem and Affection, according to their particular Merits and Qualifications. FINIS.
