D2478 12142728 54873
ADVERTISEMENT. THat the First, Second, and Third Volumes of the Great English ATLAS are now finish'd (the Fourth Volume being in the Press). A View of the late Troubles in England, from the year 1637 to 1660. By Sir William Dugdale Knt. Garter Principal King of Arms. Bibles, Testaments, and Common Prayers, in all Volumes: Also all Books Printed at the Theater: Are sold by M. Pitt at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-yard London.
THE ANTIENT USAGE In Bearing of such Ensigns of Honour As are commonly call'd ARMS. WITH A Catalogue of the present NOBILITY of ENGLAND. By Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE Knt. Garter Principal King of Arms. To which is added, A Catalogue of the present NOBILITY of SCOTLAND and IRELAND, &c. OXFORD: Printed at the Theater, for Moses Pitt at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-Yard, London, 1682.
To the right Honourable ROBERT Earl of AYLESBURY, Deputy, with his Ma∣jesties approbation, to the most Noble HEN∣RY Duke of NORFOLK Earl-Marshal of ENGLAND. My Lord SUch have been the extravagant Actings of Paynters, and other Mechanicks in this licen∣tious Age; that, to satisfie those, who are o∣pen handed to them, they have not stuck to depict Arms only for divers younger branches of Families with undue distinctions, if any at all; but to allow them to such as do bear the same appellation, though of no alliance to that stock: the permission whereof hath given such encouragement to those, who are guilty of this boldness, that there are not a few who do already begin to prescribe, as of right thereto: so that these Marks of Honour, called Arms, are now by most people grown of little esteem: for apparent it is, that they make the Crescent, which is the known filial distinction for the second Son, to be also the only proper difference of the Grandson and heir of that second Son, and of his heires male; and a Mul∣let upon a Crescent, and a Martlet upon the same Mullet to be the distinction for a fourth Son of a third Brother, whose Father was the second Son of the chief stock: and according to that rule do, for the most part, frame their Differences for others.
Against this absurd usage therefore, I have thought it requisite, not only to offer to your Lordship the light of reason, which ought to be the principal guide; but the irrfragable Authoritie of several persons of great Learning and high estimation for their knowledge in points of Honour and Arms: and likewise to give instance by sundry important presidents, as to the usage of ancient times, when order and regularity were held in repute: not doubting but that your Lord∣ship will in this point be so far satisfyed, as that for the future some restraint may be put to those un∣due practises. Resting Your Lordships most obedient Servant WILLIAM DUGDALE Garter principal King of Arms. 10. Junij 1681.
ADDENDA pag. 148. l. 20. An. 1681. Car. 2. xxxiii. 865 Nov. 17 Sir George Jefferys of Bulstrode Knight one of his Majesties Serjeants at Law, and chief Justice of Chester created Baronet and to the heires male of his body by Ann his now wife, and for default of such Issue, to the heires male of his body. Buck. 866 Dec. 6 Hugh Middleton of Hackney Esq Midd. ERRATA. P. 17. l. 5. r. petite y. Ib. l. 13. r. Henoursi p. 21. l. 8. r. retained. p. 23. l. 11. r. Eleury. p. 24. l. 7. r. Hooke. p. 26. l. 7. r. grateful. p. 37. l. 5. r. tres. p. 47. l. 5. r. flos. p. 51. l. penul. r. Aspilogia. p. 52. l. 28. r. conspectioribus. p. 54. l. 2. r. Ercaloue. p. 57. l. 27 r. Ercaleue. p. 59. l. 4. r. Estoille. p. 60. l. 6. r. augmenteront. p. 64. l. 3. from the bottom r. round. p. 81. l. 17. r. Gosfeild. p. 82. l. 11. after E. of Down add Extinct. p. 100. l. 19. r. Ferrers. p. 113. l. 18. r. of the houshold to K. Charles the second. p. 126. l. 27. r. Wakeman. The Patent was in grossed but never sealed. p. 146. l. 18. r. Kent. P. 149. l. 7. from the bottom r. Agmondesham. p. 151. betwixt l. 24. and 25. add W. shire Car∣narvon
P. M. 2. Burg. 1. and Knight 1. p. 154. l. 28. r. P. M. 18. Barens of the Cinq. P. 8. p. 155. l. 15. r. Lestuthiel. p. 159. l. ult. add P. M. 28. Barons of the Cinq. P. 8. p. 160. l. 19. after Great-Wendlock strike out Burg. 2. p. 161. l. 5. r. Burg. 2. l. 9. r. North-Yarmouth v. Great. Yarmouth. p. 162.. 19. after Rumney add Sandwich.
THE ANTIENT USAGE In Bearing of ARMS. THat these Ensignes of Honour, as are commonly called Armes, which of later times have been chiefly used for distinction of families, had their ori∣ginal from the practise of great Commanders in War, is not unknown to the learned: for certain it is, that the faces of all great military Officers, being obscured by such Hoods and Helmets as were antiently worn in times of Battel; it was expedient, that by some other meanes their per∣sons should be notifyed to their friends and fol∣lowers. Necessity therefore requiring it, they, depicted upon their Sheilds (which were borne for the defence of their Bodies) as also upon their Surcotes of silke, Banners, Penons &c. certain Badges, that might make them known at a di∣stance from each other. Of which sort those that were most conspicuous; viz Crosses, Bends, Fesses, Cheverons, Saltiers &c. all single chardges being ever held the best.
In bearing whereof (as appeareth by divers old Rolls of Armes) such order was observed that none might assume anothers marke; but that there should be a plain and apparent difference in each man's Sheild, Surcote, Banner, Penon, &c. to the end, that upon any disorder the common Souldier might know his leader, and the better repair to his suc∣cour in case of danger. But these later times having devised other sorts of Armour and weapons, both for offence and defence then of old were used; those marks and Badges in Sheilds, Surcotes &c. have been for divers past ages, as to any such military pur∣pose, totally layed aside; and since meerly re∣tained as honourary Ensignes by the Nobility and Gentry; especially to difference themselves and their families from the vulgar, and one from a∣nother: as also to distinguish the collateralls from those of the principal stock; for if they do not so, what do they signify; or of what use are they? In all which the Kings of Armes, in their respective provinces were to see due order ob∣served. Nevertheless such hath been the inadvertencie of sundry Gentlemen, in not regarding the ill consequence which the breach of order herein doth produce; as that, going to common Payn∣ters to depict and marshall their Arms, seldom any regular Differences have been assigned by them for the descendents of younger Brothers!
Which extravagant practise hath occasion'd such confusion therein; that this laudable and antient usage in bearing of Arms, on which our forefa∣thers did set an high esteem, is now overmuch sleighted and almost grown contemptible. It cannot be denyed, but that in the best times good order was not by every one exactly obser∣ved: for I find, that in the reign of Q. Elizabeth there were some unjustifiable practises in this kind: But, in this last age, through the liberty taken by divers mechanicks since the commencement of the late unparallel'd Rebellion, the disorder herein is so far spread, as if greater care be not speedily taken, such a confusion must inevitably follow, that the true use of Arms will be utterly forgot; most people, though of never so mean extraction; if they obtain a little wealth, intruding themselves into these Marks of Honour, and usurping what doth justly belong to others, especially if their name doth sound any thing like that of a Gentle∣man. Seeing therefore these things relating to Ho∣nour to be thus out of square, I have here thought fit to add to what I have already briefly sayd, the Authorities and opinions of the most learned men in Herauldry and Antiquities that this last age hath produced: from whose writings I have selected some particulars, which will amply corroborate what is here asserted. Beginning with what was publisht in print by
Mr. William Wyrley (a Staffordshire Gentleman) an. 1592 (34 Eliz:) and intituled The true use of Armes, but written by Sampson Erdswike then of Sandon, in that county Esq (whose deserved fame for his great knowledg in these commenda∣ble Studies is still fresh and flourishing in all those parts.) I was assured by Mr. William Burton of Lindley in Leicestershire that Mr. Erdswike did to him ac∣knowledge, he was the Author of that Discourse, though he gave leave to Mr. Wyrley (who had been bred up under him) to publish it in his own name. This Mr. Erdswike from pulick Records and antient Evidences compiled a brief, but elaborate work, of the Antiquities of Staffordshire, as yet not made publick by the press, which is now in the hands of an eminent and learned Gentleman of that County, Walter Chetwind Esq Next proceeding with what I have observed from an excellent but short discourse in elegant Latin De Origine et Antiquitate Armorum, written likewise in the same Q. Eliz. time (but never printed) by Robert Glover Esq then Somerset-Herauld, whose great abilities in this kind of learning I cannot sufficiently extoll; his most elaborate and judicious work, intituled The Cata∣logue of Honour, published after his death by
Mr. Thomas Mills his Executor in an. 1610 and the voluminous Collections from our publick Records, and sundry choice old Manuscripts, as al∣so from original Charters and Evidences of note (which I my self have seen, but which are now disperst into sundry hands) sufficiently setting forth his great abilities therein. From which discourse; viz. De Origine et An∣tiquitate Armorum &c. I have selected certain observations, and added them to this work; whereby his great judgment as to this point of Differences in Arms is cleerly shewed. So likewise from what the learned Camden, Sir Henry Spelman and others have expressed upon this subject; and given most evident instances of the laudable practise of antient times herein. I shall begin with what I find so publisht by Mr. Wyrley (but penn'd by Mr. Erdswike)
To the Right Honourable the LORDS and others the Professors of Mar∣tial Discipline. NObles and Gentlemen, I will salute you with a sentence of mine Author Sir John Froysard, The adventures of Arms (saith he) are so divers, and so far oftentimes be∣yond expectation, as that their effects causeth great admiration: which saying of his, caused me with the more attention to read over his works, and finding the same most truly prosecuted through the whole course of his History, but espacially in the actions and adventures of two famous Cap∣tains Sage and Imaginative, the one Sir John Chandos, and the other Sir See more of him in the Institution of the Garter of El. Ashmole Esq. John Grayllie by name (commonly called the Captall de Buz) it de∣lighted me (as a lover of Honour and chevalry) to note This was done in a Poem then published in print by the say'd Mr. Wyrley an. 1592. of these two persons, but writ by Mr. Erdswike. down their several fortunes with some reasons of their falls. I have been careful to set down (as my manner
is) the Standards, Pennons, Cote-armours; and other marks of Honour, to the end it may pub∣lickly be known of what necessity the use of them is, (as being for that cause first ordained:) how and in what manner they are to be used, and to whom they do of right most chiefly and pro∣perly appertain and belong. And these matters being well conceived (as indeed without such Tokens no martial discipline can be exercised, no Army ranged, no attempt of any company at∣chieved; and so (by cnnsequence) no conquest made, nor so much as any Common-wealth (what∣soever) defended, neither ftom outward enemies, civil discord, nor the rebellion of any plebeian rout. Be the same never so simple, rude, or of small esteem it will (I hope) reduce into estimation a matter both of Honour, order, and Necessity, which now (through the abuse thereof) is so far run into contempt, as that (of many men) it is holden for a thing of no price, but thought to be a very mockery, and a matter of no other sequence, then to set up vain and fantastical glorious fellows into a pride, and to draw from them some small summes to certain persons into an office instituted, which no doubt was by the wisest and best governed states at the first devised, and generally by all of any pollicy received, to a most necessary end: yet think they (as it is now in use) it serveth but only for that purpose. And
indeed I must by the way complain, that certain of the said officers (or others pertaining to them) either for want of skill or maintenance, or other∣wise for their gain, have committed faults not justifiable, whereby they have brought a matter of great Honour into defame, and injured there∣by the Commonwealth, and brought both others that have managed those affairs with more dis∣cretion, and themselves into obloquy. But these faults and errors, and some others also (spoken of in this dedication instituted to that purpose) will in the handling of this matter more easily appear; and the thing be (I hope) reformed, either by the good endeavors which the officers (understanding thereof) will use, or else by the magistrate, when he shall have knowledg of such the abuses as he may be in∣formed of. And first that Guydhomes, Ensignes, and marks of Armory be of necessity, let it be but considered whether wars be sometimes of necessity to be taken in hand or not; and surely I think there is none of so very mean capacity, but will yeild unto it that they be: especially defensive, and in some cases also offensive: which as a thing granted I will overpass. And when I say further, that wars being law∣ful and of necessity, it must also be granted, that the same must be made by companies and bands of men, over which some must command, and
the rest obey, and then will it follow, that for the ordering and dividing of those to the best advantage, Standards and Banners must be allotted to every company, to the end they may draw together in their strength, and perform such actions as they shall be commanded; thus may you see the necessity. And for the use, it doth also appear, that sithence some must be commanders, it is of impor∣tance that they be known, both by the persons over whom they command, and generally by all; and that so perspicuously that upon every sudden occurrent, the meanest and simplest common soul∣dier may thereby know every particular officer, and captain that hath charge: for which pur∣pose our Ancestors device was, that such men should wear some such coat of mark over his Ar∣mor, as whereby they might be easily discerned, to be the same persons which indeed they were: and where somtimes (when occasion so offered itself) they were forced to use Pavishes for their de∣fence, whereby a great part of the mark which was upon their vesture, was shadowed from sight, it was thought necessary that their marks should be also laid upon their shields: the com∣manders of Horse-men (their faces being for the most part covered) they added to the crests of their Helmets some further distinction to be the better also known by: Thus much for the ordi∣nance and use of Armory.
And hereby also may it appear to whom they do properly belong and appertain, namely, to Kings, Princes, Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Lords of provinces and fees; Knights; officers in the Army, Navy or peece, and generally to all that have charge over Bands and companies of souldiers. And now sithence from henceforth many of my speeches will tend to the discovery of such things as I take to be abused, erronious, or faulty, where∣in I may peradventure not square in opinion with some others; and being myself no officer or of any authority, whereby I should have cause to deal in these affairs, I will therefore first beseech your Honours, and all others to whom it may appertain, that if any thing shall pass my pen which shall be offensive, that they will conceive no worse of it then I mean, which is but to bring these matters of Armory into question; to the end that if any thing be amiss (as I for my part think that many things are) that then the same may be reformed: but if happily I mistake, that then it would please such as be of judgment or skill, to justifie the same as well done, and I shall most willingly yield to authority and reasons. And so not speaking but under correction, I say that, first I find (as I conceive) some blame to be imputed in your selves which be professed souldiers, that where your ancestors and all others generally did in their Standards, Banners, and
Pennons shew forth to the view and face of the enemy, certain fair, antient, and known marks, which their elders for the most part had usually before time carried, or at least themselves had then taken (if they but then were in their rising age) whereby their own people were in a goodly decent order conducted and led, and their enemies very much terrified, when they should see those marks shewed forth; the owners whereof had in their memories by plain feat of Arms overthrown their parents, or happely themselves, beaten them out of the field, razed down their castels and fortresses, sacked their towns and cities, wasted and spoiled their countries, ransomed their people, and generally so daunted and amazed them, that it, was sometimes found to be true, that very bare names of some valiant persons overcame whole Armies: I can but blame you of all sorts, which shall make choice of Banners (which you call colors) so curtein-like and so far from all due order of Ancient bearing as may be; and for your parts which are descended from Ancestors of mark, I would be glad to hear any reason from you, to what end you should lay the same aside, and make choice of a curtein in the place there∣of. And you others (whose wisdom and valure have gained you the reputation of a charge) I would gladly also hear from you what should move you to be of that mind, as not to take some
convenient mark, such a one as may be thought meet by authority for you, whereby you may gain an honour, both to your selves and your posterity, and by your good usage thereof much enlarge the reputation, you have by your valours obtained. An other thing that is amiss, as I take it, and hath great need to be reformed, is the quartering of many Marks in one shield, coat, or Banner; for sithence it is true, that such Marks serve to no other use but for a commander to lead by, or to be known by, it is of necessity that the same be apparent, fair, and easie to be dis∣cerned; so that the quartering of many of them together, doth hinder the use for which they are provided. As how is it possible for a plain un∣learned man (who may be as good a souldier in some respects as the best) to discern and know a sunder, six or eight, (what speak I of six or eight?) sometimes thirty or forty several marks clustered all together in one shield or Banner, nay though he had as good skill as Robert Glover late Somerset that dead is, and the eyes of an Eagle, amongst such a confusion o things, yet should he never be able to decipher the errors that are daily committed in this one point, nor discern or know one Banner or Standard from another, be the same never so large? So that except it be to be made in a pedigree or descent to lock up in an evidence chest, thereby
to shew mens titles to their lands or the Alliences and kindreds of their houses; otherwise (as I say) I see not to any use in the world they serve, specially so many together to be made upon a mans vesture, Target or Banner; and therefore I could wish that every man would content him∣self with his own peculiar coat of name, and not to use above one quartered therewith at the most: which one yet doth not so much trouble the capacity of a man, but that he may both know and discern a Banner or shield well enough. And this one do I the rather esteem well of to be born, for that a Prince or Noble man making challenge or title to any Country (for which he is forced to make wars before he can obtain it) it will be a goodly thing for him to shew forth his Standard of the Arms of that Country quartered with his own amongst those people which in reason and conscience owe him duty and obedience, to the end that they may thereby be the sooner induced to submit themselves to their true and lawful Soverain, as his subjects. And for that cause (as I take it) King Edward the third and his valiant sons devised and shewed forth the Arms of France and England quartered together, and although my Authour saith that Jaques This Jaques d'Arvell was a wealthy Citizen of Gant, and had great interest and authority in Flanders under K. Edw. 3. in opposition to the French, as the Hist, of that time do amply shew. Dartvell, was the first deviser thereof,
yet will I not believe otherwise, but that the principal reasons that led the King thereto, was to make known the justness of his title to that kingdom where he then intended to make wars. But now it may be objected, sithence a Prince or great Lord may have title to several Countries, that therefore it is necessary for him to beare all such tokens or marks as he hath title too: To this I answer, that although I could yeild to them (but that it will bring the eonfusion aforesaid) yet is it of no such necessity, for that a man needs to shew his title but onely to them whom he means to subdue: and if it should fortune that he had title to divers and several countries, and that he would make wars to them all at once, yet should it not be needful to him to shew forth any more marks quartered in one Standard, but onely unto every several Country the Arms of that nation quartered with his own. But this being the case of Kings and Princes, wherein (amongst others) our most famous, noble and worthy Kings and princes of this land, have shewed themselves most prudent and wise; to what purpose is it, that others bring out com∣manders under their prince, and which of them∣selves have neither title to country nor are able to maintain wars, should in their princes service pester their Banners and shields with such an infinite number as many do? And in this point I cannot enough commend
the Baron of Stafford, who herein sheweth his great skill and temperance; for although his Ancestors have had title to quarter the marks of that valiant Thomas of Woodstock (youngest son of King Edward the third) Earl of Buckingham and Duke of Glocester; of Bohune Earl. of Here∣ford and Northamton and high Cunstable of En∣gland: and also of that great house of Somerset, which by their ancestors John Earl of Somerset, (younger son to John of Gaunt) descended from the same king Edward the third, (I omit to speak of divers Barons and others of great estate, whose heires both with revenue and honor enlarged greatly his family) yet the said Baron contents himself with the paternal mark of his house. It were to be wished that this matter of Quar∣tering should be reformed, as well for untruths therein oftentimes committed, as for the titles that may be brought in question thereby to lands and Heritages: And as being one of the chiefest things that bringeth honour of Armory into dis∣grace: for not long ago heard I one speak in this manner, Did I not (quoth he) know the grandfather of this man (speaking of the owner of a Scuchion wherein were quartered many marks) to purchase by plain patent (although he never were man at Armes) both his coat and crest within these forty years, and how comes it now to pass that I see his nephew invested in all this Armory? (numbring many and divers several devices, all
in one shield, by way of quartering) this being a very mockery to see a man of no valour or estimation in warlike affairs, and the paternal An∣cestors of whom (for ought that can be proved) were not in any late age welders of Arms, to entrude themselves into so many Badges of Ar∣mory, is not the least matter to bring into con∣tempt an order so honourable and necessary as the bearing of Arms is. Differences in Arms to younger children, and their Descendents. Another matter that to my understanding is also to be reformed, is the manner of differings, which are by the younger Brothers and their posterities laid upon their marks, being cressants, mollets, &c. and that such little ones, as that a man cannot discern them a very small distance from him, which differences are in reason to be made fair, plain, and large, that they may be also as easie to be discover'd as any other Devise that is in the Coat, Shield, or Banner, otherwise they serve not to the purpose for which marks were first ordained. And the inconvenience which ensueth of this error will the more easily appear, if I but set you down the words of mine Author (treating of an accident that happened in such a case) which be these: Et feist Mr. Robert Baileul alter sa Ban∣niere
tout devant en escriant Moriannes les He∣nuiers qui ia estoint esthauses Aperceurent la Ban∣niere de Moriannes qui encore estoit tout Droicte, si cuiderent que ce feust la leur ou ilz se deuoient rad∣resser, car mult petitey auoit de difference de lune a l'autre; car les Armes Moriennes sount Barres contre Barres d' Argent & d' Azure a deux Che∣verons de Gueules, Et le cheveron de Mr. Ro∣bert auoit vne petite crosete d'or, si ne l'adviserent mye bien les Hennuiers ainsi vindrent bouter de fait dessubs la Banniere de Mr. Robert, si furent moult fierement reboutes et tous discomfis. For these Honours being led by Sir William Bai∣leul thought in the stir and business to have come to his Banner hearing the surname of Moriens called upon; and seeing as they supposed, their captains ensigne, and the difference of Sir Robert, being the younger Brother, but a little cross upon the upper cheuron, they could not appercieve; so that the most of them were either slain or ta∣ken, and the elder Brother (the Knight their leader) was glad to save himself as well as he might: The Lord of Cowcie son in law to King Edward the third, suffered also reproch through the hard dealings of the Lord of Chine, who raised his Banner against certain Englishmen of Sir Hugh Caveleys company, being either the same that Cowcies: was, or the difference so small as might not be discerned, whereby the said Lord Cowcy though he were absnt as far as Austrich, had dis∣honour
spoken of him, as in the discourse Viz in the Poem mentioned in the margent of pag. 1. of the Capital I have touched. Thus then having shewed, by example, the harm and inconvenience, that cannot but many times happen, through the littleness and niceness of such differences, I have thought it not amiss to lay before you the differings that antiquity used; that by comparing them together, you may dis∣cern the great wisdom of our ancestors, and our own imperfections in this point, for want of due consideration: which was done at the first by changing of the device born into other colors only; but when that would not suffice for the number of leaders (many times all of one house) then were they forced to vary their marks by adding of either Bars, Bends, cheurons, cheefes, quarters, Borders, labels, losinges, or such like, and very seldome should you see in those times cressant, mollet, or such like small thing born for a dif∣ference; and if any did, yet was the same so large and fair that it might be seen as well as any o∣ther device which should be in the Shield or Ban∣ner. And for the proof, I will give you the ex∣ample but of one house onely for your better information (though I could do the like of many others) namely, that of the Bassets, who indeed (in my judgment) varied their marks of honour very finely and that upon good respect:
For Ralph Basset, (the son of Thurstine who came in with the Conquerour) which Ralph (as it is said) devised the Law of Franke pledge, and many o∣ther good laws, being Justi∣ciarius Angliae; having four sons, to wit, Thurstine, Thomas, Richard, and Nicholas; the first and last both failing; the issue of the one being extinct, and the other overthrown by standing against King Henry the second with King Steven; The son of Thomas went away with his ancestors mark without distinction (being undie gold and red) But the sons of Richard Basset being advanced by their mo∣ther Mauld, the daughter and heir of Sr. Geffrey Rydell Knight, varied the marks of the said Geffrey in this manner: first, Geffrey Lord of Witering the eldest son of Richard Basset and the said Mauld, (surnaming himself Rydell) the progeny of him bare gold three piles red, with a scarff or Bend of blew over all.
Ralph Basset the eldest son of Richard, (which Richard was the second son of Richard and Mauld Rydell, and to whom his mother gave the Barony of Weldon) bare gold three piles red, a Border of steel studded with gold compassing the same about. Also Ralph Basset, the son of Ralph, third son of Richard Basset and Mauld, to whom the said Richard gave the Ba∣rony of Drayton in Staffordshire, bare gold three piles red, with a quarter of Brittain. And Roger Basset of Warwick∣shire varied from Drayton, chang∣ing the piles into black.
But Ralph Basset (descended from William Basset Baron of Sapcote in Leicestershire (which William was Justice in Itenere, and youngest son of Richard Basset and Mauld Rydell his wife) having no advancement by the house of Rydell) de∣tained undie the device of the Bassets, and only changed the colors thereof into silver and black: And Sir Ralph Basset of Chedle Knight (a younger son of Sap∣cote) varied from that house, by adding to his device of waves, a red Labell, whereunto he was forced by reason the progeny of Thomas Basset had many ways varied the said un∣die, by changing the color thereof. As John Basset of North-Luffen∣ham in Rutlandshire bare it, va∣ried into white and red:
And Allen Basset Baron of Wi∣combe, differed this device of undie into white, and blew; from whom the Sanfords descending, assumed the same mark, and now Browning beareth it as being descended from an heire of Sanford. The house of Chedle yet after this dividing it self into two branches, John Basset of New place (being the younger house) left the Labell, and charged the black undie with many Besants dispersed all over them. But after all this (about the time of King Edw. III.) the line of Ralph Basset of Chedle, being extin∣guished; Simon Basset Baron of Sapcote (descended from the fore∣named William) and Sir John Basset of Blore Knight, (heire to the above named John Basset of New place) both of them (I know not the
cause why) at one instant (as I think) relin∣quished their device of undie, and invested them∣selves into Ridels: that is to say, Simon into the piles charged with a quarter vary white and blew; and Sir John into the same, with a quarter silver, and a black Griffon thereon. And in Tamwoorth Church (near to Drayton) well and old, there standeth gold three piles red, a quarter silver, and a cross party black thereon. A multitude more as my authour hath already hinted, (were it not for brevityes sake) might be instanced from the practise of sundry bran∣ches of Noble-families, whereof I shall only make mention of some few which are not unknown to most pretenders to Herauldry. Such are those of Grey of Codnore, and Grey of Sndiacre in Derbyshire; Grey of Barton in Ridale, in com. Ebor. Grey of Wilton in com. He∣reford; Grey of Ruthyn in com. Denbigh; Grey of Groby in com Leic. and Grey Vicount L'isle. Of Beauchamp Earl of Warwick; Beauchamp of Holt; Beauchamp of Powick, and Beauchamp of St. Amand.
Of Nevill Earl of Westmorland, Nevill Earl of Salisbury; Nevill Earl of Warwick; Nevill Lord Latimer; Nevil Lord Abergaveny. Of Stafford Duke of Buckingham; Stafford of Pipe; Stafford of Bromshull, (both in Staf∣fordshire;) Stafford of Graston in Worcestershire; Stafford of Haske in com. Dorset; and Stafford of Blatherwick in com. Northampton. Of Berkley Lord Berkley of Berkley-castle in com. Glouc. Berkly of Beverston in the same County; Berkley of Bruton in com. Somerset; and Berkley of Wymundham in com Leic. Of Cobham Lord Cobham of Cobham in Kent; Cobham of Sterborough in Surrey; Cobham of Black-burgh in com. Devon. and Cobham of Bel∣merle in com Cantii. Of Radcliffe Earl of Sussex; Radcliffe of Sme∣thels; Radcliffe of Drdsale, and Radcliffe of Chaderton. All retaining the original Armes, but distin∣guisht by various eminent differences. Likewise of Noell Vicount Campden; Noell of Kirkby in Leicestershire; Noell of Hilcote, and Noell of Pelshall (both in Stafforshire) and o∣thers of that Antient family. Thus have I set down unto you (though some∣thing tediously) the use that antiquity followed in a very glorious line, for Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, which flourished divers hundreds of years sithence: And you may see that these men
(though they were many of them great Barons) were not ashamed of their Differences, but laid them forth largely to the view; neither do I esteem it a shame whereby any man should covet to hide the same, to be descended as a younger Brother, sithence that every Brother (having the like parents) is as well descended as the eldest, and therefore as good a Gentleman (though not so rich) as he. And the more is his honour, if without the help which by reason of his patri∣mony the elder hath, he can advance himself into place of office or dignity, whereby he may raise an other flourishing family of the same sur∣name: and therefere you my masters that be younger Brothers, never hide your Differences by putting forth a little cressant or a peeping mollet, but use some fair large device, sithence in truth your estimation is by your rising to be had in as good a regard as if you were the elder. And now being in speech of younger Brothers and their differences, I have observed two kinds of them which antiquity used, (besides the afore∣said) one was, that such as were advanced by Kings, Princes, or other great Lords, did many times bear some part of the device of him who advanced them, by way of addition unto the mark of their own family, which served very aptly to distinguish them from their elder house. The other was, that divers did add unto the mark of their own house, some part of the de∣vice
of that family from which their mothers des∣cended; and both these two kinds of differings are (in my mind) greatly to be commended, not only for that they may be made large and apparent, and for that cause serve very properly to the use for which Badges are ordained, but also that the one makes manifest a greatful mind (in him that is advanced) to his prince or lord of whom he received benefit, and by reason there∣of linketh them together in a kind of amity, which seldom or never is worn out, and by that means a great strengthening it is unto both Houses. The other not only serveth to unite the fami∣lies which have matched together in the foresaid love and amity, and thereby worketh the like ef∣fect; but besides it sheweth the certainty of the descending of the said younger Brother out of both the said Houses, and also giveth knowledg of the time thereof, whereby if any title of in∣heritance be at any time cast upon the younger Brother, either descending from ancestor of the fathers side, or mothers, it gives him a testimony of his title, and witnesseth unto the world the truth of that descent by the continual bearing of that device, so that this kind may (many times) work profit to the bearer, and avoid many trou∣bles and suits: and therefore into one of these kind of differing could I wish our younger Bro∣thers, which from henceforth shall be advanc'd, to invest themselves, as being both honourable, fair, certain, and profitable.
But now it may be objected, that the order in use sheweth plainly enough the diversity of Brothers, as the cressant a second, the mollet the third, that by this means the matters are made certain. To this I answer, that first the time is not (by this means) signified, neither can it be known which of the Cressant-bearers was the Uncle or Nephew. And further, it is a very usual matter for every new Riser at this day, if he can find that there is any of the like Surname that beareth mark, presently to usurp the same with a Cressant, or some such difference, so that (for my own part) I do seldom credit such kind of differ∣ings nor their bearers, unless it be by some other testimony or proof made manifest, which cannot be counterfetted so well in the other device, ex∣cept the riser should be throughly acquainted with the descent of him whose line he seeketh to intrude himself into. And besides, it may be the sooner espied by them of the true line and forbidden; nor the other dare (for fear thereof) so soon venture the com∣mitting of a falsity. But what a confusion is it when you shall see the second of a second Brother, and sometimes an other second from him, to cluster one Cressant upon an other; many times three or four, one on horseback upon an other; where as by the aforesaid bearing of the difference from the Prince, Lord, or mothers family, a man may better distinguish the Brothers and set down
for a second, a third, and fourth, &c. And after from those again, in a fairer, larger, and more apparent manner: and the more apt am I to speak against these ordinary Differences (as they are called) knowing them to be but new inventions, and any of them as ordinaries (in Fashion as now they are) never used before the time of King Henry the sixt; before which time men were much more wary and discreet in bearing of their marks, and in foreseeing that no intru∣ders should enter into their families; nor that any should lay away or remove their Differings without special warrant or license of them that thereby might be prejudiced: for a Labell being much in use for the heire apparent (to wear as his differeuce during his fathers life) was seldom removed to the second Brother, but when the in∣heritance went unto the daughters of the elder Brother; and then the second was permitted to bear the same for his Difference, as being the heire male of his family and as one that remained in expectancy; yet might not the second Bro∣ther use to intrude himself into the absolute signs of his house (the inheritance being in his neeces or kinswomen) as appeared in the case between Gray of Ruthine and Hastings which was this: John Lord Hastings married to his first wife Izabell one of the sisters and heires of Almery de Vallence Earl of Penbrooke, by whom he had issue John Hastings, (after Earl of Penbrooke) Elizabeth,
(married to Roger Lord Gray of Ruthin) and some other children which needs not to be spo∣ken of; for that, as I take it, all the lines of them fail'd before the extinguishing of the line of the said John Earl of Penbrooke. After (such issue being had) the said Izabel Vallence died, and the said John Lord Hastings took to a second wife Izabel the Daughter of Hugh Spenser, by whom he had issue Hugh Hastings, and Thomas, and then died, and left as heir John his son by his first Wife (who was Earl of Penbrooke, as I have said, erected by reason of his mothers inheritance) which John Earl of Penbrooke married and had issue another Earl of Penbrooke, who also mar∣ried and had issue a third Earl of Penbrooke; but in the end all the line of the said John Hast∣ings (first Earl of Penbrooke of that family) failing, there arose a question betwixt the Heirs of Roger Gray and Elizabeth his wife being sister (of the whole blood) and the Heirs of Hugh Hastings brother (of the half blood) to the said John Earl of Penbrooke, for the inheritance of the Hastings. But Gray recovering the same (by the law that saith, Possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit so∣rorem esse haeredem) called the said Hastings also (having removed the difference of his mark for that he was then heir male of that house) into the Court of chevalry, and there having a judge∣ment against him, the said Hastings was compel∣led
to use a Difference (which was a Label of silver) upon his mark, a fair red sleeve of his Ladies upon his golden vesture: since which the heirs of that younger family have used the said Labell even un∣til this our age. So that you may see by this, that the law was then taken to be such, that such an heir male as had not the inheritance of his Ancestors should not be suffered to bear his mark without distinction; for it should seem (by this) that the issue of them that had married the heir general of any family (being by reason thereof possessed of the lands) had not only an interest in the Arms, but might also forbid any man the bearing thereof. There is also another matter out of square, which is, that every man that obtaineth large possessions, (whether the same be acquired by his judgment in law, traffick in merchandize, or any other mean) yea although never any of his pro∣genitors, (from whom he can derive himself) had the charge to lead men of Arms, will yet at this day intrude themselves into the Badges and marks of souldiers: for although such as be descended from men of martial discipline, have an interest in their ancestors marks (amongst o∣ther their goods) and therefore may shew forth the same to their predecessors glory, and their own (in respect of their descent) yet such men as rise by their sciences, judgments, or skill in other arts, affairs, or trades (although they be
to be reverenced for their wisdom and praiseful actions, and had in honour answerable to their vertues and dignities) have yet little to do with the marks or Badges of soldiers. For altho a reverend Judg, that hath ministred law and justice a long time (and that so long as that thereby to his great glory) he hath ob∣tained reputation, wealth, and revenue, is to be had in high estimation, and in respect thereof to have allow'd him some note or mark of Honour fit for his calling, yot (to my simple judgment) the same should be disposed unto him after the old Roman order, by signifying the manner of his rising, rather then to put a corselet on his back, a Burgonet on his head, a Target on his Arm, and a Sword by his side, being things that would cumber greatly the good old man to use, either for his own defence, or but to shew (by way of triumph) for his glory, sithence, neither is it tolerable (by reason of his age) nor in his youth did he exercise himself in welding there∣of. And as these things are unseeming for him to wear, no more can I see any reason why he should deck up the moniments of his house with such signs or tokens, except he can derive himself from an ancestor that hath had the use of such things, and then (to set them sorth as a glory to his de∣ceased parent) will greatly augment the regard of his rising, which rising yet (of it self) is a suf∣ficient
Honour, the same being by any just, ver∣tuous, or laudable means. And these new risings I could wish to be of more reputation then they seem to be esteem'd of, either by others, or them∣selves that so rise; as is apparent by many of their doings, who intrude themselves into marks of An∣tiquity, and setting forth of descents, wherein they are yet fain many times either to counterfet, or else to derive themselves from some poor pa∣rents, which they (either truly, or by surmize) alledge to have descended from some antient fa∣mily, and that have been by some accident or o∣ther in former time decayed: wherein me thinks men do greatly mistake the matter, for that (in my opinion) a man that is but of mean paren∣tage and riseth by commendable means, is equi∣valent to him that riseth from a decayed family, namely when his said parent hath been over∣thrown for offence, as many times they alleadge in plain terms. And I could wish that every man that raiseth a House by his good industry, should be honoured with some such Badge or Mark, as should be answerable to the quality of his rising; and not every man of what condition soever they be, to entrude themselves into the signs and marks of souldiers, and such as follow the field with martial exploits. Some people also there are that be so precise, as that they do disallow altogether the setting forth of any memory of well deserving men,
which have shewed themselves valiant either in the act of Religion, their Princes service, or de∣fence of their Country; neither allowing their posterity to set forth any memory of their praises, nor suffering any monuments or garnishments to remain of their Burials; as tho it were a matter offensive to God to have good men well spoken of, or their valorous doings by their obsequies either reverenc'd, or by any records remembred. To such men I have not thought it amiss to shew them their error by directing them to such places of Scripture as do not only tolerate and allow of such actions, but also praise and com∣mend the doing thereof, and in some sort charge and command the same to be done, whereby both they may (if they be not obstinate) reform their misconceived opinions, and others may be fortifyed in their praiseful endeavours towards the honouring of vertuous and worthy men, to the animating of posterity to imitate their lauda∣ble actions; sithence indeed the chiefest matter that stirreth up men to do well next their zeal to God, and the love of vertue it self, is to think that not only their souls shall be rewarded with the mercies of God, but also that their doings shall be had in a reverent remembrance with the reports of all good men that shall speak of them. And first, that the using, bearing and setting forth of Banners, Ensigns and Marks of Armory are
allowable by the sacred scriptures, it appeareth by the holy Evangelist Saint Luke recording the peregrination of Saint Paul, and speaking of Ar∣mory without reprehension (which he would not have done had the use thereof been offensive) in this sort: (Act. Apost. cap. 28. v. 11.) Post menses autem tres navigavimus in navi Alexandrina, quae in insula Hyemaverat cui erat insigne Castorum. And after three months we departed in a Ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the Isle, whose Signs was Castor and Pollux. And in the book of Numeri, God by his pro∣phet Moyses commandeth his people of Israel to devide and dispose themselves into companies by their Ensigns and Banners speaking unto them in these words: (Num. Cap. 2. v. 1. 2) Locutusque est Dominus ad Moysen & Aaron, dicens, singuli, per turmas, Signa, atque vexilla, & domos cognationum suarum, castra-metabuntur, filiorum Israel per Gyrum taber∣naculi foederis. And the Lord spake unto Moyses, and unto Aaron saying, Every man of the chil∣dren of Israel shall pitch by their own Standard, with the Ensign of their father's house, far off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch. So that by this you may see, that as these matters be no new inventions of men, so they are also things allowable by the word of God.
Neither do Obsequies or monuments ensuing wor∣thy acts want the authority of Scriptures, for in the book of Numeri it is written thus: (Num. cap. 31. v. 48.) Cumque accessissent prin∣cipes exercitus ad Moysen, & Tribuni, centuriones∣que dixerunt, nos serui tui recensuimus numerum pug∣natorum, quos habuimus sub manu nostra: & ne unus quidem defuit, ob hanc causam offerimus in do∣narijs Domini singuli quod in praeda auri potuius invenire, Periscelides & Armillas, Annulos & Dextralia ac Murenulas, &c. Et susceptum intule∣runt in Tabernaculum testimonij in monimentum co∣ram Domino. And the officers which were over thousands of the Host, the Captains of thousands and Captains of hundreds came near unto Moses and sayd thy servants have taken the summe of the men of war, which are under the chardge, and there lacketh no one man of us: we have there∣fore brought an oblation for the Lord, what eve∣ry man hath gotten, of Jewels of Gold, Chains, and Bracelets, Ear-rings, and Tablets, &c. and brought it into the Tabernacle of the Con∣gregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the Lord. And in another place of Numeri thus: (Num. cap. 16. v. 36.) Locutus{que} est Dominus ad Moysen dicens, praecipe Eliazaro filio Aaron sa∣cerdoti, ut tollat Thuribula quae jacent in incendio, & ignem huc illucque dispergat: &c. producatque ea in laminas, & affigat altari: &c. ut cernant ea
pro signo & monimento filij Israel. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying; Speak unto Eleazer, the son of Aaron the Priest, that he take up the Censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder &c. Let them make broad plates for a covering of the Altar &c. and they shall be a sign unto the children Israel. Also in the book of Joshua I find these words: (Josuae cap. 4. v. 5.) Et ait Josue ad eos, ite ante arcam Domini Dei vestri ad Jordanis medium & portate inde singuli singulos lapides in humeris vestris, juxta numerum filiorum Israel, ut sit sig∣uum inter vos: & quando interrogaverint vos filij vestri cras, dicentes quid sibi volunt isti lapides? Respondebitis, defecerunt aquae Jordanis ante arcam foederis Domini, cum transiret eum, idcirco positi sunt lapides isti in monimentum filiorum Israel usque aeternum. And Joshua said unto them, pass over before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according to the number of the Tribes of the children of Israel, that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying what mean you by these stones: Then ye shall answer them that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord when it passed over Jordan; the waters of Jordan were cut off; and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.
(Num. cap. 27. v. 8) And for the disposing of heritages it is written thus. Homo cum mor∣tuus fuerit abs{que} filio, ad filiam ejus transibit haere∣ditas; si filiam non habuerit, habebit successores fra∣trs suos; quod si & fratres non fuerint, dabitis hae∣reditatem fratribus patris ejus; sin autem nec patruos habuerit, dabitur haereditas his qui ei proximi sunt. Eritque hoc filijs Israel sanctum lege perpetua siout praecepit Dominus Moysi. If a man dy and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughters: And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his Bre∣thren: and if he have no Brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his fathers Brethren: And if his father have no Brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman, that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a sta∣tute of judgment as the Lord commanded Mo∣ses. (Num. cap. 26. v. 1. and v. 5.) And for the collection of Genealogies, thus saith God to Moses and Elèazar: Numerate omnem summam filiorum Israel à viginti annis & suprà, per domos & cog∣nationes suas, cunctos qui possunt ad bella procedere: &c. Reuben primogenitus Israel, hujus filius, He∣noch, à quo familia Henochitarum: & Phallu, à quo familia Phalluitarum; & Hezron à quo familia Hezronitarum. Take the summe of the people
from twenty years old and upwards, as the Lord commanded Moses and the children of Israel (ac∣cording to their families and kindred, all that were able for warr; Reuben the eldest son of Israel: The children of Reuben, Hanoch, of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of Palluites: of Hesron the fa∣mily of the Hesronites. And for a further proof of the recording of Genealogies, it is to be considered how diligent the same hath been observed through the whole course of the Scriptures, as the descents from A∣dam to Noe, and from Noe to Abraham, &c. do sufficiently testify. And more, that with the spirit of truth the Genealogy of Christ our Saviour and redeemer, as concerning his humanity, is also by the writing of his holy Evangelists most plainly and sincerely remembred and set down. All these things being therefore by the Scriptures of God (the decider of all controversiies) proved and declared: Your Lordships may see that the bearing of Arms, raising and advancing of Stan∣dards, Banners and Ensigns, using of Obsequies, erecting of Monuments, Enroling and regestring of Pedegrees, and Descents, have joyned to the anti∣ent customs and laws both of this Land and all other nations; the authority of Gods word, being very well accompanied with discretion, reason, and judgment; for God having by his sacred institution ordained Kingdoms, Provinces, and
Seignories, and that over them Kings, Princes and Magistrates, shall command, rule, and govern his people, to the end chiefly that his heavenly Kingdom may be replenished with the blessed souls of his servants, for the instructing whereof he hath also ordained his holy Church, and the Bishops, pastors and ministers of the same, which Bishops and other spiritual officers cannot so well enform his Christian people without the aid of the said Kings and temporal Lords: neither can they govern their particular Countries either from the invasion of outward tyrants or inward Rebels, but through the use of their sword of justice, which sword cannot be exercised against unruly persons being of strength, wanting men skilful in martial Discipline, who cannot ma∣nage those affairs but by mean of the aforesaid Arms and Ensigns, in manner as before I have more largely expressed. And in like sort as Princes, great Lords, Judges, Magistrates and Governours, do use to wear sacred Robes of gold, purple, scarler, and other ornaments and apparel; not to take pride in, or for any vain ostentation or show; but only that they may be distinguished from the inferior peo∣ple, to the end that a reverent regard may be had of them in respect of the high office which under God here on earth they bear. And as these things no man of any reason will gainsay, so I see not but as-well may their just
vertues and good government be remembred with Funerals, Obsequies, and Monuments, after their decease, whereby such as succeed in government may also be had in more high estimation, and a fair example is thereby given them to imitate the regiment of their predecessors, Likewise doth the Registring of descents carry with it reason joined to authority and custom; for as by Gods law there is commanded a pri∣viledge of enheritance to the first begotten of Israel, and so for want of sons to the females, and from them to others answerable to the proximity of their blood and kindred, which with the laws of this land, and of most nations do concur and agree; it doth well stand with peaceful govern∣ment for the avoiding of contentions which may rise for want of records, to testify the truth of mens titles to their enheritances, that Genealogies and Pedegrees, should be enrolled and kept in re∣membrance. I have my good Lords stood the longer upon this point, for that of late travelling through some countries of this Land, and having a desire to see the Moniments of antiquity which have re∣mained in such places as I passed by, for which cause as otherwise I many times resorted to Churches and other houses to satisfy my affection, I found that many Moniments both of Burials and in glass were so broken and defaced, that vneth may be had any knowledge what the fragments
remaining did signify: and enquiring of the in∣habitants how it came to pass that those things were so blemished, they made report that certain persons, delighting as may seem in novelty, for they can abide no mark of Antiquity, had de∣faced the same. These men that take upon them to be reformers, whose desires are great through the singularity and pride they have in their own wits and understandings, weening themselves to be very wise, where indeed they are very simple, and only look but into the abuses of things, and do not see into the grounds and depth of the reasons and causes for which good ordinances were made, go about to find faults, where many times none are; but if peradventure they hap to find an ordinance well made misused, then streight never seek they to reform the abuse, but by their wills, down goeth ordinance and all, such is their insolency, rashness, and want of judgment. It were well done therefore my good Lords, and I could wish that your Honours having some∣times access to her Majesty, and oftentimes con∣ference with my Lords of her privy Councel, should enform her Highness, and their Honours of the said abuses committed, and to be thereby a mean that these simple fellows taking upon them to be reformers, might be reformed them∣selves,
and both kept from destroying of good ordinances, and be punished for their offences in that behalf committed. In the mean time yet shall I desire that Honoura∣ble personages will look better to the Moniments of their ancestors, by correcting the destroyers thereof, and therein to imitate the laudable acti∣ons of William Fleetwood, Serjeant at the Law, and Recorder of the City of London, who being commissioner amongst others for the visitation of causes Ecclesiastical, by the Princes authority, by vertue thereof imprisoned certain wilful per∣sons that had defaced the Moniment of Queen Katherine Dowyger at Preterborough, until such time as they had reformed the same, which thing was through his good endeavour reedified and perfected again, and so remaineth to this day: for although some hapily see standing those of their own parents, yet it were good they should sorsee that no others be pulled down; for that there is not to be looked for but that suffering such injuries to rest unpunished, the doers there∣of will in time grow more insolent, and have a cast to overthrow theirs also. And now being in speech of Monuments, I cannot but remember their ignorance who make small account of any ancestor except before the Conquest, weening that all that lie cross-legged
Such as lie Cross-legg'd are those who were in the wars of the Holy Land, or vowed to go and were prevented by death. In the Collegiate Church of Houden in Yorkshire lyeth a fair cross-leg'd figure of a man in armour of male; on whose sheild is the Arms of Metham of Metham a worshipful family in those parts; as also another of his wife lying close by him, with her leggs also a cross; by which it may seem that she accompanied him in one of these expeditions. so were: and that all antient evidence without date is the like: whereas the one was not had in use until after the Palestine wars, and the other, such as be sealed, be also since This must be understood of Subjects; for K. Edward the Confessor did use a Seale. the Conquest; for I could never see nor hear of any that had seen sealed deed, but the same was made sithence the Conquest of this Land, when the use (as I take it) of sealing with wax first began in England. But these men will not stoop one jot under the Conquest, telling many fables of their ancestors then preserving their Houses, Honours, and Ar∣mories, forgetting quite that it is much more glorious and honourable to be descended from a most famous nation conquering, then such
people by plain feat of Arms subjuged, for as the Poet saith, quis enim sua praelia victus Commemorare velit? referam tamen ordine, nec tam Turpe fuit vinci, quàm contendisse decorum est, Magnaque dat nobis tantus solatia victor. So that if they have any thing praise-worthy left to brag of, it it that they well contended with so puissant conquerors, which were then in their time as wise, glorious, and famous a nation as were in the whole world to be found. Another sort there be not much more skilful, who if they see any Armory, straight enter into the comparison of the fairness thereof: and foul and false is it, if mettal lie upon mettal alone, or colour upon colour: And yet I could wish we should never have more dishonourable men nor worse souldiers then have so born their Armory: for to omit that worthy Godfrey, and that Mack Morise King of Lymster in Ireland, whose on∣ly daughter and heir was married to Richard Strongbowe Earl of Penbrook, and bare in a black shield a red ramping Lion; of our own Sir Richard Sanbach of Sanbach in Chesshire, Sir William Wak∣birge of Wakbirge in Darbishire, two valiant Knights, yet both bare colour upon colour. Pas∣sing the number of examples, I will recite the words of mine Author speaking of the adven∣tures of a brave Knight in the company of Sir Ro∣bert Canole resting by Paris.
This Knight having vowed to strike with his launce on the barriers of the city, performed it, and then the words be these: Celluy cheualier ie ne sca comment il auoit nom ne de quel pays il istoit mais s' armoit a gueulles a de deux fouses noyeres et vne bordure noyre non endente. And although I grant they be not so well to be discerned, as when metal and colour be varied the one with the other; yet sithence the number be great of most worthy men that have born their Arms in such manner, I will esteem their marks as honoura∣ble as the rest, and never impute any falsity to them. And this kind of men also commonly discant upon the proportion, nature, and quality of the device, as if the name of Ricbard were better then Robcrt; and Ralph better then Roger; and in their conceits the Eagle or Faulcon are the fairest birds to be born of all feathered fowls, and so of other the like: when indeed except for the reverence due to the Bearers, who do honour their bearings by their renown, vertue and valure, otherwise there is no difference in the fairness of marks: but that those only are to be prefer∣red which be easiest to be perceived, discerned, and known to be the same things they be marked out for: And therefore the Capitale of Beuf'z black Midas head with his fair long Asse-ears, was as good a crest, as Sir John Chandos chif∣tains head proper in a white scarffe goodly envel∣lopped:
And as fair a coat is Hopwells, being three red Hares playing on Bagpipes in a silver shield, as Newinton which bare d' Azure three Eglets d' Argent displaid. And now me thinks I hear. some that esteem me to mend, and become more fine, skilfull, and Herauld-like in my emblazons, as using the French phrases of d'azyer & d'argent, who think, I doubt not, but that I have committed a great error for want of using the said French phrases in my emblazons; notwithstanding I will joyn in opinion with such as esteem it to be more pro∣per to speak and use English terms and phrases in an English book dedicated to Englishmen, then French or Latin, otherwise than cited authority leadeth. Thus far from Mr. Erdswike publisht by Mr. Wyrley. I come now to what that most expert Herauld Robert Glover Somerset hath sayed upon this sub∣ject of Differences, in his Book De Origine & Antiquitate Armorum, &c. Apud nos in Anglia, longo & approbato usu, tri∣plices observantur Armorum Differentiae; scilicet Principales, Consanguineorum, & Extraneorum. Differentiae principales sint Labellus, sive Lingula, eum pendulis, & appendicibus imparibus: Simplex, & quandoque rebus onustis. Bordura, sive fimbria simplex, componata, aut alio modo semmata, vel distincta per endenturas, & crenelaturas, quae dicuntur principales differentiae;
quia in Armis nunquam cernuntur, nec ullo alio usui destinantur, nisi ad illorum differentiam & dis∣crepantiam. Differentiae Consanguineorum sunt Crescens, Ma∣cula, Merulus, Annulus, Fos-lilij & similia, quae dicuntur Consanguineorum differentiae, quia serviunt & destinantur consanguineis, ab uno & eodem sti∣pite descendentibus: Ut filius junior, dum caelebs & innuptus remanserit gerens Arma patris sui cum tali parva differentia dignoscatur. Et-inter multos fratres, ut quilibet eorum possit bene secerni & cognosci ab alio per sua Arma in praelijs & expedi∣tionibus bellicis; & priaecipue quo ad Nativitatis & geniturae suae statum & praeeminentiam, porta∣bunt Arma domus & familio unde sunt praegnati, cum tali parva differentia. At postquam ductis uxoribus, mutiplicatisque liberis, novam per se con∣stituerint familiam, rejectis prioribus minutis dif∣ferentijs, Arma domus cum Labello, Bordura, Quarterio, Benda, aut alia graviori distinctione, additione, vel commutatione portare debent, quo de∣hinc & illorum familia, ab originali illa familia, unde oriuntur, Armorum delatione facile precipi, distingui, & separari. Et tamque est verus, na∣turalis, & genuinus Armorum usus, ut per easdem cognoscantur & distinguantur familiae & agnationes, ob quam causam proculdubio in initio inventa fue∣rant. Differentiae Extraneorum sunt, Barrulae, Bendae, Fasces; Tigna, sive signa capitalia, Palae, Quarte∣riae,
& similia, quae extraneorum dicuntur notae: Quia licet Extraneo Arma cujuscumque domus seu familiae portare & ostendere, cum hujusmodi in∣crementis et additione sine quorumeumque praejudicio vel offensione. Harum Differentiarum vero usu neglecto, dum his dieb juniores filij minutulas illas Crescenti∣um, Macularum, Merulorum, Annulorum, at{que} Florum differentias retinere solent, easque ad suos quoque posteros transmittant, famularum notitia (quae per Armorum delationes cognosci, secerni, et distingui solebant) prorsus obfuscatur, et deletur. With us in Egland, there hath been a three∣fold Difference observed in Arms; that is to say of the Chiefs, or Principals; for those of Consan∣guinity; and of Strangers. The principal Differences are a Labell, or string with points, or pendents unlike: some∣times plain; and sometimes chang'd. The Border, or plain fillet, componed, or di∣stinguished by Endenting, or Engrailing, which are called the Principal Differences; because they are never seen in Arms, or designed, but for Dif∣ferences. The Differences for such as are of Consanguinity, are a Crescent, a Mullet, a Martlet, an Annulet, a Flower de Lys, and the like; which are called Dif∣ferences of kinsmen; because they are designed and serve for those which are descended from one and the same stock: as for example, a younger
son, whilst he continues a Batcheler and not mar∣ried, he is known by bearing his Fathers Arms with such a small distinction or difference. And amongst many Brothers, to the end that each of them may be discern'd and known from another by his Arms in Battels, and warlike Expeditions, and specially as to their primogeniture and prehe∣minence, they bore the Arms of the House and Family, whence they sprung, with such a small Distinction. But afterwards, when married, and had children, being Heads of new Families, they quitted those former minute and petty Differences, they bore the Arms of their House with a Labell, Bordure, Quarter, Bend, or some other greater distinction or addition, which thenceforth might evidently distinguish them and their Family from the original House and Stock from whence they were descended. Such being the true, natural, and genuine use of Arms, that each Family and Kindred might be known and distinguisht from one another; that being doubtless the cause for which they were at first devised. As to the Differences of Strangers, they were Barrulets, Bends, Fesses, Cheverons, or capital marks; Pales, Quarters, and the like, which are said to be the Badges and marks of Strangers; because it is lawful for a Stranger of any House or Family to bear his Arms with these kind of distinctions and differences, without doing injury or giving offence to any.
But these Differences being grown out of use; now adays younger Sons do not only retain these petty Distinctions of Crescents, Mullets, Martlets, Annulets, and Flowers, but transmit them to their posterity; whence it is, that the Distinction and proper knowledg of several Families, which had wont to be perspicuous by the bearings in their Arms, is now totally confounded and obscured. Hereunto I shall add what the most learned Camden, sometimes Clarencieux King of Arms, hath express'd as to this point: Taken out of his papers in the Cottonian library. No Gentlemen ought to bear their Diffe∣rences in Armory, otherwise then the Office of Armory requireth: And when younger Brethren do marry, erect, and establish new Houses, are accordingly to bear their Arms with such Di∣stinctions and Differences, that they may be known from their elder Families, out of which they were descended; the King of Arms of the Province to be consulted withall, and such Dif∣ferences of Houses are to be assigned and esta∣blish'd by his privity and consent, that so he may advise them to the best, and keep record thereof; otherwise Gentlemen may either hurt themselves, by taking such a Difference as shall prejudice the chief House from whom they are descended.
Let us now see what Sir Henry Spelman (whose memory is not a little famous for his knowledg i Antiquities, and Herauldry) hath written as to thi matter. De Discerniculis. Henr. Spelmanni Aspilagia Impr. Lond. 1654 pag. 140. Pluribus idem Insigne deferre, abs{que} debita diffe∣rentia sua, fas non est: Ne ejusdem gentis fami∣lijs; ne ejusdom familiae fratribus. Familiae autem coryphaeo Symbolum manet integrum et indiscretum; Junioribus omnibus suis Discerniculis interstrictis; quae semper in editiori clypei parte (cophalicae regionis medio, juxta Leum) expetuntur quod Wriothsleus fecialis sub Edwardi quarti aevo, a se inventum propagatum{que} fuisse, ne ulterius quaeras, tradidit. Fratrem primogenitum Lemniscis, seu virgula lemniscata donant. Vivente patre triplici, nondum extincto avo quintuplici; semper impari, si Lei fi∣dem sequamur. Corollae praefert similitudinem, Lemniscis ex ea dependentibus; quam ideo primogenito assignatam dixeris, quia familiae decus, sic prae caeteris exornan∣dus videatur. Antique autem idem hoc Signum, secundo, tertio, quinto conferebatur; discrimine vel in colore posito,
vel in Lemniscorum numero. Secundo fratri Lunulam, Crescentem vocant; Graeci , assignant; Tertio Penticonum; Quarto A∣podem; Quinto Anellum; Sexto Lilium. Et hisce quidem Discerniculis internoscenda exhi∣bentur Warwici in Fenestra veteri, Ecclisiae S. Ma∣riae, Arma, sex filiorum Thomae Beauchamp XIIII. Comitis illius tractus, qui obijt 34. Edw. tertij, ut intelligas istiusmodi Distinctionis ritum non a nu∣peris emanasse. Alij qui aetate Henrici septimi scripserunt, Hae∣redem ipsum Crescenti lunula distinxerunt, ut accessuro huic lumine, accessuram illi haereditatem ostenderent. Secundo vero fratrem, quem tertium familiae limen occupare aiunt (primum enim patri, alterum Haeredi tribuunt) triplici Lemnisco consignarunt: Tertio fratri quadruplicem: Quarto quintuplicem. Sed nec haec, nec illa distinguendi ratio satis apud veteres invaluit, qui apertissimis differentiis consu∣sulentes, paternos colores saepe inverserunt: Saepe rerum gestarum numerum auxerunt; saepe minue∣runt; alicui gestamina, praesertim materna, & hae∣reditaria saepissime interseruerunt. Interdum desertis integris Insignibus, novis gavisi sunt. Sin vero Protogoni Clypeum, per omnes agnatio∣nes, familias, gentes retinuisse placuerit; Lemniscis, quos diximus, Diagoniis, Limbis, Quadraturis, An∣gulis, aliisque latis & conspecti; oribus differen∣tiis usi sunt. En in una gente omnium pene Exemplaria.
Extraneorum gens, vulgo le Strange, inter li∣mitaneos proceres notissimae virtutis, & triplici tum olim Baronia, amplissimisque familiis perquam po∣tens & splendida, Clypeo utebatur rubeo, duobus argenteis Leonibus graduarijs, quam Johannes le Strange quartus Baro de Knockyn, ut familiarum coryphaeus, purum protulit. Fulco le Strange, Baro de Corsham & Blak∣mere, qui a Johanne, avo dicti Johannis, per—filium tertium descenderet, colores inversit, Ar∣genteo clypeo rubeos inducens. Rogerus le Strange, Baro de Ellesmere (ab eodem avo, per filium quartum prognatus) gentis clypeum, limbo imbricato aureo circundedit. Ejus pater etiam Rogerus, cum Matildem filiam Willielmi de Bellocampo uxorem duxisset, Bello∣camporum Cruces Crucigeras (sed argenteos nu∣mero{que} novenario) argenteis suis Leonibus inter∣calavit. Hamo le Strange a Johanne quarto, per quin∣tum editus, clypeum fratris sui Johannis, sexti Ba∣ronis de Knockyn, aurea diagonali virgula trajecit, eodem{que} discrimine apud Hunstanton (Norfolcensi agro) quam a Barone fratre anno gratiae 1309 dono acceperat, consedens, celebri familiae (quae in hunc us{que} diem, eadem sede, eadem{que} discernicula, faeliciter claruit) initium dedit. Sed ipse etiam Johannes le Strange sextus Baro de Knockyn, Leones suos Apodum peribolo (ut e Sigillo cernimus) aliquando circumclusit,
Eadem tempestate Johannes le Strange (Glo∣cestriensis puto) is, qui dominus de Ercalene inscri∣bebatur, clypeum Rogeri le Strange de Ellesmere, cerulea mitella transegit. At{que} hunc quidem decernendi morem potiori laude multi efferunt, quod militaria Symbola, ad distin∣ctionem enata, distinctiora multo effecerat: Minutulis enim illis recentiorum formulis, nec error defuit, nec periculum. Sic elusi (apud Froisardum) Hannones illi, qui sub vexillo Willielmi Baileul, argenteis cya∣neis{que} repagulis transmutato, rubri{que} binis fastigijs inducto, recipere se contendebant; ad vexillum Ro∣berti Baileul, fratris sui minoris, exigua cruce au∣rea (quam male animadverterent) discriminatam convolabant: fusi{que} & dissipati omnes gravissimas ernoris sui paenas persolverunt. Rideo igitur & rejicio icunculas istas, quas tum praecipue in morem venisse arbitramur, cum ipsa in∣signia, relictis jam nativis stationibus, clypeis, vex∣illis, apparatu{que} militari, in aedium fenestris molli{que} supellectili (ubi nec refert magnitudo) potissiimum residerent. Touching small Differences, being the Latin before mentioned, put in English. It is not at all lawful for several persons to bear one and the same Arms, without a due Difference; no not to those of the same family though they be Brothers thereof.
To the chief of the family, the intire Arms without any difference do belong, but the youn∣ger branches are to have their respective Diffe∣rences, and bear them in the midst of the upper part of the Escocheon, according to Lee, which Wriothesley (a Herauld under K. Edw. 4th) af∣firms to be of his devising. To the eldest son, in his fathers life time, was assigned a Labell of three points; but if his grand∣father was living, with five points, ever different, if we give credit to Lee. Which (like a Coronet) the Labells hanging at it, is therefore assigned to the eldest son, that as he is the glory of the family he may seem to be adorned above the rest. Antiently this distinction was conferred on the second, third or fourth, either by different colour, or number of the Labells. To the second Brother they assigned a Crescent: to the third a Mullet of five points; to the fourth a Martlet; to the fifth an Annulet; to the sixth a Flower de Lys. And by these Differences the six sons of Tho∣mas Beauchamp the XIIII Earl of Warwick, (who died in the thirty fourth year of K. Edw. 3.) are shewed forth in an old window of the Church of St. Mary at Warwick; so that you may see that this usage is ancient. Some who have written in the time of K. Henry the seventh, have distinguisht the Heir himself
by a Crescent, that by the accession of Light they might shew that the inheritance was coming to him. And to the second Brother, whom they take to be the third boundary of the family (attribu∣ting the first to the father, and the second to the heir) they assign a Labell of three points: To the third a Labell of four points; and to the fifth a Labell of five points. But none of these kind of Distinctions were used amongst the Antients; Who studying appa∣rent and perspicuous Differences, often inverted the paternal colour; sometimes augmented the particular chardge in the shield; sometimes diminishing the same; and sometimes inserting another sort of bearing, especially from the mo∣ther; but sometimes totally quitting their pa∣ternal Arms, and assuming new. But if the respective branches of the family did retain their Ancestors Arms, then they did use apparent and conspicuous Differences either by Labells, Bends, Borders, Quarters, Cantons or the like. Examples whereof we have almost all in one family. As in that of le Strange, sometimes famous for their valour in the marshes of Wales; whereof there were three distinct Barons; who had a sheild gules, with two Lyons passant Argent, which John
le Strange the fourth Baron of Knockyn, as the chief of that house, did bear. But Fulke le Strange, Baron of Corfham and Blakmere, who descended from the Grandfather of the said John, by a third son, inverted the colours, bearing in a field Argent, two Lyons passant gules. Likewise Roger le Strange Baron of Ellesmere, who descended from the same grandfather by a fourth son, bore the same Arms, with a Border engrayled Or. Also Roger his father, after he had marryed Maud the daughter of William de Beauchamp, bore nyne Cross-croslets Argent betwixt his silver-lyons. Moreover Hamon le Strange, who descended from the said John the fourth, by a fifth son, bore the Arms of his Brother, John the sixth Baron of Knockyn, with a Bendlet Or; and fixing himself at Hunstanton in Norfolk (which he obtained in the year 1309 from John his Brother) was the original of that worthy family, which doth still remain there, bearing the same Difference. But the sayd John le Strange the sixth Baron of Knockyn, did sometime environ his Lyons with an Orle of Martlets, as by his Seals are to be seen. At the same time another John le Strange, who was Lord of Ercalene (in Shropshire) bore the Arms of Roger le Strange of Ellesmere with a Bend∣let Azure. Which kind of Differences, as many do affirm,
are most worthy of commendation, because as mi∣litary Badges, first used for distinction, they are much more discernable. For by these small and petty Differences, there is both error and danger, as it is evident by those Hennovers of which Froisard speakes; who fight∣ing under the Standard of William de Baileul, with Barrs Argent and Azure counterchanged, and over them two Chevrons gules striving to repair thereto, came to the Standard of Robert Baileul his younger Brother, distinguisht but by a small golden-cross, which occasioned a total rout to them all, whereby they paid dear for their mistake. I do therefore smile at, and despise these pettey Differences, which now a days are used; whereas the Arms themselves, leaving their native stati∣ons, in Shields, Banners, and habiliments of warr, doth now chiefly appear in Glass-windows and sleight houshold stuff, where the largeness of the distinction is not at all regarded. Having now done with these English writers, let us hear what the French say thereto. Mons. Charles Segoigne, Advocate of the Parli∣ament, and of the Council of Estate, and of the privy-council of the King in his Tractate, called Tresor Heraldique, printed at Paris 1657. Pag. 459. Pour celles des maisons particularies, chascun on
use comme il lui plaist, toutes fois les pieces, dont se sert ordinairement pour Brisures, sont le Lambell, les Bordures, le Baton, ou Cottice, le Franc Can∣ton; la Molette; le Croissant; l' Estaille; le Be∣sant &c. For Differences of particular Houses, each one useth as he pleaseth: nevertheless the pieces that ordinarily are used, are the Labell; the Bordures; the Baton, or Cotice; the Franc Canton (id est the Dexter Canton) the Mullet; the Crescent; the Star, the Besant [the Besant in the French ac∣ceptation being a roundell, either Or or Argent.] Le Trophee d' Armes (whose author conceals himself) a book printed at Paris an. 1650. Pag. 33. Les pleines Armes sont reservees aux aisnez par les loix divines & humaines: Les Cadets & puisnez les portent aussi, mais avec quel{que} differences d' in∣feriorite; ce que l' on appelles Brisures, dont le nom∣bre n' est point limite, puis qu' elles dependent de la fantasie. Les uns prennent Estoilles; Croissans; Soleils, animaux, oyseaux, fleurs, & autres choses posces d' ordenaire sur le flanc dextre de l' Escu, en chef ou montantes d' icelui. Des autres brisent en diminuant les pieces: & d' autres en changeant les esmail-de leur Armes. Mais le plus souvent pour Brisure, on se sert du Lambeau; de la Bordure; de l' Orle; Báston;
Bande ou Cottice, que ie range ici selon leur dignite. Car on tient que s' il se trouvoit cin{que} puisnez en un maison, le Lambeau appertiendroit au premier; le Bordure au second; & aussi des autres. Si bien, que les puisnez: Du premier puisnes pour doubles Brisures, ou sou brisures, augmente: ront les pendens du Lambeau; le premier d' un: le second de deux autres; & les autres de mesme jusques a cin∣que. Apres quoy, pour sou-brisures, on chargeroit de Lambeau, qui d' une figure qui d' une autre. Les sou-brisures de la Bordure, sont primierement de la fair Engreslee. Secondement de la charger de Torteaux ou Besans: Troisiesmement de la Componee. Et finálement de la charger de plusieurs figures, ou d' une soule. Il en est de mesme des autres Brisures. Which in English is thus. The plain Arms are reserved to the eldest sons, both by divine and humane laws: The Cadets (or younger) bear the same Arms, but with some Difference of inferiority, which we call Brisures: of which the number is not limitted, but depends upon fancy. Some take Starrs, Cressents, Sunns, Beasts, Birds, Flowers, and other things, put most com∣monly upon the dexter Flanc of the Escocheon; upon the cheife part of the same; or moving, or issuing thence. Others difference by diminishing the peices of the chardge, or changing the colours.
But most commonly for Brisures (or differen∣ces) we make use of the Labell; the Bordure; the Orle; the Baton; the Bend, or Cottice, which I range here according to their dignity: For we hold, that if there be five puisnes in a house, the Labell belongs to the first; the Bordure to the se∣cond, and so of the rest. So that the puisnes of the first puisnes for dou∣ble (or sub-brisures) shall augment the pendents of the Labell: the first with one; the second with two: the rest accordingly to the number of five. After which, for Sub-brisures, or differences, we must chardge the Labell with one figure or another. The Sub-brisures of the Bordure, are first of all to make it Engrailed. Secondly to chardge it with Torteaux, or Besants. Thirdly to Compone (or Gobone) it. And finally to chardge it with various sorts of figures or with one alone. The same must be done with the other sort of Brisures or differences. Note that the French Blazoners, do, by Torte∣auxes mean Roundles of colors: And by Besants those of mettal; viz. Silver, and Gold. The book of St. Albans sayth, that Labells are excellent Differences; as with three, four, five, or more points. It also speaks of Cross-croslets, Mullets, or the like. Likewise of Bordures changed, in form, or in color.
We will conclude this chapter of Arms, and Blazons with acknowledging and distinguishing the eldest sons from the younger and inferior. The Theatre of Honour &c. by Andrew Fa∣vine a French man, translated into English, printed at London an. 1623. lib. 1. cap. 1. pag. 11. The eldest are known and discerned from the other by the plain paternal Arms without any Brisure (id est diminution) whatsoever, except the father gave the same so. It is ordinarily seen in illustrious and most noble Houses, that the second son quartereth the fathers Arms, with them of his mother: but this occasi∣oneth confusion to their descent and linage, if they have store of male children: Others diversifye and vary in the chief, or else in the first quarter and Canton of the cheife, which is termed of Honour; or else Partissent Any kind of partitions., Flan∣quent Flanching bear∣ing upon Flanches., Entent Partitions in base of any sort., en poincte, ou mettent Placing something over all. sur le tout: But the most certain knowledge is made by Brisures, so far as to the seventh generation, the end of all patronage [Brisures signifying any thing added besides the original chardge.] It is an assured rule, that among males, the el∣dest
acknowledgeth himself, and he ought to be acknowledged by his father's Arms, if he be no otherwise stipuled by contracts of marriage, of do∣nation, or of substitution, which do extend so far as to the fourth heir. And if all the males would bear the fathers Arms, they ought to be distin∣guished according to degree of Birth, or primo∣geniture, by Brisures. But the second son deit Porter le Lambeau de trois pieces; which is to be understood of metal or color, and which also ought to be observed in all other Brisures. The third son une simple Bordure. The fourth le Orle; The fifth le Baston: And the sixth le Bande. If there be any more, the Cheife; the first or last Canton of the Cheife, or else le Ente en Poincte will serve to be remarked. The assailants or challengers of all the younger thus born must be acknowledged by doubles Bri∣sures; in regard the eldest son issued of the second, ought to retain and bear the Fathers Arms avecques leur Brisure le Lambeau de trois pieces en chef. The second le Larabeau de quatre pieces en chef. The third pareil Lambeau monuant le cheif. And the fourth pareil Lambeau charge solon sa fantasie d'Aigles, Lyons, Croissants, Roses, Aleryons, Merlets, ou Diapre. The second son issuing of the first third portera la Bordure engreslee. The third chargee de Befans, ou Torteaux.
The fourth La Bordure Componee. The next Endentee, or Endenchee. And the rest (if there be any more) Chargee de Annulets, par∣tie del un ou l' autre, ou bien le simple, ou be double essanier & trescheur; id est the diminitive of an Orle. The second son issuing of the first fourth, l' Orle, which his descendents and he may diversifye; d' Eschecquette, pale, counterpale, Lozange, Frelte, Fusille, Faisses, conterfaisses, Paile, Viure A forme of Dancetty., che∣veronne contre-cheveronne; Verse, Turned and coun∣terchanged. contre-verse; or chardged with the forenamed Beasts with pannes All sorts of Ermins and vairy., Marles, Molettes, Estoiles, ou de rustres Lozenges rarouranal pierced., or other varieties, which may be put into Arms. The second son of the first fifth, and his descen∣dents may change and vary le Baston, as hath been said before and the like. Of the second son, and his assaylants of the first six a la Band With the Bend., which may be Coticee, jumelle double-cotized., Bretesscee, embatelled Feuillee chardg'd with six leaves of any sort. de six, componee, En∣denctiee, ou chargee d' animaux, ou de pannes. But it is to be held for a rule, and an infallible Maxime in Arms, and the noble art of painting, and Blazon, that he which beareth least is the best, which will serve for question and enquirie.
A True and Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE Nobility OF ENGLAND.
A true and perfect Catalogue of all the Nobility, Great Officers of State and Court, Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal of the King∣dom of ENGLAND, according to their Respective Precedencies. Dukes of the Royal Blood (II) * JAMES Duke of York (and Albany in Scotland, Earl of Ulster in Ireland) * Rupert Duke of Cumberland (Count Palatine of the Rhine) Archbishops (II), and Great Officers (IV), who in respect of their Offices precede all the Nobi∣lity except those of the Blood Royal. Arch-bishop of Canterbury Primate of All England William Sancroft Dr. of Divinity Lord High Chancellor of England Heneage Earl of Nottingham Arch-Bishop of York, Primate of England
Richard Stern Dr. of Divinity Lord High Treasurer of England This Office is now executed by Commissioners Lord President of the Council John Earl of Radnor Lord Privy Seal Arthur Earl of Anglesey Dukes (IX) and Dutchesses (II) Henry Howard Duke of Norfolk (Earl Marshal) Charles Seymour Duke of Somerset (under age) * George Villiers Duke of Buckingham * Christopher Monke Duke of Albemarle * James Scot Duke of Monmouth (and Buccleugh in Scotland) * Henry Cavendish Duke of New-castle Barbara Dutchess of Cleveland (sole Daughter and Heir to William Villiers Vicount Grandison in Ireland) for Life, with Remainder to Charles Fitz-Roy, her eldest Son, and for want of Issue male to George Fitz-Roy, her Younger Son. Lovisa de Querovalle Dutchess of Portsmouth (for Life) * Charles Lenos Duke of Richmond (and Lenox in Scotland) under age. * Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southampton (under age)
* Henry Fitz-Roy Duke of Grafton (the Re∣mainder, for want of Issue male, to George Fitz-Roy, his Younger Brother) under Age Marquesses (II) Charles Paulet Marquess of Winchester * Henry Somerset Marquess of Worcester Other Great Officers (V) (Who take place in respect of their Offices) Lord High Chamberlain of England Robert Earl of Lindsey Earl Marshal of England Henry Duke of Norfolk, with His Majesty's appro∣bation at present executes the Office by his Deputy who now is Robert Earl of Aylesbury Lord High Admiral of England This Office is now executed by Commissioners Lord Steward of the King's Houshold James Earl of Brecknock (Duke of Ormond in Ire∣land) Lord Chamberlain of the King's Houshold Henry Earl of Arlington Earls (LXIX) and (I) Countess * Auberie de Vere Earl of Oxford
Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury (Waterford and Wexford in Ireland) Anthony Grey Earl of Kent Willlam Stanly Earl of Derby John Maners Earl of Rutland Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntington * William Russel Earl of Bedford Philip Herbert Earl of Pembroke and Montgo∣mery Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln James Howard Earl of Suffolk Charles Sackvill Earl of Dorset and Middlesex * James Cecil Earl of Salisbury John Cecil Earl of Exeter John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater Philip Sidney Earl of Leicester James Compton Earl of Northampton Edward Rich Earl of Warwick and Holland (un∣der Age) William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire William Feilding Earl of Denbigh (and Desmond in Ireland) John Digby Earl of Bristol Gilbert Holles Earl of Clare Oliver St. Johns Earl of Bolinbroke Charles Fane Earl of Westmorland Robert Mountagu Earl of Manchester Thomas Howard Earl of Berkeshire * John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave Thomas Savage Earl of Rivers
Robert Bertie Earl of Lindsey (Lord Great Cham∣berlain of England) Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough Thomas Grey Earl of Stamford Hencage Finch Earl of Winchelsey Robert Pierrepont Earl of Kingston upon Hull Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvon Philip Stanhope Earl of Chesterfield Richard Tufton Earl of Thanet Thomas Weston Earl of Portland * William Wentworth Earl of Strafford Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland Robert Leke Earl of Scarsdale Charles Wilmot Earl of Rochester (and Vicount Wilmot of Athlon in Ireland) under Age * Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans Edward Mountagu Earl of Sandwich * James Butler Earl of Brecknock (Lord Steward of the King's Houshold, and Duke of Ormond in Ireland) Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon Arthur Capel Earl of Essex Robert Brudnel Earl of Cardigan Arthur Annesly Earl of Anglesey (Lord Privy Seal, and Vicount Valentia in Ireland) John Greneville Earl of Bath Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle William Craven Earl of Craven Robert Bruce Earl of Aylesbury (and Elgin in Scotland)
Richard Boyle Earl of Burlington (and Cork in Ireland) * Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington (Lord Chamber∣lain of His Majesties Houshold) Anthony-Ashley Cooper Earl of Shastsbury William Herbert Earl of Powis Edward-Henry Lee Earl of Lichfield * John Maitland Earl of Guilford (and Duke of Lauderdale in Scotland) * Thomas Osborne Earl of Danby Thomas Lennard Earl of Sussex George Fitz-Roy Earl of Northumberland (under Age) Lewis Duras Earl of Feversham Charles Beauclair Earl of Burford (under Age) George Savile Earl of Hallifax Charles Gerard Earl of Macclesfield John Roberts Earl of Radnor (Lord President of the Council) Robert Paston Earl of Yarmouth George Berkeley Earl of Berkeley Edward Conway Earl of Conway (and Vicount Killutagh in Ireland Elizabeth (Lady Dacres) Countess of Shepey (Daughter of Paul Vicount Banyng, Relict of Francis Lennard Lord Dacres, and Mother to Thomas Earl of Sussex) for Life Heneage Finch Earl of Nottingham (Lord High Chancellor of England)
Uicounts (VIII) and (I) Uicountess Leceister Devereux Vicount Hereford (under Age) Francis Brown Vicount Mountague William Fiennes Vicount Say and Sele Baptist Noel Vicount Campden Thomas Bellassyse Vicount Fauconberg Charles Mordant Vicount Mordant Francis Newport Vicount Newport Sarah (Lady Corbet) Vicountess Corbet (Daugh∣ter and Coheir of Sir Robert Munson of Carle∣ton in Com. Linc. Knight Relict of Sir Vincent Corbet of Morton Corbet in Com. Salop. Ba∣ronet) for Life Laurence Hyde Vicount Hyde Bishops (XXIV) Dr. Henry Compton L. B. of London Dr. Nathaniel Crew L. B. of Durham Dr. George Morley L. B. of Winchester Dr. Herbert Crofts L. B. of Hereford Dr. Seth Ward L. B. of Salisbury Dr. Edward Rainbow L. B. of Carlisle Dr. John Dolben L. B. of Rochester Dr. Antony Sparrow L. B. of Norwich
Dr. Peter Gunning L. B. of Ely Dr. Thomas Wood L. B. of Coventry and Lichfield Dr. Guy Carleton L. B. of Chichester Dr. Peter Mew L. B. of Bath and Wells Dr. John Pearson L. B. of Chester Dr. Humphry Lloyd L. B. of Bangor Dr. William Lloyd L. B. of Peterborough Dr. Thomas Barlow L. B. of Lincoln Dr. James Fleetwood L. B. of Worcester Dr. John Fell L. B. of Oxford Dr. Thomas Lamplough L. B. of Exeter Dr. William Thomas L. B. of St. Davids Dr. William Gulston L. B. of Bristol Dr. William Beaw L. B. of Landaff Dr. William Lloyd L. B. of St. Asaph Dr. Robert Frampton L. B. of Gloucester (The Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester do constantly precede the residue of the Bishops who take their places according to the seniority of their Consecrations) Barons (LXV) and Baronesses (III) Henry Howard Lord Moubray (beareth the Title of Earl of Arundel) George Nevill Lord Abergavenny (under Age) James Touchet Lord Audley (and Earl of Castle-Haven in Ireland) Charles West Lord La Warre
Thomas Parker Lord Morley and Lord Montegle Robert Shirley Lord Ferrers Conyers Darcie Lord Darcie and Lord Meinel. Charles Mildmay Lord Fitz-Walter (under Age) Henry Yelverton Lord Grey (under Age) Frances (Lady Ward) Baroness Dudley (Grand-Daughter and sole Heir to Edward Sutton Lord Dudley, Relict of Humble Lord Ward, and Mo∣ther of Edward Lord Ward) William Stourton Lord Stourton Conyers Darcie Lord Conyers Henry Sandys Lord Sandys Thomas-Windsor Windsor alias Hickman Lord Windsor Thomas Cromwell Lord Cromwell (and Earl of Arglas in Ireland) Ralph Eure Lord Eure Philip Wharton Lord Wharton Thomas Willoughby Lord Willough by of Parham William Paget Lord Paget Francis Howard Lord Howard of Effinghm Charles North Lord North and Lord Grey of Rolleston James Brugges Lord Chandos Robert Carey Lord Hunsdon James Bertie Lord Norris William Petre Lord Petre Digby Gerard Lord Gerard of Bromley (under age) Henry Arundell Lord Arundell of Wardour (and Count of the Empire)
The Lady Catherine (O Brien) Baroness Clif∣ton (Daughter of the Lord George Stuart call'd Lord D'Aubignie; Sister and sole Heir to Charles late Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and thereby sole Heir to the Lady Catharine her Grandmother, Daughter and Heir to Gervaise Lord Clifton) first marryed to Henry Lord O Brien (Son and Heir to Henry Earl of Tho∣mond in Ireland) and since his death to Sir Jo∣seph Williamson Knight Christopher Roper Lord Tenham Fulke Grevill Lord Brooke Edward Mountagu Lord Mountagu of Boughton Forde Grey Lord Grey of Werke John Lovelace Lord Lovelace John Paulet Lord Paulet William Maynard Lord Maynard (and Baron Maynard of Wickelow in Ireland) John Coventrie Lord Coventrie William Howard Lord Howard of Escrick Charles Mohun Lord Mohun (under Age) Henry Herbert Lord Herbert of Chirbury (and Baron Herbert of Castle-Island in Ireland) Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton William Byron Lord Byron Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan (and Earl of Car∣bery in Ireland) Francis Smith Lord Carington (and Vicount Ca∣rington of Barrefore in Ireland)
William Widdrington Lord Widdrington Edward Ward Lord Ward Thomas Colepeper Lord Colepeper Jacob Astley Lord Astley Charles Lucas Lord Lucas John Bellassyse Lord Bellassyse Edward Watson Lord Rockingham Robert Sutton Lord Lexinton (under Age) Charles-Henry Kirckhoven Lord Wotton (and Earl of Bellomont in Ireland) Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale Charles Berkeley Lord Berkeley of Stratton (under Age) Francis Holles Lord Holles Charles Cornwallis Lord Cornwallis George Boothe Lord De la Mer Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend Thomas Crew Lord Crew John Frescheville Lord Frescheville Richard Arundell Lord Arundell of Treryse James Butler Lord Butler of Moore-Parke (beareth the Title of Earl of Ossory in Ireland) under Age Hugh Clifford Lord Clifford of Chudley (under Age) Richard Butler Lord Butler of Weston (and Earl of Arran in Ireland) Susan (Lady Bellassyse) Baroness Bellassyse of Os∣godby (Daughter and Coheir to Sir WilliamAir∣mine of Osgodby in Com. Linc. Baronet, Re∣lict of Sir Henry Bellassyse Knight of the Bathe
son and heir to John Lord Bellassyse) for Life Edward Noel Lord Noel Richard Lumley Lord Lumley (and Vicount Lum∣ley of Waterford in Ireland) George Carteret Lord Carteret (under Age) All those before, whose names an Asterisc (*) is prefixed, are Knights of the Garter.
A true and exact LIST of all the KNIGHTS of the CARTER infer SCHEME of the Stalls of the SOVE and the KNIGHTS COMPANIONS MOST NOBLE Order as they no in St. GEORGES CHAPPEL in WI CASTLE this tenth of SEPTEMBER Christian the 5th. King of Denmark The Soveraigne Charles the 2d. King of England &c Charles the XIth. King of Sweden James York Prince Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine William-Henry Prince of Or Frederick William Prince Elector Mar∣quess of Brandenburgh Charles the 2d. Prince Ele of the Rhine James Duke of Ormond George Duke of Buckinghan Auberie Earl of Oxford William Earl of Strafford James Duke of Monmouth Christopher Duke of Albemar
James Duke of Monmouth Christopher Duke of Albemarle John Duke of Lauderdale Henry Marquess of Worcester Henry Earl of St. Albans William Earl of Bedford Henry Earl of Arlington Charles Duke of Southampton John Earl of Mulgrave Henry Duke of Newcastle homas Earl of Danby Henry Duke of Grafton James Earl of Salisbury Charles Duke of Richmund lace this after page 78.
A CATALOGUE OF THE BARONETS OF THIS KINGDOM OF England; From the first Erection of that Dignity until the 4th of July 1681 inclusive.
AN Advertisement TO THE READER. WHen the Copie, from which this subse∣quent Catalogue of the English Nobility is printed, was sent to the Press, the name and Title of Francis Lord Howard of Effing∣ham was omitted, (tho in the second Volume of the Baronage of England published in anno 1676 up∣on the best information I could then obtain, I had there taken notice of that person, as heir expectant to the said Honour, after the death of Charles Earl of Nottingham, who was then very aged and issu∣less) doubting to fix him therein before he had regu∣larly made his claim thereto, might give offence to the rest of the Nobility: but upon view of my Copie: by some intelligent persons, who nevertheless thought it proper to be inserted I submitted thereto: whereat if any take offence I humbly crave pardon: it being my clear opinion, that such of a collateral line, as have right by descent to any Title of Honour, accru∣ing to them by virtue of an entail thereof made long since; they should openly exhibite their claim unto the King, with due proof of their right thereto (as hath
heretofore in like cases been done) and thereupon, with his Majesties allowance thereof, have the same, by the direction of the Earl Marshal, orderly registred. Whereas in the Catalogue of the Vicounts, I have inserted Leicester Devereux Vicount Hereford, now in minoritie; I'have hereby thought fitt to advertise the Reader; that, upon certain exceptions taken in Parliament in anno 1677 to his right for that Title, by reason of the attainder of Robert Earl of Essex and Vicount Hereford in 43 Eliz. and restoration of that Honour being only limitted to Robert his Son and the two Sisters of the said Robert: the decision hereof was then, by order of the House of Lords, reited till the said Leicester Devereux shall come of full Age. It is likewise to be noted; whereas in this ensuing Catalogue Pag. 71. Charles Wilmot Earl of Ro∣chester is inserted; that since the printing thereof he dyed, whereby that Title of Honour is totally ex∣tinct: and therefore, that the number of Earls men∣tioned in pag. 69. lin. penult. is to be no more then 68. And that James Compton Earl of North∣ampton mentioned p. 70. is since dead but suc∣ceeded by George his Son who is under Age. I have likewise thought fit, farther to advertise the Reader, that the Book-Seller being desirous to publish Catalogues of the Scottish and Irish Nobi∣lity: such hath been the unexspected delay, in ob∣taining perfect Copies from Scotland and Ireland
that the publication of my papers (which have been printed more then four months since) hath by reason thereof, been so long retarded, that it hath necessitated some alterations and emendations now added. Also, that as to the following Catalogue of the Scottish Nobility, Sir George Mackenzie, the worthy Lord Advocat of Scotland in his letter to me bearing the 30th of December 1681 doth sig∣nify, that he did review it and gave his assistance for the better compleating thereof and doth certify that it is very perfect and exact. But the said Sir George Mackenzie in a learned Treatise of Prece∣dency (publish'd at Edinburgh 1680 together with another of Heraldry both written by himself being a person eminently renow'd for his several other excellent works) having at large discoursed of the Precedency due to the Arch-Bishops of Scotland, to the end that no injury be done to them by concealing their just right therein, I shall here transcribe what he saith as to that point. I find by a letter in An. 1625, that before King James his going into England, the Mar∣quesses of Scotland, did take place from the Arch-bishops: And by a letter in An. 1626, renew'd in An. 1664. The Arch-bishop of St. Andrews is to take place before all subjects. Yet I think, this will not give him place from the Kings Sons, Uncles, and Nephews, though they be likewise subjects; since the word subjects must be here in∣terpreted
according to the custom of Nations, by which these neare relations of Princes are prefer∣red to all other subjects. Yet defacto since the let∣ter the Arch-bishops of St. Andrews ceds to the Lord Chancellor. These Advertisements to the Reader, are to be pre∣fixt before pag. 67.
THE Preface. WHereas in the year 1667 a Catalogue of the Baronets of England was by autho∣rity published; to the end that such as had obtained Patents for that Honour, which were not enrolled, should, by discerning an omission of their names therein, take care to supply that defect, so that, upon a second Impression thereof they might be inserted: Now, whereas, after twelve years and more, no Enrollments are yet to be found for sundry persons which have assumed this Title, which causeth some to doubt whether they can make any justifiable claime thereto. Whereas therefore no person whatsoever ought to take upon them this Title of dignity, but such as have been really advanced thereto by Letters Patents under the great Seale of England; it is thought fit by the right Honorable Robert Earl of Aylesbury, who now exerciseth the Office of Earl Marshall of En∣gland, that this present Catalogue of such, touching whom the Docquet-books remaining with the-Clerk of the Crown in Chancery do take notice, shall be pub∣lished;
to the end that those of whom no memorial upon Record is to be found, to justifie their right to this Title, may be known; and care henceforth ta∣ken in Commissions of the peace, and otherwise, that it be not given unto them until they shall manifest the same unto the Lord Chancellor of England, and have speciall order from his Lordship to enroll such Patents, whereby they pretend Title to that dignity. As also, that regard be had of giving credit to any other Catalogues of the Baronets which are al∣ready publisht, or that shall be publisht, than what is taken from the authority of those Docquet-books above mentioned, or the Enrollment of their Patents.
BARONETS Created by King James. Anno Dom. 1611. May 22 & Anno Regis Jac. 9. 1 SIR Nicholas Bacon of Redgrave Knight. Suff. 2 Sir Richard Molineux of Sefton Knight (Irish Visc. viz. Viscount Molineux.) Lanc. 3 Sir Thomas Maunsell of Morgan Knight. Glam. 4 George Shirley of Staunton Esq (English Baron viz. Lord Ferrers.) Leic. 5 Sir John Stradling of St. Donats Kt. Glam. 6 Sir Francis Leke of Sutton Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Scaresdale). Darb. 7 Thomas Pelham of Lawghton Esq Suss. 8 Sir Richard Houghton of Houghton-Tower Knight. Lanc. 9 Sir Henry Hobart of Intwood Knight (At∣tourney
General to the King afterwards Lord chief justice of the Common-pleas.) Norff. 10 Sir George Boothe of Dunham-Massey Knight (English Baron viz. Ld. de La Mer.) Chesh. 11 Sir John Peyton of Iselham Knight Cambr. 12 Lionel Talmach of Helmingham Esq From whom the present chief Lineal descendant hath a just expectancy to be a Scotch Earl viz. Earl of Dysert and now beareth the title of Lord Huntingtower as being eldest son to the Countess of Dysert Daughter of Wil∣liam Murray Earl of Dysert and the relict of the late Sr. Lionel Talmach, but since married to the Duke of Lauderdale. Suff. 13 Sir Gervase Clifton of Clifton Knight of the Bath. Nott. 14 Sir Thomas Gerard of Bryn Knight. Lanc. 15 Sir Walter Aston of Tixhall Knight of the Bath. Embassador in Spain from King James (Scotch Baron viz. Lord Aston.) Staff. 16 Philip Knevet of Buckenham Esq (Extinct.) Norff. 17 Sir John St. John of Lidiard-Tregoz Knight. Wiltf. 18 John Shelly of Michelgrove Esq Suss. 19 Junij 29 Sir John Savage of Rock-Savage Knight. (English Earl viz. E. Rivers) Chesh. 20 Sir Francis Barington of Barington-hall Knight. Essex.
21 Henry Berkely of Wimundham Esq (Extinct). Leic. 22 Will. Wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse Esq (English Earl viz. E. of Strafford) Ebor. 23 Sir Richard Musgrave of Hartley Castle Knight. Westmerl. 24 Edward Seymour of Bury-Pomeray Esq Devon. 25 Sir Moyle Finch of Eastwell Knight. (English Earl viz. E. of Winchelsey) Rent 26 Sir Antony Cope of Hanwell Knight. Oxon. 27 Sir Thomas Mounson of Carleton Knight. Linc. (Vide Charles Vavasor Junij 22. 1631). 28 George Gresely of Drakedow Esq Derb. 29 Paul Tracy of Stanway Esq Glouc. 30 Sir John Wentworth of Goffield Knight. (Ex∣tinct) Essex. 31 Sir Henry Belasyse of Newborough Knight. (English Visc. viz. Vicount Fauconberge) Ebor. 32 William Constable of Flamborough Esq (Extinct.) Ebor. 33 Sir Thomas Leigh of Stoncley Knight. (Eng. Baron viz. Lord Leigh) Warw. 34 Sir Edward Noell of Brook Knight. (Eng. Visc. viz. Vicount Campden) Rutl. 35 Sir Robert Cotton of Connington Kt. Hunt. 36 Robert Cholmondeleigh of Cholmondeleigh Esq Irish Earl viz. E. of Lemester as also Engl. Baron viz. L. Cholmondeleigh of Wiche-mal∣bank,
alias Nant-wiche Extinct). Chesh. 37 John Molineux of Teversal Esq Nott. 38 Sir Francis Wortley of Wortley Knight. (Extinct) Ebor. 39 Sir George Savile senior of Thornehill Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Hallifax). Ebor. 40 William Kniveton of Mircaston Esq Derb. 41 Sir Philip Woodhouse of Wilberhall Knight. Norff. 42 Sir William Pope of Wilcot Knight. (Irish Earl viz. Earl of Down). Oxon. 43 Sir James Harrington of Ridlington Kt. Rutl. 44 Sir Henry Savile of Methley Knight. (Ex∣tinct). Ebor. 45 Henry Willoughby of Risley Esq (Extinct). Darb. 46 Lewes Tresham of Rushton Esq (Extinct). Northamp. 47 Thomas Brudenell of Deene Esq (English Earl viz Earl of Cardigan). Norrhamp. 48 Sir George St. Paul of Snarsford Knight. (Ex∣tinct). Linc. 49 Sir Philip Tirwhit of Stainefield Knight. Linc. 50 Sir Roger Dallison of Loughton Knight (Ex∣tinct). Linc. 51 Sir Edward Carre of Sleford Knight. Linc. 52 Sir Edward Hussey of Hennington Kt. Linc. 53 L'Estrange Mordant of Massingham Esq Norff. 54 Thomas Bendish of Steeple Bamsted Esq Essex 55 Sir John Wynne of Gwedyr Kt. Caernarv.
56 Sir William Throckmorton of Tortworth Knight. Glouc. 57 Sir Richard Worseley of Appledore-combe Knight. Hants. 58 Richard Fleetwood of Calwiche Esq Staff. 59 Thomas Spenser of Yarnton Esq Oxon. 60 Sir John Tufton of Hothfield Knight. (English Earl viz. E. of Thanet). Kent. 61 Sir Samuel Peyton of Knowlton Knight Kent. 62 Sir Charles Morrison of Cashio-Bury Knight (Extinct). Hertf. 63 Sir Henry Baker of Sillinghurst Knight (Ex∣tinct). Kent. 64 Roger Appleton of South-Bemsted Esq Essex. 65 Sir William Sidley of Ailesford Knight. Kent 66 Sir William Twisden of East-Peckham Knight. Kent 67 Sir Edward Hales of Wood-Church Knight. Kent 68 William Monys of Walwarsher Esq Rent 69 Thomas Mildmay of Mulsham Esq (English Baron, viz. Lord Fitz-walter.) Essex 70 Sir William Maynard of Eastanes-parva Kt. (Irish and English Baron) viz. Lord May∣nard. Essex 71 Henry Lee of Quarendon Esq Buck.
Anno Dom. 1612. Nov. 25. & Regis Jac. 10 72 Sir John Portman of Orchard Knight. Somers. 73 Sir Nicholas Saunderson of Saxby Knight (Irish Visc. viz. Vicount Castleton) Linc. 74 Sir Miles Sands of Wilberton Knight. (Ex∣tinct) Cambr. 75 William Gostwick of Willington Esq Bedf. 76 Thomas Puckering of Weston Esq (Extinct). Hartf. 77 Sir William Wray of Glentworth Kt. Linc. 78 Sir William Ailoffe of Braxted-magna Knight. Essex 79 Sir Marmaduke Wivel of Constable-Burton Knight. Ebor. 80 John Pershall of Horsley Esq Staff. 81 Francis Englefield of Wotton-Basset Esq UUilts. 82 Sir Thomas Ridgway of Torre Knight (Irish Earl viz. E. of London-Derry). Devon. 83 William Essex of Bewcot Esq Berks. 84 Sir Edward Georges of Langford Knight (Irish Baron). viz. Lord Georges UUilts. 85 Edward Devereux of Castle-Bromwich Esq (Eng. Visc. viz. Vicount Hereford) UUarw. 86 Reginald Mohun of Boconnok Esq (English Baron Viz. Lord Mohun) Cornub. 87 Sir Harbottle Grimston of Bradfield Kt. Essex
88 Sir Thomas Holt of Aston juxta Bermingham Knight. UUarm. 89 Sir Robert Naper, alias Sandy, of Lewton-How Knight (vid. John Napier Martij 4. 1660). Bedf. 90 Paul Banning of Bentley-Parva Esq (English Vic. viz. Vicount Banning Extinct). Essex 91 Sir Thomas Temple of Stow Knight. Buck. 92 Thomas Penyston of Leigh Esq Suss. Anno Dom. 1615. & Regis Jac. 13. 93 Maij 27 Thomas Blackston of Blackston Esq (Extinct) Durh. 94 Junij 10 Sir Robert Dormer of Wing Kt. (English Earl) viz. E. of Caernarvon. Buck. Anno Dom. 1617. & Regis Jac. 15. 95 Aprilis 5 Sir Rowland Egerton of Egerton Knight. Cestr. 96 Apr. 16 Roger Towneshend of Rainham Esq (English Baron viz. Lord Towne∣shend). Norf. 97 Maij 1 Simon Clark of Salford Esq UUarm. 98 Oct. 2 Edward Fitton of Gawsworth Esq (Extinct). Cestr. 99 Martij 11 Sir Richard Lucy of Broxburn Knight. (Extinct). Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1618. & Regis Jac. 16. 100 Maij 25 Sir Matthew Boynton of Bramston Knight. Ebor. 101 Julij 25 Thomas Littleton of Frankley Esq UUigorn. 102 Dec. 24. Sir Francis Leigh of Newnham Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Chichester Extinct) UUarm. 103 Febr. 25 Thomas Burdet of Bramcote Esq UUarm. 104 Martij 1 George Morton of St. Andrews-Milborn Esq Dors. Anno Dom. 1619. & Regis Jac. 17. 105 Maij 31 Sir William Hervey of Kidbrook Knight with remainder to William Hervey his son, and to the Heirs males of the body of the said William. (Irish and English Baron; viz. Lord Hervey Extinct). Kent 106 Junij 4 Thomas Mackworth of Norman∣ton Esq Rutl. 107 Junij 15 William Grey Esq son and Heir of Sir Ralph Grey of Chillingham Knight (English Baron viz. Lord Grey of Warke) Northumv
108 Julij 19 William Villers of Brookesby Esq The eldest Brother by a former Venter to George Villers, then Marquess, after Duke of Buckingham. Leic. 109 Julij 20 Sir James Ley of Westbury Knight, Serjeant at law, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench and afterwards Lord High Treasurer of England (English Earl viz. E. of Marlborough Extinct) UUilts. 110 Julij 21 William Hicks of Beverston Esq Glouc. 111 Sept. 17 Sir Thomas Beaumont of Cole-Orton Knight. (Irish Vic. viz. Vicount Beau∣mont) Lric. 112 Nov. 10 Henry Salisbury of Lleweny Esq Denb. 113 Nov. 16 Erasmus Driden of Canons-Ashby Esq Northamp. 114 Nov. 28 William Armine Esq son and heir to Sir William Armine of Osgodby Knight. (Extinct) Linc. 115 Dec. 1. Sir William Bamburgh of Howton Knight (Extinct). Ebor. 116 Dec. 3 Edward Hartop of Freathby, Esq Leic. 117 Dec. 31 John Mill of Camoys-Court Esq Suss. 118 Jan. 31 Francis Radcliffe of Darwentwater Esq Cumber. 119 Febr. 6 Sir David Foulis of Ingleby Kt. Ebor.
120 Febr. 16 Thomas Philips of Barrington Esq Somers. 121 Martij 7 Sir Claudius Forster of Bambrough Castle Knight (Extinct) Northumb. 122 Martij 23 Anthony Chester of Chichley Esq Buck. Anno Dom. 1620. & Regis Jac. 18. 123 Martij 28 Sir Samuel Tryon of Layre-Marney Knight. Essex 124 Apr. 2 Adam Newton of Charleton Esq Kent 125 Apr. 12 Sir John Boteler of Hatfield-wood∣hall Knight. (English Baron viz. Lord Bote∣ler of Bramfield Extinct) Hertf. 126 Apr. 13 Gilbert Gerard of Harrow on the Hill Esq Midd. 127 Maij 3 Humphrey Lee of Langley Esq Salo 128 Maij 5 Richard Berney of Parkhall in Red∣ham Esq Norff. 129 Maij 20 Humphrey Forster of Alder-Mar∣ston Esq Berks. 130 Maij 26 Thomas Biggs of Lenchwike Esq (Extinct) UUigorn. 131 Maij 30 Henry Bellingham of Helsington Esq (Extinct) UUestm.
132 Maij 31 William Yelverton of Rougham Esq (Extinct) Norff. 133 Junij 1 John Scudamore of Home-Lacy Esq (Irish Vic. viz. Vicount Scudamore) Heref. 134 Junij 2 Sir Thomas Gore of Stitnam Knight. Ebor. 135 Junij 22 John Pakington of Alesbury Esq Buck. 136 Junij 28 Ralph Ashton of Lever Esq Lanc. 137 Julij 1 Sir Baptist Hicks of Camden Knight. (English Visc. viz. Vicount Camden Extinct) Glouc. 138 Julij 3 Sir Thomas Roberts of Glassenbury Knight. Kent 139 Julij 8 John Hanmer of Hanmer Esq Flint. 140 Edward Fryer of Water-Eaton Esq (Ex∣tinct). Oxon. 141 Julij 13 Edward Osborne of Keeton Esq Vice-President of King Charles the first his Councill in the North (English Earl viz. E. of Danby) Ebor. 142 Julij 20 Henry Felton of Playford Esq Suss. 143 Julij 20 William Chaloner of Gisborough Esq (Extinct) Ebor. 144 Julij 24 Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham Knight. Suss. 145 Julij 26 Sir Francis Vincent of Stoke Da∣bernon Knight. Surr. 146 Febr 27 Henry Clere of Ormesby Esq (Ex∣tinct) Norff.
147 Martij 8 Sir Benjamin Tichburne of Tich∣burne Knight. Hantsh. Anno Dom. 1621. & Regis Jac. 19. 148 Maij 5 Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey Knight. Cestr. 149 Maij 8 Sir Thomas Delves of Dodington Knight. Cestr. 150 Junij 23 Sir Lewes Watson of Rockingham Castle Knight (English Baron viz. Lord Rockingham) Northamp. 151 Junij 29 Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham Knight. Kent 152 Julij 3 Sir Richard Roberts of Truro Knight (English Earl viz. Earl of Radnor) Cornub. 153 Julij 19 John Rivers of Chafford Esq Kent 154 Sept. 6 Thomas Darnell of Heyling Esq Linc. 155 Sept. 14 Sir Isaac Sidley of Great Chart Knight. Kent 156 Sept. 21 Robert Browne of Walcot Esq (Extinct) Northamp. 157 Oct. 11 John Hewet of Headley-Hall Esq Ebor. 158 Oct. 16 Henry Jernegan of Cossey alias Cos∣sese Esq Norf. 159 Nov. 8 Sir Nicolas Hide of Albury Knight (Extinct). Hartf. 160 Nov. 9 John Philips of Picton Esq Pembr.
161 Nov. 24 Sir John Stepney of Prendergast Knight. Pemb. 162 Dec. 5 Baldwin Wake of Clevedon Esq Somers. 163 Dec. 20 William Mashom of High-Laver Esq Essex 164 Dec. 21 John Colbrond of Borham Esq Suss. 165 Jan. 4 Sir John Hotham of Scarborough Knight Governor of Hull. Ebor. 166 Jan. 14 Francis Mansell of Mudlescombe Esq Caermarth. 167 Jan. 18 Edward Powell of Penkelley (one of the Masters of the Requests) (Extinct) Heref. 168 Febr. 16 Sir John Garrard of Lamer Knight. Hartf. 169 Febr. 23 Sir Richard Grosvenour of Eaton Knight. Cestr. 170 Martij 11 Sir Henry Moody of Garesdon Knight (Extinct). Wilts. 171 Martij 17 John Barker of Grimston-Hall in Trimley Esq Suff. 172 Martij 18 Sir William Button of Alton Knight. Wilts. Anno Dom. 1622. & Regis Jac. 20. 173 Martij 26 John Gage of Ferle Esq Suss. 174 Maij 14 William Goring Esq son and heir
of Sir Henry Goring of Burton Knight. Su. 175 Maij 18 Peter Courtene of Aldington alias Aunton Esq (Extinct). Wigorn. 176 Maij 23 Sir Richard Norton of Rotherfild Knight. Has. 177 Maij 30 Sir John Leventhorpe of Shingley-Hall Knight. Hartt. 178 Junij 3 Capell Bedell of Hamerton Esq (Extinct). Hunt. 179 Junij 13 John Darell of West-Woodhey Esq (Extinct). Berks. 180 Junij 15 William Williams of Veynol Esq Caernarv. 181 Junij 18 Sir Francis Ashbey of Harfield Knight. Midd 182 Julij 3 Sir Anthony Ashley of St. Giles-Win∣burne Knight (Extinct). Dorf. 183 Julij 4 John Cooper of Rockbourne Fs{que} (English Earl viz. E. of Shaftesbury) Hants. 184 Julij 17 Edmund Prideaux of Netherton Esq Devon. 185 Julij 21 Sir Thomas Haslerigge of Nosely Knight. Leic. 186 Julij 22 Sir Thomas Burton of Stockerston Knight. Leic. 187 Julij 24 Francis Folejambe of Walton Esq (Extinct). Derb. 188 Julij 30 Edward Yate of Buckland Esq Berks. 189 Aug. 1 Geo. Chudleigh of Ashton Esq Devon.
190 Aug. 2 Francis Drake of Buckland Esq Devon. 191 Aug. 13 William Meredith of Stansly Esq Denb. 192 Oct. 22 Hugh Middleton of Ruthin Esq Denb. 193 Nov. 12 Gifford Thornehurst of Agnes-Court Esq Kent. 194 Nov. 16 Percy Herbert, son and Heir of Sir William Herbert of Red-Castle Knight. (English Earl) viz. Earl of Powis. Montgom. 195 Dec. 7 Sir Robert Fisher of Packington Knight. Warw. 196 Dec. 18 Hardolph Wastneys of Headon Esq Nott. 197 Dec. 20 Sir Henry Skipwith of Prestwould Knight. Leic. 198 Dec. 22 Thomas Harris of Boreatton Esq Salop. 199 Dec. 23 Nicholas Tempest of Stella Esq Durh. 200 Febr. 16 Francis Cottington Esq Secretary to King Charles the I. when Prince of Wales, afterwards passing thro several eminent employments and great Offices he was ad∣vanced to be Lord High Treasurer of En∣gland (English Baron ziz. Lord Cottington Extinct).
Anno Dom. 1623 & Regis Jac. 21 201 Apr 12 Thomas Harris of Tong-castle Ser∣jeant at Law (Extinct). Salop. 202 Junij 28 Edward Barkham of South-Acre Esq (Lord Mayor of London). Norff. 203 Julij 4 John Corbet of Sprowston Esq (Ex∣tinct). Norff. 204 Aug. 13 Sir Thomas Playters of Sotterly Esq Suff.
BARONETS Created by K. Charles I. Anno Dom. 1626. & Regis Car. primi 2. 205 Julij 27 SIR John Ashfield of Netherhall Knight (Extinct). Suff. 206 Sept 8 Henry Harpur of Calke Esq Derb 207 Dec. 20 Edward Seabright of Besford Esq Wigorn. 208 Jan. 29 John Beaumont of Gracedieu Esq Leic. 209 Febr. 1 Sir Edward Dering of Surrenden-Dering Knight. Kent 210 Febr. 5 George Kempe of Pentlone Esq (Extinct) Essex 211 Martij 10 William Brereton of Hanford Fs{que} (Extinct). Cestr. 212 Martij 12 Patricius Curwen of Workinton Esq (Extinct). Cumbr.
213 Martij 12 William Russel of Witley Esq Wigorn. 214 Martij 4 John Spenser of Offley Esq Hartf. 215 Matij 17 Sir Giles Estcourt of Newton Knight. Wilts. Anno Dom. 1627 & Regis Car. I. tertio. 216 Apr. 19 Thomas Aylesbury Esq (one of the Masters of the Requests), (Extinct). 217 Apr. 21 Thomas Style of Wateringbury Esq Kent 218 Maij 4 Frederick Cornwallis of Brome Esq Treasurer of the Houshold to King Charles the 2d (English Baron viz. Lord Corn∣wallis) Suff. 219 Maij 7 Drue Drury of Ridlesworth Esq Norff. 220 Maij 8 William Skeffington of Fisherwick Esq (Irish Vic. viz. Vicount Massereene) Staff. 221 Maij 11 Sir Robert Crane of Chilton Knight (Extinct). Suff. 222 Maij 17 Anthony Wingfield of Goodwins Esq Suff. 223 Maij 17 William Culpeper of Preston-Hall Esq Kent. 224 Maij 17 Giles Bridges of Wilton Esq (Engl. Baron) viz. Lord Chandos. Heref.
225 Maij 17 John Kirle of Much-Marcle Esq Heref. 226 Maij 20 Sir Humphrey Stiles of Beckham Knight (Extinct). Kent. 227 Maij 21 Henry Moor of Falley Esq Berks. 228 Maij 28 Thomas Heale of Fleet Esq Devon. 229 Maij 28 John Carleton of Holcum Esq (Ex∣tinct). Oxon. 230 Maij 30 Thomas Maples of Stow Fs{que} (Ex∣tinct). Hunt. 231 Maij 30 Sir John Isham of Lamport Knight. Northamp. 232 Maij 30 Hervey Bagot of Blithfield Esq Staff. 233 Maij 31 Lewes Pollard of King's Nimph Esq (Extinct). Devon. 234 Junij 1 Francis Mannock of Gifford's-Hall in Stoke juxta Neyland Esq Suff. 235 Junij 7 Henry Griffith of Agnes-Burton Esq (Extinct). Ebor. 236 Junij 8 Lodowicke Dyer of Staughton Esq Hunt. 237 Junij 9 Sir Hugh Stukely of Hinton Knight. Hants. 238 Junij 26 Edward Stanly of Bickerstaffe Esq Lanc. 239 Junij 28 Edward Littleton of Pillaton-Hall Esq Staff. 240 Julij 7 Ambrose Brown of Betsworth-Castle Esq Surr.
241 Julij 8 Sackvile Crow of Llanherne Esq for several years Embassador to the Grand Seignior. Caerm. 242 Julij 11 Michael Livesey of East-Church in the Isle of Shepey (Extinct). Kent 243 Julij 17 Simon Bennet of Benhampton Esq (Extinct). Buck. 244 Julij 19 Sir Thomas Fisher of the Parish of St. Giles Knight (Extinct). Midd. 245 Julij 23 Thomas Bowyer of Leighthorn Esq (vid. Sir James Bowyer May 18 1678). Suff. 246 Julij 29 Buts Bacon of Mildenhall Esq Suff. 247 Sept. 19 John Corbet of Stoke in Com. Salop. Esq Salop. 248 Oct. 31 Sir Edward Tirrell of Thorneton Kt. (vid. Sir Ed. Tirrell Feb. 19. 1638) Buck. 249 Febr. 18 Basill Dixwell of Terlingham, alias Gerelingham Esq (Extinct). Kent 250 Martij 10 Sir Richard Young Knight one of the Gentlemen of His Majesties Privy Cham∣ber (Extinct). Anno Dom. 1628. & Regis Car. I. quarto. 251 Maij 6 William Pennyman the younger of Maske, alias Marske Esq A Collonell in the late Kings Army and sometime Governor of Oxford (Extinct). Ebor.
252 Maij 7 William Stonehouse of Radley Esq (v. Sir George Stonehouse May 5. 16) Berks. 253 Maij 21 Sir Thomas Fouler of Islington Knight (Extinct). Midd. 254 Junij 9 Sir John Fenwick of Fen wick Knight. Northumb. 255 Junij 30 Sir William Wray of Trebitch Knight. Cornub. 256 Julij 1 John Trelawney of Trelawney Esq Cornub. 257 Julij 14 John Conyers of Horden Gent. Durh. 258 Julij 24 John Bolles of Scampton Esq Linc. 259 Julij 25 Thomas Aston of Aston Esq Cestr. 260 Julij 30 Kenelme Jenoure of Much-Dun∣more Esq Essex 261 Aug. 15 Sir John Price of Newtown Knight. Montgom. 262 Aug. 19 Sir Richard Beaumont of Whitley Knight (Extinct). Ebor. 263 Aug. 29 William Wiseman of Canfield-Hall Esq Essex 264 Sept. 1 Thomas Nightingale of Newport-Pond Esq Essex 265 Sept. 2 John Jacques of Esq one of His Majesties Gent. Pensioners (Extinct). Midd. 266 Sept. 6 Robert Dillington of in the Isle of Wight Esq Hants. 267 Sept. 12 Francis Pile of Compton Esq Berks.
268 Sept. 12 John Pole of Shur Esq Devon. 269 Sept. 14 William Lewes of Langors Esq (Extinct). Brecknock. 270 Sept. 20 William Culpeper of Wakehurst Esq Suff. 271 Oct. 3 Peter Van-Loor of Tylehurst Esq (Extinct). Berks. 272 Oct. 9 Sir John Lawrence of Iver Knight. Buck. 273 Oct. 23 Anthony Slingesby of Screvin Esq Ebor. 274 Oct. 24 Thomas Vavasour of Haselwood Esq Ebor. 275 Nov. 24 Robert Wolseley of Wolseley Esq Staff. 276 Dec. 8 Rice Rudd of Aberghaney Esq Cnerm. 277 Dec. 18 Richard Wiseman of Thurndersley Esq Essex 278 Dec. 19 Henry Forrers of Skellingthorpe Esq Linc. 279 Jan. 3 John Anderson of St. Ives Esq Hunt. 280 Jan. 19 Sir William Russel of Chippenham Knight. Cambr. 281 Jan. 29 Richard Everard of Much-Waltham Esq Essex 282 Jan. 21 Thomas Powell of Berkinhead Esq Cestr. 283 Martij 2 William Luckin of Waltham Esq Essex
Anno Dom. 1629. & Regis Car. I. quinto. 284 Martij 29 Richard Graham of Eske Esq (Scottish Vicount viz. Vic. Preston). Cumber. 285 Apr. 2 George Twisleton of Barly Esq (Ex∣tinct). Ebor. 286 Maij 30 William Acton of the City of Lon∣don Esq (Extinct). Lond. 287 Junij 1 Nicholas L'Estrange of Hunstan∣ton Esq Norff. 288 Junij 15 John Holland of Quiddenham Esq Norff. 289 Junij 24 Edward Aleyn of Hatfield Esq (Extinct). Essex. 290 Julij 2 Richard Earl, of Craglethorp Esq Linc. 291 Nov. 28 Robert Ducy Lord Mayor of Lon∣don Lond. Anno Dom. 1630. & Regis Car. I. sexto. 292 Apr. 9 Sir Richard Grenevile Knight, (younger brother to Sir Bevill Grenevile) of Kilkhampton, in Com. Cornw. (Extinct). Cornub.
Anno Dom. 1631. & Regis Car. I. septimo. 293 Junij 22 Charles Vavasour of Killingthorpe Esq with an especial clause of precedency, viz. to take place next below Sir Thomas Moun∣son of Carleton, in Comm. Linc. Bart. and next above Sir George Gresely of Drakelow, in Comm. Derb. Baronet created 29 Junij 1611. Linc. Anno Dom. 1638. & Regis Car. I. xiv. 294 Febr. 19 Sir Edward Tirrell of Thorn Knight, with remainder to the heirs male of Toby Tirrell one of the sons of the said Sir Edward Tirrell; and for default of such Issue, on Francis Tirrell another of the sons of the said Sir Edward, and the heirs male of the body of him the said Francis. And to have prece∣dency from the 31 of Oct. Anno tertio Car. Reg. according to a Patent then granted to him the said Sir Edward Tirrell, which was sur∣rendred upon the sealing of this present Patent. Buck.
Anno Dom. 1640. & Regis Car. I. xvj. 295 Julij 20 Edward Moseley of Rowlston Esq (Extinct). Staff. 296 Jan. 8 Martin Lumley of Bradfield Esq Essex 297 Febr. 15 William Dalston of Dalston Esq Cumber. 298 Febr. 19 Henry Fletcher of Hutton in the Forrest Esq Cumber. 299 Martij 4 Nicholas Cole of Brancepeth Esq Durh. Anno Dom. 1641. & Regis Car. I. xvij. 300 Apr. 23 Edmund Pye of Leekhamsted Esq (Extinct). Buck. 301 Maij 26 Simon Every of Egginton Esq Derb. 302 Maij 29 William Langley of Higham-Go∣bion Esq Bedf. 303 Junij 8 William Paston of Oxnead Esq (English Earl viz. Earl of Yarmouth). Norff. 304 Junij 11 James Stonehouse of Amerden-Hall Esq Essex 305 Junij 24 John Palgrave of Norwood-Bar∣ningham Esq Norff.
306 Junij 25 Gerard Napper of Middle-Mer∣thall Esq Dors. 307 Junij 28 Tho. Whitmore of Apley Esq. Salop. 308 Junij 29 John Maney of Linton Esq Kent 309 Junij 30 Sir Thomas Cave jun. of Stanford Knight. Northamp. 310 Junij 30 Sir Christopher Yelverton of Ea∣ston-Mauduit Knight (Engl. Baron viz. Lord Grey). Northamp. 311 Julij 3 William Boteler of Teston Esq Kent 312 Julij 5 Sir Thomas Hatton of Long-Stanton Knight. Cambr. 313 Julij 7 Thomas Abdy of Felx-Hall Esq Essex 314 Julij 14 Thomas Bampfield of Poltmore Esq Devon. 315 Julij 14 Sir John Cotton of Landwade Knight. Cambr. 316 Julij 15 Sir Simonds D'Ewes of Stow-Hall Knight. Suff. 317 Julij 15 Henry Frederick Thinne of Cause-Castle Esq Salop. 318 Julij 15 John Burgoyne of Sutton Esq Bedf. 319 Julij 16 John Northcote of Haine Esq Devon. 320 Julij 17 Sir William Drake of Sherdelow Knight. Buck. 321 Julij 23 Thomas Rous of Rouse-Lench Esq Wigorn. 322 Julij 23 Raphe Hare of Stow-Bardoe Esq Norff.
323 Julij 24 Sir John Norwich of Brampton Knight. Northamp. 324 Julij 26 John Brownlow of Belton prope Grantham Esq (Extinct). Linc. 325 Julij 27 William Brownlow of Humby Esq Linc. 326 Julij 28 John Sidenham of Brimpton Esq Somers. 327 Julij 28 Henry Prat of Coleshall Esq (Ex∣tinct). Berks. 328 Julij 28 Francis Nichols of Hardwick Esq Northamp. 329 Julij 30 Sir William Strickland of Boynton Knight. Ebor. 330 Aug. 4 Sir Thomas Wolriche of Dudmaston Knight. Salop. 331 Aug. 4 Thomas Mauleverer of Allerton Mauleverer Esq Ebor. 332 Aug. 4 William Boughton of Lawford Esq UUarw. 333 Aug. 4 John Chichester of Raleigh Esq Devon. 334 Aug. 4 Norton Knatchbull of Mersham-Hatch Esq Kent 335 Aug. 4 Hugh Windham of Pilsden-Court Esq (Extinct). Dors. 336 Aug. 9 Rich. Carew of Antony Esq Cornub. 337 Aug. 9 William Castleton of Saint Edmonds-Bury Esq Suff. 338 Aug. 9 Ric. Price of Gogarthan Esq Cardigan.
339 Aug. 10 Hugh Cholmley of Whitby Esq Ebor. 340 Aug. 11 William Springe of Pakenham Esq Suff. 341 Aug. 11 Thomas Trevor of Enfield Esq (Extinct). Midd. 342 Aug. 11 Sir John Curson of Kedleston (Ba∣ronet of Scotland). Derb. 343 Aug. 11 Hugh Owen of Orrelton Esq Pembr. 344 Aug. 12 Morton Briggs of Haughton Esq Salop. 345 Aug. 12 Henry Heyman of Somerfield Esq Kent 346 Aug. 12 Thomas Sandford of Howgill-Ca∣stle Esq Westmerl. 347 Aug. 14 Sir Francis Rhodes of Barlbrough Knight. Derb. 348 Aug. 14 Richard Sprignell of Coppenthorpe Esq Ebor. 349 Aug. 14 Sir John Potts of Mannington Knight. Norff. 350 Aug. 14 Sir John Goodrick of Ribstan Knight. Ebor. 351 Aug. 16 Robert Bindlosse of Borwicke Esq Lanc. 352 Aug. 16 Will. Walter of Saresden Esq Dron. 353 Aug. 16 Thomas Lawley of Spoonhill Esq Salop. 354 Sept. 6 William Farmer of Eston-Neston Esq Northamp.
355 Sept. 9 John Davye of Creedy Esq Devon. 356 Sept. 23 Thomas Pettus of Rackheath Esq Norf. 357 Dec. 11 William Andrews of Denton (alias Dodington) Esq Northamp. 358 Dec. 11 John Meaux of in the Isle of Wight Esq Hants. 359 Dec. 14 Sir Richard Gurney, Knight. The signally Loyall Lord Mayor of London (Ex∣tinct). Lond. 360 Dec. 15 Thomas Willys of Fen-Ditton Fs{que} Cambr. 361 Dec. 15 Francis Armitage of Kirklees Esq Ebor. 362 Dec. 18 Rich. Halford of Wistow Esq Leic. 363 Dec. 24 Sir Humphrey Tufton of the Mote, juxta Maidston Knight. Kent 364 Dec. 30 Edward Coke of Langford Esq Derb. 365 Jan. 21 Isaac Astley of Melton-Constable Esq (Extinct). Norff. 366 Jan. 21 Sir David Cunningham Baronet of Scotland (Extinct). Lond. 367 Jan. 22 Sir John Rayney of Wrotham, Ba∣ronet of Scotland. Kent 368 Jan. 29 Revet Eldred of Saxham magna Esq (Extinct). Suff. 369 Jan. 29 John Gell of Hopton Esq Derb. 370 Jan. 29 Sir Vincent Corbet of Morton-Corbet Knight. Salop. 371 Febr. 4 Sir John Kay of Woodsome Kt. Ebor.
372 Febr. 5 Thomas Trollop of Casewick Esq Linc. 373 Martij 3 Edward Thomas of Michaells-Towne Esq Glam. 374 Martij 4 Sir William Cowper of Ratling-Court, Baronet of Scotland. Kent 375 Martij 5 Denner Strut of Little Worley Hall Esq Essex 376 Martij 8 William St. Quintin of Harpham Esq Ebor. 377 Martij 14 Sir Robert Kempe of Gissing Knight. Norff. 378 Martij 16 John Reade of Brocket-Hall Esq Hartf. Anno Dom. 1642. & Regis Car. 1. xviij. 379 Apr. 9 James Enyan of Flowre Esq (Ex∣tinct). Northamp. 380 Apr. 19 Sir Edmund Williams of Marnehull Knight (Extinct). Dors. 381 Apr. 22 John Williams of Minster in the Isle of Thanet. Kent 382 Apr. 29 George Wintour of Huddington Esq UUigorn. 383 Maij 4 John Borlase of Bockmer Esq Buck. 384 Maij 6 Henry Knollys of Groveplace Esq (Extinct). Hants. 385 Maij 11 John Hamilton of London Esq Lond.
386 Maij 12 Edward Morgan of Llanternam Esq Monm. 387 Maij 13 Sir Nicholas Kemeys of Keven-Mabley Knight. Glam. 388 Maij 14 Trevor Williams of Llangibbye Esq Monm. 389 Maij 16 John Reresby of Thribergh Esq Ebor. 390 Maij 17 Will. Ingilby of Ripley Esq Ebor. 391 Maij 18 Poynings Moore of Loseley Esq Surr. 392 Maij 19 Christopher Dawney of Cowick Esq Ebor. 393 Junij 3 Thomas Hampson of Taplow Esq Buck. 394 Junij 3 Thomas Williamson of East-Mark∣ham Esq Nott. 395 Junij 3 William Denney of Gillingham Esq (Extinct). Norff. 396 Junij 3 Sir Richard Hardres of Hardres Kent 397 Junij 11 Christopher Lowther of Whit-Haven Esq Cumber. 398 Junij 13 Sir Tho. Alston of Odell Kt. Bedf. 399 Junij 20 Edward Corbet of Leighton Esq Montgom. 400 Junij 24 George Middleton of Leighton Esq (Extinct). Lanc. 401 Junij 28 Edward Payler of Thoraldby Esq Ebor.
402 Julij 9 Sir William Widdrington of Wid∣drington Knight (English Baron viz. Lord Widdrington). Northumv. 403 Julij 20 Matthew Valckenburg of Middle-Ing Esq Ebor. 404 Julij 20 Philip Constable of Everingham Esq Ebor. 405 Julij 30 Ralph Blackston of Gibside Esq Durh. 406 Aug. 8 Sir Edward Widdrington of Carting∣ton, Baronet of Scotland. Northumb. 407 Aug. 15 Robert Markham of Sedgbrook Esq Linc. 408 Aug. 15 Philip Hungate of Saxton Esq Ebor. 409 Aug. 15 Stephen Lennard of West-Wickham Esq Kent 410 Aug. 24 Sir William Thorold of Marston Knight. Linc. 411 Aug 29 Walter Rudston of Hayton Esq Ebor. 412 Aug. 30 Walter Wrotesley of Wrotesly Esq Staff. 413 Aug. 30 Thomas Bland of Kippax-Park Esq 414 Sept. 1 Robert Throckmorton of Coughton Esq UUarw. 415 Sept. 10 Will. Halton of Samford Esq Essex 416 Sept. 26 Brocket Spenser of Offley Esq Hartf. 417 Sept. 27 Edward Golding of Colston-Basset Esq Nott. 418 Sept. 27 William Smith of Crantock Esq Cornub.
419 Oct. 1 Henry Henn of Wingfield Esq Berks. 420 Oct. 5 Walter Blount of Sodington Esq Wigorn. 421 Oct. 14 Adam Littleton of Stoke-Milburge Esq Salop. 422 Nov. 2 Thomas Lidell of Ravensholme-Castle Esq Durh. 423 Nov. 9 Richard Lawday of the City of Exe∣ter Esq (Extinct). Devon. 424 Febr. 4 Thomas Chamberlain of Wickham Esq Oxon. 425 Febr. 28 Henry Hunloke of Wingarworth Esq Derb. 426 Febr. 28 Thomas Badd of Cames-Oysells Esq Hants. 427 Martij 20 Richard Crane of Wood-Rising Esq (Extinct). Nrff. 428 Martij 21 Samuel Danvers of Culworth Esq Northamp. Anno Dom. 1643. & Regis Car. 1. xix. 429 Julij 3 Henry Anderson of Penley Esq Hartf. 430 William Vavasour of Esq (Extinct) Ebor. 431 Julij 25 Sir Henry Jones of Abermarles Knight. Caernarv. 432 Aug. 1 Sir Edward Waldgrave of Hever-Castle Knight. Kent
433 Oct. 28 John Pate of Sysonby Esq (Ex∣tinct). Lric. 434 Nov. 9 John Bale of Carleton-Curley Esq (Extinct). Lric. 435 Nov. 13 Brian O Nele of in Comm. Dublin Esq Irish. 436 Nov. 16 Willoughby Hickman of Gaynes∣borough Esq Linc. 437 Dec. 7 John Butler of Bramfield Esq Hartf. 438 Jan. 17 Edward Acton of Aldenham Esq Salop. 439 Martij 14 Sir Francis Hawley of Buckland Knight. (Irish Baron viz. L. Hawley) Somers. Anno Dom. 1644. & Regis Car. 1. xx. 440 Apr. 1 John Preston of the Mannour in Fur∣nesse Esq Lanc. 441 Apr. 2 John Web of Odstoke Esq UUilts. 442 Apr. 25 Thomas Prestwich of Holme Esq Lanc. 443 Maij 4 Henry Williams of Guernevet Esq Breckn. 444 Maij 20 Gervase Lucas of Fenton Esq Go∣vernor of Belvoir-Castle for King Charles the I. in time of the late horrible rebellion (Extinct). Linc. 445 Junij 14 Robert Thorold of Hawley Esq Linc.
446 Julij 23 John Scudamore of Balingham Esq Heref. 447 Oct. 8 Sir Henry Bard of Stanes Knight, a commander in the late kings Army, and Em∣bassadour from our present Soveraign to the Emperour of Persia (Irish Viscount viz. Vic. Bellamount Extinct). Midd. 448 Febr. 12 Sir Richard Vivian of Trelowren Knight. Cornub, 449 Febr. 28 William Van-Colster of Amsterdam in Holland. 450 Martij 21 William de Boreel of Amsterdam in Holland. (v. Hugh Ackland Jan. 21. 1677). (v. Francis Edwards Apr. 22. 1678). Anno Dom. 1645. & Regis Car. 1. xxj. 451 Maij 9 George Carteret of Metesches in the Isle of Jersey Vice-Chamberlaine of the Kings Houshold, one of his Majesties most Hono∣rable Privy-Councill, Treasurer of the Navy, since whose decease Sir George his Grand∣son and heir is lately Created an English Ba∣ron viz. Lord Carteret. Jersey. 452 Nov. 25 Thomas Windibanke of Haynes Esq UUilts. 453 Febr. 7 Benjamin Wright of Dennington
Esq (This Patent was afterwards Superseded by the Kings Warrant). Suff. 454 Martij 6 Edward Charleton of Hesleyside Gent. Northumb. Anno Dom. 1646. & Regis Car. 1. xxij. 455 Junij 11 Sir Richard Willis Knight (Bro∣ther to Sir Thomas Willis of Fen-Ditton) Colonel of a Regiment of Horse; as also Colonel general of the Counties of Lincoln Notingh. and Rutland, and Governour of the town and Castle of Newarke. Cambr.
BARONETS Created by K. Charles THE SECOND. Anno Dom. 1649. & Regis Car. 2. primo. 456 Sept. 1 RIchard Browne of Deptford Esq (for several years Resident for King Charles I. and his now Majesty with the French Kings Lewis the 13th and the present King Lewis the 14th and one of the Clerks of his Majesties Most Honorable Privy Council) by Letters Patents, Dated at St. Ger∣mans in France. Kent 457 Sept. 3 Henry de Vic of the Isle of Garnsey (Resident for his late Majesty near twenty years in Bruxells) afterwards Chancelour of the most Noble Order of the Garter, by Letters Pa∣tents, dated at St. Germans in France. Garnsey
458 Sept. 18 Richard Forster of Stokesley Esq (by Letters Patents dated at St. Germans above∣said). Ebor. Anno Dom. 1650. & Regis Car. 2. iij. 459 Sept. 2 Richard Fanshaw (a younger Brother to Thomas Lord Viscount Fanshaw of Dro∣more in Ireland) Secretary of State to his Majesty at Worcester Battel, where he was taken prisoner; Master of the Requests (since his Majesties Restauration) and Embassador extraordinary in Spain and Portugal. Anno Dom. 1652. & Kegis Car. 2. v. 460 Apr. 2 William Curtius then Resident for His Majesty with Gustavus King of Sweden and the Princes of Germany. Anno Dom. 1657. & Regis Car. 2. ix. 461 Octob. 19 Sir Arthur Slingsby of near Canterbury (by Letters Patents, Dated at Bruges in Flanders). Kent
Anno Dom. 1658. & Regis Car. 2. x. 462 Thomas Orby of Esq Servant to the Queen Mother (by Letters Patents bearing Date at Bruxells in Brabant). Linc. 463 Tho. Bond Esq (Servant to the Queen Mother) by Letters Patents bearing Date at Bruxells. 464 Aug. Arthur Marigny Carpentier (a French∣man) at Bruxells. Anno Dom. 1659. & Regis Car. 2. xi. 465 Julij 1 Henry Browne of Kiddington Esq (son of Sir Peter Browne Knight, slain in the service of K. Charles the first) for default of issue male, to Francis his Brother &c. Dated at Bruxells. Oxon. Anno Dom. 1660. & Regis Car. 2. xij. 466 Apr. 2 Jeremy Whichcot of the Inner-Temple London. Bruxells 467 Sir Anthony de Merces (a Frenchman) Ex∣tinct. 468 Maij 29 (Stilo Novo) Sir John Evelin of by Letters Patents bearing Date at the Hague in Holland.
469 Maij 30 (Stilo Novo) Sir Gualter dc Raed of in Holland. 470 Junij 7 Sir Orlando Bridgeman of great Lever Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, then Lord Chief justice of the Common pleas and afterward Lord-keeper of the Great seale of England. Lanc. 471 Junij 7 Sir Geofrey Palmer of Carleton Kt. Attourney General to his Majesty. Northamp. 472 Junij 7 Sir Heneage Finch of Raunston Kt. Sollicitor General to his Majesty, then Attour∣ney General, now Lord Chancellor of England and English Earl viz. Earl of Nottingham. Buck. 473 Junij 7 Sir John Langham of Cotsbrooke Knight Alderman of London. Northamp. 474 Junij 9 Humphrey Winch of Hannes Esq now one of the Commissioners of the Admiralty. Bedf. 475 Junij 9 Sir Robert Abdy of Albins Kt. Essex 476 Junij 9 Thomas Draper of Sunninghill-Parke Esq Berks. 477 Junij 11 Henry Wright of Dagenham Esq (Extinct). Essex 478 Junij 12 Jonathan Keate of the Hoo Esq Hertf. 479 Junij 12 Sir Hugh Speke of Hasilbury Knight. Wilts. 480 Junij 13 Nicholas Gould of the City of Lon∣don Esq (Extinct). Lond.
481 Junij 13 Sir Thomas Adams Knight Alder∣man of London. Lond. 482 Junij 13 Richard Atkins of Clapham Esq Surr. 483 Junij 14 Thomas Allen then Lord Mayor of London. Lond. 484 Junij 14 Henry North of Mildenhall Esq Suff. 485 Junij 15 Sir William Wiseman of Rivenham Knight. Essex 486 Junij 18 Thomas Cullum of Hastede Esq Suff. 487 Junij 20 Thomas Darcy of St. Cleres-Hall in St. Osith's, Esq Essex 488 Junij 20 George-Grubham How of Cold-Barwick Esq Wilts. 489 Junij 21 John Cuts of Childerley Esq (Ex∣tinct). Cambr. 490 Junij 21 Solomon Swale of Swale-Hall Esq Ebor. 491 Junij 21 William Humble Citizen of Lon∣don. Lond. 492 Junij 22 Henry Stapleton of Miton Esq Ebor. 493 Junij 22 Gervase Elwes of Stoke juxta Clare. Suff. 494 Junij 22 Rob. Cordell of Melford Esq Suff. 495 Junij 22 Sir John Robinson Knight, Lord Mayor, and Lievtenant of the Tower, of Lon∣don Lond.
496 Junij 22 Sir John Abdy of Moores Knight (Extinct). Essex 497 Junij 25 Sir Robert Hilliard of Patrington Knight. Ebor. 498 Junij 25 Jacob Astley of Hill-Morton Esq Warw. 499 Junij 25 Sir William Bowyer of Denham Knight. Buck 500 Junij 25 Thomas Stanley of Alderley Esq Cestr 501 Junij 26 John Shuckborough of Shuckbo∣rough Esq UUarw. 502 Junij 27 William Wray of Ashby Esq Linc 503 Junij 27 Nicholas Steward of Hartley-Mauduit Esq Hants 504 Junij 27 George Warburton of Areley Esq Cestr 505 Junij 27 Francis Holles of Winterburn Esq (son and heir to Denzill Lord Holles) English Baron viz. Lord Holles. Dors 506 Junij 28 Oliver St. John of Woodford Esq Northamp 507 Junij 29 Ralph de la Val of Seton Esq Northumb 508 Junij 30 Andraeas Henley of Henley Esq Somers 509 Junij 30 Thomas Ellis of Wyham Esq Linc 510 Julij 2 John Covert of Slangham Esq Suss 511 Julij 2 Peter Lear of London Gent. Lond 512 Julij 2 Maurice Berkley of Bruton Esq
(Irish Visc. viz. Vic. Fitz-Harding). Somers. 513 Julij 3 Henry Hudson of Melton-Moubray Esq Leic. 514 Julij 3 Thomas Herbert of Tinterne Esq Monm. 515 Julij 4 Tho. Middleton of Chirk Esq Denb. 516 Julij 6 Verney Noell of Kirkby Esq Leic. 517 Julij 7 George Buswell of Clipston Esq Northamp. 518 Julij 10 Robert Austen of Bexley Esq Kent 519 Julij 12 Robert Hales of Bekeskurne Esq Kent 520 Julij 13 Sir William Boothby of Bradley-Ashe Knight. Derb. 521 Julij 14 Wolstan Dixey of Market-Bosworth Esq Leic. 522 Julij 16 John Bright of Badsworth Esq Ebor. 523 Julij 16 John Warner of Parham Esq 524 Julij 17 Sir Job Harby of Aldenham Knight. Hartf. 525 Julij 18 Samuel Morland, alias Morley of Suthamstede-Banaster Esq one of the Gentle∣men of his Majesties Privy-Chamber in ordi∣nary and master of the Mechanicks. Berks. 526 Julij 19 Sir Thomas Hewit of Pisho-Bury Knight. Hartf. 527 Julij 19 Edward Honywood of Evington Esq Kent 528 Julij 19 Basill Dixwell of Bromehouse Esq Kent
529 Julij 22 Richard Browne Lord Mayor of London. Lond. 530 Julij 23 Henry Vernon of Hodnet Esq Salop. 531 Julij 23 Sir John Aubrey of Llantrithied Knight. Glam. 532 Julij 23 William Thomas of Fowington Esq Suss. 533 Julij 25 Thomas Sclater Esq (of Cam∣bridge). Cambr. 534 Julij 25 Henry Conway of Botrithan Esq Flint. 535 Julij 26 Edward Green of Sonpford Esq Essex 536 Julij 28 John Stapeley of Patcham Esq Suss 537 Julij 30 Metcalfe Robinson of Newby Esq Ebor. 543 Aug. 6 Anthony Oldfield of Spalding Esq Linc. 544 Aug. 10 Peter Leicester of Tabley Esq Cestr. 545 Aug. 11 Sir William Wheeler of the City of Westm. Knight, with Remainder to Charles
Wheeler Cosin to the said Sir William and the heirs males of the body of the said Charles. Midd. 546 Aug. 16 John Newton of Barscote Fs{que} Glouc. 547 Aug. 16 Thomas Lee of Hartwell Esq Buck. 548 Aug. 16 Thomas Smith of Hatherton Esq with Remainder (for want of Issue male of his body) to Laurence Smith his brother, &c. and for want of Issue male of Laurence, to Francis Smith his brother, &c. Cestr. 549 Aug. 17 Sir Ralph Ashton of Middleton Knight. Lanc. 550 Aug. 17 John Rous of Henham Esq Suff. 551 Aug. 22 Henry Massingbeard of Bratosts-Hall Esq Linc. 552 Aug. 28 John Hales of Coventre Esq Warm. 553 Aug. 30 Ralph Bovey of Hill-fields Esq (Extinct). UUarm. 554 Aug. 30 John Knightley of Offchurch Esq UUarm. 555 Aug. 31 Sir John Drake of Ashe Kt. Devon. 556 Sept. 5 Oliver St. George of Carickermrick in the County of Trim Esq Ireland 557 Sept. 11 Sir John Bowyer of Knipersley Knight. Staff. 558 Sept. 13 Sir William Wilde Knight, Recor∣der of the City of London, afterwards one of the justices of the Kings Bench. Lond. 559 Sept. 19 Joseph Ashe of Tittenham Esq Midd. 560 Sept. 22 John How of Compton Esq Glouc.
561 Sept. 26 John Swinburne of Chap-Heton Esq Northumb. 562 Oct. 12 John Trot of Laverstoke Esq (Ex∣tinct). Hants. 563 Oct. 13 Humphrey Miller of Oxenheath Esq Kent 564 Oct. 15 Sir John Lewes of Ledston Knight (Extinct). Ebor. 565 Oct. 19 John Beale of Maidston Esq Kent 566 Oct. 16 Sir Richard Fraklin of Moore-Parke Knight. Hartf. 567 Nov. 8 William Russell of Langhorn Esq Caerm. 568 Nov. 9 Thomas Boothby of Friday-Hill in the Parish of Chingford Esq (Extinct). Essex 569 Nov. 9 William Backhouse Esq Grandchild to Rowland Backhouse late Alderman of Lon∣don) (Extinct). Midd. 570 Nov. 12 Sir John Cutler of the City of Lon∣don Knight. Midd. 571 Nov. 16 Giles Mottet of Leige Esq 572 Nov. 21 Henry Gifford of Burstall Esq Leic. 573 Nov 21 Sir Thomas Foote Knight, Citizen of London. v. Arthur Onslow Maij 8. 1674. Midd. 574 Nov. 22 Thomas Manwaring of Over-Pever Esq Cestr. 575 Nov. 22 Thomas Bennet of Baberham Esq Cambr. 576 Nov. 29 John Wroth of Blendenhall. Kent
577 Dec. 3 George Wynne of Nostell Esq Ebor. 578 Dec. 4 Heneage Fetherston of Blakesware Esq Hartf. 579 Dec. 4 Humphrey Monnox of Wotton Esq Bedf. 580 Dec. 10 John Peyton of Dodington within the Isle of Ely Esq (Extinct). Cambr. 581 Dec. 11 Edmund Anderson of Broughton Esq. Linc. 582 Dec. 11 John Fagg of Wiston Esq Suss. 583 Dec. 18 Matthew Herbert of Bromfield Esq Salop. 584 Dec. 19 Edward Ward of Bexley Esq Norff. 585 Dec. 22 John Keyt of Ebrington Esq Glouc. 586 Dec. 22 William Killegrew of Arwynike Esq with remainder to Peter Killegrew of Ar∣wynike aforesaid Esq Son of Sir Peter Kille∣grew Knight. Cornub. 587 Dec. 22 John Buck of Lamby grange Esq Linc. 588 Dec. 24 William Frankland of Thirkelby Esq Ebor. 589 Dec. 24 Richard Stiddolph of Norbury Esq (Extinct). Surr. 590 Dec. 24 William Gardner Citizen of Lon∣don. Midd. 591 Dec. 28 William Juxon of Albourne Esq Suss. 592 Dec. 29 John Legard of Ganton Esq Ebor.
593 Dec. 31 George Marwood of Little-Buskby Esq Ebor. 594 Dec. 31 John Jackson of Hickleton Esq Ebor. 595 Jan. 2 Sir Henry Pickering of Whaddon Knight. Cantab. 596 Jan. 2 Henry Bedingfield of Oxbrough Esq Norff. 597 Jan. 4 Walter Plomer of the Inner-Temple London Esq Midd. 598 Jan. 8 Herbert Springet of Broyle Esq (Extinct). Suss. 599 Jan. 23 William Powell (alias Hinson) of Pengethley Esq Heref. 600 Jan. 25 Robert Newton of the City of Lon∣don Esq (Extinct). Midd. 601 Jan. 29 Nicholas Staughton of Staughton Esq Surr. 602 Jan. 29 William Rokeby of Skyers Esq Ebor. 603 Febr. 2 Walter Ernley of New-Sarum Esq UUilts. 604 Febr. 2 John Hubaud of Ipsley Esq UUarw. 605 Febr. 7 Thomas Morgan of Langattock. Monm. 606 Febr. 9 George Lane of Tulske in the County of Roscommon Irish Viscount viz. Vic. Lanes∣borough. Ireland. 607 Febr. 13 George Wakefren of Beckford Esq Glouc. 608 Febr. 15 Benjamin Wright of Cranham Hall Essex
609 Febr. 18 John Colleton of the City of London Esq Midd. 610 Febr. 18 Sir James Modyford of the City of London Knight. Midd. 611 Febr. 21 Thomas Beaumont of Stoughton∣grange Esq Leic. 612 Febr. 23 Edward Smith of Eshe Fs{que} Durh. Martij 4 John Napier, alias Sandy Esq with re∣mainder to Alexander Napier, &c. with re∣mainder to the heirs male of Sir Robert Na∣pier Knight Grandfather to the said John: And with precedency before all Baronets made since the four and twentieth of September Anno 10. Regis Jac. at which time the said Sir Robert was Created a Baronet. Which Letters Patents so granted to the said Sir Robert Na∣pier, were surendred by Sir Robert Napier (father of the said John and Alexander) lately deceased; to the intent that the said degree of Baronet should be granted to himself, with re∣mainder to the said John and Alexander. 613 Martij 4 Thomas Gifford of Castle-Jordan in the County of Meath (Extinct). Ireland. 614 Martij 4 Tho. Clifton of Clifton Esq Lanc. 615 Martij 4 William Wilson of Eastborne Esq Suss. 616 Martij 4 Compton Read of Barton Esq Berks. 617 Martij 10 Sir Brian Broughton of Brough∣ton Knight. Staff.
618 Martij 16 Robert Slingesby of New cells Esq Hartf. 619 Martij 16 John Crofts of Stow Esq Suff. 620 Martij 16 Ralph Verney of Middle-Claydon Esq Buck. 621 Martij 18 Robert Dicer of Uphall Esq Hartf. 622 Martij 20 John Bromfield of South warke Fs{que} Surr. 623 Martij 20 Thomas Rich of Sunning Esq Berks. 624 Martij 20 Edward Smith of Edmundthorpe Esq Leic. Anno Dom. 1661 & Regis Car. 2. xiij. 625 Martij 26 Walter Long of Whaddon Esq Wilts. 626 Martij 30 John Fetiplace of Chilrey Esq Bexks. 627 Apr. 8 Walter Hendley of Louchfield Esq Suss. 628 Apr. 9 William Parsons of Langley Esq Buck. 629 Apr. 9 John Cambell of Woodford Esq (Ex∣tinct). Essex 630 Apr. 20 William Morrice of Werrington Esq eldest son to William Morrice Knight (one of His Majesties Principall Secretaries of State). Devon.
631 Apr. 20 Sir Charles Gawdey of Crowshall Knight. Suff. 632 Apr. 29 William Godolphin of Godolphin Esq Cornub. 633 Apr. 26 William Caley of Brumpton Esq Ebor. 634 Apr. 30 Thomas Curson of Water-Perry Esq Oxon. 635 Maij 1 Edmund Fowell of Fowell Esq Devon. 636 Maij 7 John Cropley of Clerkenwell Esq Midd. 637 Maij 10 William Smith of Red-Cliff Esq Buck. 638 Maij 10 George Cooke of Wheatley Esq Ebor. 639 Maij 10 Charles Llhoyd of Garth Esq Montgom. 640 Maij 10 Nathaniel Powell of Ewhurst Esq Essex 641 Maij 15 Denney Ashburnham of Bromham Esq Suss. 642 Maij 16 Hugh Smith of Long-Ashton Esq Somers. 643 Maij 18 Robert Jenkinson of Walcot Esq Oxon. 644 Maij 20 William Glinne of Bisseter alias Burncester Esq Oxon. 645 Maij 21 John Charnok of Holcot Esq Bedf. 646 Maij 21 Robert Brooke of Netton Esq Suff.
647 Maij 25 Thomas Nevill of Holt Esq Leic. 648 Maij 27 Henry Andrews of Lathbury Esq Buck. 649 Junij 4 Anthony Craven of Spersholt Esq Berks. 650 Junij 5 John Clavering of Axwell Esq Durh. 651 Junij 8 Thomas Derham of West-Dereham Esq Norff. 652 Junij 17 William Stanley of Houton Esq Cestr. 653 Junij 17 Abraham Cullen of East-Shene Esq Surr. 654 Junij 17 James Roushout of Milnst-Maylers Esq Essex 655 Junij 17 Godfrey Copley of Sprotborough Esq Ebor. 656 Junij 17 Griffith Williams of Penrhin Esq Caern. 657 Junij 18 Henry Winchecumbe of Buckde∣bury Esq Bexks. 658 Junij 18 Clement Clarke of Lande-Abby Esq Leic. 659 Junij 18 Thomas Viner Alderman of Lon∣don. Midd. 660 Julij 18 John Sylyard of de la Warre Esq Kent 661 Julij 10 Christopher Guise of Elsmore Esq Glouc. 662 Julij 11 Reginald Forster of East-Grene∣wiche Esq Kent
663 Julij 16 Philip Parker of Erwarton Esq 664 Julij 16 Sir Edward Duke of Denhall Knight. Suff. 665 Julij 21 Charles Hussey of Caythorp Esq Linc. 666 Julij 21 Edward Barkham of Waynflete Esq Linc. 667 Julij 23 Thomas Norton of the City of Co∣ventry Esq Warw. 668 Julij 23 John Dormer of the Grange Esq Buck. 669 Aug. 2 Thomas Carew of Haccombe Esq Devon. 670 Aug. 7 Mark Milbanke of Halnaby Ebor. 671 Aug. 16 Richard Rothwell of Ewerby and Stapleford Esq Linc. 672 Aug. 22 John Bankes of the City of London. (now of Alesford in Kent). Midd. 673 Aug. 30 Henry Ingoldsby of Lethenborow Esq Buck. 674 Sept. 3 Francis Bickley of Attilborough. Norff. 675 Sept. 5 Robert Jason of Broad-Somerford Esq Wilts. 676 Sept. 26 Sir John Young of Culliton Knight. Devon. 677 Oct. 4 John Frederick van Freisendorf of Herdick, Lord of Kymp, of Councill to the King of Sweden, and Embassadour extraordi∣nary to His Majesty King Charles the II.
678 Nov. 8 William Roberts of Willesdon Esq Bidd. 679 Nov. 15 William Luckin of Waltham. Essex. 680 Nov. 28 Thomas Smith of Hill-Hall. Essex 681 Dec. 3 Edwyn Sadler of Temple-Donesley Esq Hartf. 682 Dec. 9 Sir William Windham of Orchard-Windham Knight. Somers. 683 Jan. 24 George Southcote of Bliborough Esq Linc. 684 Jan. 24 George Trevilian of Nettlecombe Esq Somers. Anno Dom. & Regis Car. 2. xiv. 685 Febr. 4 Francis Duncombe of Tangley Esq Surr. 686 Febr. 7 Nicholas Bacon of Gillingham Esq Norff. 687 Febr. 7 Richard Cox of Dumbleton. Glouc. 688 Febr. 11 John Osburne of Chicksand Esq Bedf. 689 Febr. 27 John Coriton of Newton Esq Cornub. 690 Febr. 28 John Llhoyd of Woking Esq Surr. 691 Martij 1 Edward Moore of Moorehall Esq Note That this patent to Edward Moore, though at this time the Recepi was made, did not pass the Seal until 22. Nov. 1675. Lanc. 692 Martij 7 Tho. Proby of Elton Hall Esq Hunt.
693 Martij 20 Miles Stapleton of Carleton Esq Ebor. Anno Dom. 1662. & Regis Car. 2. xiv. 694 Apr. 16 Sir Richard Braham of New-Wind∣sor Knight. Berks. 695 Maij 2 Sir John Witerong of Stantonbury Knight. Buck. 696 Junij 13 Philip Matthews of great Gobions in Collyer-Rowward Esq Essex 697 Julij 1 Robert Bernard of Huntingdon Esq Serjeant at Law. Hunt. 698 Julij 15 Roger Lort of Stock-poole Esq Pembr. 699 Julij 15 Edward Gage of Hargrave Esq Suff. 700 Julij 22 Thomas Hooke of Flanchford. Surr. 701 Julij 24 John Savile of Copley Esq Ebor. 702 Aug. 5 Christopher Wandesford of Kirk∣lington Esq Ebor. 703 Aug. 13 Richard Astley of Patshull Esq Staff. 704 Aug. 16 Sir Jacob Gerard of Langford Knight. Norff. 705 Aug. 21 Edward Fust of Hill Esq Glouc. 706 Sept. 1 Robert Long of the City of Westmin∣ster Esq Auditor General of the Exchequer and one of his Majesties most Honorable Privy Council with remainder for lack of Issue male upon John Long of Draycot-cerne in Com.
Wilts. and the heirs male of his body. Bidd. 707 Sept. 13 Sir Robert Can of Compton-Green∣field Knight. Glouc. 708 Oct. 24 William Middleton of Belsey-Castle Esq Northumb. 709 Nov. 17 Richard Graham of Norton-Coniers Esq. Ebor. 710 Nov. 17 Thomas Tankard of Burrow-Brigg Esq Ebor. 711 Nov. 20 Cuthbert Heroh of Chipchase Esq Northumb. 712 Nov. 29 Sir Francis Wenman of Caswell Knight. Dron. 713 Dec. 4 Henry Purefey (son and heir to George Purefey of Wadley Esq) Berks. 714 Dec. 9 Thomas Cobb of Adderbury Esq Dron. 715 Dec. 12 Henry Brook of Norton Esq Cestr. 716 Dec. 22 Peter Pindar of Edinshaw Esq Cestr. 717 Jan. 19 Sir Nicholas Slaning of Mariston Knight of the Bath and Standard bearer to the band of Gentlemen Pensioners. Devon. 718 Jan. 22 Sir George Reeve of Thwayte Knight. Suff. Anno Dom. & Regis Car. 2. xv. 719 Martij 18 Thomas Brograve of Hammels Esq Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1663. & Regis Car. 2. xv. 720 Apr. 7 Sir Thomas Bernardeston of Ketton alias Kedington Knight. Suff. 721 Maij 11 Samuell Bernardeston of Bright-Hall Esq and to the heirs males of his boby; and for want of such issue to Nathaniel Ber∣nardeston of Hackney Esq &c. with remain∣der to Pelitiax Bernardeston of London Esq &c. Suff. 722 Junij 1 Sir John Daws of Putney Kt. Bidd. 723 Junij 1 Sir John Holman of Banbury Knight. Dron. 724 Junij 29 William Cook of Bromehall Esq Norff. 725 Junij 30 John Bellot of Moreton Esq Cestr. 726 Julij 1 Sir George Downing of East-Hatley Knight, Embassador in Holland, Secretary to the Treasury and now one of his Majesties Commissioners of the Customes. Cambr. 727 Julij 13 William Gawdey of West-Herting Esq Norff. 728 Julij 14 Sir Charles Pym of Brymmore Knight. Sonters. 729 Julij 29 Sir William D'oyley of Shottesham Knight. Norff. 730 Aug. 12 Sir John Marsham of Cuckston Knight. Kent
731 Aug. 15 Robert Barnham of Boughton Mun∣chensye Esq Kent 732 Dec. 15 Francis Leeke of Newarke upon Trent Esq Governor of Gravesend. Nott. 733 Dec. 30 John St. Barbe of Broadlands Esq Hants Anno Regis Car. 2 xvj. 734 Febr. 12 Thomas Cambell of Clay-Hall Esq Essex 735 Febr. 22 James Pennyman of Ormesby in Cleveland Esq Ebor. 736 Martij 1 Thomas Muddiford of Lincolns Inne Esq Midd. 737 Martij 3 George Selby of Whitehouse Esq Durh. Anno Dom. 1664. & Regis Car. 2. xvij. 738 Martij 31 Sir Edmund Fortescue of Fallow∣pit Knight. Devon. 739 Martij 31 Samuel Tuke of Cressing-Temple Esq Essex 740 Maij 25 John Tempest of Tonge Esq Ebor. 741 Junij 25 Littleton Osboldeston of Chadling∣lington Esq Oxon. 742 Julij 1 Giles Tooker of Maddington Esq UUilts.
743 Julij 13 Stephen Anderson of Eyworth Esq Bedf. 744 Aug. 31 Thomas Bateman of How-Hall Esq Norff. 745 Sept. 26 Thomas Lorrayne of Kirke-Harle Esq Northumb. 746 Sept. 27 Thomas Wentworth of Bretton Esq Ebor. 747 Nov. 2 Sir Theophilus Biddulph of West∣combe Knight. Kent 748 Nov. 2 William Greene of Micham Esq (Extinct). Surr. 749 Dec. 24 William Cookes of Norgrave Esq Wigorn. 750 Jan. 10 Sir John Wolstenholme of London Kt. (one of the Farmers of the Customs). Midd. 751 Jan. 11 Sir John Jacob of Bromley Knight, (another of the Farmers of His Majesties Customs). Midd. 752 Jan. 12 John Yeomans of the City of Bristol Esq Somers. 753 Jan. 13 John Pye of Hone Esq Derb. 754 Jan. 18 Thomas Taylor of the Parkehouse in the Parish of Maydston Esq Kent Anno Dom. Car. 2. xvij. 755 Martij 3 William Leman of Northaw, alias Northall Esq Hartf.
Anno Dom. 1665. & Regis Car. 2. xvij. 756 Martij 30 Sir Robert Smith of Upton Knight. Essex 757 Apr. 14 Sir Nicholas Crispe of Hamersmith Knight. Midd. 758 Apr. 15 Sir John Shaw of the City of London Knight, (one of the Farmers of His Majesties Customs). Midd. 759 Maij 10 John Browne of Caversham Esq Oxon. 760 Maij 20 George Rawden of Moira in Com. Downe Esq Ireland 761 Junij 8 Robert Jocelyn of Hyde-Hall Esq Hartf. 762 Junij 16 Robert Duckenfield junior of Duc∣kenfield-Hall Esq Cestr. 763 Julij 6 John Lawson of Brough Esq Ebor. 764 Julij 20 Philip Tyrrell of Hanslap and Castlethorpe Esq Buck. 765 Julij 25 Francis Burdet of Burchet Esq Ebor. 766 Julij 26 George Moore of Mayds-Morton Esq Buck. 767 Sept. 9 Abell Barker of Hambleton, alias Hambledon Esq Kotel. 768 Dec. 12 Sir William Oglander of Nunwell in the Isle of Wight Knight. Hants. 769 Jan. 31 William Temple of Sheene Esq
Resident for His Majesty at Bruxells. After∣wards Embassador to the States General of the united Provinces and one of his Majesties Pleni∣potentiaries at the Treaty of Nimmegen. Surr. 770 Martij 1 Sir William Swan of Southflete Knight. Kent 771 Martij 6 Anthony Shirley of Preston Esq Suss. 772 Martij 6 Maurice Diggs of Chilham-castle Esq (Extinct). Kent 773 Martij 6 Peter Gleane of Hardwick Esq Norff. Anno Dom. 1666. & Regis Car. 2. xviij. 774 Maij 10 John Nelthorpe of Grays-Inne Esq Midd. 775 Maij 10 Sir Robert Viner Lord Mayor of London Knight. Midd. 776 Junij 13 Sir Thomas Twysden of Brad∣burne juxta East-Malling Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Kent 777 Julij 4 Sir Anthony Aucher of Bishops Bourne Knight. Kent 778 Julij 7 John D'oylie of Chiselhamton Esq Oxon. 779 Julij 12 Edward Hoby of Bisham Esq Berks. 780 Julij 21 Thomas Put of Combe Esq Devon. 781 Oct. 22 John Tirell of Siringfield Esq son
and heir apparent of Sir John Tirell of Heron in Com. Essex Knight. Essex 782 Nov. 17 Gilbert Gerard of Fiskerton, En∣tayling the same Title upon his issue male by Mary his second Wife, Daughter to Dr. John Cozens Lord Bishop of Durham. Linc. 783 Dec. 31 Sir Robert Yeomans of Redlands Knight. Glouc. 784 Jan. 16 Carr Scroope of Cockerington Esq Linc. 785 Jan. 29 Peter Fortescue of Wood Esq Devon. Anno Regis Car. 2. xix. 786 Feb. 7 Sir Richard Bettenson of Wimbleton Knight. Surr. 787 Martij 21 Algernon Peyton of Dodington in the Isle of Ely. Cantabr. Anno Dom. 1667. 788 Martij 28 Roger Martin of Long-Melford Esq Suff. 789 Maij 7 Richard Hastings of Redlench Esq Somers. 790 Maij 24 William Hanham of Winburne Esq Dors.
Anno Dom. 1668. & Regis Car. 2. xx. 791 Julij 25 Francis Topp of Tormarton Esq Glouc. 792 Aug. 28 William Langhorne of the Inner-Temple London Esq Lond. Anno Dom. 1669. Car. 2. xxij. 793 Apr. 28 Edw. Mostyn of Talacre Esq Flynt. 794 Maij 5 Sir George Stonehouse, for life (ha∣ving surrendred his former Patent by a fine) with remainder to John Stonehouse his second son and to the heirs male of his body; and for lack of such issue to James his third son &c. with precedency to him and his sayd sons according to the first patent dated 7. Maij 1628. Berks. 795 Junij 4 Philip Carteret of St. Owen Esq Iersey 796 Oct. 25 Fulwar Skypwith of Newbold-Hall Esq UUarw. Anno Dom. 1670. Car. 2. xxiij. 797 Martij 22 Sir John Sabin of Eyne in the Pa∣rish of Gravenhurst Knight. Bedf.
Anno Dom. 1671. Car. 2. xxiiij. 798 Junij 28 William Chater of Croft-Hall Esq Ebor. 799 Nov. 18 Herbert Croft of Croft-Castle (son and heir to the Bishop of Hereford.) Heref. 800 Dec. 11 John St. Aubin of Clowance Esq Cornub. Anno Dom. 1672. Car. 2. xxv. 801 Nov. 13 Robert Eden of West-Aukland Esq Durh. 802 Nov. 28 John Werden Esq Secretary to his Royal Highness the D. of York. Chesh. 803 Febr. 7 Thomas Allen of Blundesdon a Cap∣tain at sea, sometime Admiral in the Streights, then Controler of the Navy and one of the Com∣missioners thereof. Suff Anno Dom. 1673. 804 Junij 2 Francis Warre of Hestercombe Esq Somers. 805 Nov. 12 Orlando Bridgeman of Ridley Esq second son to Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight
and Baronet Lord-keeper of the great Seal of England. Chesh. 806 Nov. 18 Francis Windham of Trent Esq Somers. 807 Dec. 1 Arthur Harris of Stoford Esq Devon. 808 Dec. 12 William Blaket of Newcastle Esq Northumb. 809 Dec. 12 John Thompson of Haversham Esq Buck. Anno xxvi. Car. 2. 810 Junij 7 Halsewell Tint of Halsewell Esq Somers. Anno Dom. 1674. Car. 2. xxvij. 811 Martij 25 Cornelius Martin Trump Vice-Admiral of Holland and West-Friezland. 812 Maij 22 Sir Robert Parker of Ralton in the Parish of Willingdon Esq Suss. 813 Maij 20 John Sherrard of Lopthorpe Esq Linc. 814 Maij 8 Arthur Onslow of West-Clandon Esq in reversion after the death of his Father in law Sir Thomas Foote, without issue male (who was created 21. Nov. 1660.) and with the same precedency. Surr.
815 Oct. 30 Walter Cleargis of St. Martins in the Feilds Esq Midd 816 Nov. 2 Thomas Williams of Eltham Esq his Majesties Physitian in Ordinary. Kent 817 Dec. 26 Robert Filmer of East-Sutton Esq Kent Anno Dom. 1674. Car. 2. xxviij. 818 Febr. 24 Sir Edward Nevill of Grove Knight. Nott. Anno Dom. 1675. Car. 2 xxviij. 819 Apr. 23 Sir Richard Tulpe of Amsterdam in the Province of Holland Knight. 820 Dec. 22 Thomas Samuell of Upton Esq Northamp 821 Jan 24 Charles Rich of the City of Lon∣don Gent for life with remainder to Rober Rich of Sonden in Com. Essex Esq. mi 822 Martij 11 Benjamin Maddox of Wormle Esq. Hert Anno Dom. 1676. Car. 2. XXIX. 823 Martij 29 Will. Barker of Bockenhall Esq E
824 Junij 13 John Brookes Citizen of York Esq Ebor. 825 Junij 19 Rich. Head of Rochester Esq Kent 826 Junij 21 William Pennington of Moncaster Esq Cumbr. 827 Dec. 18 Bennet Hoskins of Harwood Esq Heref. 828 Febr. 8 Richard Standish of Esq Lans. 829 Febr. 26 Alexander Robertson, alias Colyear of the Province of Holland. 830 Martij 3 Tho. Dike of Horeham Esq Su. Anno Dom. 1677. 831 Martij 29 Sir Robert Cotton of Cumbermeir Knight. Chesh. 832 Apr. 7 Francis Willoughby of Wollaton Esq (with remainder for lack of Issue male to Thomas his brother and to the heirs male of his body). Nott. 833 Junij 29 Ignatius Vitus, alias White (second son of Sir Dominlck White of Lymerick in Ireland) for want of Issue male, to his nephew Ignatius Maximilian Vitus, and to the heirs male of his body. Ireland 834 Julij 13 John Barlowe of Slebege Esq Pembr. 835 Julij 24 Richard Newdigate of Erdbury Serjeant at law. Warw. 836 Sept. 29 Richard Cust of Stanford Esq Linc.
837 Oct. 8 Francis Anderton of Lostoke Esq Lanc. 838 Oct. 18 James Simeon of Chilworth Esq Oxon. 839 Oct. 25 James Poole of Poole in Worrell Esq for lack of issue male to William his brother, and to the heirs male of his body. Chesh. 840 Dec. 31 George Wharton of Kirkby-Ken∣dall Treasurer of the Ordnance. UUstmerl. 841 Jan. 21 Hugh Ackland of Columb-John Esq with a special clause for precedency before all Baronets created since the year 1644. Devon. Anno Dom. 1678. Car. 2. xxx. 842 Apr. 22 Francis Edwards of Shrewsbury Esq and to the heirs male of his body, with re∣mainder to Thomas, Benjamin, Herbert and Jonathan and the heirs male of their bodies &c. and a speciall clause for precedency before all Baronets created after the year 1644. Salop. 843 Maij 8 Sir Henry Oxenden of Deane Kt. Lanc. 844 Maij 18 Sir James Bowyer of Leighthorne Baronet, Grandson and heir to Sir Thomas Bowyer Baronet (created 23. Julij 3. Car. 1.) surrendring his patent, had now a new Creation to that dignity, for life only; the remainder to Henry Goring of Highden in the same county Esq and to the heirs males of his body, with the same precedency as the said Sir Thomas Bow∣yer enjoyed. Suss.
845 Junij 20 Walter Curle of Suberton Esq Hants. 846 Junij 22 Raphe Dutton of Sherborne Esq Glouc. 847 Julij 6 William Dyer of Totenham Esq Hertf. 848 Julij 18 Josias Childe of Wansted Esq Essex 849 Julij 27 Sir Thomas Skypwith of Mether∣ingham Knight. Linc. 850 Dec. 6 Walter Hawkesworth of Hawkes∣worth Esq Ebor. 851 Junij 25 Jeremy Snow of Salesbery Esq Hertf. Anno Dom. 1679. Car. 2. xxxi. 852 Martij 29 William Kenrick of Whitley Esq Berks. 853 Julij 16 Sir Samuel Marrow of Berkswell Knight. Warw. 854 Nov. 17 Sir Roger Bradshaigh of Haigh Knight. Lanc. 855 Dec. 20 William Stapleton Esq Governor of the Leeward-Islands in America. 859 Jan. 27 Thomas-Pope Blount of Tittenhan∣ger Esq Hertf. 857 Jan. 28 Sir George Walker of Bushey Knight. Hertf.
Anno 1680. xxxij. Car. 2. 858 Oct. 22 Gelebrand Sas Van Bosch (a Servant to the Prince of Orange.) 859 Febr. 2 John Roberts of Bowe Esq Essex Anno 1681. 860 Apr. 15 Roger Beckwith of Alborough Esq Ebor. 861 Maij 18 Thomas Parkyns of Bonney Esq Nott. 862 Junij 29 Thomas Bunbury of Bunbury and Stanney Esq Chesh. 863 Julij 1 Hugh Parker of the City of London Esq and to the heirs male of his body: with re∣mainder to Henry Parker of Hunnington in Com. Warwick Esq &c. Land. 864 Julij 4 Henry Seymour Esq son and heir to Henry Seymour, one of the Groomes of his Majesties Bed-Chamber, and to the heirs mal of his body; with remainder to the said Henr the father, and to the heirs male of his body. FINIS.
An Exact Alphabetical Catalogue, of all the Shires, Cities, Bur∣rough-Towns, Cinque-Ports in England and Wales; Specifying the number of the Knights of the Shires, Citizens, Burghesses, and Barons of the Cinque-Ports, they do respectively elect, to serve as their Representatives in Parlia∣ments. Before each Shire and Burrough of Wales a W is Prefixed. After the name of each Shire, is set down the num∣ber of Burghesses Citizens and Knights chosen in that Shire. Bur. ABington Berk-Shire Burghess 1 Amondesham vide Amersham Bur. St. Albans Herford-Shire Burg. 2 Bur. Aldborough Suffolke Burg. 2 Bur. Aldborough York-Shire Burg. 2 Bur. Alesbury or Aylesbury Bucks Burg. 2 Allerton v. North-Allerton Bur. Amersham alias Agmondesham Bucks Burg. 2
Bur. Andover Hantshire Burg. 2 W. Shire Anglesey Parliament Men 2; Burg. 1 and Knight 1 Bur. Appleby Westmorland Burg. 2 Bur. Arundel Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Ashburton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Banbury Oxford-Shire Burg. 1 Bur. Barnstable Devon-Shire Burg. 2 City Bath Somerset-Shire Citizens 2 Shire Bedford-Shire P. M. 4; Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Bedford Bedford-Shire Burg. 2 Bedwyn v. Great-Bedwyn Bur. Berealston Devon-Shire Burg. 2 Shire Berks or Berkeshire P. M. 9; Burg. 7; and Knights 2 Bur. Berwicke upon Tweed Northumber∣land Burg. 2 Bur. Beaerly Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Bewdlye Worcester-Shire Burg. 1 W. Bur. Bewmorris Anglesey Burg. 1 Bur. Bishops-Castle Shrop-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Blechingly Surry Burg. 2 Bur. Bodmin Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Bossiney Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Boston Lincoln-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Brackley Northampton-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Bramber Sussex Burg. 2 W. Shire Brecon alias Brecknock-Shire; P. M. 2; Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Brecon alias Brecknock Brecknock-sh. Burg. 1
Bur. Bridport Dorset-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Bridge-north, alias Bruges, Shropshire Burg. 2 Bur. Bridgwater Somerset-shire Burg. 2 City Bristol Somerset-shire Citizens 2 Bruges v. Bridge-north Shire Bucks alias Buckingham-shire P. M. 14 Burg. 12, and Knights 2 Bur. Bucks alias Buckingham Bucking∣hamshire Burg. 2 Bur. Burroughbridge or Burroughbrig Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bury v. St. Edmonds-bury Bur. Calne Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Cambridge-sh. P. M. 6; Burg. 4, and Knights 2 Bur. Cambridge University Burg. 2 Town Burg. 2 City Canterbury Kent Citizens 2 Bur. Camelford Cornwall Burg. 2 W. Shire Cardigan-sh. P. M. 2, Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Cardigan Cardigan-Shire Burg. 1 W. Bur. Cardiffe Glamorgan-Shire Burg. 1 W. Shire Carmarthen-Shire P. M. 2; Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Carmarthen Carmarthenshire Burg 1 W. Bur. Carnarvon Carnarvon-Shire Burg 1 City Carlile Cumberland Citizens 2 Bur. Castle-Rising Norfolke Burg 2 Shire Chester P. M. 4; Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Chester Cheshire Citizens 2 City Chichester Sussex Citizens 2
Bur. Chippenham Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Chipping-Wicomb Bucks. Burg. 2 Bur. Christs-Church Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Cirencester Gloucester-Shire Burg. 2 Clifton v. Dartmouth Bur. Clithero Lancashire Burg. 2 Bur. Cockermouth Cumberland Burg. 2 City Colchester Essex Citizens 2 Bur. Corfe-Castle in the Isle of Purbecke Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Shire Cornwall P. M. 44 Burg. 42, and Knights 2 City Coventry Warwickshire Citizens 2 Crampound v. Grampound. Bur. Cricklade Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Cumberland P. M. 6 Burg. 4, and Knights 2 Bur. Dartmouth Clifton, and Hardness Devonshire Burg. 2 W. Shire Denbigh-shire P. M. 2, Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Denbigh Denbigh-shire Burg. 1 Shire Derby-Shire P. M. 4 Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Derby Derby-shire Burg. 2 Shire Devonshire P. M. 26; Burg. 22, Citizens 2 and Knights 2 Bur. The Devizes Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Dorsetshire P. M. 20; Burg. 18, and Knights 2 Bur. Dorchester Dorset-shire Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Dover Kent Barons 2 Bur. Downton Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Droitwich Worcestershire Burg. 2 Dunhevet or Dunhivid v. Lanceston
Bur. Dunwich Suffolk Burg. 2 Shire Durham P. M. 4; Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Durham Citizens 2 Bur. East Grinstead Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. East-Low Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. East-Retford Nottingham-shire Burg. 2 Bur. St. Edmonds-Bury Suffolk Burg. 2 Shire Essex P. M. 8, Burg. 6, and Knights 2 Bur. Evesham Worcester-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Eye Suffolk Burg. 2 City Exeter, alias Exon Devonshite Citizens 2 W. Shire Flintshire P. M. 2; Burg. 1 and Knight 1 W. Bur. Flint Flintshire Burg. 1 Bur. Fowey, or Foy Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Gatton Surry Burg. 2 Bur. St. Germains, or Jermins Cornwall Burg. 2 W. Shire Glamorganshire P. M. 2; Burg. 1 and Kt. 1 Shire Gloucestershire P. M. 8; Burg. 4, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Gloucester Gloucestershire Citizens 2 Bur. Grampound or Crampound Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Grantham Lincoln-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Bedwyn Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Grimsby Lincoln-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Marlow Bucks Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Wenlock Shrop-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Great-Yarmouth alias North-Yar∣mouth Norffolk Burg. 2 Grnistead v. East-Grinstead Bur. Guilford Surry Burg. 2
Shire Hampshire or Hantshire, alias Southampton P. M. 26; Burg. 22, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 Hardness v. Dartmouth Bur. Harwich Essex Burg. 2 Bur. Haslemere Surry Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Hastings Sussex Barons 2 W. Bur. Haverford-West Pembrook-shire Burg. 1 Bur. Helston Cornwall Burg. 2 Shire Hereford-shire P. M. 8; Burg. 4, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Hereford Hereford-shire Citizens 2 Shire Hertford P. M. 6; Burg. 4, and Knights 2 Bur. Hertford Hertford-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Hetsbury or Heitsbury Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Heydon Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Higham-Ferrers Northampton-shire Burg. 1 Bur. Hindon Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Honiton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Horseham Sussex Burg. 2 Hull v. Kingston upon Hull Shire Huntingtonsh. P. M. 4, Burg. 2 and Knights 2 Bur. Huntington Huntington-shire Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Hyth Kent Barons 2 St. Jermins v. St. Germains Bur. Ilcester Somerset-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Ipswich Suffolk Burg. 2 Bur. St. Ives Cornwall Burg 2 Shire Kent P. M. 10; Burg. 4; Citizens 4, and Knights 2 Bur. Killington Cornwall Burg 2
Kings-Lyme, v. Lyme-Regis Kings-Lynn, v. Lyn-Regis Kings-Melcomb, v. Melcomb-Regis Bur. Kingston upon Hull Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Knaesborough Yorkshire Burg. 2 Shire Lancaster, or Lancashire P. M. 14; Burg. 12 and Knights 2 Bur. Lancaster Lancashire Burg. 2 Bur. Lanceston Launcestoun or Launston alias Dunhevet Cornwall Burg. 2 Shire Leicestershire P. M. 4; Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Leicester Leicestershire Burg. 2 Bur. Lempster Herefordshire Burg. 2 Bur. Leskard Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Lestathiel, Lestwithiel, or Lostwi∣thiel Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Leverpoole, or Liverpoole Lancash. Burg. 2 Bur. Lewes Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Limmington Hantshire Burg. 2 Shire Lincolnshire P. M. 12; Burg. 8, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Lincoln Lincolnshire Citizens 2 City Litchfield Staffordshire Citizens 2 City London Middlesex Citizens 4 Lostwithiel v. Lestuthiel Low v. East-Low West-Low Bur. Ludgershall Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Ludlow Shropshire Burg. 2
Bur. Lyme-Regis alias Kings-Lyme Dor∣setshire Burg. 2 Bur. Lynn-Regis, alias, Kings-Lynn Norfolk Burg. 2 Bur. Maidston Kent Burg. 2 Bur. Marlborough Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Malden Essex Burg. 2 Bur. Malmesbury Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. Malton Yorkshire Burg. 2 Marlow v. Great-Marlow Bur. St. Mawes Cornwall Burg. 2 Medena v. Newport Bur. Melcomb-Regis alias Kings-Melcomb Dorsetshire Burg. 2 W. Shire Merionethshire P. M. 1; viz. Knight 1 Bur. St. Michael Cornwall Burg. 2 Shire Middlesex P. M. 8, Citizens 6, and Knights 2 Bur. Midhurst Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Milborn-Port Somerset-shire Burg. 2 Bur. Minehead Somerset-shire Burg. 2 W. Shire Mongomery-shire P. M. 2; Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W Bur. Mongomery Mongomery-shire Burg. 1 Shire Monmouth-shire P. M. 3; Burg. 1, and Knights 2 Bur. Monmouth Monmouth-shire Burg. 1 Bur. Morpeth Northumberland Burg. 2 Bur. Newarke upon Trent Nottinghamsh. Burg. 2 Bur. New-Castle under line Staffordshire Burg. 2 Bur. New-Castle upon Tine Northumber. Burg. 2
Bur. Newport Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Newport alias Medena in the Isle of Wight Hantshire Burg. 2 Cinq. P. New-Rumney Kent Barons 2 New-Sarum v. Salisbury Bur. New Shoreham Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Newton or Newtown in the Isle of Wight Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Newtown or Newton Lancashire. Burg. 2 Bur. New Windsor Berkshire Burg. 2 Bur. New Woodstock Oxfordshire Burg. 2 Shire Norfolk P. M. 12; Burg. 8, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 Bur. North-Allerton Yorkshire Burg. 2 Shire Northamptonshire P. M. 9; Burg. 5, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Northampton Northamptonshire Burg. 2 Shire Northumberland P. M. 8; Burg. 6, and Knights 2 North Yarmouth v. Great Yarmouth City Norwich Norfolk Citizens 2 Shire Nottinghamshire P. M. 8; Burg. 6, and Knights 2 Bur. Nottingham Nottinghamshire Butg. 2 Bur. Oke Hampton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Old-Sarum Wiltshire Burg. 2 Shire Oxon alias Oxford Oxfordshire P. M. 9; Burg 5, Citizens 2, and Knights 2 City Oxon alias Oxford Oxfordshire University Burg. 2 City Citizens 2
Bur. Ortford Suffolk Burg. 2 W. Shire Pembrokeshire P. M. 3; Burg. 2, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Pembroke Pembrokeshire Burg. 1 Bur. Penryn Cornwall Burg. 2 City Peterborough Northamptonshire Citizens 2 Bur. Peterfield Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Plymouth Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Plympton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Pomfret alias Pontefract Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Pool Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Port Pigham v. West-Low Bur. Portsmouth Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Preston in Amounderness, or Ander∣ness Lancashire Burg. 2 Bur. Queensborough or Quinborough Kent Burg. 2 W. Shire Radnorshire P. M. 2, Burg. 1, and Knight 1 W. Bur. Radnor Radnorshire Burg. 1 Bur. Reading Berkshire Burg. 2 Retford v. East-Retford Bur. Richmond Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Rippon Yorkshire Burg. 2 City Rochester Kent Citizens 2 Rumney v. New-Rumney Shire Rutland P. M. 2, viz. Knights 2 Cinq. P. Rye Sussex Barons 2 Bur. Ryegate Surry Burg. 2 City Salisbury alias New-Sarum Wiltsh. Citizens 2
Salop County v. Shropshire Town v. Shrewsbury Bur. Saltash Cornwall Burg. 2 Cinq. P. Sandwich Kent Barons 2 Sarum New-Sarum v. Salisbury Old-Sarum Bur. Scarborough Yorkshire Burg. 2 Cin{que} P. Seaford Sussex Barons 2 Bur. Shaftsbury alias Shafton Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Shoreham v. New-Shoreham Bur. Shrewsbury alias Salop, Shropshire Burg. 2 Shire Salop alias Shropshire P. M 12, Burg. 10, and Knights 2 Shire Somerset-shire P. M. 18, Burg. 10, Citizens 6, and Knights 2 Southampton the County v. Hampshire Bur. Southampton Hampshire Burg. 2 Bur. Southwarke Surry Burg. 2 Bur. South-Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight Hantshire Burg. 2 Shire Staffordshire P. M. 10, Burg. 6, Citi∣zens 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Stafford Staffordshire Burg. 2 Bur. Stamford Lincolnshire Burg. 2 Bur. Steyning Sussex Burg. 2 Bur. Stockbridge Hantshire Burg. 2 Bur. Sudbury Suffolk Burg. 2 Shire Suffolk P. M. 16, Burg. 14, and Knights 2 Shire Surry P. M. 14, Burg. 12, and Knights 2 Sh. Sussex P. M. 20, Burg. 16, Citiz. 2, and Knights 2
Bur. Tamworth Staffordshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tavistocke Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Taunton Somersetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tewksbury Gloucestershire Burg. 2 Bur. Thetford Norffolk Burg. 2 Bur. Thirske Yorkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tiverton Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Totnes Devonshire Burg. 2 Bur. Tregony Cornwall Burg. 2 Bur. Truro Cornwall Burg. 2 Vizes v. Devizes Bur. Wallingford Berkshire Burg. 2 Bur. Wareham Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Shire Warwickshire P. M. 6, Burg. 2, Citi∣zens 2 and Knights 2 Bur. Warwick Warwickshire Burg. 2 Bur. Webly or Weobly Herefordshire Burg. 2 City Wells Somersetshire Citizens 2 Wendlock v. Great-Wendlock Burg. 2 Bur. Wendover Bucks Burg. 2 Bur. Westbury Wiltshire Burg. 2 Bur. West-Low alias Port-Pigham Cornw. Burg. 2 City Westminster Middlesex Citizens 2 Shire Westmorland P. M. 4, Burg. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Weymouth Dorsetshire Burg. 2 Bur. Whit-Church Hantshire Burg. 2 Wiccomb v. Chipping Wiccomb Bur. Wigan Lancashire Burg. 2 Shire Wiltsh. P. M. 34, Burg. 30, Citi. 2, and Knights 2 Bur. Wilton Wiltshire Burg. 2
Cinq. P Winchelsey Sussex Barons 2 City Winchester Hantshire Citizens 2 Windsor v. New-Windsor Woodstock v. New-Woodstock Bur. Wooton-Basset Wiltshire Burg. 1 Shire Worcestershire P. M. 9, Burg. 5, Citi∣zens 2, and Knights 2 City Worcester Worcestershire Citizens 2 Yar∣mouth v. North-Yarmouth South-Yarmouth v. Great-Yarmouth Shire Yorkshire P. M. 30 Burg. 26, Citi∣zens 2, and Knights 2 City York Yorkshire Citizens 2
THe total number of all the Knights of the Shires, Citizens, Burghesses, and Barons of the Cinque-Ports of England and Wales, which (when the Kings Majesty Summons a Parliament) are Respectively chosen by the several Shires &c. as the Representatives of all the Commons of En∣gland. Knights of the Shires, 2. for each of the 40. Shires in England reckoning Monmouthshire, as one 80 Citizens for the 25. Cities in England; for London 4, for each of the other Cities 2. 52 Burghesses 2. for each of the 2. Universities, and for each of the 171. Burrough-Towns in England, except for Abington, Banbury, Bewdly, Higham-Ferrers, and Monmouth, for each of which only 1. 341 Barons of the Cinque-Ports, viz. Hastings, Do∣ver, Hyth, Rumney; and the 3. Principal mem∣bers of the Cinque-Ports, Winchelsey, Rye, and Seaford, of each 2. 16 Knights of the Shires 1. for each of the 12. Shires of Wales 12 Burghesses 1. for each of the 12. Burrough-Towns of Wales 12 The full and Compleat number of all the Mem∣bers of the House of Commons. 513
A True and Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE Nobility OF SCOTLAND
THE Bookseller TO THE READER. THe frequent complaints I have heard, from several learned and Ingenuous per∣sons, of the errors and defects in all the Catalogues, of late Printed, of the Nobi∣lity in his Majesties Dominions, created in me a belief, that the publication of exact and correct Ca∣talogues thereof, wou'd be very acceptable to the pub∣lick. And this induced me, to attempt it. In or∣der whereunto, I obtained the preceeding Catalogue of the Nobility of England, from the Author of the aforegoing Treatise, a person who by reason of his Office of Garter, is best enabled to publish it most correctly and Authentickly. And in August last (the Parli∣ament of Scotland then sitting) by the favour of a freind there. I procured a copy, of the then Lord Rgister his Role of the Nobility of Scotland. But their Christian names not being inserted therein, my
Correspondent was so careful and industrious, as to in∣form himself thereof, either from the several Noble∣men themselves, then assembled into Parliament, or from the near Relations, or intimate acquaintances of those absent; and for those few Christian names of which he could receive no certain information, he hath left blanks; and having thus procured it, he trans∣mitted it to me. Since when it hath been communi∣cated to several, very intelligent persons in the affairs of that Kingdom, who have very well approved thereof, so that I may with a modest assurance affirm this present Catalogue to be more accurate then most of this nature hitherto publish'd. And yet I will not confidently averr that there are no errors there∣in, for I am told the Nobility of Scotland are no more careful, then the Noblemen of England, to Re∣gister their descents and successions; the defect of which doth almost occasion an impossibility, with an accurate exactness to publish any Catalogue of this nature. But if any person shall percieve any error or defect therein, or any Nobleman judges himself in∣jured, either by any omission or misrecitall of his name or title, if he shall be pleased to notify it to me, with directions how it ought to be corrected and supplyed, or to inform therein Mr. Robert Meine Post-Master of (Edinburgh) I shall take all possible care that in the next edition all the errors may accordingly be a∣mended, and all due right don to every individual Nobleman. To the present Catalogue, is annexed a list of all
the Shires and Royal Burroughs in Scotland, with the number of Barons, Commissioners, and Burg∣hesses they do respectively retaine to serve in Par∣liament. Which I have don in the same manner, as in compliance with the desires of several persons, I have published the preceeding Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Shires, Cities, Burroughs and Cinque-Ports in England and Wales.
A true and perfect Catalogue of the Officers of State, Nobility, Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, ac∣cording to their Respective Prece∣dencies. His Majesties High-Commissioner HIS Royal Highness James Duke of Al∣bany Princes of the Blood Royal James Duke of Albany, his Majesties aforemen∣tioned High-Commissioner, and Lord High Ad∣miral of Scotland, (Duke of York in England, and Earl of Ulster in Ireland) Archbishops (II), and Great Officers (IV), (Who in respect of their Offices, precede all the Nobility except those of the Blood Royal) The Lord High Chancellor This Office is now vacant
The Arch-Bishop of St. Andrews Lord Primate and Metropolitan of All Scotland Dr. Alexander Burnet Lord Arch-Bishop of St. An∣drews The Lord High Treasurer This Office is now executed by Commissioners The Arch-bishop of Glasgow Lord Primate and Metropolitan of Scotland Dr. Arthur Ross Lord Arch-bishop of Glasgow The Lord President of the Privy Council John Duke of Lauderdale The Lord Privy Seal John Marquess of Atholl Dukes (IV) William Hamilton Duke of Hamilton * James Scot, Duke of Buccleugh, Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland (and Duke of Mon∣mouth in England) * John Maitland Duke of Lauderdale, Lord Pre∣sident of the Privy Council in Scotland (and Earl of Guilford in England) * Charles Lenos Duke of Lennox (and Richmond in England) Marquesses (IV) George Gordon Marquess of Huntley
William Douglas Marquess of Douglas James Grahame Marquess of Montrose John Murray Marquess of Atholl (Lord Privy Seal and Admiral Deputy of Scotland) Earls (LXII) and (I) Countess The Lord Secretary of Scotland, in respect of his Office, preceeds all of his Degree, and at present, that Office is executed by an Earl, viz. Alexander Earl of Murray Archibald Campbell Earl of Argyle John Lindsay Earl of Crawford John Hay Earl of Arroll (Lord High Constable of Scotland by Inheritance) George Keith Earl Marshal (Great Marshal of Scotland by Inheritance) George Sutherland Earl of Sutherland Charles Erskeine Earl of Marre William Grahame Earl of Menteith and Airth John Lesley Earl of Rothes William Douglas Earl of Morton William Erskeine Earl of Buchan John Cunningham Earl of Glencairn Alexander Montgomery Earl of Eglinton John Kenedie Earl of Cassils George Sinclare Earl of Caithness Alexander Stewart Earl of Murray (Lord Secreta∣ry of Scotland)
Robert Maxwel Earl of Nidisdail George Seaton Earl of Winton George Levingston Earl of Linlithgow James Home Earl of Home James Drummond Earl of Perth James Seaton Earl of Dunfermling John Fleming Earl of Wigton Patricke Lyon Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne Hamilton Earl of Abercorne Robert Kerr Earl of Roxburgh Alexander Ereskeine Earl of Kellie Charles Hamilton Earl of Hadington William Stewart Earl of Galloway Kenneth Mac-Kenzie Earl of Seaforth Robert Carr Earl of Lothian William Hay Earl of Kinnoul John Campbell Earl of Loudoun William Crichton Earl of Drumfreis William Douglas Earl of Queensberrie William Alexander Earl of Sterling Robert Bruce Earl of Elgin (and Aylesbury in England) Robert Carnegie Earl of South-eske John Stewart Earl of Traquaire Charles Carr Earl of Ancram David Weimes Earl of Weimes William Ramsey Earl of Dalhousie James Ogiluie Earl of Airlie James Ogiluie Earl of Finlator James Dalziel Earl of Carnwath
Alexander Levingston Earl of Callander David Leslie Earl of Leven William Johnstoun Earl of Annandail Elizabeth (present Dutchess of Lauderdale) Coun∣tess of Dysert, Daughter and Coheir of William Murray Earl of Dysert (first marryed to Sir Lionel Talmach Baronet of England, her el∣dest Son by whom, now beareth the Title of Lord Hunting-Tower, being heir in succession to the Earldom of Dysert) George Mauld Earl of Panmeure John Hay Earl of Twedall. David Carnegie Earl of North-Eske Alexander Bruce Earl of Kincarden Colin Lindsay Earl of Balcarres Archibald Douglas Earl of Forfar Charles Middleton Earl of Middleton. Charles Gordon Earl of Aboyne Walter Scot Earl of Tarras James Levingston Earl of Newbrugh William Boyde Earl of Kilmarnocke William Cochraine Earl of Dandonald George Douglas Earl of Dunbarton John Keith Earl of Kintor John Campbell Earl of Braid-Albin and Holland Viscounts (XIII) Anthony Carey Viscount Falkland
Robert Constable Viscount Dunbar David Murray Viscount Stormont William Gordon Viscount Kenmeare Robert Arbuthnet Viscount Arbuthnet William Crichton Viscount Frendraught Alexander Seaton Viscount Kingston Robert Mackgill Viscount Oxenford Edward Ingram Viscount Irwing James Levingston Viscount Kilsyth Peregrine Osburne Viscount Dumblane Richard Grahame Viscount Preston James Cheney Viscount Newhaven Bishops (XII) Dr. John Patterson L. B. of Edinburgh Dr. James Atkins L. B. of Galloway Dr. Andrew Bruce L. B. of Dunkell Dr. Patrick Scougall L. B. of Aberdeen Dr. Colin Falconer L. B. of Murray Dr. Alexander Young L. B. of Ross Dr. George Halliburton L. B. of Brechen Dr. James Ramsey L. B. of Dumblane Dr. Andrew Wood L. B. of Cathness Dr. Archibald Grahame L. B. of the Isles Dr. Hector Mack-clene L. B. of Argyle Dr. Murdo Mack-Kenzie L. B. of Orkney In the same order, as the several Bishopricks are
here inserted, the Respective Bishops do constant∣ly precede each other, without regard to the seni∣ority of their Consecrations. Lords (XLVII) Alexander Forbes Lord Forbes Alexander Frazer Lord Salton Robert Gray Lord Gray Allan Cathcart Lord Cathcart Henry Saintclare Lord Saintclare James Douglas Lord Mordington Francis Semple Lord Semple John Elphingston Lord Elphingston Charles Oliphant Lord Oliphant Hugh Frazer Lord Louat John Borthwick Lord Borthwick George Ross Lord Ross Walter Sandilands Lord Torphichen John Leslie Lord Lindoris John Elphingston Lord Balmerinoch and Ld. Cowper Henry Erskeine Lord Cardrass Alexander Stewart Lord Blantyre James Cranston Lord Cranston John Balfour Lord Burgleigh Robert Kerr Lord Jedburgh David Drummond Lord Madertie George Meluil Lord Meluil Archibald Napier Lord Napier
Henry Fairfax Lord Fairfax of Cameron Henry Richardson Lord Cramond Walter Aston Lord Aston of Forfare Donald Mack-Ray alias Forbes Lord Rae James Forester Lord Forester Alexander Forbes Lord Pitsligo John Mackleland Lord Kirkudbright Charles Frazer Lord Frazer John Hamilton Lord Bargeny George Ogiluie Lord Bamff Patricke Murray Lord Elibank Thomas Galloway Lord Dunkell Alexander Falconer Lord Hackerton John Hamilton Lord Belhaven John Carmichael Lord Carmichael James Sutherland Lord Duffes Andrew Rollo Lord Rollo Robert Colvil Lord Colvil David Ruthuen Lord Ruthuen John Rutherford Lord Rutherford John Bellenden Lord Bellenden David Leslie Lord Newark James Weimes Lord Burnt Island David Nairne Lord Nairne Other Officers of State  These have the Title of Lord and precedency of all under the degree of Noblemen and their eldest Sons. Charles Maitland of Hatton Lord Treasurer Depu.
Sir George Mack-Kenzie of Torbat Lord Register Sir George Mack-Kenzie of Roshaugh Lord Advocat Richard Maitland of Duddip Lord Justice Clerke A List of the XXXIII Shires in Scotland each of which send: II Barons Commissioners, to serve in Parliament, as the Representatives of the se∣veral Respective Shires. Edinburgh Hadington Berwick Roxburgh Selkirk Peeblis Lanerick Drumfreis Wigton Aire Dunbarton Bute Renfrew Sterling Linlithgow Perth Kincarden Aberdeen Innerness Nairne Cromartie Argyle Fife Forfar Bamff the Stewarty of Kirkcud∣bright Sutherland Cathness Elgin Orkney Clackmannan Ross Kinross The number of the Barons Commissioners for the Shires. LXVI
A List of the Royal Burroughs in Scotland; each of which send only one Burghess to Parliament, as their Representative except Edinburg which sends two Burghesses Commissioners Edinburgh Perth Dundee Aberdeen Sterling Linlithgow St. Andrews Glasgow Aire Hadington Dysert Kirkcaldie Montrose Cowper in Fife East-Anstruther Drumfreis Innerness Burnt Island Inner-Keything Kinghorne Brechen Irwing Iedburgh Kirkcudbright Wigton Dunfermling Sanyhuar New Galloway Fort-Ross Dingwall Dornoch Queens Ferrie Innerara Pittenweem Selkirk Dunbarton Renfrew Dunbar Lanerick Aberbrothock Elgin Peeblis Crail Tayne Culross Bamff Whitherne Forfar Rothesay Nairne Forres Rutherglen North-Berwick Callen Kilrinnie Lauder Kintor Annand Lochmaben
Inner-Durie Rosemarkie Cromartie Wick Kirkwall Inner-Beruie The number of Burghesses Commissioners for the Royal Burroughs. LXV * Note That since this present Catalogue was com∣mitted to the press Archibald Campbell Earl of Argyle hath been and is attainted of High treason. FINIS.
A True and Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE Nobility OF IRELAND.
To Mr. Moses Pitt at the Theater in Oxford SIR Whitehall 24. Jan. 1681/2. YOur Letter to my Lord Chamberlaine of 22. of this month his Lordship hath sent me to be answered; but the time you allot for it being the very next post, or else you say the Irish Catalogue will be printed, in which said Catalogue tis questioned whether the present Lord Ossory be a Peer: None can resolve that point better then my Lord Vicount Lansbrough, who is now in Ireland; and was Secretary to my Lord of Ormond, and concerned for his Grace, and his Sons, at such times when those additional Honours were conferr'd upon them in England and Ireland; So that unless I be al∣lowed time to receive his Lordships answer, I dare not take upon me to speak to the point in question, so as to justifie the printing thereof. I Am Your most humble Servant RICHARD MULYSE To my best remembrance I have heard my Lord Lansbrough say, that Thomas Butler the late Earl of Ossory had his place in the Parliament of Ireland by the Kings Writ as Earl of Ossory; (and to precede all other Earls, but not to be a President for the future) and in England as Thomas Butler Baron of Moore Park: And that by vertue thereof James Butler the present Earl of Ossory was to succeed to his Father in the same places and Honours. However I will send this night to Ireland for better information.
A true and perfect Catalogue of the Great Officers of State, Nobility, Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral of the Kingdom of Ireland, according to their respective precedencies. The Lord Lievtenant or Cheif Governor James Duke of Ormond. Princes of the Blood-Royal. * His Royal Highness James Earl of Ulster, Duke of York in England and Albany in Scotland. Arch-Bishops (IV) and Great Officers (II) (who in respect of their Offices, precede all the Nobility except those of the Blood-Royal) The Lord Arch-Bishop of Armagh Primate of All Ireland Dr. Michael Boyle Lord Arch-bishop of Armagh The Lord Chancellor Michacl Lord Arch-bishop of Armagh beforemen∣tioned The other Arch-bishops The Lord Arch-bishop of Dublin Primate of Ireland Dr. Francis Marsh Lord Arch-bishop of Dublin
The Lord Arch-bishop of Cashels Dr. Thomas Price Lord Arch-bishop of Cashels The Lord Arch-bishop of Tuam Dr. Joseph Vesey Lord Arch-bishop of Tuam. The Lord Treasurer Richard Earl of Cork Dukes * James Butler Duke of Ormond Lord Lievtenant of Ireland (and Earl of Brecknock in England) Marquesses Randolph Macdonnel Marquess of Autrim Earls (XXX) John Fitz-Gerald Earl of Kildare Henry O Bryen Earl of Thomond William Burgh alias Bourke Earl of Clanrickard James Touchet Earl of Castlehaven (and Baron Audley in England) Richard Boyle Earl of Cork Lord Treasurer of Ire∣land by inheritance (and Earl of Burlington in England) Thomas Nugent Earl of Westmeath
Wentworth Dillon Earl of Roscomon Robert Ridgway Earl of London-Derry William Fielding Earl of Desmond (and Denbigh in England) William Brabazon Earl of Meath Richard Barry Earl of Barrimore Richard Vaughan Earl of Carbery (and Baron Vaughan in England) Luke Plunket Earl of Fingall Thomas Cromwel Earl of Arglas (and Baron Cromwel in England) Arthur Chichester Earl of Donnegall Lambert Earl of Cauan William O Brien Earl of Inchequin Donnugh Macarty Earl of Clancarty Richard Boyle Earl of Orrery Charles Coot Earl of Montrath Henry Moore Earl of Drogheda Charles Talbot Earl of Waterford and Wexford (and Shrewsbury in England) Hugh Montgomery Earl of Mount-Alexander Roger Palmer Earl of Castlemain Richard Butler Earl of Arran (and Baron Butler of Weston in England) Nicholas Taaf Earl of Carlingford Richard Power Earl of Tyrone Richard Jones Earl of Rannelagh Francis Aungier Earl of Longford Charles-Henry Kirkhoven Earl of Bellomont (and Baron Wotton in England)
Uiscounts (XLIX) Jenico Preston Viscount Gormanston David Roch Viscount Fermoy Richard Butler Viscount Mountgarret William Viliers Viscount Grandison Arthur Annesly Viscount Valentia (and Earl of Anglesey in England) Thomas Dillon Viscount Dillon of Costillogallen Nicholas Nettervile Viscount Nettervile of Dowth Arthur Luftus Viscount Luftus of Elye Beaumont Viscount Beaumont of Swords Arthur Magenis Viscount Magenis of Evagh Thomas Needham Viscount Kilmurry David Sarsfeild Viscount Sarsfeild of Kilmallock Edward Conway Viscount Killultagh (and Earl of Conway in England) Miles Burgh Viscount Burgh of Mayo George Sanderson Viscount Castleton Patricke Chaworth Viscount Chaworth of Armagh John Scudamore Viscount Scudamore of Slygoe Richard Lumley Viscount Lumley of Waterford (and Baron Lumley in England) Thomas Smith Viscount Strangford Philip Wenman Viscount Wenman of Tuam Carol Molineux Viscount Molineux of Marybourgh William Fairfax Viscount Fairfax of Emmely James Butler Viscount Ikerine
Thomas Fits-Williams Viscount Fits-Williams of Merion Lewis Odempsi Viscount Glanmaleyra Brien Cockain Viscount Cullen Tracy Viscount Tracy Francis Smith Viscount Carington of Barrefore (and Baron Carington in England) Richard Bulkley Viscount Bulkley of Cashells William Brounker Viscount Brounker of Lyons Richard Ogle Viscount Ogle of Catherlough Peircy Butler Viscount Galmoy Henry Barnwell Viscount Kingland Henry Boyle Viscount Shannon John Skeffington Viscount Masarene Hugh Cholmondley Viscount Cholmondley of Kellis Evelyn Fanshaw Viscount Fanshaw of Dromore William Dungan Viscount Claine Daniel O Brien Viscount Clare Lewis Trevor Viscount Dungannon Charles Boyle Viscount Dungaruan (and beareth the title in England of Lord Clifford) Maurice Berkley Viscount Fitzharding of Beer∣haven William Caulfeild Viscount Charlemount Foliut Wingfeild Viscount Powers-Court Murrogh Boyle Viscount Blesington Arthur Forbes Viscount Granard George Lane Viscount Lanesbrough John Dawney Viscount Downe Richard Persons Viscount Ros
Bishops (XVIII) Dr. Anthony Doppin L. B. of Meath Dr. William Morton L. B. of Kildare Dr. Hugh Gore L. B. of Waterford Dr. Edward Wolley L. B. of Clonfert Dr. John Hudson L. B. of Elphin Dr. Richard Boyle L. B. of Fernes and Laghlin Dr. Roger Boyle L. B. of Clogher Dr. Essex Digby L. B. of Dromore Dr. Thomas Otway L. B. of Ossory Dr. Ezekiel Hopkins L. B. of Derry Dr. Thomas Hacket L. B. of Down Dr. John Roan L. B. of Killallow Dr. Edward Wettenal L. B. of Corke Dr. Simon Digby L. B. of Limericke Dr. Patricke Sheridan L. B. of Cloyne Dr. Tenison L. B. of Killalla Dr. Smith L. B. of Rapho Dr. William Sheridan L. B. of Kilmore The Bishop of Meath in respect of his Bishoprick is always a Privy Counseller, and he and the Bishop of Kildare have constantly precedency before the rest of the Bishops who take place according to the seniority of their Consecrations. Barons (XXXII) Francis Bermingham Lord Bermingham of Athenry
Almericus Ceurcy Lord Courcy of Kingsale William Fitz-Morrice Lord of Kerry and Lixnaw Randolph Flemming Lord Slane Thomas St. Laurence Lord of Howth Robert Barnwell Baron of Trimleston Christopher Plunket Lord of Dunsany Peircy Butler Lord of Dunboyne Brien Fitz-Patricke Lord of Upper Ossory Matthew Plunket Lord of Lowth William Bourke Lord Bourke of Castle-Connel Theobald Butler Lord of Cahire Toby Bourke Lord Bourke of Brittas Steward Lord Steward of Castle Steward Foliot Lord Foliot of Balishannon William Maynard Lord Maynard of Wickelow (and Baron Maynard in England) Richard George Lord George of Dandalk Simon Digby Lord Digby of Geashil William Fitz-Williams Lord Fitz-Williams of Lifford. Henry Blany Lord Blany of Monaghan Henry Herbert Lord Herbert of Castle-Island (and Baron Herbert of Chirbury in England) John Calnert Lord Baltimore William Brereton Lord Brereton of Laghlin Henry Hare Lord Colrane Benedict Sherard Lord Sherard of Letrim Claud Hamilton Lord Hamilton of Strabane Francis Hawly Lord Hawly of Donamore William Allington Lord Allington of Killard
John King Lord Kingston Richard Coot Lord Colonel Richard Barry Lord Santry Altham Anesly Lord Altham A List of all the Shires Cityes and Burroughs of Ireland which make returns of Parliament with the number how many each place returns Comitatus Armagh 2 Burrough of Armagh 2 Bur. of Charlemount 2   6 Com. Antrim 2 Bur. of Belfast 2 Bur. of Carickfergus 2 Bur. of Lishbon 2 Bur. of Antrim 2   10 Com. Catherlaugh 2 Bur. Catherlaugh 2 Bur. Old Leighlin 2   6 Com. Corke 2 City of Corke 2 Bur. of Mallow 2 Bur. of Baltimore 2 Bur. of Cloghnekilty 2 Bur. of Bandon Bridge 2 Bur. of Kingsale 2 Bur. of Younghall 2   16 Com. Cavan 2 Bur. of Cavan 2 Bur. of Belturbet 2   6 Com. Clare 2 Bur. of Inish 2   4 Com. Dublin 2 City of Dublin 2 University of Dublin 3 Bur. of New-Castle 2 Bur. of Swords 2   11 Com. Downe 2 Bur. of Downe 2 Bur. of Newtown 2 Bur. of Newry 2
Bur. of Balkillaleagh 2 Bur. of Bangor 2 Bur. of Hilsborough 2   14 Com. Donegal 2 Bur. of Lifford 2 Bur. of Ballyshannon 2 Bur. of Killbeggs 2 Bur. of Donegal 2 Bur. of Sir Johns town 2   12 Villa. de Drogheda 2   2 Com. Gallway 2 Bur. of Gallway 2 Bur. of Athenry 2 Bur. of Tuam 2   8 Com. Fermanagh 2 Bur. of Eniskilling 2   4 Com. Kerry 2 Bur. of Traley 2 Bur. of Dingleicough 2 Bur. of Ardfart 2   8 Com. Kilkenny 2 Civit. Kilkenny 2 Bur. of Cullen 2 Bur. of Thomas Town 2 Bur. of Gowran 2 Bur. of Enisteoge 2 Bur. of Knoctopher 2 Bur. of St. Kennis 2   16 Com. Kildare 2 Bur. of Kildare 2 Bur. of Naas 2 Bur. of Athy 2   8 Com. Regis 2 Bur. of Philips Town 2 Bur. of Banagher 2   6 Com. Letrim 2 Bur. of James Town 2 Bur. of Carricdrum∣rasck 2   6 Com. Lymerick 2 Civit. Lymerick 2 Bur. of Kilmallock 2 Bur. of Askeaton 2   8 Com. Longford 2 Town of Longford 2 Bur. of Sir Johns Town 2 Bur. of Lanesborough 2   8 Com. Lowth 2
Bur. Carlingford 2 Bur. of Dundalke 2 Bur. of Atherdee 2   8 Com. London-Derry 2 Civit. London-Derry 2 Bur. of Colraine 2 Bur. of Limauddy 2   8 Com. Mayo 2 Bur. of Castlebarr 2   4 Com. Meath 2 Bur. of Trym 2 Bur. of Kells 2 Bur. of Navan 2 Bur. of Athbay 2 Bur. of Duleeke 2 Bur. of Ratooth 2   14 Com. Monaghan 2 Bur. of Monaghan 2   4 Com. Reginae 2 Bur. of Ballinakin 2 Bur. of Maryborough 2   6 Com. Roscomon 2 Bur. of Roscomon 2 Bur. of Tulske 2   6 Com. Sligoe 2 Bur. Sligoe 2   4 Com. Tipperary 2 Bur. of Clonnel 2 Bur. of Fetherd 2 Town of Cashells 2   8 Com. Tyrone 2 Bur. of Donegal 2 Town of Clogher 2 Bur. of Agber 2 Bur. of Strabane 2   10 Com. Waterford 2 Civit. Waterford 2 Bur. of Dungaruan 2 Bur. of Lismore 2 Bur. of Tallow 2   10 Com. Westmeath 2 Bur. of Athlone 2 Bur. of Fower 2 Bur. of Kilbegan 2 Bur. of Molingra 2   10 Com. Wicklow 2 Bur. of Wicklow 2 Bur. of Caresford 2 Bur. of Baltinglass 2   8
Com. Wexford 2 Town of Wexford 2 Town of Ross 2 Bur. of Eniscourthy 2 Bur. of Feathard 2 Bur. of Banow 2 Bur. of Cloghmaine 2 Bur. of Tughman 2 Bur. of Newborough 2   18 The total of Parliament Men returned in the whole Kingdom of Ireland. 275
A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Printed at the Theater in Oxford, since the first Printing there which was in the Year 1672 to 1682 (With several others) and sold in London, by Moses Pitt at the Angel against the Great North-door of St. Pauls-Church. 1682. IN FOLIO. BIble for Churches with Chronology and an Index. The English Atlas Vol. 1st. containing the description of the North-Pole, as also Muscovy, Poland, Sweden and Denmork. The second Vol. of the Atlas containing half the Empire of Germany. The fourth Vol. containing the 17 rovinces. And the third Vol. containing the other half of the Empire of Germany. now in the Press. sive Pandectae Canonum S. S. Aposto∣lorum & Conciliorum ab Ecclesia Graeca recep∣torum, nec non canonicarum S. S. Patrum Episto∣larum una cum Sholijs antiquorum singulis an∣nexis, & Scriptis alijs huc spectantibus, quorum plurima e Bibliothecae Bodleianae, aliarumque MSS. codicibus nunc primum edita, reliqua cum iisdem MSS. summa fide & diligentia collata. Totum opus in duos Tomos divisum, Gul. Beveregius Ec∣clesiae
Angl. Presbyter recensuit, Prolegomenis munivit, & Annot. auxit. Catalogus impressorum Librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Acad. Oxon. Historia Universitatis Oxoniensis duobus volu∣minibus comprehensa. Autore Antonio a Wood. Oxonia illustrata, sive omnium celeberrimae istius Univesitatis Collegiorum, Aularum &c. Sce∣nographia per Dav. Loggan. Plantarum Umbelliferarum distributio nova per tabulas cognationis & affinitatis, ex libro naturae observata & detecta, Aut. Rob. Morrison, Prof. Bo∣tanico: Plantarum Historiae Universalis Oxoniensis pars 2d. seu Herbarum distributio nova, per tabulas cognationis & affinitatis ex libro naturae observata & detecta. Autore Rob. Morrison medico & Pro∣fessore Botanico Regio 1680. The History of Lapland English. Marmora Oxoniensia, ex Arundelianis, Selde∣nian is, aliisque conflata, &c. cum notis Lydiati & aliorum. per Humph. Prideaux. The Natural History of Oxford-Shire, being an Essay towards the Natural History of England. By R. Plot, L. L. D. Theatri Oxoniensis Encaenia, sive Comitia Phi∣lologica, Jul. 6. Anno 1677. Celebrata. Dr. Pocock's Commentary on Micha and Malachi. Iamblichus Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptio∣rum Graec. Lat. Interprete T. Gale.
Regis Aelfredi vita, cum Notis. A short view of the late troubles in England from the year 1637 to 1660 by Sir William Dugdale Kt. Garter King of Arms (this book was presented the Queens Majesty by the Uni∣versity of Cambridge when they entertained the King and Queen in the year 1681). D. Cypriani opera Notis illustrata. In the Press. Gualteri Charletoni M. D. Onomasticon Zoicon, Editio secunda, priori longe auctior. Josephus Gr. Lat. cum Notis. In the Press. Irenaej opera. Gr. Lat. Provinciales constitutiones Angliae, per Guil. Lyndwood. Hugonis Grotij opera omnia Theologica in∣tres Tomos divisa. Lond. 1679. Labbaei Glossaria Latino-Graeca & Graeco-La∣tina. Paris 1679. Huetii (Pet. Dan) demonstratio Evangelica ad serenis. Delphinum Paris 1679. Episcopij (Simonis) Opera Theologica cum horis Hebraicis & Talmudicis in Acta Apostolo∣rum. 1678. Charras Pharmacopoea, Galenical & Chymical. Websters display of Witchcraft, wherein is af∣firm'd that there are many sorts of deceivers and imposters. 1677. The History of the Council of Ttent written by Patre Paolo, translated into English, to which is added his Life.
The Journal of St. Amour Dr. of Sorbonne, concerning the five famous propositions. Johan. Scotus de Divisione Naturae. De Ratione ac Jure finiendi controversias Ec∣clesiae Disputatio Authore Herb. Thorndike. Theses Theologicae variis Temporibus in Acade∣mia Sedanensi editae, & ad disputandum propositae. Authore Ludovico Le Blanc verbi Divini Ministro & Theologiae professore. In quibus exponitur sen∣tentia Doctorum Ecclesiae Romanae, & Protestan∣tium. 1675. Price 20 s. Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675. A Table of ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell D. D. sticht, 1 s. 6 d. Tuba Stentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trum∣pet; being an instrument of excellent use both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1 s. of the Instrument 2 l. 5 s. Catalogus Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Edirorum. The Commentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, Containing his Wars in Gallia, and the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey, with the Notes of Cle∣ment Edmonds. 1677. 16 s. Taverneirs travels into Persia, the East Indies, Tounquin &c. Vol. 2. IN QUARTO. SEveral English Bibles with the Liturgy, Apo∣crypha, singing Psalms and Chronology.
Icones & Descriptiones rariorum Plantarum Si∣ciliae, Melitae, Galliae & Italiae. Autore Paulo Boccone. Common Prayer-Books. Theophilus and Philodoxus, 4 controversial di∣alogues, Of Prayer in an unkown tongue. The half Communion. The worshipping of Images. The Invocation of Saints. by Gilb. Cole D. D. The Divine Authority of Scripture, a Sermon by Dr. Allestree. The Character of the last days, a Sermon by Dr. Johu Fell Lord Bishop of Oxford. Tractatus Maimonidis de donis Pauperum, cum versione latina & Notis Hum. Prideaux Art. mag. ex Aed. Chr. Historia Jacobitarum in Aegypto, Lybia, Nu∣bia, Aethiopia tota, & parte Cypri insulae habi∣tantium, per Jos. Abudacnum. A view and survey of the dangerous errors to Church and State in Mr. Hobbs his Book entituled Leviathan, by Edward E. of Clarendon. Votum pro pace Christiana Autore An. Sall. D. D. Benefits of our Saviour to Mankind. A Sermon before the House of Peers Dec. 22d, 1680. by John Lord Bishop of Oxford. A discourse of Convex Glasses. Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum. Pharmaceutice Rationalis vol. 2. Claudii Ptolomaei Harmonica Gr. Lat. ex re∣censione & cum Notis Joh. Wallis S. T. D. Geom: Prof.
Archimedis Opera, Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum Libri IIII. Theodosii Sphaerica, Methodo nova Il∣lustrata & succincte demonstrata. per Isaac. Barrow. Lectiones Geometricae per Isaac. Barrow. Apologia pro Ecclesiae patribus adversus Johan∣nem Dalleum de usu patrum Auth. Math. Scrivener. Beveregii Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Primitivae vindicatae. Hereboordi (Adriani) Melitemata Philosophica Amsterdam 1680. Vita selectorum aliquot virorum, qui Doctrina Dignitate aut Pietate inclaruere London 1681. History of Tyths, by John Selden London 1618. Johannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theologica 1677 16 s. Dr. Pell's introduction to Algebra 7 s. Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive me∣thodus construendi Logarithmos, 1668 & Jac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668 2 s. Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg. Bat. 1624 5 s. Dr. Thomas Jacomb, on the eighth Chapter of the Romans 8 s. Dr. Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22 s. Hieronymi Mercurialis de: Arte Gymnastica Libri sex cum figuris, 1672. J. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica & Christiana, 16 s. Huic Editioni praeter praefixam Auctoris vitam, accedit Cathechesis Ecclesiarum Polonicarum, a Jo. Crellio, Jona Schlethtingio, M. Kuaro, & A Wissowatio recognita atque emendata, Casmop. 1681.
Joan. Binchii Mellificium Theologicum, 16 s. Holy Fast of Lent defended, 1667 6 d. A Looking-Glass for all new converts, 1667 1 s. There is newly published two Recantation-Ser∣mons, (Preached at the French Church in the Sa∣voy) by two converted Romanists, Mr. De la Motte, late Preacher of the Order of the Car∣melites, and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licenciate in Di∣vinity? wherein the corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and confuted. Both Printed in French and English. A Modest Survey of the most material things in a discourse, called the Naked Truth, 6 d. Marshal Turene's Funeral Sermon 1677. Jer. Horrocii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673. An Historical Vindication of the Church of England in point of Schism, by Sir Rob. Twisden. Dr. Tillotson's Sermon before the King, April 18 1675. Dr. Wilkins's two Sermons before the King, March 7 1669 and Feb. 7 1670. Dr. Jo. Tillotson's Rule of Faith, 1676. Coopers Hill, Latine redditum ad Nobilissimum Dominum Gulielmum Dominum Cavendish, Hono∣ratissimi Domini Gulielmi Comitis Devonioe Fili∣um unicum St. Cyprian of the Unity of the Church.
IN OCTAVO. THO. Lydiati Canones Chronologici, nec non series summorum Magistratuum & Trium∣phorum Romanorum. Saul and Samuel at Endor, or the new ways of salvation and Service, which usually tempt Men to Rome, and detain them there, truly represented and refuted by Dan. Brevint D. D. with the vin∣dication of his Missale Rom. the second Impression. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the Epi∣stles of St. Paul to the Romans, Corinthians and Hebrews. The Ladies Calling. The Government of the Tongue. The Art of contentment. The Lively Oracles given to us, Or the Chri∣stians Birth-right and duty in the custody and use of the Holy Scripture: these four by the Author of the whole duty of Man. Zenophon Cyrop. Graec. A short Dissertation concernining Free-Schools, being an Essay towards a History of the Free-Schools of England, by Christopher Wase of St. Mary Hall Oxon. Superiour Beadle of the Civil Law in the same University. Epicteti Enchiridion, Cebetis Tabulae, Theo∣phrasti Caract. Gr. L. cum Notis 1680. Parecbolae, sive excerpta e corpore statuto∣rum
Univ. Oxon. &c. M. Fabii Quintiliani Declamationes undevi∣ginti, cum ejusdem (utnonnullis visum) dialogo de causis corruptae Eloquentiae, quae omnia notis illustrantur. Nemesii Philosophi & Episcopi de natura homi∣nis lib. unus, denuo recognitus & manuscriptorum collatione in integrum restitutus, annotationibus∣que insuper illustratus, Graec. Lat. West Barbary, or a short narrative of the re∣volutions of the Kingdom of Fez and Morocco, with an account of the present customs, sacred, civil, and domestic, by L. Addison. Homeri ilias, cum Scholiis Didymi Gr. Theocritus cum Scholiis Graecis. Aratus cum Scholiis Gr. Suetonius Tranquillus, cum Notis. De Ecclesiae Graecae statu hodierno Epist. per Tho. Smith S. S. Th. Bac. Gul. Oughtredi opuscula hactenus inedita. Caii Plinii Caecilii Secundi Epistolae & Oratio Panegyrica, cum Notis illustratae. Rhetores selecti, Gr, Lat, Demetrius Philereus, de Elocutione; Tiberius Rhetor, de Schematibus Demosthenis; Anonymus Sophista, de Rhetorica; Severi Alexandrini Ethiopoeiae. Demetrium emen∣davit, reliquos e MSS. edidit & Latine vertit; omnes Notis illustravit Tho. Gale, Sc. Co. M. . Georgii Diaconi
Primarii Judicis, atque Scriniorum custodis Pachy∣merii, Epitome Logices Aristotelis. Reflections upon the Council of Trent, By H. C. de Luzancy, M. A. Ch. Ch. and Deacon of the Church of England. Psalterium Gr. Juxta M. S. Alexand. cum vers. Vulg. per Dr. Tho. Gale. Herodiani Hist. Gr. La. cum Notis. Zozomi Historia Gr. La. Catholica Romanus Pacificus. per Jo. Barnes. Common Prayer. Lucii Caecilii Firmiani Lactantii Liber ad Do∣natum Confessorum de mortibus persecutorum cum Notis Steph. Baluzii. Oxon. 1681. A discourse of the Original of Arms with a Catalogue of all the Nobility, Bps. and Baronets of England by Sir William Dugdale Kt. Garter King of Arms. To which is added a Catalogue of all the Nobility and Bishops of Scotland and Ireland according to their precedency. Bibles with References and Chronology. Dr. Isaac Vossius de Poematum Cantu. De Oraculis Sibyllinis. Dr. Mayow Tractatus quinque de Spiritu nitro∣aereo &c. Lactantius cum Notis now in the Press. The Certainty of Christian faith by Dr. Whitby. Didascalocophus or the deaf and dumb Mans tutor. Historiae Poeticae scriptores antiqui, Apollodorus,
&c. Grae. La. cum notis & Indicibus necessariis. Sophocles Gr. La. cum Notis. Gradus ad Parnassum. A Scriptural Catechism, according to the me∣thod observed by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, 1676. Howe, of delighting in God, and of the Blessed∣ness of the Righ teous, Two Vol. Art of speaking, by M. du Port-Royal. 1676. A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion, and withal to prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Cartes on this subject he hath mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s. The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a description of the Countrey, in two Volumes, 7 s. The History of the Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tartars, 1671. 4 s. Mystery of Iniquity unvailed in a Discourse, wherein is held forth the opposition of the Do∣ctrine, Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian Faith, by Gilbert Burnet 1 s. Theod. Turqueti, De Mayerne, De Arthritide, Accesserunt ejusdem consilia aliquot Medicinalia, 1 s. A new way of curing the Gout, and Observati∣ons and Practices relating to Women in travel, 3 s. Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars ter∣tia, sive Motus Compositi. Ubi G. Monchii e Scotia
progressus, nec non Aug. Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus; ejusdem{que} Regiae Majest. per Decenniun gesta fideliter enarrantur, 1676. Gualteri Needham Disputatio Anatomica de For∣mato Foetu. 1677, 3 s. 6 d. Buxtorfius's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1 s. 6 d. The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2 s. The adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Mer∣chant, taken prisoner by the Turks of Argiers, with a description of that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places thereabouts, 1670. 1 s. 6 d. Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s. A Discourse written to a Learned Fryer, by Mr. Des Fourneillis, shewing that the Systeme of Mr. Des Cartes, and particularly his Opinion con∣cerning Brutes, does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he hath written of both, seems to have been taken out of the first Chapter of Gene∣sis: To which is annexed the Systeme General of the Cartesian Philosophy, 1 s. The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africk, by Roland Frejus of Marseilles, by the French King's Order, 1666, to Muley Arxid King of Taffaletta, &c. with a Letter in Answer to divers questions concerning their Religion, Manners, &c. 1671. 1 s. 6 d. A Genuine Explication of the Visions in the Book of Revelation, by A. B. Peganius. 1671. 2 s.
Prodromus to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within Solids, laying a foun∣dation for the rendring a rational account, both of the Frame and the several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various Productions of the same, By Nich. Steno, 1671 1 s. 3 d. The Poetical Histories, being a compleat Col∣lection of all the Stories necessary for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other ancient Authors, written Originally in French, by the Learned Jesuit P. Galtruchius. Now Englished and Enriched with Observations concerning the Gods worshipped by our Ancestors in this Island, by the Phaenicians and Syrians in Asia; with many useful Notes and occasional Pro∣verbs, gathered out of the best Authors: Unto which are added two Treatises; One of the Curi∣osities of Old Rome, and of the difficult Names relating to the affairs of that City; The other containing the most remarkable Hieroglyphicks of Aegypt. The third Edition, with Additions. By Marius D. Assigny, B. D. 3 s. 6 d. An Essay about the Origine and Virtues of Gems, by the Honourable Robert Boyle. 1 s. 6 d. Idem Latin. twelves, 1 s. A Compleat Treatise of Chyrurgery, contain∣ing Barbetts Chyrurgery. Mindererus of Diseases Incident to Camps and Fleets: with a Chyrur∣gion's Chest of Medicines and Istruments, &c. 6 s. Dr. Lower de corde. Amster. 1671 3 s.
Crowei Elenchi Script. in Scripturam 3 s. 6 d. Eugelenus de Scorbuto. Grotii via ad Pacem. Mr. Boyle of hidden Qualities of the Air a∣gainst Hobs, and of attraction by Suction, 2 s. 6 d. Mr. Boyle of Effluviums of fire and flame, and of the previousness of Glass 3 s. Memoires of Mr. Des-Ecotais formerly stiled in the Church of Rome, The most Venerable Fa∣ther Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher of the Order of the Capucins; or the Motives of his Conversion. In English 2 s. In French 2 s. In French and English 4 s. All Printed 1677. Les Memoires De Madame la Princesse Marie Mancini Colonne G. Connetable du Royaume de Naples 1677. La vie & les Actions Memorables de Lieut. A∣miral Michel de Ruyter, 1677 5 s. A vindication of the Primitive Church and Diocessan Episcopacy, in answer to Mr. Baxters Church history by H. Morice Fellow of Jesus Col. Oxon. A Catechism. Hugo Grotius de Jure Belli ac Pacis cum Notis 1680. IN DUO DECIMO. . Novi testamenti lib. omnes. Accesserunt parallela Scripturae loca,
nec non variantes lectiones ex plus 100 MSS. Cod. & antiquis versionibus collectae. De Secretione animali cogitata, Aut. Gilb. Cole. M. D. H. Grotius de Veritate Relig. Christi. St. Clementis Epist. Gr. Lat. cum Notis. Cornelii Nepotis vitae Excellent. Imper. Collat. 4 MSS. recognitae. Accessit Aristomenis vita, ex Pausania. Ars Rationis, maxima ex parte ad mentem No∣minalium. lib. 3. Guil. Lilii Grammatica Latina, additis subinde observationibus utiliss. ex Despaut. Alvar. Sanct. Sciop. Voss. Busbeo, & quotquo nuper scripsere, Gram. Latinis. The Education of Young Gentlemen, in two parts. The Christian Sacrament and Sacrifice by way of Discourse, Meditation and Prayer, upon the nature, parts and blessings of the Holy Commu∣nion, by Dan. Brevint, D. D. Missale Romanum, or the Depth and Mystery of the Roman Masse. Maximus Tyrius, Gr. Lat. Willisii Pharmac. rationalis. Archimedis Arenarius, & de dimensione circuli, cum Eutocii comment. Gr. Lat. ex versione & recens. Dr. Wallis Prof. Geom. Savil. M. Juniani Justini Historiarum, ex Trogo Pompeio lib. 44 ex Cod. MS. collatione recogniti.
Catholick Religion maintain'd in the Church of England, by A. Sall, D. D. Sallustii Hist. cum Notis. Antoninus. Gr. Lat. Faustini Presbiteri Scriptores Seculi quarti & fidei Orthodoxae adversus Arianos, vindicis acce∣rimi, Opera. 1678. Elegantiae Poeticae. Testamentum Latinum. Senecae Tragediae, cum Notis. Horatius cum Notis Menellii. Bibles large Letter. Testaments several sorts. Common Prayers of several sorts. —Idem in 24, several sorts. A brief explanation of the Church Catechism. Biblia Francois, 18. Voyage d'Italie, de Dalmatie, de Graece & du Levant fait in aux annes, 1675, & 1676. par Jacob Spoon, D. M. Et George Wheeler Gentle∣homme Anglois, 3 Vol. 1678. Abrege de la Philosophiae de Gassendi en VIII Toms, par F. Bernier Lyon, 1678. A Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir of Comforts offered to Believers, in two Discourses, the first on Heb. 6. 17, 18. the second on Rom. 8. 32. by Robert Wyne 1 s. Grotii Sophompaneas. Gronovius in Livium. Primrose Ars Pharmaceutica.
Schook de Pace. Suetonius. Swalve Alcali. Severini Synopsis Chyrurgiae. Terentii Flores. Trelcatii loci Communes. Balduinus de Calceo & Nigronius de Caliga Ve∣terum. Accesserunt ex Q. Sept. Fl. Tertulliani, Cl. Salmasii & Alb. Rubenii Scriptis plurima ejus∣dem Argumenti, 1667. Ottonis Tachenii Hyppocrates Chymicus, 1671. Theodori Kerckringii, D. M. Commentarius in Currum Triumphalem Antimonii Basilii Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671. Jo. Pincieri M. D. Aenigmatum Libri Tres cum solutionibus. 1655. Francisci Redi Experimenta circa res diversas naturales, speciatim illas quae ex Indiis adferuntur, 1675. Aulus Gellius. Besterfeldus Redivivus. Herls Wisdoms Tripos. Wilkins Beauty of Providence. Gramatica Rationis. Bishop Andrews Devotions Gr. Lat. Athenagorae Apologia pro Christianis & de Re∣surréctione Mortuorum Gr. Lat. Lactantius de Mortibus persecutorum & passi∣onibus S. perpetuae & Felicitatis. Several other antient books and MS. preparing for the press.
