E3363 11834546 49753
The Ʋsefulness of Church-Musick. A SERMON Preach'd at CHRIST-CHƲRCH, Novemb. 27. 1696. Upon Occasion of the Anniversary-Meeting OF THE Lovers of Musick, On St. Coecilia's Day. By S. ESTWICK, B. D. and Chaplain of Christ-Church, in Oxford. Published at the Request of the Stewards. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half-Moon in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1696.
TO THE Stewards of St. Coecilia's Feast. The Right Honourable the Lord Dunluce. Sir John Smith, Baronet. John Hill, Esq; Colonel Henry Holt. Colonel Nathan. Blackiston. John Cary, Merchant. Moses Snow, B. M. Nicola. Matteis,Gent. GENTLEMEN, YOƲ desir'd me first to Preach, and then to Print this Sermon: I have Obey'd You in Both; as being willing to do whatever lay in my Power to keep up a
due Esteem of Church-Musick, in an Age that seems hastning on apace to a neglect, if not a disuse of it. If this Discourse may contribute any ways towards so good an end, and withal serve to express the Re∣spect I have for You, I have the double aim I propos'd to my self in Preaching and Publishing it. For I am a true Lover of Musick, espe∣cially when it is imploy'd to so excellent a purpose, as that of composing our Attention, and raising our Affections in Divine Wor∣ship, and a true Honourer of all those who favour and encourage it. After which, I need not tell either You or the World how much I am, Gentlemen, Your Obedient and Humble Servant, S. ESTWICK.
A SERMON Preach'd at Christ-Church, Nov. 27. 1696. upon Occa∣sion of the Anniversary Meeting of the Lovers of Musick, on St. Cecilia's Day. Col. 3. 16. The latter Part, Teaching and Admo∣nishing one another, in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing with Grace in your Hearts to the Lord. THE Design of this great Assembly's meet∣ing together, being to celebrate the Praises of our God with exalted Hearts and Voices, I hope each one has acquitted him∣self in a suitable manner, and duly observ'd the most concerning part of this Exhortation contain'd in the latter branch of these Words. It may be needless to tell you we have all been pleas'd, if not transported, whilst the Skilful Performers with laudable Emulations have en∣deavour'd
to raise and extol God's Goodness, to the utmost pitch our impair'd Faculties will allow of in this imperfect State: By the Frame of our Nature we may perceive our selves fitted and pre∣par'd for the Reception of Harmonious Sounds; as we are fenc'd about with Nerves, we find our selves ready strung, and most of us tun'd for this Heavenly Entertainment: By a kind of Sympa∣thy sometimes we tremble; we are generally pleas'd when a fitting Subject is well painted by the Composer and well breath'd and set off by the several Performers. If any one should be found so hardy, or, as some think, so ill-natur'd as to oppose himself to the General Consent of Mankind, and to deny the Pow'r of Harmony, for his Satisfaction we might have wish'd him here, where he might have had the best sort of Argument for his Con∣viction (viz) the Testimony of his own Sense; and if after this, he had remain'd unaffected with the gentle Insinuations of our softer Strains, and un∣mov'd with the more forcible Impressions of our louder Acclamations, you are all ready to pity the Fate of this Unhappy Temper, and to pronounce him such a sort of an Infidel, that is uncapable, if not unworthy of a farther Conviction.
To say we are pleas'd with Harmonious Sounds, is to say very little in comparison of what our A∣postle has suggested to us, who carries this Mat∣ter much higher, and teaches us the true use and benefit of Divine Musick in the Worship of God. He is chiefly concern'd for that Spiritual Ad∣vantage that may result from this Sensible Plea∣sure; and intimates to every Good Christian, that at the same time he is gratify'd and delighted, he may be better'd and improv'd by it in Holy and Vertuous Living. By Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms, &c. we are assur'd of the fitness of this Divine Exercise, to promote the Spiritual Interests of Faithful People, of its suitableness to help 'em forward, as well as refresh 'em in their Passage to∣wards their Heavenly Canaan; and, in a word, to farther and advance their Spiritual Good and Edi∣fication. How this is done by this Divine Exercise will be more fully made out in this ensuing Discourse; in the mean time it ought not to be forgot, that in a large sense we may be said to be taught and admonish'd by whatever renews, revives, and calls to remembrance former Thoughts, and Idea's; we certainly may be admonish'd of what we knew before, and I think may not im∣properly
be said to be Taught and Instructed by whatever excites and enlarges our Desires of Goodness, by whatever enflames in our Hearts the Love of God and our Neighbour; and whatsoever Instruction serves to confirm our Faith, to enliven our Hope, and quicken our Graces, and to render our Souls more Humble, more Holy, and more like to God than they were before, may in a large Sence be deem'd Teach∣ing; tho' all this while we gain no fresh Sup∣plies of new Idea's, but having an Occasion of∣fer'd us of reviving those old ones that before lay dormant, we are thereby enabled to turn 'em to a better use, and to reduce our Know∣ledge to Practice. This being the Sense of our Apostle's Teach∣ing and Admonishing in this Place, give me your Attention, whilst I lay before you some Considerations, that may serve to enforce the Injunction, and shew the Usefulness of Divine Musick in the Worship of God, and the Ad∣vantages that may be reap'd by it in Particular, by every one that attends to it in due Manner. First, I desire to offer to your Consideration, that this Method our Apostle has made choice of as a help to our Spiritual Improvements, was the old way of Teaching the World, much applauded
by the Wise Ancients, and in their Esteem a very effectual means of inculcating Wisdom, and ma∣king Men more Tractable, by fixing in their Minds the Principles of Natural and Moral Phi∣losophy. As for its Antiquity, Timagenes, as Quintilian observes, allows Musick to be the el∣dest of the Learned Studies: And a greater than him tells us, that about the same time that Tents, Husbandry, and Working in Brass and Iron were found out by their several Authors, Jubal lessen'd their Cares by the addition of Musical Instru∣ments, which being handled down to After-Ages, and serving to cover the Nakedness of Vocal Sounds, were embrac'd and cherish'd by Legisla∣tors and Philosophers, who found the Aptness Musick had to Civilize the ruder part of Mankind, the Advantages it had in gently insinuating My∣sterious Truths. Upon which accounts Poetry and Musick may well be esteem'd the Nurses of Infant Common-wealths, the School-Mistresses of Learning, from whose fruitful Breasts stream'd such a kindly Nou∣rishment, as made Empires swell out to that ex∣tent of Grandure, as to attract the Eyes of their Neighbours to behold and dread their Power. Lycurgus and Numa enacted Laws for the Encou∣ragement of Musick, not thinking themselves se∣cure in their Governments, till by its Charms
they had Temper'd and Smooth'd their unpolish'd Subjects; or at least by this pleasant Vehicle, al∣lur'd 'em to submit to their harsher Constitutions. How much Learning owes to Poetry and Mu∣sick, may appear from this, That the first Seeds of it were scatter'd in Number and Measure, and what the Celebrated Poets sung, and many of the Philosophers taught, gain'd a more easie passage into Mens Minds by the agreeable mixture of well regulated Sounds. Hence it was that the various Motions of the Planets, the Arcanas of Nature, and the Causes of her seeming Irregularties, were first deliver'd in Verse; And Atlas is presum'd by Virgil to frame, and Jopas to sing the lofty Song on that Subject. If the Universe it self was thought to be Com∣pos'd by Harmony, it's the less to be wonder'd, that those Philosophers that embrac'd this Opinion, should act agreeably to it; whilst Pythagoras fram'd his Works as near as he could to this Model, and apply'd himself to Musick, as a means to brighten his Morning, and compose his Evening Thoughts: 'Tis the less remarkable, that Socrates should di∣vert the taedium of his Age, by a late application to Musick; and that Plato and Aristotle should ad∣vance it so high, as that the Speculations of the former could not be throughly understood with∣out it, and that both allow it to be a necessary In∣gredient
to the Education of Youth, and tend∣ing much to the Formation of Vertue and good Manners. In pursuance of these high Encomiums given by the greatest Masters of Learning, and the Ex∣perience of its usefulness, the World became soon acquainted with the happy influences of it, be∣holding with pleasure, how much it serv'd to quiet and calm the unruly Passions of Men, to alleviate the Troubles of Life, to ease its Labours, to abate the Rigours of Adversity, and heighten the Enjoyments of Prosperity: It beheld with Pleasure how much it advanced the Honours of the Military Life, whilst their Heroes were anima∣ted with their Martial Sounds, and in some mea∣sure rewarded too by the grateful acknowledg∣ment of Triumphant Songs. How much also were the Affairs of the Civil Life bettered by it, when, as Plutarch tells us, their Entertainments were season'd with wholesom Admonitions, and their Musicians encourag'd Temperance and Mo∣deration at that very time they stood in need of such faithful and pleasant Monitors. Thus this excellent gift of Heaven, when exer∣cised in its Primitive Purity and Simplicity, tended much to the bettering and improving Mankind; and 'tis the less to be wonder'd, that this common Blessing, that serv'd for so many excellent pur∣poses,
should be enclos'd and appropriated to the Service of God's Worship, and the Uses of Reli∣gion: That Mens Tongues and Voices should be Consecrated to enlarge upon the Noble Themes of God's Power, Wisdom and Goodness; and thereby to make his Praise Glorious, make him Admir'd of all his Saints, and Reverenc'd of all that are round about him. For seeing the Great End of Man's Creation was to set forth the Praises of his Creator, and he alone of all the Creatures of this Sublunary World, was indu'd with Faculties to qualifie him for this Noble Employment; it is but reasonable that he should do his utmost (for that utmost will come far short of it) to extol the Praises of God to the highest pitch he is capable of, to Glorifie his Maker with his Body and Spirit, with his Voice as well as Understanding. A second Consideration that serves to recom∣mend to us our Apostle's Injunction is the Practise of the Jewish Church, as to the use of Vocal and Instrumental Musick; both which kinds were in∣troduc'd in the latter end of David's Reign, when the Ark had rest, and that by the Command of God, (1 Cor. 11. 31▪) 'Tis true Ezra calls this the Ordinance of David King of Israel; and if he ap∣pointed these Usages as a King, and not as a Pro∣phet, we're assured that these Commands were
however confirm'd by other Contemporary Pro∣phets: For thus we read (2 Chron. 29. 25.) the Levites were set in the House of God with Cymbals, with Psalteries, and with Harps, according to the Commandment of David, and of Gad the King's Seer, and of Nathan the Prophet; for so was the Command of God by his Prophets. From which Passage it is evident, that these In∣stitutions proceeded from God, and that this and no other is the Critical Season, from whence they are to bear Date. Now this was long after the delivery of Moses's Law and the Sealing up of the Cere∣monial Canon; and consequently cannot be rec∣kon'd a part of that, nor indeed any violation of that Law. It cannot be reckon'd a part of it, because that Law mentions nothing belonging to Vo∣cal or Instrumental Musick in the Worship of God. We find indeed some Commands relating to the Priests Trumpets, but these were appointed for Civil Uses, viz the Calling of Assemblies, the Removal of their Camps, the Proclaiming War, and giving notice of their Festivals, as we find by the 10th of Numbers.
These Usages were no Violation of that Law, because the appointment of Vocal and Instrumen∣tal Musick was no essential Change and Alteration of it. It was only an additional Ornament, intended to help and raise Devotion, and for its Natural fitness and congruity to that End Commanded, and so Receiv'd into the House of God. A third Consideration that enforces our Apo∣stle's Exhortation and Recommends the Use of Di∣vine Musick in the Worship of God, is the Exer∣cise of it in the Christian Church, from the first Foundations of it. We find in a particular manner our B. Lord's ap∣proving it by singing a Hymn. In like manner Paul and Silas followed this Pattern, and all faith∣ful People throughout all Ages of the Church imi∣tated their Practice herein. 'Tis true the first Age of the Christian Church was distinguish'd from the following upon this as well as other accounts; here therefore I shall briefly inform you, what the learned Commentators un∣derstand by the several Terms▪ mentioned by the Apostles: and first they tell us, that the Psalm is such a Divine Song, that is either design'd, or actually sung to some Musical Instrument, and this is Mr. Calvin's Sense of this word in his Comment upon
this Text; The Hymn is made to Celebrate the Praises of God, and as such does not extend so far as the Psalm, because the Matter of the Psalm may take in Petition of Blessings and Confession of Sins, and Deprecation of Evil, as is usual in many of the Psalms of David. As for the third sort, viz. Spiritual Songs, we are to understand by them such Songs, as were in∣dited by the Holy Ghost in the Praise of God the Father, and our Redeemer, and utter'd by Virtue of a peculiar Gift, which was Communicated to some Believers, and frequently found in the Apo∣stolical Age. Some indeed are of Opinion that these Spiritual Songs are to be understood in opposition to those Lewd Songs us'd amongst Heathens, and this may in some sense be allow'd too, yet not so as to ex∣clude the former, and that for this reason, viz. be∣cause amongst other miraculous Gifts vouchsafed to the Church of God, we are assured that indit∣ing Spiritual Songs by the immediate impulse of the Spirit which is sometimes call d Prophesying, was as remarkably known, as Praying by the Spirit. And this our Apostle assures us of in that noted Passage, 1 Cor. 14. V. 15. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the Un∣derstanding also; the Scope and Design of which
place is to make each particular Gift of Praying and Singing useful to their Auditors; that is, those that had either of the two, were not either to pray or sing in unknown Tongues, but those that their Hearers were acquainted with. We have indeed but few of these Spiritual Songs trans∣mitted to our Hands; but from these excellent Patterns we may take our estimate of the rest, and give a pretty good guess at the great Advan∣tages the Church of God received by 'em: For illiterate Men becoming suddenly qualified to extol the Mercies of God for the great Work of our Redemption, we cannot but presume that the matter and manner of this Exercise, was worthy of its Author; that the Harmony was suitable to the Subject: and because it was a Gift of the Spi∣rit, it is but reasonable to believe, that these sort of inspir'd Persons Commenc'd good Poets and good Musicians, and were thus doubly qualify'd to set forth the Praises of our God. When we consider again that Psalms and Hymns are joyn'd with Spiritual Songs, this evidently shews that the use of these was not superseded by the extra∣ordinary assistance then given, and thô it pleas'd God to raise up Men to magnifie his Name, and to enlarge upon the new Themes of Man's Re∣demption and Reconciliation, yet not with that
design to make void the old Subjects that were accommodated to all Estates and Conditions of Life, and to be of perpetual use to the Church of God. These by the Goodness of God are con∣tinued to his Church; and all that I shall ob∣serve at present is, that as we have the greatest Reason, so we ought to receive the same with grateful acknowledgments, and express our Gra∣titude by making what Improvements we can by these standing Helps of Piety and Devo∣tion. And so I proceed to shew more particularly the usefulness of Divine Mnsick in the Worship of God; as how, and after what sort, it tends to our Spiritual Improvement, and what advantages may be reap'd by every good Christian that at∣tends to it in a due manner. The usefulness of it will in some Measure ap∣pear, by reflecting on the Infirmities incident to our corrupted Nature, For when we make our approaches to the House of God, by sad experi∣ence we too often find our selves disturb'd, either by the Cares or the Pleasures of this Life. The Man of Business too frequently brings a load of it upon his Shoulders, not easie to be dis∣charg'd; the Man of Pleasure too often ruminates on, and acts over again the Scenes of his past
Follies, or is projecting new ones. The Trades∣man is too apt to make the Temple of God a House of Merchandice. The Scholar, to make it his Study to refine and digest his Notions in. In short, we are all too subject to be distracted in our Addresses to the Throne of Mercy, too liable to bring a Sacrifice without a Heart, and to be present in Body, and at a distance in Spirit. This being too often our unhappy Condition, what better Remedy can be thought of for the Cure of these Evils, than agreeable Harmony, which has a great Force and Efficacy to hush and quiet the Cares and Business of Life, to quell and lay a∣sleep the thoughts of our Innocent Diversions or forbidden Pleasures, and by bringing the Mind into a calm even frame and temper, dispose it to attend to the concerning Matters on which our Salvation depends. By the help of these delightful Sounds, we are fitted and prepar'd to offer up our Prayers in a better manner, and to receive more eagerly the salutary Admonitions of Holy Scripture either Read or Explain'd in the Pulpit. When we find our Devotion and Attention begins to pall by the length of some of our Offices, we have from these fresh Recruits provided us to renew and invigorate our drooping Spirits. In a word, our manifold
Infirmities do much want such a kind of relief, first to bring us into due Temper, and then to quicken us when we find our selves Fainting un∣der their Pressures. Secondly, The usefulness of Divine Musick in the Worship of God, will farther appear from the Nature of this Exercise, together with the subject Matter about which it is conver∣sant. This Exercise, when skilfully manag'd, has a native Puissance and admirable Facility to set off the Matter about which it is Conversant, and make it appear to the best Advantages, so as to render that which in it self is lovely, more ami∣able, and more delightful. There are Sounds proper for every Passion, such as can damp you, when your Mirth and Joy begins to be rampant and excessive, such as can raise you when your Spirits are languishing, and either the needless Troubles, or necessary Cares of Life begin to overset you. Your Hopes shall be enlarg'd, and by an over-ruling Power of Harmony, ye shall be willingly forc'd to part with your unplea∣sing Thoughts, and to enjoy a Calm at least, if not an Extasie of Rapture when the Poet and Musician have severally discharg'd themselves,
according to their different Tasks and Imploy∣ments. Ev'n the mean empty Trifles of this Life, when cloath'd and adorn'd in proper Words, and harmoniously express'd, are made too lovely and too desirable. Vice its self, which one would think needs Art and all other Imbellishments to ingratiate it self, owes too much of its Empire to the impure Idea's of lascivious Poets, and the Performances of wan∣ton Musicians; by the help of which Varnish, the Mind becomes enamour'd with the most odi∣ous and deform'd Objects, and those excellent Faculties that were given us to raise our Love and Esteem, and to fix our Mind upon Vertue and our sovereign Good, are too often debas'd, and made to serve in the meanest Drudgeries, even the pro∣pagating Sensuality and Uncleanness. If Vice it self is oblig'd to call in for those Succours to make her wrinkl'd gastly Face look Smooth and Beautiful, how amiable must Vertue appear, which in its self is lovely, when adorn'd with those Imbellishments? When the Lineaments of her Picture are drawn by the skilful Hand of a Chast Poet, and colour'd by a good Musician? For to come now to the subject Matter of our Praises and Thanksgivings, with what compla∣cency
and delight, ought we to receive those imitable Patterns of Devotion; that display the Scenes of God's Love, and our thankful acknow∣ledgements for his transcendent Goodness and Mer∣cy to the Children of Men. And that more especially when we sing the Songs of Angels or Inspir'd Men; or those Holy Raptures of Good Men, wherein God's Power, Wisdom and Goodness are set forth by the Works of Creation and Redemption. When in particular we adore his excellent Ma∣jesty in our Te Deums, make his Praise glorious for the Works of Creation in our Benêdicite. When we Joy and Triumph in our Faith by singing the Nicene Creed, and at the same time that we con∣fess our Faith, shew that we are pleas'd with it: When in the rest of our Psalms and well chosen Hymns, we ascribe the Honour due unto his Name, and thus offer him the best Sacrifice in the best manner. If the bare Matter of our Praises, when atten∣tively read, are so very apt to raise our Affections, and fill our Hearts with Joy, how much is that Joy encreas'd, when melodious Sounds, agree∣able to the Matter treated of, give each Word their due force and emphasis, especially when the Composer has an Eye upon the Sense, lays wait
upon what is most material, does not clog his Parts with needless Repetitions, but orders his business so, that the Hearer shall be little inter∣rupted, but shall follow him with Ease and Pleasure, whilst he raises your Idea's by a just representation of the Subject that lies before him. If his Matter is Great and Majestick, his Har∣mony rises proportionably with it; if it is more Grave and Solemn he lengthens his Measure, and gives you time to pause upon it: If it is more Chearful and Gay, you'll the more easily pardon him, if he keeps pace with it in a quick measure: If sometimes he repeats the more emphatical words of our Psalms and Hymns, you'll excuse him, because the Holy Pen-men have done the same before him; and where they have not done it, he does not want an excuse, if, by the variety of the Descant he gives you a fresh occasion to circumstantiate the Praises of God, and to dwell upon 'em with greater Complacency. There are some Expressions that are hardly parted with, and more especially deferve to be in∣sisted on. The Consideration of God's Mercy ought to create an Holy emulation among the Performers, and when the Composer has well acquitted him∣self,
each of 'em seems to be desirous to raise it to the highest Perfection. The last follows the Steps of the former, and that with a design to improve and raise, as well as to make the Harmony more compleat; and, to conclude, when the Composer and Performers have exactly done their Parts, how much must our Hearts be lifted up? how much have they now been lifted up with these Heavenly Ac∣clamations? How much must our Joys be en∣larg'd? how much have they been enlarg'd, whilst we have all joyn'd together either in Heart or Voice, to praise and magnifie our Glo∣rious God, and tell out His Works with Glad∣ness? From what I have hitherto said, give me leave to make a few short Inferences, and so I shall conclude. Seeing what I have hitherto laid down re∣lates chiefly to the external part of our Duty, and has a regard to the Modes and Circum∣stances of performing it. This gives us a good account of the Nature of those Constitutions that belong to these; and also suggests to us, that we ought to mind more the Substance of what
is perform'd in the House of God, than the man∣ner of its performance. This is very requisite in every Duty, and more especially in our Praises and Thanksgi∣vings, and if we want that inward frame of Spirit, and that Attention that is the Life and Soul of 'em, we are only pleasing our selves: And if so, it is easie to determine what sort of Worship this it to be accounted. Our Apostle requires the Melody of Heart, and that we should sing with Grace unto the Lord; we ought therefore to attend to what is doing, that we may not incurt the Hypocrites Doom, who draw near to God with their Lips, when their Heart is far from him. Secondly, If it be true that Divine Musick in Gods Worship may contribute to our Spiritual Improvement; This gives us just occasion to blame the Practice of the Church of Rome, which has fram'd and contriv'd her Praises more to the Honour of Men than of God; and not only so; but she has lock'd up the few sound Pieces of De∣votion remaining in their Breviary, in a Language not understood by the generality of their People.
Possibly they may please the Ears of the Peo∣ple, more than we do ours, but their Hearts can never be affected, and if so, they are doing but one half of their Duty; they're doing nothing that concerns the more substantial part of God's Worship, who being a Spirit, is to be Worship'd in Spirit and Truth. Thirdly, If the Use and Practice of Church-Mu∣sick is of such long standing in the House of God, and Voices and Instruments were appointed by God himself, to promote the Edification of his People, this shews us the unjust Exceptions the Dissenters takes against our Way of Worship, making it to be Popish and Superstitious, and what not; not considering in the mean time, that those excellent Offices of Praise, I mean our Hymns were practiced long before Popery was in being; and as to the manner of adorning 'em with good Musick; this I presume is no fault, however I could wish for the good of their Souls, that they would come to our Churches, and try whether it is a fault or not; and then it might be hop'd we might keep them there, at least, give 'em no just cause to forsake our Assemblies.
Fourthly, And to conclude, seeing these usages of our Church have a great tendency to farther our Spiritual Improvement, this shews what great reason we have to stick firm to the Practices of our Church, and to adhere to the Model of our first Reformers, who have discover'd their Wisdom and Piety in nothing more, than in the happy Choice of those Offices that were design'd to set forth the Praises of God. And because our frail state is such, that we can never hope in this Life, to do it so perfectly as we ought, let our Constitutions be never so compleat; However, let us accustom our selves to this Divine Work here to the utmost extent of our Faculties, that we may with the Blessed Saints and Angels Praise God in the Life to come, and sing Hallelujahs to the Honour of his Great Majesty, who liveth and reigneth Three Persons and One God, both now and for evermore, Amen. FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half-Moon in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MOnsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, con∣taining Reflections useful and necessary for the right understanding and judging of the Excellencies of Homer and Virgil. Done into English from the French. Together with some Reflections upon Prince Arthur. By W. Jones. To which are added, an Essay upon Satyr. By Monsieur D' Acier. And a Treatise upon Pastoral Poetry. By Monsieur Fontanelle. 80. A Comparison between Pindar and Horace. Written in French by Mr. Blondel, Master to the Dauphin. English∣ed by Sir Edward Sherburn. 80. The Art of Speaking. Written in French by Messeiurs Du Port-Royal, in pursuance of a former Treatise, Entitled, The Art of Thinking. Made English. Remarks on the late Writings of the English Socinians. By Mr. Lurancy. 80. The Lives of all the Princes of Orange; from William the Great, Founder of the Common-wealth of the Ʋni∣ted Provinces. To which is added, The Life of His pre∣sent Majesty, King William III. from His Birth, to His Landing in England. By Mr. Tho. Brown. Together with
all the Princes Heads, taken from Original Draughts. By Mr. Robert White. 80. Ten Sermons Preach'd upon several Publick Occasions. By R. Meggot, D. D. and late Dean of Winchester. 80. The Foolish Abuse, and Wise Use of Riches. A Ser∣mon Preach'd May the 1st. 1695. By W. Talbot, D. D. Dean of Worcester. Mr. Blackburn's Sermon of Anger. Preach'd before the Queen. Mr. Adams's Sermon, before the Lords Justices, at Whitehall, upon the Thanksgiving for the Taking of Namur. —His Sermon before the Honourable House of Commons, at St. Margaret's, Westminster, Nov. 5. 1696.
