F1105 12497206 62551
Colonell Fitz-Waters HIS PETITION To the Honourable House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT: Desireth Auxiliary Forces for the assistance of our poore Brethren in IRELAND. Who being there Resident, was both a Partaker, and an eye∣witnesse of their Miseries. Whereunto is added the lamentable estate they are like to fall into, without some sudden supply of men for their defence against the Rebells. IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed. 1642.
Colonell Fitz-Waters HIS PETITION TO THE Honourable House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT. Right Honourable, THere are two manifest instigations which importune the sequell of my words. First, the equity of your pro∣ceedings hitherto, giving me bould∣nesse and courage. Secondly the ground and principall motives insti∣gating me to this my proposition and request. For I behold in all your intendments a singularity of proceedings grounded upon discretion and good∣nesse, your consultations being steered and ballanced as well by charity and compassionate lenity towards the reflecting sorrowes of others miseries, as extre∣mity
of Justice towards delinquents. And my wishes are and shall be for the continuance of this wisdom, which redounds to the glory of God and unexpres∣sible joy of the Subject. But not to digresse too farre from the matter I intended to speake of, hope∣ing that your this dayes resolution concerning my intended motion will prove as happy as I conceive: the proposition which now moves me to speake is seasonable and necessary. The order of your noble favour and gratious aspect to such as have been for∣merly petitioners unto you, together with the im∣portunity of the subject, hath given me so much confidence in your Honours as to solicite an exten∣tion of the last and late mentioned petition for the poore protestants in Ireland who are persecuted, massacred, and miserably distressed by the Rebells there, whose malice extends not onely to the take∣ing of any one particular towne or county, nor content to dispossesse the poore inhabitant prote∣stants taken by them, but pursuing them with un∣heard of Severity, to the imbrewing their murde∣rous, and most wicked hands in their blood, endea∣vouring by all meanes to embesill his Majesties Regall authority by using their chiefest cruelty to his Majesties most true and loyall Subjects. My desire and humble petition to your honours there∣fore is, that there may be some speedy and sudden course taken for the expediting and dispatching of some more auxiliary forces towards the assistance of our aforesaid brethren. Your honours cannot
upon sage and mature consideration but conceive the conveniency, necessity and pi∣tifull extremity they are, and will dayly be more and more plunged into without it. As for my part, I that have formerly engaged my selfe for my King and countreys good, am now ready, nay more willing then ever, to adventure both life, estate, liberty, and what∣soever else I may tearme mine, for the good of the Kingdome and advancing of his Ma∣jesties honor against any forrain or civill ene∣my, under the pleasing shade of whose Crown we have ever gathered the fruits of Justice, and upon whose happinesse the welfare of the whole Common-wealth principally depends, our hopes principally consisting in his royall pleasure, and you who are his graund Coun∣sell to determine of things for the benefit of the Common-wealth and advancing of his honours. This of Irelands derogating and re∣belling against his Majestie, persecuting his Subjects, it must needs be a poynt of great in∣dignity and dishonour to our Realme of Eng∣land, who may well be taxed with cowardise, in that we are so tardie, slow and disrespect∣full of our poore distressed brethren; so pa∣tient and favourable, as not to assist and re∣venge their wrongs ere they had come to so high a head; and so forgetfull, as to endanger the losse of His Majesties Prerogative, and
our owne credit by their unrepelled insurre∣ction, who now exalt themselves through their strength, and give glory to their arme of flesh, but I hope that I am really and veri∣ly perswaded that their joy will be soon ex∣tinct, and their sacrilegious pleasures will prove but momentany, and of no continu∣ance. It is in your pleasures to crown my ex∣pectation with a joyfull Reply to this my in∣digent though indulgent Petition. It is you that onely can, and I hope will stand their friend in this their sorrowfull and deplorable extremity. Yea, upon you are their eyes fixt, their hearts grounded, and on your mature and sage consideration their principall, yea onely hopes depend, who (both I and they) with such Forces as your Honours shall be pleased to grant as Auxiliaries, shall be ready to venter life and limbe for regaining of our lost honour, and the maintenance of true Re∣ligion and Vertue. FINIS.
