F1472 16396632 105351
THE SPEECH OF SR Richard Ford Knight, and Alderman of London: MADE AT GUILD-HALL TO THE Liveries of the several COMPANIES of that CITY, on Michaelmass day, 1670. Upon their Election of Him to be LORD MAYOR of the same CITY for the Year ensuing. Taken in Short-Hand Writing by a Person then present. LONDON, Printed for N. B. 1670.
THE SPEECH OF Sir RICHARD FORD Knight, and Alderman of LONDON: Made at Guildhall to the Liveries of the several Companies, &c. GENTLEMEN, IF I should tell you, that this Election of me to this great Office was to me very much unexpected, I should tell you nothing but a very great Truth, and (if you believe that) then you
will easily apprehend, that the Work of this day hath put me to a great sur∣prize; therefore you cannot reason∣ably expect that I should entertain you, either with a long, or well con∣cocted discourse; I know according to custom (and custom prescribed by book) I am (to do that which I own to be my Duty too, that is) to give you thanks, which I do with all my heart, and that to every individual person; and first to those that have had the charity for me, as to think me in some degree capable for the ma∣nage of this great Trust; and for those that had the charity to have prevented me from an Office of so great burthen, they shall not go away without a share of my thanks, I do also thank them; and I shall be very
heartily glad, that this little beginning of Union of you in my Thanks, may be the introduction to a perfect recon∣ciliation of all those unhappy diffe∣rences which have of late so much di∣stracted both the Councils and Acti∣ons among all the degrees of Citizens. You have been pleased to call me to an Office, the burthen of which I always apprehended (even in the most peaceable Times, and greatest Union of the Hearts of the Citizens) did re∣quire a person of the greatest abilities that ever this City bred, but I trem∣ble to think what an insupportable Burthen (and how impossible) it will be for you and me to render our Du∣ties either to God, the King, or this great City, unless it please God to make up those breaches and animosi∣ties,
which Gods just judgments (for our sins) have lately laid upon us; I do readily submit to the Call of God by you, and will endevour by my Councils and Actings, to leave you at the latter end of my Year, in a more perfect Knot of Unity. I am more conscious to my self of my own weakness, than to be an Un∣dertaker; and I would not put my self under a promise, of which I have not a very near prospect of abilities to perform; and therefore I shall not promise you much of my self, only thus much I do, in the presence of God, engage my self, That in the Ex∣ecution of this Office, I shall endevour so to comport my self, as that I may prove an Instrument of Peace amongst all the Citizens of London, as far as I
can; and I shall neither sharpen the edge of the Sword (when it comes to my hand) to chastise any man beyond the intention of the Law, for any dis∣respect that I may have for his per∣son, or his Principles; nor blunt the edge of it, for fear or favour of any of His Majesties Subjects; and by the Grace of God (as far as he shall enable me) I shall in all things ende∣vour, to perform my Duty to God, the King, and this City, and in that, give you a real Thanks for the honour of this day. FINIS.
