f556 99827521 31941
The Father's wholsome Admonition: OR, A Lumping Pennyworth of Good Counsel for Bad Husbands. To the Tune of Grim King of the Ghosts. Licensed according to Order. My Son if you reckon to Wed, and take your self to a kind Wife, Then then, let it never be said, but that you'll reform your old Life: There's many good pounds you have spent, the which you had reason to prize, But labour in time to repent, 'tis good to be merry and wise. Be sure keep a penny in store. 'twill help you when Friends they may fail; For should you spend all, and grow poor, your Case you'll have cause to bewail: In Troubles you'll strangely be hurl'd, the which will your Senses surprize: But he that will thrive in this World must learn to be merry and wise. Perchance you may meet with a Friend, which doth to your Dealings belong, If with him a Tester you spend, this can do you no great wrong, And then to your Labour again, it being enough to suffice; This care will your Houshold maintain, 'tis good to be merry and wise.
There's many a Woman well bred, has Marry'd a prodigal knave, So that the same day she was Wed 'twere better she had gone to her Grave, her Lands and her Livings all sold, which caus'd Tears to flow from her Eyes, And likewise true friendship grew cold, then 'tis good to be merry and wise Son, if a Rich Wife be thy Lot, be carefull and thrifty I pray, For Means is not so easily got, as it may be squander'd away: Be careful and always contrive those temporal Blessings to prize; For he that is willing to thrive. must learn to be merry and wise. There's some that are absolute poor, as well I can make it appear, Who will in strong Liquor spend more than some that has hundreds a year, And bring their poor Families low, and can't get wherewith to suffice; But that Man would never do so, who learns to be merry and wise. The Work∣man that is a boon Lad, you'll find his Condition is thus, If Trading shou'd chance to grow bad, he scarce has a Groat in his Purse, While he that both get, spend, and save, has always enough to suffice: Then Son if this Blessing you'd have, then learn to be merry and wise. Thus Counsel which to you I give, prize it more dearer than Gold And then you in and save som There's man when Fa My Son but le Great l Printed for P. Booksby, J. Dea
