F72 12125680 54589
Gulielm. Fabricius Hildamus, HIS EXPERIMENTS IN CHYRURGERIE: Concerning Combustions or Burnings, made with Gun powder, Iron shot, Hot-water, Lightning, or any other fiery matter whatsoever. In which is excellent∣ly described the differences, Signs, Prognostication and cures, of all accidents and burning themselves. Very necessary and useful for all Gentlemen, and Soldiers as well of the Trayned Bands, as others; especially upon sudden oc∣casions. Translated out of Latine by Iohn Steer, Chyrurgeon. London, Printed by Barnard Alsop, living in Grubstreet, 1642.
A TABLE CONTAINING The Contents of each severall Chapter in this Booke, CHAP. I. Fol, 3. OF the Definition and cause of Combu∣stions and Burnings. The degree and distinction of Combustions, de∣clared in three particulars, as also from whence the directions curative are to be ta∣ken. Chap. 2. The signs by the which those three Degrees of combustions may be known and distingui∣shed, Chap. 3. The Sign or Prognostication of Combustions, Chap. 4. Of a two-fold Method of curing combustions, chap. 5.
The curations of the first Degree of combu∣stions, chap. 6. The curation of the second Degree of combu∣stions, Chap. 7. The Cure of the third and last Degree of com∣bustions, Chap. 8. Of the Combustions of the Eyes, chap. 9. Of Combustions of the Groynes, Chap. 10. Of Combustions of the Joynts, Chap. 11. Of Pain, and the cure thereof, Chap. 12. Of the imbecillity of the Sight, Chap. 13. Of the deformity of Scarres and their Remedy Chap. 14. Of the retracted Nerves and crooked Juncturs after Combustions, Chap. 15. Of Lightning, and how those that are stricken with it, are to be succoured, chap, 16. The end of the Table.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition and cause of Combustions or Burnings. ALthough Combustions be very well knowne from other effects, yet for the better explai∣ning of the Doctrine, before wee enter any further, we will thus describe it. Combustion is the solution of continuity of Epi∣dermis or the outward skin of the body, sometimes of Cutis or the true skin, and oftentimes of the Mus∣culi, Flesh, Veynes, Arteries, Nerves, &c. marked with the strength of the Fire; Now there follow∣eth after this Combustion vehement paine, inflam∣mation, pustels, &c. and if the Combustion be deep, the body will be foule, and will easily produce a fil∣thy and malignant Vlcer, for as soone as ever the fire or the firy substance hath touched the skin, the radi∣call moysture is presently dryed from the part; here∣by the skin waxeth hard, and is drawn together. The rest of the Humour which remaineth within the skin and the parts adjacent, becommeth very hot, and get∣teth the nature of the Fire: Furthermore, that hard∣nesse of the skin which the parts circumjacent have
drawne together, as also the Ebullution of Humours and solution of Continuity do raise intollerable pain, which draweth unto it many humours from the parts adjacent, which (if the Combustion be but light) doth run together under the upper skin, and hardneth the same, by reason of the strength of the Fire; and not admitting transpiration they are lifted up, and hereby come pustels; but if the Combustion be great, so that the true skin be also hurt, it will be hardned unto an Escarre, then the Humours which are ingendred and whatsoever else is retained and imprisoned under that hard skin will still flow thither by reason of the paine, whereby not onely the heat which they have received of the Fire is increased; but also what blood or Humours sover doth flow from the body and the parts adjacent, do also wax hot and burning, and doe get a certaine sharpe and biting quality: Hereby it commeth to passe, that the Humours doe crode and knaw the place affected, and doe cause a great Vlcer. Furthermore it is to be noted, that as there are ma∣ny things with the which the Fire doth imprint his strength and quality, which as they doe differ in sub∣stance, so one much more vehemently burneth then the other; therfore how much hard or solid the wood or mettle is, so much the more ardent heat is retained therein: Also the heat of Oyle, Fat, waxe, pitch, new wine boyled unto the third part, as hereafter we will declare by an example; and those which doe lightly sticke are much mor hotter then hot water; For ex∣perience teacheth that Lead will be dissolved in hot Oyle, which will never be done in water, although it
be in the height of heat. When Lyme is quenched then it is so heated, that not onely it exulcerateth and burneth the skin and the flesh, but also it most vio∣lently draweth together the skin, nervs, and junctures. But the most vehement and dangerous Fire of all, is Heavenly Fire, or Lightning, for it containeth super∣naturall Faculties, as hereafser in order shall be de∣clared. CHAP. II. The Degree and distribution of Combustions declared in three particulars, as also from whence the Di∣rections curative are to be taken. ALthough Combustions be made of divers mat∣ters, as with mettels and liquors, as wee have afore declared, yet that little or nothing profiteth to the cure; for even as Combustions made with red hot Iron is like unto Combustions made with Gold or Silver being hot, so also Cembustions whether they be made with hot Oyle, wax, pitch, &c. among themselves (according to their snbstance) doe not differ, neither do they require a particular Method in curing; Even as that most worthy D. D. Laurentius Faubertus, a singular man, and well practised in Chi∣rurgery, doth testifie. Now as the Cure may bee rightly instituted, we will divide all Combustions, of what fiery matter soever they are made, into 3. divisi∣ons, to wit, into a Small, Indifferent, and Great;
For if the thing which burneth doth not long stick un∣to the body, or be but light as straw, flax, hemp, or any kind of light or dry wood, or any thing which quickly falleth off, they are but only pustels raised, and this is the first degree or particular: But if the substance doe something longer stick, or shall be induced with a more violent heat, then not only the Pustels are raised, but al∣so the true skin is made destitute of Radicall moysture from the part, and it is something dryed and drawn toge∣ther, but not as yet any Escar made. Thirdly, if the fiery matter do stick very long, and doth contain in it a most violent heat, then not onely the true skinn, but also the flesh, veins, arteirs, Nerves &c. are burned, drawn together, and dryed into an E∣skar, because the naturall moysture is consumed, with the strength of the fire: wherfore there are Medicines which are to be changed and applyed, according to these differences, as hereafter is declared. The second Iudication is taken from the part affected, for not one and the same Medicine doth agree with the Eye Mem∣bers, generative, nerves, Iunctures, musculous, flesh, &c. Also women and children, who are endued with an exquisite sence, do require more gentle Medicines, but contrary those of a hard and rustique flesh, and which are strong men, require more stronger Remedies, as Galen rightly admonisheth. From this description, and distribution of Combustions the Method of curing easily appeareth, which wee (God willing) will declare in three Chapters, like as wee have distributed Combustions in three Species or Particu∣culars.
CHAP. III. The Signes by the which those three De∣grees of Combustions may be knowne and di∣stinguished. SEeing that wee have divided Combustions into three degrees or species, and further, have prescribed a proper remedy unto every particular, it is necessary to declare how they are distinguished by signes and notes; Therefore the signes of the first particular or small Combustion are these, rednesse of the skin, a sharpe and prick∣ing pain, like as though the skin were rubbed with Nettle-sced; by and by (except there be fit re∣medies applyed) the place is inflamed, and pu∣stles doe arise, in the which is contained cleere and white water, as also the upper skin is separa∣ted. A light combustion is knowne by the Cir∣cumstances, to wit, that the firy substance was gentle, as Straw, Flaxe, Hempe, and the like; or that did fall off, as hot water: or that the part touched it but a little moment of time, on the contrary in the other species, the firy substance did touch the part a longer time, or it retained some
greater heat in it, as hot iron, or any liquid mettle hard wood, Pitch, Oyle, Wax, and the like: From hence it commeth, that the place doth presently inflame, waxeth red, painfull and burneth, and in the very same moment pustels are elevated, in which are contained thin water, and waxeth yellow and is sore by reason of the stretching of the skin, which is stretched and drawne together by the stanch of the fire. Now in the last Species, even in the same moment when the firy substance doth sticke to the body, there are pustels elevated, but presently they fall again, and chiefly in same place where the Combustion is great and vehement, and the under skinne seemeth blacke and wanne, and hardly feeleth, though it bee pricked with a Lan∣cet, for there is a hard and dry crust, which when it falleth off, there remaineth a deep and profound Vlcer, from the nature of the firy matter, and the space how long it hath stucke unto the body, a great Combustion may be knowne. Furthermore Combustions doth speedily require a Surgeon, and let him inquire to what Species it is to be referred To wit, whether it be light, indifferent or great, if it be light, let it be holpen with the remedies de∣clared in the 6. Chap. least pustels bee raised; if indifferent, then tune unto the 7. Chap. but if it be vehement and great, poceed; as we have decla∣red in the 8. Chapter.
CHAP. IV. The Signe or Prognostication of Com∣bustions. A Light Combustion, where the the skin is only hurt, although it be something pain∣full, yet it may easily, and in a short time be cured, and there will scarce any scarre be per∣ceived, if the cure be rightly instituted, and accor∣ding to Art: But contrary, a great Combustion is hard to be healed, which also leaveth behinde it a filthy and withered scarre, by reason of the per∣dition and contraction of the skin, if pustils do not appeare in the beginning. The many humours do concurre together unto the offended part, which do putrifie and get a kind of a sharpe and knawing quality, so that they doe deeply crode the skin and flesh, and do cause a rotten ulcer and naughty Scar: Therefore the pustels are presently to be cut, that the sharp and hot water may flow forth. In wholsome and well-tempered bodies Com∣bustions is healed with a little labour: Contrary in foule and plethorique bodies, it is hardly cured, and doth easily grow to a putred ulcer. For paine doth continually draw unto it Hu∣mours and blood from the Body, hereby the part affected, waxeth hot, and it flamed, and divers and naughty Symtomes doe follow.
Combustions of the head and face do leave be∣hind them smooth scarres, for the skin is so dryed and contracted with the fire, and the pores so shut, that the haire will never after come forth, nor grow. Combustions of the Eyes and the Eye-browes, and of the members Adnata and Cornea although they be light, yet are they dangerous, and there may easily follow a deprivation of sight, or at the least a great imbicility, and the eye-lids may bee turned inwards. Also Combustions of the Groyne are very dan∣gerous, and hard to be cured, for these Members neere unto the privie parts are moist, weake, and easily hurt by flux of humours. Combustions of the Belly is alwayes dangerous and hard to be cured, for the muscels of Abdomen are in perpetuall motion, by reason of inspiration expiration and extention, which is mad with meat and drinke, excretion of excrement, laughing, cry∣ing, as I have observed in my Country of Hildane in a certaine Childe of three yeares old, for hee being affected with a dangerous burne in the belly procured us much businesse the space of eight months. But if an intestine or gut in any part be burnt, it is mortall, as also the burning of Lightning is mortall, as it is declared in its proper place. Combustion of the great vessels of the Arteries and Veynes are dangerous, chiefly if it be deepe,
for the heat contracteth and shutteth those vessels whereby the spirits and blood cannot flow to give life and nourishment, and then followeth Gan∣grena and Atrophia, as wee have shewed in our Tract De Gangrena & Sphacelo. Burning also of the Nerves and Articuls doe easily draw together the junctures: Therefore it is needfull that the Surgeon doe use great diligence in these kinde of Burnings, and that he study presently from the beginning to soften the hardnesse and roughnesse of the skin with fit medicines, and to draw away and disperse the violent heat of the fire. CHAP. V. Of a two-fold Method of curing Combu∣stions. ALthough there be an infinite number of Me∣dicines in use both among Practitioners and the vulger sort of people for burnings, whether they be Plaisters or Ointments, juices, or distil∣led water; neverthelesse, that all doe tend to the same end, to wit, that they doe either choke, re∣solve, or dissipate the corrupt matter or heat, which is left in the part, now the suffocating or choking of corrupt matter is done, either with cold and moist mndicines, as with the juices and waters of
Houslike, Lettice, Henbane, Nightshad, and the like, or else with cold and dry things, such as are bale armeni Terra sigillat, Ceruse, Potters Clay, and such like plaisters, which doe shut the pores, so that the outward heat which is left by the fire, may be choaked and quenched like unto fire, which is shut into a close place. The other way of quenching hot humours con∣sisteth in this, that the outward heate and sharpe humours be resolved and scattered, even as we see coles to be quenched if they bee scattered hither and thither, which is done by hot Medicines, as we will shew in the next Chapter, it shall not bee needfull to enquire what Method is to be used. They which doe follow the first Method, doe think themselvs to be sufficiently authorized with this generall rule of Hipocrates. Contrary Medi∣cines are made of contrary things. For seeing Combustions is a hot accident, wee ought to cure it with his contrary, which is with cold things, which may extinguish the hot & bur∣ning humours left by the fire: I do confesse those sentences of Physitians to be very true, but in my opinion refrigeration in Camb. ought to be done by abating: for it is fitly rejected from the first Method of curing, seeing there do many times a∣rise divers Symtomes, as hereafter we will shew, for it doth not suffice only to prevent corrupt hu∣mours, but chiefly many other accidents, as griefe, retraction and roughnesse of the skin, and inviron
of the pores, which doe all require hot remedies. But that these things bee well understood, let us looke unto the properties of heat, the which Hi∣pocrates doth thus describe, heate is biting in Vl∣cers, hardneth the skin, causeth intollerable paine, it ingendreth vehement feares, Convulsions, and distentions. And Galen saith, that the substance proper to draw together and thicken, is alwayes proper to cold, which is knowne to be in oyle, fat, and other things which by their coldnesse doe thicken and harden; in which it is shewn, that cold things are plainly adversaries to Combustions, and do cause divers and naughty accidents, for the skin being contracted and hardned by the fire, by the much use of cold Medicines is hardned, and paine is increased; hereby humours do gather together which are not onely retained under the hard skin, but by the use of cold Medicines is forced down∣wards, and there they doe more heat, hereby com∣meth inflammation, impostimation, and divers times Gangrene, for the humour included, because it wanteth breathing, it presently putrifieth, as Ga∣len witnesseth; or because the heat which chanced whilst it is included in the affected part, hath dryed up the radicall moisture, in which the naturall heat consisteth, as we have shewed in our Tract of Gangrena; For this cause Hipocrates admonisheth that it is not good to turn Erisipilas from the out∣ward parts unto the inward, and there oftentimes doth follow (if great burnings be dressed with cold
Medicines) Herpes or knawing wilde-fire for the Humour being included under the Skinne doth breed a certaine sharpenesse and malig∣nity. Anno 1594. there came unto mee a certaine young man from Colin whom Hirpes or wild fire had invaded his whole legge from the foot unto the thigh, by reason of a simple Com∣bustion: By what method, and with what Medi∣cines wee cured the same the Reader may under∣stand by my observations Chirurgicall. Therefore when I did consider, that as coales when they are carefully covered under the ashes doe retaine their heat a long time; so corrupt hu∣mours, which in Combustions doe flow to the af∣fected place, are by the use of cold medicines re∣tained; I have therefore more rather chosen to my selfe another Method, which hitherto I have used with great benefit to the Patient; For even as coals doe quickly squench if they are scattered a∣bout; so hot Medicines doe quickly coole (yet by evacution) by discussing and extracting corrupt humours, as Galen witnesseth. For as heat (as Hipocrates witnesseth) foftneth the skin, extenuateth, easeth paine, mittigateth Convulsions, and bringeth Vlcers to supperation: So such kind of Medicines are applyed to those parts which are molested with blood, (but they must be those which doe moderately heat) to make thin the humours, and to dilate the passages and pores: The same Galen also writeth, for cold
But that there might be a right and Methodi∣call curation of Combustions instituted, all ef∣fects and accidents of burnings are to be diligent∣ly examined and looked unto, so that remedies may be changed and applyed and according to their natures; but first of all, because paine fol∣loweth, by reason of the solution of continuity and sudden mutation which violently draweth humours and blood from the body. It is necessary to use repellent Medicines, to wit, defensives, and clouts wet in Vinegar and water lest such like hu∣mours and blood do follow to the offended place: Then let there be used and observed, dyet, purga∣tions, blood-letting, cupping, and other revulti∣ons, that the humours and blood may be drawne and evacuated to the other part, as appertaining to Topicks; in the first species of Combustions, if pustels be not risen, let the corrupt and sharpe humours be drawn forth with an Ointment made of Onions and the like, but if the skin be drawne together and hardned, wee ought to use all dilli∣gence that it be softned and made red, which ought to be done with Medicines which are hot and moist, as the Chapters following we will de∣clare at length.
CHAP. VI. The Curations of the first degree of Com∣bustions. THe first and chiefe worke which is required in Combustions, is, that the Chirugion doe prevent the rising of pustels; for if he can do that the Patient need not feare any further molestion; Therefore if any one be burnt with fire, water, hot Oyle, or any such like thing: If the Combustion be light, presently let the place be madified with water or spettle, and then held to fire as long as may be suffered, or let the burnt place be dipped in hot water, or if that will not be conveniently done, let a sponge or clout be wrung out in hot wa∣ter, and applyed to the place, for that outward heat doth draw unto it Empyruma, that is, heat left by the fire in the burned part, as Aristotle and expe∣rience teacheth; for as a Scorpion being applyed to the bite of a Scorpion doth draw to it his pro∣per poyson; so doth heat draw heat: hereby Onions being mixed in a morter with a little Salt and applyed to the burnt place, doth draw forth the corrupt humours, and suffereth not the pustels to arise, it may be spread on little pleggets and ap∣plyed,
untill the whole burnt place bee covered. Also this following Oyntment doth violently draw forth corrupt humours, and will not suffer the pustels to arise. ℞ Caepae Crudae ℥. 1. ss. Salis. Saponis ulbi veneti, ana. ℥. ss. Let them be mixed in a Morter, and make an Oyntment with Oyle of Roses and sweet Almons. Anno 1604. as my beloved wife was boyling of New Wine in a great skellet, and stirring it with a spatter, she unadvisedly thrust her hand unto the wrist into the boyling wine, when it was boyled even unto the very height and thicknesse, whereby there presently arose a vehement paine, not onely in the hand, but also in the whole arme, the wine being washed away with hot water, wee applyed the Oyntment lately prescribed (which as then was most fittest unto my hand) I anointed the whole arme with Oile of Roses, and rowled about Rowlers dipped in water and Vinegar, and did of∣tentimes renew them all. Thus (by Gods favour) of so great a Combustion there followed no ulce∣ration of the skin, but onely two pustels, the one in her thumbe, the other by her middle finger, which with a little trouble, vvith Vnguentum Ba∣silicon vvere cured. Now in universall Combustions proceed as is declared in the following Example. In the yeare 1605. The Servant of one Mr. Ioachim, a Dyer,
by chance fell into a great Chaldron full of hot Die, from whence there followed a Combustion of the whole body; but because the Die was not very much hot, those parts were chiefly burnt which clave unto the dregs of the Die in the bot∣tome of the Chaldron, in which the heat was longest contained; for the hands and face were onely burnt; wherefore I being sent for, I anoin∣ted the whole body, the face onely accepted, with this following Ointment. ℞ Saponis liquidae lb ss. Caepae crudae ℥ ij. Salis ℥. i ss, Oleum de v tellis onorum ℥ j. Amigdasar. dulc. ana. ℥ iii. Musilag. Sem. Cydon ℥ iii. Mixe them and make an Ointment. For the eyes I used this Anodine Colerium as followeth: ℞ Aque Rosar, ℥ iii. Aque Plantag, ℥ i Sem. Cydonor & Foenogreci, ana, ℥ ss misce, Let them remaine upon hot ashes, the space of an houre, then let them be strained, and adde thereto a little womans Milke, and drop it hot into the eyes, unto the other parts of the Face I applyed an Ointment of new Wine boyled to the third part, which was solid and thick, lest it should flow unto the eyes and hurt them: The description whereof is thus:
℞ Gum. Elemni ʒ i. Oleum de vit. ovor, Rosar. ana. ʒ iii. Saponis Albi & veneti ℥ ii. Let the gums be dissolved with the Oyle, and all diligently mixed in a Morter, & make an Oint∣ment, which being spread upou a linnen cloath, apply it all over the Face, and every foure houres renew the emplaister, but the Colery every houre; Also the same day, the belly being first emptied by a supposition, I opened the Basilica veyne in the right arme, and took forth ten ounces of blood for he was a strange and plethoricke man, and the day following I administred this purgation fol∣lowing. ℞ Electuar. Diacatho, ʒ vi. Ele, de Succo rosar. ʒ ii. Syrupi Resat, solut. ℥. i. With water of Cicorie and Buglosse make a po∣tion, give it in the morning fasting, observing a good dyet. The next and third day I anointed the whole body with the foresaid Ointment, and to the face I applyed the Ointment which I prescribed for the same purpose, and in the eyes I often drop∣ped the Colerium, but because that in divers pla∣ces, espeeially in the veynes the Combustions penetrated deep, wee followed the same Method of curing which we have declared in the 7 and 8 Chapt. And by these remedies (by the Grace of God) he was perfectly cured of this Combustion in 14. dayes.
Furthermore the Ointment of Onions doth lit∣tle or nothing profit to Combustions of the face, for by it the eyes may suffer much hurt and dam∣mage; therefore this following Ointment is used in place of the other. ℞ Saponis Veneti ℥. 1. olei Roser & Amigdalar dulcium. ana. ℥ ss misce Make an Ointment in a Morter, adding a little quantitie of the Musilage of Cydon seeds extracted with Rose-water; It is to be noted, that although the wine thin is not to be rejected in Combusti∣ons, yet to the face we ought by no meanes to ap∣ply it so, for it moistneth, and penitrateth, and of∣fendeth the eyes; wherefore wee ought to take great heed that this foresaid Ointment be not too liquid: Many, that they may keepe the pustels from rising, doe presently apply clouts dipped in the gum of the Juniper Tree, others doe apply pleggets of Larde about the burnt place. Paulus Egineta doth counsell to dip doubled clothes in Brine, and apply them in Lye and wa∣ter, wherein Lime hath been squenched, is good for the same purpose; but these kinde of Medi∣cines are to be often repeated and applyed luke∣warme, lest the Linnen being dry should raise paine in the affected part. If the face be burnt with
Gunpowper, and that any of the graines or corne of the powder doe sticke in the skin, presently it must be gotten forth with a Needle or some other sharpe Instrumenr, afterwards heed is to be taken that pustels do not rise; by this meanes the pow∣der which is in the skin may easily be drawne forth, and the skin mundified, but if a Chirurgion be not sent for in the beginning, and that the skin be already cicumtrised, it is necessary that the skin be againe blistered, which may be fitly done with this following Ointment. ℞ Cantharidum num. vj. Fermenti ℥ ss. Mix them in a Morter with a drop or two of Vi∣negar, of the which make a little plaister and ap∣ply upon the spots, but you ought to take great heed that this Ointment come not unto the eyes, when the pustels doe first arise, let them be cut with cizors, then let the powder be taken away either with a Needle or some other sharpe instru∣ment, and then apply this following Ointment. ℞ Butiri sine sale ℥. 1. Vng. Basilic. clei Lillior albor, De vitell, over, ana. ℥. ii. misce Fiat Vnguentum. As often as the Chirurgion shall handle the sore, he shall diligently take notice how the blacknesse of the powder spendeth away, and shall wash it either with a Decoction of Foenegreeke or Me∣lelot flowers, afterwards apply the said Ointment
and so proceed untill the▪ Vlcer bee sufficiently mundified. I have in this Cause used the powder of precipitate, to the profit of the Patient, but to ease paine apply this Anodine Medicine about the sore. ℞ Olei migdal. dulc. Rosacei Cerae allae ana, ℥. j. Dissolve and mix them, and then adde Camphire ℈ j. the musilage of Cydon seeds a little, mix them and make an Ointment; but if the powder bee blowne into the eyes, let them bee washed with womans Milke or Rose water warme, but especi∣ally we ought to use all diligence, that the flowing of humours be prevented, and paine be eased, as we have declared in the Eleventh Chapter. Now if the powder be not blown into the skin but that the skin be onely burnt with the flame of the powder, then presently apply the afore-writ∣ten Ointment of Sope, Oyle of Sweet Almonds and Roses. In the meane time whilst the effect is thus handled, the offensive humours and blood are to be diminished and drawne out by other places, lest by reason of the solution of continuity they should flow to the hurted part, and should cause inflammations and other dangerous symtomes, which may be fitly done by purgation, blood-letting, cupping, as we will shew in their proper place,
CHAP. VII. The Curation of the second Degree of Combustions. FVrthermore, if the Combustion do penitrate more deep, so that not only pustels or blisters are raised, but that also the skin be burnt dead and contracted, then neither Onions, sope, salt, neither any such kinde of Medicines are to be applyed, much lesse those which are before said to be cold and dry, but those which doe mollifie the skin and cause rednesse, are to be used, for they are of tem∣perature hot and moist, therefore proceed after this manner. First of all let the blisters be all cut with cizors whereby the hot and sharpe water may flow foith and wheresoever the upper skin is separated, let it be peeled off, lest matter should gather together under it, and because humours and blood doe pre∣sently flow to the affected place, it is needfull to prevent them with defensives; therefore apply one of the following defensives, about the breadth of the palme of ones hand upon the burnt place:
℞ Pul. boli armeni. Sanguis draco. Gallar. Croci martis. Accatiae ana. ℥ ss. Olei Rosar. ℥ iij. Cerae novae ℥ i. ss. Make an Ointment according to Art, adding a lit∣tle Vinegar, or else ℞ Farina hordei. Argillae fornac. ana. ℥ ij. Let them bee boiled with Vinegar and water to the forme of a Cataplisme, and in the end mixe therewith the whites of two Egges. This defen∣sive is to he reiterated two or three times every day, lest it should dry upon the affected place, and should cause paine. But to the places round about, apply this fol∣lowing Ointment. ℞ Vngunt. Basilicon. ℥. 1. Ol. Rosar. & hillior. albor. ana. ℥ ss. Vitel. ovor nam. ij. misce. This following Ointment doth also very much profit for Combustions, it easeth paine, softneth the skin, and resolveth the Humours flowing to the part: ℞ Butyri Sine sale Pinguedinis gallinae necent. Ana, ℥ j. Caerae novae. Ol. Lilior, albor, ana, ℥ ss, Let them be dissolved together, and afterwards adde unto them Croci ℈ j. Muselag, Sem, Cydon, ℥ j.
Let them be mixed in a morter, and make an oint∣ment; If the paine be so vehement, that the sicke can very little take his rest, then mixe with the said foresaid ointment Opii dissoluti ℈ ss, or else ℞ Butiri recent, ℥ ii. Ol, Amigdalar, dulc. de vitellis ovor. ana. ℥ Croci pii ana ℈ ss Caphorae ℈ i. Muselag. sem. cidon, ℥ i. misce. make an Ointment and apply it. The Defensive being applyed, and one of the foresaid Ointments, the affected part is to be row∣led in rowlers madified in water and Vinegar, and if the offended part be the arme or the leg, beg in at the infirme part, for by this meanes the humours are repressed, which are prepared to flow unto the hurt part; but if the Combustion be any part that may not be rowled, apply linnen clothes, madified in water and vinegar 3. or 4 times a day, or also water wherein Colworts have bin infused (which should be of vinegar, water and salt) in which lin∣nen clothes he wet and applyed, it doth mightily represse the Humours, easeth paine, and is an ene∣my to corrupt Humours; notwithstanding in the Face such kinde of Medicines are not be applyed be reason of the eyes, the skin being softned, and sufficiently rubified, divers doe apply drying Me∣dicines, as Vngunt ex calce tota Diapmpholigos Album Rasis, and the like, but because such dry∣ing Medicines doe contract the skinne, and cause filthy skarres, I doe not allow of the use of them, therfore I use emolent Medicines to the end of the
Also I prepare an Ointment for all Combustions whatsoever, after this manner: ℞ Butiri recent & tot. in aqua. Rosar, ℥. iij. Ol. violatii de vitel▪ ovor. Amigdalar dulc. ana. ℥ ss. Farinae hordii ℥ i. ss. Croci ℈ j. Musilag. Sem. Cydon ℥. i. Cerae q. S. Make an Ointment in a morter. This Ointment mollifieth, easeth paine, and by little and little induceth a Cicatrice; but because Combustions, especially those which are in the upper part of the skin flame with vehement sence, the Chirurgions ought to have a great care that they do gentle clense them; I, lest I should cause paine by clensing of Vlcers, doe cover the burnt part about with fine linnen cloth, as with Cam∣bricke or Lawne, and I remove it not untill the Vlcer be whole, by this cloth the matter may ea∣sily flow forth, and the vertue of the Medicines may come unto the Vlcer; now whilst that the Vlcer is a curing, dyet, purgation of humours, and Phlebotomy is not to be neglected; let the Pati∣ent abstaine from all things that are vehement, falt, hot and sharpe, and those things which are hard of disgestion, let him use pottage made of flesh new killed, in the which Sorrill, Endine, Lettice and Borage hath been boyled; let his drinke be phti∣san or Ale not very strong; if the body bee full,
open the Basilica or Mediana veyne, and take out as much blood as strength will suffer; if it bee needfull for him to purge, let him purge according to the nature of the humour predominating, con∣cerning which it were good to have the opinion of a Learned Physitian; if the Combustion bee in the face, it were good to apply Cupping Glasses to the shoulders, that the blood and humours may be drawne backe. CHAP. VIII. The Cure of the third and last degree of Combustions. THis third and last Degree of Combustions is very dangerous, for that very often it ingen∣dreth Gangrena and Sphacetus; For first by rea∣son of the vehement heat, the Radicall moisture and naturall heat is dryed up: Secondly, the skin Musculous, Flesh, Veynes, Arteries, &c. be dried and drawne together, so that the blood cannot flow to the offended part: Thirdly, the Humours and blood, by reason of the Solution of Continuitie and paine doe gather together, and increase the
burning heat, hereby by reason of want of nourish∣ment, and choaking of the naturall heat, the affe∣cted part mortifieth, as is declared in our Tract of Gangrena and Sphasetus. In the yeare of our Lord 1592. there lighted into my hands a very honest Matron in Hilden, who being weary, by reason of her domesticall bu∣sinesse, and sitting by the fire alone, of a sudden fell into a swound downe to the hearth, and her right legge lay on the burning coales, whereby the calfe of her legge was so burnt, that a little after, (by reason her body was foule) she was taken with Gangrena and Sphaselus, wherefore the Escarre being separated, and Medicines applyed which pertaine to Gangrena, she recovered her health: First of all therefore, the blisters are to be cut, and the water that floweth by reason of the Com∣bustion, to be dryed with a clout or sponge; then the Escarre is to be separated, or at the least to be cut away almost as close as the flesh, whereby the humour which is retained under the hard crust may flow forth, the Medicines may enter, and whatsoever is inducerated and hardned by reason of the heat may softned, the Escarre ought to be separated the first or second day before the part be inflamed, and in the beginning this following Ointment is to be applyed. ℞ Butirs. rec, et tot. in aquaros. ℥ iii. Vngunt Basilioon ℥. i. ss Ol. Lilior. albor. Amigda. dulc. ana. ℥ ss Vitel. unius ovi. misce et appli.
Afterwards doubled clothes wet in this following Emulsion, is to be applyed hot, for it easeth paine mollifieth and stayeth flux of humours. ℞ Medullae sem. Cucurb. ℥ ii. Sem. Cidon, Foenogr, ana. ʒ i. Let them be mixed in a morter and strained out with lb vj. of pure water, and make an Emultion, in the which dissolve Saponis veneti albi ℥ ss Ca∣phurae ℈ j. But if the Combustion be in the Face, the Sope is not to be nsed by reason of the eyes, but in the place adde the waters of Roses and Plan∣taine. Defensives also in the beginning are to be applyed, and Rowlers wet in water and vinegar, that the violent flux of humours may be stayed; But if the affected part be inflamed, and chiefely if the Veynes, Arteries, are contracted by the fire, then Defensives are not so well approved of, ex∣cept they have some power to resolve, viz. such as are these, Beane Flower, Flower of Lupins, of wheat, and the powder of Camomile Flower, &c. mix them, let the Patient, and let the body be pur∣ged with fit purges, according to the nature of the humour predominating; also open a Veyne and apply Cupping glasses, concerning which take the counsell of a Physitian. When the Flowing of Humours and blood is stayed, then Defensives are left off, whereby the spirits and nutriment may the better passe to the affected part, and to divide and separate the Escarre: Wherefore the learned Chirurgion
which is the Hand-maid of Nature, ought every day, as much as possibly he can, without paine to seperate some of the Escarre, and afterward let him apply the forewritten Ointment of Sweet Butter thereto: Also this following fomentation hath no little power to ease paine, mollifie the skin, and helpe digestion. ℞ Radicum altheae ℥ ii. Sem. Cidonior. Foenograeci ana. ℥ ss. Flor. Chamon. Meliloti ana. M. 7. Let them be boyled in water, or if there be vehe∣ment paine, in Milke; then wet a Sponge therein and apply it hot▪ and afterwards mix a little Oyle of white Lillies, but if the burne shall be so great then it groweth to Gangrena, or Sphacetus, then proceed according to the cure of Gangrena. But because these kinds of Combustions, of the which we have spoken, doe oftentimes grow to a Gangrene, therefore they ought to be carefully and judiciously handled, and alwayes something ought to be applyed, which may resist corruption, In Children divers times doe happen Combusti∣ons of the hands and feet, in the which the extre∣mities of the fingers and toes are cleane burnt off; In these, great diligence is to bee used, that that which is so burnt may be quickly separated, lest the corruption doe invade the sound parts; there∣fore if the flesh and the bone be so burnt, that the
joynt may be saved, the bone in the same joynt is to be separated with a Raizor, not with cizors, as some would have it; if the Joint it selfe shall be also affected, let the skin behind the joynt be ta∣ken away with a Raizor, but the bone with a little Saw; but why this abscision ought not to be done with Inscision knives wee have shewed in a Tract De Gangrena, in the which also is shewed the manner of cutting off of fingers. As soone as ever the Escarre is separated, it is good first to mundifie the Vlcer, wherefore if it shall be rotten and stinking, the Patient strong, and the affected part not very sencible, in such causes I was wont to apply Egyptialum, but if the Patient bee delicate, and the affected part very sencible, then mix with the foresaid Ointment Hony of Ro∣ses, also the powder of precipitate washed in Rose water, is an excellent Medicine against all rotten Vlcers, or else ℞ Pulueris Praec pitati Radix Aristoloch. rot. Farinae hordei ana. ℥ i. With Honie or Roses, and a little Turpentine make an Ointment. If the Combustion be in the head or face, adde a little Gumma Lemnia dissolved in Oyle of Roses, also a mundificative of the juice of Smallege doth very much clense putrid Vlcers when it is mixed with Mel. Rosarum and Aquavita and applyed; Also these Medicines spred upon Cotten or fine
Lint, and applyed to Vlcers, is profitable, or fine Linnen cloths doubled, or let the part affected be rowled in a soft sponge, for these linnen clothes and sponge doe draw thin humours, which do hin∣der consolidation; to Vlcers already mundified, it is best to use Incarnatives, such as are Vngunt Au∣rium Nicotiane, or this following powder: ℞ Pulvis Aroes. Sarcocollae. Myrrhe. ana. ʒ ii. Miso. f. pul. This following Viscus doth mightily mundifie and incarnateth all sorts of corrup ulcers: ℞ Herbar. Centaurii et Hiperici. Cum toto, Diapensiae, Alchimellae, Bete Silvest. Folior-arnoglossae maioris, Ana M. iiij. Radic. tormentille, Aristolocbie longe ana. ℥. iij. Let them all be cut and beaten together, after let them be put in a Glasse vessell and powre Wine thereon untill it doe onely swim, and set it in the Sunne the space of three dayes, then let it be boi∣led with a slender fire, untill the third part be con∣sumed, and when it is strained with a strange ex∣pression; in a Glasen Limbecke and in Balneo Ma∣rea make a Viscus or Bird-lime; Then cause a Cicatrix, but not with those things which doe ve∣hemently dry, as Chirurgions use to doe in other Vlcers, for vehement dryers applyed unto Burnes doe cause a rough and filthy scarre; Therefore apply this following Ointment:
℞ Emplast. Palmei ℥ i. Pinguid. Gall. Et anser ana. ℥ ss. Let them be dissolved together, and then mixe with them Alumines Vsti, Saturni Calcinati, Lythargirii aurei, Lapidis Calum. naris. And in a Leaden Morter make an Ointment ad∣ding of the Musilage of Cydon seedes and Foeno∣greeke, as much as is expedient, with the which make an Ointment most excellent for all Combu∣stions whatsoever; Also I have used an Ointment of Aliblaster in this cause with great profit, whose description is as followeth: ℞ Lapidis Alablastratis Calc. ℥ i. ss Pumicis albi Calcionat. ℥ ss Make them into a very small powder, afterwards ℞ Caerae albae Ceri Cervini Ol. Amigdalar. Dulc. Lilior Albor ana. ℥ i. Ol. de. vitell. ovor. ℥ ss. Make an Ointment according to Art, this Oint∣ment mollifieth, easeth paine, and produceth a faire Cicatrix. If the Combustion be in the eye-browes lippes, or in the fingers, there ought to be great care ta¦ken that these parts be not contracted and fastned backewards rowled in a soft sponge: therefore Linnen cloathes or Lint, or thin Leaden Plates finely beat and used, are to be put betweene the
parts where conglutination is feared: In great Combustions which are in the great vessels of the Veynes and Arteries where Atrophia is feared, by reason of little nourishment, all the affected part are the first dayes to be anointed with Oile of Ro∣ses, to represse the humours, and afterwards with this following Ointment. ℞ Cucci lumbricor ℥ ij. Pinquid. humanae Callinae. Vrsi ana. ℥ i. Aquavitae ℥ ii. misce. This Ointment mollifieth, resolveth, corrobora∣teth, and openeth, if any veynes or arteries, by reason of the violence of the fire, be contracted or stopped; and it stayeth Atrophia. CHAP. IX. Of the Combustions of the Eyes. BY how much the more noble one part of our Body is more then the other, so much the more care is to be taken thereof when it is ill af∣fected; therfore because the Eye, of all members
is the most Noblest and very sencible, it doth re∣quire a certaine particular cure: First of all there∣fore, the Chirurgion shall endeavour himselfe in this whole worke, that he easeth paine, and stayeth the flux of Humours; wherefore presently from the beginning let him apply defensives to the tem∣ples; and our all the pustels or blisters, that the sharpe and hot water may flow forth, but drop in∣to the eyes now and then womans milke mixed with Rose water luke warme, in which let a little Saffron be macerated; Also doubled clothes ma∣dified in this Milke should be applyed, and let it be reiterated as often as it is dry; Or else ℞ Aqua. Rosac. ℥ iij. Sem. Cydonior. & Foenogr. ana. ℥ ss, Croci Integri. ℈ ss. misce. Let them remaine in infutione the space of 4. houres, then let them be strained, to this Musi∣lage mixe a little womans Milke, and then let it be dropped warme into the eyes, and let them be ap∣plyed thereto with doubled clothes warme; it there be any great paine, then adde thereto a grain or two of Opium dissolved in Rose water, also Pi∣geons blood being dropped warme into the eyes, easeth paine, then apply this following Cata∣plasma: ℞ Pulpa malor. dulc. suh. prunis decoct. ℥ ss. Farine Foenogr. et Hordei ana. ℥ ss. Boyle them in Milke to the forme of a Powltice, and in the end mix thereto Croci ℈ ss. vitellum u∣nius
ovi, with a little Oyle of Roses, and let it be applyed hot, but round about the eyes, if the burn be but light, some Ointment of sope may be ap∣plyed, which must be of a reasonable hard body lest it offendeth the eyes. This processe is not to be changed unlesse the Parient be quite free from inflammation and pain, after that apply this following Colerium, for the better exiccation and corroboration of the sight. ℞ Aquar. Euphrasia. Foeniculi, Rosarum ana. ℥ i. Tutie Preparat, Sief Sive opio ana. ℥. i. Misce fiat Colerium. Now know (gentle Reader) that a Colery, into the which womans Milke entreth, is in the Sum∣mer every day to be changed, but in the Winter every other day, for the Milke quickly turneth and waxeth sowre, and then it easeth not paine, but dryeth; for this cause, those sharp things which we have prescribed in other burnings, as Lye, brine &c. are not be applyed to burnes in the face, Stu∣pifactive Medicines are to be resisted as much as possible may be, except great paine be present, for they (by reason of their great coldnesse) do thicken the Humours and visible spirits of the eyes; but if the skin shall be hardned to the eyes, it may bee softned and made supple with the foresaid Oint∣ments, but grear care is to be had that the Oint∣ment
or fat enter not into the eyes, for that stireth paine; In the meane time whilst the skin is mol∣lified with the aforesaid Ointments and Oyles, let the Colery be dropped in, and the Cataplasme be applyed, as we have already spoken of. Generally let the Patient use a sparing dyet, let him abstaine from all hot things, salt things, Gin∣ger, Pepper, Cloves, Garlicke, Onyons, Radishes, and the like: And also from all things that are hard of Digestion, also Wine and strong Ale doth much hurt, let his drinke be phtisan, in the which Coriander seeds prepared, and Anniseeds have bin boyled; If the Patient by reason of his age can not abstaine from Wine, let him drink white win that is not very strong; In his pottage let those herbes bee boyled which doe coole, and that doe purge Choller, as are these, Sorrill, Borage, Ci∣cory, Chernill, the Roots of Parsely, Fennel Mariory, Rosemary, and Eye-bright: Let the pa∣tient take a little Syrup Cydonior, Symplex or old Conserve of Roses, that the elevation of vapors unto the head may be hindered, if he be very thur∣sty, let him use his decoction of Parley, in the which dissolve the Sirrup of the Juice of Sorrell, Limons or Pomgranuts, also Confections of cher∣ries, Barberies, and such like are convenient. Furthermore before I make an end of this Chapter (for the benefit and further experience of the Reader I will declare an excellent Example of Combustions.
There was a Maiden childe, of the age of two yeares or thereabouts, which was the daughter of Mr. Samuel Gaillard a most vigilant Schoole-ma∣ster of Neocoments, and my most Reverend God∣father, whom by chance sitting by the fire, fell among the burning coales, whereby not onely her forehead about the eyes, but almost all her whole face, especially in one place was grievously burnt, I being called iust at the instant, I applyed this fol∣lowing ointment upon the whole face in the form of a Plaister. ℞ Saponis veneti ℥ i. Ol. de vitel. ovor. et Amigdal. dulc. ana, ℥ ii. Gumi elemi dissolut. Cum Oleis ʒ i. misce. Make an Ointment adding a little of the Musilage of Cydon seeds. But alwayes into the Eyes drop a little of the Colerium made of womans Milke and Rose water and apply it also with fine linnen clothes, the first I renued the Plaister every foure houres, hereby the greatest part of currupt humours were culled forth, and the second day I prescribed him pottage made of new killed Flesh, in the which was boyled the powder of the Root of Mechoacan ℈ i. and to the affected place I applyed this Oyntment fol∣lowing: ℞ Ol. de vitellis ovorum, Ol. Amigdalar. dulc,
Pinguid vrsi & Pinguedinis humana ana ℥ ss. Gum Elami dissolut cum oleis ℥ ii. Caerae novae ℥ i. Croci ℈ i. misce. Make an Ointment, with the which I almost fini∣shed the Cure, except that in the end of the Cure I mixed with the foresaid Ointment a little of the Flower of Lentils, and I anointed the whole burnt part with this following Emolent Oyntment: ℞ Gum Elemmi ℥ ss. Ol. de vital ovor & Lilior albor ana ℥ ss. Pinguid. humanae. ʒ ii. misce. In the meane time whilst that the skin is molli∣fying, I use to extend it with both my hands, like as the Felmongers doe there skins when they can them up; and thus by Gods favour she was cured, and there was no signe of a Combustion left, ex∣cept it were one little one in her upper lippe, in the which place, by reason of the Childs unpatience I could not make the Medicine stay. CHAP. X. Of Combustions of the Groynes. THe Groynes, because they are rare, laxe, hu∣mid members, and apt to fluxe of humours, whereby they doe easily putrifie; They doe also
require a particular care and method of curing: First of all therefore (because by reason of the vi∣cinity of the Emunctiories, humours doe quickly flow unto them) Defensives are to be applyed to the bottome of the belly, upon the Combustion, also cut a veyne in the Cubide, and if it may con∣veniently be done, provoke vomitting; but if it be not convenient, let the Patient be purged downe∣wards, and prescribe him a slender dyet; let him abstaine from strong Wine, and from meats hot and sharpe, as we have shewed in the former chap∣ter; because the Groynes are Members rare, laxe, humid, and apt to corruption; therefore if there be no blisters risen, presently apply some Oynt∣ment prepared of sope and Onions, but if they are risen, let them be cut, whereby the sharpe water may flow forth, then apply this following Oint∣ment. ℞ Vngunt rosati ℥ i. ss Ol. de vitel. ovor. et Amigdal. dulc. ana. ℥ ss. Dissolve them, and then mixe thereto Mirrhae Aloes ana. ʒ i. Mixe them and apply them with Linnen clothes, and then let the whole part be covered, with this following Cataplasme: ℞ Farinae hordii et Fabar. ana. ℥ iii. Pulv. Rosar. rubar. ℥ ss. With a little Vinegar and Honey make a Powl∣tice, and apply it hot: But if the Combustion bee great, so that it maketh a hard crust, then let it be
seperated by little and little, with an Incision knife or at the least scarified in divers places, then apply this following Ointment to cause the escar to fall. ℞ Superior is ungunt ℥ ij. Pul. Scordii ʒ. i. Vnguent. Egiptiaci ʒ ij. More or lesse according to the quantity of the pu∣trifaction and the strength and weaknesse of the Patient, and apply it on linnen clothes, afterwards. ℞ Farinae lupinor. Fabarum. Lollii ana. ℥ i. ss Let them be boiled in Barbers lye, and then mixe to them. Pul. Scordii. Aloes. Mirrhae ana. ℥ ss. Mix them and make a Powltice, and apply it hot, after the Escar is fallen, mundifie, incarnate, and cicatrice the Vlcer, as wee have declared in our 8. Chapter. CHAP. XI. Of the Combustions of the Joynts. IN Combustions of the Ioynts defensives ought to be applyed, the body purged, &c. Medicines made of sope, Onions, &c. are naught; wherefore anoint the whole member twice a day with Oyle of wormes, Mans greace, Hens greace, with an Ointment of Marsh, Mallowes, and the like. The rest is to be learned in the former Chapters.
CHAP. XII. Of Paine, and the Cure thereof. PAyne is a grievous Symtome as well in Com∣bustions as in all other effects whatsoever, for it scattereth and consumeth the vitall spirits, and causeth unquietnesse and Feavers, hereby followeth a defect of the minde, it draweth a flux of humors, and thereby arise Inflammations, Convultions, and other grievous symptomes, therefore it is to be ea∣sed as much as possible may be, now the generall curing of paine, is to take away the cause thereof. But because that in Combustions there are two severall causes, to wit, sudden alteration, and solu∣tion of continuity, there shall be a two-fold scope of Curing: First, that the corrupt humours cau∣sed by the fire be drawne forth, and the part affe∣cted refrigerated and brought to his proper tem∣per, as we have sufficiently declared before. Secondly, that whatsoere be disjoyned and burnt be united and consolidated; but because the cor∣rupt humours cannot be drawne forth, much lesse the blisters and ulcer cured, except the hard and contracted skin be first molified and made supple; Therefore it is necessary that the Chirurgion doe
bend his whole study, to supple and soften the skin, with those hot and moist Medicines which are before rehearsed, whereby those sharpe and subtile humours may be exhallated and drawne by the pores of the skin; but although such kinde of Medicines are hot, yet they coole, notwithstan∣ding by accident, that is as Galen witnesseth, by resolving and scattering sharpe humours; there∣fore if there be great paine, and that it be not ea∣sed with those Medicines which we have prescri∣bed in our 7 and 8. Chapters (the body being first purged, and a veyne opened, if age and other things will permit) apply this following Foment. ℞ Radic. Altheae ℥ i. Florum Chamomil, Meloloti Rosarum Absynthii ana. M. ss. Sem. Foenog. Anethi ana. ℥ ss. Ol. violar. ℥ iij. Let them be boyled in Milke, in the which wring out a sponge or else doubled clothes, and apply it oftentimes to the painfull place, hot as it may bee suffered. This following Powltice is also very good, and easeth paine marvellously. ℞ Micarum panis Albi lb ss Boyle it in Milke to the forme of a Powltice, then mix thereto Oyle of sweet Almonds, new Butter of each ℥ i. Oile of Egges ℥ ss. Saffrom ℈ i. the yeolke of one Egg, make therewith a Cataplasme and apply it hot three or foure times a day, but first foment the place affected with the following fo∣ment; if you have any mans greace in a readines, mix it therewith, for it is a singular Anodine.
Also apply Defensives, and prescribe a Dyet, and let the body be purged according to the nature of the Humour predominating; also open a veyne and apply Cupping-glasses; if the paine be not eased with these things, proceed to stupifactive Medicines, for it will not be in vaine, because they are cold, even in the fourth degree, and being done with heedfulnesse and wisdome, they are not dan∣gerous, especially in the outward parts, but begin with those which are gentle. CHAP. XIII. Of the imbecillity of the Sight. SEeing that divers times after Combustions there followeth an imbecillity of the sight, and a great rheume in the Eyes, therefore it will be ne∣cessary to declare how they may be holpen, that they grow not into Lachrimale Fistilo. S. Opthal∣mia, and to a pin and webbe, or else cleane perish the sight: Wherefore the Cure shall be perfor∣med by three intentions, that is, by Dyet, purga∣tion, and stupifactive Medicines; and because that in Rheumes of the Eyes the Braine sendeth forth Humours and the eyes receive them, it is necessary that they be not altogether hindered, lest naughty
Humours should ingender in the Body and the Braine, but rather that those which are already in∣gendred and flow to the eyes, may be dryed and drawne backwards, likewise the eyes are to be de∣fended lest they sustaine a fluxe. There are three things to be observed in the ad∣ministration of dyet, to wit, the quantity, the qua∣lity, and the use; For first all excesse, as well of meat as of drinke is to be avoided; Secondly, be∣cause the flux of the Eyes is alwayes caused by su∣perfluity of humours. The third thing to be ob∣served, is, that the Patient never eate, except the meat be first well concocted, that he have a natu∣rall appetite thereto, and that he doe avoid multi∣tude of meats at one meale, which differ in sub∣stance and in quality, let his bread be of the best wheat well boyled and levened, let him abstaine from salt meat, and that which is dryed, but espe∣cially from Hogs Flesh; the Flesh of young Bullocks, Capons, and of Birds that live in woods is profitable for him; also boyle with his meate and other pottages, Hisope, Mariorum, Sage, Rosemary, Eye-bright, the Roots of Parsley, Pimpernill, and the like: But if the fluxe bee caused of thin and sharpe humours, then boyle with his meate and pottage, and other warme things Borage, Buglosse, Sorrill, Chernill, Ce∣lendine, Eyebright, Fennell, and Purslow seedes, with many other things.
Other pottages are also very hurtfull, as those of Letrices, Purslow, Colworts, as also of Mili∣ons, Onions, Leekes, Garlike, Musterd-seed, Ra∣dishes; as also Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, pease, and white meats instead of Butter, all which are naught for Fluxes of the eyes. Strong wine and strong Ale doe also hurt, let him use Ale that is not very strong, but well boy∣led, or else Pthisan drinke, wherein Agrimony, Eye-bright and Pruens have beene boyled, then let it be a little sweetned with Sugar and spiced with Cinamon; but if the Patient cannot abstaine from wine, by reason of Age or Imbecility of the ven∣tricle, let him choose old white wine which is not very strong: Sleepe and rest are very convenient in Diseases of the eyes, but watching and study is very hurtfull, especially presently after meat, to which may be added Venus Sports. Secondly, let the hurtfull humour which flow∣eth to the eyes, be digested, prepared and evacuated and if the flux be caused by a hot and sharp Hu∣mour, let it bee digested with this following Ju∣lip: ℞ Aquar. Bitonicae. Euphrasie. Borragini: Acitoce ana. ℥ i. ss. Syrupi de nymphea Violatia et de Cicorio ana, ℥ ss misce. Make a Iulip for two mornings, and then purge him with this following potion: ℞ Electuar. diacathol. ʒ iv. Diaphenic ʒ ij. Syrupi ros. solut. cum Rhabar. et Agaric. ℥ ij.
Make a potion with the water or decoction of Betony or Eye-bright, or else administer these Pills: ℞ Masse pillular de quinque generibus myrobolonor Pil. agregativar ana. ℥ ss. Diagridii grana iiij. With water of Eye-bright, forme fine pills unto Children you may administer them from ʒ i. to ʒ ii or ʒ iii. according as age and strength doth permit; also let them be purged with Manna, or the powder of Machaocan, the body being purged use this follow∣ing Electuary: ℞ Conserve Flor. betonicae Euphrasie et Rosarum ana. ℥ misce. Vnto Children give a dram or two; the body be∣ing purged, use this following Electuary. ℞ Conser. Flor. beton. et Euphrasie ana. ℥ ii. Salvie et Rosmarini ℥ i. misce. Let the Patient take of this Electuary, the stomacke being empty, the quantity of a nut, the Decoction of Guiacum, the roots of China sarsa Parilla Sassaphras, is very good to dry up evil humours and to strengthen the sight: Also the stomack ought to be looked unto because of his vicinity with the brain, for a weak sto∣mack sendeth many vapours unto the brain which doe after descend unto the eyes; therefore let the Patient abstaine from all things which do clog the stomacke, and are hard of digestion, let him also take twice a weeke ʒ i▪ of this Masse; ℞ Pil. hiere pigr. simpli. gal. masse pillul. Assaieret. Rhah. opt. triti pulveris sene ana. ℈. i. Gariophiller. Macis. Cinamoni and. ℈ ss. With Syrup. Rosar. lenit, make a Masse of Pill. Or else this following powder;
℞ Sem. Coriandri preparat Sem anisi ana. ℥ i. Flor. betonicae Rosar. rubr. Euphrasiae ana. ℥ ss. Cinamoni electi macis ana ʒ ii. Pellicular, interior, ventriculi, Galinarum ℥ ss. Sacchari rosat, ad pondus omnium. Mix them, and make thereof a powder. Now followeth the 3 Intention which consisteth of Medicine Chirurgicall, therefore if there be great pain, apply to the forehead some defensive out of the 7. Chap. but drop into the eyes this following Cole∣ry, and apply it with doubled clothes wet therein. ℞ Aquar. plantaginis Rosarum Euphrasiae ana. ℥ i. Caeruse lotae Tutie preparat. Olibani subtilis. pulv. ana. ʒ. i. misce. But if the flux of the eyes be of cold humours, then apply this Colery following: ℞ Aquar. Euphra. Foeniculi Rutae ana, ℥ ii. Olibani, Masticis, Myrrhe, Aloes, Tutiae preparat. Sacocollae ana. ʒ. i. Make a Colery according to Art. If the flux be of blood and of hot humours, then o∣pen the Cephalica veyne in the arme; if age doe give way, unto children apply Leeches unto the Capha∣lica veyne in the arme, or unto the jugular veynes in the necke, also apply Cupping-glasses with great flame unto the shoulders; also apply this follow∣ing Viscatory behind the eares. ℞ Canthar. in Pulv. redact. num. vj. Fermenti acris ℥ ss misce. With a drop or two of strong Vinegar, The inner Barke of the black Grape tree, if it be brui∣sed and applyed, hath the same quality.
Also let the Patient use twice or thrice a weeke this following Masticatory: ℞ Masticis Radic. Pyretri. Summitat maioranae. Nucis Muscate ana. ʒ i. Make thereof trochisqs in a morter, about the bignes of a Lupine: Also Mastique being chewed and kept a good space in the mouth, doth draw much humi∣dity from the brain, also Rasons and Damasine Pru∣ens, moistned in Oyle of Fennell, and chewed, al∣though they doe not altogether so much draw Hu∣mours from the braine, yet they doe corroborate the braine and sight. I doe not allow of sneezing powders in diseases of the Eyes, for by drawing of humours unto the nose, they fill the Nerves Optiques therwith, and so wea∣ken the sight, also strew this following powder upon the Head: ℞ Flor. rorismarini, Salvie, Betonice, Stoechados, Rosar. rubr. Summitatum maiorini ana. M. ss. Coriand. Prepar. ʒ. i. Ligni aloes, Mistieis, Thuris, Diam. dulc. Nucis moscate Granor. Alkermes. Cut them small, and beat them together in a morter according to Art. If the sight be weakned, by reason of a continuall and long flux, let it be corroborated with this fol∣lowing distilled water: ℞ Euphra. cum toto Anagal. flore Purpureo. Henbar foenic. ana. M. X. ii. Rute M. vi. incidantur. Afterwards powre upon them of Rose-water lb / . ii. set them in the Sunne in a glasse vessell well stopped, the space of a day, and then distill them in Balneo Marea, with a gentle fire, it is good for the sight.
CHAP. XIV. Of the deformity of Scarres and their Remedy. THe chief causes of the deformity of scarres, after the cure of Combustions, are first, that the skin, flesh, veynes, &c. are drawne together and hardned with the force of the fire; Secondly, because that the radicall moysture (by whose benefit all Vlcers are cicatrised) is by the force of the fire dryed and con∣sumed, whereby it commeth to passe, that even as dry and barren ground bringeth forth weeds, Cockel, and all other imperfect things; but on the contrary the fat and moist ground bringeth forth all things perfect; so also by the defect of the naturall heat and radicall moisture, there commeth filthy scarres; also the use of cold Medicines causeth naughty scarres, as Hippocrates witnesseth in these words, Cold things are biting in Vlcers, hardneth the skin causeth intolle∣rable paine, blacknesse, &c. Wherefore, that we may avoid these hurtfull things, we ought presently in the beginning to apply emolent Medicines, as wee have before instructed: Now, as appertaining to the cure, first of all let the hardnesse of the skin be softned and made supole with the far of Beares, Hens, Capons, Oyle of Lillies, and of the yeolke of Egges, or else with this following Oyntment.
℞ Pinguid. galine Vrsi Piscis Thymali. Liliorum. De vitellis ovorum ana. ʒ ij. Ol. Myrrhe ʒ i. Succi lumbricor ℥ ss. misce. Make an Oyntment, with the which anoint the scar, every day three or foure times: Then apply thereon a thin plate of Lead rubbed over with Quick-silver, but before the affected part be anointed with the fore said Ointment, let it be washed with water, in the which Bran and a little Myrrhe hath bin boyled, but if the scarres be so much elevated, that they require greater mollifying, foment the place with this fol∣lowing Decoction: ℞ Radicum althe cum toto, Ralic. brione & Lilior Albor. ana. ℥ i. Flor. Chammomille Mel. loti ana. M. i. Sem. Foenogr. lini. ana. ℥ ss. Let them be boiled in water, or else in the Decoction of the head and feet of a Weather, and apply it with sponges, or clothes dipped therein; after the fomen∣tation, anoint with this following Oyntment, and ap∣ply thereon a Cerot of Oesope, or a plaister of Frogs with Mercury, and reiterate it every day, untill the cicatrix be sufficiently mollified, that it may be pres∣sed downe with the plate of Lead. And as often as the Chirurgion shall anoint the scar, let him endea∣vour to stretch the skin that is contracted, with both his hands, as the Glovers doe their skin. Then let the wound which was before contracted, be dilated, which may be fitly done with linnen clothes spread over with glue, as is expressed by this following figure.
A The wound of the scar being cut. BBBB these are foure linnen clothes spread over with glew, two whereof shall be placed to both sides of the wound so that there remaine some space betweene them, as appeareth by the Figure. CCCCCC these are sixe strings to be tyed in knots, which may be more or lesse, according to the magnitude of the wound; furthermore, as soone as the glew is dry, so that the Linnen clouts doe sticke fast, which will be within the space of foure or five houres, then let the string be tyed fast together, and so the skin which is be∣tween the clouts will be drawne and forced together and the wound will be dilated; In the meane time, hasten to cure and cicatrice the wound as fast as you may, and remove not your clouts untill the wound be cured, let your Glew be made of astringent and clammy things, and of healing Plaisters, as ℞ Farine volitatis ℥ i. Masticis Rosar. rub. Sanguinis dracon. ana. ʒ ii.
Make thereof a fine powder and mixe it with the whites of Eggs and Gum. Tragacanth. to the thick∣nesse of Honey. CHAP. XV. Of the retracted Nerves and crooked Juncturs after Combustions. IN great Combustions of the Joynts, the sinewes are divers times retracted and drawn together, and the junctures are made crooked, and especially if the Chirurgion was not very diligent in the beginning, and applyed not the splints and other instruments, concerning which we have written in our 11. Chap∣ter, wherefore we must institute a new cure; but first let the body be purged according to the nature of the humour predominating; for which these things following are very convenient, Pil. de hirmodact. & Pil. Agrag. also Elect. Indiur. et benedict. taxatina. If the body be full of humours open a veyne, and draw blood acording to the magnitude of the strength concerning which take the counsell of a Physitian. The body being purged and prepared, as we have even now shewed, the affected part is to be mollified and supplyed with this following Decoction. ℞ Radicum Altheae cum toto Radic. Briconiae Lillior albor Malvarum ana. ℥ ii. Fol violarum. Flor. Chamomillae Meliloti. Hyperici Cham. ana. M. i.
Sem. Eoenogr. Sem. Lini. ana. ℥ i. Boyle them in the Broth of the head and feet of a Weather, for a Fomentation, then anoint the whole Member with this following Ointment, ℞ Vnguent. de Althea Auxungie humane. Gallinasum Anseris Vrsi ana ℥ ss. Succi lumbricor ℥ ss i. Aque vitae ℥ ss. Afterwards apply a Plaister of Musilage, Hysope, or Melilot spread upon a clout, the finewes, ligaments, and junctures being well molified, we must use exten∣tion, which may be fitly done without pain, with fit Instruments; if the disease be in the knee or Elbow, then those Instruments are very convenient which are drawn by Gualtherus Reyff in his Chirurgery.
Or else this following Instrument of our invention which you may prepare with a little trouble, and it may serve as well to the Elbow as the Knee. AA notifieth a little Casket made of wood, as well in the first figure as in the second. BB is an Iron plate made in the fashion of a Ring
being of such breadth, that it will compasse the whole knee; but that in the first-figure is open, and the other is shut and compasseth the knee, but that it may the bet∣ter be fitted, it is necessary that part which belongeth to the rowndell of the knee be made hollow. CC. Sheweth a skrew, by whose benefit the Ring is drawne downwards, or when need requires, is lifted up∣wards. DDD As well in the first as in the second Figure, in one part it noteth a haspe, and in the other part it shew∣eth holes, by whose benefit the ring is made straight, or slake, according as need requireth. E. Noteth henges; in the first Figure with the which the ring is opened and shut; therefore the ring being o∣pened, and the legge being placed in the Casket, ye shall fit the ring about the knee, and defend it with pleagets and linnen clothes, then haspe it close with those haspes and holes which are noted with DDD. Furthermore, it hath two Buckels noted thus FFFF. and two thongs signified with GGGG. by whose benefit the legge is bound into the Casket: therfore the skiew being turned from the right hand towards the left, the ring and the knee are drawed towards the Casket, and the legge may be extended as much as the Chirurgion shall see fitting: Furthermore, that the skrew may easily turne about in the ring, it is necessary, that it have a knobe which is no∣ted with H. 1. Is an iron plate which is annexed to the Casket, be∣tween the two Buckels, that thereby the skrew may the more easily be turned about. But if the Combustion be in the Fingers, an industri∣ous and witty▪ Chirurgion may invent Fit instruments for the purpose: I have restored all the Fingers except
the Thumbe of the right hand, which by a Combustion were drawne and conglutinated to the back of the hand, which kind of cure, although we have already touched in our observations, yet lest any thing should be here desi∣red, which may fit to this purpose, I will here againe annex it, Reader doe thou favourably judge of them all. Anno 1596 Isaacke Gotteran of Perry, brought unto me Mi∣chael his son, which was of the age of 14. months, who at the age of sixe months, fell with his right hand into the burning coales, whereby his fore-finger, middle-finger, ring-finger, and little finger, were so burnt together with the back of the hand, that the fingers fell downe even unto the first articulation; but because his Father did commit the Cure to unskilfull people, all his fingers except his thumbe were compact together with the skin of the backe of his hand, as it were in the forme of a Globe as is seene by this following Figure:
After seven months, when the cure was perfectly fi∣nished, the parents of the fore-said Child brought him unto me, pittifully desired my helpe, wherefore when I had parged his body with Manna, being given him in his broth, I did prepare Chirurgicall Medicines, as follow∣eth; First I used this following Decoction and Oynt∣ment for certaine dayes together: ℞ Radic. althaee cum toto Radic. Bryon. Lilior alb. ana. ℥ i. Flor. Chamomil. Meliloti. Chamedr. ana. M. j. Sem. Foenogr. lino ana. ℥ i. Let them be boyled in the broth of the head and feet of a Weather for a fomentation, then anoint the whole hand and arme with this following Oyntment: ℞ Vngunt dialtheos ℥ i. Auxungue humane Gallinarum Anseris, Vrsi, succi lanibricor ʒ ss. Mix them and make an Oyntment, then rowle the hand in a plaister of Mufilage, when the Nerves and the Cal∣losity of the wrinkled skin of the backe of the hand, and of the fingers, were with these things sufficiently mol∣lified; I cut away that hard skin between the backe of the hand and the fingers, with an incision knife; and I also separated the fingers, then I strewed thereon my powder, to stanch blood, and I appleed theron the whits of Egges mixed with the waters of Roses and Plantaine and Oile of Roses; also I layed a defensive to the wrist, the next day I applyed this following digestive with soft plegets upon the incisions, as before with Oyles. ℞ Terebinth. lot. in aqua. plantag. et Rosar ℥. i. Olei rosac▪ et de vitel ovor ana. ℥. ii. ℈ ss. Vitel. Vnius ovi misce. The 5 day I used this following Instrument, and I ende∣vored by little and little to bring the fingers to their na∣turall order:
A is a Splint of the breadth of three fingers, so long, that it may reach almost from the wrist to the elbow. B is a round sticke of the thicknesse of the thumbe, which is fixed to the Splint, and in the middle of this sticke are foure wodden pins, noted with CCCC.
Also the splint hath two Buckels noted with DD. and two thongs signified by EE. by whose benefit the In∣struments is bound to the arme: Therefore when the Instrument was well bound to, and every where well∣bow lstered with linnen clothes, I had in readines finger∣stalls made of Leather, which put upon the tops of the Fingers, and with the strings that hangeth to them. I drawed the Fingers downwards, and bound them to the pins noted with CCCC. and every day I tyed them straighter. Which that it might the easier be done, I anointed the arme with the aforesaid Oyntment, as often as I dressed the wound, and lest that the Fingers should againe con∣glutinate, I put between them leaden plates, and so by little and little the Fingers were reduced to their proper functions; In the meane time I consolidated and cicatri∣ced the wounds, but not with those things which doe greatly dry, but those which have also an emolent facul∣ty, with such Medicines as we have shewed, and so by Gods helpe we restored the hand to his proper use. CHAP. XVI. Of Lightning, and how those which are stricken with it, are to be succoured. BEcause that of all Fires, the Fire from Heaven is most vehement and dangerous, and containeth in it
certaine supernaturall faculties, with which a man may soone be destroyed; therfore I will make no long stay to what should be done therein: For this cause I have thought good (for the benefit of the Reader) briefly to shew how those who are stricken with Lightning are to be handled and I doe admonish all Chyrurgions, that if they possible may, they take a Physitian with them to such kinde of Patients. Now seeing this heavenly Fire (as experience teach∣eth) containeth in it certaine supernaturall qualities, we may also perceive it to have an adjunct quality and mat∣ter, very hurtfull and venomous, which is easily percei∣ved by that horrible stincke and pestiferous odour which commeth as well from men as from other creatures that are stricken with Lightning: Hence it is, (as divers lear∣ned men doe testifie) that Beares, Foxes, Conies, or o∣ther creatures using such places, which are stricken with Lightning, by reason of the filthy smell they cannot stay in their dens; and dogges also will not eate of the Flesh that hath been stricken with Lightning. By these things we may perceive how dangerous it is to use hearbs which grow in such places: and the Earth (as Oulaus witnesseth) is perceived as it were to bestrew∣ed with Brimstone, wherefore it is no marvell, that men do without any manifest cause fall downe dead. Now this Fire, as Seneca witnesseth, is subtill; hence it commeth, that inanimate creatures, as Trees, and the like, are also hurt; Also besides that subtilty it hath in it a most dry substance, and earthy; hereby it commeth to passe, that it penitrateth and hurteth the soft parts of the body, but those which are more hard it breaketh, which I have observed not onely to chance to animate creatures, but also to those which, are inanimate.
If there be any pustels, wounds, or spots, then apply onions mixed with salt, or the leaves of rue powned with Treacle, and also apply Cupping-glasses and Leaches, the Bladders being first cut; those things which doe cause putrifaction and the falling of the scar, in this cause are not to be used; therefore cut off the Escarre with a paire of cizors, and then apply this following mundifying Oyntment: ℞ Mellis Rosacei ℥ ij. Futuerisradic. vincet & Angeli. ana, Fol. rutae cum pul. qussatpii Theriacae ℥ ii. Aqua vitae ℥ ss misce. Make thereof a Mundicative, when the Ulcers are mundified then strew on this following powder: ℞ Pulveris radic. Vincitcvici & Angelicae ana. ℥ ss i. Myrrhe, Masticis, Olibani, Fol. Scordii ana. ℥ iv. Make them all into a small powder, with the which with a suffi∣cient quantity of the juice of Sanicle or of peares, make thereof Trochicqus and dry them in the shade, then make it into powder If any bones be broken, they are to be reduced, but the Chirur∣gion ought to have a great care that he apply not such aftringent and cooling plaisters, as he useth to do in other fractures. for they doe hinder the expiration of the venome; wherefore apply this following Cataplasme: ℞ Farinae Fabar. Lupinor, ana. ℥ i. ss. Pul. radic. vincitexici & Angelicae ana. ℥ ss. Polior. cutae M. ℥ ss. Boyle them with Oximel. unto the forme of a powltiee, then mix therwith or Triacle or Mithridate z i. and let fracture be once e∣very day new bound up, and let the powltice be renewed, but first wash the member with wine in the which the roots of An∣gelica hath been boyled, and a little Triacle dissolved in vinegar of Roses, which ought to be done presently whilst the feare of the venome is present; also apply a Defensive about the broad∣nesse of the palme of the hand, about the fracture, that the ele∣vation of the venome may be turned from the noble parts: Ye ought also to looke, that the belly be kept soluble, which if it be not so by narure, then use Suppositories and Clisters, ab∣staine from purging and blood letting, except there be any par∣ticular occasion to the contrary, in the which take the counsell of a Physitian. FINIS.
