H3091 12539624 62937
LONDINOPOLIS; AN Historicall Discourse OR PERLUSTRATION Of the City of LONDON, THE Imperial Chamber, and chief Emporium OF Great Britain: WHEREUNTO Is added another of the City of WESTMINSTER, WITH The Courts of Justice, Antiquities, and new Buildings thereunto belonging. By Iam Howel Esq Senesco, non Segnesco. LONDON, Printed by I. Streater, for Henry Twiford, George Sawbridge, Thomas Dring, and Iohn Place, and are to be sold at their Shops, 1657.
DE PONTE LONDINENSI Ejus{que} Stupendo Situ & Structurâ, Ad instar Celebris illius Hexastichi poetae Sannazarii de urbe Veneta—Viderat Hadriacis— Cum Londinensem Neptunus viderat Urbem, Vectus ibi propriis at{que}; revectus aquis, Dum densam penetrat Syluam, Lucos{que}; ferentes Pro ramis funes, pro foliis{que}; Cruces, Cum superimpositum Torrenti flumine Pontem Viderat, et rapido ponere jura freto, Cum tantos muros, ferrumina, castra, tot Arcus Vidit, & haec tergo cuncta jacere suo, Arcus, qui possent totidem formare Rialtos Metiri si quis summa vel ima cupit; Haec Deus undarum aspiciens, fluxus{que}; retrorsum Tundere, & horrendos inde boare Sonos, Nunc mihi quanta velis Terrae miracula pandas Est primus Mundi Pons, ait, Iste Stupor.
The same paraphrased in English. Of London-Bridg, and the Stupendous Site, and Structure thereof. When Neptune from his billows London spyde, Brought proudly thither by a high Spring-Tyde; As through a floating Wood He steer'd along, And dancing Castles cluster'd in a throng; When he beheld a mighty Bridg give law Unto his Surges, and their fury awe; When such a shelf of Cataracts did roar, As if the Thames with Nile had changed her shoar When he such massy Walls, such Towrs did eye, Such Posts, such Irons upon his back to lye, When such vast Arches he observ'd, that might NineteenThe prime Bridge in Venice. Rialtos make for depth and height, When the Cerulean God these things survayd, He shook his Trident, and astonish'd said, Let the whol Earth now all Her wonders count This Bridg of Wonders is the Paramount.
To the Renowned City of London. To the Right Honourable, Honourable, and all others, Who owe their first Birth or wellbeing to so Noble a Metropolis. IT was a notable Character, which Cornelius Tacitus, (that famous Register of Time, who had lived here many years) did give of London about fifteen hundred years agoe, Londinum copiâ Negotiatorum, & Comeatu maximè celebre, London a most renowned Mart for multi∣tude of Marchants, and Commerce. If She deserved such a Character in those dayes, what would She merit now? who being compared to what she was then, may be said, in point of magnitude, to be as a large Volume in Folio, to a Book in Decimo Sexto: And, in point of Trade, as in an East Indy Carack, to a Quinbourough Oyster ketch. I have read of some, who have bin enamor'd of Cities, as others use to be of Mistresses: so Charles the Emperor, was struck with the love of Flo∣rence, when among other expressions he said, That she was a fair Lady, fit to be seen only on Holidayes; So a French Baron was so taken with the City of Paris, (which is known to be none of the neatest) that he said, Could he live ever in Paris, he would quit his right to Paradise. And it is storied of Tamberlain, that having got Constantinople, the first Com∣plement he put upon Her, was, that he had heard so much of Her rare beauty, that He came from so far off to Court Her; but answer was made, that it was the Custom of Thrace, to Court fair Ladies, not with Trum∣pets and Drums, but with Dulcimers, and other melodious Instruments. I may well affirm, that London is not inferior to any of these, as will appear in a Parallel hereunto annexed: And having breath'd Air, and slept in her bosom, now near upon forty years (except the times that I was a∣broad upon forren Employments,) it is no wonder, if I be habitually in love with Her; nor have I bin wanting to express it many times by dedicating unto Her the great French Dictionary refin'd, and enrich'd with divers Additionals; Then in giving Her some warnings by the sad destiny of Je∣rusalem, in an Epitome that goes of Josephus; I shewed my self also very sensible of Her case at that time, when I addressd unto Her Englands Teares, and Mercurius Acheronticus. nor is it long since, that I made publick love to Venice, and Courted Naples also, and I came off with no ill success; I hope to do the like here.
I know others ave treated already of the same Subject, and given a lau∣dible account of the City of London, but Gold may be often told over with∣out fouling the fingers. I have read near upon a dozen several Survayes of Rome and Venice, with other Cities, and I alwayes found new Observa∣tions; But it is now above thirty foure years agoe, (which are near upon five Ages in the Law) since any thing was written of London, and West∣minster her collateral Sister; which tract of time, affords variety of accidents, which the Reader shall find in this new Account: wherein as I have bin care∣ful not to preermit any thing thats Material, so my special Caution hath bin not to thrust in any frivolous pedantick things, or Superfluities, where∣unto my nature hath bin alwayes averse; Moreover, I promise the Reader, that he shall meet with many other Observations here, which were never yet drawn off the Presse, or exposed to publick light until now. I will conclude my Epistle with this Question, If it was esteemed an honour among the Greeks, to be born in Athens; If among the Italians, to be a Roman; If among the Spaniards to be a Toledano: why should it be lesse honour for an Englishman to be born in London? My hearty prayers to Heaven are, for the incolumity, and welfare of this Great City, for the aversion of all Iudgements, and that she may still flourish with affluence of all Earthly felicity; by which prayer I subscribe my self, Much Honoured Sirs, Your humble, and ready Servant, Iam: Howel.
SOME ADVERTISEMENTS TO THE READER. THey who make researches into Antiquity, may be said to passe often through many dark Lobbies, and dusky places, before they come to Aula lucis, the Great Hall of light; They must repair to old Archives, and peruse many mouldred and moth-eaten Records, and so bring light as it were out of darkness, to inform the present World, what the former did, and make us see truth through our Ancestors eyes. Now, though we commonly term Them that went before us our Ancestors, yet if we have respect to the extent of Time, and the Age of the World, we who live now, may be called the more Ancient; For They lived, some of them in the Non-age, some in the Youth, some in the Adolescence, some in the virility of the World, And We who now crawl up and down the earth, may be said to live in the declining and doting old decrepit Age: Therefore if relation be had to true longaevity, We may be rather called the Older: Insomuch, that a Child born to day, as he is part of the Universe, and the pro∣duct of Time, may be said to be more ancient then Adam, which I con∣ceive to be the meaning of that common saying among us, The youn∣ger Brother is the ancienter Gentleman. Moreover, it is desired, that the discerning Reader be advertized, that Historians and Antiquaries, may well be compared to Architects, who in rearing up a Fabrick, although the Idaea, and design of the work, with the site, the contrivement of rooms, the contignation of parts and Symmetry, be wholly in themselves; yet in point of Substance, they fetch their Materials from else where; so the Historian and Antiquary, though the method, the style, and compilement be his, yet he hath his matter from others, either from Manuscripts, or printed Records, except these modern passages that are Synchronical with himself. Furthermore, an Historian may be compared to one walking in a Garden, and making a posie of Flowers, which he culs and plucks from divers beds and banks; now, though the Flowers be none of his, yet the choyce of them, and twisting them together, to give the fuller fragnancy, and not to thrust in any unsavory vegetal, is solely his own work. The Lord Bacon's Henry the seventh, and my Lord Harbert's Henry the eighth, though the composition, and digesting be theirs, whereby they denominate the Books, yet, under favour, touching the main In∣gredients, they took them from others, who had written the life of
those Kings before: So, concerning this present Treatise, although the trace, and form of the Structure be mine own; yet, I am so much the Child of modesty, as to acknowledge to have fetch'd most of my Materials from others, who preceded me in the same Subject; as from Mr. Stow, and those industrious persons, who have made Additionals unto him: yet, as I gave a hint before in my Epistle Dedicatory, there be divers things inserted here, which are not found there, nor any where else; besides those modern Occurrences which have happened since, and are contemporary with myself.
THE CHIEFEST MATERIALS THAT Go to the Compilement of this new Peece. 1. A Proeme. 2. The Historical part of London touching her first Rise and Foundation, with her degrees of growth. 3. Of the Great and glorious Temple of St. Pauls, with its dimensions, and places annexed; together, with the rest of the Churches in City, or Suburbs. 4. Of the 26. several Wards, Precincts, or Aldermanries of London, into which the whole City is divided. 5. Of the Political, and Civil Government of the City of London, as also of the spiritual. 6. Of the Walls, Streets, Gates, and Towers of London; with the Prisons, and places of restraint. 7. Of the Inns of Court and Chancery, of the Doctors Commons, Gresham, and Sion Colledge, with the publick Schools. 8. Of the Twelve chief Companies, whence the Lord Mayor is extracted, with other Societies of Marchant Adventurers, and the 61. Cor∣porations. 9. Of their several Halls or Guilds, dispersed up and down in convenient places. 10. Of the Great Tower of London, the Royal Exchange, of Guild-Leaden and Bassings-Hall, &c. 11. Of the White, and Black, the Gray, Cruchet, and Austin Fryers, with other Religious Houses, as Nunneries and Hospitalls. 12. Of the famous, and great Navigable River of Thames, from the first Source, till she dischargeth her self into the Ocean. 13. Of London-Bridge, and her admired Structure; which nevertheless, would see better, had she fewer Eyes, and that her Nineteen Arches were reduc'd to Nine. 14. Of the Prerogative, and great trust, the Lord Mayor, and the City, have for the over-sight, and repair of the said Bridge, with the Con∣servancy of the said River. 15. Of the City of Westminster, and the Abbey. 16. Of the Strand, the New Exchange, the Savoy, and all the Great Houses towards the Water-side.
17. Of the Covent Garden, Saint Giles, Lincolns-Inne-Fields, Saint Martins, and Drury-Lane, with all the late New Buildings. 18. Of Westminster-Hall, and all the Tribunals of Iustice, there sedentary, 19. Of the High Court of Parliament, and the Admiral∣ty, &c. 20. A Parallel 'twixt London, and other Great Cities of the World, whereof divers are spoken of in the Corollary.
LONDON London the glory f Great Britaines Ile Behold her Landsip here, and tru pourfile. 1 St. Paul 2 White Hall 3 Suffolke house 4 Yorke house 5 Savoy 6 Somerset house 7 Arundell house 8 St Clemens 9 S. Dunstane 10 The Temple 11 S. Brides 12 S. Andrew 13 Baynards Castle 14 Queene Hythe 15 S. Pulches 16 Three Cnes 17 The Waterhouse 18 The Still 19 Bow Churche 20 Guild Hall 21 S. Michaels 22 S Lorentz Poultney 23 Fishmongers Hall 24 The Old Swan 25 The Bridge 26 Gray Church, 27 S Dunstan in the East, 28 Belinsgate, 29 Cristome house 30 The Tower 31 Tower wharfe, 32 S. Catharins, 33 S. Olaffe, 34 S. Marie Gveris, 35 Winchester house 36 The Globe, 37 Br Garden 38 The Swan, 39 Harvwe on the Hill. 40 Hamsted, 41 Hygate 42 Hackney 43 Potney, 44 ll Ships, 45 Gally Fuste, 46 Cool harbour,
THE PROEME, OR FIRST ENTRANCE Into the City of LONDON. MY purpose is to give as exact an account, as my Enquiries can, of the renowned City of London, with her Suburbs annexed; And, to proceed herein the more regularly, the foundation of my Discourse shall be layed with that of Hers, beginning with her first Rise or Original; Then it shall grow up with Her, accor∣ding to those Degrees of profection, that she is now arrived unto. From her Foundation we will bring you to her Walls, and so lead you in at her Gates; whence you shall walk along her streets, and visit her Churches with o∣ther ancient Religious Houses, and publique Edifices; Then we shall bring you to refresh your self at her Conduits, and Aquaeducts, her brooks, bourns, and Wells; Afterwards, we shall gently lead you along over her Bridges, and so bring you to solace your self upon the rare, and renowned River of Thames, which we shall derive from her very source, and accompany her Stream all along, till she comes to pay tribute to the Ocean; Then we shall make a perambulation in her seve∣rall Precincts, Divisions, and Wards. And because nothing displayes the prudence of a City more, then her political way, and method of Government, we shall en∣deavour to satisfie you in that point, and speak of her Magistracy, her Priviledges, her well-moulded Corporations and Companies, whereby we shall take occasion to revive the memory of those famous Patriots, and Worthies, which she hath produc'd and bred, with their Munificence, their Merits, and publique Monu∣ments. We shall go on then to give the neerest conjecture we can make of her dimen∣sions, in point of length and latitude, and of the number of humane souls, that u∣sually dwell, and lodge within Her; Nor shall we conceal some Clowds that have hung over her, and ill-favour'd clashings she hath had with her Soveraign Prin∣ces. And lastly, There will be a short Discourse by way of parallel, betwixt the City of London, and other the most populous great Marts of the World.
Of the Foundation, and first Rise of the City of LONDON. IT is as difficult a task to finde out the Original of some Nations and Cit∣ties, as it is to finde out the Spring of the mysterious River of Nile; which tumbling down with a horrid noise of Cataracts through so many huge Rocks, above two thousand miles, comes punctually every Summer solstice, to visit the gran Cairo; and then takes her leave of Her, as punctually the Autum∣nal Equinox next following, having first impregnated the hot womb of Egypt, with a wonderful prolificall vertue, for the generation of so many species of A∣nimalls, and Vegetalls. But to finde out the Original of the City of London, 'tis not so hard a matter; yet, there are variety of Opinions hereof, which we will briefly examine; Ptolomy, Tacitus, and Antonine, call her sometimes Londinium, and sometimes Longidinium. Ammianus Marsellinus, calls her Lundinum, and sometimes Augusta, which is, the stately and magnificent City. There are some who call Her Troia nova, or Troynovant; which appellation, Edward the first, in that famous long Letter he writ to Pope Boniface, about the Scots Nation, seemes to assert: Others call her Caer Lud, other Dinas Belin; But that Opinion which quadrats most with truth, is, that her first Founders, and Godfathers, were the ancient Britains, (whom we now call Welsh) who by confession of all Antiquaries, both domestick and sorraign, were the Aborigenes, and first Inhabitants of this Countrey, being contemporary, and as it were concreated with the Iland her self; There are three denominations, which are derived from the Britans, viz. Llhogdin; Llhwndian, and Llhandian, which we shall endeavour to explane; Touching the first, the Britans call a ship Llhong, and Dinan a Town. Insomuch, that Llongdin is no other then Shipton, or a Town of Ships; And I have read of many Cities, who derive their names from Ships, as Naupactum, Nauplia, Naua∣lia Augusti, Nauctathmos; But none of these hath more right to assume the Title of Shipton, or Llhongdin (according to the British) as the City of London hath, in regard that she is situated, upon the gentle ascent, or flank of a Hill hard by a dainty Navigable River, which swelling at certain set houres with the O∣cean Tides, she is able by her deep, and safe Channel to entertain the greatest bottoms and Ships, that can ride on Neptunes back, which makes Her so famous a Mart, those Ships bringing in all the rich Commodities that the VVorld can afford; whereunto alludes old Robert of Glocester, in the Rimes of those dayes, which I thought worthy to insert here for the Antiquity of the Dialect. In the Country of Canterbury, most plenty of Fish is; And most chase of Beasts about Salsbury I wis, And London Ships most, and Wine at Winchester, At Hartford Sheep and Oxe, and fruit at Worcester, Soap about Coventry, and Iron at Glocestor, Metal, Lead, and Tin in the Country of Exceter, Enorwick of fairest wood, Lincoln of fairest men, Cambridge and Huntingdon most plenty of deep venne, Ely of fairest place, of fairest sight Rochester. Touching the second British appellation Llhwndian, Caesar, and Strabo, do mention, that the ancient Britans called those Woods or Groves, which they had barrocadoed and fenc'd about with Trees cast down, and plash'd, to prevent
all inrodes and assaults, they call'd such a place I say Llhwn, which is equivalent to a fenc'd Town, or dwelling, as the Poet sings of them. —Their Houses were the Thicks, And bushy queaches hollow Caves, and Hardles made of sticks. And 'tis more then probable, that in that place, where St. Pauls Church now stands, there was a Wood or Grove at first, in regard there was a Fane or Temple erected there to the honour of Diana; for Historians observe, that whereas Ve∣nus, Mars, and Vulcan were used to have their Temples in the Suburbs, Iu∣piter and Apollo within the City, the Goddess Diana was used to have her Temples set up in Woods, which might make the Britains denominate that place Llhwndian, which is as much as Diana's Grove or Town. As this derivation carrieth a great semblance of truth with it, so the third, viz. Llhandian carrieth as much, if not a greater verisimilitude, and weighs most with me; The Brittains to this day, call a Church or Temple Llhan, whereof there be a great number in Wales to this day, as Llhangorse, Llhansawel, Llhan∣dilo, &c. which signifieth the Churches of such places; And whereas by the Cur∣rent and consentient opinion of all Antiquaries, there was a Pagan Temple, or Fane erected to Diana, in that place where now St. Paul's stands, there being yet there a place called Camera Dianae, where Oxe heads and bones are daily found, which were used to be offered her as victims and sacrifices, I say, 'tis more then probable, that the Britains were induc'd thereby to call the place Nhandian, which is the Temple of Diana; and so in tract of time, the word was contracted, and came to be called London. Now, who was the first Founder of London, is no where precisely found. But whosoever first founded her, they shewed much prudence in the choyce of sci∣tuation; For the happy and fortunate Estate of the City, hath given good proof, that built she was in a good houre, when some propitious Starre was then the ascendent, and marked for long life and continuance, and that she is for anti∣quity very honourable; Ammianus Marcellinus giveth us to understand, that she was called an ancient City in his time, which is above twelve hundred years agoe; Cornelius Tacitus doth seem to do the like three hundred years before, who gives her this Character, Londinum copiâ Negotiatorum, & commeatu valdè celebre for multitude of Merchants, and commerce, London is very renowned: This only was wanting to the glory thereof, that she had not the name of Free City, nor of Colony; Neither indeed had it stood with the Roman interest, if any City flourishing with Trade, should have enjoyed the right of a Free City; And therefore it was, as may be well supposed, that they ordain'd her to be a Pre∣fecture, for so they term'd Towns where Marts were kept, and Justice admini∣stred, yet so that they had no Magistrates of their own, but rulers were sent eve∣ry year to govern them, and for to execute Law in publick matters, namely of Tax, Tribute, Tolls, Customs, Warfare, &c. from the Senate of Rome; Hence it commeth, that Tacitus the Panegyrist, and Marcellinus aforesaid, call her only a Town; But although she was not lostier in name, yet in Wealth, Riches, and Prosperity, she flourished as much as any other, yea and continued alwayes the same, under the Dominions of Romans, Saxons, and Normans, seldom or never afflicted with any great calamities. In the raign of Nero, when the Britains had conspired to recover, and resume their liberty, under the Conduct of Baodicia, the Londoncrs could not with all their vveepings hold Suetonius Paulinus, but that after he had leavied a power of the Citizens to ayd him, he would needes dislodge, and remove from thence, leaving the City naked to the Enemy, who forthwith surprized and slew some few, whom either weakness of Sex, feeble∣nesse of age, or sweetness of the place had detained there: Neither had she su∣stained lesse losse, and misery, at the hands of the Gaules, if she had not sudden∣ly, and beyond all expectation by Gods providence bin relieved; For when C.
Alectus had by a deceitful stratagem, made away Carasius, who taking advan∣tage of our rough Seas, and of Dioclesians dangerous Warres in the East, and withall, presuming of the Gauls, (now French) and most venturous Marriners, and Servitors at Sea, withheld to himself the Revenues of Britain and Holland, and born for the space of six years, the Title of Emperour Augustus, as his Coines here very oft do shew: When M. Aurelius Asclepiedotus had in a Battail slain Alectus in the third year now of his Usurpation of the Imperial Purple and State, those French who remained alive after the Battle hastening to London, would have sack'd the City, had not the Thames, who never fai'd to help the Londoners, very opportunely brought in the Roman Legions, who by reason of a Fog at Sea, were severed from the Navy: For they put the Barbarians to the Sword, all the City over, and thereby gave the Citizens, not only safety by the slaughter of their Enemies, but pleasure in beholding such a sight; And then it was, as our Chronicles record that Lucius Gallus was slain by a Brook side, which ran almost through the middle of the City, and of him was called by the Bri∣tish Nantgall, in English Wallbrook; which name remains yet in a Street, un∣der which there is a ewer within the ground, to rid away the filth, and ordures of the City, Not far from London-stone, which I take to be a Mile-mark or Mil∣liary, such as was in the Market places at Roms, from which were taken dimen∣sions of all journies, every way, considering it is neer the midst of the City, as it lyeth in length. Neither is it probable, she was yet wall'd about; But a little after our Stories report, that Constantine the Great, at the instance of his Mo∣ther Helena, did first fence her about with a Wall made of rough stone, and Bri∣tish Bricks, which took up in compasse, above three miles, so that it inclosed the Model of the City almost four-square, but not equal on every side, considering, that from East to VVest, she is far longer then from South to North. That part of this Wall which stood on the Thames side, is by the continual flowing, and washings of the River fallen down and decayed; yet there appear'd certain re∣mains thereof in Henry the seconds time, as Fitzstephen, who then liv'd doth testifie. The rest now standing, is stronger towards the North, which not ma∣ny years since, was reedified by the meanes of Ioceline, Lord Mayor of London; But towards East and VVest, although the Barons in old time, during their Warres, repaired and renewed it with the ruynes of the Iewes houses then de∣molished, yet it grew quickly, all thorow, out of decay; For Londoners like to those old Lacedemonians, laughed at strong walled Towns, as Cot-houses for Wo∣men, thinking their own Cities sufficiently fenc'd, when they are fortified with bones, and not with stones. This Wall giveth entrance at seven principal double Gates; for I willingly omit the smaller, which as they have bin lately repaired, so they have also new names given them; On the West side there be two, to wit, Ludgate of King Lud a Britain; or Flud-gate, as Leland is of opinion, of a little flud running beneath it, like as the Gate Fluentana in Rome, built again from the foundation; This Gate was made a free Prison, Anno 1378, Bremer being Major, which was con∣firm'd 1382. by a Common Councel in the Guild-Hall, where 'twas ordained, that all Freemen of London should for debts, trespasses, accounts, and con∣tempts, be imprisoned in Ludgate, where at first for lodging and water, they did not pay any thing. We go next to Newgate, the fairest of all the Gates so call'd from the newness thereof, whereas before it was call'd Chamberlane Gate, which now is the publick Gaol or Prison for Criminalls; and also for civil actions, for the County of Middlesex. And it hath bin so many Ages, as appears by Records in King Iohns time; as also in King Henry the third, who (as an old Authour testifieth) sent a Command to the Sheriffs of London, to repair the Gaol of New∣gate. On the North side are four Gates, viz. Aldersgate, or Oldersgate from the
antiquity thereof, or as others would have it from Aldrich a Saxon; the se∣cond is Cripplegate of a Spitle of Cripples sometimes adjoyning thereunto; The third is Mooregate, call'd so of a Moory ground hard by, which is now draind up, and made fair and firm, and turn'd into a field & delightful walks. Which Gate was first built by Faloner Lord Mayor, in the year of our Lord 1414. Then Bishopsgate of a Bishop the Benefactor; which Gate the Dutch Mar∣chants, or Hans of the Styliard were bound by Covenant both to repair, and de∣fend at all times of danger and extremity. On the East side there is Aldgate, so named from the oldnesse, or Elbegate as others terme it, which hath bin oft re-edified; It is thought, that two Gates more stood, besides the Bridge gate, by the Thames side, namely Belmsgate, now a Wharfe or a Key for the Scots Trade; and Donregate or the Watergate, com∣monly call'd Dowgate. There be some Posterns besides that may go for Gates, as that of Christs Ho∣spital, which was made in the Reign of Edward the sixth; Another was made out of the wall lately into Moorfields. But the Postern by the Tower shews that it hath bin very ancient, and an arch'd Gate of much trust; for in times past there was alwaies a person of quality who was Custos of that Posterne. To∣wards the Rivers side, there are also many water gates for the better security of the City. Where the wall endeth towards the River, there were two strong Forts or Bastions, of which the one Eastward remaineth yet, usually called the Tower of London, called in the old British Bringwin, or Tourgwin, which in English is, the White Tower; a most famous and goodly Cittadel encompassed about with thick and strong Walls, full of lofty, and stately Turrets, fenc'd about with a broad and a deep ditch, furnish'd also with an Armory or Magazine of Warlick munition, with other buildings besides, so that it resembleth a Town of it self; and one may well suppose, that those two Castles which Fitz-stephens re∣cordeth to have bin on the East side of this City, went both to the making of this one: The other Fort was on the West side of this City, where Fleet a little riveret ran, whence Fleetstreet took its name, and in time, it was able to bear Vessels, as appears in some Parliament Rolls, which Riveret dischargeth it self into the Thames. Fitz Stephen calls this the Palatin Tower or Castle; And they write, that in the Reign of William the Conqueror, it was consumed by fire, out of the ruines whereof a great part of Saint Pauls Church, was newly built; And also on the very plot of ground where it stood, Robert Kilwarby ArchBishop of Canterbury founded a Religious House for the Dominican Fryars, whence we call the place Black-fryars; whereby a man may easily guess of what bigness it was; howbeit, in that place, stood in the dayes of Henry the second (Gervase of Tilbury in his Book call'd Otia Imperialia is my Author) two Forts or Ram∣parts, the one whereof belong'd to Bainard, the other to the Baron of Mon∣fichet by right of succession, but nothing remaineth of them to this day; yet some think that Pembroke House was a piece of them, which we term Bainards Castle, of Bainard a noble man of Dunmow, whose possession sometimes it was, & whose Successors the Fitz Waters were in right of inheritance, who were En∣sign-bearers of the City of London, (as shall be told hereafter) and among them Robert Fitz water, had licence of K. Edward the first, to sell the Site of Bainards Castle to the forenamed ArchBishop Kilwarby. Neither was this City at that time wall'd only, but also when the Flamins or Pagan Priests were taken away, and Christian Religion established under that good Emperour Constantine, a Bi∣shop was install'd in their room▪ for it appeareth at the Councel of Arles, which in the year of grace 314 was held under the said Constantine the great, the Bishop of London was present; for he subscribed, as it is to be seen in the first Tome of the Councel in this manner. Restitutus, Bishop in the City of London
out of the Province of great Britain; Which Restitutus and his Successors, had their Seat and residence as some affirm, as Saint Peters in Cornhil. From that time, London flourished in such honour, that she began to be call'd Augusta, and by that name was famous under the Emperour Valentinian; For Ammianus Marcellinus in his 27 Book writeth thus, And going forward to London an ancient Town which posterity call'd Augusta: and in the 28 Book, He went from Augusta, which men of old time call'd London; Whence it came that after Constantine's time, there was a Mint appointed therein; For we read in those Pieces of Money, which he caused to be stamp'd in honour of his Fa∣ther Constantius, and in others; this was the Inscription, P. Lon. S. that is Pecunia Londino signata, Mony stamp'd in London. He who had the charge and overseeing thereof under the Comes of Sacrarum largitionum, is in the Book of Notice term'd, Praepositus the saurorum Augustensium in Britannia, that is, Provost of the Treasury of Augusta or London, in Britany. For this name Augusta was a name full of Dignity and Majesty; And both Founders and Repairers of Cities, when they hoped or wish'd, that such Cities would become flourishing and powerful, gave them significant names of good fortune; But among the most auspicious names that be, none is more magnificent, none more auspicate and glorious than Augusta. For, this of Augustus, the most gracious & mighty Emperour Octavianus took unto himself, not without the judgment of the best learned. Sirnamed he was, saith Dio, Augustus as one of great Majesty above the nature of man: for what things be most honourable and sacred, are called Augusta: Neither had London this name for so high an honour, without the Licence of the Roman Emperours; In regard that names could not be im∣pos'd upon Cities without authority, as Virgil notes in that verse of his; Urbem appellabant, permisso nomine, Acestam. The City, by permission, Acesta they did name. But as continuance of time has outworne this so honorable a name of Augusta: to it hath confirm'd that other most ancient name Londinum. Whiles it enjoy'd the foresaid name Augusta, it scaped fair from destruction by a rebellious rout of Ransakers; But Theodosius the father of Theodosius the Emperour did cut them in pieces whiles they were encombred with their spoils, & entred, as Mareia∣nus saith, with exceeding great joy in triumphant manner into the City distressed before, & overwhelm'd with grievous calamities; And marching with his Army from thence, he by his valour and prowesse, so freed Britain from those intolera∣ble calamities and dangers wherewith she was beset, that the Romans, as witnes∣seth Symmachus, honored him among other ancient Worthies, and men of high renown with the Statue of a man of Arms. Not long after, when the Romans Empire in Britain was come to an end, in that publick destiny, and fatal de∣fection of the whole State, it fell unto the English Saxons, but in what sort, it is not well agreed on among Authors; It is most probable that Vortigern to re∣deem himself, being taken prisoner, delivered it for his ransome unto Hengist the Saxon, considering that it did belong unto the East Saxons, whose Coun∣trey also, as Writers do record, Vortigern upon that condition made over unto Hengist. At which time the state of the Church went also to wrack, and endured sore affliction; the Pastors were either slain, or forc'd to fly, their flocks worried, and havock made of all, as well Church goods as others. Theon the last Bishop of London of the British blood, was fain to hide the holy Relique of Saints for a memorial, as my Author saith, and not for any superstition. But although those daies of the English Saxons were such, that a man might truly say, Mars then brandished and shook his weapons, yet was London neverthelesse, as Bede testifieth, a Town of Trade, and traffique, frequented by many Nations resor∣ting
thither by Sea and Land; But afterwards when a more gracious gale of peace breath'd favourably upon this wearied Island, and the English Saxon be∣gan to professe Christianity, it also began to flourish afresh; for Ethelbert King of Kent, under whom Sebert raign'd in this tract, as it  his Vassal, and by courtesie, founded here a Church, and did consecrate it to Saint Paul, which being soon reedified and repaired, became at last most stately and magnificent, it was endowed by degrees with fair revenues, & livings, wherewith were main∣tain'd a Bishop, a Dean, a Chanter, a Chancellour, a Treasurer, fire Archdeacons, thirty Prebendaries, and divers other Incumbents and Officers, who might have a hansome subsistence thereby. The East part of this Church seems to be the newer, and more curiously wrought, having under it a very fair large arch'd Vault, which also is Saint Faiths Church; It was built out of the ruines of that Castle Palatine (spoken of before) by Mauritius the Bishop, about the year of our Lord 1086, whereas it had been formerly consum'd by a wofull accidental fire, whereof William of Mamesbury writeth thus; The beauty whereof is so magnificent, that it deserves to be numbred in the rank of the most excellent Edifices, so large as that arck'd Vault underneath, and the Church above it of such capacity that it may seem sufficient to receive any multitudes of people whatsoever. Because therefore Bishop Mau∣rice carried a mind beyond all measure in this project, he transmitted the cost and charge of so laborious a piece of work unto those that came after: In the end, when B. Richard his Successor had made over all the Revenues belonging unto the Bshoprick to the building of this Cathedrall Church; sustaining him∣self and his family otherwise in the mean while, he seemed in a manner to have done just nothing, notwithstanding that he spent his whole substance thereabout, and yet small effects came thereof. The West part, as also the Cross Isle are very spacious, high built, and goodly to be seen by reason of such huge Columns, and are marvellously beautified with an arch'd roo of stone. Where these four parts crosse one another & meet in one, there ariseth up a mighty large & lofty Tower, upon which stood a spire Steeple, cover'd with lead, mounting up to a wonderful altitude; for it was no less than five hundred, and five and thirty foot high from the ground, which in the year 1087, was set on fire by lightning, and burnt with a great part of the City, but being rebuilt, was afterwards fi'rd again with lightening about an hundred and fifty years ago, and was not perfectly repair'd ever since. The measure and proportion of this stately structure, shall be here set down out of an old authentick Writer, who saith, that Saint Pauls Church containeth in length 690 foot, the breadth thereof is 130 foot, the height of the West arch'd roof from the ground carrieth 102 foot, and the new fabrique from the ground is 88 foot high, &c. The ground belonging to this great Temple, in nature of a Coemitery or Church yard was of vast expansion, for, it reach'd North, as far as St. Nicholas market place; West, almost as far as Ludgate; and South, near to Baynards Castle: Now, as they say, that Rome was not built in a day, no more was this great and glorious Sanctuary, but a long tract of time, and some Ages pass'd before it came to be entirely compleated, and made a perfect Crosse, which is the exact shape of it. Nor did there want many advantages, according to the Genius of those times, to advance the work▪ for persons of good rank, besides pecuniary Contributi∣ons, did labour themselves therein, in their own persons, thinking to do God Almighty good service, to have a hand in rearing up his Temple; Besides, It was an ordinary thing, for the ghostly Father to lay penances upon some peni∣tentiaries, as Masons, Carpenters, Bricklayers, Playsterers, and others to work so many daies gratis in the building, before they could get an absolution; In∣somuch, that it may be said, that as Pauls Church was partly ailt by the sinnes of the people, so it is now destroyed by the sins of the people.
That there stood in old time, a Fane or Pagan Temple to Diana, in this place, (as before was hinted) some have more than only conjectur'd, for there are Ar∣guments to make this conjecture good; Certain old houses adjoyning are in the ancient Records of the Church call'd Diana's Chamber; and in the Church∣yard, while Edward the first raign'd, an incredible number of Ox-heads were found, as we find in our Annals, which the common sort at that time wondred at, as the sacrifices of the Gentiles: and the learned know, that Taurapolia were celebrated to the honour of Diana. But ever since this Temple was erected, it hath been the See of the Bishops of London: and the first Bishop it had under the English, some hundred years after Theon the Brtsh Bishop, was Melitus a Roman, consecrated by Austin Archbishop of Canterbury, in honour of which Austin, (though flat against the Decree of Pope Gregory the great) the Ensigns of the Archbishoprick, and the Metropolitan See were translated from London to Canterbury. Within this grand Cathedral, there lieth Saint Erkenwald, as also Sebba King of the East Saxons, who gave over his Kingdom to serve Christ: King Etheldred, who was an oppresser rather than a Ruler of this Kingdom, cruel in the begin∣ning, wretched in the middle, and shameful in his end; so outragious he was in connivency to parricides, so infamous in his flight and effeminacy, and so disastrrous in his death; Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Sir Simon de Burlie, a right noble Knight of the Garter, executed by encroch'd authority without the Kings assent, Sir Iohn de Beauchamp Lord VVarden of the Cinque-ports, Iohn Lord Latimer, Sir Iohn Mason Knight, Willi∣am Harbert Earl of Pembrook, Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, a man of a deep reach, and exquisite judgement; Sir Philip Sid∣ey, Sir Francis Walsingham, two famous Knights; Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor of England; and a great many Worthies more, lodge there until the Resurrection. Besides this Church, there is not any other work of the English Saxons ex∣tant in London; for why, they continued not long in perfect peace, considering that the VVest Saxons subdued the East Saxons, and London began to be tribu∣tary to the Mercians; Scarcely were these civil Wars hush'd, when a new tempest brake out of the North, I mean the Danes, who pitiously tore in pieces this whole Countrey, and shook this City very sore; for the Danes brought her un∣der subjection, but Alfred recover'd her out of their hands; and after he had repair'd her, he gave her unto Ethelred Earl of the Mercians, who had married his daughter; yet those wastful depopulators, did what they could afterwards to win her by siege: but Canutus, who specially by digging a new Channel, at∣tempted to turn away the Thames from her, though the labour was lost, the Citizens did still manfully repel the force of the enemy; yet were they alarm'd and terrified ever and anon by them, until they lovingly receiv'd and admitted as their King VVilliam Duke of Normandy, whom God design'd to be born for the good of England against those so many spoilers; presently whereupon, the winds were layed, the clouds dispell'd, and golden daies shone upon her: since which time she never sustain'd any signal calamity, but through the special fa∣vour, and indulgence of Heaven, and bounty of Princes, obtain'd very large and great immunities: for she began to be call'd the Kings Chamber, and so flourished anew with fresh Trade, and concourse of Marchants, that William of Malmsbury who liv'd nere those times term'd it A noble and weal∣thy City, replenish'd with rich Citizens, and frequented with the Commerce of Occupiers, and Factors coming from all parts; Fitz-Stephen living also in those daies hath left in writing, that London at that time counted 122 Parish Chur∣ches, and thirteen Convents or Monasteries of Religious Orders; Moreover, he relates, that when a Muster was made of able men to bear Arms, they brought into the field under divers Colours 40000 Foot, and 20000 Horsemen.
London about this time began to display hr wings, and spread her train very wide; Buildings did much increase, and the Suburbs strerch'd forth from the Gates a great way on every side, but Westward especially, which may be said to be best peopled, and the civillest part. For there, all the twelve Inns of Court are situate for the Students of the Law; whereof fower being very fait and large belong to the Iudicial Courts, the rest to the Chancery: Besides two Inns more for the Servientes ad legem, or the Sargeants at Law; ere such a number of young Gentlemen do so ply their Studies in all kind of Sciences, and other civi∣lities, besides the Law; that for a choyse way of Education and Gallantry, Sir Iohn Fortescue, in his Treatise of the Lawes of England, doth affirm, It is not in∣ferior to any place of Christendom: The said four principal Houses are the In∣ner Temple, the middle Temple, Graies Inne, and Lincolns Iune; The two former stand in the very same place, where in times pass'd, during the Raign of King Henry the second, Heraclius Patriark of Ierusalem, consecrated a Church for the Knight-Templers, which they had newly built, according to the form of the Temple, neer unto the Sepulcher of our Saviour at Ierusalem, for at their first Institution, about the yeer of our Lord 1113. they dwelt in part of the Temple, hard by the Holy Sepulcher, whereof they were so named, and vow'd to defend Christian Religion, the Holy Land, and Pilgrims going to visit the holy Sepul∣cher, against all Mahumetans and Infidels, professing to live in chastity and obe∣dience; whereupon, all men voluntarily, and with candid Christian hearts em∣brac'd and honor'd them: so that through the royal munificence of Princes, and other devout people, having got very fair possessions, and exceeding great wealth they flourish'd in a high reputation for piety and devotion; yea, out of an opinion of the holiness of the men, and of the Place, King Henry the third, and many Noblemen desired much to be buried in their Church among them, where some of their Statues are to be seen crosse-legd to this day; for so they were u∣sed to be buried in that Age, having taken upon them the Crosse to serve in the holy Warres, and vow'd the same accordingly: among whom, was William Marshall the elder, a powerful man in his time; VVilliam and Gilbert his Sonnes Marshals of England, and Earls of Pembroke. Upon VVilliam the Elder, there were in the upper part engraven these words, Comes Pembrochiae; and upon one side this Verse. Miles eram Martis, Mars multos vicerat armis. But in process of time, when with insatiable greediness, they had hoarded up much wealth, by withdrawing Tithes from many Churches, and ap∣propriating spiritual Livings unto themselves; and by other meanes, their riches turnd to their ruine; which may be one day the fortune of the Jesuites, as I heard Count Gondamar once say. For thereby, their former innocence and pie∣ty began to be stifled, they sell a clashing with other Religious Orders, their pro∣fessed obedience to the Patriark of Ierusalem was rejected; they drw daily more envy upon themselves, and an ill repute; insomuch-that in the yeer 1312. this Order was condemned of impiety & other hainous crimes, & all this by the Popes Authority; but specially, by the instigation of the French King, they were uttely abolished. Nevertheless, their possessions here, were by Autho∣rity of Parliament, assigned unto the Knights Hospitalers of St. Iohn of Ierusa∣lem, lest that such Lands given to Religious and good uses, should be alienated against the pious Donors Wills. Yet it appeares in ancient writings, that this place, after the expulsion of the Templers, was the Seat and Habitation of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Sir Hugh Spencer, King Edward the seconds Minion, after∣wards of Sir Aimer de Valence, Earl of Pembrook, and in the end turned to two Colleges or Inns of Court for the study of the Lawes; The other two great Inns, were also the mansions of Noble men, Grayes Inne of the Lord Grey of Wilton, and the other of the Earls of Lincoln.
Neer unto this, Henry the third erected between the two Temples, a House for Converts, as they call'd it, for the maintenance of those that were conerted from Iudaisme to Christianity, which Edward the third afterwards made an Ar∣chive, to keep Rolls and Records in, and therefore 'tis called to this day, The Rolls. In the yeer 1381. the Rebels of Essex and Kent, among other places destroy∣ed and pulled down the Lodgings and Houses of this Temple, took out of the Church the Books and Records, that were in hutches of the Apprentices of the Law, carried them out into the street, and burnt them. The House they spoiled, and burnt also, out of an hatred they bore to Sir Robert Hales, Lord Prior of St. Iohn of Jerusalem, which was a place of so high a Dignity, that the Prior of St. John's, was accounted the first Parliamentary Peer of England; But the said House at sundry times, was repaired again, and touching the Gate-house of the middle Temple, Sir Amias Paulet did build it up, while he remained Priso∣ner, having incur'd the indignation of Cardinal Wolsey, for an old grudge. The great Hall in the middle Temple was built about the yeer 1572. in the Raign of Queen Elizabeth. The Temple-Church had of old a Master, and four sti∣pendary Priests, with a Clerk for the ministration of divine service, who had al∣lowance given them out of the Revenues of St. John of Jerusalem, and that Hos∣pital: but now by the revolution of time, and Ecclesiastical alterations, they have but one Minister to serve them. Of fresh water Rivers, Aqueducts, Conduits, and Fountains that belong to the City of LONDON. AS, the principal thing that conduceth to the health of humane bodies, is the blood that runneth through their Veins, so the chiefest thing that tends to the welfare of a City, is to have Springs and Conduits of fresh water run within her: therefore we will proceed now; to give an account of those ancient and present Rivers, Brooks, Boorns, Pools, Wells, Conduits, and Aqueducts, which serve to refresh the City of London. In former Ages, until the Conquerors time, and long after; the City of Lon∣don was watred (besides the River of Thames on the South part) with the River of Wells, as it was then call'd, and on the West with water call'd Wallbrook, run∣ning through the midst of the City, to pay Tribute unto the Thames. There was another water or boorn, which run within the City through Langborn Ward, watring the East part; In the West Suburbs was also another great Water call'd Oldborn, which had its fall into the River of Wells. Then were there 3. princi∣pal Fountains or Wells in the other Suburbs, to wit, Holy Well, Clements Well, and Clarks Well; Near unto this last named Fountain, were divers other Wells, viz. Fags well, Skinners well, Tode well, Loders well, and Rad well. All which Wells having the fall of their over-flowings into the said River, much encreased the stream, and in that place, gave it the name of Well: In West-Smithfield, there was a Pool in Records, called Horse pool, and another in the Parish of St.Giles without Cripplegate; Besides which, they had in every street, and lane of the City, divers fair Wells, and fresh Springs, after which manner, the City was then served with sweet and fresh waters, which being since decayed, other meanes have bin found to supply the want: But the prime and principal device was
found out by that worthy Briton, and Citizen of London, Sir Hugh Middleton, by whose wit, care, and cost, the new River of Ware was brought from Chadwel, and Amwel, to water and refresh the heart, and bowels of the City; The bu∣siness was long in suspence, and under weighty deliberation, it receiv'd heat and cold a long time, being exposed to so many difficulties, and vast expence, able to terrifie the stoutest man. At last, courage and resolution, with a love to the publique good met in the breast of the Adventurer, and spur'd him on to so glo∣rious an enterprise, which hath proved so happily commodious, and of such infinite utility to the whole City, that had he lived under some other Meridians, that I know, he should have had his Statue erected in the eminentest place of the City, to eternize his name & transmit his memory, and keep it fresh (like his waters) to all future Ages; Now as Mr. Stow speaks very ingeniously, if those ene∣mies to all good actions, Danger, difficulty detraction, contempt, scorn, & envy, could have prevail'd by their malevolent interposition, either before, at the be∣ginning, and in the very birth of the attempt, and a good while after; this work had never bin accomplished. 'Tis true, Queen Elizabeth gave way, by act of Parliament, to her Citizens of London, and power for cutting and conveying of a River from any part of Middlesex or Hartfordshire into the City of London, with a limitation of ten years time for the performance thereof; but that Enterprize expir'd with her life: King James her immediate successor, did grant the like, but without-date of time for the same effect; And when the courage of others were quite quail'd and utterly refused the business, Sir Hugh Middleton did undertake it, and o with infinite pains, and no lesse expence, he finish'd the work, by bring∣ing a River of wholsom fine chearful water from Chadwel and Amwel, to the North side of London, near Islington, where he built a large Cistern to receive it, The work began the 28. day of February, Anno Dom. 1608. and in the compas of five years was fully compleated. Touching the Aquaeduct, or the convey∣ance thereof to London, it hardly can be imagined, what difficulties and rubs there were in the way, by reason of the various qualities of grounds, through which the water was to passe; some being ozie, oft, and muddy; others again as stiffe, and craggy; The depth of the Trench in some places descended full thirty foot and more, whereas in other places, it required as much artifice, to mount it over a valley in troughs betwixt Hills, and those troughs to be sup∣ported by woodden Arches, some of them fix'd in the Earth very deep, and ri∣sing in height above 23. foot. Being brought to the foresaid great Cestern, the water was not yet let in, till on Michaelmas day, Anno 1613. being the day that Sir Thomas Middleton, Brother to the said Sir Hugh, was elected Lord Maior of London for the year ensuing. In the afternoon of the same day, Sir John Swinerton, then Lord Maior, accompanied with the said Sir Thomas, Sir Henry Mountague, Recorder of London, and many of the worthy Aldermen, rode in a solemn manner, to see the great Cestern, and first issuing of the strange River thereunto, which then was made free Denizon of London, and the Solemnity was thus. A Troop of Labourers to the number of threescore, or more, well apparell'd, and wearing green Monmouth Caps, after the British manner, all alike, carried Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, and such like Instruments of laborious Employment, and marching after Drums, twice or thrice about the Cistern, presented themselves before the Mount, where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were, where after a handsome speech, the Flud-gates flew open, the stream ran chearfully into the Cistern, the Drums and Trumpets sounding in triumphant manner, and a gallant peal of Chambers gave a Period to the en∣tertainment. A noble achievement it was, as this reracted to Sir Hugh Mid∣dleton, doth partly set forth, which never saw publique light until now.
Ad Hugonem Middleton equites Auratum de stupenda hac aquarum operâ. Compita qui fluvium per Londinensia dūxti, Ut jam quisque suis vicus abundet aquis, Non Aganippe tuas satis est depromere laudes, Haec scaturigo nova quam tibi fundit aquae. Of the famous, great Navigable River of Thames. VVEE will go now from the New River to the Old, the Famous and Ancient River of Thames, and find out her source, bed, and streams. She hath her head or spring out of the flank of a hill in Catswold Downs, about a mile from Tetbury, near unto the Fosse, a high road, so call'd in ancient times, where it was heretofore call'd Isis or the Ouse, from hence it runs towards the East, not without some Meanders and windings, and meets with the Cirne or Chiurne, a Brook whereof Cirncester town by which it runs takes the name; From hence it hasteneth to Creekelade, otherwise call'd Crekanford, Lechlade, Ratcotebridg, Newbridg, and Evsham, receiving in her passage many other small Rivelets, Brooks, Becks, and Rundels; And on this side the Town, divideth her self into two streams, whereof one goeth streight to Hincksey and Botley, the other passeth by Godstow; This latter spreadeth it self for a while into divers small streams, which run not far before they meet again, and then embracing sundry fruitful Medowes, she passeth at length by Oxenford, who some imagine should rather be call'd Ouseford of this River, where she joyns with the Charwell, a little from whence the original branches do joyn, and keep com∣pany to Abbandune or Abington, call'd by some Senshum, although at first no part of her did approach so near the Town as now she doth, till a branch there∣of was led thither by the main stream, through the industry of the Monks, as by the decay of Caerdoure, now call'd Dorchester, sometimes the high road from Wales, and the West Countrey to London; From hence she goeth to Dorchester and so into Tame, where contracting friendship with a River of the like name, she loseth the name of Isis or Ouse, whereof Ousenny or Osney at Oxford is derived; and from thence she assumes the name of Thamesis all along as she glides; From Tame she passeth to Wallingford, and so to Rending, which in ages pass'd was call'd Pontium in regard of the number of Bridges; There she receives the Kenet which comes from the hills that lye about Marleborough Westward, and then the Thetis, commonly call'd the Tyde, that comes from Thetisford. She hasteneth thence to Sudlington otherwise call'd Maydenhead, and so to Windlestore or Winsore, Eton, and then to Chertsey, where Erkenwald Bishop of London did erect a Religious house or Cell. From Chertsey she directs her course to Stanes; and receiving another stream by the way call'd the Cole (whereupon Colebrook stands) she goes by Kingstone, Richmond, Sheene, Sion, & Brentford or Bregentford, where she meets with the Brane or the Bren, another descending from Edgworth. From Brentford she visits Morlach, Cheisoy, Lambeth, Westminster, and so to London.
Having accompanied our gentle, and smooth-gliding Rir now to London, she now makes great haste to meet with Neptune her lovely husband; the first water she greets is the Brome, on Kent side, West of Greenwich; whose spring is Bromis in Bromley Parish, and so goeth thence to Lewshant taking from the East: The next water she meets withal, is on Essex side, almost against Woolwich, and that is the Lee; And being pass'd that, the Darwent also dischar∣geth her self into the Thames on Kent side, two miles and more beneath Erith having its rising at Tunbridge, or Tanridge. The next River that disgorgeth her self into the Thames, is West of the Wam Isles, a rill of no great note, or long course; for rising about Coringham it rune not many miles East and by South, till it falls into the mouth of this River; Last of all the Thames takes acquaintance, and mingleth with Medway a con∣derable River watering all the South parts of Kent. This noble navigable River flows, and fills all her Channels twice ev'ry natu∣ral day, by the flux and reflux of the Sea, which holdeth on for the space of 70 miles within the main Land; the stream or tyde being highest at London▪ when the Moon doth exactly touch the Norh-east, and South or West points or the Heavens, whereof one is visible, the other underneath us: These rydes do also differ in their times, each one coming later than the other by so many m∣nutes as passe; yet the revolution and natural course of the Heavens, do reduce and bring about the said Planet to these her former places, whereby the com∣mon difference 'twixt one tyde and another, is sound to consist of 24 minutes▪ which wanteth but twelve of a whole hour in 24 as experience doth confirm; In like manner we daily find that each tyde is not of equal heighth and fulness; For at the  and the Change of the Moon, we have the highest ouds, and such is their extraordinary course that as they diminish from their Changes and Fulls, unto their first and last Quarters, so afterwards, they encrease again until they come to the Fall and Change; sometimes they rise also o high, epe∣cially if the wind be at the North or North-east, which brings in the water with more vehemency, because the tyde which fills the Channel cometh Northward, that the Thames often inounds the bankes about London, which happeneth most frequently in Ianuary and February, which makes the grounds, afterwards more fertie. Neither do the tydes after a whit, unlesse some im∣petuous winds from the West or South-west, do keep back and check the stream, as the East and North-East do hasten the coming in thereof or else some other extraordinary occasion put by the course of the German Seas, which do fill the River by their ntural , and flowings; And the probabiest reason why three or four tydes do chop in in one day is, because the winds blowing more strong than ordinarily North or North-east, make the Sea to rush in with more speed, and abundance or water. The Land streams or white waters, do oftentimes thicken the finenesse of the River, in so much that after a Land floud, 'tis usual to take up Haddocks with ones hnd beneath the Bridge, as they float aloft on the water, their eyes being so blinded with the thicknesse of the water, that they cannot see whither they swimme; and how to make shift for themselves before the poor creare be surpriz'd, otherwise the Thames water useth to be as clear and , as any such great River in the world. Having gone along so fat with this great goodly River, even from her source until she dimboques, and payes Tribute to Nepume, and cast her self into his imbraces, It will be now expedient to go on further, and acquaint the Rea∣der with the jurisdiction, and Prerogatives of the Thmes, with the extent thereof, Which begins at a place call'd Colnie ditch, a little above Stnes-bridge, Weward as far as London-bridge, and rom thence to a place call'd Yendil, and the waters or Medmay, all which extent is under the juris∣diction
and conservancy of the Lord Mayor, the Comminalty, and Citizens of London. True it is, that there have been some Contests betwixt the Lord Mayor, and the Lord high Admiral of England, concerning the said Jurisdiction and pow∣er, but after a fair and judicial Tryal in open Court, the controversie was de∣cided in favour of the City; and the Lord Mayor adjudged to be Conservator of the Thames. There were also some other controversial points about the Rivers, of Thames and Medway, but all differences were absolutely concluded Anno 1613, Sir Iohn Swinerton being then Lord Mayor, and Mr. Sparry being then his Deputy, or respective Bayliff for the execution of such a great trust repos'd in him. Ever since, is well as in former times, the Lord Mayor of London hath been styl'd the Conservator of the said River, within the forenamed limits and bounds, having plenary power to inflict punishments upon all transgressors relating to the said Rivers; the Water-Bayly of London being his substitute. And whereas there are a company of Fishermen call'd Tinckermen, frequenting the River of Thames Eastward, who in times pass'd have been reported, and found out to make an infinit destruction of the young brood or fry of fish, by using unlawful Nets, and other Engines feeding their Hoggs with them; by the singular care and cost of the Lord Mayor, and vigilance of the City, those prohibited Engines and Nets, are now quite suppress'd, and a true, and orderly manner of fish∣ing brought into use, that such a havock may not be made of the young fry. Moreover, there are a great number of other kind of Fishermen, beside Tinckermen belonging to the Thames, call'd Hebbermen, Petermen, and Traw∣lermen, that had lived in former times, by unlawful fishing on the said River, to the destruction of the young fish, as aforesaid; but now they are restrain'd, and regulated to a more orderly way of fishing. There have bin other kind of abuses reformed herein, as upon complaint made to the Lord Mayor, concerning certain Timbers standing in Tilbury Hope; a matter not only dangerous to the Passengers, but a cause also to de∣stroy the young brood of fish, by the dammage those Timbers did to the Fisher∣mens Nets, in regard of their continual standing in the main course, and cur∣ent of the River: that great grievance was speedily redressed, by the provi∣dence and prudence of the Lord Mayor, and the Water-Bayly. Furthermore, there hath been care taken, to clear and cleanse the said noble River Westward of seventy nine stops or hatches consisting of sundry great stakes and piles, purposely erected by Fishermen for their private lucre, and standing illfavouredly for passengers near unto the Fair deep; but none of them remain now, but such as stand out of the passable high stream, and can be no prejudice to passers by; yet some are permitted to be planted at the waters bottome, and so they serve as a great succour to the young brood of fish, being placed so remote on the River. Nor is this provident care for security of passengers, and conservation of the young fry or fish, a new thing, for it appears that the like course was kept in the Reign of Henry the fourth, and after in Henry the eighth, as Records and Chronicles do shew. Moreover, there is a watchful eye, that no carren, or dead carkasses be thrown into the River to pollute, or infect the stream. To all these intents and purposes, the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen his Brethren with the under Officers, do use to meet eight times yearly, in the four Counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, and have a judicial sitting for maintenance of the Rivers Rights, and Priviledges, where they have pow∣er to empanel Juries, to make Inquisition after all offences committed upon the River within their extent; And as the Verdict given up by the Jury make it appear, so they proceed to the punishment of the transgressors, according to
the quality of the offence: and it is worthy the observation, to know the man∣ner of their so solemn proceedings, whereof this instance shall be produced, ex∣tracted out of authentick Records. Sir Iohn Iolles Knight and Lord Mayor of the City of London, and Conserva∣tor of the River of Thames, and waters of Medway, assisted and accompanyed by the Aldermen▪ and two Sheriffs then contemporary, and attended by the Recorder; and the Sub-conservator, or Water-bayly, with fifty Officers and servants, took their Barges at Belmsgate the third of Iuly 1616, and within few hours arriv'd at Gravesend in Kent, where a Session for the conservancy of the said River was kept before the said Lord Mayor, and his forenamed Assistants; At which time and place, a Jury of the Freeholders of the said County, being sworn to enquire of all offences committed in any part of the River whatsoe∣ver, within the said County, the Common Sergeant of the City (the Recorder being then absent upon extraordinary occasions) deliver'd them a charge to this effect; That, forasmuch as there had not been any Session of Conservancy in many years passed, kept by any Lord Mayor of London in that place, it was probable and evident they could not be well informed, neither of the Lord Mayors jurisdiction and power to reform annoyances and offences there, and to inflict due punishments upon the Offendors; nor of the nature of the ser∣vice to be by them performed in the course of their enquiry; therefore he thought it convenient to make it known unto them, both the one and the other. Hereupon he shew'd them, The Jurisdiction of the Court of London in the River of Thames, from Stanes-bridge Westward unto the points of the River next the Sea Eastward, appear'd to belong to the City in manner and form fol∣lowing. First, In point of right by Praescription, as it appeareth by an ancient Book call'd Dunthorne, that, Civitatis fundationis, aedificationis, & constructionis cau∣sa erat Thamesis Fluvius, quorum vero Civitatis & Fluminis gubernationem tam Duces, Majores, Custodes, Vicecomites, Aldr. & magnates Civitatis memoratae hucusque obtinuerunt & habuerunt; Whence he inferr'd, that the government of the River hath belong'd to the City, time out of mind. In 21. Hen. 3. Iorden Coventry one of the Sheriffs of the City, was sent by the Mayor and Aldermen, to remove certain Kiddles that annoy'd the Rivers of Thames and Medway, who ultra Yenland versus Mare, did take divers persons that were Offendors, and imprison'd them; Whereupon, complaint being made to the King, he took the matter ill at the first, and sent for the Lord Mayor and Citizens to Kennington; where, upon hearing of the matter before the said King▪ the Cityes Jurisdiction over the said River, was set forth and allow'd, and the Complai∣nants convinc'd, and every one of them amerc'd at 10 l. and the amercements adjudged to the City; And afterward, their Nets were burnt by judgement given by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in the Hustings, Moreover, 1. Ri∣chardi secundi, Writs were directed to the Sheriffs of Essex and Kent reciting the Cities Title, with command, not to suffer the Citizens of London to be molested contrary to the Liberties formerly granted, and allowed unto them. Secondly, in point of right by allowance in Eire, the conservation of the Thames belongs to the City: for it was produc'd that 1. Rich. . before Hugh Bigot be∣ing Justice Itinerant, the Sheriffs and Citizens of London were call'd in question for their Jurisdiction exercised on the Thames, before whom it was found by a Jury in Southwark, Quod nullus habeat aliquid juris in Thamisia usque ad novum gurgitem nisi Cives Londonens. In the 14. of Ed. 2. the Constable of the Tower, was indited by divers Wards of London, before the Justices in Eire at the Tower, De muneris et recep. cove. pro kidellis in Thamisiis, et Constabularius ad Kidellas respondet quód Iustic. non habent jurisdictionem extra London plitum, inde cognos∣cere cum predict. kidelli sunt in aliis comitatibus, et Justic. dixerunt, Aqua Thamisiae
pertinet ad Civitatem London usque mart, & si velit respondeat, who then pleaded, Not guilty. 3. He went further, that this Jurisdiction belonged to the City by ancient Charters, 8. R. 1. Dominus Ricardus Rex, filius Regis Henrici secundi concessit, & firmiter praecepit, ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia amoveantur ubicunque fu∣erint in Thamisia; 1. Ioh. Rex. concessit, & firmiter praecepit, ut omnes kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia vel in Medway amoveantur, & ne caeteri kidelli alicubi po∣nantur in Thamisia vel in Medway super sort: X. li. sterlingorum. Then he urg'd the famous Charter of King Henry the third, which ran thus. Henry by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and A∣quitaine, and Earl of Anjou unto all Archbishops, Bishops Abbots, Priors Earls, Barons, Justices Sheriffs, Stewards, Ministers, and to all Bayliffs, and to all his true Men, Greeting: Woreth well, that We for the health of our soul, and the health of the soul of King John our Fader, and the souls of all our Ancestors; and also for common profit of our City of London, and of all our Realms, have granted, and steadfastly commanded; That all the Weares that be in Thames, or in Medway be done away; And that from henceforth no Weares be set in Thames or Medway, upon the forfeiture of 10. l. Also we claim quit to our Citizens of London all that, that our Constable of our Tower of London, was wont to take of the said Weares. Wherefore we will, and steadfastly command that no Constable of the aforesaid Tower, at any time from henceforth forward any thing ask, nor any grievance do, to any of the same City, by enchesen of the same Weares; It is to us known enough, and by true men, do us to understand, that most privacy, and most profit might fall into the same City, and to the whole Realm by enchesen of the same weares; which we make for ever firm and stable unto the same City, as the Charter of our Lord King John, our Fader, which our Barons of London, thereof have reasonably witnessed. Witnesses, Eustace of London, Peter of Winchester, &c. At Westminster the 18. of February, the year of our Reign eleven. Besides these, he produced divers others in this Kings Raign. 4. This Jurisdiction belongs to the City of London, by Acts of Parliament. W. 2. ca. 47. An. 13. No Salmons to be taken, from the Nativity of our La∣dy, unto St. Martins day in all points; Nor none to be taken in Mill-pools, from the midst of April, until Midsummer, 1. Offence, burning of Nets, and En∣gines. 2. Offence, imprisonment for a quarter of a yeer. 3. A whole year, 13. R. 2. confirms the restraint of taking Salmons in many waters, from the midst of April, until Midsommer, upon the same pain; nor within that time to use any Nets call'd Stalkers, nor any other Engine, whereby the fry may be destroyed. 1. Eliz, None shall with any manner of Net, Weele, Butcaining, Kepper, limecreele, rawfagnet, trolnet, trimnet, scalboat, weblister, sturlamet, or with any other device or Engine, made of cheare, woolbine or Canvas, or shall by any heeling Nets, or Trimbleboat, or any other device, Engines, Cau∣tlles, wayes or meanes soever, heretofore made or devised, or hereafter to be made or devised, take, or kill any young brood, spawn, or fry of Eeles, Sal∣mon, Pike, or Pickrel, or of any other Fish or Flud-gate, Pipe, or tail of a∣ny Mill, Weare, or in any streights, streams, brooks, Rivers, salt or fresh. 2. None shall take or kill any Salmon and Trouts, not being in season, being Kepper Salmons, or Kepper Trouts, or Shedder Salmons, or Shedder Trouts, &c. The Mayor of London, inter alia, shall have full power and Au∣thority by this Act, to enquire of all offences committed contrary thereunto, by the Othes of 12 men or more, and to hear and determine all and every the same, and inflict punishments, and impose fines, accordingly.
5. Then he proceeds to assert the Cities Right, to the conservation of the Thames, and waters of Medway, by way of Inquisition, whereof there were two: the one taken at Raynam in Essex, the other at Gravesend in Kent, 9. Hen. 5. before William Grocer, then Lord Mayor of London▪ where it was presented, That whereas by the ancient Ordinances of London, the Mesches of Nets should be two Inches in the forepart, and one inch in the hinder part; and it being found, that the offences according to the said Inquisitions are contra libertates & con∣suetudines Civitatis, it was adjudged, that the Nets should be burnt, according to the ancient custom in that behalf provided. 6. He goes on after, to prove that this Right belongs to the City by Decrees. In 8. Hen. 4. The Mayor and Aldermen did exhibit their humble Petition to the Kings Councel reciting; That, time out of minde, they have had the conser∣vation and correction of the River of Thames, of all trinks, nets, and other En∣gines whatsoever in the River of Thames, and Medway placed, and have used to make a sub-Conservator under them; and complaining, that Alexander Bonner, then sub-Conservator, having discharg'd his duty, in removing Kiddels, he was ill entreated by the owners, the same owners dwelling in Erith, Putri∣ferry, Barking, Woolwich, and other places in the Counties of Kent, and Essex: and upon hearing of the matter in Camera stellata, they were sound guilty, and constrained to submit themselves to the Lord Mayor, and ordered to bring alwayes their Nets unto him, before they should use them. And that the Kiddles then taken, should be at the disposition of the Lord Mayor; so the Offendors made their submission accordingly. 7. He proceeds; This right appertains to the City of London, by Letters Pa∣tents, which he proved by a grant made by Edward the 4th, to the Earl of Pem∣broke, for setting up a Weare in the River of Thames: which grant was revok'd and annul'd, at the instance of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, upon shew∣ing their right: therefore alledg'd, It was contrary to their ancient Customs. At which time, the Cities Title to the conservacy of the Thames, and Medway, was at large set forth, and recited to have bin shewn to the Lord Chancellour, and to the said Earl and his Councel, which accordingly was allowed. 8. He reinforceth the right of the City by Proclamations, whereof one was made by Hen. 8. in 34. of his Raign, wherein it is affirmed, that the Lord Mayor and his Predecessors, have had by divers grants of the Kings of England, and, by Acts of Parliament, enjoyed alwayes the conservacy of the Thames, without impediments, or interruption; By which Proclamation, it was com∣manded that none should resist, deny, or impugne the Lord Mayor, or his De∣puty, in doing or executing any thing that might conduce to the conservacy of the River, and of the fish and fry within the same. 9. He produceth Report; for in a controversie 'twixt the Lord Admiral, and the Lord Mayor, for the measuring of Coles, and other things upon the Thames, it then fell into debate, to whom the Conservacy of the River appertain'd▪ which cause was referred by Queen Elizabeths Councel of State, 1597. to the Atturney General, and Solicitor, who joyntly certified among other things, that the Conservacy and care of the River did, and ought to belong to the City of London, 10. By quo Warranto, 'twas proved, that the Conservacy of the Thames be∣longs to the City, for 3. Jacob▪ a quo warranto, was brought against the City in the Exchequer, to know by what Title she claimed the Conservacy of the Ri∣ver of Thames, & the waters of Medway: whereupon the City made her Title good thereunto, by ancient prescription, and otherwise; so judgement was given in her favour. 11. He goes on afterwards to confirm the right of the City, by proof of usage; in regard the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have time out of minde, made Ordi∣nances concerning the good Government of the River of Thames, as well for
the seasons and manner of fishing beneath London Bridge Eastward, upon pain of penalties, as it appears from time to time, from the Raign of Hen. 3. and so downward: the Lord Mayor hath removed Kiddels, Weares, Trinks, and o∣ther unlawful Engines, and hath reformed the disorders of such as have offen∣ded besides, in the River of Thames, and inflicted punishment, upon Offendors accordingly. The right of the City appeares also by the Writs and Precepts under the teste of the Lord Mayor, to the Sheriffs of Kent and Essex, for the returning of Ju∣ries before him, to enquire of Offences done in the River. The same right of the City, appeares also by Commissions, whereof divers have bin directed to the Lord Mayor, to put in execution the Acts of Parliament, made for the Conservancie of the Thames and Medway, and to enquire of all offences, made or done in the said waters, and to punish the Delinquents accor∣dingly. Lastly, He makes good the Right and Title of the City, by the continual claim she made thereunto, as appears in those various contests she had with the Lord Admiral of England, wherein after divers debates and bandings, she kept still above water, and made her Title good; which moved King James, Anno the 3d of his Raign, to put a final determination to the business by the Letters Patents, he passed unto the City, wherein he saith, that ad omnem controversi∣am in hac parte temporibus tam presentibus quàm futuris tollendam, & omne dubi∣um amovendum, that to cut off all controversies, as well of the present times, as of future, and to remove all doubts, he did confirm and ratifie the said right unto the City of London. Thus was the Title, Prerogative, and right of the City of London stoutly, and strongly asserted by eleven pregnant, and convincing proofs, to the conservati∣on of her dearly beloved Minion, the River of Thames, both by prescription; by allowance in Eire; by ancient Charters; by Acts of Parliament; by Inquisi∣tions; by Decrees coram ipso Rege; By Letters Patents; by Proclamations; by Report of the learned Councel; by a quo Warranto; And lastly, by ancient u∣sage, custom, and continual claim. Mr. Stow in his survey of the City of London, hath more about this business, then here is inserted, which made the last King Charles the first, to command Sir John Coke his Secretary, to write to Sir Henry Martin, Judge of the Ad∣miralty, to this effect, That His Majesty understanding, that a second Edition of Stowes Sur∣vey of the City of London, was put new to sale, wherein there are some passa∣ges prejudicial to His Majesties Right in his Admiralty, and derogatory to the just power belonging thereunto, his Majesty did therefore require him, his Iudge in that high Court, to examine the said Bok, and to cause the said passages inserted in prejudice of the Admirals Iurisdiction, and in support of any other pretence against the same, to be left out, or else to prohibite the publishing, and sale of the said Book, &c. Sir Henry Martin having received this Letter, after the Book was printed, and publiquely sold, all that he could do, was to have Sir John Cokes Letter in∣serted in the last Folio of Stow, to stand there for a Cautionary Reserve, and Re∣cord for the future. Now, there be many things that concern the incumbency of the Conserva∣tor of so Noble a River, it being an Office of no small extent. His first duty is to preserve the currency of the stream, and the banks on both sides. Secondly, He must preserve the Fish and Fry within the same, He must prevent all Encroachments upon the River, and the banks thereof; as also he
must enquire of all Flud-gates, Mill-dams, and such like annoyances; and whether any do hurl in any soyl, dust, or rubbish, or other filth whatsoever to choak her. But for the strength, and safety of the River, against the invasion of an enemy, by Block-houses, Forts, Bastions or Castles, and the securing of the Merchant, and Navigation to and fro, that charge belongs to the Soveraign Prince, and not to the City. But indeed, touching the former charge, circumspection and care of the River of Thames, it is most proper for the City of London, who lies perpetually by her Beds side, and therefore in a fit posture to be watchful of her: for which vigilance the Thames rewards her abundantly, by bringing her in the Spices of the South, the Jewels of the East, and Treasure of the West; Insomuch, that it may be well said▪ this Office of Conservatorship, or superintendency of so Noble and useful a River, is as a fair flower, or rich Jewel, in the Cap of mainte∣nance. This famous River, taking all her advantages together, surpassing all other whatsoever, that pay tribute to the Ocean, if you regard the streightness of her course, the stilness of her stream, for her proportionable latitude; as also her length, for she comes sporting along from her first source, above ninescore miles before she embosomes her self in the Arms of Neptune. Add hereunto, the great store, and variety of Fish she abounds withall; the most delectable, and fertile soiles, on both sides; And lastly the conveniency of her scitua∣tion being towards the Center of England. And then in her entrance to the Sea, she opens upon France and Flan∣ders, having them both in her eye; Besides, she hath another advantagious property, that to the knowing Native, the entrance into the River is safe and easie, but difficult and hazardous to strangers, either to come in, or go out; In∣somuch, that the Thames may be said to be Londons best friend, which puts me in minde of a passage of drollery, that happened in the time of King James who being displeased with the City, because she would not lend him such a sum of money, and the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen attending him one day, being somewhat transported, he said, that he would remove his own Court, with all the Records of the Tower, and the Courts of Westminster-Hall, to another place, with further expressions of his indignation. The Lord Mayor calmly heard all and at last answered, Your Majesty hath power to do what you please, and your City of London will obey accordingly; but she humbly desires, that when your Majesty shall remove your Courts, you would please to leave the Thames behind you.
Of the great and admirable BRIDGE In the City of LONDON over the Thames. HAving bin thus long upon water, and accompanied the Thames to Thetis lap, 'tis time now to land, and take a view of her greatest Bridge, which, if the stupendious Site, and structure thereof be well considered, may be said to be one of the Wonders of the World: though, as some think, it hath too many Arches; so that it may be said, If Lon∣don Bridge had fewer eyes, it would see far better. Now as we ferch'd the Thames from her Spring, so we will fetch her Bridge from its first foundation. At first there was but a Ferry kept in the place where now the Bridge is built, at length the Ferriman and his Wife deceasing, left the said Ferry to their only Daughter a Mayden, who with other goods, left her by her Parents, together with the profits arising from the said Ferry, did build a holy House for Nuns; in place whereof, the East part of St. Mary O∣veries stands now above the Quire, where she was buried: and unto that House of Nuns, she bequeathed the over-sight and benefit of the Ferry; But after∣wards, that House of Nuns being converted into a House of Priests, the Priests did build a Bridge of Timber, and from time to time, kept the same in good reparation, till at length, considering the great charges which were bestowed in the frequent repair of the woodden Bridge, there was at last, by the Contri∣butions of the Citizens, and others, a Bridge built of Stone. The Timber Bridge had stood some Ages before; for the Story saith, that when Sweyn, King of Denmark, had besieged the City of London, both by Wa∣ter and Land in the year 994. the Citizens manfully defended themselves under their King Ethelred; so that a great number of the Enemies was slain in Battel, and part of them were drown'd in the River of Thames, because they could not recover the Bridge: Add hereunto, that in the year 1016. Cantus the Dane, with a great Navy came up to London, and on the South of the Thames caus'd a Trench to be cast, through the which his Ships were tow'd towards the West side of the Bridge, and then with a deep Trench, and streight siege, he encompassed the City about. Moreover, 1052. the Earl Godwin, with the like Navy, taking his course up the River, and finding no resistance on the Bridge, he sail'd up the South side. Further, 1067. William the Conqueror in his Charter to the Church of St. Peter in Westminster, confirmed to the Monks serving God there, a Gate in London call'd Buttolphs Gate then, with a Wharf which was at the head of London Bridge. We read likewise, that Anno 1114. in the raign of Henry 1. the River of Thames was so dryed up, and the water grew so shallow, that between the Tower of London and the Bridge, not only with Horse, but people might have passed over a foot.
In the year 1122, Thomas Arden gave to the Monks at Bermondsey the Church of St. George in Southwark, and five shillings yearly rent out of the Land pertaining to London-Bridge. There is also a remarkable Charter of Hen. 1. upon Record, to this tenor. Henry King of England, to Ralph Chiche∣ster, and all the Ministers of Sussex, sendeth greeting; Know ye, I command by my Kingly authority, that the Manor call'd Alceston, which my Father gave with other Lands to the Abbey of Battle, be free, and quiet from Shiers and Hundreds, and all other Customes of earthly servitude, as my Father held the same most freely and qui∣etly, and namely from the work of London-Bridge, the work of the Castle at Peven∣sey: And this I command upon my forfaiture. Witnesse William de Pontdelarche at Berry. The first year of King Stephen, a fire began in the house of one Alwards neer unto London-stone, which consum'd East unto Ludgate, and West to St. Erkens∣wald's shrine in St. Pauls Church. The Bridge of Timber upon the River of Thames was also burnt, but afterwards repair'd. Besides in the Reign of the said King Stephen, and of Hen. 2. men stood in great numbers upon the Bridge to see pastimes that were upon the River. In the year 1163, that Bridge was not only repair'd, but built all of new Timber as before, by Peter Colechurch Priest, and Chaplain. This serves to shew, that there was a Timber Bridge a long tract of time over the Thames, which was maintain'd partly by the proper Lands thereof, partly by the Legacies and liberality of divers persons, and partly by tax∣ations in divers Sheirs, at least 215 years before the Bridge of stone was erected. Now, about the year 1176 the stone-Bridge had its first foundation by the foresaid Peter of Cole-Church, near unto the place of the Timber Bridge, but somewhat more West, for the Chronicle saith, that Buttolphes WharF was at the end of London-Bridge; The King not only countenanced, but assisted the great work, a Cardinal being then here Legate, and Richard Archbishop of Canterbu∣ty, gave 1000 Marks towards the Foundation. The course of the River for a time was turn'd another way about, by a trench cast up for that purpose, begin∣ning East about Radriff, and ending in the West about Patricksey, now call'd Battersay. This work to wit, the Arches, Chappel, and the Stone Bridge over the Thames at London, having been 33 years in building, was in the year 1209 fini∣shed, by the worthy Citizens of London, viz. Serle Mercer, William Almane, and Benedict Botewrite, being principal Masters of that Fabrique: for Peter Colechurch was dead four years before, and was as the principal Benefactor bu∣ried in the Chappel on the Bridge. Certain void places were given by King Iohn to build upon about London, the profits whereof were assign'd to maintain the Bridge. A Mason, being Master Workman of the Bridge, builded from the foundati∣on the large Chappel on that Bridge upon his own charges, which Chappel was then endow'd with two Priests and four Clerks, &c. besides Chanteries; After the finishing of this Chappel, which the first building upon those Arches, sundry Mansion Houses in tract of time were erected; whereunto many charitable men gave Lands, Tenements, and sums of money towards the main∣tenance thereof; All which was sometimes registred, and fairly written in a Table for posterity, which was put up in the said Chappel, till at last the said Chappel was turn'd to a dwelling House, and then remov'd to the Bridge∣house: Now, in Hen. 7. time it stands upon Record, that all the payments and allowances belonging to London-Bridge, amounted to above 815 l. by which account made then, may be partly guessed the great Revenues, and incomes of the said Bridge, and to what improvement, and encrease it may be come unto by this time.
But this noble Bridge, as other earthly things, hath suffer'd many disasters since: for four years after the finishing thereof, in the year 1212, on the 10th, of Iuly at night, the Burrough of Southwark on the South side of Thames, as also the Church of our Lady of the Canons there, being on fire, and an exceeding great multitude of people passing the Bridge, either to extinguish and quench it, or to behold and gaze upon it, suddenly the North part by blowing of the South wind, was also set on fire, and the people which were then passing the Bridge perceiing the same, would have return'd, but were stopp'd by the fury of the fire: and it came to passe as they stayed all in a consternation, and protract∣ed the time; the other South end of the Bridge, was also set on fire; so that the people thronging themselves betwixt two raging fires, did nothing else but expect present death; Whereupon, there came to save them many ships and vessels into which the multitude so inadvisedly rush'd in, that the ships being thereby unk they all perished; And it was found that above three thousand souls perished by this disastrous accident at that time, whose bodies were found half burnt, besides those who were turn'd to ashes. Furthermore, in the year 1282, through a great frost and deep snow, five Arches of London Bridge were born down, and destroyed: A little after, Anno 1289, the Bridge was o sore decayed for want of reparations, that people were afrai to pass thereon and a subsidy was granted towards the amendment there∣of; Afterwards, Sir Iohn Britain, being then Custos of London Anno 1381, a great Collection was made by all the Clergy for the repair of London-Bridge. In the year 1381, on St. Georges day was a great solemnity of Justs and Tour∣nements upon London-Bridge, between David Earl of Crawford of Scotland, and the Lord Wells of England; whereby one may infer, that the houses were not there so thick, at that time. The Tower on London-bridge, at the North end of the Draw-bridge (which was then in a posture to be drawn up) was built Anno 1426, in the Majoralty of Iohn Rainwell. Anno 1471, a house call'd the Common siege on London-Bridge, tumbled down into the Thames by death of diyers persons a little after. But in the year sixteen hundred thirty three, there happen'd a most raging dismal fire upon the North side of London-bridge, which by computation con∣sum'd above the third part of the Buildings thereof; But by the commendable care of the City, there are other goodly structures rais'd up in some of their rooms, of a stronger and more stately way of building, and pity it is, that the work were not compleated there being no object (after the Church of St. Pauls) that can conduce more to the glory and Ornament of this renowned City. Besides, this Bridge that may be call'd, the Bridge of the world, there are other inferior Bridges, which have still the names of Bridges that belong to the City of London, the first is Fleet-bridge in the West, fenc'd with iron Pikes, on which towards the South there be certain Lanthorns of Stones, for lights to be placed in Winter Evenings, for com∣modity of passengers; Under this Bridge runs a water sometimes call'd, the River Wells, but since Turn-hill brook, and now Fleet Dike, because it runs by the Fleet under ground to the River of Thames; this Bridge hath been far greater in times pass'd, but lessened as the water course hath been narrowed. Over the sayd River of Wells northerly stands Oldenbridge, now Holborn∣bridge, so call'd of a boorn that sometimes ran down Holborn hill into the Ri∣ver; this Bridge like Fleet-bridge-serves for passage only. Then comes Cow-bridge more Northerly over the same water near unto Cow∣lane, but this Bridge being decayed, another of Timber is made more North to∣wards Chicklane. There are some other small Bridges over the Town-ditch, viz. without Eald-gate, without Bishopsgat, Mooregate, the Postern of Cripplegate, as also without
Aldersgate, the Postern of Christs Hospital, Newgate, and Ludgate, which are now paved eaven with the streets; only there remains one of Timber over the River of Wels or Fleet Dike. There have  informer ages divers Bridges in sundry places over the course of Wallbrook; but  they are made levell with the paements of the Streets, so that the water-course can now be hardly disco∣ver'd, being vaulted over with Brick. Of the chief Fortresse or Tower of LONDON. ANd now that we are come so near the famous and great Tower Pala∣tine, or Citadel of London; we will try whether we can get in thi∣ther, without paying fees, and take a view thereof as briefly as we can, it being an ill-favoured, and tedious thing to stay there long. I know it is the current vulgar opinion, that Julius Caesar, the first Conque∣rour, or rather indeed Discoverer of Britain, was the Original Founder thereof, but there is ery litle probability of truth in that for two Reasons; The first is, the little stay he made here, during which he had other things to think on. The second is, that he himself who is so exact in his relations, specially if they conduce to his honour; nor any other Roman Author, makes any mention of of such a work, or Fabrique; Therefore, that opinion which approacheth truth the neerest, is, that William of Normandy the Conqueror, was the first tracer and erector of the Tower of London, as Edmond de Hadenham, an old English Anti∣quary affirms; The first part that was built, was the great square and White Tower, (though black to some) which was about the year 1078, where∣of Gundulph Bishop of Rochester was principal Superviser and Surveyer, who was log'd then in the house of Edmere a Burgesse of London, as it stands upon La∣tine Record in the forenamed Author. Now it is to be considered, that at first the wall of the City was in many pla∣ces furnish'd with sundry Bastions and Turrets in due distance one from the other, and divers stood on the waters side, where some of the said Wall extended at first, but the Thames with her ebbings and flowings, did as it were corrode, and subver those Buildings on the South side; Wherefore the Conqueror (for then the Art of fortification was come to a greater perfection) for defence of the City and River, pitch'd upon that place as most convenient, to erect a Buwark in the East part of the Wall. The White square Tower (as was formerly said) was first erected, and finished in the Conquerors time, but stood naked and single without other Buildings a good while: and the story aith, that in William Rufus time, it was by the injury of the Heavens, and violence of tempest sore shaken, and some part tumbled down, which was repair'd by the said Rufus and Henry the first, who also caused a Castle to be built under the said White Tower, on the South side towards the Thames, and he surrounded that also with a strong Wall; Now, Henry of Huntindon relates, that VVill. Rufus challeng'd the inveiture of Prelates, and pill'd the people pitifully, to spend the treasure about the Tower of London, and the great Hall at VVestminster, whereof he was Founder. The first Keeper of the Tower of London was call'd Constable, Ostowerus. Acolinillus, Otho, and Geoffrey Magnaville, were the first four Constables of the Tower of London by succession, all which held a portion of Land that appertain'd to the Priory of the Holy Trinity near Algate, viz. East Smithfield, as belonging to that Office, making thereof a Vineyard; and would
would not part with it till the second year of King Stephen, when by judgment of the Court, it was restored to the Church. The foresaid Geoffery Magnaville, was at one time Constable of the Tower, Sherif of London, Middlesex, Essex▪ & Hart∣fordshire, as the Chronicles relate; He also fortified the Tower of London against King Stephen, but the King took him at last at St. Albanes, and would not free him till he had surrendred the Tower of London, with the Castles of VValden and Plashey in Essex. Richard de Lucie was Anno 1155 Constable of the Tower of London, and also of Casle the of VVinsore. About the beginning of the Raign of Richard the first, William Longshank Bishop of Ely, and Chancellour of England, for some dissentions 'twixt him, and John the Kings Brother, who was in Rebellion, enclos'd the Tower of London with an outward Wall of stone embattail'd, and also caused a deep ditch to be cast about the same, and thought to have environ'd it with the River of Thames. The Lion Tower was built by Edward the fourth & Frederick the Emperor, ha∣ving sent for a present three Leopards: they were first kept at Woodstock (which was the first Park of England seven miles about; to the destruction of some Churches, and Chappels adjacent by Henry the third) but afterwards, all such wild Beasts, as Lions (which are call'd the Beasts of the Royall Prerogative) to∣gether with Leopards, Linxes, and Propentines, have been kept in that part of the Tower, which is called Lions Tower; And we read, that Edward the 2d. com∣manded the Sheriff of London, to pay 6d. per diem, to the Keeper o the Lions and Leopards, for their sustenance; and three half pence a day for the Keeper's diet, out of the Fee-farm of the City. In former times, there were persons of high quality that kept these Beasts (whereof the Earl of Oxford was one) and they had a Pension from the Crown belonging to the Office. Mr. Robert Gill a very worthy Gentleman hath the place now, and hath had it many years, No was the Tower ever better furnish'd with Lions than it is now, there being six in all, young and old. Edward the fourth fortified the Tower of London, and enclosed with Brick a certain enclosure of ground taken from Tower-hill Westward, now call'd the Bullwark. His Officers also set up upon the said Hill a Gallowes, and a Scaffold, for the execution of offendors, whereupon the Lord Mayor com∣plaining to the King, all the answer he had, was, that it was not done to the derogation of the City. In the year 1216, the Tower of London was delivered to Lewis of France, by the Barons of England, who banded against the King; Anno 1222. the Citi∣zens of London, having made an uprore against the Abbot of Westminster, Huber de Burgh chief Justice of England came to the Tower of London, and summoned before him the Mayor and Aldermen: of whom he enquired, and demanded the principal Authors of that Insurrection. Among whom one Constantine Fitzaeluphe confess'd that he was the man, saying undauntedly that he was the man, and that he had done much lesse than he had thought to have done; Whereupon the Justice passed him over to Fulke de Brent, who with a band of arm'd men, brought him to the Gallowes where he was executed. Anno 1244. Griffeth the eldest Son to Luellin Prince of Wales, being kept prisoner in the Tower, devised means to escape, and having made a Line of the Sheets and Hangings, he put himself down from the top of the Tower, but in the sliding, the weight of his Body, he being a corpulent man, brake the rope with his neck together. King Hen. the 3d. imprisoned the Sheriffs of London, Anno 1253. for the escape of a prisoner out of Newgate. The same Henry with his Queen, to secure himself from rebelling Barons, kept his Court at the Tower, & sent for the Lords to hold a Parliament; and the next year his Queen passing through London-Bridge, the Londoners did outrage her as she pass'd hurling stones and dirt at her, in so much that she was forc'd to return; hereupon the Mayor, Aldermen, and She∣riffs,
were sent to divers Prisons, and a Custos was set over the City for the time' viz. Othon Constable of the Tower, until submission had bin made, and other satisfaction given. It is upon Record, that Edw. 2. allowed a Knight 2d. per diem, and a Squire a peny, for their Diet, as long as they were prisoners in the Tower upon his Command: Roger Mortimer being prisoner in the Tower, gave his Watch∣men a sleeping potion, and so escaped; but afterwards, he was arraigned and condemned by his Peers, without personal appearance, and so executed at the Elmes, where he hung two dayes. The Londoners in the year 136. seized upon the Tower, wresting the keys out of the Constables hands, they freed all the Prisoners, and kept it in their hands for the use of Queen Isabel, and her Son Edward, both Tower and City. The first gold that was coin'd in the Tower, was in the raign of Edward the third, and the peeces were call'd Florences, of the value of 6s. 8d; Perceval de post being Master of the Mint at that time. All great sums before, were used to be payd by the weight, as so many pounds or marks of silver, or so many pounds or marks of gold; but they bore no stamp, the lesser payments were in Starlings, which was the only coin then current, and stamp'd, which were pence so call'd. And they had their antiquity no further, then from the raign of King Henry the second. Nevertheless, the Saxon coines before the Con∣quest, were pence of fine silver, somewhat weightier, and better then the latter starlings, and the probablest Reason that is given, why it was starling money, was, because in the ring or border of the peny, there was a Starre stamp∣ed. But to return to the Tower of London: In the year 1360. Iohn the French King being Prisoner in the Tower, King Edward the third, being newly retur∣ned victoriously from France, the first thing he did, was to visit his Prisoner whose ransome was assessed afterwards at three millions of Florences or No∣bles; whereupon he was brought honourably to the Sea side: Anno 1387. King Richard kept his Christmas in the Tower, and the year after was clapt up Prisoner there. In the year 1458. there were Justs and Tournements in the Tower, wherein the chief Actor was the Duke of Somerset; Anno 1465, Henry the sixth, was brought Prisoner to the Tower, where he remained many years, of whom was given this Character, that he was a good King, but born in an ill time: The Mayor of London Sir Richard Lee, and the Aldermen, freed the said King Henry once from his imprisonment; but being sent thither again, he was pittifully mur∣thered. Anno 1478. The Duke of Clarence was drowned in a But of Malmsey within the Tower: and 5. years after young Edward the fifth, with his Brother, were by the practices of Richard the third, stied there betwixt two Fether∣beds, as the current story goes. Iohn Earl of Oxford, Anno 1485. was made Constable of the Tower, and he had also the keeping of the Lions, and Leopards, as the story makes men∣tion. Queen Elizabeth, Wife to Henry the 7th, died in the Tower, Anno 1502. in Child-birth, and the year before there was running at tilt, and tourney there; The Chappel in the high white Tower was burnt Anno 1512. Queen Anno Bullein, was beheaded in the Tower 1541. and a little after, the Lady Kathe∣rine Howard, both Wifes to Henry the eighth: Anno 1546. a strange accident happened in the Tower: for one Foxley, who was Pot-maker for the Mint, be∣ing fallen asleep, he could not be awakened by pinching, cramping, or burning for fourteen dayes, at which time he awak'd as fresh as at the first day he began to sleep.
In Henry the eighths time, the Tower was eer and anon full of prisoners, a∣mong others Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancellor of England, was clap'd there close Prisoner: and at last they took away from him all his Books, so he did shut up all his windows, and liv'd afterwards in obscurity, and being asked Why, he answered, 'Tis time to shut up shop, when the Ware is all gone: At his first entrance to the Tower, the Gentleman Porter, ask'd for his fee, which is the upper Garment, whereupon Sir Thomas pull'd off his Cap to give him, but that not suffing, he pull'd out a handful of Angels, end gave him a good many, a Knight that was in his Company telling him, that he was glad to see him so full of Angels; yes, answered he, I love to carry my friends alwayes about me. The young Lady Iane, was beheaded there not long after, and upon the Scaf∣fold she made a most ingenious Speech, and full of pity, That she came thither, to serve for an example to posterity, that innocence cannot be any protection against greatness; And that she was come thither, not for aspiring to a Crown, but for not refusing one, when it was offered Her. Queen Elizabeth was brought up many years in that School of affliction, but afterwards she may be said to have gone from the Scaffold to the Throne; For the truth is, that the Scaffold had made an end of her, had not King Philip her Brother in Law, strongly interceded for her. In her dayes, Robert Earl of Essex lost his head in the Tower, which he might have kept on many years longer, had he not bin betrayed by the Lady Walsingham; to whom after the sentence of condemnation, he sent a Ring, which the Queen had given him as a token that she would stick to him in any danger: the Lady delivered not this Ring, and being a little after upon her Death-bed she desired to speak with the Queen, and having disburthened a great weight which lay upon her Consci∣ence for that act, the Queen flung away in a fury, and never enjoyed her self perfectly after that time, but she would break out often into passion, and wring her hands, crying▪ O Essex-Essex. And this Earl was the last, who was executed within the walls of the Tower. In King Iames's time, for 22 years, there was no blood spilt, in the Tower, or upon Tower-hill, only Sir Gervase Elwayes was hanged there, when he was Lieutenant: and one remarkable passage there was in his Speech upon the Lad∣der, that being in the low Countries, and much addicted to gaming, he made a vow, that if ever he played more above such a value, he might be hanged; but he did violate the Oath, and so the just Judgement of Heaven did fall upon him, accordingly as he said. The Earl of Castlehaven was brought from the Tower to be executed for hor∣rid kinds of incontinencies in Charles the first time; Afterwards, in the raign of the long Parliament, and ever since, the Tower of London hath had more number of Prisoners, then it had in the compasse of a hundred years be∣fore. This stately Tower of London, serves not only for a Gaol to detain prisoners, but for many other uses, It is a strong Fort, or Cittadel, which secures both City and River, It serves not only to defend, but to command either, upon oc∣casion; It serves as a royal Randezvouz for Assemblies and Treaties; It is the Treasury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the Crown; The great Archive which conserves all the old Records of the Courts of Justice at Westminster; It is the place for the Royal Mint, and Coynage of Gold and Silver; It is the chief Magazin and Armory, or Arenal of the whole Land, for Martial Engines, and Provision. There only, is the Brake or Rack, usually call'd the Duke of Exceters Daughter because he was te first Inventer of it. And lastly, It is a great Ornament, by the situation of it, both to the Ri∣ver and City.
The City of London hath divers other inferior Towers, as that on the North of the great Bridge. At the South end over the Gate, there is also another Tower over London-Bridge, which hath suffered many accidents of firing, and otherwise, and was still made up by the care and charge of the City, specially one time when it was under bastard Fawconbridge, burnt by the Marriners, and Saylers of Kent. The Antiquaries speak of two Castles that were in the West part of London, one call'd the Castle of Monfiquet, which was built by a Baron of that name, who came over with the Conqueror, which was afterwards demolished, and the Black Fryers risen up out of the ruines of it; The second Castle is Baynards Castle, by Pauls Wharf, built also by one Baynard, who came over with the Conqueror: who being ennobled, the honour of Baynards Castle succeeded from Father to Son, a long time, till it came to Sir Robert Fitzwater, a valiant Cavalier: who being fallen into the displeasure of King Iohn, in the Barons Warres, was banished, and Baynards Castle destroyed; But afterwards, being restred to the Kings favour, by an exployt he did in France, he was re-invested in all his Livings, and so repair'd Baynards Castle again: Moreover, he was made chief Banner-bearer of the City of London▪ whereof he had a Charter, which ran to this sense, That he said, Robert Fitzwater, and his Heirs, ought to be, and are chief Bannerers of London, in fee for the Chastilary, which he and his Ancestors had from Baynards Castle, and the said City. In time of War the said Robert and his Heires, ought to serve the City as followeth. The said Robert (he being the twentieth man of Armes himself) ought to come on Horseback, covered with Cloth or Armor, under the great West door of St. Paul, with his Banner displayed before him; and when he is come mounted to that door, and apparreld, as before is said, The Maior (with the Aldermen and Sheriffs) in their Arms, shall come out of the Church of St. Paul, unto the said West door, the Maior bearing a Banner in his hand, all on foot, which Banner shall be Gules, the Image of St. Paul Gold, the face, hands, feet, and Sword Argent; And as soon as the said Robert shall see the Maior, Alder∣men and Sheriffs, come on foot out of the Church, armed with such a Banner, he shall alight off his Horse, and salute the Maior, and say to him, Sir Maior, I am come to do my service which I owe to the City: whereunto the Maior, and Aldermen shall answer, We give to you, as to our Bannerer of fee in this City, the Banner of this City, to beare, and govern to the honour and profit of this City to your power: And the said Robert and his Heires, shall receive the said Banner in his hands, and shall go on foot out of the Gate, with the Banner in his hands, and the Maior, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, shall follow to the door, and shall bring a Horse to the said Bannerer, worth twenty pounds, which Horse shall be sadled with a saddle of the Arms of the said Bannerer, and shall be covered with indalls of the said Arms. Moreover, they shall present unto him, twenty pounds Starling money, and deliver it to the Chamberlain of the said Bannerer, for his expences that day. Then the said Bannerer shall mount on Horseback, with the Banner in his hand, and as soon as he is up, he shall say to the Lord Maior, that he cause a Marshal to be chosen for the Host, one of the City; which Marshal being nam'd, the said Bannerer shall command the Maior and Burgesses of the City, to warn the Commons to assemble, and they shall all go under the Banner of St. Paul; and the said Bannerer shall bear it himself unto Ealdgate; and there the said Bannerer and the Maior, shall deliver the said Banner from thence, to whom they shall assent and think good; And in case they make any issue out of the City, then the said Bannerer ought to choose two out of every Ward, the most sage Personages, to foresee and look to the safe keeping of the City, after they be gone forth; And this Councel shall be taken in the priory of the holy Trinity, near unto Aldgate; And also before every Town or Castle, they
shall besiege, if the siege continue a whole year, the said Bannerer shall have for every siege one hundred shillings, and no more of the Comminalty of London. These be the Rights that the said Bannerer shall have in time of War; But the Rights that belong unto the said Bannerer Sir Rob▪ Fitzwater in time of peace are these, that is to say, The said Robert hath a Soke or Ward in the City, that is to say, a Wall of the Canonry of St. Paul unto the Thames, & so to the side of the Mill, which is in the water that cometh from Fleet bridge, & so goeth by Lon∣don walls betwixt the Fryars Preachers & Ludgate, & so returneth back by the house of the said Fryrs, unto the said Walls, of the said Canonry of St. Pauls, viz. all the Parish of St. Andrews, which is in the gift of his Ancestors by the said Signority; And so the said Robert hath appendant unto the said Soke, all these things under-written, & if any of the Sokemanry be impleaded in Guild∣hall, of any thing that toucheth not the Body of the Lord Mayor, or the She∣riffs for the time being, it is not lawful for the Sokeman of the Sokmanry of the said Robert to demand a Court of the said Robert; And the Mayor and the Citizens of London ought to grant him a Court, and in his Court he ought to bring his Judgments as it is assented and agreed upon in the Guild∣hall, that shall be given him. If any therefore be taken in his Sokemanry, he ought to have his stocks and imprisonment in his Soke, and he shall be brought thence to the Guild-hall before the Mayor, and there they shall provide him his judgement that ought to be given of him; but his judgement shall not be publish'd till he come unto the Court of the said Robert, and in his Liberty. And the Judgement shall be such, that if he have deserved death for Treason, he is to be tied to a Post in the Thames at a good Wharf, where Boats are faste∣ned, two ebbings and two flowings of the water. And if he be condemn'd for a common thief, he ought to be led to the Elmes, and there suffer his judgement as other thieves; So the said Robert and his Heirs hath the ho∣nour, that he holdeth a great Franchise within the City, that the Mayor of the City, and the Cittizens are bound to do him of Right, viz. that when the Mayor will hold a great Councel, he ought to call the said Robert and his Heir to be with him in the Councel of the said City; and the said Robert ought to be sworn of the Councell of the said City, against all people; saving the King, and his Heirs. And when the said Robert comes to the Hustings in the Guild-hall of the said City, the Mayor or his Livetenant, ought to rise and set him down to sit neer him; and so long as he is in the Guild-hall, all the judgements ought to be given by his mouth, according to the Records of the Recorders of the said Guildhall; And so many Waifes as come while he he is there, he ought to give them to the Bayliffs of the said Town, or to whom he will by the Councel of the City. These are the ancient Franchises that belong to the Bannerer of London, as they stand upon ancient authentick Records; But when this honor fell from the Fitzwaters, and from Baynards Castle, 'tis incertain; Now, that Castle fell after∣wards to the Earl of March, who was Crown'd there by the Title of Edward the fourth, to whom this City stuck very close; But in the seventh year of King Edward's Reign, many of the greatest men of London were attach'd for Treason, with divers Aldermen, whereof though they were acquitted, yet they did forfeit their goods to the value of 40000 marks; among whom Sir Thomas Coke, Sir Iohn Plummer, and Humfrey Howard, were of the number; And the said Coke Lord Mayor a little before was committed to the Tower, with one Hawkins; nor could Coke be acquitted until he had paied 8000 Marks to the King. Henry the seventh rode in Majesty through the City with all the Knights of St. George, from the Tower to St. Pauls Church, where they heard Vespers, and so the King lodg'd that night at Baynards Castle, which he had newly repair'd be∣fore. Queen Mary was also proclaim'd there, notwithstanding that the Lady
Jane had been proclaim'd a little before. There was also another Tower or Castle, near adioyning unto Baynards Castle, which was call'd Legates Inne, but now there is no trace of it let. There was also another Castle call'd the Tower of Monfiquet (spoken of a lit∣tle before) upon the River of Thames more Westward, where afterwards a Monastery of Fryars was erected, call'd to this day the Black fryars; first built by Kelwarby, Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom the Mayor of London, gave two Lanes or wayes adjoyning to Baynards Castle; There was also ano∣ther Tower stood there, above 300 years, which was demolished by Iohn Sha Lord Mayor of London Anno 1502, the King giving leave to do it. There was another Tower or Castle, that stood in the same place that Bride-well now stands; which being demolished, yet notwithstanding, there was a Royal Palace stood still where the Kings of England kept their Courts, and call'd Parliaments: and among others, it stands upon good Record, that King Iohn summoned a Parliament thither, where he exacted of the Clergy in a Par∣liament held at Saint Brides in London 100000 Marks; and besides this, the white Monks were compelled to cancel their Priviledges, and pay the King 40000 Marks; This House of Saint Brides of later time being left, and not used or inhabited, fell to ruine, yet the Platform still remained among the filth and rubbish, together with a fair Well. A great part of the House on the West side, was given to the Bishop of Salisbury, whence Salisbury Court derives its name to this day; The other part towards the East remain'd wast, until Henry the 8th, did build a stately Palace there in a very short time, and call'd it Bridewel, which he did for the entertainment of his Nephew Charles the fifth Emperour and King of Spain, who came hither Anno 1522, and was there entertain'd in a Princely and Magnificent manner. There was another Tower call'd the Tower Royal in the Parish of Saint Mi∣chael de Pater noster, where King Stephen was us'd to keep his Court, which was call'd afterwards the Queens Wardrobe; Barbican was also another Tower, Besides, there was an ancient Tower, in Bucklersbury, called Sernes Tower, and the story saith, that Edward the third kept his Court there, appointing his exchange of moneys to be also there kept, which he gave afterwards to his free Chappel of St. Stephen in VVestminster, now call'd Henry the sevenths Chappel, who spent 14000 ls. in the building of it, and about the same time a great ship was built which cost just as much.
Of the publick places of Sciences and Litera∣ture which London hath. IT is observed, that the English Nation hath bin alwaies extraordinarily addicted to Literature, and to the love of Knowledge: which among other instances appears; in that, of old times, there were three principal Churches in London which had famous Schools, wherein there were profes∣sors & Doctors, which were famous for their knowedge in Philosophy and the Mathematicks; The three Churches which had these Schools by Priviledges, were the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, for by General Councel held in the year 1176 at Rome in the Patriarchy of Saint Lateran, it was decreed, that eve∣ry Cathedral Church should have a School-master to teach poor Schollers, and others. The second, was St. Peters in Westminster, whereof Ingulphus Abbot of Crowland in the Reign of William the Conqueror writes thus; I Ingulphus an humble servant of God, born of English Parents in the most beautiful City of Lon∣don, for to attain to Learning, was first put to Westminster, and after to study a Oxford, &c. The third School, seemes to have bin in the Monastery of St. Savl∣our in Bermondsey at Southwark. There were other Schools built afterwards, as that of St Iohn by Smithfield, and that of Saint Bartholmew, that of Saint Mary Overies, and that of the holy Trinity by Ealdgate, with divers others; But touching Philosophy and other Sciences, in regard that the Colledges in Oxford and Cambridge did so much en∣crease; the former meetings in London, and di putes in Philosophy, that were used to be, did discontinue; Only of late years, that noble Maecenas and Patri∣ot, Sir Thomas Gresham, did erect to his eternal honour a Colledge for all the Sciences, in Bishopsgate-street, as an attendant to his Royall Exchange. The Chronicles teach us, that Henry the fifth having suppressed the Prioris Aliens, whereof there were some about London, namely, our Lady of Rouncval by Charing crosse, one other Hospital in Oldborn, now Holborn, another without Cripplegate, and the fourth without Aldersgate, besides others that are worne long since out of memory, only that of Rouncival continued till the Reign of Henry the eighth, being converted to a brotherhood; But Edward the sixth ap∣pointed by Patent, that there should be in London more Grammar Schooles erected, to wit, one in St Andrews in Holborn, another in Alhallows the great, another in St Peters on Cornhil, and another in the Hospital of St. Thomas of Acon in West cheap▪ The Free-school of Pauls was built of an old ruined house in ample manner, and richly endowed Anno 1512, by Doctor Colet Dean of Pauls, for 153 poor mens children: for which there was a chief Master, an Usher, and Chaplain ordained. Moreover, in the year 1553, after the erection of Christs Hospital, which risse out of the ruins of the Grey Fryers that stood there, a great number of poor chil∣dren were taken in, and a fair School appointed at the charge of the City, though Edward the sixth beat the name of Patron. Anno 1561 the Marchant Taylors of London, founded one notable School, in the Parish of St. Lawrence Poultney. The house was sometimes the Duke of Buckinghams called, the Mannor of the Rose, which Mr. Richard Hills Master of the company, did purchase for 500 l. and bestowed it for a free School. There was an old Custome in London, that the School-Masters should meet on festival daies, and their Schollers should dispute in Logick, as well as Gram∣mer Questions, and Principles, and the most common randezvouz, was Saint Bartholmews in Smithfield, being a priory, where upon a bank boorded under
a tree, they used to meet, and the best Schollers were rewarded with Bows and Arrows of silver, which they carried away as prizes: but that laudable custome is grown obsolee, and quite discontinued. A great emulation there was 'twixt Pauls Schollers, and those of St. Antho∣nies; the Schollers of Pauls would taunt, and term them, St. Anthonies Piggs; and they would call St. Pauls Schollers, Pigeons of Pauls, and many feuds hap∣pen'd amongst them in the open streets: but St. Anthonies School decaying, the quarrel also ceas'd. Anno 1582, a publick Lecture of Chirurgery was founded, to be read in the Colledge of Physitians in Knight-rider-street twice every week; The Founder thereof was, the honourable Baron the Lord Lumley, and Richard Chadwel Do∣ctor of Physick; and Doctor Foster was the first Reader thereof. A Mathematical Lecture was also founded about the same time, to be read in a fair ancient Chappel, built by Simon Eyre within Leaden-hall; But this Chappel, being employ'd afterwards for stowage of goods taken out of a Spanish Carack, the said Lecture ceas'd there, and was used to be read in Mr. Tho. Smiths house in Grass-street, 1184. Anno 1579 Sir Thomas Gresham (Queen Elizabeths Royal Marchant or A∣gent, spoken of before) gave the Royal Exchange, with all the buildings there∣unto appertaining, viz. the one moity to the Mayor and Comminalty of Lon∣don, and their Successors, upon trust that they perform as shall be declared; and the other moity to the Mercers on the same confidence; The Maior & Aldermen are to find four to read Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Musick, and Geome∣try within that dwelling in Bishopsgate-street, and to bestow the sum of 200l. viz. 50l. per annum to every Reader. The Mercers also are to find three Readers in the same place, that is, The Civil Law, Physick and Rhetorick, and every Reader was to have 50 l. a year stipen'd, which great gift was confirm'd after∣wards by Act of Parliament, and so to continue for ever. These Lectures are to be read every day in the week in Term time (Sundays excepted) in the Latine Tongue in the morning, and the same in English in the same dayes afternoon, only the Musick Lecture, whereof Doctor Bull was the first Lecturers was to be read only in English. Moreover, there is in and about the City of London, a whole University, as it were of Students, Practisers, or Pleaders, and Judges of the Lawes of England, not living of common Salaries, as is used in other Academies; but of their private maintenance, as being supported, by their own means or practise, or ex∣hibition from their friends; In so much that most of them are Sons & youn∣ger Brothers to wealthy Parents, where, besides the knowledge of the Laws, they learn all other civilities and exercises besides. Of these Nurseries or Societies there are fourteen, whereof nine do stand within the Liberties of the City, and five without; Those that stand within the Liberties are, Sargeants Inne in Fleet-street, Sargeants Inne in Chancery Lane, the two Temples, which are called, Inns of Court; The other are, Cliffords Inne, Thavies Inne in Holborn, Furnevals Inne, Barnards Inne, and Staples Inne, which are termd Inns of Chancery. Without the Liberties, there is Grayes Inne in Holburn, Lincolns Inne, (which are Inns of Court) Clements Inne, New Inne, and Lions Inne, which are houses of Chancery. In former time, there was in Scroops Court in Holborn an Inne of Sargeants also; There was likewise where Somerset House now stands Chesters Inne or Strand Inne, in the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster, which was pull'd down with many other Buildings, to make room for Somerset House, who had also his materials from St. John of Ierusalem, which some held to be no better than Sacredge; and therefore that fatal death, to be beheaded, befell the Duke of Somerset, who with his Councel were, it seems, so infatuated, that they for∣got
to call for his Clergy, whereby, by the Lawes of England, he might have bin saved. Justice Fortescue makes mention also of a tenth house of Chancery, but he names not the place. The choisest, gentliest & most ingenious wis of the Land, are founds among these Students of the Inns of Court▪ having cōmonly bin gra∣duates before, in one of the Universities; But the Inns of Chancery being as it were Provinces subjected severally to the Inns of Court be chiefly made up of Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Clerks that follow the Courts of Westminster Hall; yet many of them remove to one of the great Inns of Court, where continuing seven years, and frequenting Readings, Mootings, Boltings, and other learned Exercises, they improve themselves in the knowledge of the Lawes: they are then by the consent of the Benchers, who are most commonly of the grave and learned sort selected, & call'd to the degree of Utter Barristers, and so enabled to be Practitioners in the Law, both in their Chamber, and at the Barre in open Court▪ Of these after they be call'd to a further step of preferment, 2. were used to be chosen every year to be Readers, who make two Readings eve∣ry year out of some choise hard points in the Law, one in Lent, the other in Au∣gust. Out of these Benchers and Readers, Sergeants at Law are made, and of them the Judges, unlesse it be that some by special favour of the Prince are cho∣sen otherwise; But being made Sergeants, they leave the Inns of Court and re∣move to one of the Sergeants Inns; where they only, and the reverend Judges are admitted. Touching the two Temples, they are discoursed of here in ano∣ther place; But concerning Grayes Inne and Lincolns Inne, they took their denominations from two noble Lords, who had formerly Palaces in those places where those two Innes now stand; The one is singular, for a curious Chappel it hath; the other for choise delicate Walks, high and low, with a large delightful prospect that carrieth the optiques very far, where the choisest beau∣ties both of City and Suburbs use to resort in the Summer, to solace themselves, and breath fresh aire. Thus have we rambled through the City of London, and waded hitherto through universals (wherein there is not alwaies plain-dealing) we will now hunt dry foot after particulars, and find out the Primitive mode, & method of Government which London had, with the Titles of her chief Magistrates; We will then Muster her twelve prime Companies, with all the rest of her Corpo∣rations; Then, a Perambulation shall be made through all her Precincts, Al∣dermanries and Wards, as far as the point of the Lord Mayors Sword doth reach; Then shall there be a Parallel 'twixt London, and other the greatest Ci∣ties in the world; wherein it will appear to the impartial discerning Reader, that, if consideration be had to the Prerogatives and power of her chiefest Ma∣gistrates, to their plenty, magnificence and hospitality, to the security of Passen∣gers up and down her streets at midnight, as well as at noon daies, The City of London admits no Parallel.
Of the Political Government, and Civil Sway of the City of London. IT is no incongruous allusion, that some Polititians make, when they com∣pare a City to a great Ship, whereof Government is the Healm and Rudder, which regulate, and guide her course; Good Lawes and Constitutions, are the Cables and Ligaments; The Main-Mast is Religion, and the Stan∣dard, of the Crosse; the Foremast is Honour and Renown; the Mise Mast is Trade and Wealth; Iudgement and Prudence is the Ballast; Authority and strength the Artillery. This Comparison may quadrat with London, as much as with any other City, on the surface of the Earth. The Lord Maior is as the Pilot and Master; the Aldermen, his Mates; the Recorder and Sheriffs the chief Gunners; the Scavengers, the Swabbers; other inferior Officers are the Mariners, to weigh Anchors, to hoise and furle the Sails, &c. Touching the primitive Government of London in the time of the Britains, Antiquity scarce affords us any light, whereby to discern what it was, Caesar gives us most, when he writes, that Mandrubacius was King of the Londoners, or the Trinobants, which last word extends also to some of the Counties adja∣cent; But it may be wondred, that Iulius Caesar should know so much, in regard that He never took firm footing in Great Britain, but, by way of explo∣ration, did only d'scover Her; Augustus and Tiberius may be said to conceal Her. Caligula intending an Invasion, was diverted by his Warres with the Germans. Claudis Caesar (from whom Glocester takes her name, being no other then Castrum Claud, the Castle of Claudius) was the first that fixt here, and he sent over Publius Agriola for his Lieutenant, who took great pains to civilize the Nation: and as he was about the work, he sent notice to Rome, that he prefer∣red the British wits before the Gallic. Then was London made a Praefectura, and the Magistrate in chief, was called Praefect (as he of Rome is called to this day) this Title continued all the time that the Romans had dominion here, which was above 300 years. Afterwards, the Romans having so many great Irons in the fire by Warres they had against divers Nations, who had revolted from them, they drain'd this Iland not only of great numbers of the British Youth, to serve them in their Warres abroad, but drew away at last their own Legions; whereupon, the Iland being thus grown weak, much depopulated, and to a long deuetude of Arms, the Saxons, who are now the English (yet keep still their first denomination of Saxons, both in the British and Irish Tongues to this day) came over with a considerable strength, and having in a Parly on Salsbury Plains, musiered most of the British Nobility by a stratagem, and taken Vortiger the King Prisoner, He for his ransom was forc'd to give, not only London, but most part of the Iland to the Saxons. And the chief Magistrate of London, they call'd Portreve, which is a Gardian or Governour of a Port, and that name is yet used in England, in some places. The Saxons then changed their names into Englishmen, yet they continued Pagans a long time after, but at last, the Britains converted them to Christianity, and then the City of London flourished exceedingly for many Ages, till there came over a swarm of Danes, who proved more fatal to London, then any other Nation; for by fire and sword, they had almost utterly destroyed Her, had not the Londoners at last rowz'd up their spi∣rits, who making vertue of necessity, did fall upon King Swein the insulting E∣nemy, with such a resolution, that by a mighty slaughter, and extraordinary
prowesse, they utterly repel'd him; The City having recovered her former lustre (though 'twas a good while first) she continued under the English Go∣vernment, and the Magistracy of a Portreve, till the Norman rush'd in; yet the Title was not alter'd a good while after, when at last he came to be call'd Bayliffe, and sometimes Provost: Richard the first, for supporting the Croy sada, and his Warres in the Holy Land, got great Contributions of monies, from the Londoners; in lieu whereof, he gave them leave to choose two Bayliffs an∣nually. King Iohn after him chang'd their Bayliffs into a Maior, and two Sheriffs: To these Henry the third adds some Aldermen, who though yeerly E∣legible at first, grew afterwards Perpetual; Now, this Word Alderman, is con∣sonant to Senator, being both derived from old Age and Gravity. The first Alderman we read of in England, was in the time of King Edgar, a∣bout 800 years agoe, whose name was Ailwine, and was descended of the blood Royal, as appeares by his Epitaph in that goodly Monastery, in the Ile of Ely, whereof he was founder himself, which Epitaph runs thus. Hic requiescit Dom. Ailwinus inclyti Regis Edgari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, & hujus Sacri coenobii miraculosus Fundator. Here resteth the Lord Ailwine (Cousin to Noble King Edgar) Alderman of all England, which some interpret chief Justice, & miraculous Founder of this holy Abbey, Hence it may be infer'd, that the appellation of Alderman, is not only venerable, but ancient, & honourable. And from this Lord Ailwine, it seemes the first Maior of London descended, who was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Anno 1191. who continued many years in the Office, & lies buried in St. Mary Bothaw, near Lon∣don-stone; and the next Maior to him was Roger Fitz-Alwin, after whom he Office grew annual. The City being thus, in tract of time, come to a fixed and setled Govern∣ment, she began to flourish exceedingly. And as she increased in Men, Manu∣factures, and Merchandizing, so the Kings did enlarge their royal favours unto Her, Anno 1226. Henry the third confirmed unto the Citizens of London, free Warren, or liberty to hunt about the City, and in the Warren of Stanes; Moreover, that the Citizens of London, should passe Toll-free, through∣out all England, and that the Keddles and Weres in the Rivers of Thames and Medway, should be plucked up and destroyed for ever, because Navigation to London might be more free. Roger Renger was Maior, when these Patents were granted. A few years after the liberties, and franchises of London, were ratified by the same King, who granted, that either Sheriff should have two Clarks, and two Sargeants, and that the Citizens should have a Common Seal: A little af∣ter the same King granted that the Maior Elect, should be presented to the Barons of the Exchequer, and they should admit him. Moreover, he gave way, that the City should be fortified with Poss, and Iron Chains, drawn athwart o∣ver the streets. Anno 1326. Edward the third much increased the Immunities of the City, and the Authority of the Maior; for he granted, that the Maior should be Iu∣stice for the Gaol delivery at Newgate, and have power to reprieve Prisoners. That the Citizens of London should not be constrained to go out of the City of London, to any Warre; He granted also, that the liberties and franchises of the City, should not after that time be taken into the Kings hands, as it had bin of∣ten before, when a Custos was put in. Moreover, He granted by Letters Pa∣tents, that there should be no other Eschetor in the City, but the Maior. Anno 1338. He granted, that the Sargeants attending the Maior and the Sheriffs, should bear Maces silver and gilt, with the Royal Arms engraven.
Anno 1356. The same King ordained, that whereas the Aldermen were used to be chang'd yeerly, they should not be removed without special cause for the future. Then for the higher honour, and Authority of the Office, the Sword was added with the Cap of Maintenance. Thus in proces of time, the Government of London, grew to be more and more established. Anno 1415. Sir Henry Barton being Maior, ordained Lanthorns and Lights to be hang'd out on the Winter Evenings, betwixt Alhollontide and Candlemas: Sir Iohn Norman, being Maior, was the first who went upon the River to West∣minster, having made a stately Barge to that purpose, Anno 1453. And the rest of the Companies followed that laudable Example, with their Barges also. Anno 1473. Sir Iohn Tate being Maior, the Sheriffs of London were appoin∣ted each of them, to have sixteen Serjeants, and every Serjeant to have his Yeoman; Moreover, they were to have six Clerks, a Secondary, a Clark of the Papers, with fower other Clarks, besides the Under Sheriffs Clark. Anno 1484. It happened, that there was successively one after the other, three Mayors, and three Sheriffs of London, in the compasse of one year; by rea∣son of the sweating sickness, which rag'd so extreamly. Anno 1501. Sir John Sha being Maior, added some state to the Office; for it was ordered, that the Aldermen his Brethren should attend him on Horse∣back, from Guild-hall to the Rivers side, when he took Barge for Westminster; Besides, he was the first who kept Court in his own House, for redressing of such matters that came before him; Sir William Capel being Maior of London, caus'd Cages to be set up in every Ward, for the punishments of Vagabends, and Rogues. Anno 1556. Sir Thomas Ossley being Mayor, the Night Bel-man was first ordained. Queen Elizabeth did much favour the City of London; and for the better Government, thereof, gave way for a Provost Marshal to be appoin∣ted. Thus have we observed, that the Governours in chief of the City of London, have had from time to time, differing appellations. Under the Britains, they were call'd Kings; The Romans stiled them, Praefects. The Saxons, Portreves. The Norman Kings at their first comming, Bayliffs, and sometimes Provosts, Then came the Office to be established in the Title of Maior, which hath conti∣nued any time these 467. years, though it was interrupted sometimes by a Custos; which some of the Kings, as Henry the third, and Edward the first, upon a displeasure against the City, were used to appoint. This great Urban Magistrate, the Maior of London, useth to be chosen upon the feast of St. Michael the Archangel, every year out of the six and twenty Al∣dermen, who are his Brethren; but he takes not his place, until the 28. of Octo∣ber next following. Touching the State and Authority of the Lord Maior of London, there is no Oppidan Magistrate in Christendom, all things well considered, lives in a grea∣ter; Let us examine the particulars, and first go to his domestical attendance, and the Officers thereunto belonging, which are, 1. A Sword-bearer. 2. Com∣mon Hunt. 3. Common Cryer. And 4. Water Bayliffs, all Esquires by their places. Then is there the Coroner of London, three Sergeant Carvers, 3. Sar∣geants of the Chamber; Sargeant of the Channel, 4 Yeomen of the Water side. The Under Water-Bayliffe; two Yeomen of the Chamber, three Meal-weighets; two Yeomen of the Wood-Wharfs; and most of these have their Servants allowed them; but the common Huntsman and Water-Bayliffe have two a peece; some of them have Liveries from the Lord Maior, and the rest from the Chamber of London.
There be divers other great publick Officers belong to the Government of the City of London, as the two Sherifs, which, like the Lord Maior, are but an∣nual; The Recorder, the Chamberlain, the Common Sergeant, the Town-Clark, or common Clark, the Remembrancer, all Esquires. The Sheriffs are chosen upon Midsummer day: they formerly were used to be elected out of the Commonalty; and sometimes they came to be Aldermen, as many Aldermen were made Maiors, though not having bin Sheriffs; But of latter years, the Sheriffs have bin Aldermen before, or presently after their E∣lection; And 'tis remarkable, that Nicolas Faringdon was 4 times Maior of London, and yet never Sheriff. Now touching the Election of these Officers, we shall give a brief account, the prime Magistrate, the Lord Maior and the Aldermen, met at Guild∣hall at 8. in the morning, in their Scarlet Gowns, and their Cloaks fur'd riding on Horseback, and having bin a while in the Councel Chamber, they come forth into the Orphans Court, whence they go in their Cloaks to the Chappel, to hear Service and Sermon, where the Lord Maior, with some of the Alder∣men, take the Communion, which being ended, and Offrings delivered, they return to the Councel Chamber, and thence to the Hustings, the highest Court; where the Recorder makes a Speech, touching the business in hand: then they go back to the Lord Maiors Court, where they remain, the doors shut un∣til the Election be brought unto them; Then the common Sargeant having the Sheriffs on either side, and the Sheriffs other Officers about them, makes another Speech, touching the Custom of the City in this kind; whereupon, they choose two, whose names are brought up to the Lord Maior and the Al∣dermen, who by scrutiny, elect one of those two, whom the Commons had no∣minated before. Then the Lord Maior returns to the Hustings, and he who is chosen, goeth upon his left hand, and sitteth next him; Then the Recorder speaks again to the Commons, nominating the person whom the Lord Maior, and the Aldermen had admitted, and demands whether it be their free choyce; the commons affirming it the Sword-bearer goes to the Lord Maior, Elect, and taketh off his Tipper (which he takes for his fee) and puts on his Chain; where∣upon, he making a short Speech of gratitude, the Lord Maior, and the new E∣lect, go to the Eldest Sheriffs House to dinner. After dinner, the Lord Elect taking the Common Hunt, and other Officers to attend him, besides a Company of Aldermen, goeth to the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, where five or six Aldermen present him, wearing their Violet Gowns. The morrow after Michaelmas day, the Lord Maior and the Aldermen go with the two new Sheriffs to the Exchequer-chamber in Westminster, where they are presented and sworn, and the old Sheriffs are sworn also to their ac∣count. On Simon and Iudes day, the Aldermen and Sheriffs attend the old Lord Maior at his House, whence they come in their formalities to the Hustings, where being sate, the common Cryer commands silence: then the Town-Clark exhibites an Oath to the Lord Maior Elect, which being done, the for∣mer Lord Maior giveth place to the New; which being done, the Chamberlain delivers him the Scepter, next the Keyes of the Common Seal; and lastly, the Seal of the Majoralty; Then the Sword-bearer delivers him the Sword. On the morrow after, all the Aldermen and Sheriffs solemnly meet at the new Lord Maiors House, by 8. in the morning, whence they go to the Guild-Hall, and thence to the Vine-Tree, where they take Barge, and are rowed in state to Westminster-Hall, the rest of the chief Companies attending in their se∣veral Barges, with their Arms, Colours, and Streamers, in a very gay manner; Being come to the Hall, they go round about, and salute all the Tribunals of
justice: then they ascend to the Exchequer Chamber to the Barons, where af∣ter the Recorder hath made a Speech, the Oath is administer'd. Then they come down to the Hall, and go first to the Kings Bench, then to the Common Pleas, and so to Westminster Abbey, where having walk'd about the Kings Tombs, they return to their Barge, and so to London again; where, being landed, they go to the Guild-hall, where a most plentifull dinner is prepared, which lasts many hours, being called, the Lord Mayors feast; The Lords of the privy Councel, the Judges, with other Lords and Ladies of the best quality, are thither invited; After dinner, the Lord Mayor with all the Companies attending, ride solemn∣ly to Saint Pauls, to do their devotions; and so the Ceremony of that great day is concluded. Touching the Election of the Sheriffs, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen meet at 8 in the morning at Guild-hall in their violet-colour'd Gowns, and their Cloaks of Scarlet lin'd but without horses; where from the Counsel-Chamber, they go to the Orphans Court, & so to the Hustings, where the Recor∣der having made a speech touching the present meeting, the Mayor & Aldermen go to the Mayors Court, the dores shut upon them, then the Commons fall to the Election of Sheriffs, as also a Chamberlain, two Bridg-masters, the Auditors of the City and Bridg-house Accounts, and the Surveyors for Beer and Ale: which being done, the Sheriffs with the other Officers, the Common Cryer go∣ing before them with his Mace, go up to the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, to cary up the report of what is done at the Hustings, whither the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen descend again, and confirm the Elections; Then the Recor∣der making them a Speech of thanks, the meeting ends. Now touching the Hustings, which we have mentioned so often, it is the an∣cient'st and highest Court of the City of London; Touching the Etymology of it, it is a pure Saxon word, and is derived of House and dhing or thing, which among the Saxons signified a Cause or Plea; in so much that Hustings is no other then the House of Causes, or Pleading; and Thingere was the ancient word for a Lawyer or Pleader; This Court preserves the Laws, Rights, Franchises, Customs and Dignities of the City; There be handled also there the intricat'st accounts, and Pleas of the Crowns, and of the whole Kingdom; which Court hath for ma∣ny Ages, conserv'd inviolably its own Prerogatives and Customs. This Court was anciently held every Munday, but it was chang'd of late years into Tues∣day, because of the Sheriffs intending the Market, which being kept upon Mun∣day would hinder their sitting in the Hustings. Edward the Confessors Lawes refer much to this Hustings Court; Moreover, the Cities o York, Winchester, Lincoln, the Isle of Shepey, and other places, have had their Hustings. There is also another Court peculiar to London, which discovers as much of Cha∣rity, as of Policy: It is call'd the Court of Requests, or the Court of Conscience. It was first erected by an act of Common-Councel Anno 9. Henry 8. viz. That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being should monthly assign two Aldermen, and four discreet Commoners, to sit twice a week to hear, and determine all matters brought before them (betwixt Free-men) where the due debt, or dammage did not exceed 40S. Afterwards the said number of Commissioners was en∣creased to the number of twelve, which continued till the end of Q. Elizabeths Reign; But, primo Iacobi, it was confirm'd by Act of Parliament, That the said Commissioners should have power to exhibit an Oath, and to commit to pri∣son such as did not obey their Summons, or perform the Orders they made, be∣twixt Plaintiff and Defendant, Debitor or Creditor, touching any debt, not amounting to forty shillings; but such hath been the unconscionablenesse and malice of some men of late times, that they have endeavour'd to overthrow the the said Court, by cavilling at some doubtful words therein, & wresting them to a pervere sense, the rich might have power thereby to oppresse the poorer sort,
by bringing them to Westminster Hall to a further expence of time and trou∣ble, There is then the Court of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, which is a Court of Record; the Recorder and the two Sheriffs (being Aldermen not else) are members of this Court, whose office it is, to redresse and correct the errors, defaults and misprisions which happen in the Government of the City; This Court is kept Tuesdays and Thursdays throughout the year. Then are the two Courts of the Sheriffs, one for every Counter, whereof there are two Lawyers as Judges, well read in the Customs of the City, as well as the common Laws; but if an erroneous judgment be given before the Sheriffs, the party griev'd may sue a Writ of error, and remove it to the Hustings. Then is the Court of Orphans; For the Mayor and Aldermen, by Custome, have the custody of the Orphans within the City, and if they commit the Custody of the Orphans to another man, he shall have a ravishment of ward if the Orphan be taken away; it being enacted that the Mayor and Cham∣berlain of London for the time being, shall have the keeping of all the Lands and Goods of such Orphans, as happen within the City; saving to the King, and other Lords, their Rights of such as hold of them out of the same Liberty; Now the Chamberlain is a sole Corporation to himself, and his Successors for Orphans; and a Recognizance made to him and his Successors touching Or∣phans, shall by custome go to his Successor; Moreover, the Government of Orphans, is so invested in the Mayor, that it any Orphans sue in the Ecclesiasti∣cal Court, or else-where for a Legacy, or duty due to them, by the Custome, a Prohibition doth lye. Then is there the Court of Common Councel, which hath some resemblance of the high Court of Parliament: for it consists of two Houses, viz. the one of the Mayor and Aldermen▪ and the other of the Commoners of the City; Here they make Constitutions and Laws for advancement of Trade, and regulation of other things which bind the whole City. There is then the Court of the Chamberlain for Apprentices; Now, one may be free of London three manner of wayes, first, by Service; secondly, by Birth∣right, being sonne of a Freeman; And thirdly, by Redemption by Order of the Court of Aldermen. The Chamberlain of London, is an Officer very considerable in point of pow∣er: for without him no man can set up shop, or occupy his Trade without be∣ing sworn before him; No man can set-over an Apprentice to another, but by his Licence; He may imprison any that disobeys his Summons, or any Appren∣rice that mildemeans himself, or punish him otherwise. There are the Courts of the Coroner, and the Escheator, which both belong to the Lord Mayor; he being Coroner, and Escheator by vertue of his authority, and Office. Then is there a Court for the conservation of the water & River of Thames, which belongs to the Lord Mayor, from Stanes-bridge unto the water of Yendal and Medway, as is amply spoken of before. Then is there the Court of the Tower of London; and this Court is held within the Verge of the City before the Steward by prescription of debt, tres∣passe, and other actions; now, part of the Tower is within the City, and part in Middlesex, viz. the East part, but the West in London, whereof there was a notable example in the person of Sir Thomas Overbury, who being poyson'd in a Chamber on the West part, the principal murtherers were tryed before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminr in London, and so was Sir Gervase Elwayes the Liveenant of the Tower at that time. There is also a peculiar Court, call'd the Court of Policies, and of Assurances in London, to Marchants that venture and traffique on the Seas, where ships
and goods are insur'd at so much in the hundred, where there is an Officer of good quality who Registers these Assurances. Then is the Court of Halmote, or Hall Court, for every Company of London having a particular Hall. They use to meet there to deliberate of matters belong∣ing to the Company. Then is the Court of the Wardmote, or of the Wardmote Inquest, For the whole City being divided to 26 Wards, every Ward hath such an Inquest con∣sisting of twelve or more, who inquire after abuses and disorders, and present them to be redressed. There is also a kind of Court call'd the Colledge of the President, Censors, and Commonalty or Physicians, who have peculiar Lawes of their own: and among other one is remarkable, that if one who is not of the mystery of a Physician or Chirurgion, take upon him the Cure of a sick Body, and he dieth of the Potion or Medicament, this is, as Britton the great Lawyer saith, Covert Felony. Then is thee the Court of Sessions, or monthly Goal-delivery at the Old-Bayly, both for the City and Middlesex for tryal of Felons, whereof the Lord Mayor is the chief Judge, and hath power of reprieving. Touching the Ecclesiastical Government OF THE City of LONDON. HAving thus in a cursory way run over, and taken in grosse as it were, a view of the Civil Government of the City of London; we will now make some inspections into her spiritual way of Government, which was alwaies Episcopal from the beginning; for there be Re∣cords that may we I induce us to believe, that in the time of the Britains there were Bishops of London, whereof they ay Thean was the first; and in the Reign of Constantine, we read that Restitutus, Bishop of London, had his Session in a Councel he summoned at Arles; After that,  Saxons making twice an irruption into this Island, and at last possessing the better part of it, and being not reduced a good while after, to Christianity, there was a long interruption, and no Bishop of London  Austin the Monk came over, who was call'd the Aposte of the Saxons or English, for he absolutely converted them; He conse∣craed Melitus Bishop of London, from whom to Doctor Iuxon yet living, there are upon good Record the names of 97 Bishops of London, who succeeded one another. In so much that the City of London was not without a Bishop any time these thousand years till now: The Prior of the holy Tinity at Ald∣gate was a great man also in the vernment of the City, for he used to ride with the Mayor & the Aldermen in  but the chief administration of all Ecclesi∣astical affairs was in the Bishop  the  of London hath oftentimes far'd the better for her Bishops, who have done her many signal good services, upon some discomposures; & stood as a skreen 'twixt the fury of the Prince and Her. When the Norman came over, and was much incens'd against the City, William her Bishop then, took off the edg of his fury, and introducing her to the Con∣querors favour, got er that famous Charter which is worthy to be here inserted.
William King greit William Bishop, and Godfregis Posteron, and all the Bou∣rough, waren bynden London, Franchiste, and Engliste, and ickhyd eth that Ick yill that grete be ealbra yearalaga die yegret, &c. Which in intelligible English runs thus. William King, greets William Bishop, and Gode froy Portreve, and all the Burgesses within London, French or English, And I grant you, that I will tat ye be all your Law worth that ye were in Edward is his dayes the King; And I will, that ich Child be his Faders eyer, And I  suffer that ony man you ony wrongys beed, and God you keep. The said Bishop William, procured this Charter, from the insulting Conque∣rour, as appears by his Epitaph; And this Saxon Charter, was not only con∣firmed, but inlarged by Henry the first in Latine; Now as far Soils are sub∣ject to produce rank Weeds, so rich populous Cities are alwayes subject to bring forth turbulent spirits, whereof there is a world of examples in all sto∣ries; nor doth London want good store of them, who used to bandy against their Soveraign Prince, and we well know, how often she forfeited her Charter that way. It stands upon Record, how Henry the third, Edward the second, Richard the 2d, with other Kings, had Her their fore enemies; It is well known, how often she smarted for it, how often her Posts & Chains were taken away, how her Maior & Sheriffs wereclap'd in Prison, and a Custos appointed over her in the interim; How Rich. the first trounced her for murthering the Iews how she suffered for the barbarous fray 'twixt the Goldsmiths and Taylors Servants; For the blood, shed 'twixt her and the men of Westminster on St. Iames's day; For the brawl about the Bakers loaf in Salsbury Court; For the outrages done to St. Martins Sanctuary men; for the Ill May day; and a little of late years for the murther of Doctor Lamb. But now that we are giving a touch of her Church Govern∣ment, It is observable in History, how her Bishops proved her best friends at a pinch, to pull her out of such plunges, and rectifie her again in the opinion of her Soveraign, Nay it stands upon good Record, that she was no City, till she had a Bishop; for we well know, that a City must have of necessity, a Ca∣thedral Church, with the Seat and See of a Bishop.
Of the several COMPANIES, AND CORPORATIONS Of the City of LONDON. With their Originals, and Arms. HAving made a short transcursion through the Government of the City of LONDON, in general; we will now visit their seve∣rall Companies, Corporations, and Societies, whereof the main part of the City may be said to be composed: who for their Industry and Arts, their Inventions, and sundry wayes of Manufactures, may be com∣pared to so many Hives of Bees, the Emblems of sedulity and diligence, And first, Of the Twelve chief Companies, out of which the Lord Mayor is to be annually chosen. 1. THe Mercers have bin alwayes allowed the first place, who were incor∣porated into a Society, & enabled to purchase Lands, 17th Richardi Se∣cundi, Anno 1393. For their Arms they bear gules, a Mayden-head proper crown'd, or Wascot Purple, issuing out of Clowds proper, within a bordure nebulee, or, 2. The Grocers, who at first were called Pepperèrs, were incorporated, Anno 1345. in the twentieth year of Edward the third. The Arms a cheuron between nine Cloves, sable with this Motto, God grant Grace; Supporters Helm and Crest granted by Clarenceux, King of Arms in the Raign of Hen. 8. 3. The Drapers were incorporated in the 17 year of Henry the 6th, Anno 1430. The Arms first granted by Garter, Crest, and Helm by Clarenceux; the Coat Gules three triple Crowns, or Capt Gules issuing out of Clowds, resting upon Sun-beams▪ their Motto, Unto God only, be Honour and Glory. 4. The Fishmongers were at first two Companies, to wit, Stock-Fishmon∣gers, and Salt-Fishmongers; but 28. of Hen. 8. they were imbodied into one Company; Their Arms azure, three Dolphins in pale proper crown'd, or.
betwixt 4 lives, Salterwayes argent, all crown'd, or on a chief Gules, 3 Crosse-Keyes, Salterwayes, argent, the Motto, All Worship be to God only. 5. The Goldsmiths were incorporated in the 16. year of Richard the second, their Arms quarterly Gules and Azure, two Leopards Heads, or fower Golden Cups, covered 'twixt two Buckles, or, the Motto, To God only be all Glory. 6. The Skinners are more ancient, having bin incorporated in the first year of Edward the third, but made a perfect fraternity in the 18. of Rich. the 2d, their Arms, Ermyn on a chief Gules 3. ducal Crowns, or, lind of the first, their Motto the same with the Goldsmiths, To God only be all Glory. 7. The Merchantaylors were compleatly incorporated by Hen. 7th, Anno 1501. their Arms, Argent a Tent 3. Robes Gules, on a chief azure, a Lion pas∣sant regardant, or, with this Motto, Concordi parvae res crescunt. 8. The Haberdashers (calld of old Hurrers) were incorporated a Society of St. Katherine 26 Hen. 6. Anno 1447. And they were confirmed 17. Hen. 7. and named Marchant-Haberdashers: their Coat Nebulee argent, and azure, on a bend gules, a Lyon passant, regardant, or, the Crest and Supporters, granted Anno 1571. with this Motto, Serve and obey. 9. The Salters had the Arms of a Society given them the 22. of Hen. 8. Anno 1530, the Crest, and Supporters by Queen Elizabeth. The Coat party per cheuron azure & gules, 3. Salts covered overflowing argent with this motto, Salspit omnia. 10. The Ironmongers were incorporated in the 3, year of Edw. 4. Anno 1462. their Coat Argent, on a cheuron gules, 3 lockets capted, or between 3 steel gads a zure. 11. The Vintners are more ancient, being incorporated by Edw. 3. by the name of Winetonners, and confirmed by Hen. 6. their Coat Sable a cheuron, between three Tuns argent. 12. The Cloathworkers grew to be a Company, 22 of Hen. 8. at which time, they had Arms first granted them, which are, Sable a cheuron Ermyne in chief, two crabets argent in base a beazel, or, with Supporters and Crest; and this Motto▪ My trust is in God alone. Next to the twelve chief Companies, the Marchants by whole Sale, may well claim room in point of Dignity. 1. AMong Marchants, those of the Staple, may challenge the precedence, who were incorporated by Edw. 3. in whose Raign they had their Sta∣ple of Wooll at Callis: They have a fair Coat of Arms, with this Motto▪ God be our Friend. 2. The Marchant-Adventurers were incorporated in the Raign of Edw. 4. but their priviledges were much enlarged by Queen Elizabeth, they have also a fair Coat, with the same Motto as they of the Staple, God be our Friend. 3. The Marchants of Russia, were incorporated by Edw. 6. and confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, they have also a fair Coat with this Motto, God be our good Guide. 4. The Marchants of Elbing became incorporated by Queen Eli∣zabeth.
5. The Society of Levant Marchants, commonly called the Turky Marchants, being first incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, had their Charter enlarged by King Iames. 6. The Company of Spanish Merchants were incorporated by Queen Eli∣zabeth. 7. The Company of East India Marchants, were also first incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, 1600. 8. A new Company of French Merchant-Adventurers, had a Coat and Crest of Arms granted them by Garter, and Clarencieux, Kings of Arms in the 14th of King James, with this Motto, Reddite cui{que} suum. 9. The Merchants of Virginia, the Bermudus, & Summer Ilands, began also in Queen Eliz. Raign; but ince, they are mightily encreased, and planted in the Charibbi Ilands. Having put this Parenthesis between, viz. the Noble Company of Mar∣chant-adventurers, or Traffiquers, we will now return to the rest of the home-Corporations, and first of the Dyers. 1. The Dyers were first incorporated by a special Charter of Hen. 6. Their Coat a cheuron, engrail'd between three Wooll-sacks argents. 2. The Brewers had a charter of Incorporation of Hen. 6. and confirmed 2 Eliz. Their coat Gules, on a cheuron engraild, argent three Tuns Sable, 'twixt 6 Garbes Salterwayes, or. 3. The Company of Lethersellers is ancient, for they were first incorpora∣ted in the 6th year of Rich. 2. and for their Arms, they have 3. Bucks trippant regardant gules. 4. The Pewterers were a Society in the Raign of Edw. 4th, their Arms a∣zure, on a Cheuron, or 3. Roses gules between. 5. The Barber-Chirurgions were first incorporated by Edw. the 4th. but confirmed by every King and Queen ever since, their Arms a crosse quartered gules, a Lyon passant gardant, or, in the first quarter, a cheuron between 3. in the econd party, per pale argent & vert, a Rose gules crown'd with an Imperial Crown, the first as the 4th, the second as the third. 6. The Company of Armorers, were incorporated at the beginning of Hen. 6th, and the King himself made himself one of the Society, their Arms Argent on a Cheuron gules, a Gantlet between three Swords in Saltire, on a chief Sable, a Buckler Argent, charged with crosse gules, 'twixt two Helmets of the first. 7. The Company of White Bakers are of great antiquity, as appears by ma∣ny Monuments in their Hall. They were a Company in the first year of Edw. 2. Their Arms gules, 3. Garbs, or, on a chief, an Arm issuing out of the Clowds proper holding a pair of scales, or, between 3. Anchors of the first. 8. The Company of Wax-Chandlers are also of an ancient standing, and of great doings in the time of the Roman Religion: their Arms azure, on a cheuron between 3. Lamps argent, as Roses gules. The Brother-hood of Tallow-Chandlers, is also of much antiquity; yet they were first formally incorporated in 2 Edw. 4th: their Arms a pale counter-changed argent, and azure between 3. Doves argent volant, with Olive bran∣ches verd. 10. The Company of Cutlers, were incorporated at the beginning of the Raign of Hen. 5th, their Arms 6 Swords Salterwayes, proper. 11. The Girdlers are not inferior for antiquity to either of these, yet came they not to be incorporated, till the twentieth year of Hen. 6th, their Arms azure, or & a pale between 3. Grid-irons azure. 12. The Butchers came not to be incorporated, till the 3d year of King Iames; at which time, they were incorporated by the names of Master, War∣dens,
and Comminalty of the Art of Mystery of Butchers, yet the fraternity is an∣cient; their Arms azure, two Axes Salterwayes argent, between two Roses argent, as many Bulls Heads cowped of the second attir'd, or a Bores Head gules 'twixt two Garbs vert. 13. The Society of Sadlers must needs be of long antiquity, from the time of Edw. the first; their arms, a cheuron, between 3. Saddles, or. 14. The Company of Carpenters were incorporated by Letters Patents of Edw. 4th, by the name of Master, Warden, and Comminalty of the Mystery of Freemen of the Carpentry of the City of London; their arms, azure, a cheuron engraild between 3. Compasses argent. 15. The Company of Shoomakers, call'd Cordwainners of old, were first in∣corporated 17. of Hen. the 6th. and confirmed since by all Kings; their arms, azure a cheuron, or between 3. Goats heads, drafed argent attir'd, or. 16. The Company of Painters having the addition of Painters Stainers, are of high antiquity; yet were they not incorporated till 1580. by Queen Eliz. their arms quarterly in the first azure, a cheuron between 3. heads, erected, or, in the second argent 3. Escuchins azure, the third as the second, the fourth as the first. 17. The Company of Curriers, are also ancient, yet they were not reduc'd to a Company, till the third of King Iames, their arms azure, a Crosse engrail'd, or between 4. Sawes, Salterwayes argent. 18. The Company of Masons, otherwise call'd Free Masons, were us'd to be a loving Brother-hood for many ages; yet were they not regulated to a So∣ciety, till Hen. 4. their arms sable, on a cheuron between 3. Castles argent, a pair of Compasses of the first. 19. The Company of Plumbers were erected to a Corporation 9th Jacobi. 20. The Company of Inholders came to be reduc'd to a Corporation 6. Hen. 8. their arms azure a cheuron quarterly or and gules counterchang'd between 3. garbs, or. 21. The Company of Founders were incorporated on the 18th of Septemb. in the 12th year of King James; their Coat, gules, a Spoonpot betwixt two Candlesticks, or. 22. The Company of Embroiderers came to be a Corporation 4th Eliz. their arms barry of 8. argent, and azure on a fesse or, a Cup argent, between as many Lyons passant regardant. 23. The Company of Poulters became a Corporation in the 19th of Hen. 7th; their arms are three Swans of the first, as many Herons of the second. 24. The Company of Cooks became a Corporation in the 12th year of Edw. 4th; their arms are a cheuron Sable, between three burray branches proper. 25. The Company of Coopers was reduced to a Corporation, the 16th of the Raign of Hen. 7th, by the name of Master, Wardens, or keepers of the Commi∣nalty of the Freemen of the mystery of Coopers, and the Suburbs thereof. Their arms party per pale gules, and or, a cheuron between three hoops in a chief a∣zure. 26. The Company of Tylers and Brick-layers, though very ancient, yet were they not made a Corporation, till the 10th of Queen Eliz. Their Arms, azure a cheuron, r between a Flower-de-lice, or in chief, 'twixt two gads of Steel of the second. 27. The Company of Bowyers, though of much antiquity, and honor to the English Nation; yet their Incorporation was but in the 21. of King James: their arms, Sable on a chief, 3. Mallets of the first, between 3. Sawes of the first.
28. The Company of Fletchers are also a Corporation, their arms Sable a cheuron, or between 3. Arrowes argent. 29. The Company of Smiths, or Black-smiths, a very ancient Fraternity; were first incorporated by Queen Eliz. 20th of her Raign, their arms, Sable, a cheuron between three Hammers crown'd, or. 30. The Company of Joyners, or Seelers, were incorporated by Queen Eliz. 13th of her Raign, their Arms, gules a Cheuron, 'twixt two Compasses and a Globe argent, on a chief pale gules, charg'd with an escalop, or, between two Roses of the first. 31. The Company of Playsterers were incorporated into one fraternity in the Raign of Hen. 7th. Their arms, azure an Escucheon, or, a Rose between two Flower-de-luces gules, two Hammers, and a Brush argent. 32. The Company of Weavers, were of very ancient note indeed, as having three several Societies of themselves, viz. the Woollen Weavers, the Arras Wea∣vers & the Linnen Weavers; their arms azure, three Leopards heads, with three Shuttles in their mouthes, argent on a cheuron gules or between. 33. The Company of the Fruterers were incorporated 3d Iacobi, their arms argent, the Tree of Paradice between Adam and Eve proper. 34. The Company of Scriveners became a Corporation, 14th Jacobi; their arms, an Eagle volant, holding in his mouth a penner, and an Inkhorn. 34. As for Bottle-makers and Horners, though they may plead antiquity, yet are they no Incorporation. 35. The Company of Stationers of great antiquity before Printing was in∣vented: their old dwelling was in Paternoster Row, and the adjoyning parts; yet were they not incorporated till the third of Philip and Mary; their arms, argent on a cheuron between 3. Bibles, or a Faulcon volant between two Roses, the Holy Ghost in chief. 36. The Company call'd the Marblers, or Sculpters, are in one fraternity with the Masons, yet have they a differing Coat, viz. a cheuron between two and a Mallet argent. 37. There was a Company of Wooll-packers, in the time of the Haunce, when the staple of Wooll flourish'd, their Coat, azure a Wool-sack argent. 38. The Company of Farriers had their rise from Henry de Ferraris, a Nor∣man born, who was Master of the Horse to the Conqueror, and had given him the honour of Tutbury, which was the first preferment of the Ferrars, their arms three Horshooes azure. 39. The Company of Paviours are ancient, their Coat argent, a cheuron be∣tween three rummers Sable. 40. The Company of Lorinors, or Loriners, have for their arms, gules on a cheuron argent, three Horscombs 'twixt three Roses argent. 41. The Company of Brown-Bakers were incorporated 19th Jacobi, their arms, gules, a hand issuing out of the Clouds, a chief barry wavie, or, and azure on a cheuron gules. 41. The Company of Wood-mongers came to be incorporated 3d Jacobi, their Coat, argent a cheuron 'twixt 3. Faggots Sable. 42. The Company of the Upholsters, or Upholders, give for their arms, Sa∣ble three tents gules, on a cheuron, or 3. tents of the second. 43. The Company of Turners came to be incorporated 2d Jacobi, their Coat azure, a Katherine Wheel argent. 44. The Company of Glasiers give for their arms two Crosiers Salterwayes Sable, 4 sprigs on a chief gules, a Lyon passant, gardant or. 45. The Company of the Clarks, commonly call'd Parish-Clarks, is anci∣ent, having bin incorporated 17th Hen. 3d, their arms azure, a Flower-de-lice, or, on a chief gules, a Leopards head, 'twixt two Books, or.
46. The Company of Watermen have for their arms barry waive of six a∣zure and argent, a Lighter proper on a chief gules, a pair of Oares Salterwayes, 'twixt two Cushions, or. 47. The Company of Silk-throwers were made a Fellowship of this City, 19th Jacobi, they were incorporated by the name of the Master, Wardens, As∣sistants, and Comminalty of the Trade, Art, or Mystery of Silkthrowers, of the City of London. 48. The Company of the Apothecaries having separated themselves from the ancient Society of the Grocers, grew so much in favour with King James, that he us'd to call them his Company; and therefore gave them a Charter of Incorporation, the 15th of his Raign. Thus have we visited all the publick Societies, and Corporations of this rich and renowned City, who may be called her best sorts of Children, for increa∣sing of her Wealth, and advancement of Trade. Now every of these Compa∣nies hath a handsome and well-furnish'd stately Hall, with a Clark, and other Ministerial Officers thereunto belonging, to attend them, when they meet there to consult, and inorder what may conduce to the better regulation of the Society, and promoting of the publique good; They also use to meet there frequently to rejoyce, and make plentiful Feasts, for the increase of love and good Neighbourhood among themselves; And though there be some, who hold such Corporations, and little Body politiques, of this kind, to be prejudicial to Monarchy; yet they may be said to be one of the Glories of London, and wherein she surpasseth all other Cities.
The Perambulation of LONDON, OR, A Progress made through the six and twenty particular Wards, Precincts, or Aldermanries, whereinto the whole City is divided. GReat Cities have commonly their Divisions: And I could heartily wish, that the Noble City of London, had not so many in one sense, I mean so many Rents, factions, and feuds in the practice of Holy Du∣ties, proceeding from such extravagant, heterodoxal, and fanatical o∣pinions, or rather Chymeras of unsetled brains; But these are not the Divi∣sions that are here meant. Those which I intend in this place, are only topical distributions, or Districts, shewing the several position of parts, and differences of their locality, whereby the Reader may have a kind of Anatomy presented unto him, of all the members of this great populous City thus dissected. This general Division consists of six and twenty parts, or precincts, which in the English Diaect, are called Wards, and are these that follow. The names of all the Wards of the City of LONDON. Ward. 1. Tower-street. 2. Port-soken. 3. Algate. 4. Limestreet. 5. Bishops-gate. 6. Broad-street. 7. Cornhill. 8. Langhorn. 9. Billingsgate. 10. Bridge-ward within. 11. Candlewick. 12. Wallbrook. 13. Dowgate. 14. Vintry. 15. Cordwainer. 16. Cheape. 17. Colemanstreet. 18. Basings Hall. 19. Cripplegate. 20. Aldersgate. 21. Faringdon intra. 22. Faringdon extra. 23. Breadstreet. 24. Queen Hith. 25. Castle Bainard. 26. Bridgewater without viz. the Borough of Southwark. Whereof the greatest is the last, and Bassings-Hall the least.
Of the first Ward or, Aldermanry, called Tower-street Ward. OUt of an honour which is due to the Tower of London, it being the prime Fortresse and propugnacle of the City, both by water and Land, the chief Armory and Archive of the whole Island, &c. we will begin with Tower-street Ward, it being the first Ward East∣ward within the Wall, extending it self along the River from the Tower al∣most to Billinsgate; One half of the Tower, the ditch on the West side, and Bulwarks adjoyning, do stand within that part where the wall of the City of old time went streight from the Postern gate South to the River of Thames, before that the Tower was perfectly built. Then was Tower hill sometimes a clear large plot of ground, but now pester'd with encroachments of houses, built upon the banks of the ditch, much to the prejudice, and choaking up of the said ditch. This Hill hath alwaies a Scaffold, and Gallowes erected for execution of Traytors and others, which the City opposed at first. Many clashings have been also 'twixt the Lord Mayor and the Lieutenant of the Tower about the extent of their Liberties, and some Priviledges touching prisoners the Lievtenant claim'd, which were reconciled 1585; in Queen Elizabeths time at Nonsuch. On the Northside of Tower-hill, there is Lumly house; then is Tower-street, stretching from Tower-hill to Saint Margaret Pattens. At the end of this is the Parish Church called Alhallows Barking; on the North side whereof was sometimes a fair Chappel, built by Richard the first; and some say, that his Heart (which is call'd Coeur de lion) was buried there under the high Altar; it became afterward a little Colledge of Priests, and stood till Edward the sixth. Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, being beheaded, was buried in Barking Church; Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester, having layen naked upon the Scaffold a long time, was at last carried thither, and buried in the Churchyard; There were divers other men of note buried there: and lately Doctor Land Archbishop of Canter∣bury, who was beheaded by the long Parliament. By the West side of Barking Church lyeth Sydon Lane, commonly calld Sithing Lane, wherein among other large Buildings, there is Walsingham House. Then is there the Parish Church of Saint Olave, hard by Hart-street, where there are some Monuments of the noble Family of the Radcliffs Earls of Sussex. Then is there Mart-lane, part whereof lies in Algate Ward, where there are many fair Houses, & rich Marchants. Then is there Mincheon Lane, so call'd, because of Tenements there, sometimes pertaining to the Minchuns, or Nuns of St. Helens in Bishopsgate-street; There dwelt in this Lane divers strangers in times pass'd, and they were commonly call'd Gallimen, because they brought up Wines, and other commodities in Gallies, which they landed in the Thames street, in a place call'd Galley Key; They brought also a Coin with them call'd Gally half pence, which was a Ligurian Coin; But in the Reign of Henry the fourth, and Henry the fifth, it was inordred, that whosoever should import that Coin with Suskins or Dodkins, should be punished as a Felon; The Clothwor∣krs Hall is in this Lane.
Then have you the Parish Church of St. Mary Pattens, and Bear Lane hard by, reaching to Thames street; The next is Spurrier lane, call'd so in times pass'd, but now named Water lane; then is there Hart lane, call'd at first Harp-lane, which likewise reaches to Thames street. In this Lane is the Bakers Hall. In Tower street 'twixt Hart-lane and Church-lane, was in times pass'd a qua∣drant call'd Galley-row, because Galley men dwelt there: whence may be in∣ferr'd; that Galleys was a kind of shipping, not unknown to England in times pass'd. Then have you two Lanes out of Tower street, both call'd Church lanes, then hard by, is there another call'd Fowl-lane. Afterwards you come to the Parish Church of S. Dunstans in the East: it is a fair large Church of an ancient building, with a spacious Church-yard; the chiefest Salters & Ironmongers were us'd to be thick there. There are many Monuments of Knights, and other persons of ranke in this Church; among others, that of Sir Iohn Hawkins the great Seaman. There are many Keys in this Parish, among others VVooll Key, where was used to be the Trouage of Woolls; Then Custome-house Key, which part of the Town was used to be call'd in times passd Petty VVales. And some are of opinion, that the Princes of Wales, when they repair'd to the City, had a Pallace there, the ruines whereof remain to this day of firm stone. There was in former times an Hospital in the Parish of Barking, for the susten∣tation of poor Priests, with other both men and women that were Lunatick. And so much in brief for what concerns Tower-street Ward. Of the second Ward of London called Portsoken Ward. VVE will now make a salley out of Algate, and visit Port∣soken VVard; This Portsoken signifieth Franchise, where there was sometimes a very ancient Guild or particular Society, which had its beginning in the Reign of King Edgar; There were then 13 Knights, who desir'd to have a portion of Land on the East part of the City, which for some signal services done in the wars, was granted them with the Liberty of a Guild; The King condescended here∣unto, proided that each of them should victoriously perform three combats, one above ground, and another under ground, and the third in the water. They were to run in East Smithfield with Spears against all comers, which was us'd to be gloriously performed; So that the King namd that place Knighten Guild, and so prescribed its bound, which extended from Algate to the place where now the Barrs are Eastward, on both sides of the street, and Northward as far as Bishopsgate; and Southward as far as the Thames, and so far into the River that a horieman might ride at low water, and throw his Spear; These Knights continued their Chrter in the daies of Edgar, Ethelred, and Canutus, which Ed∣ward the Confessor did not only ratifie but enlarge, which deed remain'd a long time fairly written in the Saxon Letter & Tongue, in the Book of the late House of the holy Trinity; after that VVilliam Rufus confirm'd the said Charter unto the Heirs of those Knights, as followeth;
William King of England, to Maurice Bishop, and Godefroy de Ma∣gun, and Richard de Parre, and to his faithful people of London, Gree∣ting. Know ye me to have granted to the men of Knighten Guild, that be∣long'd to them, and the Land that belong'd thereunto, with all Customes as they were used to have the same in the time of my Predecessors, &c. Henry the first after him confirm'd the same; But afterwards the Church of the Holy Trinity, being founded by Queen Matilda within Aldgate, such was the piety of those times, that this Knighten Guild, which was of such large extent that it reach'd unto the Thames, was voluntarily given to the Canons of that Church; And for better ratification of the Grant they offer'd upon the Altar, Saint Ed∣wards Charter with the rest which they had, and put the Prior of the Holy Trini∣ty, in possession and saisin thereof; by the Church of Saint Butolph, which was built thereon, being the head of the Land; All which, King Henry confirm'd by that famous Charter which runs thus. Henry King of England to R. Bishop of London, to the Sheriffs, and Provost, and all his Barons, and faithful people, French and English of London and Middlesex, Greeting; Know ye me to have granted and confirm'd to the Church & Canons of the holy Church of the Trinity of London the Soke of the English Knighten Guild, and the Land which pertaineth thereunto; and to the Church of Saint Buttolph, as the men of the same Guild have given, and granted unto them; And I will & streightly command, that they hold the same well, and honourably and freely with Sack and Soke, Toll and Thea, Infang∣thefe, and all Customs belonging to it as the men of the same Guild in the best sort had it in the time of King Edward; and as King William my Fa∣ther and Brother did grant it to them by their Writs, Witnesse A. the Queen, &c. The Prior and Canons of the Holy Trinity beind thus seiz'd of the said Land, and Soke of Knighten Guild, being not only a part of the Suburbe without the Wall, but also within the City, the Prior was for him and his Successors ad∣mitted as one of the Aldermen of London; And according to the Customs of the City, he did sit in Court, and rode with the Mayor and his brethren the Aldermen, as one of them, in Scarlet, or other Livery as they then us'd: until the year 1531, at which time, the said Priory was surrendred to Henry the eighth by Act of Parliament, who gave it to Sir Thomas Audley Lord Chance∣lour of England, and he pull'd down the Church, and dissolv'd the Pri∣ory; since which dissolution, the said Ward of Portsoken hath been govern'd by Temporal men, one of the Aldermen of London. Thus much for the out∣bound Portsoken Ward, or Knighten Guild, touching the antiquity and Go∣vernment thereof. Now touching the Parts thereof, it is to be observed, that the East part of the Tower stands therein, then an Hospital of Saint Katherine founded by the foresaid Queen Matilda, wife to King Stephen, by Licence of the Prior, and Convent of the Holy Trinity in London, on whose ground she built it; Queen Elianor Wife to Edward the first, was a second Foundresse there, and appointed one Master, three Brethren Chaplains, and three Sisters, ten poor women, with six poor Clerks; for the maintenance of whom, she gave the Mannor of Clarton in VViltshiere, and Upchurch in Kent, &c. Queen Philippa Wife to Edward the third, founded a Chantry there, and contributed to that Hospital ten pounds Land a year; The Quiere there, was not much inferior to that of Pauls, which by one Doctor Wilson being Master there, was afterwards dissolv'd.
On the East and by North of the Tower lieth East Smithfield and Tower hill, two Plots of ground so call'd without the Walls of the City, where sometimes flood a Monastery call'd New Abbey, founded by Edward the 3d. upon the occa∣sion following; That having escaped a great danger in a tempest at Sea, he made a vow to build a Monastery, in sign of gratitude to heaven, to the honor of God and our Lady of Grace, which he perform'd accordingly. But the said Monastery, being afterwards pull'd down by Sir Arthur Darcy of late time, in place thereof is built a large store-house for victual, with convenient Ovens, for baking of Bisket to serve the Navy Royal; the rest of the ground is become into smal Tenements. The Company of Marchant-Taylors, have built thereabouts, hard by Hog∣street, divers fair Alms-houses for 14 poor women, and endow'd it with main∣tenance accordingly. Westward hence from Tower hill towards Algate, there was a Monastery of Nunns of the Order of Santa Clara, call'd the Minories, founded by Edmund Earl of Lancaster, brother to Edward the first, Anno 1293, which was demo∣lished in Henry the eighths time, Dame Elizabeth Savage being then Abbesse: In the room of this Nunnery, there are now store-houses for Armour, and ha∣billaments for war, with divers Work-houses to that purpose; and hard by, there is is a small Church, called Saint Trinity for the Inhabitants therea∣bouts. We come now to the Church of Saint Bttolph, which the Priors of the Holy Trinity did build, being Patrons thereof; In this Church a∣mong others there lies buried, Thomas Lord Darcy of the North, Knight of the Garter, who was beheaded Anno 1537. And also Sir Nicholas Carew, of Beddington in Surrey, beheaded also Anno 1538. East from this Parish Church is Hog-lane, that stretcheth towards St. Mary Spittle, which within these sixty years, had fair rows of Elm-trees all along, which are turn'd now to Houses on both sides, from Hounds∣ditch to VVhite-Chappel.
Of the Third Ward, or Aldermanry, called Aldgate Ward. WE will still look Eastward yet a good while, and go to the third Ward within the Walls, which is called Ealdgate Ward, or Aldgate, as taking name of the same gate; The principal street of this Ward beginneth at Ealdgate stretching West to sometime a fair Well, where now a Pump is placed; From thence (the way being divided into twain) the first and princi∣pal street, (called Aldgate) runneth on the South side to Lime-street corner, and half that street down on the left hand is also of that Ward. In the mid way on that South side, betwixt Ealdgate and Lime-street, is Hart∣horn Alley, a way that goeth thorow into Fen-Church street, over against Nor∣thumberland house; Then have ye Bricklayers Hll, and another Alley called Sprinkle Alley, now named Suger-loaf-alley, of the like Sin. Then is there a fair House with divers Tenements near adjoyning, sometimes belonging to a late dissoled Priory, but since possessed by Mr. Cornwallies wid∣dow, and her Heirs by the gift of King Henry the eighth, in reward of fine pud∣dings (as it was commonly said) by her made, wherewith she had presented him; such was the Princely liberality of those times. Of later time, Sir Ni∣cholas Throgmorton Knight, was log'd there. Then somewhat more West is Belzetters Lane, so called of the first Builder and owner thereof: now corruptly called Blliter lane; betwixt this Belzet∣ters lane and Lime-street, was (of later time) a frame of three fair Houses, set up in the year 1590, in place where before was a large Garden-plot, enclosed from the High-street with a Brick Wall, which Wall being taken down, and the ground digged deep for cellerage, there was found right under the said Brick Wall, another Wall of stone with a Gate arch'd of stone, and Gates of Timber, closed in the middest towards the street; the Timber of the Gates was consu∣med, but the Hinges of Iron still remained on, and their Staples on both the sides. Moreover, in that Wall were square Windowes, with Bars of Iron on ei∣ther side the Gate; this Wall was under ground above two fathoms deep, as it was esteemed, and seemed to be the ruines of some House burned in the Reign of King Steven, when the fire began in the House of one Aleward, neer London∣stone, and consumed East to Ealdgate, whereby it appeareth, how greatly the ground of this City hath been in that place raised. On the North side, this principall street stretcheth to the West corner of Saint Andrews Church, and then the Ward turneth towards the North, by S. Mary street; on the East side, to St. Augustines Church in the Wall, and so by Bur∣ryes Markes again, or about by the Wall to Ealdgate. The second way from Ealdgate, more towards the South from the Pump afore∣said, is called Fen-Church-street, and is of Ealdgate Ward, till ye come to Cull∣ver Alley, on the West side of Ironmongers Hall; where sometimes was a Lane, which went out of Fn-Church-street, to the middest of Lime-street, but this Lane was stopped up, for suspicion of Thieves that lurked there by night. Again, to Aldgate, (out of the principal street, even by the Gate and Wall of the City,) runneth a Lane South to Crossed or Crouched-Fryers, and then
Woodroof Lane, to the Tower Hill; and out of this Lane West, a street called Hart-street, which of that Ward stretcheth to Sydon-lane, by St. Olaves Church; one other Lane more West from Algate, goeth by Northumberland-House towards the Crossed-Fryars; then have you on the same side, the North end of Mart-lane, and Blanch-axelton or Chappleton, where that Ward en∣deth. Thus much for bounds. Now for Monuments, or places most ancint and notable; I am first to begin with the late dissolved Priory of the holy Trinity, call'd Christs-Church, on the right hand within Aldgate; This Priory was foun∣ded by Matilda, Queen and Wife to Henry the first, in the same place where Siredus somtime began to erect a Church in honour of that Crosse, and of Saint Mary Magdalen, of which the Dean and Chapter of Waltham, were wont to receive thirty shillings, the Queen was to acquit her Church thereof; and in exchange gave unto them a Mi, King Henry her husband confirmed her gift; This Church was given to Norman, the first Canon regular in all England. The said Queen gave also unto the same Church, and those that served God therein, the plot of Aldgate, and the Soke or Tenements thereunto belonging, with all Customs, so free as she had held the same, and 25 l. Blanks, which she had of the City of Exeter, as appeareth by her Deed, wherein she nameth the House of Christs-Church, and reporteth Aldgate to be of her Demains, which she granteth, with two parts of the rent of the City of Excester. Norman took on him to be Prior of Christs-Church, in the year of Christ 1108, in the Pa∣rishes of St. Mary Magdalen, St. Michael, St. Katherine, and the blessed Trini∣ty, and was (in old time) of the holy Crosse, or holy Rd Parish. The Priory was builded on a piece of ground in the Parish of St. Katherine, towards Aldgate, which lyeth in length, betwixt the Kings-street, by the which men go towards Algate near to the Chappel of St. Michael towards the North, and containeth in ength eighty three ells, half quarter, and half quartern of the Kings Iron eln, and lieth in breadth, &c. The Soke and Ward of Aldgate was then bounded, as I have before shewn. The Queen was a men also, that the Land and English Knighten-Guld was given unto the Prior Norman, and the hono∣rable man Geffrey de Clinton, was a great helper therein, and obtained, that the Canons might enclose the way betwixt their Church and the Wall of the City, &c. This Priory in processe of time, became a very fair and large Church, rich in Lands and Ornaments, and passed all the Priories in the City of London, or Shire of Middlesex. The Prior whereof was an Alderman of London, to wit, of Portsoken Ward. It is Recorded, that Eustacius the eighth Prior, about the year 1264, because he would not deal with temporal Matters, instituted Theobald Fitz Ivons Al∣derman of the said Portsoken Ward under him; and that VVilliam Ri∣sing Prior of Christs Church, was sworne Alderman of the said Portso∣ken Ward, in the first of Richard the second. These Priors have sitten and ridden amongst the Aldermen of London, in Livery like unto them, faring that his habit was in shape of a spirituall person, at which time the Prior kept a most bountiful house of meat and drink, both for rich and poor, as well within the House as at the Gates, to all comers according to their estates and qualities. But to take leave of this Priory: King Henry the eighth minding to reward Sir Thomas Audley Speaker of the Parliament against Cardinal Woolsey, as ye may read in the Chronicle, sent for the Prior, commending him for his Hospitality, promised him preferment as a man worthy of a far greater dignity, (which promise surely he performed) and compounded with him, though in what sort I never heard; so that the Priory, with the appurtenances, was sur∣rendred
to the King, in the month of Iuly 1531, the 23 of the said Kings Reign, the Canons were sent to other houses of the same Order: and the Priory with the appurtenances, King Henry gave to Sir Tho. Audley newly knighted, and afterwards made Lord Chancelour. Sir Thomas Audley offered the great Church of this Priory, with a ring of nine Bells well tuned (whereof four of the greatest were since sold to the Parish of Stebunbith, and the five lesser to the Parish of St. Katherine Christs-Church, in exchange for their small Parish Church, minding to have pulled it down, and to have builded there towards the steeet; But the Parishioners, having doubts in their heads of after-claps, refused the offer. Then was the Priory Church and Steeple, proffered to whomsoever would take it down, and carry it from the ground, but no man would undertake the offer; whereupon, Sir, Thomas Audley was fain to be at more charges than could be made of the Stones, Timber, Lead, Iron, &c. For the Workmen, with great labour, beginning at the top, loosed stone from stone, and threw them down, whereby the most part of them were broken, and few remained whole, & those were sold very cheap; for all the buildings then made about the City, were of Brick & Timber; At that time any man in the City might have a Cart-load of stone for paving brought to his door for 6d. or 7d. with the carriage. The said Thomas, Lord Audley, builded and dwelt on this Priory during his life, and dyed there in the year 1544, since which time, the said Priory came (by Marriage of the Lord Audley's Daughter and Heir) unto Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, and was then called the Dukes-place. At this time the Inhabitants dwelling & abiding in the said Dukes-place became utterly destitute of any Pa∣rish Church, for resorting to Gods Divine service, and the administration of the blessed Sacraments; which in the time of their former zeal, the demolished Priory, not only serv'd their use, but infinite numbers besides, resorted thither. In which respect, the Parish Church of St. Katherine being so near, and standing in the Coemitery or Church-yard of the late dissolved Priory of the Holy Trini∣ty, whereby it was called Saint Katherine Christs-Church, they resorted thither at the hours of Divine Service, and for the benefit of the blessed Sacraments, whereby they became a burthen to the said Parish, yet well enough borne withal, in regard of the benefit ensuing by them, so that they carried the re∣spect of equal parishioners, exercising and accomplishing all duties there, even as if it had been their own proper Parish. The long continuance of them in this kind, although some much misliked, and gladly would have compassed means for remedy thereof; yet their pow∣er not stretching so far, nor the way (as yet) fitting for their purpose, they re∣mained contented against their Wills, till time would fit them with more con∣venient opportunity; Ground they wanted not, for raising a sufficient Parish Church to themselves, neither did any good will fail in them for the effecting their purpose; but only were curbed by the lack of strength, how and which way to bring it about. At length perceiving their ground (intended for so good a use to themselves) aimed at for buildings to private mens benefits, that so they might be frustrate of any such help, when occasion should in better man∣ner shine on them, some of the best advised among them, by Petition solicited the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to make their desire and intention known to the King, which he did. And the King, finding the case so truly honest and religious, for new erecting a Church where such necessity required, and where Superstition had so long time formerly been harboured, not only gave the Lord Archbishop and the Suitors, both thanks and commendation, but also under his Hand and broad Seal, authorizable Warrant for their proceeding. The Lord Mayor and Senate of Aldermen, having intelligence in the case, and perceiving what an honour would redound thereby, first to God who inspired them there∣to; next to the King, for so Royally granting the suite; and then to the City,
for furthering it to Effect, notwithstanding that divers oppositions were made by them, who would have things still continue, as formerly they did without bene∣fit of a Parish Church of their own. It proceeded on with good & prosperous suc∣cess, to the no mean Honour, and commendation of the Lord Maior then being, Sir Ed. Barkham by name, the Court of Aldermen, and state of this famous City by whose good meanes it is made a very beautiful and comely Parish Church, it being called in the time of re-edifying, Trinity Christs Church, raised out of the long decayed ruines, of Trinity Priory in the Dukes place. By this time, the work is grown to such fulness and perfection, as now no∣thing wanteth, but the windows glazing, which was performed in this manner, The main and great East light in the Chancel, Sir Edward Barkham himself undertook, and effected it at his own Charge, as the expression testifieth in the same Window. The other sideling by it; but inclining more Southerly. Mr. George Whitmore, and Mr. Nicholas Rainton, performed. And the third, standing Northerly in the same Chancel, Mr. Walter Leigh, who had bin a Ser∣jeant at Arms, to the Kings Majesty, and then Sword-bearer of London, did likewise at his own Charge perform, The two Western lights in the bottom of the Church, being (indeed) very fair lights; the Company of Drapers effected the one, and the Wood-mongers Society finished the other. Beside, the two Sou∣therly Windows, the one done at the charge of Mr. Cornelius Fish, Chamberlain of London; and the other by Mr. Waldron, then Marshal: so now ye have the Church of St. Iames compleat. The Parish Church of St. Katherine, standeth in the Caemitery of the dis∣solved Priory of the holy Trinity, and is therefore called St. Katherine Christs Church. The Church seemeth to be very old, since the building whereof, the High street hath bin so often raised by Pavements, that now men are sain to de∣scend into the said Church, by divers steps, seven in number; but the Steeple, or Bell Tower thereof, hath bin lately builded, to wit, about the year 1504. For Sir Iohn Perceival Marchant-Tailor, then deceasing, gave money towards the building thereof. Now concerning this Parish Church of St. Katherine Christs Church, com∣monly Cree-Church, as formerly hath bin said, it had a descent down into it by seven steps or stayers; but being now newly built, and made a very fair Chch: the ascent into the Church, is by four or five degrees. At the North-West corner of this Ward, in the said High street, standeth the fair and beautiful Parish Church of St. Andrew the Apostle, with an Addition, to be known from other Churches of that Name, of the Knape, or Undershaft and so called St. Andrew Undershaft: because that of old time, every year (on May-day in the morning) it was used, that an high or long shaft, or May-pole, was set up there, in the midst of the street, before the South door of the said Church, which Shaft or Pole, when it was set on end, and fixed in the ground, was higher then the Church Steeple. Jeffrey Chawcer, writing of a vain boaster, hath these words, meaning of the said Shaft. Right well aloft, and high ye bear your head, The Weather-Cock, with flying, as ye would kill, When ye be stuffed, bet of Wine, than bread, Then look ye, when your wombe doth fill, As ye would bear the great Shaft of Corn-hill. Lord so merrily, crowdeth then your Croke, That all the Street may bear your Body Cloke. This Shaft was not raised any time since evil May-day (so called of an in∣surrection made by Prentices, and other young persons against Aliens, in the
year 1517.) but the said Shaft was laid along over the doors, and under the Pentises of one rowe of Houses, and Alley-gate, called of the Shaft, Shaft-Al∣ley, (being of the possessions of Rochester-bridge) in the Ward of Limestreet. It was there I say, hanged on Iron hooks many years, till the third of King Edward the sixth That one Sir Steven, Curate of St. Katherine Christs Church, preaching at Pauls Crosse, said there, that this Shaft was made an Idoll, by naming the Church of St. Andrew, with the addition of Under-shaft; he perswa∣ded therefore, that the names of Churches might be altered: Also, that the names of the dayes in the week, might be changed, the Fish dayes to be kept any dayes, except Friday and Saturday; and the Lent any time, save only be∣twixt Shrovetide and Easter: This man forsaking the Pulpit of his said Parish Church, would preach out of an high Elm Tree, in the midst of the Church∣yard, And then entring the Church, forsaking the Altar, to have sung his High Masse in English▪ upon a Tomb of the Dead, towards the North; But his Ser∣mon at Pauls Crosse, took such effect, that in the Afternoon of that present Sunday, the Neighbors and Tenants to the said Bridge, over whose doors, the said Shaft had lain, after they had dined (to make themselves strong) gathered more help, and with great labor, raising the Shaft from the Hooks (whereon it had rested two and thirty years) they sawed it in pieces, every man taking for his share, so much as had lain over his door and stall, the length of his house; and they of the Alley divided amongst them, so much as had lain over their Alley gate. Thus was his Idoll (as he termed it) mangled, and after bur∣ned. Soon after, was there a commotion of the Commons in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and other Shires, by means whereof, streight Orders being taken for the suppression of rumors, divers persons were apprehended, and executed by Marshal Law; amongst the which, the Bayliffe of Rumford in Essex, was one, a man very well beloved: he was early in the morning of Mary Magdalens day (then kept Holy-day) brought by the Sheriffs of London, and the Knight-Mar∣shall, to the Well within Aldgate, there to be executed upon a Gibbit, set up that morning, where being on the Ladder, he had words to this effect; ood People, I am come hither to die, but know not for what offence, ex∣cept for words by me spoken yester night to Sir Stephen, Curate and Preacher of this Parish, which were these, He asked me what newes in the Country, I answered, Heay newes; why quoth he? It is said, quoth I, that many men be up in Essex; But thanks be to God, all is in good quiet about us; and this was all, as God be my Iudge, &c. Thus much, by the By. Now again, to the Parish Church of St. Andrew Under Shaft, for it still retain∣eth the name, which hath bin new builded by the Parishioners, since the year 1520. every man putting to his helping hand, some with their purses, others with their Bodies. Stephen Iennings Marchant-Taylor, sometimes Mayor of London, caused (at his charges) to be builded the whole North side of the great middle Ile, both of the Body and Quire, as appeareth by his Arms, over every Pillar graven; and also the North Ile, which he roofed with Timber, and see∣led. Also the whole South side of the Church, was glazed, and the Pewes in the South Chappel made of his Costs, as appeareth in every Window, and upon the said Pewes. He deceased in the year 1524. and was buried in the Grey Fryers Church. John Kirby Marchant-Taylor, sometimes one of the Sheriffs, John Garland Marchant-Taylor, and Nicholas Levison Mercer, Executor to Gar∣land, were great Benefactors to this work, which was finished (to the glazing) in the year 1529. and fully finished 1532.
Now in the second way from Aldgate, more toward the South, from the Well or Pump aforesaid, sieth Fenne-Church street; on the right hand where∣of, somewhat West from the South end of Belzetters lane, is Ironmongers-Hall, which Company was incorporated in the third of Edward the fourth, Richard Flemming was their first Master, Nicholas Marshall, and Richard Cox, were Custodes or Wardens. And on the left hand, or South side, (even by the Gate and Wall of the City) runneth down a Lane to the Tower-Hill: the South part whereof, is called Woodroof-Lane; and out of this Lane toward the West, a street called Hart-street. In this street, at the South-East Corner thereof; sometime stood one house of Crowched or (Crossed) Fryers, founded by Ralph Hosier, and William Sabernes, about the year 1298. Stephen the tenth Prior of the Holy Trinity in London, granted three Tenements for 13 s. 8 d. by the year, unto the said Ralph Hosiar, and William Saburnes, who afterwards became Fryers of S. Crosse. Adam was the first Prior of that house: These Fryers foun∣ded their house in the place of certain Tenements, purchased of Rich. Wim∣blush, the 12th Prior of the Holy Trinity, in the year 1319. which was confirm∣ed by Edward the third, the seventeenth of his Raign, valued at 52 l. 13 s. 4 d. surrendred the 12th of Novemb, the 30. of Henry the 8th. In place of this Church, is now a Carpenters yard, a Tennis-Court, and such like: the Fryers Hall was made a Glasse-house, or house, wherein was made Glasse of divers sorts to drink in: which house, in the year 1575. on the fourth of September, burst out into a terrible fire, where all meanes possible being practised to quench it, notwithstanding, as the same house in a small time be∣fore, had consumed a great quantity of Wood, by making of Glasses; Now it self, having within it about 40000 Billets of Wood, was also consumed to the stone walls, which nevertheless, greatly, hindred the fire from spreading any further. Adjoyning unto this Fryers Church, by the East end thereof in Woodroffe Lane, towards the Tower-Hill, are certain Almes-houses, 14. in number, buil∣ded of Brick and Timber, founded by Sir John Milburn, Draper, sometime Maior, 1521. wherein be placed 13. aged poor men, and their Wives: these have their dwellings rent-free, and 2 s. 4 d. a peece, the first day of every Moneth for ever. Next to these Alms-houses is the Lord Lumleys house, builded in the time of King Henry the 8th, by Sir Thomas Wiat the Father, upon one plot of ground, of late pertaining to the aforesaid Crossed Fryers, where part of their house stood. And this is the farthest of Aldgate VVard toward the South, and joyneth to the Tower-Hill; the other side of that Lane, over against the Lord Lumleys house, on the wall side of the City, is now for the most part (or altogether) builded, even to Aldgate. Then have ye on the South side of Fenne-Church-street, over against the wall or Pump, amongst other fair and large builded houses, one that sometime belonged to the Prior of Monte Joves, or Monastarie Cornute, a Cell to Monte Joves beyond the Seas; in Essex it was the Priors Inne, when he repaired to this City; Then a Lane that leadeth down by Northumberland House, to∣wards the Crossed Fryers, as is afore shewed. This Northumberland House in the Parish of St. Katherine Coleman, belong∣ing to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, in the 33. of Henrie the sixth; but of late being left by the Earls, the Gardens thereof were made into Bowling Alleys, and other parts into Dicing-houses, common to all commers, for their money, there to bowl & recreate themselves. But now of late, so many Bowling Alleys, and other houses for unlawful gaming, have been raised in other parts of the City and Subburbs, that this which was used to be the ancientest, and only Rendezvouz of sport, is left and forsaken of the Gamesters, and therefore
turned into a number of great Rents, small Cottages, for strangers and others. At the East end of this Lane, in the way from Aldgate, toward the Crossed Friers, of old time, were certain Tenements, called the Poor Jurie, of Jewes dwelling there. Next unto this Northumberland house, is the Parish Church of St. Katherine, called Coleman; which addition of Coleman, was taken of a great Haw-yard, or Garden, of old time called Coleman Haw, in the Parish of the Trinity, now called Christs Church. And in the Parish of St. Katherine, and All-saints, called Coleman Church. There are some handsome Tombs in this Church, and parti∣cularly of Sir Henry Billingley Knight, and Lord Mayor of London, who was a Benefactor thereunto. Then have ye Blanch Appleton, whereof we read in the 13th of Edw. the first, that a Lane behind the same Blanch Appleton, was granted by the King to be in∣closed, and shut up; This Blanch Appleton was a Mannor belonging to Sir Tho∣mas Ros of Hamelake, Knight, the 7th of Rich: the 2d, standing at the North-East corner of Mart Lane, so called, of a priviledge sometime enjoyed to keep a Mart there, long since discontinued, and therefore forgotten: so as nothing remaineth for memory, but the name of Mart Lane, and now corruptly ter∣med Mark Lane. Of the fourth Ward, or Aldermanry of London, called Limestreet Ward. WE will now give a visit to Limestreet Ward, which takes its denomi∣nation from the street, and the street from making Lime there, in times passed. In Limestreet are divers fair Houses; for Marchants and others, there was sometime a Mansion house of the Kings, called the Kings Artirce, as it stands upon Record, in the 14th of Edward the first; but now grown out of know∣ledge: We read also of another great House, in the West side of Limestreet, ha∣ving a Chappel on the South, and a Garden on the West, belonging to the Lord Nevill, which Garden is now called Green Yard, of the Leaden Hall. This House in the 9th of Rich. 2. pertained to Sir Simon Burley, and Sir John Burley his Brother: and of late, the said House was taken down, and the fore∣front thereof new builded of Timber, by Hugh Offley, Alderman. At the North-west Corner of Limestreet, was (of old time) one great Me∣suage, called Benbridges Inne; Raph Holland, Draper, about the year 1452. gave it to John Gill, Master, and to the VVardens and Fraternity of Taylors, and Linnen Armourers of St. John Baptist in London, and to their successors for ever. They did set up in places thereof, a fair large frame of Timber, contain∣ing in the high street, one great house; and before it, to the corner of Limestreet three other Tenements, the corner house being the largest; and then down Limestreet, divers handsome Tenements: All which, the Marchant-Taylors, in the Raign of Edw. 6. sold to Stephen Kirton, Marchant-Taylor, and Alder∣man, who gave with his Daughter Grisild, to Nicholas Woodroffe, the said great House, with two Tenements before it, in lieu of an hundred pounds, and made it up in money, three hundred sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings four pence:
This worthy man, and the Gentlewoman his Widow, after him, kept those houses down Limestreet, in good reparations, never put out but one Tenant, took no fines, nor raised rents for them, which was ten shillings the piece year∣ly; But whether that favour did over-live her Funeral, the Tenants now can best declare the contrary. The next is Leaden-Hall, of which we read, that in the year 1309. it belong∣ed to Sir Hugh Nevil, Knight, and that the Lady Alice his Wife, made a Feoff∣ment thereof, by the name of Leaden Hall, with the Advousions of S. Peter on Cornhill, and other Churches, to Richard Earl of Arrundel, and Surrey, 1362. Moreover, in the year 1380. Alice Nevil, Widow to Sir Iohn Nevil, Knight of Essex, confirmed to Thomas Cogshall, and others, the said Mannor of Leaden-Hall, and the advousions, &c. In the year 1384. Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, had the said Mannor, And in the year 1408. Robert Rikeden of Essex, and Margaret his Wife, con∣firmed to Richard Whittington, and other Citizens of London, the said Mannor of Leaden Hall, with the Appurtenances, the Advousion of St. Peters Church, S. Margaret Pattens, &c. And in the year 141. the said Whitington, and other, confirmed the same to the Maior, and Comminalty of London, whereby it came to the possession of the City. Then in the year 1443. the one and twenty of Henry the sixth, Iohn Hatheyr¦ley, Maior, purchased Licence of the said King, to take up 200. fodder of Lead, for the building of Water Conduits, a common Granary, and the Crosse in West Cheape, more richly, for the honour of the City. In the year next following, the Parson and Parish of St. Dunstane, in the East of London, seeing the Noble and mighty Man (for the words be in the Grant; Cùm Nobilis & Potens vir.) Simon Eyre, Citizen of London, among other his works of piety, effectually determined to erect & build a certain Granary, upon the soil of the same City at Leaden Hall, of his own charges, for the common utility of the said City, to the amplifying and inlarging of the said Granary, granted to Henry Frowick, then Maior, the Aldermen and Commonalty, and their Successors for ever, all their Tenements, with the appurtenances, sometime called the Horse Mill in Grasse-street, for the annual Rent of four pounds, &c. Also, certain evidences of an Alley, and Tenements pertaining to the Horse Mill, adjoyning to the said Leaden Hall in Grasse-street, given by VVilliam Kingstone, Fishmonger, unto the Parish Church of St. Peter upon Cornhill, do specifie the said Granary, to be builded by the said Honourable and famous Marchant, Simon Eyre, sometime an Upholster, and hen a Draper, in the year 1419. He builded it of squared stone, in form as now it sheweth, with a fair and large Chappel in the East side of the Quadrant; over the Porch of which, he caused to be written, Dextra Domini exaltavit me, The Lords right hand exalted me. Within the said Church, on the North wall, was written, Honorandus famo∣sus Mercator Simon Eyre, hujus operis, &c. In English thus, The honourable and famous Marchant Simon Eyre, founder of this work, once Maior of this City, Citizen and Draper of the same, departed out of this life, the 18th day of Septemb. the year from the Incarnation of Christ, 1459. and the 38. year of the Raign of King Henry the sixth: he was buried in the Parish Church of St. Mary Wolnoth, in Lumbard street; he gave by his Testament, to be distribu∣ted to all Prisons in London, or within a mile of that City, somewhat, to relieve them.
More, he gave 2000 Marks upon a condition, which not performed, was then to be distributed to Maids Marriages, and other deeds of Charity: he also gave 3000 Marks to the Drapers, upon condition, that they should within one year after his decease, establish perpetually a Master or Warden, five secular Priests, six Clerks, and two Queristers, to sing daily Divine Service, by note for ever, in this Chappel of the Leaden-hall; Also, one Master with an Usher for Grammar, one Master for Writing, and the third for Song, with Houses there newly builded for them for ever; the Master to have for his salary, ten pounds, and every other Priest, eight pounds; every other Clarke, five pounds six shil∣lings eight pence; and every other Chorister, five Marks; and if the Drapers refused this to do, within one year after his decease, then the three thousand Marks to remain to the Prior and Covent of Christs-Church in London, with con∣dition to establish things as aforesaid, within two years after his decease; And if they refused, then the three thousand Marks to be disposed by his Executors, as they best could devise in works of Charity. Thus much for his Testament, not performed by establishing of Divine Service in his Chappel or Free-School, and Scholars; neither was it known how the stock of three thousand Marks (or rather five thousand Marks) was employ∣ed by his Executors, he left issue Thomas, who had issue Thomas, &c. True it is, that in the year 1464, the third of Edward the fourth, it was agreed by the May∣or, Aldermen, and Commonalty of London, that notwithstanding the Kings Letters Pattents, lately before granted unto them, touching the Trouage or weighing of Wares, to be held at Leaden-hall; yet Suite should be made to the King, for new Letters Pattents, to be granted to the Mayor of the Staple, for the Trouage of Wools, to be holden there, and order to be taken by the discretion of Thomas Cooke, then Mayor; The Councel of the City, Geffrey filding, then May∣or of the Staple at Westminster, and of the Kings Councel what should be paid to the Mayor, and Aldermen of the City, for the laying and housing of the Wools there, that so they might be brought forth and weighed, &c. Touching the Chappel there, we find that in the year 1466, by Licence ob∣tained of King Edward the fourth, in the sixth of his Reign, a Fraternity of the Trinity of 60 Priests (besides other brethren and sisters) in the same Chappel, was founded by Rouse, Iohn Risby, and Thomas Ashby Priests: some of the which six∣ty Priests, every Market-day, in the fore-noon, did celebrate Divine service there, to such Market people as repaired to prayer, and once every year, they met altogether, and had solemn Service, with procession of all the Brethren, and Sisters; this foundation was in the year 1512, by a Common-Councel con∣firmed to the sixty Trinity Priests, and to their Successors, at the will of the Mayor and Commonalty. In the year 1484 a great fire happened upon Leaden-hall, by what casualty it was not known, but much housing was there destroyed, with all the Stocks for Guns, and other provision belonging to the City, which was a great losse, and no lesse charge to be repaired by them. In the year 1503. the eighteenth of Henry the seventh, a request was made by the Commons of the City, concerning the usage of the said Leaden-Hall, in form as followeth; Please it the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councel, to enact, that all Frenchmen bringing Canvas, Linnen cloth, and other Wares to be sold, and all Forreins bringing Woolsteads, Sayes, Stamins, Kiverings, Nayles, Iron work, or any other Wares, and also all Forreins, bringing Lead to the City to be sold, shall bring all such their Wares aforesaid, to the open Market of the Leaden-Hall, and no where else to be shewed, sold and uttered, like as of old time it hath been used, upon pain of forfeiture of all the said Wares, shewed or sold in any other place than aforesaid; And the shew of the said
Wares to be made three daies in a week, that is to lay Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday; It is also thought reasonable, that the common Beam be kept from henceforth in the Leaden-hall, & the Farmer to pay therefore reasonable rent to the Chamber, for better it is, that the Chamber have advantage thereby, than a Forreign person; And also the said Leaden-hall, which is more chargeable now by half than profitable, shall better bear out the charges thereof; Also the common Beam for Wool at Leaden-hall may pay yearly a rent to the Chamber of London, toward the supportation and charges of the same place: for reason it is, that a common Office occupied upon a common ground, bear a charge to the use of the Communalty; Also that Forrains bringing Wools, Felts, or any other Marchandizes or Wares to Leaden-hall, to be kept there for the sale and market, may pay more largely for keeping of their goods, than Freemen. Thus much for the request of the Commons at that time. Now to set down some proof, that the said Hall hath been employed and used as a Granary for Corn and grain (as the same was first appointed) lea∣ving all former examples, this one may suffice, Roger Achley Mayor of London in the year 1512, the third of Henry the eighth, when the said Mayor entred the Majoralty, there was not found one hundred quarters of Wheat in all the Garners of this City, either within the Liberties or near adjoyning, through the which scarcity, when the Carts of Stratford came laden with Bread to the City (as they had been accustomed) there was such press about them, that one man was ready to destroy another, in striving to be served for their money; but this scarcity lasted not long, for the Mayor (in short time) made such provisi∣on for Wheat that the Bakers, both of London, and of Stratford, were weary of taking it up, and were forced to take much more than they would, and for the rest the Mayor laid out the money, and stored it up in Leaden-hall, and other Garners of the City; This Mayor also kept the Market so well, that he would be at the Leaden-Hall, by four a clock in the Summer mornings, and from thence he went to other Markets to the great comfort of the Citi∣zens. We read also, that in the year 1528, the twentieth of Henry the eighth, Sur∣veyers were appointed to view the Garners of the City, namely, the Bridge-house and the Leaden-hall, how they were stored of Grain for the service of the City; And because we have here before spoken of the Bread-carts coming from Strat∣ford at the Bow, ye shall understand, that of old time the Bakers of Bread at Stratford, were allowed to bring daily (except the Sabbath and principal Feasts) divers long Carts laden with bread, the same being two ounces in the penny wheaten loaf heavier than the penny wheaten loaf baked in the City, the same to be sold in Cheap, three or four Carts standing there 'tween Gtherans Lane, and Fausters Lane end, one Cart on Cornhil by the Conduit, and one other in Grasse-street; And we may read, that in the fourth year of Edward the second, Richard Reffeham, being Mayor, a Baker named Iohn of Stratford, for making Bread lesser than the Assize, was with a fools hood on his Head, and loaves of Bread about his Neck, drawn on a hurdle through the streets of the City▪ Moreover, in the four and fortieth of Edward the third, Iohn Chichester being Mayor of London, as we may read in the visions of Pierce Plowman, a Book so cal∣led as followeth; There was a careful commune, when no Cart came to Town with Basket Bread from Stratford tho gan beggars weep, and workmen were agast, a little this will be thought long in the date of our dirte, in a dry Averel, a thousand and three hundred, twice thirty and ten, &c. We read also in the twentieth of Henry the eighth, Sir Iames Spencer being Mayor, six Bakers of Stratford, were amerced in the Guild-hall of London, for ba∣king
under the size appointed; But these Bakers of Stratford left serving this City, I know not upon what occasion, above forty years since. In the year 1519 a Petition was exhibited by the Commons to the Com∣mon-Councel, and was by them allowed, concerning the Leaden-hall, how they would have it used, viz. Meekly beseeching, sheweth unto your good Lordship, and Masterships, divers Citizens of this City, which (under correction) think, that the great place called the Leaden-hall, should, nor ought not to be letten out to Farme, to any person or persons and in special, to any fellowship or Company incor∣porate, to have and hold the same Hall for term of years; for such convenien∣ces as thereby may ensue, and come to the hurt of the Common-weale of the said City in time to come, as somewhat more largely may appear in the Articles following. First, if any assembly or hasty gathering of the Commons of the said City, for suppressing or subduing of miruled people within the said City, hereafter shall happen to be called or commanded by the Mayor, Aldermen, and other Governours and Councellors of the said City for the time being; there is none so convenient, meet and necessary a place to assemble them in, within the said City, as the said Leaden-hall, both for largenesse of room, and for their sure defence in time of their counselling together about the premises. Also, in that place hath been used the Artillery, Guns, and other Armors of the said City, to be safely kept in a readinesse, for the safegard, wealth, and defence of the said City to be had and occupied at times when need required. As also the store of Timber, for the necessary reparations of the Tenements be∣longing to the Chamber of the said City, there commonly hath been kept. Item, If any Triumph or Noblenesse were to be done, or shewed by the Commonalty of the City, for the honour of our Soveraign Lord the King and Realm, and for the worship of the said City, the said Leaden-hall is the most meet and convenient place, to prepare and order the said Triumph therein, and from thence to issue forth to the places thereof appointed. Item, at any Largesse or dole of any money, made unto the poore people of this City; it hath been used to be done and given in the said Leaden-hall, for that the said place is most meet therefore. Item, the honourable Father, that was maker of the said Hall, had a speci∣all will, intent, and mind, that (as it is commonly said) the Market men and women, that came to the City with victuals and other things, should have their free standing within the said Leaden-Hall in wet weather, to keep themselves & their Wares dry, and thereby to encourage them, and all other, to have the better will and desire, the more plentiously to resort to the said City, to victual the same; And if the said Hall should be letten to Farme, the will of the said honourable Father, should never be fullfilled, nor take effect. Item, if the said place, which is the chief Fortresse, and most necessary place within all the City, for the tuition and safegard of the same, should be letten out to Farme, out of the hands of the chief Heads of the same City, and espe∣cially to any other Body politick, it might at length (by likelihood) be an occasion of discord and debate, between the said Bodies politick, which God defend. For these, and many other great and reasonable causes, which hereafter shall be shewed to this honourable Court, your said Beseechers think it much necessary, that the said Hall be still in the hands of this City; and to be surely kept by sad and discreet Officers in such wise, that it might alwaies be ready to be used and occupied, for the Common-weale of the said City, when
need shall require, and in no wise to be letten to any Body politick. Thus much for the Petition. About the year one thousand five hundred thirty four, great means was made about the Leaden-hall, to have the same made a Burse for the Assembly of Marchants, as they had been accustomed in Lumbard-street; many Common-Councels were called to that end, but in the year 1535, Iohn Champneys being Mayor, it was fully concluded, that the Burse should remain in Lumbard-street, as afore, and Leaden-hall no more to be spoken of concerning that matter. The use of Leaden-hall was us'd to be thus; In a part of the North Quadrant, on the East side of the North Gate, were the common Beams, for weigh∣ing of Wooll and other Wares, as had been accustomed; On the West side of▪ the Gate was the Scales to weigh Meal: the other three sides were reserved (for the most part) to the making and resting of the Pageants shewed at Mid-Sum∣mer in the watch: the remnant of the sides and Quadrants, were employed for the stowage of Wool-sacks, but not closed up: the lofts above were partly used by the Painters, in working for the decking of Pageants and other devices, for beautifying of the Watch and Watch-men: the residue of the Lofts were letten out to Marchants, the Wooll-winders and Packers therein, to winde and pack their Wools. And thus much for Leaden-hall may suffice. Now on the North of Limestreet Ward, in the Highstreet are divers fair hou∣ses for Marchants, and proper Tenements for Artificers, with an Alley also cal∣led Shalt Alley, of the Shaft or May-pole, sometime resting over the Gate thereof, as I have declared in Aldgate Ward. In the year 1576. partly at the charges of the Parish of St. Andrew, and part∣ly at the charges of the Chamber of London, a water-pump, was raysed in the high street of Lime-street Ward, neer unto Lime-street corner, for the placing of the which Pump, having broken up the ground, they were forced to dig more than two fadome deep, before they came to any main ground, where they found a Hearth made of Britaine, or rather Romane Tyle, every Tyle half yard square, and about two inches thick, they found coal lying there also (for that lying whole will never consume) then digging one fadome in the main, they found water sufficient, made their Prall, and set up the Pump, which Pump, with oft repairing and great charges to the Parish, continued not four and twenty years, but being rotted, was taken up, and a new one set in the place, in the year 1600. Thus much for the High-street. In Saint Mary street had ye (of old time) a Parish Church of Saint Mary a Virgin, Saint Ursula, and the 11000 Virgins, which Church was commonly called Saint Mary at the Axe, of the Signe of an Axe, over against the East end thereof, or Saint Mary Pellipar, of a plot of ground lying on the North side thereof pertaining to the Skinners in London; This Parish about the year 1565. was united to the Parish Church of Saint Andrew Under Shaft, and so was Saint Mary at the Axe suppressed, and letten out to be a Ware-house for a Mar∣chant; Against the East end of this Church, was sometime a fair Well, now turned to a Pump; Also against the North end of this Saint Mary street, was, sometime one other Parish Church of Saint Augustine, called Saint Augustine in the Wall, for that it stood adjoyning to the Wall of the City, and other∣wise called Saint Augustines Papey, or the poor, as I have read, in the Reign of Edward the third. About the year 1430, in the Reign of Henry the sixth, the same Church was allowed to the Brethren of the Papey, the House of poor Priests, whereof I have spoken in Aldgate Ward, the Parishioners of this Church were appointed to the Parish Church of Alhallowes in the Wall, which is in Broad street Ward, and this Brotherhood called Papey, being suppressed, the Church of Saint Augustine was pulled down, and in place thereof one Grey Apothecary, builded a Stable, a Hay-lost, &c. It is now a
dwelling house, those two Parish Churches, both lying in the Ward of Lime-street; being thus suppressed, there is not any one Parish Church or place for Divine Service in that Ward, but the Inhabitants thereof repair to Saint Peters in Cornhill Ward, Saint Andrew in Aldgate Ward, Alhallows in the Wall in Broad-street Ward, and some to Saint Denys in Langbourne Ward. Now, because there hath been some question, to what Ward this Church of Saint Augustine Papey should of right belong, for the same hath been chal∣lenged by them of Aldgate Ward, and (without reason) taken into Bishops-gate Ward, from Lime-street Ward, I am somewhat to touch it. About 70 years since, the Chamber of London, granted a Lease of ground ly∣ing near London Wall, in the Ward of Lime-street, from the West of the said Church or Chappel of Saint Augustine Papey, towards Bishops-gate &c. on the which plot of ground, the Leasee builded three fair Tenements, and placed Te∣nants there, these were charged to bear Scot and Lot, and some of them to bea Office in Lime street Ward, all which they did willingly without grudging; And when any suspected or disordered persons were by the Landlord placed there, the Officers of Lime street Ward, fetched them out of their Houses, committed them to Ward, procured their due punishments, and banished them from thence; whereby in short time that place was reformed, and brought into good order, which thing being noted by them of Aldgate Ward, they moved their Alderman, Sir Thomas Offley, to call in those Houses to be of his Ward; But Mr. Stow producing a fair Ledgier Book, sometime pertain∣ing to the late dissolved Priory of the Holy Trinity within Aldgate, wherein were set down the just bounds of Aldgate Ward, before Sir Thomas Offley, Sir Rowland Hayward, the Common-Councel, and Ward-Mote Inquest, of the said Lime street Ward, Sir Thomas Offley gave over his Challenge, and so that matter rested in good quiet, until the year 1579. that Sir Richard Pype (being Mayor, and Alderman of Bishops-gate Ward) challenged those Houses to be of his Ward, whereunto (without reason shewed) Sir Rowland Hayward yeil∣ded; and thus is that side of the street from the North corner of Saint Mary street, almost to Bishopsgate, (wherein is one plot of ground, letten by the Chamberlaine of London, to the Parish of Saint Martins Oteswich, to be a Church-yard, or burying-place for the dead of that Parish, &c.) un∣justly drawn and with-holden from the Ward of Lime-street, as Master Stow avoncheth.
Of the Fifth Ward, or Aldermanry of London, called Bishopsgate-Ward. THe Ward next in order is Bishopsgate-Ward, whereof a part is without the Gate; and of the Subburbs, from the Barres by St. Mary Spittle, to Bi∣shopsgate, and a part of Hounds-ditch, almost half thereof; also without the Wall of the same Ward. Then within the Gate is Bishopsgate-street, so called, of the Gate, to a Pump, were sometime was a fair Well, with two Buckets, by the East end of the Pa∣rish Church of St. Martin Oteswich, and then winding by the West corner of Leaden-Hall, down Grasse-street, to the corner over against Grasse-Church; and these are the bounds of that Ward. Monuments most to be noted, are these, The Parish-Church of St. Buttolph without Bishopsgate, in a fair Church-yard adjoyning to the Town-Ditch, upon the very Bank thereof; but of old time, inclosed with a comely Wall of Brick, lately repaired by Sir William Allen, Mayor, in the year 1571, because he was born in that Parish, where also he was buried. An Anchoresse (by Bishopsgate) received forty shillings the year, of the She∣riffs of London. Next unto the Parish Church of St. Buttolph, was a fair Inne, for receipt of Travellers, then an Hospital of St. Mary of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz Mary, one of the Sheriffs of London, in the year 1246. He founded it to have been a Priory of Canons, with Brethren and Sisters; and King Edward the 3d, granted a Protection, for the Brethren called Milites beatae Mariae de Bethlem; within the City of London, the 14th year of his Raign. It was an Hospital for distracted people. Stephen Gennings, Marchant-Taylor, gave forty pounds toward purchase of the Patronage, by his Testament, 1523. The Mayor and Commonalty pur∣chased the Patronage thereof, with all the Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, in the year 1546. Now it shall not be amisse, to insert here that memorable ancient deed of gift, given to Bethelem, or Bedlam, by the foresaid Simon, the Son of Mary, as fol∣loweth. To all the Children of our Mother holy Church, to whom this present wri∣ting shall come, Simon the Sonne of Mary, sendeth greeting in our Lord, where among other things, and before other Lands, the high Altitude of the Heaven∣ly Councels, marvellously wrought by some readier devotion, it ought to be more worshipped; of which things the mortal sickness (after the fall of our first Father Adam) hath taken the beginning of this new repairing: there∣fore forsooth, it beseemeth worthy, that the place, in which the Son of God is become Man, and hath proceeded from the Virgins Womb, which is in∣creaser, and beginning of Mans Redemption; namely, ought to be with Re∣verence worshipped, and with beneficial Portions to be increased: therefore it is, that the said Simon, Son of Mary, having special and singular Devotion to the Church, of the glorious Virgin at Bethelem, where the same Virgin of Her, brought forth our Saviour incarnate, and lying in the Cratch, and with her own milk nourished; and where the same Child to us there born, the Chivalry of the heavenly Company, sang the new Hymne, Gloria in Excelsis Deo. The same time, the increaser of our health, (as a King, and his Mother a Queen) willed to be worshipped of Kings, a new Starre going before them, as the Honour and Reverence of the same Child, and his most meek Mother: And
to the exaltation of my most Noble Lord, Henry King of England, whose Wife and Child the foresaid Mother of God, and her only Son, have in their keep∣ing, and protection; And to the manifold increase of this City of London, in which I was born. And also for the health of my soul, and the souls of my Predecessors, and Successors, my Father, Mother, and my Friends. And spe∣cially for the souls of Guy of Marlow, Iohn Durant, Ralph Ashwye, Maud, Mar∣garet, and Dennis, Women: Have given, granted, and by this my present Charter, here, have confirmed to God, and to the Church of St. Mary of Be∣thelem, all my Lands which I have in the Parish of St. Buttolph, without Bi∣shopsgate of London, that is to say, whatsoever I there now have, or had, or in time to come may have, in Houses, Gardens, Pools, Ponds, Ditches and Pits, and all their appurtenances, as they be closed in by their bounds; which now extend in length, from the Kings high street, East, to the great Ditch in the West; the which is called deep Ditch; and in breadth, to the Lands of Ralph Downing, in the North; and to the Land of the Church of St. Buttolph in the South; To have and to hold the aforesaid Church of Bethelem, in fre and perpetual Alms; And also to make there a Priory, and to ordain a Prior, and Canons; Brothers, and also Sisters, when Jesus Christ shall enlarge his grace upon it. And in the same place, the Rule and order of the said Church of Bethelem solemnly professing, which shall bear the Token of a Starre open∣ly in their Coapes and Mantles of profession; and for to say Divine Service there, for the souls aforesaid, and all Christian souls; and specially to receive there, the Bishop of Bethelem, Canons, Brothers, and Messengers of the Church of Bethelem for evermore, as often as they shall come thither. And that a Church or Oratory there shall be builded, as soon as our Lord shall en∣large his grace, under such form, that the Order, Institution of Priors, Ca∣nons, Brothers, Sisters, of the visitation, correction, and reformation of the said place, to the Bishop of Bethelem, and his Successors, and to the Charter of his Church, and of his Messengers, as often as they shall come thither, as shall seem them expedient; no mans contradiction notwithstanding; shall pertain for evermore: saving alway the Services of the chief Lords, as much as per∣taineth to the said Land. And to the more surety of this thing, I have put my self out of this Land, and all mine. And Lord Godfrey, then chosen of the Nobles of the City of Rome, Bishop of Bethelem, and of the Pope, confirmed then by his name in England, in his name, and of his Successors, and of his Chapter of his Church of Bethelem, into bodily possession, I have indented and given to his possession all the foresaid Lands; which possession he hath re∣ceived, and entred in form abovesaid. And in token of subjection, and reverence, the said place in London, without Bishopsgate, shall pay yearly in the said City, a mark sterling at Easter, to the Bi∣shop of Bethelem, his Successors, or his Messengers, in the name of a Pension; and if the faculties or goods of the said place (our Lord granting) happen to grow more, the said place shall pay more, in the name of Pension, at the said terme, to the Mother Church of Bethelem. This (forsooth) gift and confirma∣tion of my Deed, and the putting to of my Seal for me, and mine Heires, I have steadfastly made strong, the year of our Lord God, A thousand, two hun∣dred, forty seven, the VVednesday after the Feast of St. Luke the Evangelist, &c. King Henry the 8th, gave this Hospital unto the City, The Church and Chap∣pel were taken down in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and houses builded there, by the Governours of Christs Hospital in London. In this place, people that be distraught in their wits, are now (by the suit of their friends) received and kept as before, but not without charges to their bringers in. Then is there a fair House of late, builded by Iohn Powlet. Next to that, a far more large and beautiful House, with Gardens of pleasure, Bowling Al∣lies, and such like, builded by Iasper Fisher, free of the Goldsmiths, late one
of the six-Clarks of the Chancery, and a Justice of Peace. It hath since (for a time) been the Earl of Oxfords place. The late Queen Elizabeth hath lodged there, it now belongeth to the Earl of Devonshire. This House being so large, and sumptuously builded, by a man of no great Calling, Possessions, or VVealth; (for he was indebted to many) was mockingly called Fishers folly, and a Rithme was made of it, and other the like, in this manner. Kirbyes Castle, and Fishers Folly, Spinilas pleasure, and Megses glory. And so of other like Buildings about the City, by Citizens, men have not forborn to speak their pleasure. From Fishers Folly, up to the West end of Berwards Lane, of old time so called; but now Hogge-Lane, because it meeteth with Hogge-Lane, which commeth from the Barres without Ealdgate, as is afore shewed, is a continual bnilding of Tenements, with Allies of Cottages, pestered, &c. Then is there a large close, called Fazel Close, sometime, for that there were Zazels planted for the use of Cloth-workers, since letten to the Crosse-bow Makers, wherein they used to shoot for Games at the Popingey. Now the same being inclosed with a Brick-wall, serveth to be an Artillery-yard, or Garden, whereunto the Gun∣ners of the Tower, weekly do repair; namely, every Thursday, and their le∣velling certain Basse-Pieces of great Artillery against a But of Earth, made for that purpose; they discharged them for their exercise, present use is made thereof by divers worthy Citizens, Gentlemen, and Captains, using Marshal Discipline, and where they meet (well-neere) weekly, to their great commen∣dation, in so worthy an Exercise, whereof hereafter, I will speak more at large. Then have ye the late dissolved Priory and Hospital, commonly called, Saint Mary Spittle, founded by Walter Brune, and Rosia his Wife, for Canons regu∣lar, VValter, Arch Deacon of London, laid the first stone in the year 1197. VVil∣liam of St. Mary Church, then Bishop of London, dedicated it to the honour of Jesus Christ, and his Mother, the perpetual Virgin Mary, by the name of Domus De, and Beatae Mariae, Extra Bishopsgate, in the Parish of St. Buttolph, the bounds whereof, as appeareth by composition between the Parson, and Prior of the said Hospital; concerning Tithes, beginning at Berwards Line, towards the South, and extendeth in breadth to the Parish of St. Leonard of Sores-ditch, towards the North; and in length, from the Kings street on the West, to the Bishops of Londons field, called Lollesworth on the East. The Prior of this St. Mary Spittle, for the immortising and propriation of the Priory of Bikenacar in Essex, to his said house of St. Mary Spittle, gave to Henry the 7th, four hundred pounds, in the two and twentieth of his Raign. This Hospital surrendred to Henry the 8th, was valued to dispend four hun∣dred seventy eight pounds per annus, wherein was found, besides Ornaments of the Church, and other goods pertaining to the Hospital, one hundred eighty beds well furnished, for receipt of the poor; for it was an Hospital of great relief. Sir Henry Plesington Knight, was buried there, one thousand four hundred fifty and two. And here is to be noted, that time out of minde, it hath been a laudable Cu∣stome, that on good Friday in the After-noon, some especial learned man, by appointment of the Prelates, should preach a Sermon at Pauls Crosse, treating of Christs passion▪ and upon the three next Easter Holydayes, Munday, Tues∣day, and Wednesday, the like learned men, by the like appointment, have u∣sed to preach on the forenoons at the said Spittle, to perswade the Article of Christs Resurrection; and then on Low Sunday, one other learned man at
Pauls Crosse, to make rehearsal of those four former Sermons, either commen∣ding, or reproving them, as to him (by judgement of the learned Divines) was thought convenient; And that done, he was to make a studied Sermon of his own, which in all, were five Sermons in one; At these Sermons so severally preached, the Maior with his Brethren the Aldermen, were accustomed to be present in their Violets at Pauls, on good Friday, and in their Scarlets at the Spittle, in the Holydayes (except VVednesday, in Violet) and the Maior with his Brethren on Low Sunday in Scarlet, at Pauls Crosse. Touching the Antiquity of this Custom, I finde, that in the year one thou∣sand three hundred ninety eight, King Richard having procured from Rome, confirmation of such Statutes, and Ordinances, as were made in the Parliament begun at VVestminster, and ended at Shrewsbury; he caused the same confirma∣tion to be read, and pronounced at Pauls Crosse, and at St. Mary Spittle, in a Sermon before all the People. Philip Malpas, one of the Sheriffs, in the year, one thousand four hundred thirty nine, gave twenty shillings by the year, to the three Preachers at the Spittle. Stephen Foster Maior, in the year, 1594. gave 40 l. to the Preachers of Pauls Crosse and Spittle. We find also, that the aforesaid House, wherein the Maior, and Aldermen do sit at the Spittle, was builded (for that purpose) of the goods, and by the Executors of Richard Rawson, Alderman, and Isabel his Wife, in the year 1488. In the year 1594. this Pulpit being old, was taken down, and a new one set up: the Preachers face turned towards the South, which was before towards the West. Also a large House (on the East side of the said Pulpit) was then builded, for the Governours and Children of Christs Hospital to sit in; and this was done of the goods of William Elkin, Alderman before deceased; But with∣in the first year, the same House decaying, and like to have fallen, was again (with great cost) repaired at the Cities Charge. On the East side of this Church-yard, lyeth a large field, of old time called Lolesworth, now Spittle-field, which about the year, 1576. was broken up, for Clay to make Brick: in the digging thereof, many Earthen Pots called Urnae, were found full of Ashes, with burnt bones of men, to wit, of the Romans that inhabited here; for it was the Custom of the Romans, to burn their dead, to put their Ashes in an Urn, and then bury the same with certain Ceremonies, in some field appointed for that purpose near unto their City; and commonly, there was another Urn of fresh water, laid by the other, denoting the teares of their friends. Every of these Pots had in them (with the Ashes of the Dead) one piece of Copper money, with the Inscription of the Emperor then reigning, some of them were of Claudius, some of Vespasian, some of Nero, of Antoninus Pius, of Trajanus, and others; Besides those Urns, many other Pots were found in the same place, made of a white Earth, with long necks, and handles, like to our stone Jugs: these were empty, but seemed to be buried full of some liquid mat∣ter, long since consumed, and soked through; For there were found divers Vi∣als, and other fashioned Glasses; some most cunningly wrought, and some of Crystal, all which had water in them (which it seems were the teare-Bottles) nothing differing in clearness, tast, or savour from common Spring water, what∣soever it was at the first; Some of these Glasses had Oyl in them very thick, and earthy in savour; some were supposed to have balm in them, but had lost the vertue; many of these Pots and Glasses were broken in cutting of the Clay, so that few were taken up whole. There were also found divers Dishes and Cups, of a fine red coloured Earth, which shewed outwardly such a shining smoothness, as if they had been of Curtal; Those had (in the bottoms) Roman letters printed: There were also
Lamps of white Earth and red, artificially wrought with divers Antiques about them, some three or four Images, made of white Earth, about a span long each of them; one was of Pallas. Amongst divers of those Antiquities, there was sound one Urn, with Ashes and Bones, and one pot of white Earth, very small, not exceeding the quantity of a quartern of a Wine pint, made in shape of a Hare squatted upon her leggs, and between her Eares is the mouth of the Pot. There hath also bin found (in the same field) divers Coffins of stone, con∣taining the bones of men; these I suppose to be the Burials of some special per∣sons, in time of the Britons, or Saxons, after that the Romans had left to govern here. Morever, there were also found the sculls and bones of men, without Coffins; or rather, whose Coffins (being of Timber) were consumed; divers great Nails of Iron were there sound, such as are used in the Wheels of shod Carts; being each of them as big as a mans finger, and a quarter of a yard long; the heads two inches over: Those nayles were more wondred at, then the rest of the things there found; and many Opinions of men were there passed upon them; namely, that the men there buried, were murthered by driving those nayles into their heads. But to set down what was observed, concerning this matter; there were there, the bones of a man lying, the head North, the feet South, and round a∣bout him (athwart his head) along both his sides, and thwart his feet such nails were found; wherefore it may be conjectured, they were the nayls of his Coffin, which had bin a trough cut out of some great Tree; and the same co∣vered with a Plank of that thickness, fastened with such nayls, and found under the broad heads of some of those nayls, the old Wood was found scant turned into Earth; but still retaining both the grain and proper colour. And thus much for that part of Bishopsgate-Ward; now we will proceed to that part which lyeth within the Gate. And first, to begin on the left hand of Bishopsgate; from the Gate ye have certain Tenements of old time, pertaining to a Brother-hood of St. Nicholas, granted to the Parish Clarks of London, for two Chaplains to be kept in the Chappel of St. Mary Magdalen, near unto the Guild-Hall of London, in the 27. of Henry the sixth. The first of these Houses towards the North, and against the Wall of the City, was sometime a large Inne or Court, called the Wrastlers of such a signe; And the last in the high street, towards the South, was some∣time also a fair Inne, called the Angel, of such a signe. Amongst these said Tenements was (on the same street side) a fair Entry or Court, to the common Hall of the said Parish-Clarks, with proper Alms-houses, seven in number ad∣joyning; for Parish-Clarks, and their Wives, and their Widows, such as were in great years, not able to labour; one of these by the said Brother-hood of Parish-Clarks, was allowed sixteen pence the week: the other six had each of them nine pence the week, according to the Patent granted to that effect. This Brother-hood (amongst other) being suppressed, in the Raign of Ed∣ward the sixth: the said Hall, with the other Buildings there, was given to Sir Robert Chester, a Knight of Cambridge-shire, against whom the Parish-Clarks commencing suit, in the Raign of Queen Mary; and being like to have pre∣vailed, the said Sir Robert Chester pulled down the Hall, sold the Timber, stone, and Lead; and thereupon the sui was ended. The Alms-houses remained in the Queens hands, and people were there placed, such as could make best friends, some of them taking the pension appointed, and letting forth their houses at great Rent, have given occasion to the Prson of the Parish, to chal∣lenge Tithes of them, &c.
Next unto this is the small Parish Church of Saint Ethelburgh, Virgin; and from thence, some small distance is a large Court, called Little St. Helens, be∣cause it pertained to the Nuns of St. Helens, and was their House: there were there seven Alms-Rooms, or Houses for the poor, belonging to the Company of Leathersellers; Then somewhat more West, is another Court, with a winding Lane, which commeth out against the West end of St. Andrew Undershafts Church. In this Court standeth the fair Church of St. Helen, sometime a Pri∣ory of black Nuns; and in the same the Parish Church of St. Helen. This Priory was founded before the Raign of Henry the third; William Ba∣ing Dean of Pauls, was the first founder, and was there buried; and William Basing, one of the Sheriffs of London, in the second year of Edward the second, was holden also to be a Founder, or rather an helper thereof: This Priory be∣ing valued at 1314 l. 2 s. 6 d. was surrendred the five and twentieth of No∣vember, the thirtieth of Henry the eighth: the whole Church, the partition be∣twixt the Nuns Church; and the Parish Church being taken down, remaineth now to the Parish, and is a fair Church, but wanteth such a Steeple, as Sir Thomas Gresham promised to have builded, in recompence of ground in that Church, filled up with his Monument. The Nuns Hall, and other Housing thereto pertaining, was since purchased by the Company of Leather-sellers, and is their common Hall; which Com∣pany, was incorporate, the one and twentieth year of Richard the second. A young new-born Child was taken up, between the great Ware-house, and Sir Iohn Spencers back-gate, being (by a most unnatural Mother) there buried in a great Dung-hill of Sea-coal Ashes, with the face upward; yet found alive by Richard Atkinson, who used to make clean the passage there of the soyle, carrying it thence with his Wheel-Barrow. The Child had not any ragg, or Cloth about it, but was all bloodied, by reason that the Navil string was unty∣ed, and the Body meerly crusted over with the Seacoal-dust; yet being made clean by the poor mans Wife, it was found to be a most goodly Man-Child, strong and well-featured, without any blemish or harm upon it; but strangled inwardly, by sucking in the noysome filth and Ashes. He was Christned, and named Iob cinere extractus, Iob taken out of the A∣shes, He lived three dayes, and lies buried in the Church-yard, the fifth of September, 1612.
Of the Sixth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Broad-street Ward. WE will now proceed to make a Perambulation in Broad street Ward, whereof part lies, contigous to Bishopsgate Ward: for it beginneth from the water Conduit, Westward on both sides of the street, by Alhallows Church, to an Iron Grate on the Channel, which runneth into the water-course of Wall∣brook, before ye come to the Postern called Moregate, and this is the farthest West part of that Ward; Then have ye Broad street, where of the Ward taketh name, which stretcheth out of the former street, from the East Corner of Alhallowes Church-yard, somewhat South, to the Parish Church of Saint Peter the poor on both sides, and then by the South Gate of the Augustine Fryars, West, down Throgmorton street by the Drapers Hall, into Loathbury, to another Grate of Iron on the Channel there, whence the water runneth into the course of Wallbrook, under the East end of St. Margarets Church; certain posts of Timber are there set up; and this is also the furthest▪ West part of this Ward, in the said street, out of the which street it runneth up Bartholomew Lane, South, to the North side of the Exchange, then more East out of the for∣mer street; From over against the Fryars Augustines Church South gate, run∣neth up another part of Broad streete, South, to a Pump, over against St. Ben∣nets Church. Then have ye one other street, called Threed-needle street, beginning at the Well with two Buckets, by St. Martins Oteswich Church Wall; This street runneth down on both sides to Finkes-Lane, now called Finch Lane, and half way up that Lane, to a Gate of a Marchants house on the West side, but not so far on the East; Then the aforesaid street, from this Finkes Lane now Finch Lane, runneth down by the Royal Exchange to the Stocks, and to a place commonly called, the Scalding-house, or Scalding wicke, but now Scalding Al∣ley, by the West side whereof, under the Parish Church of St. Mildred, runneth the course of VVallbrooke, and these be the bounds of this Ward. Here stands the Parish Church of Alhallowes in the Wall, so called of standing close to the Wall of the City near Moorfields, and over against Winchester house, which was so vast and spacious a Mansion, that it has been many years since cut, into divers habitations; For the Glasse-house stood in part of it, the Spanish Ambassadour had another part; And now of late, the Excise Office hath bin kept in another part. On the other side of the street, among many proper Houses (possessed for the most part by Curriers) is the Carpenters Hall, which Company was Incorporated in the seventeenth year of Edward the fourth. Then East from the Curriers row, is a long and high Wall of stone in the foresaid Winchester house, enclosing the North side of a large Garden, adioy∣ning to as large an house, builded in the Reigns of King Henry the eighth, and of Edward the sixth, by Sir William Powlet, Lord Treasurer of England, thorow his Garden, which (of old time) consisted of divers parts, now united, was sometimes a fair foot way, leading by the West end of the Augustine Fryars Church straight North, and opened somewhat West from Alhallowes Church against London Wall, towards Mooregate, which foot-way had Gates at either
end, locked up every night, but now the same way (being taken into those Gar∣dens) the Gates are closed up with Stone, whereby the people are enforced to go about by Saint Peters Church, and the East end of the said Fryers Church, and all the said great place and Garden of Sir William Pawlet, to London Wall, and so to Moorgate. This great House adjoyning to the Garden aforesaid, stretcheth, to the North corner of Broad-street, and then turneth up Broad-street all that side, to and be∣yond the East end of the said Friers Church; It was builded by the said Lord Treasurer, in place of Augustine Fryers House, Cloyster, and Gardens, &c. The Fryars Church he pulled not down, but the West end thereof, enclosed from the Steeple and Quire, was in the year 1550, granted to the Dutch Na∣tion in London, to be their preaching place; The other part, namely, the Stee∣ple, Quire, and side Iles to the Quire adjoyning, he reserved to houshold uses, as for Stowage of Corn, Coal, and other thing: his Son and Heir, Marquiss of VVinchester, sold the Monuments of Noble men (there buried) in great number, Paving stone, and whatsoever, (which cost many thousand pounds) for one hundred pounds; and in place thereof; made fair sabling for horses; He caused the Lead to be taken from the roofs, and laid Tyle in place, which exchange proved not so profitable as he looked for, but rather to his disadvan∣tage, for there have been some remarkable judgements upon that Family since. On the East side of this Broad street amongst other buildings, on the back part of Gresham House, which is in Bishopsgate street, there are placed eight Alms-houses, builded of Brick and Timber, by Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, for eight Almes-men, which be now there placed rent-free, and receive each of them by his gift, six pound thirteen shillings four pence yearly for ever. Next unto Pawlet House, is the Parish Church of Saint Peter the poor, so called for a difference from other of that name, sometime (peradventure) a poor Parish, but at this present there be many fair Houses, possessed by rich Marchants, and others. In this little Church there be some fair Monuments, one of Sir Thomas Lowe, and another of Sir VVilliam Garaway, with Iohn Lucas Esquire of Colchester. Then next have ye the Augustine Fryers Church, and Church-yard, the en∣tring thereunto by a South gate to the West Porch, a large Church having a most fine spired Steeple, small, high, and streight, that there are few the like, founded by Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, in the year one thou∣sand two hundred fifty three. Regnald Cobham gave this Messuage in London, to the enlarging thereof, in the year one thousand three hundred fourty four. Humphrey Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, re-edified this Church in the year 1354, whose Body was there buried in the Quire. The small spired Steeple of this Church was overthrown by tempest of wind, in the year one thousand three hundred sixty two, but was raised of new, as still it might have stood, had not private benefit (the only devourer of Antiquity) pull'd it down. Both that goodly Steeple, and all that East part of the Church, hath lately been taken down, and Houses (for one mans commodity) raised in the place, whereby London hath lost so goodly an ornament, and times hereafter may more talk of it. This House was valued at fifty seven pounds, and was surrendred the twelfth of November, the 13 of Henry the 8. There were many great Monuments in this Fryers Church, one of Edmond first son to Ioan mother to Richard the se∣cond, Guy de Meryke Earl of Saint Paul, Lucie Countesse of Kent, Richard the great Earl of Arundel, Surrey, & VVarren, Sir Francis Atcourt Earl of Pembrooke,
Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford, with Aubery de Vere his son, the Lady of Bed∣ford, with Edward Duke of Buckingham, and very many more persons of quality. On the South side, and at West end of this Church, many fair houses are builded; namely in Throgmorton street, one very large and spacious, builded in the place of old and small Tenements, by Thomas Cromwel, Master of the Kings Jewel-house, after that, Master of the Rolls, then Lord Cromwell Knight, Lord Privie Seal, Vicar General, Earl of Essex, high Chamberlain of England, &c. This house being finished, and having some reasonable plot of ground left for a Garden, he caused the pales of the Gardens adjoyning to the North part thereof, on a sudden to be taken down, two and twe∣ty foot to be measured forth-right into the North of every mans ground, a Line there to be drawn, a Trench to be cast, a foundation laid and an high Brick Wall to be builded; and this was suddenly and no warning given, nor other answer, but (when any spake to the Surveyers of that work) they said their Master Sir Thomas commanded them so to do; so that no man durst go to argue the matter, but each man lost his Land; Thus the sudden rising of some men, causeth them to forget themselves. The Company of Drapers in London bought this House, and now the same is their Common Hall. This Company obtained of King Henry the sixth, in the seventeenth of his Reign, to be incorporate. Iohn Gedney was chosen to be their first Master, and the four Wardens were, Iohn VVotton, I. Darby, Robert Breton, and T. Cooke; The Armes granted to the said Company by Sir VVilliam Bridges Knight, first Garter King at Arms, in Blazon are thus. Three Sun Beams, issuing out of three Clouds of flame, crowned with three Crowns, Imperials of Gold, upon a Shield Azure. From this Hall, on the same side, down to the Grates and course of VVall∣brooke, have ye divers fair houses for Marchants and other, from the which Grates back again on the other side in Lotisbury (so called in Record of Edward the third, the thirty eighth year, and now corruptly called Lothbury) are Can∣dlestick founders placed, till ye come to Bartholmew Lane, so called of Saint Bartholmew's Church, at the South-east corner thereof. In this Lane also are di∣vers fair builded Houses on both sides, and so likewise have ye in the other street, which stretcheth from the Fryers Augustines South gate, to the corner over against Saint Bennets Church. In this street, amongst other fair buildings the most ancient was (of old time) an house pertaining to the Abbot of Saint Al∣bans; Iohn Catcher Alderman (after) dwelled there; Then is the free School, pertaining to the late dissolved Hospital of Saint Anthony, whereof more shall be shewed in another place, and so up to Thred-needle-street. On the South part of which street, beginning at the East, by the Well with two Buckets, now turned to a Pump, is the Parish Church of Saint Martin cal∣led Oteswitch, of Martin de Oteswitch, Nicholas de Oteswich, William Oteswich, and Iohn Oteswich Founders thereof, and all buried there, as appeareth by their Monuments. There is also there a fair engraven Stone, with a Latine Epitaph upon the Lord Iames Fulkes Treasurer of Holland and Ambassador for the States of the united Provinces here in England. Sir Thomas Row gave 5 l. to perpetuity to this Parish, to buy Bread and Coals for the poor. Some small distance from thence is the Merchant-Taylors Hall, pertaining to the Guild and Fraternity of Saint Iohn Baptist, time out of mind called of Taylors and Linnen Armorers of London; For we find that King Edward the first, in the eight and twentieth of his Reign, confirmed this Guild by the name of Taylors and Linnen Armorers, and also gave to the Brethren thereof, autho∣rity every year at Mid-summer to hold a feast and to choose unto them a Go∣vernour
or Master, with Wardens; whereupon, the same year, one thou∣sand three hundred, on the Feast day of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, they chose Henry de Ryall to be their Plgrim; For the Master of this Mystery (as one that travelled for the whole Company) was then so called, untill the eleventh year of Richard the second, and the four Wardens were then called Purveyers of Alms, (now called Quartredge) of the said Fraternity. This Merchant-Taylors Hall, sometime perteining to a worthy Gentleman, named Edmund Crepin, Dominus Creepng after some Record; he, in the year of Christ 1331, the sixth of Edward the third, for a certain sum of money to him paid, made this grant thereof, by the name of his principal Messuage, in the Wards of Cornhill and Broad-street, which Sir Oliver Ingham Knight, did then hold, to John of Yakeley the Kings Pavilion-maker; This was called the New Hall, or Taylors Inne, for a difference from their old Hall, which was a∣bout the back side of the Red Lion in Basing Lane, and in the Ward of Cord∣wayner street. The one and twentieth of Edward the fourth, Thomas Holm, aliàs Clarentiaux King of Armes for the South part of England, granted by his Paents to the said Fraternity and Guild of Saint John Baptist of Taylors and Linnen Armorers, to beat in a field Silver, a Pavilion between two Mantles Imperial, Purple, garnished with Gold, in a chief Azure, a holy Lamb, set within a Sun, the Crest upon the Helm; a Pavilion purpe, garnished with Gold, &c. After this King Henry the seventh, was himself a Brother of this Fraternity, or Guild of S. Iohn Baptist, of Taylors or Linnen Armorers, (as divers others of his Predecessors Kings had been) to wit Rohard the third, Edward the fourth, Henry the sixth, Henry the fifth, Henry the fourth, and Richard the second. And for that divers of that Fraternity had (time out of mie) been great Merchants, and had frequented all sorts of Merchandizes into most parts of the world, to the honour of the Kings Realm, and to the great profit of his Subjects, and of his Progenitors, and the men of the said Mystery, (during the time aforesaid) had exercised the buying and selling of all Wares and Merchandi∣zes, especially, of Woollen Cloth, as well in grosse, as by retaile, through∣out all this Realm of England, and chiefly within the said City; therefore e of his especial grace, did change, transfer, and translate, the Guild aforesaid, and did incorporate them into the name of the Master and Wardens of the Merchant-Taylors, of the Fraternity of S. John Baptist in the City of London. Some distance West from this Merchant-Taylors Hall, is Finkes Lane, so called of Robert Finke, and Robert Finke his son, James Finke and Rosamond Finke; Robert Finke the elder new builded the Parish Church of Saint Bennet commonly called Finke of the Founder; his Tenements were both of St. Ben∣uets parish, and Saint Martins Oteswich Parish, the one half of this Finke Lane is of Broad-street ward, to wit, on the West side, up to the great and principal house, wherein the said Finke dwelled; But on the other side, namely the East, not so much towards Cornhil. Then without this Lane, in the aforesaid Threed-Needle street, is the said Parish Church of Saint Bennet a handsome Church in which are sun∣dry old Monuments. There happened lately a great fire in Threed-Needle street, over against Merchant-Taylors Hall, which ragd as far as Saint Bennets Church Walls, and there the fury was sopped, otherwie it might have destroyed all this City. The French Reformers have their Sermons in this Church, and the exercise of Calvn Religion.
On the North side of this street, from over against the East corner, of St. Martins Osteswich Church, have ye divers fair and large houses, till you come to the Hospital of St. Anthony, sometime a Cell of St. Anthonies of Vienna; For we read, that King Henry the third, granted to the Brother-hood of St. An∣thony of Vienna, a place amongst the Jewes, which was sometime their Synagogue, and had been builded by them, about the year 1231. But the Christians ob∣tained of the King, that it should be dedicated to our blessed Lady; and since, an Hospital being there builded, was called St. Anthonies in London. It was founded in the Parish of St. Bennet Finke, for a Master, two Priests, one School-master, and twelve poor men; after which foundation, amongst other things, was given to this Hospital, one Messuage and Garden, whereon was builded the fair large Free-School, and one other parcel of ground, containing thirty seven foot in length, and eighteen foot in breadth, whereon were builded the Alms-Houses of hard Stone and Timber, in the Reign of Henry the sixth. Which said Henry the sixth, in the twentieth of his Reign, gave unto Iohn Carpenter, Dr. of Divinity, and Master of St. Anthonies Hospital, and to his Brethren, and their Successors for ever, his Mannor of Poinington, with the appurtenances, with certain Pensions, and Portions of Milburn, Burneworth, Charleton, and Up-Wimburn, in the County of Southhamton, towards the maintenance of five Scholars in the University of Oxford, to be brought up in the faculty of Arts, af∣ter the rate of ten pence the week for every Scholar; so that the said Scholars be first instructed in the rudiments of Grammar, at the Colledge of Eaton, foun∣ded by the said King. In the year 1474. Edward the 4th granted to William Say, Batchelor of Di∣vinity, Master of the said Hospital, to have Priests, Clerks, Scholars, poor men, and Brethren of the same, Clerks, or Laymen, Queristers, Procters, Messengers, Servants in Houshold, and other things whatsoever, like as the Prior, and Co∣vent of St. Anthonies of Vienna, &c. He also annexed, united, and appropriated the said Hospital, unto the Collegiate of St. George in Windsor. The Protectors of this House, were to collect the benevolence of charitable Persons, towards the building and supporting thereof. In the year 1499. Sir John Tate, sometime Alebrewer, then a Mercer, caused his Brewhouse, called the Swan, near adjoyning to the said Free Chap∣pel, College, or Hospital of St. Anthony, to be taken for the enlarging of the Church, which was then newly builded; toward the building whereof, the said Tate gave great sums of money, and finished it in the year 1501, Sir John Tate, deceased 1514. and was there buried, under a fair Monument by him prepared, Dr. Taylor Master of the Rolls, and other. Walter Champion, Draper, one of the Sheriffs of London, 1529. was buried there, and gave to the Beadmen twenty pounds, The Lands by year of this Hospital, were valued in the 37. of King Henry the eighth, to be 55l. 6 s. and 8. pence. One Iohnson (a Schoolmaster of the famous Free-School there) became a prebend of Windsor, and then (by little and little) followed the spoil of this Hospital: he first dissolved the Quire, conveyed away the Plate and Ornaments, then the Bels; and lastly, put out the Alms men from their houses, appoin∣ting them portions of twelve pence the week to each; but now I hear of no such matter performed; for their houses, with other, be letten out for rent, and the Church is a preaching place for the French Nation, as was touched before. This School was commended in the Reign of Henry the sixth, and sithence commended above other; but now decayed, and come to nothing, by taking that from it, which thereunto belonged. Next is the Parish Church of St. Bartholmew, at the end of Bartholmew Lane, Thomas Pike Alderman, with the assistance of Nicholas Yoo, one of the Shetiffs
of London, about the year 1438. new builded this Church. West from this Church, have ye Scalding Alley, of old time called Scalding House, or Scalding wick, because that ground (for the most part) was then im∣ployed by Poulterers, that dwelled in the high street, from the Stocks Market, to the great Conduit. Their Poultry which they sold at their stalls, were scal∣ded there: the street doth yet bear the name of the Poultry, and the Poulte∣rers are but lately departed from thence, into other streets, as into Grasse-street, and the ends of St. Nicholas Flesh-shambles. This Scalding wick, is the farthest part of Broadstreet-Ward, and is (by the water called Wallbrook) parted from Cheap-Ward. Of the Seventh Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Corn-hill Ward. NOw Cornhil Ward comes to consideration, corruptly called Cornwel by the vulgar; It was called Corn-hill of a Corn-Market, time out of mind there holden, and is a part of the principal high street, begin∣ning at the West end of Leaden-Hall, stretching down West, on both the sides, by the South end of Finkes Lane, on the right hand, and by the North end of Birchoven Lane, on the left part: of which Lanes, to wit, to the middle of them, is of this Ward, and so down to the Stocks Market; and this is the bounds. The upper or East part of this Ward, and also a part of Limestreet Ward, hath been (as I said) a Market-place, especially for Corn, and since for all kind of Victuals, as is partly shewed in Limestreet Ward. It appeareth by Record, that in the year 1522. the Rippiers of Rie and other places, sold their fresh Fish in Leaden-hall Market upon Cornhill; but forraign Butchers were not admitted there to sell Flesh, till the year 1533. And it was enacted, that Butchers should sell their Bief, not above a half peny the pound; and Mutton, half peny, half farthing: which Act being de∣vised, for the great Commodity of the Realm, (as it was then thought) hath since proved far otherwise; for, before that time, a fat Oxe was sold at London, for six and twenty shillings eight pence, at the most; a far Weather, for three shillings four pence; a fat Calf at the same price; a fat Lamb for twelve pence; pieces of Bief weighing, 2. pounds and a half at the least, yea, 3. pound or better for a peny, on every Butchers Stall in this City; and of those pieces of Bief, 13, or fourteen for twelve pence; fat Mutton for eight pence the quarter; and one hundred weight of Bief, for four shillings eight pence, at the dearest. What the price is now, I need not set down; many men thought the same Act to raise the price, by reason that Grasier knew, or supposed what weight every their Beasts contained: and so raising their price thereafter, the Butcher could be no gainer, but by likewise raising his price: the number of Butchers then in the City and Suburbs, was accounted sixscore, of which every one killed six Oxen a peece weekly, which is in forty six weeks, 33120. Oxen, or seven hun∣dred and twenty Oxen weekly. The forraign Butchers (for a long time) stood in the high street of Limestreet-Ward, on the North side, twice every week, viz, Wednesdayes and Saturdayes, and wer some gain to the Tenants, before whose doors they stood, and into
whoe houses they set their blocks and stalls; but that advantage being epied, they were taken into Leaden-Hall, there to pay for their standing to the Cham∣ber of London. Thus much for the Market upon Cornhill. The chief Ornaments in Cornhill-VVard, are these; First, at the East end thereof, in the middle of the high street, and at the parting of four wayes, have ye a Water-Standard, placed in the year 1582. in manner following; A certain German, named Peter Morris, having made an ar∣tificial Forcier for that purpose, conveyed Thames-water in Pipes of Lead, over the Steeple of St. Magnus Church, at the North end of London-Bridge; and from thence into divers mens Houses in Thames-street, New Fish-street, and Grasse-street, (now Gracious-street) up to the North West corner of Leaden-hall, the highest ground of all the City; where the waste of the main Pipe rising into this Standard (provided at the charges of the City) with four spouts, did at every Tyde run (according to Covenant) four wayes, plentifully serving to the Commodity of the Inhabitants, near adjoyning in their houses; and also clean∣sed the Channels of the street, toward Bishops-gate, Aldgate, the Bridge, and the Stocks Market; but now no such matter, by what default I know not. Then have ye a fair Conduit, of sweet water, castellated in the midst of that Ward; This Conduit was first builded of stone, in the year 1282. by Henry VVallis, Maior of London, to be a Prison for Night-walkers, and other suspicious persons, and was called the Tunne upon Cornhill; because the same was builded somewhat in fashion of a Tunne, standing on the one end. To this Prison, the Night-watchers to this City, committed not only Night-walkers, but also other persons, as well spiritual as temporal, whom they sus∣pected of incontinency, and punished them according to the customs of this City; but complaint therefore being made, about the year of Christ, 1297. King Edward the first, writeth to the Citizens thus. Edward by the Grace of God, &c. VVhereas Richard Gravesend▪ Bishop of London, hath shewed unto us, that by the great Charter of England, the Church hath a privilede, that no Clark should be imprisoned by a Lay-man, without our Commandment, and breach of peace: Which notwithstanding, some Ci∣tizens of London, upon meer spight, do enter in their vvatches, into Clarks Chambers, and then (ike Felons) carry them to the Tunne, which Henry le Wallis, sometime Maior, built for Night-walkers; wherefore we will, that this our Commandment, be proclaimed in a full Hustings, and that no vvatch hereafter enter into any Clarks Chamber, under the forfeit of thirty pounds. Dated at Carlile, the 18th of March, the 25. of our Reign. More we read, that about the year of Christ 1299. the seven and twentieth of Edward the first, certain principal Citizens of London, to wit, T. Romane, Rich: Gloucester, Nicholas Faringdon, Adam Helingbury, T. Saly, Iohn Dun∣stable, Richard Ashwy, John Wade, and William Stortforde, brake up this Prison, called the Tunne, and took out certain Prisoners; for the which they were sharply punished, by long Imprisonment, and great fines; It cost the Citizens (as some have written) more than 20000 Marks, which they were amerced in, before William de March, Treasurer of the Kings Exchequer, to purchase the Kings favour, and the confirmation of their Liberties. By the West side of the aforesaid Prison, then called the Tunne, was a fair Well of Spring water, curbed round with hard stone, but in the year 1401. the said Prison house called the Tunne, was made a Cestern for sweet water, con∣veyed by Pipes of Lead, from Tyburne, and was from thenceforth called the Conduit upon Cornhil; Then was the Well planked over, and a strong Prison made of Timber, called a Cage, with a pair of Stocks therein, set upon it; and this was for Night-walkers: on the top of which Cage, was placed a Pillory, for the punishment of Bakers, offending in the assize of Bread, for Millers
stealing of Corn at the Mill; for Bawds, Scholds, and other offen∣ders. As in the year 1468. the seventh of Edward, the fourth, divers persons, be∣ing common Jurors, such as at Assizes, were forsworn for rewards, or favour of parties, were judged to ride from Newgate, to the Pillory in Corn-hill, with Miters of Paper on their heads, there to stand, and from thence again to New∣gate, and this judgement was given by the Maior of London. On the North side of this street, from the East unto the West, have ye divers fair houses, for Marchants and others; amongst the which, one large House is called the Wey-house, where Marchandizes brought from beyond the Seas, are to be weighed at the Kings Beame: this House hath a Master, and under him four Master-Porters, with Porters under them, they have a strong Cart, and four great Horses, to draw and carry the Wates from the Marchants Houses to the Beam, and back again; Sir Thomas Lovel, Knight, builded this House, with a fair front of Tenements, toward te street, all which he gave to the Grocers of London, himself being free of the City, and a Brother of that Com∣pany. Then have ye the said Finks Lane, the South end of which Lane, on both sides, is in Corn-hill Ward. Then next is the Royal Exchange, erected in the year 1566. after this Order, viz. certain Houses upon Corn-hill, and the like upon the part thereof, in the Ward of Broadstreet, with three Allies; the first called Swan Alley, opening into Corn-hill; the second, New Alley, passing through out of Corn-hill, into Broadstreet Ward, over against St. Bartholomew-Lane; the third, St. Christo∣phers Alley, opening into Broadstreet-Ward, and into St. Christophers Parish, containing many thick Housholds, were first purchased by the Citizens of Lon∣don, for more than 3532. pounds, and were sold for 478. pounds, to such per∣sons as should take them down, and carry them thence; Also the ground, or plot was made plain, at the Charges of the City, and then possession thereof was by certain Aldermen (in name of the whole Citizens) given to Sir Tho∣mas Gresham Knight, sometimes Agent to the Queens Higheness, thereupon to build a Burse, or place for Marchants to assemble in, at his own proper charges; And he, on the seventh of June, laying the first stone of the Foundation, being Brick, accompanied with some Aldermen, every of them laid a piece of Gold, which the Workmen took up; and forthwith followed upon the same, such di∣ligence, that by the Moneth of November, in the year 1567. the same was co∣vered with slate, and shortly after fully finished. In the year 1570. on the 23. of January, the Queens Majesty, attended with her Nobility, came from her House at the Strand, called Sommerset-House, and entred the City by Temple-Barre, through Fleet-street, Cheape, and so by the North side of the Burse, through Thredneedle-street, to Sir, Thomas Greshams House in Bishopgate-street, where she dined: After dinner, her Majesty returning through Corn-hill, entred the Burse on the South side; and after she had viewed every part thereof above the ground, especially the Pawne, which was richly fur∣nished with all sorts of the finest Wares in the City, she caused the same Burse, by an Haurad and a Trumpet, to be proclaimed at the Royal Exchange, and so to to be called from thenceforth, and not otherwise. Next adjoyning to this Royal Exchange, remaineth one part of a large stone House, and is now called the Castle, of such a sign at a Tavern door; there is a passage thorough out of Cornhill, into Threed-needle street; the other part of the said stone House was taken down, for enlarging the Royal Exchange; This stone House was said of some to have been a Church, whereof it had no propor∣tion; of others, a Jewes House, as though none but Jewes had dwelt in stone houses, but that opinion is without warrant.
For beside the strong building of stone houses, against  of thieves in the night when no watches were kept, In the first year of Rich∣ard the first, (to prevent casualties of fire, which often had hapned in the City, when the Huses were builded of Timber, and covered with Reed and Straw, Henry Fitz Allwine being Mayor) it was Decreed, That from thenceforth, no man should build within the City but of some unto a certain height, and to cover the same building with Slate, or burnt Tyle; This was the very cause of such stone Buildings, whereof many have remined until out time that for gaining of ground, they have been taken down, and in place of some of them being low, (as but two Stories above the ground) many Houses of four or five Stories high are placed. From this Stone House down to the Stocks, are divers large Houses, especial∣ly for height, or Merchants and Artificers. On the South side of this High-street, is the Parish Church of Saint Peter upon Cornhill, which seemeth to be of an ancient building, but not so anient as fame reporteth; for it hath been lately repaired, if not all new builded, ex∣cept the Steeple which is ancient. The Roo of this Church and Glazing, was finished in the Reign of King Ed∣ward the fourth, as appeareth by Armes of Noble men, and Aldermen of Lon∣don then living. There remaineth in this Church a Table, wherein it is written I know not by what Authority, but of no late hand, that King Lucius founded the same Church, to be an Archbishops See, Metropolitan, and chief Church of his Kingdom, and that it so continued the space of four hundred years, unto the coming of Augustine the Monk. Now, because many may be curious to be further acquainted therewith, I have here inserted the same Verbatim, as it is there recorded in the Table. BE it known unto all men, that the year of our Lord God 179, Lucius the first Christian King of this Land, then called Britaine, sounded the first Church in London, that is to say, the Church of St. Peter upon Cornhill; and he founded there an Archbishops See, and made that Church the Metropolitan and chief Church of this Kingdom, and so endured the space of four hundred years, unto the coming of St. Austin, the Apostle of the English, the which was sent into this Land by St. Gregory the Doctor of the Church, in the time of King Ethilbert; And then was the Archbishops See, and Pall, removed from the foresaid Church of St. Peter upon Cornhill, unto Doreburniam that now is called Canterbury, and there remaineth to this day. And Millet the Monk, which came into the Land with S. Austin, was made this first Bishop of London, and his See was made in Pauls Church, And this King Lucius was the first Founder of St. Peters Church upon Cornhill; and he reigned in this Land after Brute, a thousand two hundred fourty five years, and the year of our Lord God, a hun∣dred twenty four, Lucius was Crowned King: and the years of his Reign were seventy seven years, and he was (ater some Chronicle) buried at London; and (after some Chronicle) he was buried at Glocester, in that place where the Or∣der of St. Francis standeth now. Joceline of Furnis writeth, that Thean or Theon, the first Arch bishop of Lon∣don in the Reign of Lucius builded the said Church, by the aid of Cran chief Butler to King Lucius: and also that Etvnus the second Archbishop buil∣ded a Library to the same adjoyning, and conerted many of the Druydes lear∣ned men in the Pagan Law, to Christianity. William Harrison, discoursing hereon more at large, hath these very words, There is a Controversy (saith he) moved among our Historiographers, whe∣ther the Church that  built at London, stood at Westminster, or in Cornhill,
For, there is some cause, why the Metropolitane Church should be thought to stand where St. Peters now doth, by the space of four hundred and od years, be∣fore it was removed to Canterbury by Austin the Monk, if a man would lean to one side without any conference of the asseverations of the other; But herein there may lurk some scruple; for, besides that St. Peters Church stood in the East end of the City, and that of Apollo in the West; the word Cornhil, a deno∣mination given of late (so speak of) to one street, may easily be mistaken for Thorney. For as the word Thorney, proceedeth from the Saxons; who called the West end of the City by that ame where Westminster now standeth, because of the wildernesse and bushinee of the soile, so we do not read of any street in London, called Cornhill, before the Conquest of the Normans: wherefore, I hold with them, which make Westminster to be the place, where Lucius builded his Church, upon the ruines of that Fane, 264 years (as Malmsbury saith) be∣fore the coming of the Saxons, and four hundred and eleven before the arrival of Augustine. Read also his Appendix in Lib. fourth Pontif. where he noteth the time of the Saxons, in the 444 of Grace, and of Augustine in 596 of Christ, which is a manifest account, though some Copies have 499 for the one, but not without-manifest corruption and error. And now to return where we left; True it is, that a Library there was, per∣taining to this Parish Church, of old time builded of Stone, and of late repaired with Brick, by the Executors of Sir Iohn Crosby Alderman, as his Arms on the South end do witnesse. This Library hath been (of late time) to wit within this seventy years, well furnished of Books, Iohn Leyland viewed and commended them: but now those Books are gone, and this place is occupied by a School-master, and his Usher, for a number of Scholers learning their Grammer Rules, &c. Notwithstanding before that time, a Grammar School had been kept in this Parish, as appeareth in the year a thousand four hundred twenty five. We read, that John Whitby was Rector, and John Steward School-master there; and in the five and twentieth of Henry the sixth, it was Enacted by Par∣liament, that four Grammer Schools in London, should be maintained, viz In the Parishes of Alhallowes in Thames street, Saint Andrew in Oldburn, Saint Peters upon Cornhill, and Saint Thomas of Acres. Then have ye the Parish Church of St. Michael the Archangel: for the antiquity thereof, we find that Alnothus the Priest, gave it to the Abbot and Covent of Covesham; Raynold the Abbot and the Covent there, did grant the same to Sparling the Priest, in all measures, as he and his Predecessors before had held it: to the which Sparling also, they granted all their Lands which they there had, except certain Lands which Orgar le proud held of them, and paid two shillings yearly; For the which grant, the said Sparling should yearly pay one mark of Rent to the said Abbot of Covesham, and find him his lodging, Salt, Water, and Fire, when he came to London; This was granted, a thousand one hundred thirty three, about the thirty four of Henry the first. The fair new Steeple or Bell-Tower of this Church, was begun to be builded in the year 1421, which being finished, and a fair ing of five Bells therein placed, a sixth Bell was added, and given by John VVhitwell, Isabel his Wife, and William Rus, or Rous Alderman; and Goldsmith, about the year 1430, which Bell named Rus, (nightly at eight of the clock, and otherwise for Knels, and in Peals, rung by one man by the space of 160 years) of late over-haled by four or five at once, hath been thrice broken, and new cast, within the space of ten years, to the charges of that Parish more than 100 marks. And here note of this Steeple: Upon St. James night, certain men in the loft next under the Bell, ringing of a peal, a tempest of Lightning and Thunder did
arise, and an ugly-shapen sight appeared to them, coming in at the South Win∣dow, and lighted on the North, for fear whereof, they all fell down, and lay as dead for the time, letting the Bells ring and cease of their own accord; When the Ringers came to themselves, they found certain stones o the North Win∣dow to be raised, and scratched, as if they had been so much Butter printed with a Lions claw. The same stones were fastned there again, and so remain till this day; they may be seen to this day, together with the holes where the claws had entred, three or four inches deep. At the same time, certain main Timber posts at Queen-Hith, were scratched and cleft from top to the bottome; and the Pulpit-crosse in Pauls Church∣yard, was likewise scratcht, cleft, and overturned; One of the Ringers lived in Queen Elizabeths time, who would verifie the same to be true to his know∣ledge. Robert Fabian Alderman, and Chronicler of England, lieth buried in this Church, with divers others persons of note. This Parish Church hath on the South side thereof a handsome Cloyster, and a fair Church-yard, with a Pulpit-cross, not much unlike to that in Pauls Church∣yard; Sir John Rudstone Mayor, caused the same Pulpit-crosse in his life time to be builded, the Church-yard to be enlarged, by ground purchased of the next Parish; and also hansome Houses to be raised, for lodging of Quire men, such as at that time were assitants to Divine Service, then daily sung by note in that Church. Then have ye Burchover Lane, so called of Burchover the first builder, and owner thereof, now corruptly called Birchin Lane; the North half whereof, is the said Cornhill Ward, the other half is of Langborn Ward. This Lane and the High-street neer adjoyning, hath been of old inhabited (for the most part) with wealthy Drapers, in whose room now Mercers and Silk∣men are come; from Birchover Lane, on that side the street down to the Stocks, in the Reign of Henry the sixth, had ye (for the most part) dwelling there, Frippers or Upholders, that sold Apparrel and old houshold stuff. The Popes-head Taverne, with other Houses adjoyning, strongly buil∣ded of Stone, hath of old time been all in one, appertaining to some great Estate, or rather to the King of this Realm, as may be supposed, both by largenesse thereof, and by the Armes, to wit, three Leopards passant gar∣dant, which was the whole Arms of England, before the Reign of Edward the Third, that quartered them with the Armes of France, the three Flower de Luces.
Of the Eighth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Langborn Ward. VVE are now by discourse, and degrees of observation, come to Langbourn Ward, so called of a long Bourn of sweet water, which (of old time) breaking out into Fenne Church-street, ran down the same street, and Lomard street to the West end of St. Mary Woolnoths Church, where turning South, and breaking into small floares, rills, or streams, it gave the name of Share-borne Lane, or South-borne Lane, (as we read) because it ran South to the River of of Thames; This Ward beginneth at the West end of Ealdgate Ward in Fen-Church street, by the Ironmongers Hall, which is on the North side of that street, at a place called Culver Alley, where sometime was a Lane, through which men went into Lime-street, but that being long since stopped up, for suspition of Theeves that lurked there by night, as is shewed in Lime-street Ward; there is now in this said Alley a Tennis-Court, &c. Fen-Church-street, took that name of Fenny or Moorish ground, so made by means of this Bourne, which passed through it; And therefore (until this day) in the Guild-Hall of this City, that Ward is called by the name of Langbourne, and Fenny about, and not otherwise; yet others be of opinion, that it took that name of Faenum, that is, Hay sold there, as Grass-street took the name of Grasse or Herbs there sold. In the midst of this street standeth a small Parish Church called, S. Gabriel Fen-Church, corruptly Fan-Church. Helming Legget Esquire, by Licence of Edward the third, in the fourty ninth of his Reign, gave one Tenement, with a curelarge thereto belonging, and a Garden with an entrey thereto leading, unto Sir Iohn Hariot, Parson of Fen-Church, and to his Successors for ever, the House to be a Parsonage House, the Garden to be a Church-yard or burying place for the Parish. Then have ye Lombard street, so called of the Longobards, and other Mer∣chants strangers of divers Nations, assembling there twice every day: of what original, or continuance it hath been, ther's no Record, more than that Ed∣ward the second, in the twelfth of his Reign, confirmed a Messuage sometime belonging to Robert Turk abutting on Lombard street toward the South, and to∣ward Cornhill on the North, for the Marchants of Florence, which proveth that street to have had the name of of Lombard street before the Reign of Edward the second; The meeting of which Merchants, and others there, continued until the 22th of December in the year 1568, on the which day, the said Mer∣chants began to make their Meetings at the Burse, a place then new builded for that purpose, in the Ward of Cornhill; and was since by her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, named the Royal Exchange. On the North side of this Ward, is Lime street, one half whereof (on both sides) is of this Langbourne Ward, and therein on the West side, is the Pewterers Hall, which Company were admitted to be a Brotherhood in the thirteenth of Edward the fourth.
At the South West corner of Limestreet, standeth a fair Parish Church of St. Dionys, called Back-Church, new builded in the Reign of Henry the sixth. John Bugge Esquire, was a great Benefactor to that work, as appeareth by his Arms, three water-Budgets, and his Crest a Morions head, graven in the stone-work of the Quire, at the upper and end on the North side, where he was buried. Also John Darby, Alderman, added thereunto, a fair Ile or Chappel on the South side, and was there buried, about the year 1466. He gave (besides sundry Ornaments) his dwelling House, and others unto the said Church; The Lady Wich, Sir Edward Osborn, Sir James Harvey, with divers other persons, and Benefactors to that Church, lie interred there. Then by the four Corners (so called of Fen-Church-street in the East, Bridge-street on the South, Grasse-street on the North, and Lumbard-street on the West) in Lumbard-street is one fair Parish Church, called Alhallowes Grasse-Church in Lumbard-street; for so 'tis read in Evidences of Record; for that the Grasse-Market, went down that way, when that street was farre broa∣der then now it is, being straightned by incroachments now. This Church was new builded: John Warner, Armorer, and then Grocer, Sheriff 1494. builded the South Ile, his Sonne Robert Warner, Esquire, finish∣ed it, in the year 1516. The Pewterers were benefactors towards the North Ile, &c. The Steeple, or Bel-Tower thereof, was finished in the year 1554. a∣bout the 36. of Henry the 8th, The fair Stone-Porch of this Church, was brought from the late dissolved Priory of St. John of Jerusalem, by Smithfield, so was the frame of their Bells; but the Bells being bought, were never brought thither, by reason that one old VVarner, Draper of that Parish deceasing, his Sonne Mark VVarner, would not perform what his Father had begun and ap∣pointed, so that fair Steeple hath but one Bell, as Fryers were wont to use, &c. Next is a common Ostery for Travellers, called the George, of such a signe. This is said to have pertained to the Earl Ferrers, and was his London Lodging in Lumbardstreet. And that in the year 1175. a Brother of the said Earl, be∣ing there privily slain in the night, was there thrown down into the dirty street. Next is the Parish Church of St. Edmond, the King and Martyr, in Lumbard-street, by the South corner of Birchover Lane. This Church is also called St. Edmond Grasse-Church, because the said Grasse-Market came down so low; Sir John Mlburn, and Sir VVilliam Chester, both Lord Maiors, with others, have Monuments in this Church. From this Church down Lombard-street, by Birchovers Lane, (the one half of which Lane is of this Ward) and so down, be divers fair Houses; namely, one with a fair fore-front towards the street, builded by Sir Martin Bowes, Gold∣smith, since Maior of London. And then one other, sometime belonging to William de la pole, Earl of Suffolk in the 24. of Richard the second, and was his Marchants House, and so down towards the Stocks Market, lacking but some three houses thereof. The South side of this Ward beginneth in the East, at the Chain to be drawn thwart Mart-Lane, up into Fenchurch-street, and so West, by the North end of Mincheon-Lane, to St. Margaret Pattens street, or Rood Lane, and down that street to the mid-way, towards St. Margarets Church, then by Philpot-Lane, (so called of Sir John Philpot that dwelled there, and was owner thereof) and▪ down that Lane, some six or eight houses, on each side, is all of this Ward. Then by Grasse-Church corner, into Lumbard-street, to St. Clements Lne, and down the same to St. Clements Church, then down St. Nicholas Lane, and down the same to St. Nicholas Church, and the same Church is of this Ward.
Then to Abchurch Lane, and down some small portion thereof; then down Sherborn-Lane, a part thereof, and a part of Bearbinder-Lane, be of this Ward, and then down Lumbard-street, to the sign of the Angel, almost to the corner over against the Stocks Market. On the South side of this Ward, somewhat within Mart-lane, have ye the Parish Church of Alhallowes, commonly called Stane-Church, (as may be sup∣posed) for a difference from other Churches of that name in this City, which (of old time) were builded of Timber, and since were builded of stone; Sir John Test, Knight of the holy Sepulcher, hath here a Monument with others. Then is the Parish Church of St. Nicholas Acon, or Hacon (for so it is read in the Records) in Lombardstreet. Sir John Bridges Draper, Maior 1520. newly repaired this Church, and imbattelled it, and was there buried. Then is there (in the high street) a comely Parish Church of St. Mary Wol∣noth, of the Nativity; the reason of which name, the Annals make no mention; This Church is lately new builded, Sir Hugh Price Goldsmith, Mayor in the first year of Henry the 7th, Keeper of the Kings Exchange at London, and one of the Governours of the Kings Mint in the Tower of London, under William Lord Hastings, the fifth of Edward the fourth deceased, 1496. He builded in this Church a Chappel, called the Charnel; as also part of the Body of the Church, and of the Steeple, and gave money toward the finishing thereof, be∣sides the stone that he had prepared; he was buried in the Body of the Church, and Guy Brice or Boys, was also buried there, with some other of note. Simon Eyre, 1459. He gave the Tavern, called the Cardinals Hat in Lum∣bard-street, with a Tenement annexed on the East part of the Tavern, and a Mansion behind the East Tenement; together, with an Ally from Lumbard-street to Corn-hill, with the appurrenances; all which were by him new buil∣ded, toward a Brother-hood of our Lady in St. Mary Wolnoths Church: A∣mong others, Sir Martin Bowes hath a Monument there, who Anno 1569. gave certain Lands for discharging Langborn Ward, of all fifteens granted by Parliament. Of the Ninth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Billings∣gate Ward. WE will now go South-East, and take a Survey of Billingsgate-Ward, which beginneth at the West end of Tower-street Ward in Thames-street, about Smarts Key, and runneth down along that street, on the South side, to St. Magnus Church, at the Bridge foot, and on the North side of the said Thames-street, from over against Smarts Key, till over against the North-West Corner of St. Magnus Church aforesaid. On this North side of Thames-street, is St. Mary Hill Lane, up to St. Mar∣garets Church, and then part of St. Margarets Pattens street, at the end of St. Mary Hills Lane; next out of Thames-street, is Lucas Lane; and then Buttolph Lane; and at the North end thereof Philpot Lane, Then is there Rother Lane, of old time so called; and thwart the same Lane is little East-Cheape, And these be the bounds of Billingsgate Ward.
Touching the principal Ornaments within this Ward, on the South side of Thamesstreet, beginning at the East end thereof; there is first the said Smarts Key, so called, of one Smart, sometime owner thereof. The next is Billinsgate, whereof the whole Ward taketh name, the which (leaving out of the Roman's faining it to be builded by King Belnus, a Britain, ong before the Incarnation of Christ) is at this present, a large Water-gate, Port, or Harbor for Ships and Boats, commonly arriving there with Fish, both fresh and salt, Shell-fishes, Salt, Oranges, Onions, and other Fruits and Roos, Wheat, Rie, and Grain of divers sorts, for service of the City, and the parts of this Realm adjoyning. This Gate is now more frequented, then of old time, when the Queens Hith was used, as being appointed by the Kings of this Realm, to be the special or only Port, for taking up of all such kind of Mat∣chandizes, brought to this City by strangers and Forraigners, because the Draw-Bridge of Timbe at London Bridge, was then to be raised, and drawn up for passage of Ships, with tops to the said Queen Hith. Touching the ancient Customs of Billingsgate, in the Reign of Edward the third; every great Ship landing there, paid for standage, two pence, every little Ship with orelocks, a peny: the lesser Boat, called a Battle, a half-peny; of two quarters of Corn measured, the King was to have one farthing; of a Combe of Corn, a peny, of every weight going out of the City, a half peny, of two quar∣ters of Sea-Coals measured, a farthing; and of every Tun of Ale, going out of England, beyond the Seas, by Marchants strangers, four pence; of every thou∣sand Herrings, a farthing, except the Franchises, &c. Next to this is, Sommers Key, which likewise took that name, of one Som∣mer, dwelling there, as did Lyon Key, of one Lyon, owner thereof, and since of the Signe of the Lyon. Then is there a fair Wharf or Key, called Buttolphs-gate, by that name so called, in the time of William the Conqueror, and before him, of Edward the Confessor. Next is the Parish of St. Buttolph, a comely Church, and hath had many fair Monuments therein, now much defaced and gone; Among others, there is William Rainwel and his Sonne, who gave a Stone-House to be a Vestry to that Church; with Lands and Tenements to discharge Billingsgate, Dowgate, and Algate, of fifteens granted to the King, and other Tolls: this was about the year 1426. This Parish of St. Buttolph, is no great thing; notwithstanding, divers stran∣gers are there harboured, as may appear by a presentment, not many years since made, of strangers Inhabitants in the Ward of Billingsgate, in these words. In Billingsgate Ward, were one and fifty Housholds of strangers, whereof thirty of thee Housholders, inhabited in the Parish of St. Buttolph, in the chief and principal Houses, where they give twenty pounds a year, for an house let∣ten, used to be let before for four marks: the nearer they dwell to the Water side▪ the more they give for Houses; and within 30. years before, there was not in the whole Ward above three Nether landers; at which time, there was within the said Parish, levied for the help of the poor, seven and twenty pounds by the year; but since they came so plentifully thither, there cannot be ga∣thered above eleven pounds; the strangers being exempted, to contribute to such charges as other Citizens do, in regard they much advance the Trade of the City. On the North side is Bosse Alley, so called of a Bosse of Spring-water, conti∣nually running, which standeth by Billingsgate, against this Alley; and was sometimes made by the Executors of Richard Whittington.
Then is St. Mary Hill ane which runneth up North from Billingsgate, to the end of St. Margaret Pattens, commonly called Rood-lane; and the greatest half of that Lane, is also of Billingsgate Ward. In this St. Mary Hill lane, is the Parish Church of St. Mary on the Hill, called so, because of the ascent from Billingsgate. In the year 1497. in the Moneth of April, as labourers digged for the foun∣dation of a Wall, within the Church of St. Mary Hill, near unto Billingsgate, they found a Coffin of rotten Timber, and therein the Corps of a Woman, whole of skin, and of bones undissevered, with the joynts of her Arms, ply∣able, without breaking of the skin, upon whose Sepulcher this was en∣graven. Here lie the Bodies of Richard Hackney, Fishmonger, and Alice his Wife; The which Richard, was Sheriff, in the fifteenth of Ed∣ward the second. Her Body was kept above ground three or four dayes, without noyance; but then it waxed unsavory, and was again buried. This Lane on both sides, is furnished with fair Houses for Marchants, and hath at the North end thereof, one other Lane, called St. Margaret Pattens, because of old time, Pattens were usually there made and sold; but of latter time, this is called Rood Lane, of a Rood there placed, in the Church-yard of St. Margaret, whilest the old Church was taken down, and again new builded; during which time, the oblations made to this Rood, were imployed towards building of the Church; But in the year 1538. about the 23. of May in the morning, the said Rood was found to have been in the night preceding (by people unknown) broken all to pieces; together, with the Tabernacle, where∣in it had bin placed. Then have ye another Lane, called Rother Lane, or Red Rose Lane, of such a signe there, now commonly called Pudding Lane, because the Butchers of East-Cheape, have their Scalding-house for Hoggs there, & their Puddings, with other fith of Beasts, are voided down that way to their Dung-boats on the Thames: In this Church you have the Sepulchers of sundry worthy men, among other of Mr. Vandepute, a very worthy Marchant, whose Son Mr. Giles Vandepute, was lately buried also there. Then on the West side of St. Mary Hill Church, is a Lane called Rope-lane of old, and after Lucas-lane, but now Love-lane; Then have you the Parish of St. Andrew Hubbart in East-Cheape; Then is there Butolph-lane, and afterwards the Church of St. George Buttolph-lane, which though small, hath divers Monu∣ments.
Of the Tenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Bridg-Ward within. WE will direct our pace downward now, and take a Survey of Bridge Ward within, so called of London-Bridge, which Bridge is a principal part of that Ward, and beginning at the Stulps on the South end by Southwark, runneth along the Bridge, and North up Bridge-street, commonly called (of the Fish Market) New Fish-street, from Fish-street Hill up Grass-street, to the North corner of Grass-Church. All the Bridge is replenished on both the sides, with large, fait, and beautiful buildings, Inhabitants for the most part Rich Marchants, and other wealthy Citizens, Mercers, and Haberdasher▪ In New Fish-street, be Fishmongers and fair Taverns; on Fish-street ill, and Grasse-street, men of divers Trades, Grocers, and Haberdashers. In Grass-street, have ye one fair Conduit of sweet water, castellated with crest and vent, made by the appointment of Thomas Hill Mayor, 1484, who gave by his Testament a hundred Marks towards the conveyance of water to this place; it was begun by his Executors in the year 1491, and finished of his goods, what∣soever it cost. On the East side of this Bridge Ward, have ye the fair Parish Church of Saint Magnus, in the which Church have been buried many men of good repute, whose Monuments are now for the most part defaced. Among others Sir Rich∣ard Morgan chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, and Morris Griffith, Bishop of Rochester, both born in Wales about the year 1556. Then is the Parish Church of St. Margarets Fish-shreet Hill; a proper Church, but Monument it hath none of any note. Up higher on this Hill, is the Parish Church of St. Leonard Milk-Church, so termed of one VVilliam Melker, an especial builder thereof, but common∣ly called Saint Leonards East-cheap, because it standeth at East-cheap co∣ner. This Church, and from thence into little East-cheap, to the East end of the said Church, is of the Bridge Ward. Then higher in Grasse-street, is the Parish Church of St. Bennet called Grass-Church, of the Herbe Market there kept; this Church also is of the Bridge Ward, and the farthest North end thereof. The Customes of Grasse-Church Market, in the Reign of Edward the third, as appears in a Book of Customes, were these: every forreign Cart laden with Corn, or Malt, coming thither to be sold, was to pay one half penny; every Forreign Cart bringing Cheee, two pence; every Cart of Corn and Cheee together, (if the Cheese be more worth than the Corn) two pence; and if the Corn be more worth than the Cheese, it was to pay a half-penny; of two Horses laden with Corn o Malt, the Bayliff had one farthing; The Carts of the Fran∣chie of the Temple, and of Saint Mary Le Grand, paid afarching; the Carr of the Hospitall of St. Iohn of Ierusalem, paid nothing of their proper goods, and if the Corn were brought by Merchants to sell again, the load paid a half penny, &c. On the West side of this Ward, at the North end of London Bridge, is a part of Thames street, which is also of this Ward, to wit, so much as of old time was called Stock-Fishmonger Row, of the Stock-Fish-mongers dwelling tere, down West to a Waer-gate, of old time called Ebgate, since Ebgate Lane, and
now the Old Swan, which is a common stair on the Thames, but the passage is very arrow, by means of encroachments. On the South side of Thames street, about the Mid-way betwixt the Bridge foot and Ebgate Lane, standeth the Fishmongers Hall, and divers other fair Hou∣ses for Merchants. These Fishmongers were sometimes of two several Companies, to wit, Stock-Fishmongers and Salt-Fishmongers. Of whoe antiquity we read that by the name of Fishmongers of London, they were for fore-stalling, &c. contrary to the Laws and constitutions of the City, fined to the King at 500 Marks, the eighteenth of King Edward the first; Moreover, that the said Fishmongers hearing of the great victory obtained by the same King against the Scots, in the six & twentieth of his Reign, made a Triumphant and solemn Shew through the City, with divers Pa∣geants, and more than a thousand Horsemen, &c. These two Companies of Stock-Fishmongers and Salt-Fishmongers, of old time had their severall Halls, to wit, in Thames street twain, in New Fish-street twai, in Old Fish-street twain, in each place one for either Company, in all six several Halls; the Company was so great, that it lies upon Records, that these Fishmongers have been jolly Citizens, and six Mayors have been of their Company in the space of four and twenty years, to wit, Walter Turk 1350, John Lofkin 1359, John Wreth, 1361, John Pechie 1362, Simon Morden 1369, and William Wallworth 1374. It followed, that in the year 1382, through the Counsel of John North hampton Draper, then being Mayor, VVilliam Essex, John More Mercer, and Richard Northbury the said Fishmongers were greatly troubled, hindred of their Liberties, and almost destroyed by combinations made against them, so that in a Parliament at London, the controversie depending between the Mayor and Aldermen of London, and the Fishmongers, Nic. Exton Speaker for the Fish∣mongers, prayeth the King to receive him and his Company into his protecti∣on for fear of corporal hurt, whereupon it was commanded, either part to keep the peace, upon pain of losing all they had; Hereupon, a Fishmonger starting up, replyed, that the complain brought against them by the movers, &c. was but matter of malice, for that the Fishmongers, in the Reign of Edward the 3d. being chief Officers of the City, had for their misdemeanors then done, com∣mitted the chief exhibitors of those Petitions to prison. In this Parliament the Fishmongers (by the Kings Charter Patents) were restored to their Liberties; Notwithstanding, in the year next following 1383, John Cavendish Fishmon∣gr, craveth the peace against the Chancellour of England, which was gran∣ted, and he put in Sureties, the Earls of Stafford and Salisbury, and challengeth the Chancellour for taking a bribe of ten pounds, for favour of Cavendish Case, which the Chancellour by Oath upon the Sacrament avoideth. In further triall, it was found, that the Chancellours man (without his Masters privity) had taken it; whereupon Cavendish was Judged to prison, and to pay the Chan∣cellour 1000 Marks for slandering him. After this, many of the Nobles assembled at Reading, to supprese the sedi∣tious Sheirs of the said John Northampion, or Combarton, late Mayor, that had attempted great and hainous enterprises, of the which he was convict; and when he stood mute nor would utter one word, it was Decreed, that he should be committed to perpetual prison, his goods confiscate to the Kings use, and that he should not come within a hundred miles of London, during his life; He was therefore sent to the Castle of Fintegall in the Confines of Cornwall; and in the mean space the Kings Servants spoiled his goods: John Moore, Richard Northbury, and others were likewise there Convict, and con∣demned to perpetual prison, and their good confiscate, for certain Congregati∣ons by them made against the Fishmongers in the City of London, as is aforesaid,
but they obtained and had the Kings pardon in the fourteenth of his Reign, as appeareth upon Record and thus were all these troubles ap∣pealed. Those Stock-Fishmongers and Salt-Fishmongers were united in the year 1536, the eight and twentieth of Henry the eighth, their Hall to be but one, in the House given unto them by Sir Iohn Cornwall, Lord Fanhope, and of Ampthull, in the Parish of Saint Michael in Crooked Lane, in the Reign of Henry the sixth. Thus much was thought remarkable to be spoken of the Fishmongers, men ignorant of their Antiquities, and not able to shew a reason why, or when they were in amity with the Goldsmiths, do give part of their Arms, &c. Neither to say ought of Sir William Walworth (the Glory of their Company) more than that he slew Jack Straw, which some do question: for the said Straw was after the overthrow of the Rebels, taken, and by judgement of the Mayor beheaded, whose confession at the Gallows is extant in Mr. Stows Annales, where also is set down the most valiant and praise-worthy act of Sir William Walworth, a∣gainst the principal Rebel Wat Tyler. On that South side of Thames street, have ye Drink-water Wharf, and Fish Wharf, in the Parish of Saint Magnus. On the North side of Thames street is Saint Martins Lane, a part of which Lane is also of this Ward, to wit, on the one side to a Well of water, and on the other side as far up as against the said Well. Then is St. Michaels Lane part whereof is also of this Ward, up to a Well there &c. Then at the upper end of New Fish-street, is a Lane turning towards St. Mi∣chaels Lane, and is called Crooked-Lane, of the crooked windings thereof; Above this Lanes end, upon Fish-street Hill, is one great House for the most prt builded with stone, which pertained sometime to Edward the black Prince, sonne to Edward the third, who was in his life time lodged there; and 'twas cal∣led the Prince of VVales his Court, which was afterward for a long time a com∣mon Hostry, having the sign of the Black Bell. Of the Eleventh Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Candle-wick Ward. WE will now see what light Antiquity can give us of Candle-wick street, or Candle-wright street Ward. It beginneth at the East end of great East-cheap, it passeth West through East-cheap to Candle-wright street, and thorough the same down to the North end of Suffolk Lane: on the South side, and down that Lane by the West end of St. Lawrence Church-yard, which is the farthest West part of that Ward; the street of Great East-cheap, is so called of the Market there kept, in the East part of the City, as VVest-cheap is a Market so called, being in the West. This East-Cheap is now a Flesh-market of Butchers, there dwelling on both sides of the street: it had sometime also Cooks mixed amongst the Btchers, and such other as sold Victuals ready dressed of all sorts; For of old time, when friends did meet, and were disposed to be merry, they never went to dine and Sup in Taverns, but to the Cooks, where they called for meat what them liked,
they alwayes sound ready dressed, and at a reasonable rate; for Vintners old ony Wine. In the year 1410. the eleventh of Henry the fourth, upon the Even of Saint Iohn Baptist▪ the Kings Sonnes, Thomas and Iohn, being in East-Cheape at Sup∣per, (or rather at break-fast; for it was after the Watch was broken up, betwixt two and three a Clock after mid-night) a great debate happened between their men, and other of the Court, which lasted one houre, till the Maior and Sheriffs, with other Citizens appead the same; For the which, afterwards, the said Maior, Aldermen and Sheriffs, were called to answer before the King, his Sons, and divers Lords, being highly moved against the City; At which time, Wil∣liam Gascoign, chief Justice, required the Maior and Aldermen, for the Citi∣zens, to put them in the Kings Grace; whereunto they answered, that they had not offended, but (according to the Law) had done their best, in stinting de∣bate and maintaining of the peace; upon which answer, the King remitted all his Ire, and dismissed them. And to prove this East-Cheape to be a place replenished with Cooks, it may appear by a Song called London lick-penny, made by Lidgate, a Monk of Bury, in the Reign of Henry the fifth, in the person of a Country-man, comming to London, and travelling thorough the same. In West-Cheape (saith the Song) he was called on to buy fine Lawn, Paris Thred, Cotton Umble, and other linnen Clothes, and such like, (he speaketh of no silk.) In Corn-hill, to buy old Ap∣parel, and Houshold-stuffe, where he was forced to buy his own Hood, which he had lost in Westminster-hall. In Candlewright-street, Drapers procred him Cheap Cloth. In East-Cheape, the Cooks cryed hot Ribs of Beef rosted, Pies well baked, and other Victuals. There was clattering of Pewter-Pots, Harp, Pipe and Sawtry; yea by cock, nay by cock, for greater Oaths were spared, some sang of Ienkin, and Julian, &c. All which Melody liked well the Passenger, but he wanted money to abide by it; and therefore gat him into Gravesend-Barge, and home into Kent. Candlewright (so called in old Records, of the Guild-hall of St. Mary Overies, and other) or Candlewick-street, took that name (as may be supposed) either of Chaundlers, or Makers of Candles, both of Wax and Tallow, for Candle-wright is a Maker of Candles, and of Wick, which is the Cotton, or yarn thereof, or otherwise which is the place where they used to work them, as scalding wick by the Stocks-Market, was called of the Poulterers dressing and scalding their Poultry there. And in divers Countries, Dairy-houses, or Cottages, wherein they make Butter and Cheese, are usually called Wickes. There dwelled also of old time, divers Weavers of Woollen Clothes, brought in by Edward the 3d; for I read that in the four and twentieth of his Reign, the Weavers, brought out of Flanders, were appointed their meetings to be in the Church-yard of St. Lawrence Poultney; and the Weavers of Brabant, in the Church-yard of St. Mary Sommerset: There were then in this City, Weavers of divers sorts, to wit, of Drapery or Tapery, and Nappery: these Weavers of Candlewicke street, being in short time worn out, their place is now possessed by rich Drapers, Sellers of Woollen Cloth, &c. On the Northside of this Ward, at the West end of East-Cheape, have ye St. Clements Lane; a part whereof, (on both sides) is of Candlewicke street Ward, to wit, somewhat North, beyond the Parish Church of St. Clement in East-cheape. Though this Church be small, yet there are some comely Monuments in it, a∣mong others of William Chartney, and William Overy, who founded a Chantry there. Next is St. Nicholas Lane, for the most part on both sides, of this Ward, al∣most to St. Nicholas Church.
Then is Abchurch Lane, which is on both sides, almost wholly of this Ward: the Parish Church there (called of St. Mary Abchurch, Apechurch, or Upchurch, as I have read it) standeth somewhat near unto the South end thereof, on a ri∣sing ground. It is a fair Church, Simon de Winchcombe, sounded a Chauntery there, the 19th of Richard the 2d, Iohn Littleton ounded another, and Thomas Hondon another. Here are likewise some remarkable Monuments, particularly of Sir Iames, and Sir Iohn Branch, both Lord Mayors of London, about the year 1570. On the South side of this Ward, beginning again at the East, is St. Michaels lane; which lane is almost wholly of this Ward, on both sides down towards Thames street; to a Well or Pump there; on the East side of this Lane is Crooked Lane aforesaid, by St. Michaels Church, towards New Fishstreet. One of the most ancient Houses in this Lane, is called the Leaden Porch, and be∣longed sometime to Sir John Merston, Knight, the first of Edward the 4th; It is now called the Swan in Crooked Lane, possessed of strangers, and retailing of Rhenish Wine. The Parish Church of this St. Michaels, was sometime but a small and homely thing, standing upon part of that ground, wherein now standeth the Parsonage House, and the ground thereabout was a filthy plot, by reason of the Butchers in East-Cheape, who made the same their Lay∣stall. VV. de Burgo, gave two Messuages to that Church in Candlewick street, 1317. John Loveken, Stock-fish monger, fout times Maior, builded (in the same ground) this fair Church of St. Michael, and was there buried in the Quire, un∣der a fair Tombe, with the Images of him and his Wise in Alabaster: the said Church hath bin since increased, with a new Quire, and side Chappels by Sir W. Walworth, Stock-fishmonger, Maior, sometime Servant to the said John Loveken; Also the Tombe of Loveken was removed, and a flat stone of gray marble, garnished with Plates of Copper, laid on him, as it yet remaineth in the Body of the Church. This William Walworth is reported by some, to have slain Jack Straw; but Jack Straw being afterward taken, was first adjudged by the said Mayor, and then executed by the losse of his head in Smithfield: True it is, that this Wil∣liam Walworth, being a man wise, learned, and of an incomparable Manhood, arrested Wat Tyler, a presumptuous Rebel, upon whom no man durst lay hand, whereby he delivered the King and Kingdom, from most wicked Tyranny of Traytors: the Mayor arrested him on the head with a sound blow; whereupon, Wat Tylar furiously stroke the Mayor with his Dagger, but hurt him not, by reason he was well armed, The Maior having received his stroke drew his Ba∣sliard, and grievously wounded Wat in the Neck; and withall, gave him a great blow on the Head; in the which Conflict, an Esquire of the Kings House, called John Cavendish, drew his Sword, and wounded Wat twice or thrice, even to the death, and Wat spurring his Horse, cryed to the Commons to revenge him: the Horse beats him about eighty foot from the place, and there he fell down half dead, and by and by, they which attended on the King, environed him about, so as he was not seen of his Company; many of them thrust him in, in divers places of his Body, and drew him into the Hospital of St. Bartho∣lomew; from whence again the Maior caused him to be drawn into Smithfield, and there to be beheaded: In reward of his Service, (the people being dis∣persed) the King commanded the Maior to put a Basenet on his Head; and the Mayor requesting why he should so do, the King answered, he being much bound unto him, would make him Knight; The Mayor answered, that he was neither worthy, nor able to take such an Estate upon him; for he was but a Marchant, and had to live by his Marchandize only: Notwithstanding, the King made him to put on his Basenet, and then with a Sword in both his hands,
he strongly struck him on the Neck, as the manner was then, and the same day he made three other Citizens Knights (for his sake) to wit, John Philpot, Ni∣cholas Brember, and Robert Launde, Aldermen. The King gave to the Maior, a hundred pound Land by year, and to each of the other forty pound Land, year∣ly, to them and their-Heires for ever. After this, in the same year, the said Sir William Walworth, founded in the said Parish Church of St. Michael, a Colledge, of a Master and nine Priests, or Chaplains, and deceasing 1385. was there buried in the North Chappel by the Quire; but his Monument being (amongst other by bad people) defaced in the Reign of Edward the sixth; and again, since renewed by the Fishmongers, for lack of knowledge, whatsoever before had been written in this Epitaph, they followed a fabulous Book, and wrote Iack Straw, instead of Wat Tylar. It hath also been, and is now grown to a common opinion, that in reward of this service done by the said William Wallworth, against the Rebel, that King Richard added to the Arms of this City (which was Argent, a plane Crosse Gules) a Sword, or Dagger, (for so they terme it) whereof Mr. Iohn Stow makes a doubt; but to the contrary, he alledgeth, that in the fourth year of Richard the second, in a full Assembly made in the upper Chamber of the Guild-hall, summoned by this William Walworth, then Mayor, as well of Alder∣men, as of the Common Councel, in every Ward, for certain affaires concer∣ning the King, it was there by common consent agreed and ordained, that the old Seal of the Office of the Majoralty of the City, being very small, old, un∣apt, and unomely for the Honour of the City, should be broken, and one other new should be had, which the said Mayor commanded to be made arti∣ficially, and honourably for the exercise of the said Office thereafter, in place of the other. In which new Seal, besides the Images of Peter and Paul, which of old were rudely engraven, there should be under the feet of the said Ima∣ges, a Shield of the Arms of the said City, perfectly graven with two Lyons supporting the same, and two Serjeants of Arms; in the other part, one, and two Tabernacles; in which, above, should stand two Angels, between whom (above the said Images of Peter and Paul) should be set the Glorious Virgin. This being done, the old Seal of the Office was delivered to Richard Odiham, Cham∣berlain, who brake it, and in placethereof, was delivered the new Seal to the said Mayor, to use in his Office of Majoralty, as occasion should require. This new Seal seemeth to be made before William Walworth was Knighted; for he is not there intituled Sir, as afterwards he was; and certain it is, that the same new Seal then made, is now in use, and none other in that Office of the Majoralty, which may suffice to answer the former supposition, without shewing of any evidence sealed with the old Seal, which was the Crosse, and Sword of St. Paul, and not the Dagger of William Walworth. In this Church are sundry ancient Monuments, of Mayors and Sheriffs of London. West from this St. Michaels Lane, is St. Martins Orgar Lane, by Candlewick-street, which lane is, on both sides down to a Well, replenished with fair and large Houses for Marchants; and it is of this Ward. One of which Houses was sometime called Beauchamps Inne, as pertaining unto them of that Family. Thomas Arundel, Arch Bishop of Canterbury commonly, for his time was lodged there. The Parish Church of St. Martin Orgar, is a small thing. William Crowmer, Maior, builded a proper Chappel on the South side thereof, and was buried there in an ancient Tombe 1533. where are some others, of Maiors and Aldermen. Then is there one other Lane, called St. Lawrence, of the Parish Church there. This Lane, down to the South side of the Church-yard, is of Candlewick street VVard.
The Parish Church of St. Laurence, was increased with a Chappel of Jesus, by Thomas Cole, for a Master and Chaplain; the which Chappel and Parish Church, was made a Colledge of Iesus, and of Corpus Christi, for a Master and seven Chaplains, by Iohn Poultney Maior, and was confirmed by Edward the third, the twentieth of his Raign; of him was this Church called St. Laurence Poultney in Candlewick street; which Colledge was valued at seventy nine pounds, se∣venteen shillings eleven pence, and was surrendred in the Reign of Edward the sixth. In this Church, Robert and Henry Radcliffe, Earls of Sussex, lie buried. Of the Twelfth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Wallbrook Ward. WE will now proceed, and make a Perambulation of Walbrook VVard, which beginneth at the vvest end of Candlewick Street VVard, It run∣neth down Candlewick street, vvest toward Budge Rowe; It hath on the North side thereof, St. Swithens Lane, so called of St. Swithens, a Parish Church by London-stone; This Lane is replenished (on both the sides) with fair builded Houses, and is vvholly of VVallbrook VVard. The said Parish Church of St. Swthen, standeth at the South vvest corner of this Lane; Licence vvas procu∣red, to new build and increase the said Church and Steeple, in the year 1420. Sir Iohn Hend Draper, and Maior, was an especial Benefactor thereunto, as ap∣peareth by his Arms in the Glasse vvindows, even in the tops of them, which is in a Field Argent, a Chief Azure, a Lyon passant Argent, a Cheueron Azure, three Escalops Argent; Ralph Ioceline, Maior of London, among others, hath a Monument in this Church, having bin a benefactor to it. On the South side of this high street, near unto the Channel, is pitched up∣right a great stone, called London stone, fixed in the ground very deep, fastned with Barres of Iron, and otherwise so strongly set, that if Carts do run against it, through negligence, the VVheels be broken, and the Stone it self unshaken. The cause vvhy this Stone was there set, the time when, or other memory there∣of is none, but that the same hath long continued there, is manifest, namely since (or rather before) the Conquest; for in the end of a fair written Gospel Book, given to Christs Church in Canterbury, by Ethelstane, King of the vvest Saxons, mention is made of Lands and Rents in London, belonging to the said Church, whereof one parcel is described to lie near unto London Stone. Of latter time we read, that in the year of Christ 1135. the first of King Stephen, a fire, which began in the house of one Ailward, near unto London, stone, consumed all East to Ealdgate, in which fire the Priory of the Holy Trinity was burnt, and vvest to St. Erkenwalds shrine in Pauls Church, and these be the Eldest Notes that I read thereof. Some have said, this stone to be set there, as a Mark in the middle of the Ci∣ty within the Wall, but in truth it standeth far nearer to the River of Thames, than to the Wall of the City.
Some others have said, the same to be set, for the tendering and making of payment by Debtors to their Creditors, at their appointed dayes and times, till of latter time, payments were more usually made at the Font in Ponts Church, and now most commonly at the Royal Exchange; Some again have imagined, the same to be set up by Iohn or Thomas London-stone dwelling there against it; but more likely it is, that such men have taken name of the Stone, than the Stone of them: as did John at Noke, and Thomas at Stile, William at Wall or at Well &c. But the most probable opinion, is, that it was placed there by the Romans for a Milliare, as was observed elswhere in this Discourse. Down West from this Parish Church, and from London-stone, have ye Wall∣broke corner, from whence runneth up a street North to the Stocks called Wal∣brook; because it standeth on the East side of the same Brook by the Bank thereof, and the whole Ward taketh name of that street. On the East side of this street, and at the North corner thereof, is the Stocks Market, which had this beginning. About the year of Christ 1282, Henry Wallis Mayor, caused divers houses in this City to be builded towards the maintenance of London-Bridge, namely, in one void place neare unto the Parish Church called Wooll-Church; On the North side thereof, where sometime (the way being very large and broad) had stood a pair of Stocks for punishment of offenders; This building took name of those Stooks, and was appointed (by him) to be a Market-place for Fish & Flesh, in the midst of the City: other Houses be builded in other pla∣ces, by Patent of Edward the first it doth appear, dated the tenth of his Reign. After this, in the year 1322, the seventeenth of Edward the second, a Decree was made by Hamond Chickwell Mayor, that none should sell fish or flesh, out of the Markets appointed, to wit, Bridge-street, East-cheap, Old Fish-street, St. Nicholas Shambles, and the said Stocks, on pain to forfeit such fish or flesh as were there sold, for the first time; and the second time to lose their Freedom: Which Act was made by commandment of the King, under his Letters Patents, dated at the Tower the 17th of his Reign, & then was this Stocks let to Farm for forty six pounds thirteen shillings four pence by year: this Stocks Market was again be∣gun to be builded, in the year 1410, in the eleaventh of Henry the fourth, and was finished in the year next following. In the year 1507, the same was rented fifty six pounds nineteen shillings ten pence; And in the year 1543, John Cotes being Mayor, there was in this Stocks Market, for Fishmongers five and twenty Boards or Stalls, rented yearly to 34 pounds, 13 shillings. 4 pence. There was for Butchers 18 Boards or stalls rented at 41 pounds, 16 shillings 4 pence, and there were also Chambers above sixteen, rented at five pounds, thir∣teen shillings four pence, in all, eighty two pounds three shillings. Next unto this Stocks is the Parish Church of St. Mary VVool-Church, so cal∣led of a Beam placed in the Church-yard, which was thereof called Wool-Church Haw, of the Tronage or weighing of Wooll there used, and to verifie this, we find amongst the Customs of London written in French, in the Reign of Edward the second, a Chapter intituled, Les Customes de VVooll-Church Haw, wherein is set down, what was there to be paid for every parcel of Wooll weighed; this Tronage, or weighing of Wooll, till the sixth of Richard the second, was there continued: John Church-man then builded the Custome-house upon VVooll Key, to serve for the said Tonnage as is before shewed in Tower-street Ward. This Church is reasonable fair and large, and was afterwards new builded, by Licence granted in the twentieth of Henry the sixth, with condition to be builded fifteen foot from the Stocks Market, for sparing of light to the said Stocks, the Parson of this Parish is to have four Marks the year, for Tyth of the said Stocks, paid him by the Masters of the Bridge-house, by a special Decree, made the second of Henry the seventh. In the year about 1500, John VVingar Lord Mayor, gave two Basons of silver to this Church; And Richard Shore Sheriff of London made the Porch at the West end: they lye both there entombed.
From the Stocks Market, and this Parish Church East, up into Lombard∣street, some four or five houses on a side, and also on the South side of VVooll-Church have ye Bear-Binder Lane, a part whereof is of this VVallbrook Ward. Then down sower in the street called Wallbrook, is one other fair Church of St. Stephen, builded new on the East side thereof; for the old Church stood on the West side, in place where now standeth the Parsonage House, and there∣fore so much nearer to the Brook, even on the Bank. This Church was finished in the year 1439. The breadth thereof is sixty se∣ven foot, and length one hundred twenty five foot, the Church-yard ninty foot in length, and thirty seven in breadth, and more, Robert VVhittingham (made Knight of the Bath) in the yeer 1432, purchased the Patronage of this Church, from John Duke of Bedford, Unkle to Henry the sixth; and Edward the fourth, in the second of his Reign, gave it to Sir Richard Lee then Mayor, who il∣eth there hansomely entomb'd, having bin twice Lord Maior, with divers others. Lower down from this Parish Church, be ivers fair houses, namely one, wherein of late Sir Richard Baker, a Knight of Kent was lodged; and wherein also dwelled Mr. Thomas Gore, a Merchant famous for Hospitality. On the West side of this VValbrook street, over against the Stocks Market, is a part of the High street, called the Poultry; On the South side West, till over against Saint Mildreds Church, and the Scalding wike, is of this Ward. Then down again Wallbrook street, some small distance, in Buckles Bury, a street so called of Buckle, that sometime was owner thereof; part of which street on both sides, three or four Houses, to the course of the Brook, is of this Ward, and so down VValbrook street, to the South corner, from whence West, down Budge row, some small distance, to an Alley, and thorow that Aley South, by the West end of St. Johns Church upon VValbrook, by the South side and East end of the same, again to VValbrook corner. This Parish Church is called, St John upon VValbrook, because the West end thereof is on the very bank of Walbrook by Horshooe Bridge, in Horshooe-Bridge street. This Church was also lately new builded: for about the year 1412, Licence was granted by the Mayor and Communalty, to the Parson and Parish, for the inlarging thereof, with a piece of ground on the North part of the Quire, one and twenty foot in length, seventeen foot in breadth, and three inches; and on the South side of the Quite, one foot of the common soyle. On the South side of Walbrook Ward, from Candle-wick street, in the mid∣way between London-stone and Walbrook corner, is a little Lane with a Turn-Pike in the middest thereof, and in the same a hansome Parish Church, called S. Mary Bothaw, or Boat-Haw, by the Erbar. This Church being near unto Downgate, on the River of Thames, hath the addition of Bothaw or Boat-haw, of near adjoyning to an Haw or Yard, wherein (of old time) Boats were made and landed from Downgate to be mended, as may be supposed; for other reason I find none, why it should be so called. This Church hath one remarkable thing in it, viz. The Monument of the first Lord May or of London, Sir Henry Fitz Alwin; His dwelling House remains yet in the Parish, but divided to di∣vers Tenements; Mr. Stow relates, that he was buried in the holy Trinity with∣in Algate, but it is far more probable that he was buried here, because his Arms are both upon the Gravestone and the Windows.
Of the Thirteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Dowgate Ward. WE will now, following the thred of our Discourse, descend to Down∣gate Ward, which beginneth at the South end of Wallbrook Ward, over against the East corner of St. Iohns Church upon Walbrook, and descen∣deth on both the sides to Downgate or Dowgate, on the Thames, and is so called of that down going or descending thereunto, and of this Downgate the Ward taketh name; This Ward turneth into Thames street Westward, some ten Houes on a side, to the course of Walbrooke, but East in Thames street (on both sides) to Ebgate Lane, or Old Swan, the Land-side whereof hath many Lanes turning up, as shall be shewed when we come to them. But first to begin with the High street called Dowgate: at the upper end there∣of, is a fair Conduit of Thames Water, castellated, and made in the year 1568, at the charges of the Citizens, and is called, the Conduit upon Dowgate. The de∣scent of this stret is such, that in the year 1574, on the fourth of September in the afternoon, there fell a storm of rain, where-through the Channels suddenly aroe and ran with such a swift course towards the Common-shores, that a Lad of eighteen years old, minding to have leapt over the Channel near unto the said Conduit, was taken with the stream, and carried from thence towards the Thames, with such a violence, that no man, with staves, or otherwise, could stay him till he came against a Cart-wheele, that stood in the said Water-gate; before which time he was drowned and stark dead. On the West side of this street is Tallow-Chandlers Hall, a hansome house, which Company was incorporated in the second year of Edward the fourth. Somewhat lower standeth the Skinners Hall, a fair house, which was some∣times called Copped Hall by Downgate, in the Parish of St. John upon Wall∣brook. In the nineteenth year of Edward the second, Ralph Cobham possessed it, with five shops, &c. This Company of Skinners in London, was incorporate by Edward the third, in the first of his Reign; they had two Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi viz. one at St. Mary Spittle, the other at St. Mary Bethlem without Bishopsgate. Richard the second, in the eighteenth of his Reign, granted them to make their two Bro∣therhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Christi of Skinners; divers Royal persons were named to be Founders, and Brethren of this Frater∣nity, to wit, Kings six, Dukes nine, Earls two, Lords one; Kngs, Edward the third, Richard the second, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth. This Fraternity had also once every year on Corpus Christi day afternoon a a proession, which passed through the principal streets of the City, wherein was borne more than one hundred Torches of Wax, (costly garnished) burning light, and above two hundred Clerks and Priests in Surplesses and Coaps, sing∣ing; After the which, were the Sheriffs servants, the Clarks of the Compters, Chaplains for the Sheriffs, the Mayors Sergeants, the Councel of the City, the Mayor and Aldermen in Scarlet and then the Skinners in their best Liveries. Then lower, was a Colledge of Priests, called Jesus Commons, a House well furnished with Brasse, Pewter, Napery, Plate, &c. besides a fair Library well stored with Books; all which of old time were given to a number of Priests
that should keep Commons there; and as one left his pace (by death or o∣therwise) another should be admitted into his room; but this Order within these 70. years, being discontinued, the said House was dissolved, and turned into Tenements. Down lower have ye Elbowe Lane, and at the corner thereof, was one great Stone-house, called Old-hall; it is now taken down, and divers fair Houses of Timber placed there: This was sometimes pertaining to William de pont le Arch, and by him given the Priory of St. Mary Overy in Southwark, in the Reign o Henry the first. In this Elbow-lane, is the Inholders Hall, and other fair Houses: this Lane runneth West, and suddenly turneth South, into Thames-street, and therefore (of that bending) is called Elbow-lane: on the East side of this Downgate-street, is the great old House before spoken of, called the Erbar, neere to the Church of St. Mary Bothaw; Geffery Scroop held it by the gift of Edward the third, in the fourteenth of his Reign: It belonged since, to Iohn Nevel, Lord of Raby; then to Richard Nevel, Earl of Warwick; Nevel, Earl of Salisbury, was lodged there, 1457. Then it came to George Duke of Clarence, and his Heires Males, by the gift of Edward the fourth, in the fourteenth yea of his Reign. It was lately builded by Sir Thomas Pullson Maior, and was af∣terward Inhabited by Sir Francis Drake, that famous Navigator; Next to this great House, is Lane turning to Bush-lane, (of old time called Carter-lane, of Carts, and Carmen having Stables there) and now called Chequer-lane, or Chequer-Alley, of an Inne called the Chequer. In Thamesstreet, on the Thames side West from Downgate, is Greenwitch lane, of old time so called, and now Fryer lane, of such a signe there set up. In this Lane is the Ioyners Hall, and other fair Houses. Then is Granthams Lane, so called of Iohn Grantham, sometime Maior, and owner thereof, whose house was very large and strong, builded of stone, as ap∣peareth by Gates Arched yet remaining; Ralph Dodmer, first a Brewer, then a Mercer, Maior 1529. dwelled there, and kept his Majoralty in that house: it is now a Brew-house, as it was before. Then is Down-gate, whereof is spoken in another place; East from this Downegate, is Cosin lane, named of one VVilliam Cosin, that dwelled there in the fourth of Richard the second, as divers his Predecessors, Father, Granfa∣ther, &c. had done before him; VVilliam Cosin was one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1306. That House standeth at the South end of the Lane, having an old and Arti∣ficial conveyance, of Thames water into it; And is now a Dye-house, called Lambards Message; Adjoyning to that House, there was lately erected an Engine, to convey  hames water unto Downgate Conduit aforesaid. Next to this Lane, on the East, is the Steel-yard (as they terme it) a place for Marchants of Almain, that used to bring hither, as well Wheat, Rie, and o∣ther Grain, as Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tarre, Flax, Hemp, Linnen Cloth▪ Wainscots, Wax, Steel, and other profitable Marchandizes; unto these Mar∣chan sin the year 1259. Henry the third, at the Request of his Brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, King of Almain, granted, that all and singular the Marchants; having a House in the City of London, commonly called Guilda Aula Theo∣nicorum, should be maintained and upholden through the whole Realm, by al such freedoms, and free usages or Liberties▪ as by the King and his Noble Pro∣genitors time they had, and enjoyed, &c. Edward the first renewed and con∣firmed that Charter of Liberties granted by his Father; And in the tenth year of the same Edward, Henry Wllis being Mayor, a great Controversie did arise be∣tween the said Mayor, and the Marchants of the Haunce of Almaine, about the reparations of Bishops-gate, then likely to fall; for that the said Marchants enjoyed divers priviledges, in respect of maintaining the said Gate, which they now denyed to repair; for the appeasing of which controversie, the King sent
his Writ to the Treasurer, and Baron of his Exchequer commanding that they should make Inquisition thereof; Before whom the Marchants being called, when they were not able to discharge themselves, sh they enjoyed the Liber∣ties to them granted for the same, a precept was sent to the Maior and She∣riffs, to distrain the said Marchants to make reparations; namely, Gerard Mar∣hod, Alderman of the Haunce, Ralph de Cussarde a Citizen of Colen, Ludero de Denauar, a Burgesse of Trivar, Iohn of Aras a Burgesse of Trivon, Bartram of Hamburgh, Godestalk of Hundoudale, a Burgesse of Trivon, Iohn de Deal a Burgesse of Munster, then remaining in the said City of London, for themselves, and all other Marchants of the Haunce, and so they granted 210 Marks sterling, to the Maior and Citizens; and undertook, that they and their Successors, should (from time to time) repair the said Gate, and bear the third part of the Charges in money, and men to defend it, when need were. And for this Agreement, the said Maior and Citizens, granted to the said Marchants their liberties, which till of late they have enjoyed; as namely, a∣mongst other, that they might lay up their Grain, which they brought into this Realm, in Inns, and sell it in their Garners, by the space of forty dayes, after they had laid it up; except by the Mayor and Citizens they were expresly for∣bidden, because of Dearth, or other reasonable occasions. Also they might have their Aldermen, as they had bin accustomed; provided alwayes, that he were of the City, and presented to the Maior and Aldermen of the City, so oft as any should be chosen, and should take an Oath before them, to maintain Justice in their Courts, and to behave themselves in their Office, according to Law, and as it stood with the Customs of the City. Thus much for their priviledges, whereby it appeareth, that they were great Marchants of Corne, brought out of the East parts hither; insomuch, that the Occupiers of Husbandry in this Land, were enorced to complain of them, for bringing in such abundance, when the Corn of this Realm was at an easie price; whereupon it was ordained by Parliament, That no person should bring into any part of this Realm, by way of Marchandize, Wheat, Rie, or Barley, grow∣ing out of the said Realm, when the Quarter of Wheat exceeded not the price of six shilling eight pence, Rie four shillings the Quarter, and Barley three shillings the Quarter, upon forfeiture one half to the King, the other half to the seisor thereof: These Marchants of the Hawnce, had their Guild-Hall in Thames-street, in the place aforesaid by the said Cosin-lane: Their Hall is large, buil∣ded of Stone, with three Arched Gates towards the street; the middlemost whereof, is far bigger than the other, and is seldom opened, the other two be mured up, the same is now called the Old Hall. In the 6th of Richard the 2d, they hired one House next adjoyning to their Old Hall, which sometime belonged to Richard Lions, a famous Lapidary, one of the Sheriffs of London in the 49 of Edward the 3d; and in the 4th of Richard the 2d, by the Rebels of Kent, drawn out of that House, and beheaded in West-Cheape: This also was a great House, with a large Wharf on the Thames; and the way thereunto was called Windgoose, or Wildgoose-lane, which is now called Windgoose-Alley; for that the same Alley is (for the most part) builded on by the Styliard Marchants. The Abbat of St. Albans, had a Messuage here, with a key given to him, 34. of Henry the 6th. Then is one other great House, which sometime pertained to Iohn Rainwel, Stock-Fishmonger, Maior, and it was by him given to the Maior and Commo∣nalty, to the end, that the profits thereof, should be disposed in deeds of piety; which House, in the 15th of Edward the 4th, was cfirmed unto the said Mar∣chants, in manner following, viz. It is ordered by our Soveraign Lord, and his Parliament, that the said Mar∣chants of Amain▪ being of the Company, called the Guild-hall Theutonicorum, (or the Flemish Geld) that now be, or hereafter shall be, shall have, hold, and enjoy to
them and their Successors for ever, the said place, called the Steel-house, yiel∣ding to the Maior and Commonalty, an annual Rent of threescore and ten pounds, three shillings, foure pence, &c. In the year 1551, the 5th of Edward the 6th, through complaint of the Eng∣lish Marchants, the liberty of the Steel-yard Marchants, was seized into the Kings hands, and so it resteth. Then is Church-lane, at the West end of Alhollowes Church, called Alhollowds the more in Thames-street, for a difference from Alhollowes the lesse, in the same street; It is also called Alhollowes ad faenum in the Ropery, because Hay was sold near thereunto, at Hay-Wharf, and Ropes of old time made and sod in the high street: This is a fair Church, with a large Cloyster on the South side thereof a∣bout their Church-yard, but fouly defaced and ruinated. Dr. Lichfield, a learned man, and an Authour, who died 1447. lieth here buried, with other Bene∣factors. At the East end of this Church goeth down a Lane, called Hay Wharf-lane, now lately a great Brew-house, builded there by one Pot; Hen, Compion, Esq a Beere-Brewer, used it, & Abraham his Son, since possessed it: Then was there one other Lane, sometime called Woolseys Gate, now out of use, for the lower part thereof, upon the Bank of Thames, is builded by the late Earl of Shrewsbury; & the other end is builded on, & stopped up by the Chamberlain of London. I. Butler, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1420. dwelled there; He appointed his house to be sold, and the price thereof to be given to the poor; it was of Alhollowes Parish the lesse. Then is there the said Parish-Church of Alhollowes called the Lesse, and by some Alhollowes on the Cellars; for it standeth on Vauts, it is said to be builded by Sir Iohn Poultney, sometimes Mayor: The Steeple and Quire of this Church, stand on an Arched Gate, being the entry to a great House, called Cold Harborough, the Quire of late being fallen down, is now again at length, in the year 1594. by the Parishioners new builded. Touching this Cold Harborough, I finde, that in thirteenth of Edward the second, Sir Iohn Abel, Knight, demised, or let unto Henry Stow, Draper, all that his Capital Messuage, called the Cold Harborough, in the Parish of All Saints ad fanum, & all the putenances within the Gate, with the Key which Rob. Hart∣ford Citizen, Son to W. Hartford, had, & ought, & the foresaid Rob. paid for it Rent, 335. the year. This Ro. Hartford being owner thereof, as also of other Lands in Surrey, deceasing without issue Male, left two Daughters his Co-heires, to wit, Idonia, married to Sir Ralph Biggot, and Maude married to Sir Stephen Cosenton Knights, between whom the said House & Lands were parted. After the which Io. Bigot Sonne to the said Sir Ralph, & Sir Iohn Cosentn, did ell their Moyeties of Cold Harborough unto Iohn Poultney, Sonne of Adam Poultney, the 8th of Edward the 3d. This Sir John Poultney dwelling in this House, and being four times Mayor, the said House took the name of Poultneys Inne; notwithstanding this, Sir John Poultney, the 21. of Edward the 3d, by his Charter gave and con∣firmed to Humphrey de Bohune, Earl of Hereford, and Essex, his whole Tene∣ment, called Cold Harborough, with all the Tenements and Key adjoyning, and appurtenances sometime pertaining to Robert de Hereford, on the way called Hay-wharf Lane, &c. for one Rose at Midsommer, to him and his Heires, for all services, if the same were demanded, This Sir John Poultney deceased 1349. and left issue, by Margaret his Wife, William Poultney, who dyed without is∣sue; and Margaret his Mother was married to Sir Nicholas Lovel Knight &c. Philip St. Cleare, gave two Messuages, pertaining to this Cold Harbrough, in the Ropery, towards the enlarging of the Parish Church, and Church-yard of Al-Saints, called the lesse, in the 20. of Richard the second. In the year 1397. the 21. of Richard the 2d. John Holland, Earl of Huntington, was lodged there, and Richard the second his Brother, dined with him, it was
then counted a right fair and stately house; But in the next year following, I finde, that Edmund, Earl of Cambridge, was there lodged, notwithstanding, the said house still retained the name of Poulneys Inne, in the Reign of Henry the sixth, the 26 of his Reign. It belonged since to H. Holland, Duke of Excester, and he was lodged there, in the year 1472. In the year 1485. Richard the third, by his Letters Patents, granted and gave to John VVrith, alias Garter, principal King of Arms of English men, and to the rest of the Kings Heralds, and Purse∣vants of Arms, all that Messuage, with the appurtenances called Cold Harber, in the Parish of Al-Saints the little in London, and their Successors for ever, Dated at VVestminster, the second of March, Anno regni sui primo, without fine or fee. How the said Heraulds departed therewith, I have not read; ut in the Reign of Henry the eighth, the Bishop of Durhams hous neer Charing Crosse, being ta∣ken into the Kings hand, Cuthbert Tunstall, Bishop of Durham, was lodged in this Cold Harber; since the which time it hath belonged to the Earls of Shrews∣bury, by composition, (as is supposed) from the said Cuthbert Tunstall. The last deceaed Ear took it down, and in place thereof, builded a great number of mall Tenements, now letten out for great Rents, to people of all sorts. Then is the Dyers-hall, which Company was made a Brother-hood and a Guild, in the fourth Henry the sixth, and appointed to consist o a Gardian, or Warden, and a Communalty, the twelvth of Edward the fourth. Then be there divers large Brew-houses, and others, till you come to Ebgate Lane, where that Ward endeth in the East; On the North side of Thames-street, be divers Lanes also, the first is at the South end of Elbow Lane, before spoken of, West from Downgate, over against Greenwich-lane, then be divers fair Houses for Mar∣chants, and others all along that side; The next Lane East from Downgate, is called Bush-lane, which turneth up to Candlewick-street, and is of Down-gate Ward. Next is Suffolk, lane, likewise turning up to Candlewick-street, in this Lane is one notable Grammar School, founded in the year 1561. by the Ma∣ster, Wardens, and Assistants of the Marchant-Taylors, in the Parish of St. Law∣rence Poultney, Richard Hills, sometimes Master of that Company, having be∣fore given 500 l. toward the purchase of an House, called the Mannor of the Rose, sometime belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the said School is kept. Then is there one other Lane, which turneth up to St. Lawrence-hill, and to the South vvest Corner of St. Lawrence Church-yard, then another Lane, called Poultney-lane, that goeth up of this Ward to the South-East corner of St. Law∣rence Church-yard, and so down again, and to the West corner of St. Martin Orgar lane, and over against Ebgate-lane; and this is all of Downgate-vvard, the thirteenth in number, lying East from the Water-course of VVallbrooke, and hat hnot any one House on the West side of the said Brook. This Dowgate vvard is more considerable then others, in divers things; for it hath more Halls then any other; it hath also the Great Hans, or the Teutonique Guild, call'd now the Stil-yard. Mr. John Robinson, who hath his House in Milk-street, is lately made the Alderman of this VVard, a generous, discreet, and wor∣thy Gentleman, being of the Company of the Turkie, or Levantine Marchants.
Of the Fourteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Vintry Ward. THe Wards spoken of hitherto may besaid to lye on the East. Now I am to treat of the other Ward twelve in number, all lying on the West side of the course of Wallbrook, and first of the Vintry Ward, so cal∣led of Vintners, and of the Vintry, a part of the Bank of the River of Thames, where the Merchants of Bourdeaux craned their Wines out of Lighters, and other Vessels, and there landed and made sale of them, within forty daies after; until the twenty eighth of Edward the first, at which time the said Mer∣chants complained, that they could not fell their Wines, paying poundage, nei∣ther hire Houses or Cellars to lay them in: and it was redressed by virtue of the Kings Writ, directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, dated at Carlaveroke or Carlile, since the which time, many fair and large houses (with Vaults and Cellars for stowage of Wines and lodging of Burdeaux Merchants) have been builded, in place where before time were Cooks houses:▪ for Ftz Stephen, in the Reign of Henry the second, writeth, that upon the Rivers side, between the Wine in Ships, and the Wine to be sold in Taverns, was a common Cooks row, &c. as in another place I have set down. Whereby it appears, that in those daies, (and till of late times) every man lived according to his own professed Trade, not any one interrupting another▪ The Cooks dressed meat, and sold no Wine; and the Taverner sold Wine, but dressed o meat for sale, &c. This Ward beginneth in the East, at the West end of Downgate Ward, at the Water-course of Walbrook, which parteth them, to wit, at Granthams Lane on the Thames side, and at Elbow-Lane on the Lands side, it runneth along in Thames street West, some three houses beyond the Old Swan a Brew-house; and on the Land side, some three Houses West, beyond Saint Iames at Garlick Hithe. In breadth, this Ward stretcheth from the Vintry North, to the Wall of the West gate of the Tower Royal, the other North part is of Cordwainer-street Ward. Out of this Royal street by the South gate of Tower Royal, runneth a small street East to St. Iohns upon Walbrook, which street is called Horseshooe-Bridge, of such a Bridge sometime over the Brook there, which is now vaulted over, and pavd. Then from the South gate West, runneth one other street, called Knight-riders street, by Saint Thomas Apostles Church, on the North side, and Wrgwren Lare, by the said Church, at the West end thereof, and to the East end of Trinity Church in the said Knight-riders street, where this Ward endeth, on that South side the street; but on the North side it runneth no farther than the corner a∣gainst the new builded Taverne, and other Houses, in a plot of ground where sometime stood Ormond place; yet have ye one other Lane, lower down in Roy∣all-street, stretching forth from over against Saint Michaels Church, to and by the North side of Saint Iames Church by Garlick Hithe, this is called, Kerion Lane; and thus much for the bounds of the Vintry Ward. Now on the Thames side, West from Granthams Lane, have ye Herbert Lane, or Brickles Lane, so cal∣led of Iohn Brickles, sometimes owner thereof.
Then is Simpsons Lane, of one Simpson; or Emperours head Lane, of such a Sign: then the Three Cranes Lane, so called, not only of a Sign of three Cranes at a Ta∣verne door, but rather of three strong Cranes of Timber placed on the Vintry Wharf, by the Thames side, to Crane up Wines there as is aforesaid; this Lane wa of old time, to wit, the ninth of Richard the second, called the Painted Ta∣vern Lane, of the Tavern being painted. Then next over against St. Martins Church, is a large House builded of Stone and Timber, with Vaults for the stowage of Wines, and is called the Vin∣try; There dwelled John Gisers Vintner, Mayor of London, and Constable of the Tower; and then was Henry Picard, Vintner, Mayor; In this house Henry Pi∣card feasted four Kings in one day, as is shewed before. Then next is Vanners Lane, so called of Vanner that was owner thereof; it is now called Church Lane, of the coming up from St. Martins Church. Next is Proad-Lane, for that the same is broader for the passage of Carts from the Vintry Wharf, than be the other Lanes. At the Northwest corner of this Lane, is the Parish Clarkes Hall, by them purchased, since they lost their old Hall in Bishopsgate-street. Next is Spittle-Lane, of old time so called, since Sto∣dies-Lane, of the owner thereof named Stodie; Sir John Stodie, Vintner and Mayor in the year 1357 gave it, with all the Quadrant wherein Vintners Hall now standeth, with the Tenements round about, unto the Vintners. The Vintners builded for themselves a fair Hall, and also thirteen Alms-houses there, for thirteen poor people, which are kept of Charity Rent-free. The Vintners in London, were (of old time) called Marchant Vintners of Gascoyne, and so I read them in the Records of Edward the second, the eleventh year, ad Edward the third the ninth year; they were as well English-men as strangers born beyond the Seas, but then subjects to the King of England, great Burdeaux Merchants of Gascoyne & French Wines, divers of them were Mayors of this City; namely, John Adrian Vintner, Reignold at Conduit, John Oxen∣ford, Henry Picard that feasted the Kings of England, France, Scotl and, and Cy∣pres; John Stodie, that gave Stodies Lane to the Vintners, which four last named, were Mayors in the Reign of Edward the third, and yet Gascoyne Wines were then to be sold at London, not above fourpence, nor Rhenish Wines above six pence the Gallon. I read of Sweet Wines, that in the fiftieth of Edward the third, Iohn Peachie, Fishmonger was accused of, for that he procured a License for the only sale of them in London, which he endeavoured to justifie by Law, yet he was impriso∣ned and fined. More I read, that in the sixth of Henry the sixth, the Lombards corrupted their Sweet Wines; when knowledge thereof came to Iohn Raynwel Mayor of London, he (in divers places of the City) commanded the heads of the Buts and other Vessells in the open streets, to be broken, to the number of a hundred and fifty, so that the liquour running forth, passed through the City like a stream of rain water, in the sight of all the people, from whence there issued a most loathsome savour. I read in the Reign of Henry the seventh, that no Sweet VVines were brought into this Realm but Malmsyes, by the Longobards, paying to the King for his Licence, six shillings eight pence of every Butt, besides twelve pence for Bottel∣lage. In those daies Malmsey was not to be sold above three half-pence the pint; For proof whereof, it appeareth in the Church of St. Andrew Under-shaft that in the year 1547, I. G. and S. K. then Church-Wardens, for eighty pints of Malmsey spent in the Church, after one penny half penny the pint, paid at the years end for the same ten shillings.
Moreover, no Sacks were sold, but Rumney, & that for Medicine more than for drink; but now many kinds of Sacks are known and used. And so much for Wines. I read further that in the Reign of Henry the fourth, the young Prince Hen∣ry, T. Duke of Clarence, I. Duke of Bedford, and Humphrey Duke of Glocester the Kings sons, came to Supper amongst the Merchants of London, in the Vintry in the House of Lewes Iohn a Briton. The successors of those Vintners and Wine-drawers, that retailed by the Gal∣lons, Pottel, quart, and pint, were all incorporated by the name of Wine-tunners, in the Raign of Edward the third, and confirmed the fifteenth of Henry the sixth. Next is Palmers Lane, now called, Anchors Lane, the Plummers have their Hall there, but are Tenants to the Vintners. Then is Worcester House, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Worce∣ster, now divided into many Tenaments; The Fruiterers have there Hall there. On the Land side, is the Royal street, and Pater noster Lane, I think of old time called the Arches, for I read, that Robert de Suffolk, gave to Walter Darford, his Tenement with the apurtenance, in the Lane called Les Arches, in the Pa∣rish of Saint Michael de Pater noster Church, between the Wall of the field called Winchester field on the East, and the same Lane on the West, &c. More, there was a stone House called Stoda de Winton, juxta Stodum Bridge, which in that Lane was over Walbrook water. Then is the fair Parish Church of Saint Michael, called Pater noster Church, in the Royal street; This Church was new builded, and made a Colledge of S. Spirit, and S. Mary, founded by Richard VVhittington, Mercer, four times Mayor, for a Master, four Fellows, Masters of Art, Clerks, Conducts, Chorists, &c. and an Alms-house, called Gods house or Hospital, for thirteen poor men, one of them to be Tutor, and to have sixteen pence the week, the other twelve, each of them to have fourteen pence the week for ever, with other necessary provision, an Hutch with three Locks, with a common Seal, &c. The Licence for this foundation was granted by King Henry the fourth, the eleventh of his Reign, and in the twelfth of the same Kings reign, the Mayor and the Communalty of London, granted to Richard VVhittington, a vacant piece of ground thereon, to build his Colledge in the Royall; all which was confirmed by Henry the sixth the third of his Reign, to Iohn Coventry, Jenkin Carpenter, and VVilliam Grove, Executors to to Richard Whittington. This foundation was again confirmed by Parliament, the tenth of Henry the sixth, and was suppressed by the Statute of Edward the sixth. The Alms-Houses, with the poor men, do remain, and are paid by the Mercers. This Richard VVhittington was (in this Church) three times buried, first, by his Executors, under a fair Monument; then, in the Reign of Edward the sixth, the Parson of that Church, thinking some great riches (as he said) to be buried with him, caused his Monument to be broken, his Body to be spoiled of his Leaden sheet, and again the second time to be buried; And in the Reign of Queen Mary, the Parishioners were forced to take him up, and lap him in Lead, as afore, to bury him the third time, and to place his Monuments, or the like, over him again, which remaineth still and so he rested. Among others, Sir Thomas Tanke Knight of the Garter born in Almain, a great Martial man, lieth buried there. At the upper end of this street, is the Tower Royall, whereof that street ta∣keth name; This Tower & great place was so called, of pertaining to the Kings of this Realm, but by whom the same was first builded, or of what Antiquity continued, it doth not appear, more than that in the Reign of King Edward the
first, the second, fourth, and seventh year, it was the Tenement of Simon Beawmes; Also that in the thirty sixt of Edward the third the same was called the Royal, in the Parish of St. Michael de Pater noster, and that in the three and fortieth of his Reign, he gave it by the name of his Inne, called the Royall, in his City of London, in value twenty pounds by year, unto his Colledge of Saint Stephen at Westminster: Notwithstanding, in the Reign of Richard the second, it was called the Queens Wardrobe, as appeareth by this that followeth. King Richard, having in Smithfield overcome and dispersed the Rebels, He, his Lords, and all his Company, entred the City of London with great joy, and went to the Lady Princesse his Mother, who was then lodged in the Tower called the Queens Wardrobe, where she had remained three daies and two nights much affrighted; But when she saw the King her Son, she was greatly rejoyced, Ah Son, What great sorrow have I suffered for you this day? The King answered and said, Certainly, Madam, I know it well, but now re∣jce, and thank God, for I have this day recovered mine Heritage, and the Realm of England, which I had near-hand lost. This Tower seemeth to have been (at that time) of good defence; for when the Rebels had beset the Tower of London, and got possession thereof, taking from thence whom they listed, the Princesse being forced to fly, came to this Tower-Royall, where she was lodged, and remained safe, as ye have heard and it may be also supposed, that the King himself was at that time lodged there. I read, that in the year 1386, Lyon King of Armony, being chased out of his Ream, by the Tartarians, received innumerable gifts of the King and of his Nobles, the King then lying in the Royall, where he also granted to the said King of Armony, a Charter of a thousand pounds by year during his Life; This for proof may suffice, that Kings of England have been lodged in this Tower, though the same (afterwards) hath been neglected, and turned into stabling for the Kings Horses, and now letten out to divers men and ivided into Tene∣ments. In Horse-Bridge-street, is the Cutlers Hall, Richard de Wilehale, 1295, confirmed to Paul Butelar this House, and Edifices, in the Parish of Saint Mi∣chael Pater noster Church, and Saint Iohn upon Walbrook, which sometime Lawrence Gisers, and his son Peter Gisers did possesse, and afterward Hugonis de Hingham, and lyeth between the Tenement of the said Richard towards the South; and the Lane called Horse-shoe-Bridge, towards the North, and be∣tween the way called Pater noster Church on the West, and the course of Wal∣brooke on the East, paying yearly one Clove of Gilliflowers at Easter, and to the poor and Convent of Saint Mary Overy, six shillings. This House sometime belonged to Simon Dolesly Grocer, and Mayor 1359, They of this Company had (of old time) three Arts, or sorts of Workmen, to wit, the first were Smiths, Forgers of Blades, and therefore called Bladers, and divers of them proved wealthy men, as namely, Walter Nele Blader; one of the Sheriffs, the twelfth of Edward the third, Deceased 1352, and was buried in Saint Iames Garlicke Hithe, He lest Lands to the mending of High-wayes about London, be∣twixt Newgate and Wicombe, Ealdgate and Chelmesford, Bishopsgate and Ware, Southwark and Rochester, &c. The second were Makers of Hafts, and other∣wise Garnishers of Blades. The third sort were Sheath-makers for Swords, Dag∣gers, and Knives. In the tenth of Henry the fourth, certain Ordinances wee made betwixt the Bladers, and the other Cutlers, and in the fourth of Henry the sixth, they were all three Companies drawn into one Fraternity, or Brotherhood, by the name of Cutlers.
Then is Knight-riders street, so called (as is supposed) of Knights well armed' and mounted at the Tower-Royall, riding from thence through the street West to Creed-Lane, and so out at Ludgate, towards Smithfield, when they were there to Turney, Just, or otherwise to shew activities before the King and States of the Realm. In this street is the Parish Church of Saint Thomas Apostles, by Wring-wren Lane a hansome Church, and in the year 1629, well repaired and finey garni∣shed; but Monuments of antiquity, there are none beyond the Reign of Henry the eighth, except some Arms in the Windows, as also in the Stone-work, which some suppose to be of John Barnes Mercer, Mayor of London, in the year 1371, a great builder thereof. H. Causton Merchant, was a Benefactor and had a Chantry there about, 1396. T. Roman Mayor 1310, had also a Chantry there 1319. Fitz Williams also a Benefactor, had a Chantry there. More, Sir William Littlesbury, aliàs Horne, (for King Edward the fourth so named him) because he was a most excellent Winder of an Horne; he was a Salter, and Mer∣chant of the Staple, Mayor of London in the year 1487, and was buried in this Church, having appointed (by his Testament) the Bells to be changed for four new Bells of good tune and sound; but that was not performed: he gave five hundred Marks towards the repairing of High-waies, between London and Cam∣bridge; his dwelling House, with a Garden and appurtenances in the said Pa∣rish, to be sold, and bestowed in charitable actions. His House called the George in Bread-street he gave to the Salters, they to find a Priest in the said Parish, to have six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence the year; to every Preacher at Pauls-Crosse, and at the Spittle, four pence for ever; to the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, Marshalsey, and Kings-Bench, in Victuals, ten shillings at Christmas, and ten shillings at Easter for ever, which Legacies were not performed. Among others, ther's one Epitaph in Greek in this Church on the Lady Katherine Killegree. Then West from the said Church on the same side, was one great Messuage, sometime called Ipres Inne of William of Ipres a Flemming, the first Builder thereof; This William was called out of Flanders, with a number of Flemmings to the aid of King Stephen, against Maude the Empress, in the the year 1138, and grew in favour with the said King for his service, so far, that he builded this House near unto Tower-Royall, in the which Tower it seemeth the King was then lodged, as in the heart of the City, for his more safe∣ty. Robert Earl of Glocester, Brother to the Empresse, being taken, was com∣mitted to the Custody of this VVilliam, to be kept in the Castle of Rochester, till King Stephen was also taken, and then the one was delivered in exchange for the other, and both set free. This William of Ipres gave Edredes Hith, now called Queens Hith, to the Prior and Canons of the Holy Trinity in London, he founded the Abbey of Bor∣ley in Kent, &c. In the first of Henry the second, the said William, withall the other Flem∣mings (fearing the indignation of the new King) departed the Land, but it seemeth that the said William was shortly called back again, and restored both to the Kings favour, and to his old possessions here, so that the name and Fa∣mily continued long after in this Realm. On the other side, I read of a Messuage, called Kinged Hall: King Henry the eighth, the thirty two of his Reign, gave the same (with four Te∣nements adjoyning) unto Morgan Phillip, aliàs Wolfe, in the Parish of Saint Thomas Apostles in London, &c.
Over against Ipres Inne in Knight-Riders street, at the corner towards Saint James Garlick Hith, was sometime a great House builded with Stone, and called Ormond place, for that it sometime belonged to the Earls of Or∣mond. King Edward the Fourth in the fifth of his Reign, gave to Elizabeth his Wife, the Mannor of Greenwich with the Tower and Park, in the Coun∣ty of Kent. He also gave this Tenement called Ormond place, with all the appurre∣nances to the same, scituate in the Parish of Saint Trinity in Knight-Rider street in London. This House is now taken down, and divers fair Tenements are builded there. Then lower down in Royall-street, is Kerion Lane, of one Kerion sometime dwelling there. In this Lane be divers fair Houses for Merchants, and amongst others is the Glasiers Hall. At the South corner of Royall-street, is the fair Parish Church of Saint Mar∣tin, called, in the Vintry, sometimes called St. Martin de Beremand Church; This Church was new builded about the year 1399, by the Executors of Mat∣thew Columbars, a stranger born, a Burdeaux Marchant of Gascoine and French Wines: His Armes remain yet in the East Window, and is a Cheveron, be∣tween three Colombins. Sir Iohn Gisors Mayor, with his Brother, and his Son, lye there buried; He had a great Mansion House called Gisors Hall, in St. Mildreds Parish in Bread-street. There are sundry Latin Epiraphs in this Church. Then is the Parish Church of St. Iames, called, at Garlick Hith, or Garlick Hive, for that (of old time) on the River of Thames, near to this Church Gar∣lick was usually sold; This is a comely Church, whereof Richard Rothing one of the Sheriffs 1326, is said to be the new builder, and lyeth buried in the same: so was Walter Nele Blader, one of the Sheriffs 1337, Iohn of Oxenford, Vintner, Mayor 1341. I read in the first of Edward the third, that this Iohn of Oxenford gave to the Priory of the Holy Trinity in London, two Tofts of Land, one Mill, fifty Acres of Land, two Acres of Wood, with the appurtenances in Kentish Town, in va∣lue twenty shillings and three pence by year. The Lady Stanley, the Countesse of Huntingon, and the Lady Harbert, lye buried in this Church.
Of the Fifteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Cordwayner Ward. VVE will passe now from the Vintry to Cordwainer-street Ward, taking that name of Cordwayners or Shoomakers; Curriours, and Workers of Leather dwelling there; for it appeareth in the Records of Henry the sixth, the ninth of his Reign, that an Order was taken then for Cordwayners and Curriours, in Corney-street and Sopers Lane. This Ward beginneth in the East, one the West side of Walbrooke, and runneth West thorow Budge-row, (a street so called of Budge Furre, and of Skinners dwelling there) then up by Saint Anthenes Church, thorow Atheling (or Noble-street) as Leyland termeth it, commonly called Wathling-street, to the Red-Lion, a place so called, of a great Lion of Timber placed there, at a Gate entring a large Court, wherein are divers fair and large Shops, well furnished with Broad-cloths, and other Draperies of all sorts to be sold, and this is the farthest West part of this Ward. On the South side of this street from Budge-row, lyeth a Lane turning down by the West-gate of the Tower Royal, and to the South end of the Stone Wall beyond the said Gate, which is of this Ward, and is accounted a part of the Roy∣all-street. Against this West gate of the Tower-Royall, is one other Lane, that run∣neth West to Cordwainer-street, and this is called Turn base Lane; on the South side whereof is a piece of Wring-wren-Lane, to the North-west corner of Saint Thomas Church the Apostle. Then again out of the High-street called Wath∣ling, is one other street, which runneth thwart the same, and this is Cordwayner street, whereof the whole Ward taketh name. This street beginneth by West-cheap, and Saint Mary Bow Church is the head thereof on the West side, and it runneth down South, thorow that part which of latter time was called Hosier Lane, now Bow Lane; and then by the West end of Aldermary Church to the new builded Houses, in place of Ormond House, and so to Garlick hill, or Hith, to St. Iames Church. The upper part of this street towards Cheap, was called Hosier Lane, of Hosi∣ers dwelling there in place of Shoomakers; but now those Hosiers being worn out by men of other Trades, (as the Hosiers had worn out the Shoomakers) the same is called Bow-Lane, of Bow Church. On the West side of Cordwainer-street, is Basing-lane, right over against Turn∣base-lane, This Basing-lane, West to the back gate of the Red Lyon, in Wathling-street, is of this Cordwainer-street Ward. Now again on the North side of this high street, is Budge-row: by the East end of St. Anthonies Church, have ye St. Sithes Lane, so called of St. Sithes Church, (which standeth against the North end of that Lane) and this is wholly of Cordwainer-street Ward; also the South side of Needlers lane, which reacheth from the North end of St. Sithes lane, then vvest from St. Anthonies Church, is the South end of Sopers lane, which lane took that name, not of Sope-making, as some have supposed, but of Alen le Sopar, in the ninth of
Edward the second; nor can we read of Sope-making in this City, till within this hundred and fifty years, that Iohn Lambe, dwelling in Grasse-street, set up a boyling house; for this City (in former time) was served of white Sope in hard Cakes (called Castle-Soap, and other) from beyond the Seas, and of gray Sope, speckled with white, very sweet and good, from Bristow, sold here for a peny the pound, and never above peny farthing; and black Sope for an half∣peny the pound. Then in Bow-lane (as they now call it) is Goose-lane, by Bow-Church; Willam Essex, Mercer, had Tenements there, in the six and twentieth of Edward the third. Then from the South end of Bow-lane, up Wathling-street, till over against the Red Lyon, are the bounds of Cordwainer-street Ward. Then is there a fair Parish in Budge-row, called St. Anthonies at first, and now St. Antlins. Sir Thomas Knowles Lord Mayor of London, lyeth buried there, who repaired, and was a great Benefactor to that Church, upon whom is this Epitaph, Here lyeth graven under this Stone, Thomas Knowles, both flesh and bone, &c. Next on the South side of Budge-row, by the West corner thereof, and on the East side of Cordwainer-street, is one other fair Church, called Aldermary Church, because the same was very old, and elder then any Church of St. Mary in the City; till of late years, the foundation of a very fair new Church, was laid there by Henry Keeble, Grocer, and Mayor, who deceased 1518. and was ther buried in a Vault, by him prepared, with a fair Monument raised over him, on the North side of the Qire, now destroyed and gone: he gave by his Testament, a thousand pound toward the building up of that Church; and yet was not permitted a resting place for his bones there afterwards. Richard Chawcer Vintner, thought to be the Father of Ieffrey Chawcer the Poet, was a great Be∣nefactor to this Church. At the upper end of Hosier-lane, toward VVest-Cheape, is the fair Parish Church of St. Mary Bow; this Church in the Reign of VVilliam the Conqueror, being the first in this City, builded on Arches of Stone, was therefore called New Mary Church, of St. Mary de Arcubus, orle Bow, in VVest Cheaping; As Stratford Bridge, being the first builded (by Matilda, the Queen, VVife to Henry the first) with Arches of Stone was called Stratfordle Bow; which names, to the said Church and Bridge, remain till this day; the Court of the Arches is kept in this Church, and taketh name of the place, not the place of the Court; but of what Antiquity, or continuation that Court hath there continued, 'tis uncertain. This Church is of Cordwainer-street, and for divers accidents happening there, hath bin made more famous than any other Parish Church of the whole City, or Suburbs. First we read, that in the year 1090, and the third of VVilliam Rufus, by tempest of vvin, the roof of the Church of St. Mary Bow in Cheape, was over∣turned, wherewith some persons were slain, and four of the Rafters of six and twenty foot in length, with such violence were pitched in the ground of the high street, that scantly four foot of them remained above ground, which were fain to be cut even with the ground, because they could not be plucked out; for the City of London was not then paved, but a Moorish ground. In the year 1196. VVilliam Fitz Osbert, a seditious Traytor, took the Steeple of Bow, and fortified it with Munitions and victuals, but it was assaulted, and VVilllam with his Complices, were taken (though without blood-shed) for he was forced by fire and smoak to forsake the Church, and then being by the Judges condemned, he was by the heels drawn to the Elmes in Smithfield,
and there hanged with nine of his fellowes, where because his favourers came not to deliver him, he forsook Maries Son, (as he termed Christ our Saviour) and called upon the Devil to help and deliver him: such was the end of this de∣ceiver, a man of an evil life, a secret murtherer, a filthy fornicator, a keepr o Concubines, and (amongst other his detestable facts) a false accuser of his elder Brother, who had (in his youth) brought him up in learning, and done many things for his preferment. In the year 1271. a great part of the Church of Bow fell down, and slew ma∣ny people, men and women. In the year 1284, the thirteenth of Edward the first, Lawrence Ducket, Gold∣smith, having grievously wounded one Ralph Crepin in West Cheap, fled into Bow-Church, into the which (in the night time) entred certain evil persons, friends unto the said Ralph, and slew the said Laurence, lying in the Steeple, and then hanged him up, placing him so by the Window, as if he had hanged him∣self, and so was it found by Inquisition; for the which fact, Lawrence Ducket being drawn by the feet, was buried in a ditch without the City; but shortly after (by relation of a Boy, who lay with the said Lawrence, at the time of his death, and had hid him there for fear) the truth of the matter was disclosed; for the which cause, Iordan Good-Cheape, Ralph Crepin, Gilbert Clarke, and Ief∣frey Clarke, were attainted, and a certain Woman named Alice, that was chief causer of the said mischief, was burned, and to the number of sixteen men, were drawn and hanged, besides others that, being richer, after long imprisonment, were hanged by the purse. The Church was interdicted, the Doors and Windows were stopped up with Thorns for a while, but Lawrence was taken up, and honestly buried in the Church-yard afterwards. The Parish-Church of St. Mary Bow, by meanes of incroachment, and buil∣ding of Houses, wanting room in their Church-yard, for burial of the Dead, Iohn Rotham, or Rodham, Citizen and Taylor, by his Testament dated the year 1465. gave to the Parson and Church-wardens, a certain Garden in Hosier-lane, to be a Church-yard, which so continued near a hundred years, but now is buil∣ded on, and is a private mans house. The old Steeple of this Church, was by little and little re-edified, and new builded up, at the least so much as was fal∣len down, many men giving sums of money to the furtherance thereof, so that at length, to wit, in the year 1469, it was ordained by a Common Councel, that the Bow Bell should be nightly rung at nine of the Clock. Shortly after, Iohn Donne Mercer, by his Testament dated 1472, according to the trust of Reginald Longdon, gave to the Parson and Church-wardens of St. Mary Bow two Tenements, with the appurtenances, since made into one, in Hosierlane, then so called, to the maintenance of Bow Bell, the same to be rung as aforesaid, and other things to be observed, as by the Will ap∣peareth. The Arches or Bowes thereupon with the Lanthorns five in number, to wit, one at each Corner, and one on the top in the middle upon the Arches, were also afterward finished of Stone, brought from Cane in Normandy, delivered at the Customers Key, for four shillings eight pence the Tun 1515, and 1516, William Copland being Church-warden. It is said that this Copland gave the great Bell, which made the fifth in the Ring, to be rung nightly at nine of the Clock: This Bell was first rung (as a Knell) at the Burial of the same Copland; It appeareth, that the Lanthorns on the top of this Steeple, were meant to have bin glazed, and lights in them placed nightly in the Winter, whereby Travel∣lers to the City might have the better sight thereof, and not to misse of their wayes.
In this Parish also was a Grammar-School, by commandment of King Henry the sixth, which School was (of old time) kept in an house for that purpose pre∣pared in the Church-yard; But that School being decayed, as others about this City, the School-house was let out for Rent, in the Reign of Henry the 8th, for four shillings the year, a Cellar for two shillings the year, and two Vaults under the Church, for 15 s. both. There are Monuments of divers Citizens of note in this Church, but most of them much defac'd, and mouldred away. Without the North side of this Church of St. Mary Bow, towards West-Cheape, standeth one fair building of Stone, called in Record Sildam, a shed which greatly darkneth the said Church; for by meanes thereof, all the Win∣dows and doors on that side, are stopped up; King Edward the third, upon occasion, as shall be shewed in the Ward of Cheap, caused this side or shed to be made, and strongly to be builded of Stone for himself, the Queen, and other States, to stand there to behold the Justings, and other shewes at their plea∣sures; And this House (for long time after) served to that use, namely, in the Reign of Edward the third, and Richard the second; but in the year 1410. Henry the fourth, in the twelfth of his Reign, confirmed the said shed or building, to Stephen Spilman, William Marchford, and John Wattle, Mercers, by the name of one new Sildain, Shed or Building, with Shops, Cellars, and Edifices, what∣soever appertaining, called Crounsild, or Tamersild, scituate in the Mercety of West-Cheape, and in the Parish of St. Mary de Arcubus in London, &c. Notwithstanding which grant, the Kings of England, and other great Estates, as well of forraign Countries repairing to this Realm, as Inhabitants of the same, have usually repaired to this place, therein to behold the shewes of this City, passing through West-Cheape; namely, the great Watches accustomed in the night, on the Even of St. John Baptist, and St. Peter at Midsommer; the Examples whereof were over-long to recite, wherefore let it suffice briefly to rouch one. In the year 1510, on St. Johns Eve at night, King Henry the eight, came to this place, then called the Kings-Head in Cheape, in the Livery of a Yeoman of the Gard, with an Halberd on his shoulder, and there beholding the Watch, departed privily, when the Watch was done; and was not known to any, but whom it pleased him; But on Saint Peters night next following, He and the Queen came Royally riding to the said place, and there with their Nobles, beheld the Watch of the City, and return'd in the morning.
Of the Sixteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Cheape-Ward. WE enter now into the Center of the City, which is Cheap-Ward, ta∣king name of the Market there kept, called West Cheaping; which Ward, as a River, as Mr. Stow saith, that hath three heads, and running along to the uttermost of his bounds, issueth out on the sides into little streams: so this Ward, beginning on the Course of Wallbrook, and is not the meanest of the Wards, (if for no other cause, yet because it is nearest to the heart of the City) hath his beginning on the East from three places. The High street of the Poultrey, the lower end of Buckles bury, and the nether part of the Venell, or entry into Scalding Alley, & so running along, as far as unto the North-East corner of Bow-lane on the South side, and from thence into Bow-lane on the East side, until ye come to the Channel over against the Cellardoor under the Church; & then, on the North side of Cheap up to the Standard, stretching it self into divers Lanes and peeces, on the right hand, and on the left hand, as it commeth along. First, for the High street of the Poultrey (which is the main body of this Ward:) on the South side thereof toward the East, this Ward beginneth in the way going down to St. Mary Wooll-Church. Now for Antiquities, and things worthy of memory in Cheap-Ward. First, in the main Body of this Ward, that is, the Poultry, standeth the hansome little Church, that beareth the name of St. Mildred in the Poultry the Virgin, which name was given surely for distinction not for superstition; for so was the Custom of the Kingdom (& yet is) in building their things for the service of God, that the Founders called them by the name of some Apostle, Saint, Martyr, or Confessor, as best liked their own conceit, at the present time, to di∣stinguish them from others. Who this Mildred was, whether she was the Eldest Daughter of Merwaldus, King of the VVest-Mercians, as some think, or that she was Daughter of Ethel∣bert, King of Kent, one of the founders of Pauls Church, it is incertain: nei∣ther is it much material, but it is probable, that she was some holy and devout Maid, which the People of that Age held to be a Saint afterward in Heaven. In what years this Church was first erected, or who was the first Founder of it, we find not; but it appeareth by some ancient Evidences of the said Church, that from the beginning it had not so much spare ground about it, as to make a Church-yard of, until in the year of our Lord God 1420, and the 8th of King Henry the fifth, Thomas Morsted Esquire, and Chirurgion to the Kings, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth. (And afterward, in Anno Dom. 1436. was Sheriff and Alderman of London) gave unto the Church a parcel of ground, lying between his dwelling-house and the said Church (and adjoyning unto the said Church toward the North) to make a Church-yard of, for the burial of their Dead, containing in length, from the Course of VVall∣brook, toward the West, forty five foot, and in breadth, from the Church to∣ward the North, thirty five foot. Within short time after, some body, of Religious and Charitable disposition, erected upon the sides of the said Church-yard, but upon Posts and Pillars, with Cloysters underneath, toward the West, a Parsonage House, or Mansion, and free dwelling of the Ministers and Rectors of the said Church, and toward
the East four Chambers, then called the Priests Chambers, now converted into a Tenement or dwelling House, & demised for yearly Rent; but the Church-yard is much abridged, and of late fouly defaced; and the lights of the said Parso∣nage hindered by additions of pieces, to the said ancient Chambers, which ought not to be: In this ancient Church, some Citizens of note lie buried. Some few Houses West from this Parish Church of St. Mildred, is a Prison∣house, pertaining to one of the Sheriffs of London, and is called the Counter in the Poultry: This hath bin there kept, and continued time out of minde; for I have not read of the Original thereof: West from this Counter, was a proper Chappel, called of Corpus Christi, and St. Mary, at Cony-hope lane end, in the Pa∣rish of the said Mildred, founded by one named Iorivirunnes, a Citizen of Lon∣don, in the Raign of Edward the third; in which Chappel was a Guild, or Frater∣nity, that might dispend in Lands better then twenty pounds by year; it was suppressed by Henry the eighth, and purchased by one Thomas Hobson, Haber∣dasher: he turned this Chappel into a fair Ware-house, and Shops towards the street, with fair Lodgings over them. Then is Cony-hope lane, of old time so called, of a signe of three Coneys, which hung over a Poulterers Stall at the Lanes end; within this Lane standeth the Grocers Hall, which Company being of old time called Pepperers, were first incorporated by the name of Grocers, in the year 1345, at which time, they e∣lected for Cusos, or Gardian of their Fraternity, Richard Oswin, and Lawrence Hallwell, and twenty Brethren were then taken in, to be of their Society. In the year 1411, the Custos or Gardian, and the Brethren of this Company, purchased of the Lord Robert Fitzwaters, one Plot of ground, with the buil∣ding thereupon, in the said Cony-hope lane, for three hundred twenty Marks, and then laid their foundation of their new Common-Hall. About the year 1429, the Grocers had Licence to purchase five hundred Marks Land; since the which time, near adjoyning unto the Grocers Hall, the said Company have builded seven proper Houses, for seven aged poor, Alms∣people; Thomas Knowles Grocer and Maior, gave his Tenement in St. Antho∣nies Church-yard to the Grocers, towards the relief of the poor Brethren in that Company: Also Henry Keeble, Grocer and Maior, gave to the seven Alms∣people, six pence weekly for ever; which Pension is now increased by the Ma∣sters, to some of them two shillings a peece weekly, and to some of them lesse, &c. Henry Ady Grocer, 1563, gave a thousand Marks to the Grocers to purchase Lands, and Sir Henry Pechy, Knight Banneret, free of that Company, gave them five hundred pounds to certain uses: he builded Alms-houses at Luding stone in Kent, and was there buried. West from this Cony-hope Lane, is the Old Iury, whereof some portion is of Cheape Ward; at the South end of this Lane, is the Parish-Church of St. Mary Cole-Church, named of one Cole, that builded it: this Church is builded upon a Vault above ground, so that men are forced to go to ascend up thereunto, by certain steps, I finde no Monuments of this Church more, than that Henry the fourth granted Licence to William Marshal, and others, to found a Brother∣hood of Saint Katherine therein, because Thomas Becket and St. Edmond, the Arch Bishop were baptized there. The Old Iury hath had alwayes Citizens of quality, and fair large Houses, as there is now Gurney-house, where Alderman Friderique lives, a very worthy Gentleman. There is also another ancient fair House of Thomas Bowyer, and another of Mr. Bonnel, worthy and wealthy brave Marchants. We read of Bordhangli-lane, to be of that Parish; and thus much for the North side of the Poultry. The South side of the said Poultry, beginning on the
Bank of the said Brook, over against the Parish-Church of St. Mildred passing, up to the great Conduit, hath divers fair Houses, which were sometimes inha∣bited by the Poulterers, but now by Grocers, Haberdashers, and Upholsters. Concerning other Antiquities there, first is Bucklesbury, so called of a Man∣nor, and Tenements pertaining to one Buckle who there dwelled, and kept his Courts; this Mannor is supposed to be the great Stone-Building. yet in part remaining on the South side of the street, which of late time hath been called the Old Barge, of such a signe hanged out, near the Garte thereof; This Mannor, or great House, hath of long time bin divided, and letten out into mny Tene∣ments; and it hath bin a common Speech, that when Wallbrook did lie open, Barges were rowed out of the Thames, or towed up so far; and therefore the place hath ever since bin called the Old Barge. Also, on the North side of this street, directly over against the said Buckles∣bury, was one ancient and strong Tower of Stone; the which Tower, King Ed∣ward the third, in the eighteenth of his Reign, called by the name of the Kings house, and Cornet Stoure in London, and id appoint his Exchange of mo∣ney, there to be kept: In the nine and twentieth, he granted it to Fridus Guy∣nysane, and Landus Bardaile, Marchants of Luke, for twenty pound the year; And in the three and twentieth, he gave the same Tower to his Colledge, or Free Chappel of St. Stephen at VVestmister, by the name of Cornet Stoure, at Bucklesbury in London. This whole street, called Buckles bury, on both the sides throughout, is pos∣sessed of Grocers, and Apothecaries; toward the West end thereof, on the South side, breaketh out one other short lane, called in Records, Peneritch-street, it reacheth but to St. Sythes lane; and St. Sythes Church, is the farthest part there∣of; for by the West end of the said Church, beginneth Needles Lane, which reacheth to Sopers Lane, as is aforesaid. This small Parish Church of St. Syth, hath also an addition of Bennet Shorne, (or Shrog, or Shorehog) for by all these names it hath bin called; but the anci∣ent is Shorne, wherefore it seemeth to take that name of one Benedict Shorne, sometime a Citizen and Stock-fishmonger of London, a new Builder, repairer, or Benefactor thereof, in the year of Edward the second, so that Shorne is but cor∣ruptly called Shrog, and more corruptly Shorehog, Here are divers Monu∣ments, and among other the Tomb of Sir Raph Varren, Knight, Alderman, twice Lord Maior of London, and Marchant of the Staple at Callis, with his two Wives, Anno 1553. Then in Needlers Lane, have ye the Parish Church of St. Pancrase, a proper small Church, but divers rich Parishioners therein, and hath had of old time, many liberal Benefactors; But of late, such as (not regarding the Order ta∣ken by Queen Elizabeth,) the least Bell in their Church being broken, have ra∣ther sold the same for half the value, then put the Parish to charge with new casting: late experience hath proved this to be true, besides the spoil of Monu∣ments there; This little Church hath also some handsome Monu∣ments. Then is a part of Sopers-lane, turning up to Cheap. By the assent of Stephen Abunden, Maior, the Pepperers in Sopers lane, were admitted sell all such Spices, and other Wares, as Grocers now use to sell, re∣taining the old name of Pepperers in Sopers lane, till at length, in the Reign of Henry the sixth, the same Sopers lane was inhabited by Cordwayners and Curriers, after that the Pepperers or Grocers had seated themselves in a more open street, to wit, in Buckles bury, where they now remain: Thus much for the South Wing of Cheap-Ward. At the West end of this Poultry, and also of Bucklers bury, beginneth the large street of West Cheaping, a Market place so called, which street siretcheth West, till ye come to the little Conduit by Pauls Gate, but not all of Cheap
Ward. In the East part of this street standeth the Great Conduit, of Sweet∣water, conveyed by Pipes of Lead, under ground from Paddington, for ser∣vice of this City, castellated with stone, and Cisterned in Lead, about the year 1285, and again new builded and enlarged by Thomas Ilam one of the Sheriffs, 1479. About the middest of this street is the Standard in Cheape: of what Anti∣quity, the first foundation is, I have not read. But Henry the sixth by his Patent, dated at Windsor the one and twentieth of his Reign (which Patent, was con∣firmed by Parliament, 1442) granted Licence to Thomas Knolles, Iohn Chichle, and other Executers to Iohn Wells, Grocer, sometime Maior of London, with his Goods to make new the high-way, which leadeth from the City of London, to∣wards the place of Westminster, before and nigh the Mannor of Savoy, parcel of the Dutchey of Lancaster, a way then very ruinous, and the Pavement broken, to the hurt and mischif of the Subjects, which old Pavement, then remaining in that way, within the length of five hundred foot, and all the breadth of the same. before and nigh the fire of the Manner aforesaid, they were to break up, and with Stone, Gravel, and other stuffe, make one other good and sufficient way for the Commodity of the Subjects; And further, that the Standard in Cheape, where divers Executions of the Law before time had bin performed; which Standard at that preent was very ruinous with age; in which there was a Cond it, should be taken down, and another competent Standard of Stone; to∣gether with a Conduit in the same, of new, strongly to be builded, for the Commodity and honour of the City, with the goods of their Testator, without interruption &c. Of Executions at the Standard in Cheape, we read, that in the year 1293. three men had their right hands smitten off there, for rescuing of a Prisoner, ar∣rested by an Officer of the City. In the year 1326, the Burgesses of London, caused Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exceter, Treasurer to Edward the second, and others, to be beheaded at the Standard in Cheap (but this was by Pauls Gate.) In the year 1351, the six and twentieth of Edward the third, two Fishmon∣gers were beheaded at the Standard in Cheap. 1381, wat Tylar beheaded, Rich∣ard Lyons, and others, there. In the year 199, Henry the fourth, caused the Blank Charters, made by Rich∣ard the econd, to be burnt there. In the year 1450, Iack Cade, Captain of the Kentish Rebels, beheaded the Lord Say there. In the year 1461, Iohn Davy had his hand stricken off there, because he had stricken a man before the Judges at Westminster, &c. Then next is the great Crosse in VVest Cheap, which Crosse was there erected in the year 1290, by Edward the first; upon occasion thus, Queen Elianor his Wise, dyed at Hardeby (a Town near unto the City of Lincoln) her Body was brought from thence to VVestminster, and the King in memory of her, caused in every place, where her Body rested by the way, a stately Crosse of Stone to be e∣recte, with the Queens Image, and Arms upon it, as at Grantham, VVoborn, Northampton, Stony-stratford Dunstable, St. Albones, VValtham, VVest-Cheape, and at Charing, from whence she was conveyed to VVestminster, and there bu∣ried. This Crosse in VVest-Cheape, being like to those other which remain to this day; and being by length of time decayed, Iohn Hatherley, Mayor of London, procured in the year 1441, Licence of King Henry the sixth, to re-edifie the same in more beautiful manner, for the honour of the City; and had Licence also, to take up two hundred Fodder of Lead, for the building thereof, & of cer∣tain Conduits, and a common Granary. This Crosse was then curiously wrought, at the Charges of divers Citizens; Iohn Fisher Mercer, gave six hun∣dred
Marks towards it, the same was begun to be set up 1484, and finished 1486, the second of Henry the seventh: It was, after, gilt over, in the year 1522, against the comming in of Charles the fifth, Emperor. In the year 1553, against the Coronation of Queen Anne. New burnished against the Coronation of Edward the sixth; And again new guilt 1554, against the comming in of King Philip. Since which time, the said Crosse having bin pre∣sented by divers Juries, (or Quests of Wardmote) to stand in the high-way, to the let of carriages (as they alledged) but could not have it removed; it fol∣lowed, that in the year 1581, the twenty one of Iune, in the night, the lowest Images round about the said Crosse (being of Christ his Resurrection, of the Virgin Mary, King Edward the Confessor, and such like) were broken, and de∣faced: Proclamation was made, that who so would discover the doers, should have forty Crowns, but nothing came to light: the Image of the blessed Vir∣gin, at that time was robbed of her Son, and her Arms broken, by which she stayed him on her knees; her whole body was also haled with Ropes, and left likely to fall; but in the year 1595. was again fastened and repaired; and in the year next following, a new mis-shapen Son, as born out of time, all naked, was laid in her Arms; the other Images remaining, broke as afore. But on the East side of the same Crosse, the steps being taken thence; under the Image of Christs Resurrection defaced, was set up a curious wrought Tabernacle of gray Marble, and in the same an Alabaster Image of Diana, and water conveyed from the Thames, prilling from her naked Brest for a time, but now de∣cayed. In the year 1599, the Timber of the Crosse at the top, being rotted within the Lead, the Arms thereof bending, were feared to have fallen, to the harming of some people; and therefore the whole Body of the Crosse, was seasfolded about, and the top thereof taken down, meaning in place thereof, to have set up a Pyramis: but some of her Majesties honourable Councellors, directed their Letters to Sir Nicholas Mosley, then Maior, by her Highnesse express Com∣mandment concerning the Crosse, forthwith to be repaired, and placed again as it formerly stood, &c. Notwithstanding, the said Crosse stood he adless more then a year after, whereupon the said Councellors in great number, meaning not any longer to permit the continuance of such a contempt, wrote to Wil∣liam Rider, then Maior, requiring him, by vertue of her Highness said former direction and Commandement, without any further delay, to accomplish her Majesties most princely care therein, respecting especially, the Antiquity and continuance of that Monument, and ancient Ensign of Christianity, &c. dared the four and twentieth of December, 1600. After this, a Crosse of Timber was framed, set up, covered with Lead, and gilded, the Body of the Crosse down∣ward, cleansed of dust, the Scaffold cartyed thence. About twelve nights fol∣lowing, the Image of our Lady was again defaced, by plucking off her Crown, and almost her head, taking from her, her naked Child, and stabbing her in the Brest. But in the year 1644, during the Reign of the long Parliament, the said Crosse, by an Ordinance thereof, was utterly demolished; and while the thing was a doing, there was a noyse of Trumpets blew all the while. Upon the utter demolition of this so ancient and visible a Monument, or Ornament of the City of London as all Forrainers esteemed it, it fortuned, that there was another new one, popp'd up in Cheap-side, hard by the Standard, viz. a high square Ta∣ble of Stone, left in Legacy by one Russel a Porter, and well-minded man, with this Distichengraven, God blesse the Porter who great pains doth take, Rest here, and welcome when thy back doth ake. Thus much for the Crosse in West-cheape. Then at the West end of West-Cheap-street,
was sometimes a Crosse of Stone called the Old Crosse. Ralph Higden in his Polychronicon saith, that Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exceter, Trea∣surer to Edward the second, was by the Burgesses of London beheaded at this Crosse, then called the Standard, without the North door of St. Pauls Church; and so it is noted in other Writers that then lived. This old Crosse stood and remained at the East end of the Parish Church called St. Michael in the corner by Pauls Gate, near to the North end of the old Exchange, till the year 1390, the thirteenth of Richard the second, in place of which old Crosse then taken down, the said Church of St. Michael was enlarged, and also a fair Water-Con∣duit builded, about the ninth of Henry the sixth. In the Reign of Edward the third, divers Justings were made in this street, betwixt Sopers Lane and the gre Crosse, namely, one in the year 1331, about the one and twentieth of September, as 'tis obserted by divers Writers of that time. In the middle of the City of London, (say they) in a Street called Cheap, the Stone paement, being covered with sand, that the Horses might not slide, when they strongly set their feet to the ground, the King held a Tournement three daies together with the Nobility, valiant men of the Realm, and others, some strange Knights; And to the end the beholders might with the better ease see the same, there was a wooden Scaffold erected crosse the street, like unto a Tower, wherein Queen Philip and many other Ladies, richly attired, and assembled from all parts of the Realm, did stand to behold the Justs, but the higher frame in which the Ladies were placed, brake in sunder, whereby they were (with some shame) forced to fall down, by reason whereof the Knights, and such as were underneath, were grievously hurt; wherefore the Queen took great care to save the Carpenters from punishment, and through her prayers (which she made upon her Knee) pacified the King and Councel, and thereby purchased great love of the people. After which time, the King caused a shed to be strongly made of Stone for himself, the Queen, and other States to stand on, and there to behold the Justings, and other shewes, at their pleasure, by the Church of St. Mary Bow, as is shewed in Cordwayner-street Ward. Thus much for the High street of Cheap. Now of the North side of Cheap street and Ward, beginning at the great Conduit, and by St. Mary Cole Church, where we left; Next thereunto West∣ward, is the Mercers Chappel, sometime an Hospital, entituled of St. Thomas of Acon, or Acars, for a Master and Brethren. Militia Hospitalis &c, saith the Re∣cord of Edward the third, the fourteenth year, it was founded by Thomas Fitz Theobald de Heili, and Agnes his Wife, sister to Thomas Becket, in the Reign of Henry the second: they gave to the Master and Brethren the Lands with the ap∣purtenances, that sometimes were Gilbert Beckets, Father to the said Thomas, in the which he was born, there to make a Church; There was a Charnel, and a Chappel over it of St. Nicholas and St. Stephen; This Hospital was valued to dispend two hundred seventy seven pounds, three shillings four pence, surrendred the thirtieth of Henry the eighth, the one and twentieth of October, and was since purchased by the Mercers, by means of Sir Richard Gresham, and was again set open on the Eve of Saint Michael 1541, the three and thirtieth of Henry the eighth; It is now called the Mercers Chappel, therein is kept a free Grammer School, as of old time had been accustomed, commanded by Parliament. In this Chappel there is every Sunday morning throughout the year a Sermon in the Italian Tongue, beginning about ten a clock. Here be many Monuments remaining, but more have been defaced; among others, there is Iames Butler Earl of Ormond, and Dame Ioane his Countesse, 1428. Before this Hospital towards the street, was builded a fair and beautiful Chap∣pel arched over with stone, and thereupon the Mercers Hall, a most curious
piece of work, Sir Iohn Allen Mercer, being founder of that Chappel, was there buried, but since his Tombe is removed thence into the Body of the Hospital: Church, and his Body-room divided into Shops, are letten our for Rent; These Mercers were enabled to be a Company, and to purchase Lands to the value of twenty pound the year, the seventeenth of Rchard the second; they had three Messuages and Shops in the Parish of Saint Martins Oteswch, in the Ward of Bishopsgate, for the sustentation of the poor, and a Chantry, the two and twen∣tieth of Richard the second. Henry the fourth in the twelfth of his Reign, con∣firmed to Stephen Spilman, W. Marchford and Iohn Watild Mercers, by the name of one new Sildam, shed, or building, with Shops, Cellars, and Edifices what∣soever appertaining, called Crownsildes Scituate in the Mercery in West-cheap, in the Parish of St. Mary de Arcubus in London, &c. to be holden in Burgage, as all the City of London is. Next beyond the Mercers Chappel, and their Hall, is Ironmonger Lane, so cal∣led of Ironmongers dwelling there. In this Lane, is the small Parish Church of St. Martin, called Pomary, upon what occasion I certainly know not; it is supposed to be of Apples growing, where now Houses are lately builded. Farther West, is St. Lawrence Lane, so called of St. Lawrence Church, which standeth directly over against the North end thereof. Antiquities in this Lane I finde none other, then that among many fair Houses, there is one large Inne for receipt of travellers, called Blossomes Inne, but corruptly Bosomes Inne, and hath to Sign St. Lawrence the Deacon, in a Border of Blossoms or Flowers. Then near to the standard in Cheap, is Hony-lane, being very narrow, and somewhat dark. In this Lane, is the small Parish Church called Alhallowes in Hony-Lane; There be no Monuments in this Church worth the noting. I find that Iohn Norman, Draper, Mayor 1453, was buried there. He gave to the Drapers his Tenements on the North side the said Church; they to allow for the Beam light and Lamp, thirteen shillings four pence yearly, from this Lane to the Standard. And thus much for Cheap Ward, in the High-street of Cheap, for it stretcheth no farther. Now, for the North wing of Cheap Ward, have ye Catte-street, corruptly called Catteaten-street, which beginneth at the North end of Ironmong Lane, and runneth to the West end of Saint Lawrence-Church, as is afore∣shewed. On the North side of this street is the Guild-hall, wherein the Courts for the City are kept, namely, first the Court of Common-Councel, second the Court of the Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen, third the Court of Hustings, fourth the Court of Orphanes, fifth the two Courts of the Sheriffs ixt the Court of the Wardmote, seventh the Court of Hallmote, eight the Court of Requests, com∣monly called the Court of Conscience, nine the Chamberlains Court for Prentices, & making them free; This Guild-hall, saith Robert Fabian, was began to be builded new, in the year 1411, the twelfth of Henry the fourth, by Thomas Knowles, then Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen; The same was made, of a little Cottage, a large and great House, as now it standeth towards the charges where∣of, the Companies gave large benevolences; Also offences of men were pardo∣ned for sums of money towards this work, extraordinary Fees were raised, Fines, Amercements, and other things imployed, during seven years, with a Continu∣ation thereof, three years more, all to be employed to this building. The first year of Henry the sixth, John Coventry & John Carpenter Executors to Richard Whittington, gave towards the paving of this great Hall twenty pounds and the next year fifteen pounds more to the said pavement, with hard Stone of Purbck; They also glaz'd some VVindows thereof, and of the Mayors Court,
on every which Window, the Arms of Richard Whittington are placed. The foun∣dation of the Mayors Court was laid in the third year of the Reign of Henry the sixth, and of the Porch on the South side of the Mayors Court, in the fourth of the said King. Then was builded the Mayors Chamber, and the Councel Chamber, with other Roomes above the staires. Having here so just occasion, speaking of that former ancient Councel Cham∣ber, which hath continued so ever since, I cannot but account it expedient (as in no place better fitting) to remember the fair and goodly new Councel Cham∣ber, a worthy Act, and an Honour to the City. The said new Councel Cham∣ber, with a fair Room over the same, appointed for a Treasury, wherein to pre∣serve the Books and Records belonging to the City, and another Room also un∣derneath the same Chamber, reserved for necessary use and employment, began to be builded the first week after Easter, in the time of the Majoralty of Sir Tho∣mas Middleton, Knight, and Alderman, in the year of our Lord 1614, it was fully finished shortly after Michaelmas 1615, at the later end of the Majoralty of Sir Thomas Hayes, Knight and Alderman; But the Lord Mayor, and the Al∣dermen his Brethren, kept their first Court in the said new Councel Chamber, on the seventh day of November, in the year of our Lord 1615, Sir Iohn Iolles Knight and Alderman, being then Lord Mayor; by whose order and direction, the said building was performed, from the first beginning thereof, to the finall finishing of the same, amounting to the charge of 1740 l. than which, no mo∣ney could be better bestowed, nor more to the Cities credit and renown. Last of all, a stately Porch enring the great Hall, was erected; the front there∣of towards the Stouth, being beautified with Images of Srone. Now for the Chappel or Colledge of our Lady Mary Magdalene, and of All Saints by Guild-Hall, called London Colledge, we read, that the same was buil∣ded about the year 1299, and that Peter Fanelore, Adam Francis, and Henry Frowick Citizen, gave one Messuage with the appurtenances, in the Parish of St. Foster, to William Brampton Custos of the Chauntry, by them founded in the said Chappel, with four Chaplains; and one other House in the Parish of St. Giles without Creplegate, in the seven and twentieth of Edward the third, was given to them. Adjoyning to this Chappel on the South side, was sometime a fair and large Library, furnished with Books pertaining to the Guild-Hall and Colledge. These Books (as it is said) were in the Reign of Edward the sixth, sent for by Edward Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector, with promise to be restored short∣ly; Men laded from thence threescore Carts with them, but they were never returned; This Library was builded by the Executors of R. Whittington, and by W. Bury; on the other side, it is now lofted through, and made a Store-house for Cloaths, South-west from this Guild-Hall, is the fair Parish Church of St. Lawrence, called, in the Iury, because (of old time) many Jewes inhabited there about; This Church is fair and large, and hath divers Monuments. In this Church there was the Shank-bone of a man, and also a Tooth of a ve∣ry great bigness, hanged up for shew, in Chains of Iron, upon a Pillar of Stone: the Tooth (being about the bigness of a mans fist) is long since conveyed from thence; the Thigh or Shank-bone, of five and twenty inches in length by the Rule, remaineth yet fastned to a post of Timber, and is not so much to be noted for the length, as for the thickness, hardness, and strength thereof; for when it was hanged on the Stone Pillar, it fretted (with moving) the said Pillar, and was not it self fretted, nor (as seemeth) is not yet lightned by remaining dry: but where or when this Bone was first found or discovered, I have not heard.
Of the Seventeenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Coleman∣street Ward. VVE will now stear our course Northward, and look towards London Walls to find out another Ward, and next to Cheap Ward on the North side thereof, is Coleman-street Ward, and beginneth also in the East, on the course of Wallbrook, in Lothbury, and runneth West, (on the South side to the end of Ironmongers Lane, and on the North side, to the West corner of Basing-Hall street; On the South side of Lothbury, is the street called the Old Iewry; the one half, and better, on both sides towards Cheap, is of this Ward. Antiquities therein to be noted, are these, First, the street of Lothbury, Lathbery, or Loadbay; This street is possessed (for the most part) by Founders, that cast Candlesticks, Chasing-dishes, SpiceMortars, and such like Copper or Latin workes, and do after turn them with the Foot, and not with the Wheel, to make them smoth and bright, with turning and scrating, (as some do term it) making a loathsome noise to the by-passers, that have not been used to the like, and therefore by them disdainedly called Lothbury. On the South side of this street amongst the Founders be some fair Houses and large, for Merchants; namely, one that of old time was the Jews Synagogue, which was defaced by the Citizens of London, after that they had slain seven hundred Jewes, and spoi∣led the redue of their goods, in the year 1262, the forty seventh of Henry the third. And not long after, in the year 1291, King Edward the first banished the remnant of the Jewes out of England, as is afore shewed. The Synagogue being so suppressed, certain Fryars got possession thereof; For in the year 1257, (saith Matthew Paris) there were seen in London a new Order of Fryars, called De poenitentia Iesu, or Fratres de sacco, because they were apparrelled in sackcloth, who had their House in London, near unto Aldersgate, without the gate, and had Licence of Henry the third, in the four and twentieth of his Reign, to remove from thence to any other place; and in the fifty sixt, she gave unto them this Iews Synagogue. After which time Elianor the Queen, wife to Edward the first, took into her protection, and warranted unto the Prior and Brethren De poenitentia Jesu Christi, of London, the said Land and building in Cole-Church street, in the Parish of Saint Olave in the Jury and St. Margaret in Loathbury, by her granted, with consent of Stephen de Fulborn, under-Warden of the Bridge-house, and other Brethren of that House, for threescore Marks of Silver, which they had received of the said Prior and Brethren of repentance, towards the building of the said Bridge. This Order of Friers gathered many good Schollars, and multiplyed in number exceedingly, untill the Councel, of Lyons; by the which it was Decreed, that (from that time forth) there should no more Orders of Begging Fryers, be permitted, but only the four Orders, to wit, the Dominick or Preachers, the Minorites or Gray Fryers, and the Augustines: and so from that time the Begging Fryers decreased and fell to nothing.
Now it folowed, that in the year 1305, Robert Fitzwalter, requested and obtained of the said King Edward the first, that the same Fryers of the Sack, might assigne to the said Robert, their Chappel or Church, of old time, called the Synagogue of the Iewes, near adjoyning to the then Mansion house of the same Robert, which was in place where now standeth the Grocers Hall, and the said Synagogue was at the North Corner of the old Jury, Robert Large, Mercer, Mayor, in the year 1439, kept his Majoralty in this House, and dwelled there until his dying day. This House sandeth, and is of two Parishes, as opening into Lothbury, of St. Margarets Parish, and opening into the Old Iewry, of St. Olaves Parish, The said Robert Large, gave liberally to both these Parishes, but was buried at St. Olves. Hugh Clopton, Mercet, Maior 1492, dwelled in this House, and kept his Ma∣joralty there: it is now a Tavern, and hath to signe a Wind-Mill. And thus much for this House, sometimes the Iews Synagogue, since an house of Fryers, then a Noble mans House, after that, a Marchants House, wherein Majoralities have bin kept, and now a Wine-Tavern. Then is the Old Jewry, a street so called of Jews, sometime dwelling there, and near adjoyning in the Parishes of St. Olave, St. Michael Basing Hall, St. Martin Ironmonger-lane, St. Lawrence, called the Jewry, and so West to Wood-street. William Duke of Normandy, first brought them from Roane to inhabit here. William Rusus favoured them so far, that he sware by Lukes face, his com∣mon Oath, if they could overcome the Christians, he would be one of their Sect. Henry the second, grievously punished them for corrupting his Coyne. Richard the first forbad Jewes, and Women to be present at his Coronation, for fear of Inchantments; for breaking of which Commandment, many Jews were slain, who being assmbled, to present the King with some gift, one of them was icken by a Christian, which some unruly people perceiving, fell upon them, beat them to their houses, and brent them therein, or slew them at their comming out. Also the Jewes at Norwich, St. Edmonds bury, Lincoln, Stanford, and Lyn, were robbed and spoyled; and at York, to the number of five hundred, besides Women and Children, entred a Tower of the Castle, profered money to be in surety of their lives; but the Christians would not take it; whereupon, they t the throats of their own Wives and Children, and cast them over the Walls on the Christian heads; and then, entring the Kings Lodging, they burned both the House and themselves. King John in the 11th of his Reign, commanded all the Jews, both Men and Women, to be imprisoned, and grievously punished, because he would have all their Money; some of them gave all they had, and promised more, to es∣cape so many kinds of torments; for every one of them, had one of their eyes at the least plucked ot. Amongst whom there was one, which being tormen∣ted many wayes, would not ransome himself, till the King had caused (every day) one of his great teeth to be plucked out, by the space of seven dayes, and then he gave the King ten thousand Marks of silver; to the end, they should pull out no more, the said King at that time, spoyld the Jews of sixty six thou∣sand Marks. The 17th of this King, the Barons brake into the Jews Houses, rifled their Coffers, and with the Stone of their Houses, repaired the Gates and Walls of London. King Henry the third, in the 11th of his Reign, granted to Semaine, or Ballaster, the house of Benomie Mittun the Jew, in the Parish of St. Michael Bassing-hanghe, in which the said Benomy dwelt, with the fourth part of all his
Land in that Parish, which VVilliam Elie held of the Fee of Hugh Nevel, and all the Land in Colemanstreet, belonging to the said Benomy; and the fourth part of the Land, in the Parish of St. Lawrence, which was the Fee of Thomas Buckerel, and were excheted to the King, for the murther which the said Beno∣my committed in the City of London, to hold to the said Semaine, and his Heires, of the King, paying at Easter, a pair of gilt Spurs, and to do the servie thereof due unto the Lords Court. In the like manner, and for like services, the King granted to Guso for his Homage, the other part of the Lands of the said Benomye in St. Michaels Parish; which Law, the Painter held, and was the Kings Excheter, and the Lands of the said Benomye, in the said Parish, which VValter Turner held, and fifteen foot of Land, which Hgh Harman held, with fifteen Iron Ells of Land, and an half, in the front of Iron-monger-lane, in the Parish of St. Martin, which were the said Benomyes, of the Fee of the Hospital of St. Giles, and which Adam the Smith held, with two Stone-Houses, which were Moses the Jew of Canterbury, in the Parish of St. Olave; and which are of the Fee of Arnold de Reus, and are the Kings Exchetes, as aforesaid. The 16th of the said Henry, the Jews in London, builded a Synagogue, but the King commanded, it should be dedicated to our blessed Lady, and after gave it to the Brethren of St. Anthonies of Vienna, and so was it called St. An∣thonies Hospital. This King Henry founded a Church and House for converted Jews, in a new street by the Temple, whereby it came to passe, that (in short time) there was gathered a great number of Converts. The twentieth of this King Henry, seven Jews were brought from Norwich, vvhich had stolen a christened Child, had circumcised, and minded to have cru∣cied him at Easter, vvherefore their Bodies and Goods vvere at the Kings plea∣sure: The six and twentieth, the Jews vvere constrained to pay to the King, twenty thousand Marks, at two Termes in the year, or else to be kept in per∣petual Prison. The five and thirtieth, He taketh inestimable sums of money, of all rich men, namely, of Aaron, a Jew born at York, fourteen thousand Marks for himself, and ten thousand Marks for the Queen; and before, he had taken of the same Jew as much, as in all, amounted to thirty thousand Marks of Silver, and two hundred Marks of Gold to the Queen. In the fortieth year, vvere brought up to VVestminster, two hundred Jews from Lincoln, for crucifying a Child, named Hugh; eighteen of them were hang'd. The forty third, a Jew at Tewksbury fell into a Privie on the Saturday, and would not that day be taken out, for reverence of his Sabbath; wherefore Richard Clare, Earl of Gloucester, kept him there till Monday, that he was dead. The forty seven, the Barons slew of the Jews at London, seven hundred; the rest were spoiled, and their Synagogue defaced, because one Jew would have forced a Christian to have payd more than two shillings, for the lone of twenty shillings a week. The third of Edward the first, in a Parliament at London, usury was forbidden to the Jews; and that all Usurers might be known, the King commanded that every Usurer should weare a Table on his brest, the breadth of a Paveline, or else to avoid the Realm. The sixth of the said King Edward, a Reformation was made for clipping of the Kings Coyn; for which offence, two hundred sixty seven Jews were drawn and hanged; three were English Christians, and other were English Jews. The same year the Jews crucified a child at Northampton; for the which fact, many Jews at London were drawn at Horses Tayls, and hanged.
The 11th of Edward the first, Iohn Perkham, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, com∣manded the Bishop of London, to destroy all the Jewes Synagogues in his Diocese. The 16th of the said Edward, all the Jews in England, were (in one day) ap∣prehended by precept from the King, but they redeemed themselves for twelve thousand pounds of silver; notwithstanding, in the nineteenth of his Reign, he banished them all out of England giving them only to bear their Charge, till they were out of this Realm, the number of Jews then expulsed, were fifteen thousand and sixty persons: the King made a mighty masse of money of their Houses, which he sold, and yet the Commons of England had granted, and gave him a fifteenth of all their Goods, to banish them; and thus much for the Jewes. In this street called the Old Iewry, is a proper Parish-Church of St. Olave Up∣well, so called in Record, 1320, John Brian, Parson of St. Olave Upwell, in the Iewry, founded there a Chauncery, and gave two Messuages to that Parish, the sixteenth of Edward the second, and was by the said King confirmed. In this Church to the commendations of the Parsons and Parishioners, the Monu∣ments, of the dead, remain lesse defaced than in many other. From this Parish Church of St. Olave, to the North end of the Old Iewry, and from thence West to the North end of Ironmonger-lane, almost to the Parish Church of St. Martin, (was of old time) one large building of stone, very ancient, made in place of Jews Houses; but of what antiquity, or by whom the same was builded, or for what use, is not known: more than that King Henry) the sixth, in the sixteenth of his Reign, gave the Office of being Porter, or Keeper thereof, unto John Stent, for terme of his life, by the name of his principal Pallace in the Old Jewry. This was called the Old Wardrobe, but of latter time, the outward Strone-Wall hath bin by little and little taken down, and divers fair Houses builded thereupon, even round about. Now or the North side of this Lothbury, beginning again at the East end thereof, upon the Water-Course of Wallbrook, have ye a proper Parish Church, called St. Margaret, which was newly re-edified and builded, about the year 1440. By the West end of this Parish-Church, have ye a fair Warter-Conduit, buil∣ded at the Charges of the City, in the year, 1546. Next is the Founders Hall, a hansom House, and so to the South-West cor∣ner of Basing-hall-street, have ye fair and large Houses for Marchants, name∣ly, the Corner-house, at the end of Basings-Hall-street, an old peece of work, builded of Stone, sometime belonging to a certain Jew, named Mansere, the Sonne of Aaron, the Sonne of Coke the Jew, the seventh of Edward the first, since, to Rahere Sopers-Lane, then, to Simon Francis. Thomas Bradbury, Mer∣cer, kept his Majoralty there, deceased 1509. part of this House hath bin late∣ly imployed as a Market-house for the sale of Woollen Bayes, Watmoles, Fla∣nels, and such like. On this North side, against the Old Iewry, is Colemanstreet, so called of Cole∣man▪ the first builder and owner thereof; is also of Cole-Church, or Coleman-Church, against the great Conduit in Cheape: This is a fair and large street, on both sides builded with divers fair Houses, besides Allies with small Tene∣ments in great number, on the East side of this street, almost at the North end thereof, is the Armorers-Hall, which Company of Armorers, were made a Fra∣ternity of Guild of St. George, with a Chantry in the Chappel of St. Thomas, in Pauls Church, in the first of Henry the sixth; also on the same side is Kings Al∣ly, and Love-lane, both containing many Tenements, And on the West side, towards the South end, is the Parish Church of St. Stephen, wherein the Mo∣numents are defaced.
This Church was sometime a Synagogue of the Jews, then a Parish Church, then a Chappel to Saint Olaves in the Jewry, until the seventh of Edward the fourth, and was then incorporated, a Parish Church. Of the Eighteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Basings-Hall-Ward. THe next adjoyning to Coleman-street-Ward, on the West side thereof, is Bassings-Hall-VVard, a small thing, and consisteth of one street, called Basings-Hall-street, of Basings-Hall, the most principal House, whereof the Ward taketh name: it beginneth in the South, by the late spoken Market House, called the Bay Hall, which is the last of Coleman-street-VVard. This street runneth from thence North, down to London-Wall, and some distance both East and West, against the said Hall, And this is the bounds of Ba∣sings-Hall-VVard. Amongst divers fair Houses for Marchants, have ye three Halls of Compa∣nies, namely, the Masons Hall for the first; but of what Antiquity that Com∣pany is, I have not read. The next is the Weavers Hall, which Company hath bin of great Antiquity in this City, as appeareth by a Charter of Henry the se∣cond, in these words, Rex omnibus ad Quos, &c. to be englished thus. Henry King of England, Duke of Normandy, and of Guyan, Earl of Anjou, to the Bishop, Justices, Sheriffs, Barons, Ministers, and all his true Lieges of Lon∣don, sendeth greeting: Know ye, that we have granted to the Weavers in London their Guild, with all the Freedoms, and Customs that they had in the time of King Henry my Grandfather, so that they intermit none but within the City, of their Craft, but he be of their Guild; neither in Southwark, or other places pertaining to London, otherwise than it was done in the time of King Henry my Grand-father; wherefore I will and straightly command, that over all law∣fully they may treat, and have all aforesaid, as well in peace, free, worshipful, and wholly, as they had it ftreer, better, worshipfuller, and whollier than in the time of King Henry my Grand-father, so that they yield yearly to me, two Marks of Gold, at the feast of St. Michael. And I forbid, that any man to them do any Unright, or Disease, upon pain of ten pound, &c. Lower down, is the Girdlers Hall, and this is all touching the East side of this Ward. On the West side, almost at the South end thereof is Bakewell-Hall, corrupt∣ly called Blackwell-Hall, concerning the Original whereof, I have heard divers Opinious, which I over-passe as Fables, without colour of truth; for though the same seemed a Building of great Antiquity, yet (in mine Opinion) the Foundation thereof was first laid, since the Conquest of VVilliam, Duke of Nor∣mandy; for the same was builded upon Vaults of Stone; which Stone was brought from Cane in Normandy: The like of that in Pauls Church, builded by Mauritius and his Successors, Bishops of London; but that this House hath bin a Temple, or Jewish Synagogue (as some have fantisied) I allow not, seeing that it had no such form of roundness, or other likeness; neither had it the form of a Church, for the Assembly of Christians, which are builded East
and West; but contrariwise, the same was builded North and South, and in the form of a Noblemans House, and therefore the best Opinion (in my judgement) is, that it was (of old time) belonging to the Family of the Bassings, which was in this Realm, a name of great Antiquity and Renown; and that it beares al∣so the name of that Family, and was called therefore Basings-Haugh, or Hall. Now how Bakewell-hall took that name, is another Question, For which I read, That Thomas Bakewel dwelled in this House, in the 36. of Edward the 3d, and that in the 20. of Richard the 2d, the said King for the sum of 50. pounds, which the Mayor and the Communalty, had paid into the Hanapar, granted Li∣cence, so much as was in him, to Iohn Frosh, William Parker, and Stephen Spil∣man, (Citizens and Mercers) that they, the said Messuage, called Bakewell-hall, and one Garden, with the appurtenances, in the Parish of St. Michael of Bas∣sings-Haugh, and of St. Lawrence, in the Jewry of London, and one Messuage, two Shops, and one Garden, in the said Parish of St. Michael, which they held of the King in Burgage, might give and assign to the Mayor and Communalty for ever. This Bakewell-Hall thus established, hath bin long since imployed, as a week∣ly Market-place for all sorts of Woollen Clothes, broad and narrow, brought from all parts of this Realm, there to be sold. In the 21. of Richard the second, Richard Whittington Mayor; and in the 22, Drew Barringtine being Mayor, it was decreed, that no Forraign or stranger, should sell any Woollen-Cloth; but in Bakewell-hall, upon pain of forfeiture thereof. This House (of late years) growing ruinous, and in danger of falling, Rich∣ard May, Merchant-Taylor, at his decease, gave towards the new building of the outward part thereof, 300l. upon condition, that the same should be per∣formed, within three years after his Decease; whereupon, the old Bakewell-Hall, was taken down, and in the Moneth of February next following the foun∣dation of a new, strong, and beautiful Store-house being laid, the work thereof was so diligently applyed, that within the space of ten moneths after, to the charges of two thousand five hundred pounds, the same was finished, in the year 1588. Next beyond this House, are placed divers fair Houses for Marchants, and o∣thers, till ye come to the back Gate of Guild-hall; which Gate, and part of the building within the same, is of this Ward: some small distance beyond this Gate, the Coopers have their common Hall. Then is the Parish Church of St. Michael, called St. Michael at Bassings-hall, a proper Church, lately re-edified or new builded.
The Nineteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Cripple∣gate Ward. THe Next Ward is called of Cripplegate, and consisteth of divers Streets and Lanes, lying as well without the Gate and Wall of the City, as within. First, within the Wall on the East part thereof, towards the North; it runneth to the West-side of Bassing Hall's Ward, and towards the South, it joyneth to the Ward of Cheap; It beginneth at the West end of the St. Laurence Church in the Jury, on the North-side, and run∣eth West to a Pumpe, where sometimes was a well with Buckets, at the South Corner of Alderman-Bury-Street, which Street runneth down North to Gayspur Lane, and to London Wall, which Street and Lane are wholly (on both sides) of this Ward, and so be some few houses (on both sides) from Gayspur Lane, by and against the Wall of the City, East to the Grates, made for the water-course of the Channels, and West to the Creple∣gate. Now on the South side, from over against the West End of Saint Laurence Church, to the Pumpe, and up Milke-Street South unto Cheap, which Milke-Street is wholly (on both the sides) of Cripplegate Ward, as also without the South end of Milke-Street, a part of West Cheap, to wit, from the Standard to the Crosse, is all of Cripplegate Ward. Then down great Wood-Street, which is wholly of this Ward on both the sides thereof, so is little Wood-Street, which runneth down to Creplegate. Out of this Wood-Street be diver Lanes, namely on the East side is Lad lane, which runneth East to Milke-Street Corner, down lower in WoodStreet is Love lane, which lieth by the South side of St. Albans Church in Wood-Street, and runneth down to the Conduit in Aldermanbury-Street; Lower down in Wood-Street, is Addle-Street, out of the which runneth Philip-lane, down to London Wall. These be the Lanes on the East-side. On the West side of Wood-Street, in Huggen-lane, by the South side of St. Michaels Church & goeth thorow to Gutherons lane; Then lower is Maiden-lane, which runneth West to the North End of Gutherons lane, and up the said lane on the East side thereof, till against Kery lane, and back again, then the said Maiden-lane, on the North side, goeth up to Staining lane, & up a part thereof on the East side, to the farthest North part of Haberdashers Hall, and back again to Wood-Street, and there lower down is Silver Street, which is of this Ward, till ye come to the East End of St. Olaves Church on the South side, and to Monkes-well Street, on the North side, then down the said Monkes-well Street on the East side thereof, and so to Cripplegate, do make the bonds of this Ward within the Walls. Of these More-Feilds, you have formerly read, what a Moorish rotten ground they were, unpassable, but for Cawsways; purposely made to that intent; what they were also in our own nearer times of Memory, even till Sir Leonard Halliday was Lord Major of London, I am very well assured many do perfectly remember. And what they are now at this instant by the honour∣able cost and care of this City, and the industrious pains and diligence of that worthy Citizen Mr. Nicolas Leate, we all (to our continuall comfort) do evidently behold. Then to turn back again, through the said Posternlane to More lane, which
More-lane, with all the Allies and buildings there, is of this Ward. After that is Grub-Street more rhen half thereof to the Streightning of the Street, Next is White-Crosse-Street, up to the End of Beech-lane, and then Red-Crosse-Street, wholly with a part of Golding-lane, even to the posts there placed, as a bounder. Then is Beech lane before spoken of; the East side of the Red-Crosse, and the Barbican-Street, more than halfe thereof toward Aldersgate-Street. Touching the Antiquitie of this Old Aldermans-Bury or Court, I have not read other, then that Richard Kenery, one of the Sheriffs of London; in the first of Richard the first, which was in the year of Christ 1189. gave to the Church of Saint Mary at Osey by Oxford, certain grounds and rents in Alderman-Bury, of London, as appeareth by the Register of that Church, as as also entered into the Hustings of the Guild-Hall in London. This Old Bery, Court, or Hall continued, and the courts of the Major and Aldermen were continually holden there, untill the New Bery-Court, or Guild-Hall that now is, was builded and finished, which Hall was first begun to be founded in the year 1411, and was not fully finished in twenty years after, The ruines of the Old Court Hall in Alderman-Bury-Street yet appear which of late hath bin imployed as a Carpenters yard, &c. Then is the parish Church of St. Mry Aldermanbury, a fair Church, with a Church-yard and Cloyster adjoyning. In the which Cloyster is hanged and fast∣ned a Shanke-bone of a man (as is said) very great, and larger by three inches and a half, than that which hangeth in St. Laurence Church in the Iury, for it is in length twenty Eight inches and a half of assise, but not so hard and Steely, like as the other; for the same is Leight, and somewhat pory and spongy. This bone is said to be found amongst the bones of men removed from the Charnell house of Pauls, or rather from the Cloyster of Pauls Church. Beneath this Church have ye Gayspur-lane, which runneth down to London Wall, as is afore shewed. In this lane, at the North end thereof, was (of old time) a house of Nuns, which house being in great decay William Elsing, Mercer, in the year of Christ 1329. the third of Edward of the third, began in place thereof the foundation of an Hospitall, for sustentation of one hundred blind men: Towards the erection whereof, he gave his two houses in the Parish∣es of St. Alphage and our Blessed Lady in Aldermanbury Near Cripplegate. This house was after called a Priory or Hospitall of St. Mary the Virgin, found∣ed in the year 1332. by W. Elsing for Canons Regular, the which W. became the first Prior there. In the same place where the aforesaid Elsing Spittle and priory, were formerly scituated, there is now newly erected a Colledge for the Clergy of London, and Liberties thereof, called by the name of Sion-Colledge: And Almes-houses for twenty poor people, ten men and ten women. This was done by the especiall care and paines of Mr. Iohn Simson, Rector of St. Olaves Hart-Street London, one of the Executors of the last Will and Testa∣ment of Mr. Thomas White, Doctor in Divinity, Vicar of S. Dunstans in the West, and one of the Canons Residentiary of S. Pauls Church London: which ore-named Thomas White, (besides sundry sums of money, and great yearly Revenues given by him to pious and Charitable uses in divers places) gave three thousand pound to purchase and build the foresaid Colledge for the use of the Clergy, and Almes-houses for the twenty poor people aforesaid. He gave also unto the said Colledge, and Almes-houses, a hundred sixty pound, per annum for ever; whereof there is a hundred twenty pound yearly allowed for the maintenance of the poor Almes-men and women: And forty pound yearly for four dinners for the Clergy, who are to have four Latine Sermons in the year one every quarter, and upon these dayes are to dine together in the Col∣ledge.
In the same Colledge the forenamed Iohn Simson did in his life time, at his own proper Costs and Charges, build a very faire and spacious Library, con∣taining, a hundred twenty one foot in length, within the Walls, and above twenty five foot in breadth. And hath furnished it with Wainscot, Stalls, Desks, Seats, and other Necessary and usefull Ornaments befitting the place. To this Library there have been already divers bountifull, and well disposed Benefactors, who have given large sums of money towards the furnishing of it with Books. Then is there the Parish Church of Saint Alphage; The principall Ile of this Church towards the North, was pulled down, and a frame of four houses set up in the place: the other part, from the Steeple upward, was converted into a Parish Church of S. Alphage; and the Parish Church which stood near unto the Wall of the City by Cripplegate, was pulled down; the plot thereof made a Carpenters Yard, with Saw-pits. The Hospitall it self, the Prior, and Canons house, with other Lodgings were made a dwelling house, the Church-Yard is a Garden plot, and a faire Gallery on the Cloyster, the Lodgins for the poor are translated into stabling for horses. Now we will return to Milk-Street so call'd of Milke sold there at the be∣ginning. In this Milk-Street, is a small Parish Church of Saint Mary Mag∣delen, which hath of late years been repaired. William Brown, Mayor 1513. gave to this Church fourty pounds, and was buried there. Then Next is Wood-Street, by what reason so called, I know not. True it is, that (of old time) according to a Decree made in the reign of Richard the first, the houses of London were builded of Stone, for defence of fire, which kind of building was used for two hundred years or more, but of latter time, for the winning of ground, taken down; and houses of Timber were set up in their place. It seemeth therefore that this Street hath been of the latter build∣ing, all of timber, (for scarce one house of stone hath been known there) and therefore called Wood-Street: otherwise it might take the name of some buil∣der or owner thereof. On the East side of this Street is one of the Prison-houses, pertaining to the Sheriffs of London, and is called the Compter in Wood-Street, which was pre∣pared to be a prison-house in the year 1555. And on the Eve of S. Michael the Archangell, the prisoners that lay in the Compter in Bread-Street, were remo∣ved to this Compter in Wood-Street. Beneath this Compter in Lad-lane, or Ladle Hall, for so I find it of Record, in the parish of Saint Michaell Wood-Street; and Beneath that is Love lane, so called of wantons. By this lane is the Ancient parish Church of S. Albans. One note of the great Antiquity of it, is the name, by which it was at first dedicated to St. Albanus, the first Martyr of England. Another Character of the Antiquity of it, is to be seen in the manner of the turning of the Arches in the windows, and heads of the Pillars. A third Note, appears in the Roman Bricks, here and there here and there inlayed amongst the stones of the building. Very probable it is, that this Church is at least of as ancient a standing as King Aldelstane the Saxon, who, as the Tradition sayes, had his house at the East end of this Church. This Kings house, having a door al∣so into Adel-Street in this Parish, gave name, as 'tis thought, unto the said Adel-Street, which in all Evidences to this day, is written King Adel-Street. One great square Tower of this Kings house seems yet remaining, to be seen at the North corner of Love lane, as you come from Alderman-bury; which Tower is of the very same stone and manner of building with S. Albans Church. There is also (but without any outward Monument) the head of Iames the Fourth King of Scots of that name, slain at Flodden field, and buried here by this occasion: After the Battell, the body of the said King being found, was closed
in ead, and conveyed from thence to London, and so to the Monastery of Sheine in Surrey, where it remained for a time, in what order I am not certain: But since the dissolution of that house, in the reign of Edward the Sixth, Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, being lodged and keeping house there, the same body was to be shew'd, so lapped in lead, close to the head and body, thrown into a waste room amongst the old timber, lead, & other rubble; since which time, the work∣men there (for their foolish pleasure) hewed off his head; and Launcelot Young, Master Glasier to Queen Elizabeth, feeling a sweet savour to come from thence, and seeing the same dried from all moisture, and yet the form remaining, with the hair of the head and beard red, brought it into London, to his house in Wood∣street, where (for a time) he kept it for the sweetnesse; but in the end, caused the Sexton of that Church, to bury it amongst other bones, taken out of their Charnell, &c. There are divers Records of a house in Wood-street, then called Black Hall, but no man at this day can tell thereof. On the North side of this Saint Mi∣chaels Church is Maiden-lane, now so called, but (of old time) Ingene-lane, or Inglane. In this Lane the Wax-Chaundlers have their Common Hall, on the the South side thereof; and the Haberdashers have their Hall on the North side, at Stayning-lane end. This Company of the Haberdashers, or Hurrers, of old time so called, were incorporated a Brotherhood of St. Katherines, the twenty sixth of Henry the Sixth, and so confirmed by Henry the Seventh, the se∣venteenth of his Reign; the Cappers and Hat-Merchants, or Hurrers, being one Company of Haberdashers. Down lower in VVood-street is Silver-street (I think, of Silver-Smiths dwel∣ling there) in which be divers fair houses. And on the North side thereof is Monks-well street, so called, of a well, at the North end thereof, where the Abbot of Garendon had an house or Cell, called Saint Iames in the wall by Cripple-gate, and certain Monks of their house were Chaplains there; wherefore the Well (belonging to that Cell or Hermitage) was called Monks-well, and the street of the well, Monks-well street. The East side of this street down against London wall, and the South side thereof to Crip∣ple-gate, be of Cripple-gate Ward, as is afore-shewed. In this street, by the corner of Monks-well street, is the Bowyers Hall. On the East side of Monks-well street, be convenient Alms-houses, twelve in num∣ber, founded by Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, Maior. 1575. wherein he placed twelve poor and aged people rent-free, having each of them seven pence the week, and once the yeer each of them five sacks of Charcoals, and one quartem of one hundred of Faggots, of his gift for ever. On the North side of the way, turning towards Cripple-gate, and even upon, or close to London wall, (as it were) are certain new erected Almes-houses, six in number, of the cost and gift of Mr. Robert Rogers, Leather-Seller, and very good maintenance allowed (for ever) to such people as are appointed to dwell in them. Then, in little VVood-street, be seven proper Chambers in an Alley on the West side, founded for seven poor people, therein to dwell rent-free, by Henry Barton, Skinner, Maior, 1516. Now without the Postern of Cripple-gate, first is the Parish Church of Saint Giles, a very fair and large Church, lately repaired, after that the same was burn∣ed, in the yeer 1545, the thirty seventh of Henry the Eighth, by which mis∣chance, the Monuments of the dead in this Church are very few. In VVhite Crosse-street King Henry the Fifth builded a fair house, and founded there a Brotherhood of S. Giles to be kept, which house had sometime been an Hospitall of the French Order, by the name of Saint Giles without Cripple-gate. In the reign of Edward the First, the King having the Jurisdiction, and pointing a Custos thereof, for the Precinct of the Parish of Saint Giles, &c. which Hospi∣tall
being suppressed, the lands were given to the Brotherhood for relief of the poor. One Alley, of divers Tenements, over against the North wall of Saint Giles Church-yard, was appointed to be Alms-houses, for the poor, wherein they dwelled rent-free, and otherwise were releeved; but the said Brotherhood was suppressed by Henry the Eighth, since which time, Sir Iohn Gresham, Maior, pur∣chased the lands, and gave part thereof to the maintenance of a Free School, which he had founded at Holt, a Market-town in Norfolk. In Red Crosse-street, on the West side from S. Giles Church-yard, up to the said Crosse, be many fair houses builded outward, with divers Alleys, turning into a large plot of ground, of old time called the Iews Garden, as being the only place appointed them in England, wherein to bury their dead, till the year 1177, the twenty fourth of Henry the Second, that it was permitted them (after long suit to the King and Parliament at Oxford) to have a speciall place assigned them in every quarter where they dwelled. On the East side of this Red Crosse-street, be also divers fair houses, up to the Crosse, and there is Beech-lane, peradventure so called of Nicholas de la Beech, Lievtenant of the Tower of London, put out of that office in the thirteenth of Edward the Third. This Lane stretcheth from Red Crosse-street to VVhite Crosse-street, replenished not with Beech trees, but with beautifull houses of Stone, Brick, and Timber: Amongst the which was (of old time) a great house per∣taining to the Abbot of Ramsey, for his lodging, when he repaired to the City; it is now called Drewry House, of Sir Drew Drewry, who dwelt there. On the North side of this Beech-lane, towards VVhite Crosse street, the Dra∣pers of London have lately builded eight Alms-houses of Brick and Timber, for eight poor widows of their own Company, whom they placed there rent-free. Then is Golding-lane: Richard Gallard of Islington Esquire, Citizen and Painter-Stainer of London, founded thirteen Alms-houses, for so many poor peo∣ple placed in them rent-free. He gave to the poor of the same Alms-houses, two pence the peece weekly, and a load of Charcoals among them yeerly for ever: He left fair lands about Islington, to maintain his Foundation. T. Hayes, sometime Chamberlain of London, in the latter time of Henry the Eighth, mar∣ried Elizabeth, his daughter and heir, which Hayes and Elizabeth had a daughter named Elizabeth, married to Iohn Ironmonger, of London Mercer, who had the ordering of the Alms-people. On the West side of Red Crosse-street, is a street called the Barbican, because sometime there stood on the North side thereof a Burghkenning or VVatch-tower of the City, called in some language a Barbican, as a Bikening is called Beacon. This Burgh-kenning, by the name of the Mannour of Base Court, was given by Edward the Third, to Robert Ufford Earl of Suffolk, and was afterward pertaining, to Peregrine Barty, Lord VVilloughby of Ersby. Next adjoyning to this, is one other great house, called Garter Place, some∣time builded by Sir Thomas VVrithe, or VVrithesly, Knight, aliàs Garter, princi∣pall King of Arms, second son of Sir Iohn VVrithe, Knight, aliàs Garter, and was Uncle to the first Thomas, Earl of Southampton, Knight of the Garter, and Chancellor of England: He built this house, and in the top thereof a Chappell, which he dedicated by the name of S. Trinitatis in Alto.
Of the Twentieth Ward, or Aldermanry, of the City of LONDON, calld Alders∣gate Ward. THe Next is Aldersgate Ward, taking name of that North Gate of the City: this Ward also consisteth o divers Streets and Lanes, lying as well within the Gate and Wall, as without, And first, to speak of that part within the Gate, thus it is, the East part thereof joyneth unto the West part of Cripplegate Ward, in Engain lane, or Maiden lane; It beginneth on the North side of that Lane, at Staining lane End runneth up, from the Haberdashers Hall, to St. Mary Staining Church, and by the Church East, winding almost to Wood Street; and West through Oate lane; and then by the South side of Bacon house in Noble-Street, back again by Lilipot lane, which is also of that ward, to Maiden lane; and so on that North side West to Saint Iohn Zacharies Church, and to Foster lane. Now on the south side of Engain or Maiden lane, is the West side of Gutherons lane. to Kery lane and Kery lane it self (which is of this ward) and back again into Engain lane, by the North side of the Goldsmiths Hall, to Foster lane are almost wholly of this Ward: which beginneth in the South toward Cheap on the East side by the North side of Saint Fosters Church, and runneth down North West by the East end of Engain lane by Lilipot lane, and Oate lane, to Noble-Street, and through that by Shelly house, (of old time so called, as belonging to the Shellies) Sir Thomas Shelley Knight, was owner thereof in the first of Henry the fourth. It is now called Bacon-House, because the same was new builded by Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord-Keeper of the Great Seal; Down on that side by Serjeant Fleet-Woods house, Recorder of London, who also new builded it to Saint Olaves Church in Silver-Street, which is by the North-West End of this Noble-Street. Then have ye Maine Street of this Ward, which is called Saint Martins lane, in cluding Saint Martin, on the East side thereof; and so down on both the sides to Aldersgate. And these be the bounds of this Ward, within the Wall and Gate. Without the Gate, the main Street called Aldersgate-Street, runneth up North on the East side to the West end of Hounds-ditch or Barbican-Street; a part of which Street, is also of this Ward; And on the West side to Long-Lane, a part whereof is likewise of this Ward. Beyond the which Aldersgate, is Goswell Street up to the Barrs. And on the West side of Hidersgate Street, by Saint Buttolphs Church, is Briton-Street which runneth West to a Pumpe, and then North to the Gate, which en∣treth the Church-Yard, sometimes pertaining to the Priory of Saint Bartholo∣mews on the east side & on the west side towards St. Bartholomews Spittle, to a paire of posts there fixed. And these be the bounds of this Aldersgate Ward without. The antiquities be these, first in Stainng lane, of old time so called, as may be supposed of Painter-stainers dwelling there. On the East side thereof, adjoyning to the Aaberdashers Hall, be ten Almes∣houses, pertaining to the Haberdashers; wherein be placed ten Almes people of that Company, every of them having Eight pence the peece every Friday for ever, by the gift of Thomas Huntlow, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffs, in the year, 1539. Then is the small Parish Church of Saint Mary, called Staining, because it standeth, at the North end of Staining lane. Then is Engain lane, or Maiden lane; and, at the North-West Corner thereof,
the Parish Church of St. John Zachary, a fair Church, with the Monuments well preserved, of Thomas Lichfield who founded a Chancery there, in the fourteenth of Edward the second. On the East side of this Foster Lane, at Engane Lane end, is Goldsmiths Hall, a proper House, but not large; and therefore to say▪ that Bartholmew Read Gold∣smith, Mayor in the year 1502 kept such a feast in this Hall, as some have fabu∣led, is far incredible, and altogether unpossible, considering the smallnesse of the Hall, & number of the Guests, which as they say, were more than one hun∣dred persons of great estate; But of late years the said Goldsmiths Hall is much enlarged and in a stately and sumptuous manner, in so much that it may compare with any other Hall in London. Then at the North end of Noble-street, is the Parish Church of St. Olave in Silver-street, a small thing. On the West side of Foster-Lane, is the small Parish Church of St. Leonards, for them of St. Martins le Grand. A number of Tenements being lately builded in place of the great Collegiate Church of St. Martin: that Parish is mightily encreased. Then in Pope-lane, so called of one Pope that was owner thereof▪ On the North side is the Parish Church of Saint Anne in the Willowes, so called, I know not upon what occasion, but some say, of Willowes growing thereabouts, but now there is no such void place for Willowes to grow, more than the Church-yard, wherein do grow some high Ash-trees to this day. Then in St. Martins Lane was (of old time) a fair and large Colledge, of a Dean and Secular Canons or Priests, and was called Saint Martins le grand, foun∣ded by Ingelricus, and Edwardus his Brother, in the year of Christ 1056, and confirmed by William the Conqueror, as appeareth by his Charter, dated 1068. This Colledge claimed great Priviledges of Sanctuary, and otherwise, as appea∣reth in a Book written by a Notary of that House, about the year 1442 the nineteenth of Henry the sixth: wherein, amongst other things, is set down and declared that on the first of September, in the year aforesaid, a Souldier, priso∣ner in Newgate, as he was led by an Officer towards the Guild-Hall of London, there came out of Panyer Alley five of his fellowship, and took him from the Officer, brought him into Sanctuary, at the West door of St. Martins Church, and took Grithe of that place; But the same day Philip Malpas, & Robert Mar∣shall, then Sheriffs of London, with many other entred the said Church, and for∣cibly took out with them the said five men thither fled, led them fettered to the Counter, and from thence chained by the Necks to Newgate: of which violent taking, the Dean and Chapter in large manner complained to the King, and re∣quired him as their Patron, to defend their Priviledges, like as his Predecessors had done, &c. All which complaint and suite, the Citizens by their Counsel Markham Serjeant at the Law, Iohn Carpenter common Clerk of the City, and others, learnedly answered, offering to prove, that the said place of St. Martin had no such Immunity or Liberty, as was pretended. Notwithstanding, after long debating of this Controversie, by the Kings commandment, & assent of his Councel in the Starr-Chamber, the Chancellour and Treasurer, sent a Writ unto the Sheriffs of London, charging them to bring the said five persons, with the cause of their taking and withholding, afore the King in his Chancery on the Vigil of Alhallowes: on which day, the said Sheriffs, with the Recorder and Counsel of the City, brought and delivered them accordingly, afore the said Lords; where the Chancellour, after he had declared the Kings Commandement, sent them to St. Martins, there to abide freely, as in a place having Franchises, whiles them liked, &c. Without Aldersgate on the East side of Aldersgate-street, is the Cookes Hall, which Cooks (or Pastlers) were admitted to be a Company, and to have a Ma∣ster and Wardens, in the two and twentieth of Edward the fourth; From
thence, along unto Houndsditch, or Barbican street, be many fair Houses; on the West side also, be the like fair buildings, till ye come to Long-Lane, and so to Goswell street. In Britaine street, which took that name of the Duke of Britain Lodging there, is one proper Parish Church of St. Buttolph; In which Church was sometime a Brotherhood of St. Fabian and Sebastian, founded in the year 1377, the fifty one of Edward the third; and confirmed by Henry the fourth in the sixth of his Reign. Then Henry the sixth in the twenty fourth of his Reign, to the honour of the Trinity, gave Licence to Dame Joane Astley, sometime his Nurse, to R. Cawood and T. Smith, to found the same a Fraternity perpetually, to have a Master and two Custos with Brethren and Sisters; This Brotherhood was en∣dowed with Lands, more than thirty pounds by the year, and was suppressed by Edward the sixth. Of the One and Twentieth Ward, or Alder∣manry of the City of London, called Faringdon Ward Intra. ON the South side of Aldersgate Ward, lyeth Faringdon Ward, called Intra, or within, for a difference from another Ward of that name, which lyeth without the Walls of the City, and is therefore called Farringdon Extra. These two Wards (of old time) were but one, and had also but one Alderman; The whole great Ward of Faringdon, both Intra and Extra took name of W. Farrendon Goldsmith, Alderman of that Ward, and one of the Sheriffs of London, in the year 1281, the ninth of Edward the first; He purchased the Aldermanry of this Ward, as by the Abstract of Deeds which are yet extant, may appear. At the South-West corner of Wood-street, is the Parish Church of St, Peter the Apostle, by the said Crosse: a proper Church. John Sha Goldsmith, Mayor, de∣ceased 1503, appointed by his Testament, the said Church and Steeple to be new builded of his goods, with a flat roof. Notwithstanding, Tho. Wood Gold∣smith, one of the Sheriffs 1491, is accounted a principal Benefactor, because the roof of the middle Isle is supported by Images of Woodmen, thought to be at his charge. The long Shop, or Shed encroaching on the High-street before this Church Wall, was licenced to be made in the year 1401, yielding to the Chamber of London three shillings four pence yearly for the time. Also the same Shop was letten by the Parish, for three pounds at the most, many years since. Then is Guthuruns Lane, so called of Guthurun, sometime owner thereof, the Inhabitants of this Lane (of old time) were Gold-beaters, as doth appear by Re∣cords in the Exchequer. For, the Easterling money, was appointed to be made of fine Silver, such as men made into foyle, and was commonly called Silver
of Guhrons Lane, &c. The Imbroyderers Hall is in this Lane, Iohn Throwstone Imbroyderer, then Goldsmith, Sheriff, deceasing 1519. gave forty pound to∣wards the purchase of this Hall; Hugon Lane on the East side, and Key Lane called of one Kery on the West. Then in the High street on the same North side, is the Sadlers Hall, and then Foster-Lane, so called, of Saint Fosters, a fair Church, lately new builded. Henry Coote Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, deceased 1509, builded St. Dunstans Chappel there. Iohn Throwstone, one of the Sheriffs, gave to the building there∣of one hundred pounds by his Testament. John Brown Sergeant-painter Alder∣man, deceased 1532, was a great Benefactor, and was there buried. William Trist Selerar to the King 1425. John Standelf Goldsmiths, lye buried there. Richard Galder 1544, Agnes Wife to William Milbourne, Chamberlain of Lon∣don, 1500. In this West side is the Barber Chirurgions Hall; This Company was Incorpo∣rated by means of Thomas Morestead, Esquire, one of the Sheriffs of London, a thousand four hunded thirty six; Chirurgion to the Kings of England, Henry the fourth, fifth, and sixth He deceased 1450. Then Jaques Fries, Physitian to Edward the fourth, and William Hobbs, Physician and Chirurgion to the same Kings Body, continuing the Suite the full terme of twenty years. Edward the fourth in the second of his Reign, and Richard Duke of Glocester became Foun∣ders of the same Corporation, in the Parish of Saint Cosme and Damiane. The first assembling of that Mystery was by Roger Strippe, William Hobbs, Thomas Goddard, and Richard Kent, since the which time they builded their Hall in that street, &c. At the North corner of this street, on the same side, was sometime an Hermi∣tage, or Chappel of Saint James called in the Wall, near Creplegate, it belonged to the Abbey and Covent of Garadon, as appeareth by a Record the seven and twentieth of Edward the first; and also the fiftieth of Edward the third, William de Lions was Hermit there, and the Abbot and Convent of Garadon found two Chaplains Cestercan Monkes of their House, in this Hermitage one of them, for Aymor de Valence Earl of Pembrooke, and Mary de Saint Paul his Countesse. Of these Monks, and of a Well pertaining to them, the street took that name, and is called Monkes-Well street. This Hermitage with the appurrenances, was in the Reign of Edward the sixth, purchased from the said King by W. Lambe, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Chappel, Citizen, and Cloth-worker of Lon∣don; He deceased in the year 1577, and then gave it to the Cloth-workers of Lon∣don, with other Tenements to the value of fifty pounds the year, to the intent they shall hire a Minister, to say Divine Service there. Again, to the High street of Cheap, from Foster Lane end, to St. Martins, and by that Lane to the Shambles or Flesh-markt, on the North side whereof is Pen∣tecost Lane, containing divers Slaughter-houses for the Butchers. Then was there of old time, a hansome Parish Church of Saint Nicholas, whereof the said Flesh-market took the name, and was called Saint Nicholas Shambles. This Church with the Tenements and Ornaments, was by Henry the eighth given to the Mayor and Communalty of the City, towards the maintenance of the New Parish Church, then to be erected in the late dissolved Church of the Gray Fryers, so was this Church dissolved and pulled down, in place whereof, and of the Church-yard; many fair Houses are now builded, in a Court with a Well, in the middest whereof the Church stood. Then is Stinking Lane, formerly so called, or Chick Lane, at the East end of the Gray Fryers Church, it is now kept clean, and free from annoyance, and cal∣led by the name of Butchers Hall Lane, for there is the Butchers Hall.
In the third of Richard the second, motion was made, that no Butcher should kill any flesh within London, but at Knightsbridge, or such like distant place from the Walls of the City. Then is there the late dissolved Church of Gray Fryars, the Originall where∣of was thus; In the year 1224, being the 8th year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d, there came out of Italy nine Fryers of the order of the Franciscans, or Frior Minors; five whereof were Priests, and the other four Lay-men; the Priests placed themselves at Canterbury in Kent, but the other four came to London, and were lodged (for some short while) among the preaching Fryers, who lived then in Oldburn, now Holborne, Afterwards, they obtained to be placed in Cornhil London, man House belonging to one Iohn Travers, who was then one of the Sheriffs of Lon∣don, in the same year 1224 in which House they made themselves Cells, and inhabited there for a certain time, till their number so encreased, and the Citi∣zens devotion grew to be so great, that (within few years after) they were thence removed, by the means of one Iohn Ewin Mercet, who purchased a void plot of ground, near to St. Nicholas Shambles, where to erect an House for the said Fry∣ers. Divers Citizens seemed herein to joyn with the said Iohn Ewin, and erected there very beautiful Buildings, upon the same ground so formerly purchased by John Ewin, and a great part builded at his own Charge, which he appropriated to the Communalty of London, and then entred into the same Order of Friers, as a Lay-Brother himself. This whole Church contained in length three hundred foot, of the feet of St. Paul, in breadth eighty nine foot, and in heighth from the ground to the roof, sixty four foot, and two inches, &c. It was consecrated 1325, and at the Ge∣nerall suppression, was valued at thirty two pound, nineteen shillings; and sur∣rendred the twelfth of November 1538, the thirty of Henry the eighth: the Or∣naments and goods being taken to the Kings use, the Church was shut up for a time▪ and used as a Store-house of goods taken prizes from the French, but in the year 1546, on the third of January, it was again set open, on the which day preached at Pauls Crosse the Bishop of Rochester, where he declared the Kings gift thereof to the City, for the relieving of the poor; which gift was inroll'd by Patents. St. Bartholmews Spittle in Smithfield, lately valued at three hundred five pounds: six shillings, seven pence, and surrendred to the King, was of the said Church of the Gray Fryars and of two Parish Churches the one of St. Nicholas in the Shambles, and the other of St. Ewins in Newgate-Market; they were to be made one Parish Church, in the said Fryers Church: In Lands he gave for maintenance of the said Church, with Divine Service, reparations, &c. five hun∣dred Marks by year for ever. The thirteenth of January, the thirty eighth of Henry the eighth, an agree∣ment was made betwixt the King and the Mayor, and Communalty of London, dated the twenty seven of December, by which the said gift of the Gray Fryers Church, with all the Edifices and ground, the Fratrie, the Library, the Portar, and Chapter House, the great Cloistry and the lesser, Tenements, Gardens, and vacant grounds, Lead, Stone, Iron, &c. The Hospitall of St. Bartholmew in West Smithfield▪ the Church of the same, the Lead, Bells, and Ornaments of the same Hospitall, with all the Messuages Tenements and appurtenan∣ces. The Parishes of Saint Nicholas and of Saint Ewin, and so much of Saint Sepul∣chres Parish as is within Newgate, were made one Parish Church in the Grey Fryers Church, and called Christs Church, founded by King Henry the eighth.
In the year 1552, began the repairing of the Gray Fryars House, for the poor fatherlesse Children; and in the Month of November, the children were taken into the same, to the number of almost four hundred. On Christmas day in the afternoon, while the Lord Mayor and Aldermen rod to Pauls, the Children of Christs Hospital stood, from Saint Lawrence Lane end in Cheap towards Pauls, all in one Livery of Russet Cotton, three hundred and forty in Number, and in the Easter next they were in Blue at the Spittle, and so have continued ever since. For these sorts of poor, three several Houses were provided. First, for the innocent and fatherlesse, which is the Beggars Child, they provided the House that was the late Gray Fryers in London, and called it by the name of Christs Ho∣spitall, where poor Children are trained up in the Knowledge of God, and some vertuous exercises, to the overthrow of beggary. For the second degree, was provided, the Hospitals of Saint Thomas in Southwark, and Saint Bartholmew in West Smithfield, where are continually, (at least) two hundred diseased persons, which are not only there lodged and cured, but also fed and nourished. For the third degree, they provided Bridewell, where the Vagabond and idle Strumpet is chastised, and compelled to labour, to the overthrow of the vicious life of idlenesse. They provided also for the honest decayed housholder, that he should be re∣lieved at home at his House, and in the Parish where he dwelled, by weekly re∣lief and Pension; And in like manner they provided for the Lazer, to keep him out of the City, from clapping of dishes and ringing of Bells, to the great trouble of the Citizens, & also to the dangerous infection of many, that they should be relieved at home at their Houses by several Pensions. St. Bartholmewes Hospital is incorporated by the name of Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of the City of London, Governours of the Hospital for the poor, called little St. Bartholmews, near to West Smithfield, of the Foundation of King Henry the eighth. Christs Hospitall, Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle in Southwarke, are incorporated, by the names of the Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London, Governours of the Possessions, Revenues, ad Goods of the Hospitals of Edward King of England the sixth, of Christ, Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apo∣stle, &c. This Church was full of many great Monuments, as of the Lady Mar∣garet Daughter to Philip of France, and Wife to Edward the first. Of Queen Isabel Wife to Edward the second. Of Joane Queen of the Scots, Wife to David Bruce. Of Isabel, Daughter to Edward the third. Of Eleanor Dutchesse of Britain. Of the Lady Beatrix, Dutchesse of Britain, Daughter to Henry the third. Of Roger Mortimer, Earl of March. Of John Hastings Earl of Pembrook. Of John Duke of Bourton, who had been taken Prisoner at Agencourt, with di∣vers other great Personages. There is lately erected there in the South end of the Chancel and extraor∣dinary hansome Monument to the Lady Venetia Stanley, Wife to the noble Knight Sir Kenelme Digby. Now for the South side of this Ward, beginning again at the Crosse in Cheap, from thence to Fryday-street, and down that street on the West side, till over against the North-west corner of Saint Matthewes Church; And on the West side, to the South corner of the said Church, is wholly in the Ward of Faringdon.
From this Fryday-street West, to the old Exchange, a street so called of Kings Exchange there kept, which was for the receipt of Bullion, to be coyned. For Henry the third, in the sixth year of his Reign, wrote to the Scahines, and men of Ipre that he and his Councel had given prohibition, that no Englishmen, or other should make change of Plate, or other Masse of Silver, but only in his Ex∣change at London, or at Canterbury; Andrew Bukerel, then had to arm the Ex∣change of England & was Maior of London; in the Reign of Henry the third, Iohn Somercote, had the keeping of the Kings Exchange overall England. In the eighth of Edward the first, Gregory Rockley, was Keeper of the said Exchange for the King in the fith of Edward the second, William Hausted was Keeper thereof; And in the eighteenth, Roger de Frowick, &c. These received the old stamps, or Coyning-Irons, from time to time, as the same were worn, and delivered new to all the Mints in England. This street beginneth by VVest-Cheap in the North, and runneth down South, to Knight-rider-street-that part thereof which is called Old Fish-street: But the very Housing and Office of the Exchange and Coynage, was about the midst thereof, South from the East Gate, that entreth Pauls Church-yard, and on the West side, in Baynards-Castle Ward. On the East side of this Lane, betwixt West-Cheap, and the Church of St. Au∣gustine, Henry VValleis Mayor, (by Licence of Edward the first) builded one row of Houses, the profits rising of them to be imployed on London Bridge. The Parish-Church of St. Augustine, and one House next adjoyning, in VVathing-street, is of this Ward called Faringdon. Then is the North Church-yard of Pauls, in the which standeth the Cathedral Church first founded by Ethelbert, King of Kent, about the year of Christ 610. He gave Lands thereunto, as appeareth, Ethelbertus, Rex, Deo inspirante, pro animae suae remedio, dedit Episcopo Melito terram quae appellatur Tillingeham, ad Monasteris sui solatium▪ scilicet, S. Pauli, &c. Ego Rex Ethelbertus ita firmiter concedo tibi praesuli Melito potestatem ejus habendi & possidendi ut in perpetuum in Monasterii utilitate permaneas, &c. Athelstan, Edgar, Edward the Con∣fessor, and others also, gave Lands thereunto. William the Conqueror, gave to the Church of St. Paul, and to Mauricius, then Bishop, and his Suc∣cessors, the Castle of Stortford▪ with the appurtenances, &c. He also confirmed the gifts of his Predecessors, in these words, ut habeant quiet as in perpetuum, 24. Hidas quas Rex Athelbert dedit S. Paulo juxta Murum London, &c. The Charter of King William the Conqueror, exemplified in the Tower, englished thus. William, By the Grace of God, King of Englishmen, to all his well-beloved French and English People, greeting: Know ye, that I do give unto God, and the Church of St. Paul of London, and to the Rectors and Serviors of the same, in all other Lands which the Church hath, or shall have, within Borough, and without, Sack and Sock, Thole and The, Infangtheef, and Grithbirche, and all free Shps by Sea, and by Land, on Tide, and off-Tide, and all the Rights that unto them Chri∣stendom by rad and more speak, and on Buright hamed, and on Buright work, afore all the Bishopricks in mine Land, and on each other mans Land. For I will, that the Church in all things, be as free, as I would my soul to be in the day of Iudgement. In the year 1087. this Church of St. Paul, was burnt with fire, and there∣with the most part of the City; which fire began at the entry of the West Gate, and consumed the East Gate. Mauricius then Bishop, began therefore the Foundation of a new Church of St. Paul, a work, that men (of that time) judg∣ed▪ would neer have bin finished, it was to them so wonderful for length and breadth; and also the same was builded upon Arches (or Vaults) of stone, for defence of fire, which was a manner of work (before that time) unknown to
the people of this Nation, and then brought in by the French, and the Stone was fetch'd from Cane in Normandy. The Steeple of this Church was builded and finished in the year 1222. The Crosse on the said Steeple fell down, and a new was set up in the year 1314. The new work of Pauls (so called) at the East end aboe the Quite, wa be∣gun in the year 1251. Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, Constable of Chester, and Custos of England, in his time was a great Benefactor to this work, and was there buried, in the year 1310. The first of February, in the year 1444. about two of the Clock in the After-noon, the Steeple of Pauls was fired by Lightning, in the midst of the Shaft, or Spire, both on the West side, and on the South; but by labour of many well dis∣poed people, the same was (to appearance) quenched with Vineger. This Steeple was repaired in the year 1462. and the Weather-Cock again erected, Robert Goodwin winding it up, the Rope brake, and he was destroyed on the Pinacles, and the Cock was sore bruised; but Brchwood (the Kings Plummer) set it up again; since the which time, needing reparation, it was both taken down and set up in the year 1553. At which time it was found to be of Copper, gilt over, and the length from the Bill to the Tail, be∣ing four foot, and the breadth over the Wings, three foot and a half, it weighed forty pounds, the Crosse from the Bole, to the Eagle (or Cock) was fifteen foot and six inches of assize; the length thereof, overthwart, was five foot and ten Inches, and the Compass of the Bole was nine foot and one inch. The inner Body of this Crosse was Oak, the next Cover was lead, and the outermost was of Copper red varnished. The Bole and Eagle, or Cock, were of Copper, and gilt also. The height of the Steeple was 520 Foot, whereof the Stone-work was 260 Foot, and the Spire was likewise 260 Foot. The length of the whole Church is 240 Taylors yards, which make 720 Foot. The breadth thereof is 130 Foot, and the heighth of the Body of that Church, is 150 Foot. The Colledge of petty Cannons there, was founded by King Richard the second, in honour of Queen Anne his Wife, and of her Progenitors, in the se∣venteenth of his Reign. Their Hall and Lands was then gien unto them, as appeareth by the Patent, Robert Dokesworth, then being Master thereof. In the year 1408. the petty Canons then building their Colledge, the Maior and Communalty granted them their Water-Courses, and other Ease∣ments. There was also one great Cloyster, on the North side of this Church, invi∣roning a Plot of ground of old time called Pardon Church-yard, whereof Tho∣mas Moore, Dean of Pauls, was either the first builder, or a most special Bene∣factor, and was buried there. About this Cloyster, was artificially, and richly painted the Dance of Mo∣chabray, or Dance of Death, commonly called the Dance of Pauls, the like whereof was painted about S. Innocents Cloyster, at Paris in France; the Meeters or Poesie of this Dance, were translated out of French into English, by Iohn Lidgate, Monk of Berry, the Picture of Death leading all estates. In the midst of this Pardon Church-yard, was also a fair Chappel, first foun∣ded by Gilbert Becket, Portgrave, and principal Magistrate of this City, in the Reign of King Stephen, who was there buried. There was also a Chappel at the North door of Pauls, founded by Walter Sherington, by Licence of Henry the sixth. There was furthermore, a fair Chappel of the Holy Ghost, in Pauls Church, on the North side, ounded in the year 1400, by Roger Holmes, Chancellor, and Prebendary of Pauls. Then under the Quire of Pauls, is a large Chappel, first dedicated to the name of Iesu, founded, or rather confirmed the 37. of Henry the sixth, as ap∣peareth by his Parent thereof, dared at Crowdown to this effect.
Many Liege-Men and Christian People, having begun a Fraternity and Guild, to the honour of the most glorious name of Jesu Christ, our Saviour, in a place call∣ed the Crowds of the Cathedral Church of Pauls in London, which hath continued long time peaceably, till now of late; whereupon they have made request, and we have taken upon us, the name and charge of the Foundation, to the laud of Almigh∣ty God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and especially, to the honour of Jesu, in whose honour the Fraternity was begun, &c. At the West end of this Iesus Chappel, under the Quire of Pauls, also was, and is, a Parish-Church of St. Faith, commonly called St. Faith under Pauls, which served (as still it doth) for the Stationers and others, dwelling in Pauls Church-yard▪ Pater Noster Rowe, and the places near adjoyning. The said Chappel of Jesus, being suppressed in the Reign of Edward the sixth, the Parishioners of St. Faiths Church were removed into the same, as to a place more sufficient for largeness and lightsomness, in the year 1551. and so it remaineth. In the East part of this Church-yard standeth Pauls School, lately new buil∣ded, and endowed in the year 1512. by John Collet, Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Pauls, for a hundred fifty three poor mens Children, to be taught free in the same School; for which he appointed a Master, a Sub-master or Usher, and a Chaplain, with large stipends for ever, committing the over-sight thereof, to the Masters, Wardens, and Assistants of the Mercers in London, because he was Son to Henry Collet, Mercer, sometime Maior. Near unto this School, on the North side thereof, was (of old time) a great and high Clochier, or Bell-house, foure square, builded of stone, and in the same, a most strong frame of Timber, with four Bells, the greatest of England: these were called Jesus Bells, and belonging to Jesus Chappel: The same had a great spire of Timber, covered with Lead, with the Image of St. Paul, on the top, but was pulled down by Sir Miles Partridge Knight, in the Reign of Henry the eighth: the common speech then was, that he did set one hundred pounds, upon a cast at Dice against it, & so won the said Clochier and Bells of the King, & then causing the Bells to be broken as they hung, the rest was pulled down: This man was afterward executed on the Tower-Hill, for matters concerning the Duke of Summerset, the fifth of Edward the sixth. In the year 1561. the fourth of June, betwixt the houres of three and four of the Clock in the Afternoon, the great Spire of the Steeple of St. Pauls Church, was fired by lightening, which brake forth (as it seemed) two or three yards beneath the foot of the Crosse, and from thence it burnt downward the spire to the Battlements, Stone-work, and Bells, so furiously, that within the space of four houres, the same Steeple, with all the roofs of the Church, were consu∣med, to the great sorrow, and perpetual remembrance of the beholders; After this mischance, the Queen Elizabeth directed her Letters to the Maior, willing him to take order for speedy repairing of the same; And she, of her gracious disposition, for the furtherance thereof, did presently give, and deliver in gold, one thousand Marks, with a Warrant for a thousand Loads of Timber, to be ta∣ken out of her Woods, or else-where. The Citizens also gave first a great Benevolence, and after that three fifteens to be speedily paid. The Clergy of England, within the Province of Canterbury, granted the for∣tieth part of the value of their Benefices, charged with first fruits, the thirtieth part of such as were not so charged; but the Clergy of London Dioces, granted the thirtieth part of all that payd first fruits, and the twentieth part of such as had paid their fruits.
Six Citizens of London, and two Petty Canons of Pauls Church, had charge to further and oversee the work, wherein such expedition was used, that within one Moneth next following the burning thereof, the Church was covered with boards and Lead, in manner of a false roof, against the Weather, and before the end of the said year, all the said Iles of the Church▪ were framed out of new Timber, covered with Lead, and fully fi∣nished. Pauls Church was full of great Monuments, the ancientest are of King Sibba, and King Ethelred, two Saxon Kngs: There are two ancient Bishops of Lon∣don, viz. Erkenvald, and William Norman, who being of the privy Councel to William the Conqueror, not only preserved, by his Mediation, the old prii∣ledges of London, but got them inlarged; whereupon, it was the Custom of the Lord Maior and Aldermen, upon solemn dayes, when they came to Pauls to walk to the Graves stone, where this Bishop lay; and Sir Edward Barkham, caused a Table to be hung up there with Verses thereupon, called the Monument of Gratitude. Touching other remarkable peeces of Antiquity, which belong to St. Pauls Church, I leave them to such a Person of knowledge and industry, who may haply make it his sole task to preserve the memory of so stately a Temple from the injury of time. Without the North Gate of Pauls Church, from the end of the old Ex∣change, West up Pater Noster Rowe, by the two Lanes out of Pauls Church, the first out of the Crosse Isle of Pauls, the other out of the body of the Church, about the midst thereof, and so West to the Golden Lyon, be all of this Ward, as is aforesaid: The Houses in this street from the first North Gate of Pauls Church-yard, unto the next Gate, were first builded without the Wall of the Church-yard, by Henry Walleis Mayor, in the year 1282. the rest of those Hou∣ses go to the maintenance of London-Bridge. This street is now called Pater Noster Rowe, because of Stationers, or Text-Writers, that dwelled there, who wrote, and sold all sorts of Books then in use, namely, A. B. C. with the Pater Noster, Ave, Creed, Graces, &c. There dwelled also Turners of Beads, and they were called Pater Noster makers. At the end of this Pater Noster Rowe, is Ave-mary lane, so called upon the like occasion, of Text-writers, and Bead-makers then dwelling there. And at the end of that Lane, is likewise Creed-lane, lately so called, but some∣time Spurrier Rowe, of Spurriers dwelling there; And Amen-lane is added there∣unto, betwixt the South end of Warwick-lane, and the North end of Ave Mary Lane. At the North end of Ave Mary Lane, is one great House, builded of Stone and Timber, of old time pertaining to Iohn Duke of Britain, Earl of Richmond, as appeareth by the Records of Edward the second; since that, it was called Pem∣brooks Inne, near unto Ludgate, as belonging to the Earls of Pembrooke, in the times of Richard the second, the eighteenth year, and of Henry the sixth, in the fourteenth year: it was after called Aburgaveny House, and belonged to Hen∣ry, late Lord of Aburgaveny; but the Company of Stationers have since pur∣chased it, and made it the Hall for the Meeting of their Society, converting the Stone-work into a new fair Frame of Timber, and applying it to such serviceable use, as themselves have thought convenient. Betwixt the South end of Ave Mary Lane, and the North end of Creed-lane, is the comming out of Pauls Church-yard, on the East, and the high street on the West, towards Ludgate, and this was called Bowyer Roue, of Bowyers dwel∣ling there in old time, now worn out by Mercers and others.
In this street, on the North side, is the Parish Church of St. Martin, wherein there are divers hansom Monuments, and Epitaphs. On the South side of this street, is the turning into the Black Fryers, which Order (sometime) had their Houses in Old-born, where they remained for the space of five and fifty years, and then, in the year 1276. Gregory Rocksley, Mayor, and the Barons of this City, granted and gave to Robert Kilwarby, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, two Lanes or wayes next the street of Baynards Castle; and also the Tower of Mount fitchet, to be destroyed; in place of which, the said Robert, builded the late new Church of the Black-Fryers, and placed them therein; King Edward the first, and Eleanor his Wife, were great Benefactors thereunto: this was a large Church, and richly furnished with Ornaments, wherein divers Parliaments, and other great Meetings have been holden; namely, in the year 1450▪ the twenty eighth of Henry the sixth, a Parliament was begun at VVestminster, and adjourned to the Black Fryers in London, and from thence to Leicester. In the year one thousand five hundred twenty two, the Emperor Charls the fifth, was lodged there. In the year one thousand five hundred twenty foure, the fifteenth of April, a Parliament was begun at the Black Fryers, wherein was demanded a Subsidy of 800000. pounds, to be raised of Goods and Lands, four shillings in every pound; and in the end, was granted two shillings of the pound, of their Goods and Lands, that were worth twenty pound, or might dispend twenty pounds by the year, and so upward, to be paid in two years. This Parliament was adjourned to VVestminster, amongst the black Monks, and ended in the Kings Palace there, the 14th of August, at nine of the Clock in the night, and was therefore called the Black Parliament. The same year, in the moneth of October, began a Parliament in the Black Fryers; in the which, Cardinal VVoolsey was condemned in the premunire: this House, valued at a hundred and four pound, fifteen shillings five pence, was surrendred the 12th of November, the 30th of Henry the 8th. Now to turn again to the Black Fryers, through Bowyer Rowe, Ave Mary Lane, and Pater Noster Rowe, to the Church of St. Michael ad Bladum, or at the Corn, (corruptly, at the Querne) so called, because in place thereof, was sometime a Corn-Market, stretching up West to the Shambles; It seemeth, that this Church was new builded, about the Reign of Edward the third, Tho∣mas Newton, first Parson there, was buried in the Quire, in the year 1461. At the East end of this Church stood a Crosse, called the old Crosse, in West Cheap, which was taken down in the year 1390. since the which time, the said Parish Church was also taken down, but new builded, and enlarged in the year 1430. the eighth of Henry the sixth, VVilliam Eastfield Mayor, and the Communalty, granted of the common ground of the City, three foot and an half in breadth, on the North part, and four foot in breadth toward the East, for the inlarging thereof. At the West end of this Parish Church, is a small passage for people on foot, thorow the same Church, and West from the said Church, some distance, is an∣other passage out of Pater Noster Rowe, and is called (of such a signe) Panyer Alley, which commeth out into the North, over against Saint Martins Lane. Next is Ivy Lane, so called of Ivy, growing on the Walls of the Prebends Houses; but now the Lane is replenished on both the sides, with fair Houses, and diers Offices have bin there kept, by Registers, namely, for the Prerogative Court of the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, the Probate of Wills, which is now re∣moved into Warwick lane; and also for the Lord Treasurers Remembrance of the Exchequer, &c.
This Lane runneth North, to the Westend of St. Nicholas Shambles: of old time there was one great House, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Britan; since that, to the Lovels, and was called Lovels Inne. Then is Eldenesse Lane, which stretcheth North to the high street of Newgate Market, the same is now called Warwick Lane, of an ancient House there buil∣ded by an Earl of Warwick, and was since called Warwick Inne: It is in Re∣cord, called a Messuage in Eldenesse lane▪ in the Parish of St. Sepulchre: the twenty eighth of Henry the sixth, Cicilie, Dutchesse of VVarwick possessed it. Now again, from the Conduit by Pauls Gate, on the North side, is a large street, running West to Newgate; the first part whereof, from the Conduit to the Shambles, (of selling Bladders there) called Bladder-street: then behind the Butchers Shops, be now divers Slaughter-houses inward, and Tipling-houses outward: This is called Mount Goddard-street, of the Tipling-houses there, and the Goddards mounting from the Tap to the Table, from the Table to the Mouth, and sometimes over the Head. This street goeth up to the North end of Ivy lane; before this Mount-god∣dard street, Stall-boards were of old time set up by the Butchers, to shew, and to sell their Flesh meat upon, over the which Stall-Boards; they first builded sheds, to keep off the Weather; but since that, (incroaching by little and little) they have made their Stall-boards and sheds, fair Houses, meet for the principal Shambles. Next is Newgate Market, first of Corn and Meale, and then of other vict∣uals, which stretcheth almost to Eldenese-Lane, a fair new and strong Frame of Timber, covered with Lead, was therefore set up at the Charges of the City: near to the West Corner of St. Nicholas Shambles, for the meal to be weighed, in the first of Edward the sixth, Sir Iohn Gresham being then Mayor. On this side the North Corner of Eldenese Lane, stood sometime a proper Parish-Church of St. Ewine, as is before said, given by Henry the eighth to∣wards the erecting of Christs Church. It was taken down, and in place there∣of, a fair strong Frame of Timber erected, wherein dwell men of divers Trades, And from this Frame to Newgaete▪ is all of this Ward, and so an end thereof.
Of the two and Twentieth Ward, or Alder∣manry of the City of London, called Bread-street Ward. THen is Bread-street it self, so called, of Bread in old time there sold, for it appeareth by Records, that in the year 1302, which was the thirty of Edward the first the Bakers of London were bounden to sell no Bread in their Shops or Houses, but in the Market, and that they should have four Hall-motes in the year, at four several Terms, to determine of enormities belonging to the said Company. This street, giving the name to the whole Ward, beginneth in West Cheap, almost by the Standard; and runneth down South, through or thwart Wath∣ling-street, to Knight Riders-street aforesaid, where it endeth; This Bread-street is wholly on both sides of this Ward, out of the which street, on the East side is Basing Lane, a piece whereof, to wit, to, and over against the back gate of the Red Lion in Wathling-street, is of this Bread-street Ward. Then is Fryday-street beginning also in West Cheap, and runneth down South through Wathling-street, to Knight-Ri∣ders street, or old Fishstreet. This Fryday-street is of Bread-street Ward, on the East side, from over against the North-East corner of Saint Matthews Church, and on the West side, from the South corner of the said Church, down as aforesaid. In this Fryday-street, on the West side thereof, is a Lane, commonly called Mayden Lane, or Distaffe Lane, corruptly for Distar Lane, which runneth West into the old Exchange, and in this Lane is also one other Lane, on the South side thereof; likewise called Distar Lane, which runneth down to Knight-Rider street, or Old Fish-street And so be the bounds of this whole Ward. Monuments to be noted here, first at Bread-street corner, the North-East end, 1595, of Thomas Tmolioson, causing in the High street of Cheap, a Vault to be digged and made; there was sound at fifteen foot deep, a fair payement, like unto that above ground, and at the further end, at the Channel, was found a Tree, sawed into five steps, which was to step over some Brook, running out of the West, towards Walbrooke, and upon the edge of the said Brook as it seemeth, there were found lying along, the bodies of two great Trees, the ends whereof were then sawed off, and firm Timber, as at the first when they fell, part of the said Trees remain yet in the ground undigged; It was all forced ground, untill they went past the Trees aforesaid, which was about seventeen foot deep, or better; Thus much hath the ground of this City (in that place) been raised from the main. Next to be noted, the most beautiful Frame of fair Houses and Shops, that be within the Walls of London, or else where in England, commonly called Gold∣smiths Row, betwixt Bread-street end, and the Crosse in Cheap, but is within this Bread-street Ward. Then for Watheling-street, which Leyland calleth Atheling, or Noble-street, but since he sheweth no reason why, I rather take it to be so named, of the great High-way of the same calling. True it is, that at this present the Inhabi∣tants thereof are wealthy Drapers, Retailers of Wollen Cloths, both Broad and Narrow, of all sorts, more than in any one street of this City.
Of the Old Exchange, I have noted in Faringdon Ward, wherefore I passe down to Knight-Riders street, whereof I have also spoken in Cordwayner street Ward; But in this part of the said Knight-Riders street, is a Fish-market kept, and therefore called Old Fish-street, for a difference from New Fish∣street. In this Old Fishstreet, is one Row of small Houses, placed along in the mid∣dest of Knight-Riders-street, which Row is also of Bread-street Ward. These Houses, now possessed by Fishmongers, were at the first but moveable Boards, or Stalls, set out on Market-daies, to shew their fish there to be sold, but procu∣ring Licence to set up Sheds, they grew to shops, and by little and little, to tall Houses of three or four Stories in height, and now is called Fish-street. Walter Turke, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1349, had two Shops in Old Fish-street, over against Saint Nicholas Church, the one rented at five shillings the year, the other four shillings. Bread-street, so called of Bread sold there (as I said) is now wholly inhabited by rich Marchants, and divers fair Inns be there, for good receit of Carriers, and other Travellers to the City. On the East side of this street, at the corner of Watheling street, is the come∣ly Church of Alhllowes in Bread-street. On the same side is Salters Hall, with six Alms-houses in number, builded for poor decayed Brethren of that Company; This Hall was burned in the year 1539, and again re-edified. Lower down, on the same side, is the Parish Church of Saint Mildred the Virgin. Out of this Bread-street, on the same side, is Basing Lane, a part whereof (as is afore shewed) is of this Ward, but how it took the name of Basing, I have not read; In the twentieth year of Richard the second, the same was called the Bake-house, whether meant of the Kings Bake-house, or of Bakers dwel∣ling there, and baking Bread to serve the Market in Bread-street, where the Bread was sold, I know not, but sure I am, I have not read of Basing, or of Ger∣rard the Gyant, to have any thing there to do. On the South side of this Lane, is one great House, of old time builded upon arched Vaults, and with arched Gates, of Stone brought from Cane in Nor∣mandy, the same is now a common Ostrey for receit of Travellers, commonly and corruptly called Gerrards Hall, of a Giant said to have dwelled there. In the high roofed Hall of this House, sometime stood a large Firr-pole, which reached to the roof thereof, and was said to be one of the staes that Gerrard the Gyant used in the Wars to run withal, there stood also a Ladder of the same length, which (as they said) served to ascend to the top of the staff. Of later years this Hall is altered in building, and divers rooms are made in it; Not∣withstanding, the Pole is removed to once corner of the Hall, and the Ladder hanged broken, upon a Wall in the yard. Now on the West side of Breadstreet, amongst divers fair and large Houses for Marchants, and fair Inns for Passengers, had ye one Prison-house pertaining to the Sheriffs of London, called the Compter in Bread-street, but in the year 1555, the Prisoners were removed from thence, to one other new Compter in Wood-street, provided by the Cities purchase, and builded for that purpose, the cause of which remove was this; Richard Husband Pasteler, Keeper of this Compter in Breadstreet, being a willful and head-strong man, dealt (for his own advantage) hard with the prisoners under his charge, having also servants such as himself liked best for their bad usage, and would not for any complaint be re∣formed; whereupon, in the year 1550, Sir Rowland Hill being Mayor, by the assent of a Court of Aldermen, he was sent to the Goal of Newgate, for the cruel handling of his prisoners, and it was commanded to the Keeper, to set those Irons on his leggs which are called the Widdows Alms; These he ware
from Thursday, till Sunday in the afternoon, and being by a Court of Aldermen released on the Tuesday, was bound in an hundred Marks, to observe from thence forth an Act made by the Common Councel, for the ordering of priso∣ners in the Compters; all which notwithstanding, he continued as afore: For being on a Jury, to enquire against a Sessions of Goal delivery, in the year 1552, it was found that the Prisoners were still hardly dealt with all for their achates, and otherwise, as also that Thieves and Strumpets were there lodged for four pence the night, whereby they might be safe from searches that were made abroad, for the which enormities, and other not needfull to be recited, he was indicted at that Session, but did rub it out, and could not be reformed, till this remove of the prisoners, for the House in Bread-street was his own by Lease, or otherwise, so that he could not be put from it. Now in Friday-street, so called of Fishmongers dwelling there, and serving Frydays Market, on the East side is a small Parish Church commonly called Saint John Evangelist. The Monuments therein be, of John Dogget, Merchant-Taylor, one of the Sheriffs in the year 1509. Then lower down, is another Church of Saint Margaret Moyses, so called (as seemeth) of one Moyses, that was Founder, or new Builder thereof. In this Distar Lane, on the North side thereof is the Cordwayners or Shooma∣kers Hall, which Company were made a Brotherhood or Fraternity, in the ele∣venth of Henry the fourth. Of the Twentie third Ward, or Alder∣manry of the City of London, called Queen-hithe Ward. NExt unto Bread-street Ward, on the South side thereof, is Queen-Hith Ward, so called of a Water-gate, or Harborow for Boats, Lighters, and Barges, and was (of old time) for Ships: at what time, the Timber Bridge at London, was drawn up, for the passage of them to the said Hith, as to a principal Strand for landing and unlading a∣gainst the middest and heart of the City; this Ward beginneth in the East, in Knight-Riders-street; on the South side thereof, at the East end of the Parish Church called the Holy Trinity, and runneth West on the South side, to a Lane called Lambert Hill, which is the length of the Ward in Knight-Riders street, out of the which street are divers Lanes, running South to Thames street, and are of this Ward; the first is Trinity Lane, which runneth down by the West end of Trinity Church; Then is Spuren Lane, or Spooners Lane, now called Huggen Lane; Then Bread-street Hill, Then Saint Mary Mounthaunt, out of the which Lane, on the East side thereof, is one other Lane, turning East through St. Nicho∣las Olaves Church-yard, to Bread-street Hill; This Lane is called Finimore Lane, or Five foot Lane, because it is but five foot in breadth; at the West end, in the middest of this Lane, runneth down one other Lane broader, South to Thames street, I think the same to be called Desborne Lane; for we read of such a Lane
to have been in the Parish of Saint Mary Summerset in the twenty two of Ed∣ward the third where there is said to ly between the Tenement of Edward de Mountacute Knight, on the East part, and the Tenement sometime pertaining to William Gladwine, on the West, one plot of ground, containing in length to∣wards Thames street, twenty five foot, &c. Last of all have ye Lambart Hill, so called of one Lambart owner thereof, and this is the farthest West part of this Ward. First in Knight-Riders street is the small Parish Church of the Holy Trinity, lately very old, and in danger of down falling, Collections were made for the repairing thereof; but they would not stretch so far; until a general means was made, as appeareth by a publick notice thereof, declared in the said Church. Towards the West end of Knight-Riders street, is the Parish Church of Saint Nicholas Cold Abbey, a proper Church somewhat ancient, as appeareth by the waies raysed there about, so that men are forced to descend into the body of the Church, it hath been called of many Colden Abbey, of some Cold Abbey or Cold Bay, and so have the most ancient Writings; as standing in a cold place, as Cold Harbor, and such like, the Steeple or tall Tower of this Church, with the South Ile, hath been of later building, to wit, the first of Richard the second, when it was meant, that the whole old Church should have been new buil∣ded, as appeareth by the Arching begun on the East side the Steeple, under the which, in the Stone work, the Armes of one Buckland, Esquire, and his Wife, Daughter to Beaupere, are cut in Stone, and also are in the Glasse Win∣dows, whereby it appeareth, he was the Builder thereof, and Repairer of the residue. In Trinity Lane, on the West side thereof, is the Painter Stainers Hall, for so of old time were they called, but now that workmanship of Staining is depar∣ted and out of use in England. Lower down in Trinity Lane, on the East side thereof, was sometime a great Messuage pertaining unto Iohn Earl of Cornwall, in the fourteenth of Edward the third. On Bread-street Hill, down to the Thames, on both sides, be divers fair Houses, inhabited by Fishmongers, Cheesemongers, and Merchants of divers Trades; on the West side whereof is the Parish Church of St. Nicholas Olave, a convenient Church. The next is Old Fish-street Hill, a passage so called, which also runneth down to Thames street; In this Lane, on the East side thereof, is the one end of Fini∣more or Five foor Lane. On the West side of this Old Fish-street Hill, is the Bishop of Hereford's Inne, or lodging, an ancient House, and large rooms, builded of Stone and Timber, which sometime belonged to the Mounthaunts in Norfolke. Radul∣phus de Mayden-stone, Bishop of Hereford about the year, one thousand two hundred thirty four, bought it of the Mounthaunts, and gave it to the Bi∣shops of Hereford, his Successors. Charles, both Bishop of Hereford, and Chan∣cellour of the Marches, about the year 1517 repaired it, since the which time, the same is greatly ruined, and is now divided into many small Tenements; The Hall, and principall Rooms, are in House to make Sugar-Loaves, &c. Next adjoyning is the Parish Church of Saint Mary de Monte also, or Mounthaunt; this is a very small Church, and at the first builded to be a Chappel for the said House of the Mounthaunts, and for Tenements thereun∣to belonging. On the East side of this Old Fish-street Hill, is one great House, now letten out for Rent, which House sometime was one of the Halls pertai∣ning to the Company of Fishmongers, at such time as they had six Hall-Motes
or Meeting places, namely, twain in Bridge-street, or New Fish-street, twain in Old Fish-street, whereof this was one, and twain in Stock-Fish∣monger Row, or Thames street, as appeareth by a Record the twenty two of Richard the second. Next Westward is one other Lane, called Lambart Hill, the East side wherof is wholly of this Ward, and but half the West side, to wit, from the North end of the Black-smiths Hall. Then in Thames street, of this Ward, and on the North side over against the Queens Hith, is the Parish Church of Saint Michael a con∣venient Church, but all the Monuments therein are defaced. At the West end of that Church, goeth up a Lane, called Pyel-lane; on the same North side, at the South end of Saint Mary Mounthaunt Lane, is the Parish Church of Saint Summerset, over against the Broken-Wharfe. Then is a small Parish Church of St. Peter, called parva, or little, near unto Pauls Wharf. In this Church no Monuments do remain. At the West end thereof is a Lane called Saint Peters Hill; but two Houses up that Lane, on the East side, is of this Ward, and the rest is of Ca∣stle Baynards Ward. On the South side of Thames street, beginning again in the East a∣mong the Cooks, the first in this Ward, is the Signe of David the King. Then is Towns-end Lane, turning down to the Thames. Then is Queen-hithe, a large receptacle for Ships, Lighters, Barges, and such other Vessels. Touching the Antiquity and use of this Gate and Hithe, first I find, that the same belonged to one named Edred, and was then called Edreds Hith, which since falling into the hands of King Stephen, it was by his Charter confirmed to William de Ypre, the Farm thereof in Fee and in He∣ritage; William de Ypre, gave it unto the Prior and Covent of the Holy Trinity within Ealdgate. This Edreds Hith, after the foresaid Grant, came again to the Kings hands, by what means I have not read, but it pertained unto the Queen, and therefore was called Ripa Reginae, the Queens Bank, or Queens-Hith, and great profit thereof was made to her use, as may appear by this which fol∣loweth. King Henry the third, in the ninth of his Reign, commanded the Con∣stables of the Tower of London, to arrest the Ships of the Cinque-Ports on the River of Thames, and to compell them to bring their Corn to no other place, but to the Queens Hith only. In the eleaventh of his Reign, he charged the said Constable, to distrain all Fish offered to be sold in any place of this City, but at the Queens Hith. Moreover, in the eight and twentieth of his Reign, an Inquisition was made before William of Yorke, and the Provost of Beverley, Henry of Bath, and Hierome of Caxton, Ju∣stices Itinerantes, sitting in the Tower of London, touching the Customs of Queen-hith, observed in the year last before the Wars between the King and his Father, and the Barons of England, and of old Customs of other times, and what Customs had been changed, at what time the Tax and Payment of all things coming thither, and between VVoore-path, and A∣nede Hith, were found and seized, according to the old Order, as well Corne and Fish, as of other things; All which Customes were as well to be observed in the part of Down-gate, as in Queen-Hith, for the Kings use, when also it was found, that the Corn arriving between the Gate of Guild-Hall, of the Merchants of Colleyne, and the Soke of the Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury, (for he had a House near unto the Black-Fryers) was
not to be measured by any other quarter, than by that of the Queens Soke. Next adjoyning to this Queen-hith, on the West side thereof, is Salt-Wharf, named of Salt taken up, measured, and sold there. The next is Stew Lane, of a Stew, or Hot-house there kept. After that is Timber-Hith, or Timber street, so called, of Timber, or Boards, there taken up, and wharsed; it is in the Parish of Saint Mary Som∣mers Hith, as we read in the fifty six of Henry the third, and in the ninth of Edward the second. Then is Brookes Wharfe, and Broken Wharfe, a Water-gate or Key, so called of being broken and fallen down into the Thames. By this Broken-VVharfe remaineth one large old building of Stone, with Arched Gates; which Messuage, as we finde, in the Reign of Henry the third, the forty three year, pertained unto Hugh de Bigot, and in the eleaventh of Edward the third, to Thomas Brotherton, the Kings Brother, Earle of Norfolke, Marshall of England, in the eleventh of Henry the sixth, to Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, &c. Within the Gate of this House (now belonging to the City of Lon∣don) is lately, to wit, in the year 1594. and 1595, builded one large House, of great height, called an Engine, made by Bevis Bulmar, Gentleman, for the conveying and forcing of Thames water, to serve in the middle and West parts of the City; the ancient great Hall of this Messuage, is yet standing, and pertaining to a great Brew-House for Beere. West from this is Trigge Lane, going down to the Thames. Next is called Bosse-Lane of a Bosse of water, like unto that of Belingsgate, there placed by the Executors of Richard Whittington. Then is one great Messuage, sometime belonging to the Abbots of Chartsey, in Surrey, and was their Inne, wherein they were lodged when they repaired to the City: it is now called Sandie House, by what reason we have not heard; some think the Lord Sands hath been lodged there.
Of the Twentie fourth Ward, or Alder∣manry of the City of London, called Castle-Baynard Ward. THen next is Castle Baynard Ward, so named of an old Castle there; This Ward beginneth in the East on the Thames side, at an House called, Huntington House, and runneth West by Pauls Wharfe, by Baynards Castle, Puddle Wharfe, and by the South side of Black-Fry∣ers; Then turning by the East Wall of the said Fryers to the South-West end of Creed Lane; then on the North side of Thames street, over against Huntington House, by St. Peters Church and Lane, called Peter Hill, along till over against Puddle Wharfe, and then North up by the great Wardrobe, to the West end of Carter Lane; Then up Creed Lane, Ave Mary Lane, and a piece of Pater noster Row, to the Sign of the Golden Lion, and back again up Warwick Lane, all the East side thereof, to the Sign of the Crown by Newgate-Market; and this is the farthest North part of this Ward. Then out of Thames street be Lanes ascending North to Knight-Riders street; The first is Peters Hill Lane, all of that Ward, (two Houses excepted, adjoy∣ning to St. Peters Church) The next is Pauls Wharfe Hill, which thwarting Knight-Riders street, and Carter Lane, goeth up to the South Chain of Pauls Church-yard. Then is Adle-street, over against the West part of Baynards Castle, going up by the West end of Knight-Riders street, and to Carter Lane. Thus much for Lanes out of Thames street. The one half of the West side of Lambert Hill Lane being of this Ward, at the North-west end thereof, on the South side, and at the West end of St. Mary Magdalens Church; on the North side, beginneth Knight-Riders street to be of this Ward, and runneth West on both sides, to the Parish Church of St. Andrew by the Wardrobe. Then at the said East end of St. Mary Magdalens Church, goeth up the Old Exchange, all the West side whereof, upto the South-East gate of Pauls Church-yard, and by St. Austins Church, is of this Ward. About the midst of this Old Exchange, on the West side thereof, is Carter Lane, which runneth West to the East entry of the Black-Fryers, and the South end of Creed-Lane, out of the which Carter Lane descendeth a Lane, called Do∣little Lane, and commeth into Knight-Riders street, by the Boar-head Tavern, and more West is Sermon Lane, by an Inne called the Powl-head. Then out of Carter Lane, on the North side thereof, the South Chain of Pauls Church-yard, and the Church-yard it self, on that South side of Pauls Church, and the Church of St. Gregory, the Bishops Palace, and the Deans Lodging, be all of this Ward and such be the bounds thereof. The Ornaments in this Ward, be Parish Churches four, of old time a Castle' divers Noble-mens Houses, Halls of Companies twain, and such others as shall be shewed. In Thames street at the South-East end, is an ancient Messuage, of old time called Beaumonts Inne, as belonging to that Family of Noble-men of this Realm, in the fourth of Edward the third. Edward the fourth in the fifth of his Reign, gave it to W. Hastings, Lord Chamberlaine, Master of his Mints; It is how called Huntington House, as belonging to the Earls of Huntington.
Next is Pauls Wharfe a large landing place, with a common Stayre upon the River of Thames, at the end of a street called Pauls Wharf Hill, which runneth down from Pauls Chain. Next is a great Messuage, called Scroopes Inne, sometime belonging to the Scroopes, in the thirty one of Henry the sixth. Then is one other great Messuage, sometime belonging to the Abbey of Fis∣campe, beyond the Sea, and by reason of the Wars, it coming to the hands of King Edward the third, the same was given to Sir Simon Burley, Knight of the Garer, and therefore called Burley House in Thames street, between Baynards Castle and Pauls Wharfe. Then have you Baynards Castle, whereof this whole Ward taketh name; This Castle banketh on the River Thames, and was callest Baynards Castle, of Baynard a Nobleman, that came in with William the Conquerour, of the which Ca∣stle and of Baynard himself, we have spoken in another place. There was also a∣nother Tower by Baynards Castle, builded by King Edward the second. Edward the third, in the second of his Reign, gave it to William Duke of Hamelake, in the County of Yorke, and his Heirs, for one Rose yearly to be paid for all ser∣vice; the same place (as seemeth) was since called Legates Inne, in the seventh of Edward the fourth, where be now divers Wood-Wharfes in the place. Then is there a great Brew-house, and Puddle-Wharfe, a Water-gate into the Thames, where Houses use to be watered, and therefore being filled with their trampling & made puddle-like, as also of one Puddle dwelling there, it is call'd Puddle Wharfe. Then is there a Lane between the Black Fryars and the Thames, called in the twenty six of Edward the third, Castle-lane. This Ward ascendeth up by the East VVall of the Black-Fryers, to the South VVest end of Creed Lane where it endeth on that side. Then to begin again on the North side of Thames-street, over against Huntington House, by St. Peters Church and Lane, called Pe∣ter Hill, and so to St. Bennet Hude, (or Hithe) over against Pauls VVharfe, is a convenient Parish Church, which hath the Monuments of Sir VVilliam Cheny Knight, and Margaret his VVife 1442 buried there. VVest from this Church, by the South end of Addle street, almost against Puddle VVharfe, there is one ancient building of Stone and Timber, builded by the Lords of Barkley, and therefore called Barkleys Inne. This House is now all in ruine, and letten out in several Tenements, yet the Arms of the Lord Barkley remain in the Stone-work of an arched Gate, and is between a Cheve∣ron Crosses ten, three, and four. Richard Beauchampe, Earl of VVarwick, was lodged in this House, then cal∣led Barkleys Inne, in the Parish of St. Andrew, in the Reign of Henry the sixth; Then turning up towards the North▪ is the Parish Church of St. Andrew in the VVardrobe, a proper Church, but few Monuments hath it. Iohn Parnt hath founded a Chauntrey there. Then is the Kings great VVardrobe, Sir Iohn Beauchamp Knight of the Garter, Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinqueports, (son to Guido de Beauchamp Earl of VVarwick) builded this House, was lodged there, deceased in the year 1359, and was buried on the South side of the middle Ile of Pauls Church. His Executors sold the House to King Edward the third. Touching Laes ascen∣ding out of Thames street, to Knight-Riders, the first is Peter Hill, wherein I find no mater of note more than certain Alms-houses, lately founded on the West side thereof, by David Smith Embroyderer, for six poor Widdows, whereof each to have twenty shillings by the year. At the upper end of this Lane towards the North the corner Houses there, be called Peter Key, but the reason thereof we have not heard. Then is Pauls VVharfe, on the East side whereof is VVoodmongers Hall. And next adjoyning is Darby-house, sometime belonging to the Stanleys, for Thomas Stanley: first Earl of Darby, of that name, who mar∣ried
the Lady Margaret, Countesse of Richmond, Mother to Henry the seventh, in his time builded it. Queen Mary gave it to Gilbert Dethick, then Garter, principal King of Arms of English men; Thomas Hauley, Clarentieux, King of Arms of the South parts; VVilliam Harvey aliàs Norroy, King of Armes of the North parts, and the other Heralds and Pursevants of Arms, and their Succes∣sors, all the Capital Messuage or House called Darby house, with the appurte∣nances, situate in the Parish of Saint Bennet, and Saint Peter, and then being in the tenure of Sir Richard Sackvile Knight, and lately parcel of the Lands of Edward Earl of Darby, &c. To the end, that the said Kings of Arms, Heraulds, and Pursevants of Arms, and their Successors might (at their liking) dwell to∣gether, and at meet times congregate, speak, confer, and agree among them∣selves, for the good Government of their Faculty, and their Records might be more safely kept, &c. On the West side of this street is one other great House builded of Stone, which belongeth to Pauls Church, and was sometime lette to the Blunts, Lord Mountjoy; but of later time to a Colledge in Cambridge, and from them to the Doctors of the Civil Law, and Arches, who keep a Commons there; and many of them being lodged there, it is called the Doctors Commons. In Lambard Hill Lane, on the West side thereof, is the Black-smiths Hall. Over-against the North-west end of this Lambard Hill Lane in Knight-Riders street, is the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, a small Church, having but few Monuments. By the East end of St. Mary Magdalene Church, runneth up the Old Exchange Lane, by the West end of Carter Lane, to the South-East Gate or Chaine of Pauls Church-yard, as is before shewed; And in this part was the Exchange kept, and Bullion was received for Coynage, as is noted in Faringdon Ward Within. In this Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, out of Knight-Riders street, up to Carter Lane, be two small Lanes, the one of them called Doo-little Lane, as a place not inhabited by Artificers, or open Shop-keepers, but serving for a near passage from Knight-Riders street to Carter-Lane. The other corruptly called Sermon Lane, for Sheremoniers Lane; For we find it by that name recor∣ded in the fourteenth of Edward the first; And in that Lane, a place to be cal∣led the Black Lft, (of melting Silver) with four Shops adjoyning. It may there∣fore be well supposed, that Lane to take its name of Shermonier, such as cut and rounded the Plates, to be Coyned or stamped into Estarling pence; for the place of Coyning was the Old Exchange. In Knight-Riders street, was the Colledge of Physicians, wherein was foun∣ded in the year 1582, a publick Lecture in Surgery, to be read twice every week, &c. as is shewed else-where. Towards the South, is called the Lollards Tower, and hath been used as the Bishops prison, for such as were detected for opinions in Religion, contrary to the Faith of the Church. Adjoyning to this Lowlards Tower, is the Parish Church of St. Gregory, ap∣pointed to the Petty Chanons of Pauls.
Of the Twentie fifth Ward, or Alder∣manry of the City of London, called Farringdon Ward without, or Extra. THe farthest West-ward of this City, being the twenty fifth Ward of London, but without the Walls, is called Farringdon without, and was of old time, part of the other Faringdon within, until the seven∣teenth of Richard the second, that it was devided and made twain, by the names of Faringdon Intra, and Faringdon Extra, as is afore shewed. Touching Ornaments and Antiquities in this Ward; First, betwixt the said Newgate, and the Parish of St. Sepulchres, is a way towards Smithfield, called Gilt-Spur, or Knight-Riders street, of the Knights and other riding that way into Smithfield, replenished with buildings on both sides up to Pye-corner, a place so called of such a Sign, sometimes a fair Inne, for receipt of Travellers, but now divided into Tenements, and over against the said Pye-corner, lyeth Cock-lane, which runneth down to Oldburn Conduit. Beyond this Pye-corner, lyeth VVest Smithfield, compassed about with buildings: at first on the South side, following the right hand standeth the large Hospital of St. Bartholmews, founded by Rahere, the first Prior of Saint Bartholmewes thereto near adjoyning, in the year, 1102. Alfune, that had not long before builded the Parish Church of Saint Giles, without Creplegate, became first Hospitelar, or Proctor for the poor of this House and went himself daily to the Shambles and other Markets, where he Begged the Charity of devout people for their relief, promising to the liberall givers, (and that by alledging Testimonies of the holy Scripture) reward at the hands of God. Henry the third, granted to Katherine late Wife to VVilliam Hardell, twenty foot of Land in length and breadth in Smithfield, next to the Chappel of St. Bartholomew, to build a Recluse or Ankorage, commanding the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, to assign the said twenty foot to the said Katherine, the eleventh of Henry the third, the foundation of this Hospital for the poor and diseased, and their special sustentation, was confirmed by Edward the third, the twenty sixth of his Reign; It was governed by a Master, and eight Brethren be∣ing Priests, for the Church, and four Sisters to see the poor served. This Hospitall was valued at the suppression, in the year 1539, the thirty one of Henry the eighth, to five and thirty pounds, six shillings, seven, pence yearly. The Church remaineth a Parish Church to the Tenents dwelling in the Precinct of the Hospital; But in the year 1546, on the thirteenth of Ianua∣ry, the Bishop of Rochester, preaching at Pauls Crosse, declared the gift of the said King to the Citizens, for relieving of the poor, which contained the Church of the Grey Fryers, the Church of Saint Bartholomew, with the Hospital, the Messuages, and appurrenances in Gilt-Spur, aliàs Knight-Riders street, Briton street, Peter Key, in the Parish of Saint Mary Magdalen, in old Fish-street, and in the Parish of Saint Bennet, Huda, Linie-hurst, or Limehost, in the Parish of Stebunheth, &c.
Then also were Orders devised for relief of the poor, the Inhabitants were all called to their Parish Churches, where, by Sir Richard Dobbs, then Mayor, their several Aldermen, or other grave Citizens, they were by eloquent Orati∣ons perswaded, how great, and how many Commodities would ensue unto them, and their City, if the poor of divers sorts, which they named, were taken from out their streets, Lanes, and Alleys, and were bestowed and provided for in Hospitals abroad, &c. Therefore was every man moved, liberally to grant (what they would impart) towards the preparing and furnishing of such Hos∣pitals; and also, what they would contribute weekly towards their mainte∣nance for a time, which (they said) should not be past one year, or twain, until they were better furnished of endowment; To make short, every man granted liberally, according to his ability. Books were drawn of the Relief in every Ward of the City, towards the new Hospitals, and were delivered by the Major to the Kings Commissioners, on the seventeenth of February; and order was taken therein, at the six and twenty of Iuly. In the year 1552, the repairing of the Gray Fryers House for poor Fatherless Children, was taken in hand; and also, in the latter end of the same Moneth, began the repairing of this Hospi∣tall of St. Bartholmew, and was of new endowed, and furnished at the charges of the Citizens. On the East side of this Hospital lyeth Duck-lane, which runneth out of Smithfield South, to the North end of Little Britain street. On the East side of this Duck-lane, and also of Smithfield, lyeth the late dis∣solved Priory of St. Bartholmew, founded also by Rahere, a pleasant witted Gentleman, and therefore in his time called the Kings Minstrel, about the year of Christ, 1102. He founded it in a part of the before named Moorish ground, which was therefore a common Lay-stall of all filth, that was to be voided out of the City: He placed Canons there, himself became their first Prior, and so continued till his dying day, and was there buried in a fair Monument, renewed afterwards by Prior Bolton. To this Priory, King Henry the second, granted the priviledge of a Faire, to be kept yearly at Bartholomew-tyde, for three dayes, to wit, the Eve, the Day, and the next Morrow; to the which, the Clothiers of England, and Drapers of Lon∣don repaired, and had their Boothes and standings within the Church-yard of this Prioty, closed in with Walls and Gates locked every night, and watched, for safety of Mens Goods and Wares, a Court of Pipepowders was daily, during the Faire holden, for debts and Contracts. On the North side of this Priory, is the lane truly called Long, which reacheth from Smithfield to Aldersgate-street. This Lane is now lately builded on both the sides, with Tenements for Bro∣kers, Tiplers, and such like; the rest of Smithfield, from Long lane end, to the Barres, is inclosed with Inns, Brew-houses, and large Tenements. On the West side is Chicken-lane, down to Cow-bridge; then be the Pens or Folds, so called of Sheep there parted, and penned up to be sold on the Market dayes. Then is Smithfield Pond, which of (old time) in Records, was called Horse-Poole, for that men watered Horses there, and was a great water. In the sixth of Henry the fifth, a new Building was made in the West part of Smithfield, betwixt the said Pool and the River of the Wells, or Turnmill-brook, in a place then called the Elmes, for that there grew many Elm-Trees, and this had bin the place of Execution for offenders; since the which time, the buil∣ding there hath bin so increased, that now remaineth not one Tree growing. Amongst these new buildings is Cow-bridge street, or Cow-lane, which turn∣eth toward Holdbourn; in vvhich Lane, the Prior of Semperingham had his Inne, or London Lodging.
The rest of that West side of Smithfield, hath divers fair Inns, and other comely Buildings, up to Hosier-lane, which also turneth down to Houldbourn, till it meet with Cowbridge-street, from this Lane to Cock-lane, over against Pie-Corner. In the year 1362, the thirty sixth of Edward the third, on the first five dayes of May, in Smithfield, were Justs holden, the King and Queen being present, with the most part of the Chivalry of England, and of France, and of other Nation, to the which came Spaniards, Cyprians, and Armenians, Knightly requesting aid of the King of England, against the Pagans that invaded their Con∣fines. The 48. of Edward the third, Dame Alice Perrers, or Pierce, (the Kings Con∣cubine) as Lady of the Sun, rode from the Tower of London, through Cheape, accompanied by many Lords and Ladies, every Lady leading a Lord by his Horse Bridle, till they came into West Smithfield, and then began a great Just, vvhich endured seven dayes after. In the year 1393. the 17th of Richard the second, certain Lords of Scotland, came into England, to get vvorship, by force of Arms, the Earl of Marre cha∣lenged the Earl of Nottingham, to Just vvith him, and so they rode together certain Courses, but not the full Challenge, for the Earl of Marre was cast both Horse and Man, and two of his Ribs broken vvith the fall, so that he vvas con∣veighed out of Smithfield, and so towards Scotland, but dyed by the vvay at York. Sir VVilliam Darel Knight, the Kings Banner-bearer of Scotland, challenged Sir Percey Courtney Knight, the Kings Banner-bearer of England, and vvhen they had run certain Courses, gave over vvithout conclusion of Victory: Then Cookborne, Esquire of Scotland, challenged Sir Nicholas Hawberke Knight, and rode five Courses; but Cookborne vvas born over Horse and Man. Now to return through Gilt-spur-street by Newgate, vvhere I first began, there standeth the fair Parish Church called St. Sepulchers in the Bayly, or by Chamberlain Gate, in a fair Church-yard, though not so large as of old time; for the same is letten out for buildings, and a Garden plot. This Church vvas newly re-edified, or builded, about the Reign of Henry the sixth, or of Edward the fourth, one of the Popham's, vvas a great builder there, and 'tis lately also vvashed over, and furbish'd. Next to this Church, is a fair and large Inne, for the receipt of Travellers, and hath to signe the Sarasens Head, vvhere Oxford men resort. There lyeth a street from Newgate, West, to the end of Turn again-lane, and winding North to Oldbourne Conduit; but of late, a new Conduit vvas there builded in place of the old, namely, in the year 1577. by VVilliam Lambe, sometime a Gentleman of the Chappel to King Henry the eighth, and after∣ward a Citizen and Clothworker of London. From the West side of this Conduit, is the high way, there called Snow-hill, stretching out by Oldbourne-bridge, over the oft-named Water of Turn-mill-Brook, and so up to Old-bourn-hill, all replenished with fair Buildings. Without Ould-bourn-bridge, on the right hand, is Gold-lane, as is before shew∣ed, up higher on the Hill, be certain Inns, and other fair Buildings; amongst the which, (of old time) was a Messuage called Scroops Inne, for so we finde the, same recorded in the 37. of Henry the sixth. This House was sometime letten out to Sergeants at the Law, as appeareth, and was found by Inquisition taken in the Guild-hall of London, before William Purchase Mayor, and Escheater for King Henry the 7th, in the 14th of his Reign. Then is the Bishop of Elies Inne, so called of, belonging and pertaining to the Bishops of Ely, Will, de Luda▪ Bishop of Ely, deceased 1297, and gave this House, by the name of his Mannor, with the Appurrenances in Holdbourne, to his Suc∣cessors,
with condition, that his next Successor should pay a thousand Marks, to∣wards the finding of three Chaglains, in the Chappel there. The first in the year 1464. the fourth of Edward the fourth, in Michaelmas Terme, the Sergeants at Law, held their Feast in this House; to the which, a∣mongst other Estates, Matthew Philip, Mayor of London, with the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Commons of divers Crafts, being invited, did repair; but when the Mayor looked to keep the state in the Hall, as it had bin used in all places within the City and Liberties (out of the Kings presence) the Lord Gray of Ruthen, then Lord Treasurer of England, unwitting the Sergeants, and against their wills (as they said) was first placed, whereupon, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, departed home, and the Mayor made the Aldermen to dine with him; howbeit, he and all the Citizens were wonderfully displeased that he was so dealt with, and the new Sergeants and others, were right ory there∣fore, and had rather then much good (as they said) it had not so hap∣pened. Next beyond this Mannor of Ely-house, is Lither-lane, turning into the Fields. Then is Furnivals Inne, now an Inne of Chancery, but sometime be∣longing to Sir William Furnival Knight, and Thomasin his Wife, who had in Holdbourne two Messuages, and thirteen Shops, as appeareth by Record of Richard the second, in the sixth of his Reign. Now again from Newgate, on the left hand, or South side, lyeth the Old Bay∣lay, which runneth down by the Wall, upon the Ditch of the City, called Houndsditch, to Ludgate: we have not read how this street took that name; but it is like to have risen of some Court of old time there kept; and we finde, that in the year 1356. the thirty four of Edward the third, the Tenement and ground upon Houndsditch, between Ludgate on the South, and Newgate on the North, was appointed to Iohn Cambridge, Fishmonger, Chamberlain of London, whereby it seemeth, that the Chamberlains of London, have there kept their Courts, as now they do in the Guild-hall: and till this day, the Mayor and Justi∣ces of this City, keep their Sessions in a part thereof, now called the Sessions Hall, both for the City of London, and Shire of Middlesex; over again the which House, on the right hand, turneth down St. Georges Lane, towards Fleet Lane. In this St. Georges Lane, on the North side thereof, remaineth yet an old wall of stone, inclosing a peece of ground up Sea-cole-Lane, wherein (by report) sometime stood an Inne of Chancery; which House being greatly decayed▪ and standing remote from other Houses of that Profession, the Company removed to a Common Hostery, called of the signe, out Lady Inne, not far from Cle∣ments Inne, which they procured from Sir Iohn Fineox, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench; and since, have held it of the owners, by the name of the New Inne, paying therefore six pounds Rent, by the year, as Tenants at their own will, for more (as is said) cannot be gotten of them, and much lesse, will they be put from it. Beneath this Saint Georges Lane, is the Lane called Fleet-lane, winding South by the Prison of the Fleet, into Fleet-street, by Fleet-bridge. Next out of the high street, turneth down a Lane, called the Little Bayly, which runneth down to the East end of St. Georges Lane. The next is Sea-cole-lane, I think, called Limeburners Lane, of burning Lime there with Sea-cole; For we read in Record of such a Lane, to have bin in the Parish of St. Sepulchre, and there yet remaineth in this Lane, an Alley, called Lime-burners Alley. Near unto this Sea-cole-lane, in the turning towards Oldbourne-Conduit, is Turn-again-lane, or rather, as in a Record of the fifth of Edward the third, Wind-again-lane, for that it goeth down West to Fleet Dike, from whence, men must turn again the same way they came, for there it is stopped.
Then the high street turneth down Snow-hill, to Holdbourne Conduit, and from thence, to Ouldbourn-bridge; beyond the which Bridge on the left hand, is Shooe-lane, by the which, men passe from Ouldbourne to Fleet street, by the Conduit there. In this Shooe-lane, on the left hand, is one old House, called Oldbourn-Hall, it is now letten out into divers Tenements. On the other side, at the very corner, standeth the Parish Church of Saint Andrew. From this Church to St. Andrew, up Oldbourn-hill, be divers fair builded Houses; amongst the which, on the left hand, there standeth three Inns of Chancery, whereof the first, adjoyning unto Crook-horn-Alley, is called Thavies Inne, and standeth opposite to Ely House. Then is Fewter-lane, which stretcheth South into Fleet-street, by the East end of St. Dunstanes Church, and is so called of Fewters (or idle people) lying there, as in a way leading to Gardens; but the same is now of later years, on both sides builded thorow with many fair Houses: and in the wast grounds and Gardens, betwixt Shooe-lane and Fewter-lane; there are now many fair convenient Houses, built by the Company of the Goldsmiths; as also a street called New-street, betwixt Aldersgate and Redcrosse-street. Beyond this Fewters Lane, is Baynards Inne, aliàs Mackworths Inne, which is of the Chancery. Then is Staple-Inne also of the Chancery, but whereof so named, I am igno∣rant; the same of late, is (for a great part thereof) fair builded, and not a little augmented; And then at the Barres endeth this Ward, without Newgate. Without Ludgate, on the right hand, or North side, from the said Gate lyeth the Old Bayley, as I said, then the high street, called Ludgate-hill, down to Fleet-Lane; in which Lane standeth the Fleet, a Prison-house, so called of the Fleet, or water running by it, and sometime flowing about it, but now vaulted over. Then also, against the South end of Shooe-lane, standeth a fair Water-Conduit, whereof William East field, sometime Mayor, was Founder; for the Mayor and Commonalty of London, being possessed of a Conduit Head, with di∣vers Springs of water gathered thereunto, in the Parish of Padington, and the water conveyed from thence, by Pipes of Lead, towards London unto Teyborn, where it had lain by the space of six years, and more: the Executors of Sir Wil∣lam Eastfield, obtained Licence of the Mayor and Communalty, for them, in the year 1453. with the Goods of Sir William, to convey the said Water, first, in Pipes of Lead, into a Pipe, begun to be laid besides the great Conduit Head at Maribone, which stretcheth from thence unto a separall, late before made a∣gainst the Chappel of Rounseval, by Charing-Crosse, and no further; and then from thence, to convey the said water into the City, and there to make Receit, or Receits for the same, unto the Common-weale of the Commonalty; to wit, the poor to drink, the rich to dresse their Meats, which water was by them brought thus into Fleet-street, to a Standard which they had made and finished 1471. From this Conduit up to Fewters Lane, and further, is the Parish Church of St. Dunstane, called in the West, (for difference from Saint Dunstane in the East.) Next beyond this Church, is Cliffords Inne, sometime belonging to Robert Clifford, by gift of Edward the second. Somewhat beyond this Cliffords Inne, is the South end of Newstreet, (or Chancelor Inne) on the right hand whereof, is Sergeants-Inne, called, in Chan∣cery lane.
And then next was sometime the House of the converted Iews, founded by King Henry the third, in place of a Jews House to him forfeited, in the year 1233. and the seventeenth of his Reign; who builded there for them, a fair Church, now used, and called the Chappel; for the Custody of Rolles and Re∣cords of Chancery, it standeth not far from the old Temple and the new; in the which House, all such Jews and Infidels, as were converted to the Christian Faith, were ordained and appointed (under an honest rule of life) sufficient maintenance: whereby it came to passe, that in short time, there were gather∣ed a great number of Converts which were baptized instructed in the Do∣ctrine of Christ, and there lived under a learned Christian, appointed to go∣vern them; since the which time, to wit, in the year 1290. all the Jews in England, were banished out of the Realm, whereby the number of Converts in this place was decayed, and therefore in the year 1377. this House was annexed by Parent, to William Burstall Clark, Custos Rotulorum, or Keeper of the Ros of the Chancery, by Edward the third, in the fifty one year of his Reign; and this first Master of the Rolls was sworn in Westminster-Hall, at the I able of Marble-stone; since the which time, that House hath bin commonly called the Rolls in Chancery-Lane. On the West side, sometime was an House, pertaining to the Prior of Necto Park, a House of Canons in Lincolnshire: this was commonly called Hereflete Inne and was a Brew-house▪ but now fair builded for the six Clerks of the Chan∣cery, and standeth over against the said House, called the Rolls, and near unto the Lane, which now entreth Fickets Croft, or Fickets field. Then is Shere-lane, opening also into Fickets field, hard by the Barres. Next is Bride-lane, and therein Bridewell, of old time the Kings House; for the Kings of this Realm have bin there lodged, and till the ninth of Henry the third, the Courts were kept in the Kings House, wheresoever he was lodged, as may appear by ancient Records, whereof there are many; and for example, have set forth one in the Chapter, or Towers and Castles. King Henry the eighth, builded there a stately and beautiful House of new, for receit of the Emperor, Charles the fifth, who in the year of Christ 1522. was lodged himself at the Black-Fryers; but his Nobles, in this new builded Bridewell, a Gallery being made out of the House over the Water, and thorow the Wall of the City, into the Emperors Lodging at the Black-Fryers: King Henry himself often times lodged there also; as namely, in the year 1525. a Parliament being then holden in the Black-Fryers, he created States of Nobi∣lity there. In the year 1553. the seventh of Edward the sixth, the tenth of April, sir George Barne, being Mayor of this City, was sent for to the Court at White-hall, and there at that time the King gave unto him, for the Communalty and Citi∣zens, to be a Work-house, for the poor and idle persons of the City, his house of Bridewell: and seven hundred Marks Land, late of the possessions of the house of Savoy, and all the Bedding and other Furniture of the said Hospital of the Savoy, towards the maintenance of the said Work-house of Bridewel, and the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark. This gift, King Edward confirmed by his Charter, dated the 26. of Iune, next following. And in the year 1555. in the moneth of February, Sir William Ger∣rard Mayor, and the Aldermen, entred Bridewel, and took possession thereof ac∣cording to the gift of the said King Edward, the same being confirmed by Queen Mary. The Bishop of St. Davids had his Inne over against the North side of this Bridewell, as I have said. Then is the Parish Church of St. Bridget, or Bride, of old time a small thing, which now remaineth to be the Quire; but since, increased with a large Body,
and side Iles, towards the West, at the charges of William Vinor Equire, War∣den of the Fleet, about the year 1480. all which he caued to be wrought about in the stone, in the figure of a Vine, with Grapes and Leaves, &c. The partition betwixt the old work and the new, sometime prepared as a Screne, to be set up in the Hall of the Duke of Summersets House at the Strand, was bought for eightscore pounds, and set up in the year, one thousand five hundred fifty seven. The next is Salisbury Court, a place so called, for that it belonged to the Bi∣shops of Salisbury, and was their Inne, or London House, at such time as they were summoned to come to the Parliamnt, or came for other business: It hath of late time bin the dwelling, first of Sir Richard Sackvile, and after, of Sir Thomas Sackvile his Sonne, Baron of Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer, who very greatly inlarged it with stately Buildings. Then is Water-lane, running down by the West side of a House, called the Hanging Sword, to the Thames. Then was the White Fryers Church, called Fratres beatae Mariae de monte Car∣meli, first founded (saith Iohn Bale) by Sir Richard Gray, Knight, Ancestor to the Lord Gray of Codner, in the year 1241. King Edward the first, gave to the Prior and Brethren of that house, a plot of ground in Fleet-street; whereupon to build their House, which was since re∣edified, or new builded, by Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, about the year one thousand three hundred and fifty, the four and twentieth of Edward the third. Iohn Lufken, Mayor of London, and the Commonalty of the City, granted a Lane, called Crockers-lane, reaching from Fleetstreet to the Thames, to build in the West end of that Church. Then is the Sergeants Inne, so called, for that divers Iudges and Sergeants at the Law keep a Commons, and are lodged there in Terme time. Next is the New Temple, so called, because the Templers, before the building of this House had their Temple in Oldbourn: This house was founded by the Knights Templers in England, in the Reign of Henry the second▪ and the same was dedicated to God, and our Blessed Lady, by Heraclius, Patriark of the Church, called the Holy Resurrection in Jerusalem, in the year of Christ, 1185. Many Parliaments and great Councels have been there kept, as may appear by our Histories. In the year 1308. all the Templers in England, as also in other parts of Chri∣stendom, were apprehended, and committed to divers Prisons. Anno 1310. a Provincial Councel was holden at London, against the Tem∣plets in England, upon Heresie, and other Articles, whereof they were accused; but denyed all, except one or two of them; notwithstanding, they all did con∣fesse, that they could not purge themselves fully, as faultless, and so they were condemned to perpetual penance, in several Monasteries, where they behaved themselves modestly. Philip King of France, procured their over-throw throughout the whole World, and caused them to be condemned by a general Councel to his advan∣tage as he thought; for he believed to have had all their Lands in France, and therefore seizing the same in his hands, caused the Templers, to the number of 54. or after Fabian, threescore, to be burnt at Paris. Edward the second, in the year 1313. gave unto Aimer de la Valence, Earl of Pembrook, the whole place & house, called the new Temple at London, with the ground called Fiquetes Croft, and all the Tenements and Rents, with the ap∣purtenances that belonged to the Templers in the City of London, and Suburbs threof.
After Aimer de Valence (saith some) Hugh Spencer (usurping the same) held it during his life; by whose death, it fell again to the hands of Edward the third; but in the mean time, to wit, 1324. by a Councel holden at Vienna, all the Lands of the Templers (lest the same should be put to prophane uses) were given to the Knights Hospitalers, of the Order of St. Iohn Baptist, called Saint Iohn of Ierusalem; which Knights had put the Turks out of the Ile of Rhodes, and after, wan upon the said Turk, daily for a long time. In the Reign of the same Edward the third, was granted (for a certain Rent of ten pounds by the year) the said Temple, with the Appurtenances thereunto ad∣joyning, to the Students of the Common Lawes of England, in whose possession, the same hath ever sithence remained, and is now divided into two Houses of several Students, by the name of Inns of Court, to wit, the Inner Temple, and the Middle Temple, who keep two several Halls; but they resort all to the said Temple-Church, in the round walk whereof, (which is the West part, without the Quire) there remain Monuments of Noblemen, buried to the number of eleven, eight of them are Images of Armed Knights, five lying Crosse-legged, as men vowed to the Holy Land, against the Infidels, and unbelieving Jews, the other three straight-legged. The rest are coaped stones, all of Gray Marble: the first of the Crosse-legged, was William Marshal the elder, Earl of Pem∣brooke, who died 1219. William Marshall his Sonne, Earl of Pembrooke, was the second, he dyed 1231. And Gilbert Marshall, his Brother, Earl of Pembrooke, slain in a Turnament at Hartford, besides Ware, in the year 1241. Of the Twenty sixth, or the last Ward of the City of LONDON, called the Bridge-Ward without, containing the Bourough of Southwark. WE have now almost finished the Perambulation; for having treated of Wards in London, on the North side of the Thames, (in number five and twenty) we are now to crosse over the said River, into the Burough of Southwark, which is also a Ward of London without the Walls, on the South side thereof, as is Portsoken on the East, and Faringdon Extra on the West. But before we come to the particular Description of this Ward, it will not be impertinent to declare, when, and by what meanes the Burough of South∣wark, now called Bridge-Ward without, was made one of the six and twenty Wards, belonging to the City of London, which was in this manner. After the dissolution of the Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, and other Reli∣gious Houses, in this Realm of England, The Mayor, Commonalty, and Citi∣zens of this City of London, taking into their Considerations, how commodi∣ous, and convenient it would be unto the City, to have the Burough of South∣wark annexed thereunto; and that the same Burough was in the Kings hands wholly, they became humble suiters unto King Henry the eighth, and unto the Lords of his Highness Privy Councel, for the obtaining of the same. Which suit not being granted unto them; after the Decease of King Henry the eighth, they
renewed their Suit unto his Sonne and next Successour, King Edward the sixth, and to the Lords of his Privie Councel for the obtaining of the same Bo∣rough. At the length, after long suit, and much labour, it pleased King Edward the fixth, by his Letters Parents, sealed with the great Seal of England, bearing date at VVestminster the three and twentieth day of April, in the fourth year of his Reign, as well in consideration of the sum of six hundred forty seven pounds, two shillings and a penny, of lawful money of England, paid to his Highnesses use, by the Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London, as for divers o∣ther considerations him thereunto moving, To give and grant unto the said Mayor, and Communalty, and Citizens of London, divers Messuages, Lands and Tenements, lying near the Borough of Southwark, in the said Letters Parents, particularly expressed, which were sometimes the Lands of Charles late Duke of Suffolk, and of whom King Henry the eighth did buy and purchase the same. But there was excepted out of the said grant, and reserved unto the said King Edward the sixth, his Heirs and Successors, and all that his Capitall Messuage, or Mansion Hose, called Southwark place, late of the said Duke of Suffolke, and all Gardens and Land to the same adjoyning; and all that his Park in South∣warke, and all that his Messuage, and all Edifices and ground, called the Ante∣lope there. And the said King Edward the 6th, did by his said Letters Patents, give & grant to the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, all that his Lordship, and Mannor of Southwarke, with all and singular the Rights, Mem∣bers, and Appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late be∣longing to the late Monastery of Bermondsey in the same County; And also all that his Mannor and Borough of Southwarke, with all, and singular the Rights Members, and Appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late parcel of the Possessions of the Arch-Bishop and Bishoprick of Canterbury, toge∣ther with divers yearly Rents, issuing out of the divers Messuages or Tene∣ments, in the said Letters Patents particularly expressed. But there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, to the said King Edward the sixth, his Heirs, and Successors, all his Rights, Jurisdictions, Liber∣ties, and Franchises whatsoever within the Walk, Circuit, and Precinct of his Capital Messuage, Gardens, and Park in Southwarke; and in all Gardens, Curti∣lages, and Lands, to the said Mansion House, Gardens, and Park belong∣ing. Also, there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, the House, Messu∣age, or lodging there, called the Kings-Bench, and the Gardens to the same be∣longing so long as it should be used as a Prison for prisoners, as it was then used. Also, there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, the House, Mes∣suage, or Lodging there called, the Marshalsey, and the Gardens to the same belonging, so long as it should be used as a Prison for prisoners, as it was then used. Also, it was provided, that the said Letters Patents, should not be prejudicial to the Offices of the great Master or Steward of the Kings Houshold, within the Borough and Precincts aforesaid, to be executed while the same Borough and Precincts should be within the Verge; Nor to Iohn Gates Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber, concerning any Lands, Tenements, Offices, Profits, Franchises, or Liberties to him granted during his life, by the said King Edward the sixth, or by his Father King Henry the eighth. About the space of a Month after the said Borough of Southwark was so granted by King Edward the sixth, to the Mayor Communalty and Citizens of London, and that they by force of the said Letters Patents, stood charged with the Ordering, Survey, and Government of the same Borough, and of all the
Kings Subjects, inhabiting therein, and repairing thither. At a Court holden before Sir Rowland Hill Knight, then Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen of the same City, in the Guild-Hall of London, on Tuesday the eight and twenti∣eth of May, in the said fourth year of the Reign of King Edward the sixth, the said Town or Borough was named and called the Ward, or Bridge VVard without. Not long after, it was enacted, that besides the then ancient accustomed num∣ber of five and twenty Aldermen, there should be one Alderman more elected, to have the Rule, Charge, and Governance of the said Borough and Town. And that four discreet persons, or more, being Freemen of London, and dwelling within the said City, or the Borough of Southwarke, or in other the Liberties of the said City, should from thenceforth, as often as the Case shall require, be from time to time nominated, appointed, and chosen by the Inhabitants of the said Borough for the time being, before the Lord Mayor of London for the time being; And that the said Lord Mayor for the time being, should (at the next Court of Aldermen, to be holden at the Guild-Hall of the said City, next after such election) present the Names and Sirnames of all such persons, as to should be named before him, and put in the said Election; And that the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen, for the time being, should of those four persons, or mo, so presented, Elect and Chuse one, by way of Scrutinie; to be an Alderman of the said City, and to have the peculiar Ordering, Rule, and Governance of the said Borough and Town of Southwarke, and of the Inhabitants thereof, and of all other the Kings liege people, repairing to the same. This Borough being in the County of Surrey, consisteth of divers streets, waies, and winding Lanes, all full of Buildings inhabited; And first, to begin at the West part thereof, over against the West Suburbe of the City, on the Bank of the River Thames, there is now a continual building of Tenements, about half a mile in length to the Bridge. Then South a continual street called Long Southwark, builded on both sides with divers Lanes, and Alleys up to St. Georges Church, and beyond it through Blackman street, towards New Town, (or Newington) the Liberties of which Bo∣rough, extend almost to the Parish Church of New Town aforesaid, distant one mile from London Bridge, and also South-west a continual building, almost to Lambeth, more than one mile from the said Bridge. Then from the Bridge along by the Thames East-ward, is St. Olaves street, having continual building on both the sides, with Lanes and Alleys up to Bat∣tle-Bridge: to Horse-down, and towards Rother-Hith also, some good half mile in length from London Bridge, so that I account the whole continual buildings, on the Bank of the said River, from the West towards the East to be more than a large mile in length. Then have ye from the entring towards the said Horse-down, one other con∣tinual street, called Barmonds eye street, which stretcheth South, likewise furni∣shed with Buildings on both the sides, almost half a mile in length up to the late dissolved Monastery of St. Saviours, called Bermondsey. And from thence is one Long Lane (so called of the length) turning West to St. Georges Church aforenamed, out of the which Lane, mentioned Long-lane, breaketh one other street towards the South and by East, and this is called Ken∣tvsh-street, for that it is the way leading into that County; and so have ye the bounds of this Borough. The Antiquities most notable in this Borough are these; First, for Ecclesia∣stical, there was Bermondsey, an Abbey of Black Monks; St. Mary Overies, a Priory of Canons Regular; St. Thomas, a Colledge or Hosptal for the poor; and the Loke, a Lazar-house in Kent-street. Parish Churches there have been six, whereof five do remain, (viz.) St. Mary Magdalen, in the Priory of Saint Mary Overy; Now the same St. Mary Overy is the Parish Church for the said
Mary Magdalen, and for Saint Margaret on the Hill, and is called Saint Sa∣viour. Saint Margaret on the Hill, being put down is now a Court for Justice; St. Thomas in the Hospital serveth for a Parish Church as afore; St George a Parish Church, as before it did; so doth St, Olave, and St. Mary Magdalen by the Abby of Bermondsey. There be also these five Prisons, or Goals, the Clink on the Bank, the Compter in the late Parish Church of St. Margaret, the Marshalsey, the Kings-Bench, and the White-Lyon, all in Long Southwarke. Now to return to the West Bank, there were two Bear-Gardens, the old and new, places wherein were kept Bears, Bulls, and other Beasts, to be bated; As also Mastives, in seeral Kenels, nourished to baite them. These Bears and other Beasts are there baired in plots of ground, Scaffolded about, for the be∣holders to stand safe; but this kind of sport is now prohibited. Next, on this Bank, was sometime the Bordllo or Stewes, a place so called of certain Stew-houses, pri∣viledged there, for the repair of incontinent men, to the like women, of the which Priviledge we read thus. In a Parliament holden at Westminster, the eight of Henry the second, it was ordained by the Commons, and confirmed by the King and Lords, That divers constitutions for ever should he kept in that Lordship or Franchise, according to the old Customs, that had been there used time out of mind; Amongst the which, these following were some, viz. That no Stew-holder, or his Wife should let or stay any single Woman to go and come freely at all times, when they listed. No Stew-holder to keep any Woman to board, but she to board abroad at her pleasure. To take no more for the Womans Chamber in the week than four∣teen pence. Not to keep open his doors upon the Holy-daies. Not to keep any single Woman in his House on the Holy-dayes; but the Bay∣liff to see them voided out of the Lordship. No single Woman to be kept against her will that would leave her sin. No Stew-holder to receive any Woman of Religion, or any Mans Wife. No single Woman to take mony to lye with any man, except she lie with him all night till the morrow. No man to be drawn or enticed into any Stew-house. The Constables, Bayliffe, and others, every week to search every Stew-house. No Stew-holder to keep any Woman, that hath the perilous Infirmity of burning: nor to sell Bread, Ale, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Coale, or any Victu∣als, &c. These allowed Stew-houses had Signs on their Fronts, towards the Thames, not hanged out, but painted on the Walls, as a Boars head, the Crosse-Keys, the Gun, the Castle, the Craue, the Cardinals Hat, the Bell, the Swan, &c. Ancient men of good credit do report, that these single Women were forbidden the Rights of the Church so long as they continued that sinful life, and were exclu∣ded from Christian burial, if they were not reconciled, before their death: And therefore there was a plot of ground called the Single Womans Church-yard, ap∣pointed for them, far from the Parish Church. In the year of Christ, one thousand five hundred forty six, the seven and thir∣tieth of Henry the eighth, this Row of Stews in Southwarke, was put down by the Kings commandement, which was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, no more to be priviledg'd and used as a common Brothel. Then next is the Clinke, a Goale or Prison for the Trespassers in those parts, namely, in old time for such as should brabble, fray, or break the peace on the said Bank, or in the Brothel Houses; they were by the Inhabitants thereabout, apprehended and committed to this Gaole, where they were streightly im∣prisoned.
Next is the Bishop of Winchesters House, or Lodging when he com∣meth to this City. Adioyning to this on the South side thereof, is the Bishop of Rochesters Inne, or lodging, by whom first erected, it is not upon Record; but 'tis known well, the same of long time hath not been frequented by any Bishop, and lieth rui∣nous for lack of reparations. The Abbot of Naverly had a House there. East from the Bishop of Winchesters House, directly over against it standeth a fair Church, called St. Mary, over the Rie, or Overy, that is, over the water; This Church, or some other in place thereof was (of old time long before the Con∣quest) an House of Sisters, founded by a Maiden, named Mary, unto the which House and Sisters they left (as was left to her by her Parents) the over-sight and profits of a Crosse-Ferry or Traverse-Ferry over the Thames, there kept before that any Bridge was builded; This House of Sisters was after by Swithin, a No∣ble Lady, converted unto a Colledge of Priests who in place of the Ferry, buil∣ded a Bridge of Timber, and from time to time kept the same in good repara∣tions; But lastly the same Bridge was builded of Stone, and then in the year 1106, was this Church again founded for Canons Regular, by VVilliam Pont del l' Arch, and VVilliam Daunly Knights Normans. This Peter de Rupibus or de la Roch, founded a large Chappel of St. Mary Magdalen, in the Church of St Ma∣ry Overy, which Chappel was afterward appointed to be the Parish Church for the Inhabitants near adjoyning. This Church was again new builded in the Reign of Richard the second, and King Henry the fourth. Iohn Gower Esquire, a famous Poet, was then an especial Benefactor to that work, and was there buried on the North side of the said Church, in the Chap∣pel of St. Iohn, where he founded a Chantry; He lyeth under a Tombe of Stone, with his Image also of Stone over him; The Hair of his Head auburne, long to his Shoulders, but curling up and a small forked Beard: on his Head a Chaplet, like a Coronet of four Roses, an habit of Purple damasked down to his feet, a Collar of Esses of Gold about his Neck, under his Feet the likenesse of three Books, which he compiled. The first named Speculum Meditantis, writ∣ten in French; The second, Vox clamantis, penned in Latine; The third, Con∣fessio Amantis, written in English, and this last is printed; Vox Clamantis, with his Chronica Tripartita, & other both in Latine and French, were never printed. Besides on the Wall where he lyeth, there was painted three Virgins Crowned, one of the which was named Charity, holding this Device, En Toy qui es Fitz de Dieu le pere Save soit, qui gist soubs cest pierre. In Thee who art the Son of God Be sav'd who lyes under this clod. Now passing through St. Mary Overies Close (once in possession of the Lord Montacute) & Pepper Alley into Long Southwark; on the right hand thereof the Market Hill, where the Leather is sold, there stood the late named Parish Church of Saint Margaret, given to St. Mary Overies by Henry the first, put down and joyned with the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, and united to the late dissolved Priory Church of St. Mary Overy. A part of this Parish Church of St. Margaret is now a Court wherein the Assizes and Sessions be kept, and the Court of Admiralty is also there kept; one other part of the same Church is now a prison, called the Compter in South∣warke, &c. Farther up on that side, almost directly over against St. Georges Church, was sometime a large and most sumptuous house, builded by Charles Brandon, Duke
of Suffolke, in the Reign of Henry the eighth, which was called Suffolk House, but coming afterwards into the Kings hands, the same was called Southwark place, and a Mint of Coynage was there kept for the King. Queen Mary give this House to Nicholas Heth, Archbishop of York, and to his Successors for ever, to be their Inne or Lodging for their repair to London, in recompence of York House near to Westminster, which King Henry her Father had taken from Cardinal Woolsey, and from the See of York. Then is the White Lion, a Goal so called, for that the same was a common Ho∣ftery for the receit of Travellers by that Sign. This ouse was first used as a Goal within these hundred years last, since the which time the prisoners were once removed thence to an House in New-town, where they remained for a short time, and were returned again to the aforesaid White Lion, there to remain as the appointed Goal for the Countey of Surrey. Next is the Goal or Prison of the Kings-Bench, but of what antiquity the same is, it appears not. We read, that the Courts of the Kings-Bench and Chan∣cery, have oft times been removed from London to other places, and so hath likewise the other Goals that serve those Courts, as in the year 1304, Edward the first commanded the Courts of Kings-Bench & the Exchequer, which had remai∣ned seven years at York, to be removed to their old places at London. And in the year 1387, the eleaventh of Richard the second, Robert Trisilian chief Justice, came to the City of Coventry, and there sat by the space of a Month, as Justice of the Kings Bench, and caused to be Indicted in that Court about the number of 2000 persons of that Country, &c. It seemeth therefore, that for that time the Prison or Goale of that Court was not far off. Also, in the year 1392, the six∣teenth of the same Richard, the Archbishop of York, being Lord Chancellor, for good will that he bare to his City, caused the Kings Bench and Chancery to be removed from London to York, but ere long they were returned to London. Then is the Marshalsey another Goal or Prison, so called, as pertaining to the Marshalls of England, of what continuance kept in Southwark, it appears not; but likely it is, that the same hath been removeable, at the pleasure of the Mar∣shalls. And then Thieves Lane by St. Thomas Hospital, first found by Richard, Prior of Bermondsey, in the Cellerers grounded, against the Wall of the Mona∣stery, in the year 1213, He named it the Almery, or house of Alms, for Converts and poor Children. In the year 1552, the Citizens of London, having the void suppressed Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, in the Month of Iuly, began the reparations there∣of, for poor, impotent, lame, and diseased people, so that in the Month of No∣vember next following, the sick and poor people were taken in,; And in the year 1553, on the tenth of April, King Edward the sixth in the seventh of his Reign, gave to the Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of London, to be a Work-House for the poor, and idle persons of the City, his House of Bridewell, and seven hundred Marks Lands of the Savoy Rents, which Hospital he had suppres∣sed, with all the Beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging to the same, to∣wards the maintenance of the said Work-house of Bridewell, and of this Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwark. This gift, the King confirmed by his Charter. The Church of this Hospital, which of old time served for the Tenements neer adjoyning and pertaining to the said Hospital, remaineth as a Parish Church. But now to come to St. Olaves street: on the Bank of the River of Thames, is the Parish Church of St. Olave, a fair and meely large Church, but a far larger Parish, especially of Aliens or strangers, and poor people. Next is the Bridge-House, so called, as being a Store-house for Stone, Tim∣ber, or whatsoever pertaining to the building or repairing of London Bridge. This House seemeth to have taken beginning with the first founding of the Bridge, either of Stone or Timber; it is a large plot of ground on the Bank of the River of Thames, containing divers large buildings, for stowage of things ne∣cessary,
towards reparation of the said Bridge. There are also divers Garners, for laying up of Wheat, and other Granaries for service of the City, as need re∣quireth. Moreover, there be certain Ovens builded, in number ten, of which six be very large the other four being but half so big: these were purposely made to bake out the Bread Corn of the said Grayners, to the best advantage, for relief of the poor Cittizens, when need should require. Then is Battaile Bridge, so called of Battaile Abbey, for that it standeth on the ground & over a Water-course, (flowing out of Thames) pertaining to that Abbey, and was therefore both builded and repaired by the Abbots of that House, as being hard adjoyning to the Abbots Lodging. Beyond this Bridge is Bermondsey street, turning South, in the South end whereof was sometime a Priory or Abby of St. Saviour, called Bermonds Eye in Southwarke, founded by Ailwin, a Citizen of London, in the year 1081. In the year 1094, deceased Alwin, founder of this House. Then William Rufus gave to the Monks, his Mannor of Bermondsey, with the appurtenances, and builded there for them a new great Church. In the year 1539. this Abbey was valued to dipend by the year, 474 l. four∣teen shillings four pence half penny, and was surrendred to Henry the eighth, the one and thirtieth of his Reign, the Abbey Church was then pulled down by Sir Thomas Pope Knight, and in place thereof, a goodly House builded of Stone and Timber, since pertaining to the Earls of Sussex. Next unto this Abbey Church standeth a proper Church of St. Mary Magdalen, builded by the Priory of Bermondsey, serving for resort of the Inhabitants (Tenants to the Priors or Abbots near adjoyning) there to have their Divine Service; this Church re∣maineth and serveth as afore, and is called a Parish Church. Then in Kent street, is a Lazar House for Leprous people, called the Loke in Southwark, the foundation whereof is incertain. This Borough at a subsidy to the King, was used to yield about a thousand Marks, or eight hundred pounds, which is more than any one City in England payeth except London; And also, the Muster of men in this Borough doth like∣wie in number surpasse all other Cities, except London. And thus much for the Borough of Southwarke, one of the six and twenty Wards of London. Having thus travers'd the whole Body of this great City, and her severall Wards, from the Center to the Circumference; it is now to be observed, that every Ward hath its particular Alderman as an Overseer, or Guardian assign'd thereunto, who hath a greater latitude of power, than an ordinary Justice of the Peace. This Alderman hath one Deputy, and in some Wards more. There are likewise a number of Common-Councel men, Constables, men of the Wardmote Inquest, Scavengers▪ some more, some lesse, with Beadles in every Ward. Th last Ward which is the Borough of Southwark, differs from the rest in this, that the Alderman appointed there, hath three Deputies and a Bayliff, but no Com∣mon Councel men.
Of Places adjacent, and contiguous to the City of London. HAving endeavoured already to diect the City of London, so that all her Members, and homogeneal parts may be discern'd: We will now passe on to her heterogeneal, or Suburbian parts, which yet are contiguous, and make one entire continued peece: We will, as formerly, take our first aym Eastward and begin with those parts that are with∣out the Postern by the Tower of London. The second of Henry the third, the Forrest of Middlesex, and the Warren of Stanes, were difafforested; since which time, the Suburbs also about London, in tract of time, and, as it were, by an insensible augmentation, have wonder∣fully increased in people and edifices. Near the Tower of London, is the Hospital of St. Katherine (spoken of before) founded by Matilda, Wife to King Stephen, that renowned and most Religious Queen. From the Liberties of St. Katherine to Wapping, the usual place of Execution for Pyrates, and Sea-rovers, there to continue hanging till three Tydes over∣flow and cover them; I say, from St. Katherines to Wapping, 'tis yet in the me∣mory of man, there was never a House standing, but the Gallowes which was further removed, in regard of the Buildings. But now there is a continued street towards a mile long, from the Tower, all along the River, almost as far as Radcliffe, which proceeded from the encrease of Navigation, Mariners and Tra∣fique. The Citizens of London, were the chief Benefactors, towards the erecting of the new Church at Wapping, a Chappel of ease to White-Chappel: And upon a high Beam, in the midst thereof, there is a memorable neat Inscription, viz. This Chappel was dedicated to Almighty God, and consecrated to the Honour and glory of his great and wonderful name, the seventh day of July, 1617. by the right Reverend Father in God, John King, then Bishop of London. North-East of the Tower, lyeth East-Smithfield, Hoggs-street, and another Tower-Hill, near whereunto was an Hermitage, in times passed, called the new Abbey of Grace, founded by Edward the third, in gratitude to Heaven, for his victorious Successes in France; which commendable custom, continueth still beyond the Ses, as lately there is a fair costly Church, erected in Venice, de∣dicated to St. Lawrence, in remembrance of a signal Victory she obtained a∣gainst the common Enemy the Turk, about that Saints day; as Philip the second did build the Escurial for St. Quinten Victory. Then is there Radcliffe, much en∣creased also in Buildings, and Nightingale-lane; from thence towards Aldgate, were the Minories, a famous Abbey of Nns, of the Order of Santa Clara, foun∣ded by Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Leicester and Darby, Brother to Edward the first, as hath bin formerly spoken. Without Algate there is a spacious huge Suburb, about a mile long, as far as White Chappel, and further: White Chappel was as it were, a Chappel of Ease to Stebunhith, now called by a strange contraction, Stepney Parish: the Church of White Chappel, was called St. Mary Marfelon, because a Frenchman having ser∣ved a rich Widow hard by and murthered her for her Wealth, the Women and Boyes stoned the Felon to death, as he thought to fly away. From Algate▪ North-West to Bishopsgate, lyeth Houndsditch, a long street, then is the fair Parish Church of St. Buttolph: Then is the Hospital of St. Mary of Bethlem, founded by a London Citizen, as hath bin shewn before; without
which is Norton-Fallgate, a liberty belonging to St. Pauls. Thence up to the Priory of St. Iohn Baptist, is Holy Well, where there was in ancient times, a Nun∣nery, founded by Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of London 1318. In the High street from Holy Well, there is a continual Building to Sewers Ditch, then is there Shore-Ditch, Golding-lane, Goswell-street, then Hoxton, (vul∣garly called Hogsdon) which was once a Prebend belonging to St. Pauls. Then is there in this Suburb, the Hospital of St. Mary Spittle, and a great Palace, called Fishers Folly, built by the Lord Iohn Powlet. In former times, there was in Shoreditch, a Row of small Almshones, built there by the Prior, which being suppressed, they were called the Rotten Rowe. Then is there the Parish Church of St. Leonard, in Shoreditch, whereof the Arch-Deacon of Pauls de jure, is alwayes Parson; We are come now to Moor∣fields, which in former times, was but a fenny quagge, or Moore, and is now, by the industry and bounty of well disposed Citizens, come to that perfection, and pleasantness, as now we behold it in, whereof mention is made be∣fore. We passe now to Cripplegate, and St. Giles Church, built by one, Alfune, first Hospitaler of St. Bartholomew in Smithfield; near unto this Church, there was in former times, a fair pool of sweet water, where in Anne of Lodberry was drowned, as the Story shewes. Then is there Forestreet, Moore-lane, and Grubstreet, White-crosse-street, which is of great extent, and reacheth to Old street. From the West end of Forestreet, lyeth Redcrosse-street, and Beech-lane, with Golding-lane, full of small Tenements. Then is there Barbican, anciently called Houndsditch, all these populous places, are within the Precincts of St. Giles Parish. Aldersgate Suburb is next, where the Parish of St. Buttolph stands, and little Britain street on the one side; then it stretcheth all along North, with very handsome Edifices, and a large street, as far as Barbican, on the one side, and Long-lane on the other. This street resembleth an Italian street, more then any other in London, by reason of the spaciousness & uniformity of Buildings, and streightness thereof, with the convenient distance of the Houses; on both sides whereof, there are divers very fair ones, as Peter-House, the Palace now, and Mansion of the most Noble Marquis of Dorchester: Then is there the Earl of Tenets House, with the Moon and Sun-Tavern, very fair structures, Then is there from about the middle of Aldersgate-street, a handsome new street butted out, and fairly built by the Company of Goldsmiths, which reacheth athwart as far as Redcrosse-street. At the furthest point of this Suburb Northward, there was a Winde-Mill in times past, which being blown down by a Tempest, Queen Katherine of Ara∣gon, first Wife to Henry the 8th, erected there a Chappel, and named it Mount Calvary, which was afterwards suppressed, and the place came to be called Mount-mill, whereof the Long-Parliament made much use for their fortifica∣tions. We are going now to Newgate, where towards Smithfield, I meet with Gilt∣spur, and Knight-riders-street: Then is Smithfield it self, which hath bin spoken of before, in Faringdon Ward. Without Smithfield Barres, there is St. Johns street; on the right hand where∣of, stood the Charter-house, founded by Sir Walter Manuy, Knight of the Gar∣ter to Edward the third. Hard by, is Pardon Church-yard, whereas the Annales record, above fifty thousand souls were buried in one year, who had dyed of a raging great sweeping Pestilence, in the Reign of the foresaid Edward the third.
The Chievalrou▪ and most devot Knight, first buit a Chappel there, then a Monastery of Carthusian Fryers, which are the evere one most rigid of all claustral Societies: this Monastery was called at first the Salutation. In this Charter-House, was the Monument of the said Sir Walter Mnny, and above twenty Knights more, besides Ladies and other perons of high Rank, and at the suppression of Abbeys, this Monastery had 642 l. yearly Rent, a migh∣ty sum in those dayes. This demolish'd Charter-House, came a while after, to the possession of Tho∣mas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Treasurer of England, in King James his Raign, and the place being sweetly scituated, with accommodations of spacious Walks, Orchards, and Gardens, with sundry dependencies of Tenements, and Lands thereunto belonging, gave occasion to that worthy and well disposed Gentle∣man, Mr. Thomas Sutton, of Caste Camps, in the County of Cambridge Esquire, but born at Knayth in Lincolnshire, to alter his Resolution of erecting an Hos∣pital at Hallingbury in Essex, where he had first pitched his design, and to pur∣chase this place of the Earl, for 13000 l. first peny payd before the saling of the Conveyance; which charitable, great, and noble enterprize, was counte∣nanced by King James, and his privy Councel. So having in few years raised up that goodly Fabrique, (though it pleased God to take him to himself, before it was quite finish'd) and endowed it with com∣petent allowance, by passing away many goodly Mannors, he had in Lincoln, Wiltshire, Middlesex, Cambridge and Essex, with other goodly possessions, the work was compleated, and nominated the Hospital of King James; which Hospital, consisted of a Master, a Governor, a Preacher, a Free School, with a Master and Usher, 80. poor people, and 40. Schollers, maintained all by the Revenues of the House, Anno 1614. on Munday next, after Michaelmas day, the Captains, Gentlemen, and Officers, entred into this new Hospital. Now there were by Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England, di∣vers Governors appointed of this Hospital, whereof the Arch Bishop of Can∣terbury was chief, The Lord Chancelor, and Treasurer, The Bishops of London and Ely, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Attorney General, the Dean of Pauls, the Dean of Westminster, and divers others; But the late long Parliament, inverting the order and will of the founder, did nominate others in their rooms. A little without the Barres of West Smithfield▪ is Charter-house Lane; but in the large yard before, there are many handsome Palaces, as Rutland House, and one where the Venetian Embassadors were used to lodge; which yard hath lately bin conveniently raised, and made more neat and comely. Then is there St. Johns street, with Turnmill-street, which stretcheth up West, to Clarken-well, and it is vulgarly called Turnball-street: There is another Lane called St. Peters Lane, which turns from St. Johns street, to Cow-Crosse. The dissolved Priory of St. John of Jerusalem, stood on the left hand, foun∣ded almost 600. years since, by Jorden Briset, a pious brave man, who had foun∣ded alo a Priory of Nuns at Clarken-Well. The Rebels and Rabble of Kent, did much mischief to this House 1381. set∣ting it on fire, and letting it burn seven dayes: At the suppression of Abbeys, this House among the rest, felt the fury of fare; yet it was not quite demolish∣ed, but employed as a Store-house for the Kings toyles and tents, as well for hunting▪ as for the Warres. But in Edward the sixth's time, that goodly Church for the most part, I mean the body and side Iles, with the great Bell-Tower, a most curious peece of fabrick, being engraven, gilt, and enamel'd, to the great Ornament of City and Suburb, was barbarously undermined, and blown up with Gunpowder: the stones whereof were carried to finish the then Pro∣tectors House in the Strand, viz. the Duke of Somerset, but strange Judgements fell afterwards upon him, as is before mentioned.
Cardinal Pool, in Queen Maries Raign, closed up again part of the Quire, and side Walls on the West side, and made Sir Thomas Tresham, Prior thereof; but thinking to bring the place to its first principles, it was suppressed again by Queen Elizabeth. A great number of Knights of that Order, had Monuments in that Church. North from the said House of St. John's, was the Priory of Clarken-Well, which also was very ancient, being built Anno 1100. We must now go back to Giltspur-street, where this Suburb first begins, where hard by standeth a comely fair Church, called St. Sepulcher, in the Baylie. Hard by is Turnagain-lane, Hosier-lane. and Cow-lane; then you come down Sorehill (now vulgarly called Snow-hill) to Oldborne, now called Holborn-Bridge: then you go up by Chick-lane, and Lither-lane; but before you come thither, you passe by the Bishop of Elies great Palace, and Hatton-House, and Brook-House: beyond the Barres, there is Postpool-lane, and Grayes Inne Lane. Southward of this Lane, there is a row of small Houses, which is a mighty hindrance to Holborn, in point of prospect, which if they were taken down, there would be from Holborn Conduit, to St. Giles in the field, one of the fair∣est rising street in the World. From Newgate on the left hand, lyeth the Old Bayley; and so down by Sea∣cole and Fleet-lane, we passe then over the common Sewer, up to Shooe-lane and so to Fewter-lane, now vulgarly called Fetter-lane; but betwixt these two Lanes, there is another new street, butted out by the Company of Goldsmiths, called Newstreet, where there is a knot of very handsome Buildings. Above the Barres, there was a House of the Templers, but they removed thence to Fleetstreet: There was also adjoyning thereunto, the Bishop of Lin∣colns House, which was very ancient; for the Records say, 'twas built Anno 1147. But of late years, it hath belonged to the Noble Earls of Southhampton; And lately, it hath bin quite taken down, and turned to several private Tene∣ments, as Durham House is in the Strand. Insomuch, that if one should ask, what God Almighty doth now in London, he might (as the pulse of the beats) give the same answer that was given by the Pagan Philosopher, who be∣ing demanded what Iupiter did in Heaven, he said, Magnas ollas rumpt, & ex frustis earum parvas componit, Jupiter breaks great Vessels, and makes small ones of their peeces. Side long of this ancient House of the Bishop of Lincoln, is Newstreet, for so it was called at first; but now 'tis called Chancery-lane, where Edward the third annexed the House of converted Jews, to the Office of Custos Rotulorum. Here the Cursitors Office was built by Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seal. Here also is the six Clarks Office, which is a fair convenient peece of stone and Brick Building newly erected, the old being consumed by a casual fire of late years. The Bishop of Chicester, Ralph Nevil, had much ground given him thereabouts, by Henry the third, which now is become all Tenements, thick built, and quite alienated. Then is Lincolns Inne, very much encreased in building, it appertained sometimes to the said Ralph Nevil, Bishop of Chicester, Lord Chancellor of England, having bin before the House of the Black-Fryers: and after the decease of the said Bishop Nevil, Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, Constable of Chester▪ and Custos of England, added much building to this place; and Sir Thomas Lovel did also add much thereunto, in Henry the eighth's time; but now it is one of the foure Inns of Court, for the Students in the Law. Behind Lincolns Inne Westward, is a spacious field, where many fair Houses, or rather Palaces, are taken up by the Gentry. Then is there towards Drewry Lane, a new Market, called Clare Market; then is there a street, and Palace of
the same name, built by the Earl of Clare, who lives there in a princely manner, having a House, a street, and a Market, both for flesh and fish, all bearing his name. There was something omitted which should have bin spoken of the Church of St. Giles of the Field, which is, that being a very ancient Church, and so de∣cayed, that it could not be repaired, a new one was erected, partly out of the ruines of the old; which work was begun and finished in two years; and a while after, the fair Brick Wall that encompasseth it. There were divers well dispo∣sed persons, who contributed to so pious a work; but specially the Lady Alice Duddeley, according to that which is engraven upon the North door, in pure and ponderous Latine, which I thought therefore worthy to be here inserted. Quod faelix faustumque sit posteris, Hoc Templum loco Veteris ex Annosa vetustate Collapsi, mole et splendore auctum multa Paraecorum Charitas Restauravit. In quibus pientissimae Heroinae, Dom. Aliciae Duddeley Munificentia gratum marmoris hujus meretur eloquium: Huc etiam accessit aliorum pletas; Quibus provisae sunt grates In Coelo. Heus viator an effaetum est bons Operibus Hoc Saeculum? From the North end of Chancery Lane, is High Holborn, which extends up to St. Giles in the Field, where the famous devout Queen Matilda did found an Hospital, as she did Eastward St. Katherines beyond the Tower. At this Ho∣spital the Prisoners conveyed from London to Tyborn, were used to be presented with a Bowl of Ale, for their last refreshment in this life, and it was commonly called St. Giles's Bowl: Then is there a spacious fair street, called Long Acre, and then Pickadilly, full of fair Houses round about. Thus have we as succinctly as we could, avoiding superfluities, and unneces∣sary trivial things, spoken of the Skirts of London, and the places thereunto an∣nexed, without the Gates, and now, Navige hinc al jam mihi linter aqua. I mean, let us steer now to the City of VVestminster.
Of the Savoy, the Dutchy, and City of Westminster, with the Antiquities, the Tribunals of Iustice, and Liberties there∣unto belonging. HAving taken so fair a Prospect, and finished the perlustration of London. It were a high Incivility, and a soloecism in good manners (or rather a Pi∣acle) not to give VVestminster also a visit, being so near and contiguous a Neighborr: It is true, that they were once above a mile asunder; but by in∣senbe coalition and recruit of people, they came at last to be united, and in∣corporated into one continued peece, in point of posture, though not of Go∣vernment. And the Union with Scotland, did not a little conduce, to make this Union twixt London and VVestminster▪ For the Scots multiplying here mighti∣ly, neased themseves about the Court, so that the Strand, from mud Walls, and thatched Houses, came to that perfection of Buildings, as now we see. Moreover, the City of VVestminster hath divers Magnalia's, which may de∣serve as exact a view as any within London; for if London of old had her Temple of Diana, VVestmnster had one to a greater Deity, which was Apollo; And since, (in those very places); is St. Paul, hath his Church in London: St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, hath his in VVestminster, which was used to keep the Regalia's and the Crown. Add hereunto, that if London hath her Guild-hall, and the Hustings. VVestminster hath the great Praetorian, or common Hall, where the chief Courts, and general Tribunals of Justice, do make their Sessions, though to her high praye be it spoken, London hath a far more expedite way of doing Justice, and determination of caues then Westminster hath; besides, in point of safety and strength, if London hath her Artillery Garden, Westminster hath her Mili∣tary: And in point of Extent and Government, if London hath her six and twenty Wards, and so many Aldermen; Westminster also hath her Twelve Bur∣gesses, and so many distinct Wards; but for the quality of Inhabitants, London mut vayl to her; most of the Nobility and Gentry residing in, or about her Precincts. Moreover, in one particular, Westminster may claim a great advantage of London in regard as the Royal Court once was, so the residence of the Soveraign Magistrate is still there: Insomuch, that Westminster may well glory of three things, That she hath the chiefest Courts of Justice, the chiefest Court of the Prince, and the chiefest Court of the King of Heaven (for every Temple is his Houe and Court.) Now the Abbey of Westminster, hath bin alwayes held the greatest Sanctuary, and randevouze of devotion of the whole Iland: wereunto, the scituation of the very place, seemes to contribute much, and to strike a ho∣ly kind of Reverence and sweetness of melting piety in the hearts of the be∣hoders. But before we steer our course to Westminster, we must visit the Dutchy o Lancaster, and the Savoy, which are liberties of themselves, and lie (as a Paren∣thesis) 'twixt London and Westminster. Without Temple-barre Westward, is a liberty pertaining to the Dutchy of Lancaster, which beginneth on the North side of the Thames, and stretcheth West to Ivy-bridge, where it terminates.
And again, on the North side, some small distance without Temple-Barre, in the High street, there stretcheth one large middle row, or troop of small Te∣nements, partly opening to the South, and partly towards the North, up West to a Stone Crosse, over against the Strand; and this is the bounds of the liber∣ty, which first belonged to Brian Lisle, after to Peter of Savoy, and then to the House of Lancaster. Henry the third did grant to his Uncle Peter of Savoy, all those Houses upon the Thames, which pertained to Brian Lisle, or de Insula, in the way, or the street, called the Strand, to hold to him and his Heires, yielding three gilded Arrowes, every year in the Exchequer. This Peter, Earl of Savoy and Richmond, Son to Thomas Earl of Savoy, Bro∣ther to Boniface Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Uncle unto Eleanor Wife to Henry the third, was the first Founder of the Savoy, Anno 1245. which he gave afterwards to the Fraternity of Monjoy. Queen Eleanor did purchase it for Ed∣mund Duke of Lancaster, her Son, of the Fraternity; which Duke did much augment and improve the structure. Iohn the French King was lodged there, being then the fairest Mannor of England. Anno 1381. The Rebels of Kent and Essex, did most barbarously burn this House, with many Vessels of Gold and Silver, which they threw into the River; all which they did out of a popular malice to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. It came afterwards to the Kings hands, and Henry the seventh did re-edifie and raise it up again, but converted it to the Hospital of St. Iohn Baptist; yet was he content, that it should be still called the Savoy, and bestowed Lands, for maintenance of 100. poor men; But afterwards, it was suppressed by his Granchild, Edward the sixth: the Beds, and Bedding, with other Furniture, were given to the City of London; together, with Bridewell, to be a Work-house for idle persons; and some of Savoy Furniture was given also to furnish St. Thomas Hospital in Southwark: But afterwards, the Savoy Hospital was re∣founded, and endowed with Lands, by Queen Mary, who made one Iackson, first Master thereof) And it is memorable, how the Mayds of Honour, and Ladies of the Court, in those times, did much contribute for storing it again with new Beds, and Furniture; and so it hath continued ever since: the Chap∣pel of this Hospital serving for a Parish Church, to the Neighbors thereof near adjoyning, and others. Now touching the Prerogatives, and enfranchisements of the Dutchy of Lancaster, let the Reader know, that Henry the fourth, by his Royal Charter, and concurrence of Parliament, did sever the possessions of the said Dutchy from the Crown, And that which Iohn of Gaunt held for term of life, was esta∣blished to perpetuity, by the Statutes of Edward the fourth, and Henry the se∣venth: which separation was made by Henry the fourth, in regard he well knew, that he had the Dutchy o Lancaster (par Regno) by sure and indefesble Title, whereas his Title to the Crown was not so assured, because that after the death of Richard the second, the Royal right was in the Heir of Lionel, Duke of Clarence, second Son of Edward the third. And John of Gaunt, who was Father to Henry the fourth, was the fourth Son: therefore his policy was, to make it a distinct thing from the Crown, for fear of after-claps. It was Edward the third, who erected the County of Lancaster to a County Palatine, and honoured the Duke of Lancaster therewith, giving him Jura Re∣galia, having a particular Court, The Officers whereof, were the Chancellor, the Attorney, the Receiver General, Clark of the Court, the Auditors, Surveyors, the Messenger; The Seal of the Dutchy of Lancaster remains with the Chancel∣lor; but the Seal of the County Palatine, remains alwayes in a Chest, in the County Palatine under the safe custody of a Keeper. Now, all Grants and Leases of Lands, Tenements, and Offices in the Coun∣ty Palatine of Lancaster, should passe under that Seal, and no other; but all
Grants and Leases out of the County Palatine, and within the Survey of the Dutchy, should passe under the Seal of the Dutchy, and no other; otherwise such Grants are voyd, Ipso facto. Though this County Palatine was a younger Brother, yet it had more honours mannors, and Lands annexed unto it, thn any of the rest; and all this by Acts of Parliament, whereby all the Franchises, Priviledges, Immunities, Quittances and Freedoms, which the Duke of Lan∣caster had for Himself and his Men, and Tenants, were confirmed. The Liberty of the Dutchy was used to be governed by the Chancellor, who had under him a Steward, that kept Court Let, with an Attorney of the Dutchy. There were also four Burgesses, and four Assistants, a Bayliffe, who had others under him▪ four Constables, four Wardens, that kept the stock for the poor, four Wardens for high wayes, a Jury of 14. Ale-cunners, which looked to the assise of measures, four Scavengers, and a Beadle, and the common Prison is Newgate. And now we must make a step back towards Temple-barre, and so by degrees, to Westminster all along, we will begin with the right hand, or the Northside, and so pase up West, through a back lane or street, wherein do stand (as was touched before) three Inns of Chancery▪ The first called Clements Inne, in regard it is near St. Clements Church, and Clements Well. The second New Inne, which was made of a common Hostery, about the beginning of the Reign of Henry 7. The third is Lions Inne. This street stretcheth up unto Drury lane, which lane extends Northward towards St. Giles in the Field. But now we must go back, as was said before, towards Temple-barre. and so by taking the Strand, all along return by degrees to Westminster it self, in a direct line. I have heard often of a British Prophecy, which came from an old Bard, viz. The Church man was, the Lawyer is, and the Soulier shall be. True it is, that Bishops lived in the Equipage of Princes, in former times; and among other inares, one is, the goodly Palaces they had in and about London, and West∣minster; for from Dorset House in Fleetstreet, as far as White-hall, all the great Houses, which were built upon the Banks of the Thames, were all Episcopal Palaces, except the Savoy and Suffolk-house. The first for greatness was Excester House (now called Essex) whereof the chiefest Founder was Edward Stapleton, Bishop of that See, who was beheaded by the Londoners in Cheap-side, and his Body was then brought, and buried in a heap of Sand or rubbish, in his own House near Temple-barre, in the Raign of Edward the second. Bishop Edmond Ley, built the great Hall in the Raign of Henry the sixth. The same was since called Paget-House, being enlarged by William Lord Paget. Then was it called Leicester-House, of Robert Dudley, who was the great Favo∣rite to Queen Elizabeth, and then it came to be called Essex-house, from Robert Earl of Essex, who was also a Favorite of Queen Elizabeth, and beheaded in the Tower. Opposite to this House, standeth the Parish-Church of Saint Clement Danes, so called, because Harold, a Danish King, with other of that Nation, were buried there. Then was the Bishop of Baths Inne, or City-House, builded by the Lord Thomas Seamer, Admiral of England: which House, came afterwards to be possessed by the Earl of Arundel, & so it beares the name of Arundel-house: neer there adjoyning, there was once a Parish-Church, called the Nativity of our Lady, or the Innocents of the Strand, with a fair Coemitery, or Church-yard, wherein there was a Brother-hood kept, called Saint Vrsula of the Strand. Near adjoyning to the said Church, betwixt it and the Thames, there was an Inne of Chancery, called Chesters Inne, because it belonged to the Bishop of Chester, and sometimes 'twas called Strand Inne.
Then was there a House belonging to the Bishop of Landaff, which one of those Bishops purchased of the Duke of Lancaster. Then was there the Bishop of Chesters Inne or Palace, which was first built by Walter Langhton, Treasurer of England, in the Reign of Edward the first. And not far from that was the Bishop of Worcesters Inne or Palace; All which viz. The Parish Church called Saint Mary of the Strand, Strand Inne, with the Bishop of Chester, and Bishop of Worcesters Houses, with all the Tenements adjoyning, were by commandement of Edward Duke of Somerset, Uncle to Ed∣ward the sixth, & Lord Protector pull'd down, and laid level to the ground An∣no 1549. In place whereof, he erected that large and goodly House, call'd now Somerset House, which rose out of the ruines of the Church; Therefore the Ro∣man Catholiques observed, that an apparent judgement from Heaven fell upon him afterwards, being beheaded a little after; and he and his Counsel were so infatuated, that he forgot to call for his Clergy, which he might have claimed by the Law, and so sav'd his life. Then is there Bedford House, which was sometimes the Bishop of Carliles Inne. It stretched from the Savoy to Ivie Bridge, where Sir Robert Cecill Earl of Salisbury raysed a large and stately House of Brick and Timber; Worcester House lies sideling of it, and there being a great VValnut tree there growing, which much hindred the prospect of Salisbury House Eastward, the Earl bargai∣ned with one of the Lord Edward of VVorcesters servants, that if he could get leave of his Lord to cut down that Tree, he would give him 100 li, the servanc told his Lord of it, who bad him fell down the Tree and take the money; but the old Earl (there being no good correspondence 'twixt Salisbury and him) caused presently a new Brick building to be there erected, where the Tree stood. We come now to Durham House, built by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of that See, a very capacious Edifice, on the North side whereof stood a row of thatch'd Stables, which the Earl of Salisbury purchased, and pull'd down, and erected in place thereof, the New Exchange, or Britains Burse; which was built with wonderful celerity, for the first Stone thereof was ayed on the tenth of Iune 1608, and it was fully finished the November next following. The Earl did then invite King Iames with the Queen, to see his new House, where after a rich banquet the King named the place Britains Burse. Next beyond Durham House and this new building, is another great Palace, belonging of old to the Bishop of Norwich, but afterwards it came to the Arch∣bishop of Yorke, by this occasion. When Cardinal Woolsey, Arch Bishop of Yorke, was Indicted in a premunire, whereby the King was entitled to all his Goods and Possessions, he among other things, seazed upon the said Cardinals House, where he then dwelled, commonly called York Place, and changed the name thereof to White-Hall. The Arch-bishops of York, having then no House in London or Westminster, Queen Mary gave unto Nicholas Heath then Arch-bishop of Yorke, Suffolke House in Southwark, lately built by Charles Brandon; which House the said Arch-bishop sold, and in lieu thereof he purchased the Bishop of Norwich's House, which ever since hath been called Yorke House, though it came after∣wards to the possession of the Duke of Buckingham George Villers, who added much to the old Edifice, and would have had it called Buckingham House, which name is engraven upon the watergate in great Letters. There was of old, an Hospitall of St. Mary Rouncival (an order which came from Navarre in Spain) by Charing-Crosse, where a Fraternity was founded in the fifteenth of Edward the fourth, which was afterwards suppressed and tur∣ned to Tenements. Near unto this Hospital was an Hermitage with a Chap∣pel of St. Katherine over against Charing-Crosse, which Crosse was erected by Edward the first to the honor of his Queen (as is spoken else-where) Eleanor, and
it was a goodly Monument, which was utterly destroyed by the fury of the long Parlament. West of this Crosse stood sometimes another Hospital called St. Iames, con∣sisting of two Hides of Land in the Parish of St. Margaret in VVestminster, and by the Citizens of London, for 14 Sister-Maidens that were Lepous; then were there added eight Brethren, to minister Divine Service there. After∣wards, there was a great addition of Land made to this Hospital, and Edward the first granted a Fair to be kept there every year. This Hospital being surrendred to Henry 8. the Sisters were allowed Pensi∣ons during their , and the King erected there a Mannor House, with a Park annexed-encompassed about with a Brick Wall. But before we advance fur∣ther Northward towards Westminster, we must make a slep backward to Saint Martins Church and Lane, where on the West side there are many gentile fair Houses in a row built by the same Earl of Salisbury who built Britains Burse, but somewhat before. Then have we Bedford Berry, commonly called the Coven arden, because there was a large Convent, or Monastery there in times pass'd, where there are many good structures, cloystered underneath some of them, with a large Piazza or Market place, and a Church that bears the name of Saint Paul, which, though within the Precincts of Saint Martins Parish, yet by Act of Parliament, it is now exempted. The Founder who was the Earl of Bedford, pying the Minister 100l. per annum. On the left hand of Charing-Crosse, there are divers fair Houses built of late yeas, specially the most stately Palace of Suffolk or Northampton House, built by Henry of Northampton Son to the Duke of Norfolk, and Lord Priie Seal to King Iames. Then is there a large plot of ground enclosed with Brick, called Scotland yard where the Kings of Scotland were used to be lodg'd and Margaret Queen Dowager of Scotland, eldest sister to Henry the 8th, kept her Court there aer the King her Husband had been kill'd in Flodden field. And now we are come to White-Hall, belonging of old to Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent▪ and Iusticier of England, who gave it to the Black-Fryers in Holborne; but being fallen to Henry the 8. ordained it to be called an Honor, and built there a huge long Gallery, with two Gate-houses thwart the street to St. Iames Park. From these Gates we passe in a direct Line to Kings street; on one side where∣of passing through St. Stephen Alley is Canon Row, (but now though very cor∣ruptly calld Channel Row) to called because it belonged to the Dean and Canons of Saint Stephens Chappel, who were lodg'd there, but now they are all turn'd to be temporal habitations. Then we come to Woolstaple now the common Market place of Westminster, In the Reign of Edward the first, we read that the Staple being at Westminster, the Prishioners of Saint Margarets, and Merchants of the Staple buided the said Church of new. Henry the sixth, had six Wool-houses within the Staple at Westminster, which he granted to the Dean and Canons of Saint Stephens. Becuse we are not yet ready to speak of the Abbey, we will passe by it to the Gatehouse of Westminster, and so to Totehill and Petty France. The Gate-house is called so of two Gates, the one out of the Colledge Court towards the North, on the Eastside whereof was the Bishop of Londons Prison for Clerks convict; the other Gate-house is a Goal or Prison for Felons, one Walter Warfield Cellerer to the Monastery of VVestminster, was founder of both these Gates, in Edward the third's Reign. On the South side of these Gates, Henry the the seventh founded an Alms-House for 13 poor men; one of them to be a Priest, and above 45 years old, the rest to be aged 50 years without Wives.
Near to this place, was of old, the Chappel of St. Anne, where the Lady Margaret Henry the sevenths Mother, erected an Alms-House for poor women and it was called Eleemosynary, and now Almory, or Ambry, because the Alms of the Abbey were there distributed to the poor: And there Islp Abbot of VVestmin∣ster set up the first Press of Book-printing that ever was in England, Anno 1471. And one Caxton Citizen of London, was the first who brought over that Art. Then is there Totehill street, where there are of late years sundry fair Houses on the back of St. Iames Park. The Lady Anne Dacre built there an Hosp∣tall for twenty poor Women, and so many Children to be brought up under them. Then is there Petty France, where, upon a place called St. Hermits Hill, Cornelius Van Dun a Brabanter born, and Yeoman of the Guard to Henry the 8th, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, built twenty Houses for poor Women to dwell Rent-free. And near hereunto there was of old a Chappel of St. Mary Magdalen which is now quite ruinated. There is of late years a new large Chappel of Brick erected there, at the en∣trance to Totehil fields; Where Mr. Palmer, a well diposed and reverend Di∣vine, hath also erected lately another new Hospital, with a competent allow∣ance to the poor that shall be admitted thereinto. And now we will return to the Abbey of VVestminster, a place which was us'd to be of very high devotion; It gives the denomination to the whole City, and certainly, that place cannot choose but be happy which hath Gods House for its Godfather, as Munster a great and renowned City in Germany, takes her name from the chief Church. Of Westminster Abbey. THis Church is famous, especially by reason of the inauguration and se∣pulture of the Kings of England. Sulcard writeth, that there stood sometimes a Temple of Apollo in that place, and that in the daies of Antoninus Pius, Emperor of Rome, it fell down with an Earth∣quake; out of the remains whereof, Sebert King of the East-Saxons, erected ano∣ther to St. Peter, which being by the Danes overthrown, Bishop Dunstane re-e∣dified, and granted it to some few Monks. But afterwards King Edward surna∣med the Confessour, with the tenth penny of all his Revenues, built it a new for to be his own Sepulture, and a Monastery for Benedictine Monks, endowing it with Livings and Lands, lying dispersed in divers parts of England. But listen what an Historian saith, who then lived. The devout King destined unto God that place, both for that it was near unto the famous and wealthy City of London, and also had a pleasant scituation amongst fruitful fields, and green grounds, lying round about it, with the principal River running hard by, bringing in from all parts of the World, great variety of Wares; and Merchan∣dize of all sorts to the City adjoyning; But chiefly for the love of the Chief Apostle, whom he reverenced with a special and singular affection. He made choice to have a place there for his own Sepulchre: and thereupon comman∣ded, that of the Tenths of all his Rents, the work of a noble Edifice should be taken in hand, such as might beseem the Prince of the Apostles: To the end (as the Annales have it) that he might procure the propitious favour of the Lord, after he should finish the course of this transitory life, both in regard of his de∣vout Piety, and also of his free Oblation of Lands and Ornaments, wherewith he purposed to endow, and enrich the same. According therefore to the Kings
commandement the work was nobly began, and happily proceeded forward: neither the charges already disbursed, or to be disbursed, were weighed and regarded, so that it might be presented in the end unto God and Saint Peter, and made worth their acceptation. Thus the words of the old Record run. Touching the Form of that ancient building, we read in an old Manuscript Book, that the principal plot or ground-work of the building was supported with most lofty Arches, cast round with a four square work, and semblable joynts. But the compasse of the whole, with a dobe Arch of Stone on both sides is enclosed with joyned-work, firmly knit and united together, every way. Moreouer, the Crosse of the Church which was to compasse the mid Quire of those that chaunted unto the Lord, and with a twofold supportance, that it had on either side to uphold and bear the lofty top of the Tower in the midst, sim∣ply riseth at first with a low and strong Arch; then mounteth it higher, with many winding stairs, artificially ascending with a number of steps: But after∣ward with a single Wall it reacheth up to the roof of Timber, well and surely covered with Lead. But after an hundred and threescore years, King Henry the third, subverted this Fabrick of King Edwards, and built from the very founda∣tion a new Church of very rare Workmanship, supported with sundry rowes of Marble Pillars, and the roofe covered over with sheets of Lead: a piece of work that cost fifty years labour in building; which Church the Abbots enlarged very much toward the West end; and King Henry the seventh for the burial of him∣self and his Children, adjoyned thereto, in the East end, a Chappel of admira∣ble artificial elegancy, The Wonder of the Worlde, as Leland calleth it: for a man would say, that all the curious and exquisite work that can be devised, is there compacted; wherein is to be seen, his own most stately magnificial Mo∣nument, all of solid and masse Copper. This Church, when the Monks were driven thence, from time to time, was altered to and fro with sundry changes. First of all, it had a Dean and Prebnda∣ries: soon after one Bishop and no more, namely T. Thurlbey, who having wa∣sted the Church Patrimony, surrendred it to the spoil of Courtiers; and short∣ly after were the Monks with their Abbot et in possession again by Queen Mary; and when they also within a while after, were by authority of Parliament cast out, Queen Elizabeth converted it into a Collegiate Church, or rather into a Seminary and Nurse-Garden of the Church, appointing twelve Prebendaries there, and as many old Souldiers past service, for Alms-men, fourty Schollars, who in their due time are preferred to the Universities; and from thence sent forth into the Church and Common-weale, &c. Over these they placed D. Bll Dean, whose Successor was Gabriel Goodman, a right good man indeed, and of singular integrity and an especial Patron of Literature. Within this Church are intombed (that I may note them according to their dignity and time wherein they died) Sebert the first of that name, and first Christian King of the East-Saxons. Harold the bastard Son of Canutus the Dane King of England; Edward King and Confessour, with his Wife Edth; Maud Wife to King Henry the first, the Daughter of Malcolme King of Scots; King Henry the third, and his Son; King Edward the first, with Eleanor his Wife Daughter to Ferdinando the first King of Castile and of Leon: King Edward the third, and Philippa of Henault his Wife; King Richard the second, and his Wife Anne, Sister to VVencelaus the Emperour; King Henry the fifth, with Katherine his Wife, Daughter to Charles the sixth King of France; Anne, Wife to King Richard the third, Daughter to Richard Nevil Earl of VVarwick▪ King Henry the seaventh, with his Wife Elizabeth, Daughter to Kig Edward the fourth, and his Mother Margaret Countesse of Richmond; King Edward the sixth; Anne of Cleave the fourth Wife of King Henry the eighth; Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth; Prince Henry eldest Son of King Iames the sixth of
Scotland, and first of England, who lies there also interred with Queen Anne his Wife; and lastly, the first male born of Charles the first, dying an In∣fant. Of Dukes and Earls Degree, there lie here buried, Edmund Earl of Lanca∣ster, second Son of King Henry the third, and his Wife Aveline de Fortibus Coun∣tesse of Albemarle; William and Audomar of Valence of the Family of Lusigni∣an, Earls of Pembrooke; Alphonsus Iohn, and other Children of King Edward the first; Iohn of Eltham Earl of Cornwall, Son to King Edward the second; Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Glocester, the youngest Son of King Edward the third with other of his Children; Eleanor, Daughter and Heir of Humphrey Bo∣hun Earl of Hereford, and of Essex, Wife to Thomas of VVoodstock; the young Daughter of Edward the fourth, and King Henry the seventh; Henry a Child two Months old, Son o King Henry the eighth; Sophia the Daughter of King Iames who died, as it were, in the very first day-dawning of her age; Phillppa Mohun,, Dutches of Yorke; Robert of Hexault in right of his Wife Lord Bourchier; Anne, the young Daughter and Heir of Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, pro∣mised in marriage unto Richard Duke of York, younger Son to K. Edward the 4th; Sir Giles Daubeny, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the 7th, and his Wife of the house of the Arundels in Cornwal; I. Viscount VVells; Farnces Brandon Dutchess of Suffolk, Marry her Daughter, Margaret Douglasse Countesse of Len∣nox, Grandmother to Iames King of great Britain, with Charles her Sonne; VVinifred Bruges, Marchionesse of Vinchestèr; Anne Stanhope Dutchess of Sommerset, and Iane her Daughter; Anne Cecill Countesse of Oxford, Daughter to the Lord Burleigh, Lord High Treasure of England, with Mildred Burghley her Mother; Elizabeth Berkeley Countesse of Ormond; Frances Sidney Countess of Sussex; Iames Butler Vicount Thurles, Son and Heir to the Earl of Or∣mond. Besides these, Humphrey Lord Bourchier of Cromwall; Sir Humphrey Bourchier Son and Heir to the Lord Bourchier of Beruers, both slain at Bernet field; Sir Nicholas Carew Baronesse Powisse, T. Lord Wentworth; Thomas Lord Wharton; John Lord Russel; Sir T. Bromley, Lord Chancellour of England; Douglas Howard Daughter and Heir general of H. Vicount Howard of Bindon, Wife to Sir Arthur Gorges; Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Edward Earl of Rutland, Wife to William Cecill; Sir John Puckering Lord Keeper of the great Seal of En∣gland; Francis Howard Countesse of Hertford; Henry and George Cary, the Fa∣ther and Son, Barons of Hundsdon, both Lords Chamberlains to Queen Eliza∣beth; the Heart of Anne Sophia, the tender Daughter of Christopher Harley; Count Beaumont, Embassador for the King of France in England, bestowed within a small gilt Urne over a Pyramid; Sir Charles Blunt Earl of Devonshire, Lord Livetenant General of Ireland; And (whom in no wise we must forget) the Prince of English Poets, Geoffrey Chaucer; as also he that for pregnant wit, and an excellent gift in Poetry, of all English Poets came nearest unto him, Ed∣mund Spencer, William Cambden, Clarencieux King of Arms; Causabon the grea French Writer; Michael Drayton. Then there is George Villers Duke, Marquiss and Earl of Buckingham, favorite to King James, and Charles the first. The late Earl of Essex, with divers other during the Reign of the long Parliament. There was also another Colledge or Free-Chappel hard by, consisting of a Dean and twelve Chanons, Dedicated to St. Stephen, which King Edward the third in his princely Magnificence repaired with curious Workmanship, and endowed with fair possessions, so as he may seem to have built it new, the time as he had with his Victories over-run and subdued all France, recalling to mind (as we read the Charter of the Foundation) and pondering in a due weighty devout conside∣ration, the exceeding benefits of Christ, whereby of his own sweet mercy and pitty, he preventeth us in all occasions, delivering us, although without desert, from sundry p∣ills, and defending us gloriously with his powerful right Hand, against the violent
assaults of our adversaries, with victorious successes, and in other Tribulations, and perplexities, wherein we have exceeding much bin encumbred, by comforting us, and by applying, and in powring remedies upon us beyond all hope and expectation. There was also adjoyning hereto a Palace, the ancient Habitation of the Kings of England, from the time of King Edward the Confessor, which in the Raign of King Henry the eighth, was burnt by casual fire to the ground; A very large, stately, and sumptuous Palace this was, and in that age, for building in∣comparable, with a Vawmure, and Bulwarks for defence. The remains whereof, are the Chamber wherein the King, the Nobles, with the Councellors, and, Officers of State, do assemble at the High Court of Parliament; and the next unto it, wherein anciently they were wont to begin the Parliaments known by the name of St. Edwards painted Chamber, because the Tradition holdeth, that the said King Edward therein dyed. Adjoyning unto this, is the White-Hall, wherein at this day, the Court of Requests is kept; beneath this is that Hall, which of all other is the greatest, and the very Praetorium, or Hall of Justice, for all England, In this, are the Ju∣dicial Courts; namely, The Kings Bench, The Common Pleas, and the Chan∣cery; and in places near thereabout, the Star-Chamber, the Exchequer, Court of Wards, and Court of the Dutchy of Lancaster, &c. In which at certain set times, (we call them Termes) yearly Causes are heard, and tryed: whereas be∣fore King Henry the third his dayes, the Court of Common Law, and prin∣cipal Justice, was unsetled, and alwayes followed the Kings Court; But he in the Magna Charta, made a Law in these words, Let not the Common Pleas follow our Court, but be holden in some certain place; which notwithstanding, some expound thus, That the Common Pleas, from thenceforch be handled in a Court of her own, by it self a part, and not in the Kings Bench, as before. This Judgement-Hall, which we now have, King Richard the second, built out of the ground, as appeareth by his Arms, engraven in the Stone-work, and many Ar∣ched Beams, (when he had plucked down the former old Hall that King William Rufus in the same place had built before) and made it his own Habi∣tation; For Kings in those dayes, sate in Judgement place, in their own per∣sons, And they are indeed, the , that is, Judges, whose mouth (as the Royal Writer saith) shall not erre in judgement; But the foresaid Palace▪ af∣ter it was burnt down, in the year of our Lord, 1512. lay desolate, and King Henry the eighth, translated shortly after, the Kings Seat, from thence to an House not far off, which belonged but a while before, to Cardinal Woolsey, and is called White Hall. This House is a Princely thing, enclosed on the one side with a Park, that reacheth also to another House of the Kings, named Saint James (where anciently was a Spittle for Mayden Lepers) demolished by King Henry the eighth, as is spoken else-where. Hard by, near unto the Mues, so called, for that it served to keep Hawkes, and now is become a most fair Stable for the Court Horses: there remaineth a Mo∣nument in memorial of that most pious and kind Queen Eleanor, erected by King Edward the first, her most dearly beloved Husband; and certainly, the memory of her conjugal love shall remain worthy, to be consecrated to eternity; For she, the Daughter of Ferdinand the third, King of Castile, being given in Mariage to Edward the first, King of England, accompanied him into the Holy Land, where, when as he was secretly fore-laid, and by a certain Moor, wounded with an envenomed Sword, and by all the remedies that Physitians could devise, was not so much eased as afflicted, she took her to a strange cure, I must needs say, and never heard of before; howbeit, full of love, care, and af∣fection. For, her Husbands wounds infected with the poyson, and which, by reason of the malignity thereof, could not be closed and healed, she day by day, licked with her Tongue, and sucked out the venomous humor, which to
her was a most sweet Liquor, by the vigour and strength whereof, or to say more truly, by vertue of a Wives singular fidelity, she so drew unto her, all the sub∣stance of the poyson, that the wounds being closed, and cicatrized, he becam perfectly healed, and she caught no harm at all; what then can be heard more rae, what admirable then this Womans faithful more love? That a Wives Tongue thus annoynted, as I may so say, with faith and love to her Hus∣band, should from her well beloved, draw those poysons, which by an approved Physitian, could not be drawn; and that which many, and those right exquisite Medicines effected not, the love only, and piety of a Wie performed: These are the words of the acient Record. But we must not passe by the Mewse so sleightly; that place was called so of the Kings Faulcons there kept, which in former times, was an Office of high esteem; But Henry the eighth, having his Stablings at Lomesberry, (now called Blomesberry) which was then a Mnnor in Holborn, it fortuned, that the same was consumed by ire, with Hay and Horses; whereupon, the Mewse was en∣larged, and made fit for the Kings Stables, which hath continued ever since re∣ceiving divers additions from time to time. But now we are according to the method of our Discourse, summoned to appear at Westminster-Hall; But I had almost pretermitted one signal thing, which belongs to the great Dome or Temple of Westminster Abbey, which is the great priviledge of Sanctuary it had within the Precincts thereof, viz. the Church, the Church-yard, and the Close, whereof there are two; the little, and the great Sanctuary, vulgarly now called Centry; from whence it was not lawful for the Soveraign Prince himself, much lesse, any other Magistrate, to fetch out any that had fled thither, for any of∣fence: which Prerogative, was granted near upon a thousand years since, by King Sebert, then seconded by King Edgar, and afterwards confirmed by Ed∣ward the Confessor, whose Charter I thought worthy the inserting here, the Tenor whereof, runs thus, in the modern English. Edward by the Grace of God, King of Englishmen, I make it to be known to all Generations in the VVorld, after me, that by special Commandment of our holy Fa∣ther Pope Leo, I have renewed, and honoured the holy Church of the blessed Apostle, St. Peter of Westminster; and I order and establish for ever, that what Person, of what estate or condition soever he be, and from whence soever he come, or for what offence, or cause it be, either for his refuge into the said holy place, he be assured of his life, liberty, and Limbs. And over I forbid under pain of everlasting damnation, that no Minister of mine, or any of my Successors, intermeddle themselves with any the Goods, Lands, or possessions of the said persons, taking the said Sanctuary; For I have taken their Goods and Livelihoods into my special protection. And therefore I grant to every each of them▪ in as much as my Terrestrial power may suffice, all man∣ner of freedom of joyous liberty; and whosoever shall presume, or doth contrary to this my grant, I will, he lose his name, VVorship, Dignity and Power; and that with the great Traytor Judas, that betrayed our Saviour, he be in the everlasting fire of Hell. And I will and ordain, that this my Grant, endure as long as there remaineth in England, either love or dread of Christian name. And this Record may be ranked among the most ancient of the Land. About what time, King Edward the Confessor, did renew it, he removed St. Margarets Church, which before was within the Abbey, to the place where now it stands.
Of Westminster-Hall, and all the Tribu∣nalls of Iustice, which have their motion therein; And first of the High Court of Parliament. HAving visited God Almighties House, we will now take a view of the chief Praetorium of Great Britain, which is VVestminster-Hall, and of the Courts of Judicature, which are thereunto annexed; And first, of the Court Paramount, the high national Court of Parliament: vvhich great Coun∣cel vvas used to be the Bulwark of our liberties, the boundary and bank vvhich kept us from slavery, from the inundations of Tyrannical encroachments, and unbounded VVill-Government. And in this High Court, there was used to be such a Co-ordination of power, such a wholsome mixture 'twixt Monarchy, Optimacy, and Democracy, I mean, 'twixt Prince, Peers, and Commonalty, during the time of consultation, that of so many distinct parts, by a rare co-operation and unanimity, they made but one Body Politique (like that sheaf of Arrowes in the Fable;) they made but one entire concentrical peece; and the results of their deliberations, but as so many harmonious Diapazons arising from the touch of different strings. And what greater mark of freedom can there be to a people, then to be lyable to no Lawes, but what they make themselves? to be subject to no Contribution, Assement, or pecuniary Levies whatsoever▪ but what they vote, and voluntarily yield unto themselves. For in this great compacted Body politick, there be all degrees of people represented; The Yeoman, Marchant, Tradesman, and me∣chanick, have there their inclusive Votes, as well as the Gentry and Freeholders, in the persons of their Trustees, viz. their Burgesses and Knights. The Clergy also, which make a considerable part of the Common-wealth, were used to have their Representatives there, not only in the persons of the Bishops (which at the first constitution, were the prime Parliament, and con∣tinued so many Ages) but in the Convocation which was an Assesmbly of Di∣vines, fairly chosen to that purpose. Nor is this Soveraign super-intendent Councel and Epitome of this Iland only; but it may be said, to represent the whole Universe, according to the primitive constitution. The Soveraign Prince was as the Sun, the Nobles the fixed Starres, the Itine∣rant Iudges, and other Officers, that were wont to go with Messages 'twixt both Houses, to the Planets: The Clergy (when there was a Convocation House, as was said before) to the Element of fire: The Commons to the solid body of the Earth, and the rest of the Elements. He who hath bin conversant with the Chronicles of this Iland, will finde it hath bin her fare, to be four times conquered; but the Scot, never till now of late. These so many Conquests, must needs bring with them, many tumblings and tossings, many disturbances and changes in Government; yet I have ob∣served, that notwithstanding these various tumblings, England retained still the form of Monarchy, and something there was alwayes, that held an Analogy with the great Assembly of Parliament. The first Conquest was made by Claudius Caesar, at which time it may be said, that the Standard of the Crosse came in together with the Roman Eagles▪ 'tis well known, how the Roan governed. He had his Comitia, which bore a
resemblance with our Convention in Parliament, the place of meeting was call∣ed praetorium, and the Lawes which were enacted, were called Plebiscita. The Saxon Conquest succeeded next, in which were the English, and the Sax∣ons governed by Parliament, though it was under other names, as Michel Ge∣mote, Michel Sinoth, and VVitenage Mote. There are Records near upon a thou∣sand years, of these Parliaments, in the Raigns of King Ina, Offa, Ethelbert, and others. The third Conquest was by the Danes, and they governed also by such gene∣rall Assemblies, in the Raign of Canutus and others. Then came the Norman, whose Successors did revive, and ratifie the way of governing by Parliament, witness Magna Charta, which was used to be call∣ed the Foundation of the English liberty; and it may be compared to divers outlandish graffs set upon one stock: for the choysest of the British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Lawes, being cull'd and pick'd out, and gathered as it were in one bundle, out of them the foresaid grand Charter was extracted: the establishment whereof, was a work of a Parliament: Now by an ancient Sta∣tute of Edward the third, it was enacted, That all Statutes are repealed, which are against Magna Charta, or Charta de foresta. Nor are the Lawes of this Iland only, and the immunities of the people con∣served by Parliament; but all the best policed Countries of Europe have the like. The Germans have their Diets: The Dane and Swedes their Rich-daghs. The Spaniard, las Cortes; and the French, the Assembly of the three Estates, though it hath bin for many years discontinued. And touching England, the Parliament was ued to be the principal Foun∣tain, whence the Soveraign Prince derived his happiness and safety. It was the great Conduit-Pipe, which conveighed unto him the Peoples bounty and love. It was the truest Looking-Glasse, wherein he discerned their affections and al∣legiance. In Parliament, the Soveraign Prince used to appear, like the Sun in the Me∣ridian, in the altitude of his glory, in his highest Royal State, as the Law tells us. But we will go now more particularly to work, and treat of this great Nati∣onal Conncel, according to the first constitution, and establishment thereof. This Court consisteth of the Kings Majesty sitting there, as in his Royal po∣litick Capacity, and of the three Estates of the Realm, viz. of the Lords spiritual Arch Bishops and Bishops, being in number twenty four, who sit there by suc∣cession in respect of their Counties, or Baronies parcel of their Bishopricks, which they hold also in their politick Capacity; And every one of these, when any Parliament is to be holden, ought, Ex debito justitiae, to have a writ of Summons. The Lords Temporal Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Ba∣rons, who sit there, by reason of their Dignities, which they hold by Descent or Creation; and likewise, every one of these being of full age, ought to have a writ of Summons, ex debito justitiae; for they are called Parliamentary Barons. The third Estate is the Commons of the Realm, whereof there be Knights of shires, or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and Burghesses of Burghes. All which are respectively elected by the Shires or Counties, Cities and Burghes, by force of the Kings Writ, Ex debito justitiae, and none of them ought to be omitted; and these represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, and trusted for them, and were used to be in number, near upon 500. Now the King and these three Estates, were the great Corporation or Body politick of the Kingdom; but they were to sit in two Houses, viz. the King and Lords in one House, called the Lords House, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in another House, called the House of Commons.
The Commons are in Legal understanding, taken for the Franck Tenants, or Freeholders of the Counties. And whosoever is not a Lord of Parliament, and of the Lords House, is of the House of the Commons, either in person, or by representation, partly coaugmentative, and partly representative. Of this Court of Parliament, the Soveraign Prince by the Law is Caput prin∣cipium & finis, the head, beginning, and ending. And as in the natural body, when all the sinews, being joyned in the head, do unite their forces together, for the strengthening of the body, there is ultimum potentiae; so, in the poliique Body, when the King and the Lords spiritual, and temporal, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are all by the Kings Command assembled and joyned together, under the Head in consultation for the common good of the whole Realm there is ultimum sapientiae. The third year of Henry the sixth, it appears in a Parliament Roll, that the Parliament being called, as hath bin said, Commune Consilium every member of the House being a Counsellor, should have the three properties of the Elephant; which are First, That he hath no Gall. Secondly, That he be inflexible, and cannot bow. Thirdly, That he is of a most ripe and perfect memory; which properties, as there it is said, ought to be in every Member of the great Councel of Parli∣ament. First, to be without Gall, that is, without malice, rancor, heat, and envie, In the Elephant, Melancholia transit in nutrimentum corporis, every gallish in∣clination (if any were) should tend to the good of the whole body, the Com∣mon-wealth. Secondly, That he be constant, inflexible, and not to be bowed, or turned from the right, either for fear, reward, or favour; nor, in judgement, repect any person. Thirdly, of a ripe memory▪ that they remembring perils past, might pre∣vent dangers to come, as in that Roll of Parliament it appeareth. The Prince de advisamento consilii (for so be the words of the Writ of Parlia∣ment) resolving to have a Parliament, doth out of the Court of Chancery, send out Writs of Summons, at the least forty dayes before the Parliament begins: every Lord of Parliament, either spiritual, as Arch bishops, and Bishops; or tem∣poral, as Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, Peers of the Realm, and Lords of Parliament, were used to have several Writs of Summons. And all the Judges of the the Realm, Barons of the Exchequer of the Coif, the Kings learned Cousnel, and the Civilians Masters of the Chancery, are called to give their assistance and attendance, in the upper House of Parliament; but they have no Voices in Parliament, being only ministerial; and their Writs differ from the Writs to the Judges; for their Writs be, Quòd intersitis Nobis∣cum & cum caeteris de Concilio Nostro, (& sometimes Nobiscum only) super prae∣missis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; But the Writ to the Barons is, Quòd intersitis cum praelatis, Magnatibus & proceribus, super dictis negotiis trac∣taturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri. Moreover, in every Writ to Summons to the Bishops, there is a clause re∣quiring them to summon these persons to appear personally at the Parliament, which is in these words, premonientes Decanum & Capitulum Ecclesiae Vestrae Nor∣wicensis, ac Archidiconos totumque clerum vestrae Dioces, quod iidem Decani & Archi diaconi in propris persmiss suis, ac dictum capitulum per unum, idem{que} cle∣rus per duos proeuratores idoneos plenam & sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis capitulo & clero divisim habentes predict' die & loco personaliter intersint ad consentindum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi concilio dicti regni Nostri divina favente clemen∣tia contigerit ordinari; and the Bishop under his Seal makes Certificate accor∣dingly.
And these are called Procuratores cleri, and many times have appeared in Parliament, as spiritual Assistants, to consider, consult, and consent, ut supra; but had never voyces there, because they were no Lords of Parliament; And this Assembly was called the Convocation-House, which the last King continu∣ing, (after the dissolution of the Parliament) and the Bishops comming a∣mongst them to consult, and make Canons, the next Parliament protested a∣gainst their proceedings as irregular, and prejudicial to the priviledges of Par∣liament. Observable it is, what difference there was in the Writ, whereby the spiri∣tual Lords were summoned, and that whereby the temporal Lords were called. The Ecclesiastical Barons were required by the Kings Writ to be present, In fide & dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, In the faith and Love you are bound to us; But the secular Lords were summoned to appear, In fide & homagio, quibus nobis tenemini. In the faith and homage you are bound unto us; Now touching the Commons, their Writ or Summons to the Sheriff runs thus. The King to the Vicount, or Sheriff, Greeting: WHereas by the advice and assent of our Councel for certain Arduous and urgent Affaires concerning Us, the State, and defence of our Kingdom of England, and the Anglican Church, we have ordained a certain Par∣liament of ours, to be held at our City of the day of next ensuing, and there to have Conference, and to treat with the Prelates, Great men and Peers of our said Kingdom, We command, and strictly en∣joyn you, that making Proclamation at our next County Court, after the receipt of this our Writ, to be holden the day and place aforesaid, you cause two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and discreet of the County aforesaid, and of every City of that County two Citizens; of every Borough two Burgesses, of the discreetest and most sufficient, to be freely and indifferently chosen by them, who shall be present at such Proclamation, according to the tenure of the Statutes in that case made and provi∣ded; And the names of the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so chosen, to be in∣serted in certain Indentures to be then made between you and those that shall be pre∣sent at such Election, whether the parties so elected be present or absent, and shall make them to come at the said day and place; so that the said Knights for themselves, and the County aforesaid, and the Citizens, and the Burgesses for themselves, and the Commonalty of the said Cities and Beroughs, may have severally from them, full and sufficient power, to do, and to consent to those things, which then by the favour of God, shall happen to be ordained by the Common Councel of our said Kingdom, concerning the businessse aforesaid, so that the business may not by any means remain undone for want of such power, or by reason of the unprovident Election of the foresaid Knights, Burgesses and Citizens; But we will not, in any case that you, or a∣ny other Sheriff of our said Kingdom, shall be elected, And at the day and place a∣foresaid, the said Election being made in a full County Court, you shall certifie with∣out delay unto us, in our Chancery under your Seal, and the Seals of them who shall
be present at the Election, sending back unto us, the other part of the Indenture afore∣said, affil'd to these presents, ogether with the Writ. Witness our Self at Westminster. This Commission or Writ, is the foundation, whereon the whole fabrick of the power, and duty of both Houses of Parliament is grounded. The first House is to parley, or have conference, and to treat and consult with the King, the other House is to do and consent only unto what the other shall ordain. This was the Law and usage in former times; but what is the power of the Commons in these dayes now that the Government is altred, and cast into another mould, (the House of Peers being dissolved) it is not the intent of this Discourse to determine. At the return of the Writs aforesaid, the Parliament could not begin, but by the Royal presence of the King, either in Peron, or by Representation▪ By Representation two wayes, either by a Gardian of England, by Letters Patenrs under the Great Seal, when the King was in remotis, out of the Realm; or by Commission, under the Great Seal, to certain Lords of Parliament, representing the Person of the King, he being within the Realm, but absent in respect of some infirmity. On the first day of the Parliament, the King himself, or most commonly, the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper, in the presence of the Lords and Commons, did shew the causes of the calling of High Court of Parliament; but the King might have appointed any other to be his Prolocutor, in this case. Then the Commons are to choose their Speaker; but in regard, that after their choyce, the King might refuse him; for avoiding of time and contestation, the use was as in the Congè deslire of a Bishop, that the King doth recom∣mend a discreet and learned man, whom the Commons elect; but without their Election, no Speaker can be appointed for them, because he is their mouth, and intrusted by them, and so necessary, that the House of Commons cannot sit without him: therefore a grievous sickness is a good cause to remove him, as in Henry the 4th Raign, Iohn Chervy Speaker, was for sickness discharged and Sir Iohn Dorewoold chosen in his place; but sickness is no cause to remove any Knight, Citizen or Burgesse. The Speaker being voted in the House, was presented to the King, where be∣ing allowed, he made a supplication consisting of three parts. First, That the Commons in Parliament might have free speech. Secondly, That in any thing he should deliver in the name of the Commons, if he should commit any error, no fault should be imputed to the Com∣mons. Thirdly, That as often as necessity for his Majesties service, and the good of the Common-wealth shall require, he may by the directions of the House, have access to his Royal Person. Any of the Pees, by the Kings leave, may absent himself, and make a proxy to another Lord; but a Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, cannot make a Proxy, be∣cause he is elected, and intrusted by multitudes of people. And it is to be ob∣served, though one be chosen for one particular County or City, yet when he is returned, and sits in Parliament, he serveth for the whole Common-wealth.
There belongs to Parliament, a Prorogation, or adjournment, which differ in this: A Prorogation presupposeth a Session, and then such Bills as passed in either House, or by both Houses, and had no Royal assent unto them, must at the next Assembly begin again; for every Session in Parliament, is in Law a se∣veral Parliament; but if it be but adjourned, then there is no Session. When a Parliament is called, and doth sit, and is dissolved without any Act passed, or judgement given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Con∣vention. Touching the Power and Jurisdiction of Parliament, for making of Lawes in proceeding by Bill, it is so transcendent, and absolute, as it cannot be confined within any bounds. No Alien is capable to be chosen a Parliament-man, nor can any of the Judges of the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, or Barons of the Exchequer, that have Judicial places, or any Church-man, that hath care of souls, be chosen a member of the House of Parliament: For others, the King cannot grant a Charter of Exemption to any man, to be freed from Election of Knight or Bur∣gesse of the Parliament, because the Elections of them, ought to be free for the publique service.
OF THE COVRT OF THE KINGS-BENCH, THE Royallest Court in the Land; Now called, The Upper Bench. THe Lawes of England, presuppose the King to be the Fountain and Oracle of Justice, and to have special inspirations from Heaven to that purpose; therefore all the Tribunals of Judicature, were used to be ambulatory with his Court, and He was wont to sit in Person in the Upper Bench, which is the Supreme Tribunal of the Land. The Justices in this Court, are the soveraign Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Goal-delivery, Conservation of the Peace, &c. in the Realm. In this Court the Kings of this Realm have sat, as being the highest Bench, and the Judges of that Court on the lower Bench at his Feet; but Judicature only belongeth to the Judges of that Court, and in his presence they answer all Motions, &c. The Justices of this Court are the soveraign Coroners of the Land, and there∣fore, where the Sheriffs and Coroners may receive appeals by Bill à fortiori, the Justices of this Court may do it: so High is the authority of this Court, that when it comes and sits in any County, the Justices of Eire, of Oier and Terminer, Coal-delivery, they which have conusance, &c. do cease without any writing to them; But if any Indictment of Treason or Felony in a Forain County, be removed before certain Commissioners of Oier and Terminer, in the County where this Court sits, yet they may proceed, because this Court (for that this Indictment, was not removed before them) cannot proceed for that offence; But if any Indictment be taken in Midd▪ in the vacation, and after this Court sit in the next Term in the same County (if this Court be adjourned) then may special Commissioners of Oier and Terminer, &c. in the interim proceed upon that Indictment; but the more usual way is by special Commission. And this was resolved by all the Judges of England at Winchester, Anno 1' Iacobi Regis, in the Case of Sir Everard Digby and others, and so had it been resolved, Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Case of Arden and Somervile, for this kind of special
Commission of Oier and Terminer; and herewith agreeth Pl. Com. in the Earl of Leic' Case, Anno 1 Mar. Reginae. And so supream is the Jurisdiction of this Court, that if any Record be removed into this Court, it cannot (being as it were in his Center) be remanded back, unlesse it be by Act of Parliament; And this appeareth by the Judgment of the Parliament, in Anno 6. H. 8. but by the authority of that Act, Indictments of Fellonies and Murders, removed into the Kings Bench, may by the Justices of that Court be remanded, and this Court may send down aswell the Bodies of all Felons and Murderers, as their Indictments, into the Counties where the same Murders of Felonies were com∣mitted or done, &c. in such manner, &c. as if the Indictments had not been brought into the Kings Bench. Out of this Court, are other Courts derived, as from one Fountain several Springs and Rivers, in repect of the multiplicity of Causes, which have encrea∣sed. Jurisdictio istius curiae est originalis seu ordinaria, & non delegata. The Ju∣stices of this Court have no Commission, Letters Patents, or other means to hold Pleas▪ &c. but their power is original & ordinary. They were called anci∣enlty Iusticiae, Justiciarii, locum tenentes Domini Regis, &c. The chief Justice, Justi∣cia Angliae, Justicia prima, Iusticiarius Angliae Capitalis, and Iusticiarius noster Capitalis adplacita coram nobis terminand'. To observe the Changes of these names, and the reason and Changes thereof is worthy of observation. Before the Reign of E. 1. the Chief Justice of this Court was created by Letters Patents, and the form thereof, (taking one example for all) was in these words; Rex &c. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Vice∣comitibus, Forestariis, &c. & omnibus aliis fidelibus regni Angliae, salutem. Cum pro conservatione nostra, & tranquilltatis regni nostri, & ad justiciam universis & sin∣glis de rengo nostro exhibendam constituerimus dilectum et fidelem nostrum Philip∣pum Basset Iusticiarium Angliae, quamdiu nobis placuerit, capit alem; vobis manda∣mus in fide qua nobis tenemini firmiter insungentes, quatenus in omnibus quae ad offi∣cium Justitiarii praedicti, nec non ad conservationem pacis nostrae et regni nosri eidem dum in officio praedicto steterit, pleniùs sitis intendentes. Teste Rege &c. The King &c. to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Vicounts, Foresters, &c. and to all other faithful to the Kingdom of England, greeting. Whereas for our conservation and the tranquillity of our King∣dom, &c. for the exhibition of justice to all and every one of our Kingdom, We hae constituted our beloved and faithful Philip Basset chief Justice of England, as long as we shall please. We command you upon the faith you hold unto us, and firmly enjoyn you to all things that belong unto the office of Chief Justice a∣foresaid, for the conservation of our Peace, and of our Kingdom, and that you be very intentive, as long as you stand in the said Office. Witnesse the King, &c. This Philip Basset was the last of this kind of creation by any like Letters Pa∣tents, and he died Chief Justice near to the end of the Reign of H. 3. King E. 1. being a wise and prudent Prince, knowing that Cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult quàm licet, (as most of these Summi Iusticiarii did) made three alterations, 1. By limitation of his authority. 2. By changing Summus Iusticiarius to Ca∣pitalis Iustic▪ 3. By a new kind of creation, viz. By Writ, lest if he had conti∣nued his former manner of creation, he might have had a desire of his former Authority, which three do expresly appear by the Writ yet in use, &c. Rex &c. E. C. Militi salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justiciarium no∣strum capitalem ad placita coram nobis tenenda, durante beneplacito nostro, Te∣ste &c. The King &c. to E. C. greeting. Know ye, that we have constituted you our
Capital (or Chief) Justice in Pleas, held before us during our pleasure. Wit∣nesse &c. A short Writ, but of large extent in point of Authority. The rest of the Judges of the Kings Bench, have their Offices by Letters Pa∣tents, in these words, Rex omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem, Sciatis quod constitu∣imus dilectum et fidelem Johannem Doderidge, Militem, unum Justiciariorum ad placita coram nobis tenenda durante beneplacito nostro, Teste &c. These Justices of the Kings Bench, are styled, 1. Capitales. 2. Generales. 3. Perpetui. 4. Majores à latere Regis residentes; But the Chief Justice is only by the King, Capitalis Justiciarius noster. They are called first Capitales, in re∣spect of their supream Jurisdiction. 2. Generales, in respect of their general jurisdiction throughout all England, &c. 3. Perpetui, for that they ought not to be removed without just cause, 4. Majores à latere Regis residentes, for their honor and safety, that they should be protected by the King in administration of justice, for that they be à latere Regis, that is, by the Kings fide. And vvhere∣as 5. E. 4. it was holden by all the Justices in the Exchequer Chamber, that a man cannot be Justice by Writ, but by Patent, or Commission, it is to be un∣derstood of all the Judges, saving the Chief Justice of this Court; But both the Chief Justice, and the rest of the Judges may be discharged by Writ under the Great Seal. None can be a Judge of this Court, unlesse he be a Serjeant of the degree of the Coif; and yet in the Writ or Patent to them made, they are not named Ser∣geants. There have been for a long time, and still there are great Complaints for mul∣tiplicity of Suits in Law, and it were a wholsome and happy thing, could it be prevented: but because a Disease cannot be cured without knowledge of the Cause, it is to be observed, that there be six Causes of the increase of them, whereof two be general, the other four particular; The general be Peace, and Plenty; The particular, 1. The dissolution of so many Monasteries, Chane∣ries, &c. and the dispersing of them into so many several hands. 2. The swarm of Informers. 3. The number of Concealors. 4. The multitude of At∣turneys. For the first general; In the Reign of E. 3. R. 2. H. 4. H. 5. and part of the Reign of H. 6. in respect of the wars in France, &c. & in the residue of the Reign of H. 6. & in the Reign of E. 4. in respect of the bloody & intestine Wars, & in almost continual Alarms within the bowls of this Kingdom, between the Hou∣ses of Lancaster & York, there could not be so many Suits in Law, as since this Kingdom hath enjoyed Peace, which is the first general cause. Peace is the Mo∣ther of Plenty, (which is the 2d general cause) and Plenty the Nurse of Suits. In particulars, by the dissolution of Monasteries, Chanteries, &c. and dispersing of them, &c. upon the Statutes made concerning the same (there being such a confluence of Ecclesiastical possessions) there aroe many questions, and doubts, whereupon Suits were greatly increased. 2. Informers and Relators raised ma∣ny Suits, by Informations, Writs, &c. in the Kings Courts at Westminster, up∣on penai Statutes, many whereof were obsolete, inconvenient, and not fit for those daies, and yet remained as snares upon the Subject, so as the Subject might justly say with Tacitus, Priùs vitiis laboravimus, nunc legibus. 3. Concealers; Helluones that endeavoured to swallow up Cathedral Churches, and the Eccle∣siastical possessions of Church-men, and the Livings of many others of the Kings Subjects. Lastly, the multitude of Atturneys, more than is limited by Law, is a great cause of encrease of Suits. Touching the jurisdiction of this Court, which was used to be called the King Bench, it is of a larger extent of power, and more incontroulable than any other Tribunal: for the Law presums, that the King is there still in Person:
He being the Lord Chief Justice of England himself: as King James gave a check to one who call'd Lord Coke, Lord Chief Justice of England, saying, that he was but Chief Justice of his Bench, and that it was his own Office to be Chief Justice of England; Yet it is observable, that though the King be Chief Ju∣stice of England, and that he personally sit upon the Bench, yet he can passe no sentence of judgment, but by the mouths and mediation of his Judges, who did use to sit there at his Feet when he was present. Of the Court of Chancery, or Equity and Conscience. IT is taken pro confesso by all Antiquaries, that both the Brittish, and Saxon Kings, had their Chancellors, and Court of Chancery, the only Court out of which original and remedial Writs do issue; as taking some few ex∣amples before the Conquest. Edward the Confessor had Reinbald his Chancelor; this Edward granted ma∣ny Mannors, Lands, &c. and Franchises to the Abbot of Westminster, and en∣deth his Charter thus, Adultmum, cartam istam sigillari jussi, & ipse manu me∣â propriâ signum Crucis impressi, & idonos testes annotari praecepi. And amongst those Witnesse this you shall find, Swardus Notarius ad vicem Reinbaldi regiae dignitatis Chancellarii hanc cartam scripsi &c. subscripsi, He had also Lefrick to his Chancelor. King Etheldred also had a worthy name, and a worthy man to his Chancelor, Rex Etheldredus statuit atque concessit quatenus Ecclesiam de Elye ex tunc & semper in regis curia Cancellariae ageret dignitatem, &c. This King began his Reign Anno Domini 978, which albeit, it was void in Law to grant the Chance∣lorship of England in succession; yet it proveth then there was a Court of Chan∣cery. King Edgar had Adulph; King Edred had Thurkettle, King Edmond the same, King Athelstane Wolsine, their Chancelors &c. In the Chancery are two Courts, one ordinary, Coram Domino Rege in Cancel∣laria, wherein the Lord Chancelor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal proceeds, according to the right line of the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, Secundum legem & consuetudinem Angliae; Another extraordinary according to the Rule of equity, secundum aquum & bonum; And first of the former Court. He hath power to hold Plea of Scire fac' for repeal of the Kings Letters Pa∣tents, of Petitions, Monstrans de droite, Traverses of office, Partitions in Chan∣cery, of Scire fac' upon recognizances in this Court, Writs of Audita querela, and Scire fac', in the nature of an Audita querela, to avoid Executions in this Court, Dowments in Chancery, the Writ De dote assignanda, upon Offices found, Executions upon the Statute Staple, or Recognizance in nature of a Sta∣ture Staple, upon the Act of 23. H. 8. but the Execution upon a Statute Merchant is retornable, either into the Kings Bench, or into the Common place, and all personall actions by or against any Officer or Minister of this Court in respect of their service or attendance there; In these if the parties descend to issue, this Court cannot try it by Jury, but the Lord Chancelor or the Lord Keeper, delivereth the Record by his proper hands into
the Kings Bench to be tried there, because for that purpose both Courts are accounted but one; and after trial had to be remanded into the Chancery, and there Judgment to be given. But if there be a Demurrer in Law, it shall be argu∣ed and adjuged in this Court. Nota, the legal proceedings of this Court, be not inrolled in Rolls, but remain in Filaciis, being filed up in the Office of the Pey-bag: upon a judgement given in this Court, a Writ of Error doth lye re∣tornable into the Kings Bench. The style of the Court of the Kings Bench is Coram Rege, (as hath been said) and the style of this Court of Chancery is Coram domino Rege in Cancellaria, and Additio probat minoritatem; And in this Court, the Lord Chancelor or the Lord Keeper is the sole Judge, and in the Kings Bench there are four Judges at the least. This Court is Officina Justiciae, out of which all original Writs, and all Commissions which passe under the Great Seal go forth; which Great Seal is Clavis regni, and for those ends this Court is ever open. And this Court is the rather alwaies open, for that if a man be wrongfully imprisoned in the Vacation, the Lord Chancellor may grant a Habeas Corpus, and do him Justice according to Law, where neither the Kings Bench nor Com∣mon Pleas, can grant that Writ, but in the term time; but this Court may grant it either in Term time or Vacation: so likewise this Court may grant Prohibi∣tions at any time, either in Term or Vacation: which Writs of Prohibition are not retornable, but if they be not obeyed, then may this Court grant an At∣tachment, upon the Prohibition retornable, either in the Kings Bench or Common Place. The Officers and Ministers of this Court of Common Law do principally at∣tend, and do their service to the Great Seal, as the twelve Masters of the Chan∣cey, whereof the Master of the Rolls is the chief, who by their original institu∣tion, as it is proved before, should be expert in the Common Law, to see the forming and framing of original Writs, according to Law, which are not of course; whereupon such are called in our ancient Authors, Brevia Magistralia; Then you have the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the Hamper, the Sealer, the Chafe wax, the Controuler of the Chancery, twenty four Cursitors for making Writs of course, or form'd Writs according to the Register of the Chancery; The Clerk of the presentations, the Clerk of the Faculties, the Clerk Examiner of the Patents, the Clerks of the Petty-bag, and the six Attorneys. Having spoken somewhat of this Court's ordinary Jurisdiction, something shall be said of the extraordinary proceedings thereof, according to the Rule of Equity, secundum aquum et bonum, or according to the dictates of Conscience; for the Lord Chancelor, or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, may be said to be Keeper of the Kings Conscience, for mitigation of the rigour of the Common Law. Yet this Court of Equity proceeding by English Bill, is no Court of Record; therefore it can bind but the Person only, and neither the State of the Defendants Lands, nor property of his Goods, and Chattles; therefore if the Lord Chancelor impose any fine, it is void in Law, he having no power but on the Person only. Yet the Lord Chancelor or Keeper, is sole Judge both in this Court of Equi∣ty, and in the Court concerning the Common Law; but in cases of weight or difficulty, he doth assist himself with some of the Judges: and no greater excep∣tion can be taken hereunto, than in case of the Lord Steward of England, being sole Judge in tryal of the Nobility, who also is assisted with some of the Judges. Touching this Court of Equity, the ancient Rule is, that three things are to be considered in a Court of Conscience; Covin, Accident, and Breach of confi∣dence; All Covins, collusions, frauds, and deceits, for which ther's no remedy by the ordinary course of Law. Accident, as when the servant of an Obligor or
Morgageor, is sent to pay the money on the day, and he is robb'd &c. then reme∣dy is to be had in this Court against the foreiture; The third is breach of tru't and confidence, whereof there are plentiful examples. The ancient Custome was when one was made Lord Chancellor, for the King to hang the Great Seal about his Neck. Cardinal Woolsey had the Chance∣lorship by Letters Patents during life, but it was held void because an ancien Office must be granted as it was accustomed. Henry the  had two great Seals, one of Gold, which he delivered the Bishop of Durham; and another oft Silver, which he delivered the Bishop of London. The Chancellors Oath con∣sists of six parts. 1. That well and trly he shall serve the King our Soveraign Lord, and his People in the Office of Chancellor, or Lord Keeper. 2. That e shall do right to all manner of people poor and rich, after the Laws and usages of the Realm. 3. That he shall truly Counsel the King, and his Counsel, he shall layne (or conceal) and keep. 4. That he shall not know, nor suffer the hurt or disheriting of the King, or that the Rights of the Crown be decreased, by any means as far as he may let it. 5. And in case he cannot let it, he shall make it clearly and expresly to be known to the King, with his true advice and counsel. 6. He shall do and purchase the Kings profit in all that he reasonably may. There be in this Court many Officers, whereof mention is made before, the principal whereof is the Master of the Rolls, which is an ancient Office, and grantable either for life or at will, according to the Prince his pleasure. Edward the third by Letters Patents, annex'd the House of the converted Iews in Chan∣cery Lane to this Office, for keeping of the Records of the Chancery, viz. Char∣ters, Letters Patents, Commissions, Deeds, Recognizances▪ which before the Reign of Henry the seventh, were used to be transmitted to the Tower of London, The Master of the Rolls used to have Iure Officii, the gift of the Offices of the six Clerks in the Chancery; and in the absence of the Lord Chancellor, he heareth Causes, and giveth Orders.
OF THE COVRT OF COMMON-PLEAS IN WESTMINSTER-Hall. IN times pass'd, the Courts and Benches, or Banks of Justices (as was touched before) followed the Kings Person wheresoever he went, as well since the Conquest as before: which thing being found chargeable and cumbersome; The ninth of Henry the third, it was resolved, that there should be a standing place appointed, where matters should be heard and deter∣mined; And the Court of the Common Pleas was the first that was fix'd, where∣in tenures of Lands, and civil Actions used to be pleaded; And it is one of the Statutes of Magna Charta, Quod Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nostram sed teneantur loco certo, That the Common Pleas follow not our Court, but be kept in a certain place. Now, Pleas are distinguished into Pleas of the Crown, as Treason and Felony, with misprision of Treason and Felony, (which belong to the Upper Bench) and to Common or Civil Pleas, whereof this Court takes Cognizance. This Court therefore is call'd, the Lock and Key of the Common Law of England, and the Judges there sitting had need to be more knowing, and learned than any other; for here all Reall Actions whereupon Fies and recoveries, the common assurances of the Land do passe, and all other reall Actions by original Writs, are to be determined, as also of all Common mixt or personal, in divers of which the Kings Bench, & this Court have a con∣current authority; But regularly this Court cannot hold Common  in any Action, real, mix'd or personal, but by Writ out of the Chancery and re∣turnable to this Court; yet this Court in some cases may hold Plea by Bill without any Writ in the Chancery: as for, or against any Officer, or priviledged Person of this Court. This Court also, without any Writ may upon a suggestion grant Prohibitions, to keep Temporal as well as Ecclesiastical Courts, within their bounds and jurisdictions, without any Original, or Plea depending; for the Common Law, which in those cases is a Prohibition of it self stands instead of an Original. The Chief Justice of this Court, is created by Letters Patents during the plea∣sure of the Prince, and so are the rest of his Associats, but none is capable to be constituted a Judge here, unlesse he be a Sargeant at Law of the degree of the Coif. The jurisdiction of this Court is general & extendeth throughout England. The Officers of this Court are many, viz. Custos Brevium, three Protonota∣ries, Clerk of the Warrants, Clerk of the Kings Silver, four Exigenters, fourteen Filazers, Clerk of the Juries, Clerk of the Essoins, Clerk of the Outlaries, which belongeth to the Attorney General, who doth exercise it by Deputy. In former times great abuses have been by Attorneys of this Court, by suing out a Judici∣al Processe with any Original, which when detected have been severely puni∣shed.
OF THE COVRT OF THE EXCHEQUER. THe Authority of this Court is of Original Jurisdiction, without any Commission. In the chief place of account for the Revenues of the Crown; The Hearers of the accounts have Auditors under them, and they who are the chief for the accounts of the Prince, are called Barons of the Exchequer, whereof one is called Lord Chief Baron. The greatest Officer of all is the Lord Treasurer. In this Court are heard, those that are Delators or In∣formers in popular or penal Actions, having thereby part of the profit assign'd unto them by the Law. In this Court, if any question be, 'tis determined by the Common Law of England, by twelve men, and all Subsidies, Taxes, and Cu∣stomes by account; For in this Office the Sheriffs of the Countries do attend upon the execution of the Commandements of the Judges. If any Fines or A∣mercements be extracted out of any Court or any arrearages of accounts of such things as is of Customes, Taxes, & Subsidies, and other such like occasions, the same the Sheriff of the Country doth gather, and is answerable therefore to the Exchequer. This Court is divided into two parts, viz. Iudicial accounts called, Scaccarum computorum, And into the Receit of the Exchequer, The prime Officer of this Court, as was metioned before, is the Lord high Treasurer of England, who receives a White Staff from the King; But in former time he had this Office by delivery of a Golden Key. Then there is Cancellarius Scaccarii the Chancelor of the Exchequer, who keepeth the Seal. Then you have the chief Baron, and his Associates, whereof one, though he sits there, yet he hath no voice; therefore he was used to be call'd by way of Drol∣lery, Baron Tell-clock; yet he takes the same Oath that others do, he hath a Fee of 100 Marks per annum; At daies of prefixions, he hath to do with the Sheriffs Accounts, he can take Recognizances; but he hath not the Robes, nor any suffrage upon the Bench in point of Judicature; And that nickname Baron Tellclock came up first in Baron Southertons time, who when he felt the Chimes ring in his Stomach towards dinner, he was us'd to tell chief Baron Tanfield, My Lord 'tis twelve a clock. Then have you sundry other inferiour Officers, more then in any other Court, except the Kings House. This Court is called Exchequer from a French word vne place quarree a four∣square place, because the Carpet that lay before the Judges, is in the form of a Chess-board, and of two colours: thence the name of Exchequer was derived.
Now, it is to be observe'd, that albeit the Barons are the sole Judges of the Exchequer Court, yet the Lord Treasurer is joyn'd with them, in keeping of the Records. The Lord Treasurer hath also granted him by Parent under the great Seal, Thesaurarium Scaccarii Regis Angliae, which of ancient time, as the Lord Coke hath it, was a distinct Office by it self. Then is there the Pipe Office, whereof the Chancelor of the Exchequer is Contrarotulator or Controuler. The Original institution of the Pipe Office was taken from a Conduit of water, which was conveyed by Pipes into a Cestern which lay in a Court: for as water is derived from many Fountains Springs, by Aquaeducts into a Cestern House, and from thence into several Offices of the same: so this golden and silver stream is drawn from sundry Courts as Foun∣tains of Justice, and other Springs of Revenue reduc'd and collected into one Pipe, and thereby conveyed into the Grand Cestern of the Princes receit, &c. Therefore all Accounts and Debts to the Crown are delivered and collected out of the Offices of the Kings Remembrancer, and Treasurers Remembrancer, and so drawn, and pt in charge in the Pipe. There be five Auditors of the Reve∣nue Royal within the survey of this Court, and their Office is, to take Accounts of the Kings Receivers, Sheriffs, Escheators, Collectors, and Customers, and to audite and perfect the Account; But an Auditor cannot allow any Licence or Grant, in regard he knoweth not whether it be good, this belongs to the Barons; Neither can the Auditor put any thing in Charge, his Office being only to take and audite Accounts. There is the Auditor of the Prests, whose Office it is to take the Accounts of the Mint, Ireland, and Barwick, and of all other imprested or moneys advanc'd before hand. Then is there the Auditor of the Receits, which is an Office very considera∣ble, and consisting of many parts; For first, he is a kind of Filazer, for he fileth the Tellers Bills, and entreth them. Secondly, he is a Remembrancer, for he gives the Lord Treasurer a certificate of the money received the week before. Then he is an Auditor, for he makes Debenturs to every Teller, before they pay any money, and takes and audites their Accounts. Besides all this, he keepeth the black Book of Receits, and the Lord Treasurers Key of the Treasury, and seeth every Tellers money lock'd up in the new Treasury. Of those Tellers there are four, and their Office consists in four duties. First, to receive money due to the Soveraign Prince. Secondly, to pay all persons moneys by Warrant of the Auditor of the Re∣ceit. Thirdly, to make yearly and weekly Books of their Receits and payments, which they deliver to the Lord Treasurer. And lastly, to give the Clerk of the Pell a Bill of what moneys they receive, whereby he may be charged. Now, touching Clericus Pellis the Clerk of the Pell; his duty is, to enter eve∣ry Tellers Bill into a Roll call'd Pellis Receptorum; his Office also is, to enter in∣o another Roll payments, call'd Pellis exitus, signifying by what Warrant the payment was made. Concerning the Kings Remembrancer in the Exchequer his Office, con∣sists in eight Duties; First, to write Process against Collectors of Customs, Subsidies, and Fif∣teens. 2. He entreth in his Office all Recognizances before the Barons, and taketh Bond for any of the Kings Debts, for observing of Order, for appearances, and his duty is to make out Process upon every of them. 3. He maketh Process upon Informations upon penal Statutes, all which In∣formations are entred into his Office. 4 He maketh Bills of composition upon Informations upon penal Statutes.
5. He taketh the stallment of Debts, and entreth them. 6. The Clerk of the Star-Chamber, was us'd to certifie into his Office what fines were there set, whereof he maketh a Record, and draweth them down in the Pipe. 7. In this Office ought to be kept all Assurances, Conveyances and Eviden∣ces whereby any Lands, Tenements, Herediraments, or other things are gran∣ted to the Soveraign Prince. 8. There is a Court of Equity holden in the Exchequer Chamber by English Bill, whereof all the proceedings and Bills are entred into this Office. The Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, is also an Office of trust, and conse∣quence, which consisteth of seven Duties. First, To preserve the Royal tenures, and to make out Process for the Reve∣nues thereof. 2. He maketh Process of Fierifacias, to extend for Debts due to the Prince, either in the Pipe or with the Auditors. 3. He awards Process against all Sheriffs, Escheators, Receivers, and Bay∣liffs, to bring them to account. 4. He is to make an entry of Record, whereby it appears whether Sheriffs, and other Accountants pay their proffers due at Easter and Michaelmas. 5. He makes another entry of Record, to the end that it may be known, whe∣ther Sheriffs and other Accounts keep their day of prefixion. 6. The green Was is certified into this Office, and by him delivered to the Clerk of the Estreats. 7. There ought to be brought into this Office, all the Accounts of Custo∣mers, Controulers, and all other, to make an entry of Record in this Office, to avoid delay and concealments. The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer, consists of ten parts. First, That he shall well, and truly serve in the Office of Baron. 2. That, truly he shall charge, and discharge all manner of people, as well poor as rich. 3. That for Higness, nor for Riches, nor for hatred, nor for any deed, gift, or promise of any person, which is made unto him, nor by craft engine, he shall let the Kings right. 4. He shall not let, disturbe, or respite contrary to the Lawes of the Land the Right of any other person. 5. He shall not put in respite the Kings Debts, where goodly they may be le∣vied. 6. That he shall speed the Kings need before others. 7. That neither for gift, wages, nor good deed, he shall layn, disturb, nor let the profit or reasonable advantage of the King, in the advantage of any other Person, nor of himself. 8. That nothing he shall take of any Person to do wrong or right, to delay, or deliver, or to delay the people that have to do before him, that as hastily as he may them goodly, to deliver without hurt of the King, &c. 9. Where he may know any wrong or prejudice to be done to the King, he shall put and do all his power and diligence that to redresse. 10. The Kings Counsel he shall keep and layne in all things. In the Exchequer Chamber, all cases of difficulty, either in the Kings bench, or the Common Pleas, were used to be debated, argued, and resolved by all the Judges of England, and the Exchequer Barons. The Treasurer of the Kings Chamber, and the Keeper of the privy purse, with such domestick Offices of the Kings House, are not subject to this Court of Exchequer. This Court was first erected for the particular profit and service of the Sove∣raign Prince; And this profit is mediat or immediat; Immediat, as of Lands,
Rents, Franchises, Hereditaments, Debts, Duties, Accounts, Goods, Chatrels, and other profits, and benefits whatsoever due unto the Soveraign Prince. Me∣diate, as the priviledge of the Officers, and Ministers of the Court; for two things do principally support the jurisdiction of a Court (as my Lord Coke hath it) first the preservation of the dignity thereof, and then the due attendance of the Officers and Ministers of the same. The chief Baron is created by Letters Patents, and the Office is granted, Quamdiu se bene gesserit, wherein he hath a more fixed estate, it being an estate of life, than the Justices of other Benches have, who are durante beneplacito; And in like manner are the rest of the Barons, constituted with the Patents of the Attorney General and Solicitor. There is a Court called the Court of Equity in the Exchequer Chamber. The Iudges of this Court are the Lord Treasurer, the Chancelor of the Exchequer, and the Barons; Their jurisdiction is as large for matter of Equity, as the Ba∣rons of the Exchequer have for the benefit of the King by the common Law, but if in either Court they hold any Plea that doth not concern the profit of the King, there lieth a Prohibition. To conclude, there are seven Courts that belong to the Exchequer. 1. The Court of Pleas or of the Barons. 2. The Court of Accounts. 3. The Court of Receits. 4. The Court of the Exchequer Chamber, being the Assembly of all the Iudges of England for matters in Law. 5. The Court of Exchequer for Errors in the Court of Exchequer. 6. A Court in the Exchequer Cham∣ber for Errors in the Kings Bench. 7. The Court of Equity, spoken of a little before. But touching all the Officers, either coordinate or inferior, that belong to the Exchequer, and the Revenues Customes, & perquisits of the Soveraign Prince, they are very many, & far more in number than in any other Court as was tou∣ched before; yet nothing so numerous as those Financiers, and swarm of other Officers which belong to the Revenues of France, which are so many that their fees being payed there comes not a Quardecu in every Crown clearly to the Kings Coffers, which is but the fourth part: But there is one publick advantage in it, that thousands of younger Brothers, and others, have a handsome subsistance, to carry themselves hereby in the garbe and equipage of men.
OF THE COURT OF ADMIRALTY. HAving thus made some inspections into so many Courts, we must not pretermit the Court of Admiralty; for Great Britain being an Island which makes the Sea, and Woodden Castles, to be her chiefest Conservators: the Court of Admiralty may be said to be more pertinent and necessary to her, then to divers other States: therefore the Lord High Admiral is by the Law of England, one of the four Officers of the Crown, with the Lord Chancelor, the Lord Treasurer, and Lord privy Seal. Some hold the Etymology of Admirall, to come from the Greek word , which signifieth Salsugo maris, the saltness of the Sea; others derive it from Ammir, an Arabian word, which signifieth a King, or Emperor; And some would have it to come from the low Dutch, Aen-meer-all, which signifie, on the Sea all, The Reader, according as his own judgement leads him, may ad∣here to which he please; for I know of none that have positively asserted, which is the truest. But to know the nature and jurisdiction of this Court, it will conduce very much, if we insert here certain grievances which the Lord Admiral presented in the 8th year of K. Iames, concerning Prohibitions granted by the Judges of the Courts of Westminster, against the Jurisdiction and Prerogatives of this Court, with the answer which the Judges returned to every point. 1. The first Objection was, that whereas the cognizance of all Contracts, and other things done upon the Sea, belongeth to the Admirals jurisdiction, the same are made tryable at the common Law, as if they had bin done in Cheapside and such places. The Judges of Westminster-Hall answered, that by the Lawes of the Realm, the Court of the Admiral hath no cognizance, power, or jurisdiction of any manner of Contract, plea, or querele, within any County of the Realm, either upon the Land or the water; but every Contract, Plea, or querele, and all o∣ther things arising in any County of the Realm, either upon the Land, or the water; and also Wrecks of the Sea, ought to be tryed, discussed, determined, and remedied by the common Lawes of the Land, and not before, or by, the Admiral or his Lieutenant, in any manner; so that it is not material, whether the place be upon the water, intra fluxum & refluxum aqua, or whether it be upon any other water within the precincts of a County. But the said Judges acknowledged, that of Contracts, pleas, and quereles, made upon the Sea, or any part thereof, which is not within any County, from whence no tryal can be had by twelve men, the Admiral hath, and ought to have jurisdiction. And no president can be shewed, that any Prohibition hath bin granted for any plea, contract, or querele, concerning any Marine cause, made or done upon the Sea, taking that only to be the Sea, wherein the Admiral hath his jurisdiction, which is before described by Law to be out of any County.
2. The second Objection was, that when actions are brought to the Admi∣ralty, upon Bargains and Contracts, made beyond the Seas, wherein the com∣mon Law cannot administer justice; yet in these cases, prohibitions are a∣warded, in prejudice of the Court of Admiralty. The Judges answer, that Bargains and Contracts made beyond the Sea, wherein the common Law cannot administer justice, do belong to the Consta∣ble and Marshal; For the jurisdiction of the Admiralty, is wholly confined to the Sea, which is out of any County; but if any Indenture, Bond, or other specialty, or any Contract, be made beyond the Seas, for doing of any act, or payment of any money, within this Realm, or otherwise, wherein the com∣mon Law can administer justice, and give ordinary redress: In these cases, neither the Constable nor Marshal, nor the Court of Admiralty, hath any juris∣diction: therefore when that Court hath proceeding, in derogation of the common Law, prohibitions have bin issued out, as by the Law they ought. 3. The third Objection was, that whereas time out of minde, the Court of Admiralty hath taken stipulations for appearance, and performance of the acts and judgements of the same Court, It is now affirmed, by the Judges of the common Law, that the Admirals Court, is no Court of Record, and therefore not able to take such stipulations: hereupon, prohibitions are granted, to the utter overthrow of that jurisdiction. The Judges answered, that the Court of the Admiralty, proceeding by the course of the Civil Law, is no Court of Record, and therefore cannot take any such a recognizance as a Court of Record may. And for taking Recognizanses against the Law of the Realm, we finde, that prohibitions have bin granted. And if an erroneous sentence be given in that Court, no Writ of Error, but an appeal before certain Delegates do lye, which proves, 'tis no Court of Re∣cord. 4. The fourth Objection was, that Charter parties, made only to be per∣formed upon the Seas, are daily withdrawn from that Court by prohibi∣tions. The Judges answered, That if the Charter party be made within any City, Port-Town, or County of this Realm, although it be to be performed, either upon the Seas, or beyond the Seas, yet it is to be tryed and determined by the ordinary course of the Common Law, and not in the Court of the Admiralty, And therefore, when that Court hath encroached upon the common Law, in that case, the Iudge of the Admiralty, and party there suing, have bin prohibi∣ted, and oftentimes the party condemned, in great and grievous dammages, by the Lawes of the Realm. 5. The fifth Objection was, that notwithstanding the clause of Non obstante statuto, which hath foundation in his Majesties Prerogative, and is current in all other grants; yet in the Lord Admirals Patent, 'tis said to be of no force, to warrant the determination of the Causes, committed to him in his Lord∣ships Patent, and so rejected by the Iudges of the common Law. The common Lawyers answer, that without all question, the sundry Statutes which declare the jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty, and wherein all the Subjects of the Realm have interest, cannot be dispensed with, by any non ob∣stante statuto; and therefore not worthy of any answer; but by colour there∣of the Court of Admiralty hath, contrary to those Acts of Parliament, en∣croached upon the jurisdiction of the common Law, to the intolerable grie∣vance of Subjects, which hath oftentimes urged them to complain, in his Ma∣jesties ordinary Courts of justice in Westminster-Hall, for their relief in that behalf. 6. The sixth Objection was, that to the end that the Admirals jurisdiction, might receive all manner of empeachment, and interruption, the Rivers be∣neath the first Bridges where it ebbeth and floweth, and all the Creeks and
Ports are by the Iudges of the common Law, affirmed to be no part of the Sea, nor within the Admirals jurisdiction, and thereupon, prohibitions are ordina∣rily awarded upon actions depending in that Court for Contracts, and other things done in those places, notwithstanding, that by use and practise, time out of minde, the Admirals Court hath had jurisdiction, within such Ports, Creeks, and Rivers. The Judges answer was like to their first, And 'twas further added, that for the death of a man, or mayhm in those two cases, only done in great Ships, be∣ing and hovering in the main stream only, beneath the point of some Ri∣vers nigh unto the Sea, and no other place of the same Rivers, nor in other causes, but only in those two, the Admiral hath cognizance. But for all Con∣tracts, Pleas, and Quereles, made or done upon a River, Haven, or Creek with∣in any County of this Realm, the Admiral without question hath no jurisdicti∣on; for then he should hold plea of things, done within the Body of the Coun∣ty, which are tryable by verdict of twelve men, and meerly determinable by the common Law, and not within the Court of the Admiralty, according to the Civil Law; for that were to change and alter the Lawes of the Realm in like cases, and make those Contracts, Pleas, and Quereles, tryable by the common Law of the Realm, to be drawn off ad aliud Examen, and to be sentenced by the Iudges of the Admiralty, according to the Civil Law. 7. The seventh Objection was, that the Agreement made Anno 1575. between the Judges of the Kings Bench, and the Court of the Admiralty, for the more quiet and certain Execution of Admiral Iurisdiction, is not observed as it ought to be. The Iudges answered, that the supposed Agreement, mentioned in the Ar∣ticle, hath not as yet bin delivered them; but having heard the same read be∣fore his Majesty; they answer'd, that for so much thereof, as differeth from these answers, it is against the Lawes, and Statutes of this Realm: therefore the Iudges of the Kings Bench, never assented thereunto, as was preten∣ded. 8. The eighth Objection was, That many other grievances there were, which in discussing of these former, would easily appear worthy of Reformation. To this the Judges answered, that this Article was so general, as no particu∣lar answer can be made thereunto, only it appeareth, by that which hath bin said, that the Lord Admiral his Officers and Ministers principally by colour of that Non obstante, and for want of learned advice, have injustly encroached up∣on the common Lawes of this Realm; for which the marvel is the lesse, be∣cause that the Lord Admiral his Lieutenants, Officers, and Ministers, have with∣out all colour, intruded upon the Right and Prerogative due to the Crown, in that they have seized and converted to their own use, Goods and Chattels, of infinite value taken at Sea; and other Goods and Chattels, which in no sort, appertain unto his Lordship, by his Letters Patents, wherein the said Non ob∣stante is contained; and for which, he and his Officers, remain accountable to his Majesty; And they now wanting, in this time of peace, causes apper∣taining to their natural jurisdiction, do now encroach upon the jurisdiction of the common Law, lest they should sit idle, and reap no profit. They added further, That touching their proceedings in granting of Pro∣hibitions concerning any of the said Articles, two things were to be considered of, first the matter, then the manner; touching the matter, nothing hath bin done therein, by the Court of Westminster, but by good Warrant of Law, and former judicial Precedents; And for the manner, they granted none in the Va∣cation time, nor in their Terme time, in any of their Chambers, nor in the Court in the Terme-time, ex officio, but upon motion made in open Court, by learned Councel; and after a day prefixed, and warning given to the adverse party, &c.
Hereupon they proceeded, to prove and confirm their answers, by three kind of Authorities in Law. First, By Authority of High Court of Parliament. Secondly, By Judgement, and judicial Precedents. Thirdly, By Book-Cases. Concerning the Acts of Parliament, they urged the Statute of Richard the second, viz. That the Admiralls and their Deputies, shall not meddle from henceforth, with any thing done within the Realm of England, but only with things done upon the Sea, according to that which hath been duly used in the time of the Noble King Ed∣ward, Grandfather to Richard the second. Concerning the second proof by Judgements, and Iudicial Precedents, and the third by Book-Cases, they alledged divers Cases, which are to be seen in that great light, and laborious Champion of the Common Law of England, the Lord Coke, in the third part of his Institutes; But, the Result of all which the Iudges of the Common Law driv' at, was, that the Court of Admiralty, was to take no Cognizance, nor had power to determine any thing that had happen∣ed, and should give occasion of Plea, upon any Waters, either fresh or salt, that were within the Precincts of any County; but it was tryable by the Com∣mon Law of England, and by the Empanelment, and Verdict of twelve men, which is not the way of Tryal of the Civil Law, by which the Admiralty is di∣rected. By this notable clash, and contestation 'twixt the Iudges of Westminster-Hall and the Lord Admiral, the Reader may learn what the extent of the Authority of that Court is, and that the jurisdiction of the Admiral is confined to the high Sea. In times past, there were distinct Admirals, in point of power, as we read in Richard the seconds Raign, the Earl of Northumberland was Admiral of the North; and the Earl of Devonshire, Admiral of the West: who were to receive the Subsidy of Poundage and Tonnage, for the garding of the Seas. Among other Prerogatives, which belonged to the Lord Admiral of England, one was to erect Beacons upon the Maritim Coasts; which word, is derived from the old Saxon, or Dutch Becnam, which signifieth, to give a signe, as we use the word, to becken at to this day. Before the Reign of Edward the 3d, there were but stakes of Wood, set upon high places, which were fired, upon the discovery of any enemies; but in his time, pitched Barrels were set up; and by the Law of the Land, whosoever fired a Beacon, commits Felony, unless there were Authority and just cause for it. In other Countries they are called Phares, which are no other then specula∣tory, or maritime monitory fires, which serve for two ends, as well to direct Seafaring men, as to fore-warn the approach of an Enemy; which with such wonderful celerity, give the whole Land an Alarum, and so puts them in a po∣sture of defence. But there are three main matters, whereof the Lord Admiral is to take Cognizance, which are Flotsan, Ietsan, and Lagan: whereof the first is, when a Ship is sunk and perished, and the Goods floating upon the waters: The se∣cond is Ietsan, when in stresse of weather, or other occasions, the Goods are thrown over-board. The third is, when Goods are tyed to a Cork, or Cable, and may be found again; But the Court of Admiralty, hath not to do with Wrecks; for then the Goods are deposited in the custody of the Officers of the next Town, where, if the Proprietor come within a twelve moneth and a day, he may claim them by Law.
Henry the sixth did constitute by Charter, Iohn Holland, Duke of Exceter, and Henry his Son, to be Admirallos Angliae: But the Iudges of the Common Law, held that Charter to be invalid; and the Reason they alledged, was, that that Charter being of a Iudicial Office, it could not be granted to two. When the former contestation happened 'twixt the Court of Admiralty and Westminster-Hall, they were choyse powerful men at that time, who swayed as Grandees of the Common Law, as Sir Edward Coke, the Lord Bacon, Iudge Dod∣dridge, and Hubbard, which made them carry the Bucklers from the Civilians, at that time; But there were some learned Treatises published afterward, to vindicate the Right of the Civil Law; which, without controversie, hath more in it of natural equity, and reaches of pure Reason, then any other: It is the Product of that mighty Monarchy of the Romans, who though they conquered by the Lance, yet they conered by their Lawes, so many vast distant Territo∣ries, and Nations, which they had subdued, leading so many people Captive by their policy, as much as by their Prowesse; And indeed, the Civil Law is fitted for the general Affaires of mankind, and for all Nations; For though every particular state hath some few municipal Lawes peculiar to it self: yet no where beyond the Seas is there any profession or Science of Law, but of the Civil; nor are there any other studied in Vniversities. Only in England there are Inns of Court, which are equivalent to an Academy, where lex Terrae, or the common municipal Law of the Land is studied, and Graduates proceed, and are made therein accordingly, which is no where else; But the Civil Law extends to all man-kind. And, if regard be had to the University of humane Reason, it is no where o narrowly discussed, and eventilated, and the judgement rectified by clear notions: Moreover, there is nothing, of what nature soever it be but the Civil Law hath ordained a means to bring it to a Tryal, either by giving a spe∣ciall action in the case, or a general one releeving by ordinary remedies; or if those fail, by such as are extraordinary, helping the Clyent, Iure actionis, or Of∣ficio Iudicis. Yet there was one notable Example of one business, that not only caused a clash 'twixt the Civilian, and Common Lawyer, but puzzel'd them both so that neither could try it. It was, that one Peacock, struck Lacy in alto Mari, and the Ship landing at Scarborough, Lacy dyed a little after, of the stroke that was given at Sea: there was a great contestation, whether the Court of Admiralty, or the common Lawyer, should try Peacock; but it was found, that the cognisance hereof belonged to neither, so the party escaped without condemnation. But now we will resume the thred of our Survay of Westminster, and add to that which hath bin already spoken of the Great Hall, which as it hath bin, and continueth still the usual place of pleadings, and ministration of Justice; so it was in former times, the principal Seat, and Palace of the Kings of England, since the Conquest; for here the Feasts of Coronation, and other solemn Feasts, as that of Christmas were kept: It is recorded, that at the day of Cir∣cumcision, Henry the third commanded his Treasurer, William de Haverhull, to cause 6000. poor people to be fed at Westminster-Hall, upon the Kings account; Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings Brother, Anno 1243. being married to Cincia, Daughter to the Countesse of Provence, kept his Bridall Feast at West∣minster-Hall, where, the story saith, there were three thousand dishes of meat, served in at dinner. Rich. the second having repaired the Great Hall which had bin burnt by a pit∣tiful fire, kept his Christmas there, in a most sumptuous manner, with Justings, and running at Tilt, where there was such a huge confluence of People, that for divers dayes, there were spent 26. fat Oxen, and 300 Sheep. The King him∣self wore a Gown of Cloth of Gold, garnished with precious stones, which was valued at 3000 marks, a mighty sum in those dayes.
Henry the 7th keeping his Christmas at Westminster-Hall, invited Ralph Au∣stry, Lord Mayor of London, with all the Aldermen, to a Feast on Twelf-day, The King, the Queen, and some Ambassadors, sate at the Marble Table, 60. Knights and Esquires, served in the Kings meat, which consisted of 60. dishes, and the Queen as many. The Mayor was served with 24. where after sundry sort of disports, he supped also, and it was break of day, before He, and the Aldermen returned by Barges to London. Parliaments also were used to be kept frequently at Westminster-Hall, and one was kept in Richard the seconds time, which proved fatal unto him; for he was deposed there, notwithstanding, that he had bin the greatest Repairer of that Hall, when it had bin destroyed by fire. For it hath bin the hard destiny of this Great Hall, to suffer many times the fury of fire; but the last that hap∣pened, was in the beginning of Henry the eighths Raign, Anno 1512. at which time, a great part of the Palace was consumed, which was never re-edified since; so that the Kings Courts, have bin from that time, sometimes at Baynards Castle, then at Bridewell, and since at White-Hall, called before, York place, as hath bin said before. In this great Palace at Westminster, there was St. Stephens Chappel, which was built by King Stephen himself; It was repaired and enlarged by Edward the third, and 38. persons were appointed there to serve God, viz. a Dean, 12. secular Canons, 13. Vicars, 4. Clarks, 6. Chorists, a Verger, and a Keeper of the Chap∣pel, who had endowments, and Houses built them near the Thames: there were also, Lodgings assigned them, 'twixt the Clock-house, and the Wooll-Staple, called the Weigh-house: He also built for their use, a strong Clochard, in the little Sanctuary, covered with Lead, where there were three great Bells, which usually rung at Coronations, and Funeralls of Princes, which gave such a huge sound, that 'twas commonly said they sowred all the drink in the Town; but now there's scarce any marks left of that Clochard. This Chappel of St. Stephens, at the suppression in Henry the eights time, was valued to dispend one thousand eighty five pounds; and in Edward the sixths time it was made to serve as a Parliament for the House of Commons, who formerly were used to sit in the Chapter-house of the Abbot of Westminster. Before the Great Hall, there is a large Court, called now the new Palace, where there is a strong Tower of Stone, containing a Clock, which striketh on a great Bell every houre, to give notice to the Judges, how the time passeth; when the wind is South South-West, it may be heard into any part of London, and commonly, it presageth wet weather: The Dean of St. Stephens, was used to hae the keeping of this Clock, having six pence every day out of the Exchequer, for keeping the Kings Clock, or Great Tom of Westminster. We must now make a step Southward, before we leave Westminster, and per∣form some further devotions to the old Abbey, the prime Sanctuary of the Land; whereunto belongs another very ancient priviledged place, and Sanctu∣ary of St. Martin le Grand, hard by Aldersgate in London, whereas formerly was said, there was of old a fair and large Colledge of a Dean, and secular Canons or Priests, founded by Ingelricus 1056. and confirmed a little after by William the Conqueror, as appeareth by that ample Charter he gave thereunto, which in re∣gard of the ancient Saxon Termes then used, I thought worthy the inserting here, and it runs thus. Willimus Conquester per chartam suam corroborat, & confirmat Deo & Ecclesiae Beati Martini intramuros London sitae, quod sit quieta ab mni exactione, & inqui∣etudine Episcoporum, Archidiaconorum; &c. Et possessiones suas ab omni regali Iu∣risdictione liberari, & ab Exercitus expeditione, Pontis restauratone, munitione, & Castelli auxilio quietas habent, Secuam, & Toll, & Team, & Infangthese, Blod∣wite, Mundbrice, Burghbrice, Meskenning, Seawing, Alcesting▪ Frithsorn, Flea∣mina, Finnithe, Welgerthofe, Vthleap, forfeng, fyhfeng, Firdwite, Firthwit, Wear∣dite,
Hengwite, Hamsokne, Forsteal, & si quas alias libertates, & consuetudines ali∣qua Ecclesiarum regni mei Anglie meliores habeat: Si quis vero hoc in aliud quam concessimus transferre presumserit cum Iuda proditore Deiluat poenas; Dat. Anno Dom. 1068. Anno{que} Regni mei secundo, die Natalis Domini. Et post modum in d' Pentecostes confirmo quando Matilda Conjux mea in Basilica Sancti Petri Westmona∣sterii in Reginam divino nutu est consecrata. This priviledge of Sanctuary, was confirmed, and strictly enjoyned by divers succeeding Kings, under the same Curse that the Infringers thereof should be eternally damned, and suffer the like torments, as Iudas the betrayer of God, &c. Touching the hard Saxons word of this Charter, the Reader is referred to those worthy persons, who made additionals to Mr. Stow, where he shall find them explain'd; For many Ages, this Saint Martin le Grand, continued by it self a place of as great priviledges, as Westminster, or Beverlay, which were counted the chiefest in the whole Land; But Henry the 7th annexed it at last, to the Mo∣nastery of St. Peter of Westminster, which claims Title ever since, to the free Chappel, the Priviledges, and Sanctuary thereof, and hath enjoyed it, without controlement or question. And now before we bid a farewel to Westminster, we will acquaint the Rea∣der in brief, with the modern Civil Government thereof; Now as London is divided into 26. Wards, so Westminster is partition'd to 12. for the which, the Dean of the Collegiat Church, was wont with the high Steward, to elect 12. Bur∣gesses, and as many Assistants, viz. one Burgesse, and one Assistant, for every Ward: out of which twelve, two are nominated yearly, upon Thursday in Easter week, for chief Burgesses to continue for one entire year, who have Au∣thority to hear, examine, determine, and punish according to the Lawes of the Realm, and Customs of the City, matters of incontinency, common Scolds, Inmates, with publique annoyances; and likewise to commit such persons, as shall offend against the peace, giving notice thereof within 24. houres, to some Justice of the Peace, in the County of Middlesex; And this mode of Go∣vernment, Westminster hath by vertue of an Act of Parliament, in the twenty seventh of Queen Elizabeth.
A PARALLEL, By way of COROLLARY, Betwixt LONDON, AND Other great Cities of the World. HAving hitherto rambled up and down the streets of Lon∣don, and pryed into every corner thereof; having endea∣voured to fetch Her from her very Cradle, (which may not be improperly said; for we found Her at first a Grove of Wood) and so attended Her all along, to that marvellous degree of perfection, she is now arrived unto, by insensible Coalitions of people, im∣provement of Trade, and encrease of Structures: We will now, for the better illustration of things, and further enlightning of the Rea∣der, make a Comparison or Parallel 'twixt Her, and other great Ci∣ties of the World, which are accounted Cities of the first Magni∣tude; for as the Starres in Heaven are distinguish'd by degrees of Magnitude, so are Cities on the Earth: Or, to descend lower, as there are Ships of the first, second, and third rate; so there are Cities, Now among those various wayes, which tend to convey knowledge to the understanding, & rectifie ones judgement, Examples, Compari∣sons, and Parallels conduce much thereunto; and Plutarch was the first that prescrib'd this way, who, as t' was said of him, by giving life to so many noble Greeks and Romans, after their deaths, gave himself the longest life; so it may be said, that by his Parallels, he made himself parallel'd. The Terrestial Globe, which the Great God of Nature was pleased
to entail upon man-kind for his mansion, and to hold it (for himself and his Heirs) in Capite, from Him; I say this Masse of Earth is com∣pared by some, to a Camels back, in regard of the bunchy unevenness of it; by others, to a Libbards skin, in regard of the sundry parts, and variety of Habitations: By others, to a great piece of Embrodery, enchas'd up and down, whereof the most bossie, and richest compacted parts are Towns and Cities, where People are linked in a nearer bond of love, and lead a more civil course of life; For Urbanity, and Civility, derived their names first from thence. These Comparisons are lesse wide, and more significant, then that which Lucian makes, when, by way of drollery, he makes the greatest Cities upon Earth, to appear like so many Birds Neasts. It is a Catholique truth, wherein all Chronologers, & Antiquaries, do unanimously concur, that in the non-age of the World, man-kind had no other Habitation then Woods, Groves, and bushy Queaches, which they fenc'd about with Hardles made of twigs, and loose Stone-walls, to defend them from the invasions of wild and ravenous Beasts; some lived in Caves, and concavities of Rocks, to shelter themselves from the inclemency, and rigor of the Air: Insomuch, that all men were Troglodites at first, as there are many Nations, who are housed so to this day, making themselves holes and hollowes, in Rocks, and sandy dry grounds, as we find in this Iland some of those Troglodites, both in Nottingham, and Bridge-north. Then by degrees, they made themselves small Huts: from Huts, they came to build Houses, and so to cohabit in Hamlets: and thence sprung up Towns and Cities. The first of any same, was that stupend, or City of Babylon, foun∣ded by Nimrod, the great Hunter; and enlarged by that notable Virago, Semiramis: which was girded about with Walls, 200. foot high, and fifty broad, whereof the Circuit was 300 Furlongs; she had also 300. Turrets upon the Walls, which were of such a latitude, that Chariots might go upon them; and if old Historians may oblige us to a belief, there were three hundred thousand men that were em∣ployed in the building thereof; she continueth still, a vast and flou∣rishing City, called by the Turks Bagdat; Asia being the most Orien∣tall Countrey on this side the Hemisphere, as it was first peopled, for Adam was that Countreyman; so Towns, Cities, Castles, Al∣tars, and other Buildings, first began to be erected there; and indeed, all other knowledge, besides Architecture, came first from those parts, being next Neighbors to the rising Sun: The Indian Brachmans, or Gymnosophists, were the first scientifical men, and Students of Philoso∣phy; The Persian Magi were her next Students: Then she cross'd the red Sea, and came to Memphis, among the Aegyptians, whence she steered down the Nile, and got over the Aegean Seas to Corinth and Athens among the Greeks, whence she took wing to Rome, and from thence she clammer'd ore the Alps to France, Germany, Great Britany, and other North-west Climats. Now as Asia had the first Cities, so she glories to have to this day
the greatest: we will instance only in the City of Quinzay, who arro∣gates to her self, the name of the Celestial City, whereof divers modern Authours do write portentous things; and truly, he must have a strong Faith, who will believe them: She is the chief City of the Empire of China, lying under the same Climate as Venice doth, with whom she hath a great resemblance, being built upon the South side of a huge Laque; she hath in length about forty miles, in latitude thirty, and one hundred and twenty miles in circumference; she hath above a thousand Bridges, some whereof are so high, that Ships under saile, may passe under them: Her Houses are of Stone and Earth; the lowest whereof, is five stories high, of marvellous beauty and strength: She hath many magnificent Temples, but one next the Royal Palace, of a stupendious structure, being of that altitude, that the as∣cent is threescore and fower marble stairs: There are an incredible number of fair Palaces in her; among which, after that of the Em∣perour, those of the ten Governours, are the stateliest, and among them that of the Captain of the Tartars. About the Center of the City; stands the Imperial Court, which is fenc'd about with seven Walls, whereof every one is garded by ten thousand Souldiers, the Palace is ten miles in Circuit, and hath fourscore great Halls; but that where the great Councel sits is four square, and hath Windows and Gates looking towards the four parts of the Heaven, East, West, North and South, where officers and o∣thers that have business, do enter, according to the scituation of the Countrey, whence they come, there being above threescore several Kingdoms, under the Dominion of the Emperor, and every one hath a particular Hall and Councel, where they deliberate, touching the Government of every Kingdom. 'Tis such a ravishing voluptuous place; that there are objects to please and charm all the five senses, The eyes are fed in beholding the goodly Structures, Gardens, and Trees which are up and down: The Eares by hearing, the chirping of the Birds, and sweet murmure of the waters; The smell is feasted with odoriferous sent of flowers, and other rich perfumes; The Taste by most delicate fruits; And the other sense, by most beautiful, and ravishing Women; which are able to tempt a Stoick, having by their rowling large eyes, and other postures, extraordinary wayes of al∣lurement. There was a computation made of above a million of Hou∣ses within her, so that allowing ten to a Family, there be ordinarily about ten Millions of humane souls that breath within the City; They are very rich in their Habits, and there is not much difference in the Clothes of male and female, only the women have more diversity of colours; blew and red are the commonest, but black is never worn: There be Birds there, of such a wonderful bigness, that they will take up a whole Mutton alive, up into the Air, and sometimes a man in Armor. There are abundance of Elephants, Dromedaries, Camels, and other huge Beasts, that do their work; And all Animals, both volatil, and terrestrial, are there, of a bigger size and proportion, then any where
else, by special influences of the Heavens: It is incredible, what num∣ber of Nations do resort thither for Traffique and Commerce, as all the Indies, Cathay, Tartary, Arabia, and Persia; They are rare Artists; for 'tis thought, that Guns and Printing were there invented thou∣sands of years agoe; their Characters, and way of reading, being not either from the left hand to the right, as the Greeks and Latines use; or from the right hand to the left, as the Hebrew, and all the Dialect thereof, as the Arabian, Persian, and others, but perpendicular down∣ward: There is one Law amongst them, that conduceth much to make them such exquisite Artisans, which is, that the Sonnes are alwayes of their Fathers Trade, whereby they come to have a more natural dexterity, genius, and aptitude to the Trade, and their Pa∣rents train them therein more industriously, and discover unto them all the mysteries thereof. Touching the rare China Dishes and Cups they make, the masse of Earth, whereof they are moulded, useth to be buried in lumps, with∣in the bowels of the Earth, sometimes a hundred years before they fall to work upon it, and such a masse of aged Earth is the common Patrimony, that Parents use to leave their Children: In fine, they pretend to so much sagacity, wit, and industry, that 'tis a saying a∣mong them, that They only have two eyes, the Europaeans one, and all the rest of the World is blind. They have such a high opinion of their King, that they think he is descended of the race of some demy-God, and so adore him accor∣dingly. They believe there is some Divinity in his blood, insomuch, that he never marries any, but either his own Sister, or Daughter, or next a kin, for fear of staining the Royal Blood; He is seldom seen open∣ly, but he hath a private place, when his Councel sits, whence he may hear whatsoever is agitated, and he signifieth his pleasure invi∣sibly through certain hollow Trunks, and he gives audience to Am∣bassadors also in that manner. We will now over the Red Sea to Afrique, and take a short tran∣sient Survay of the Gran Cairo in Egypt, a City also of a huge Gigan∣tique stature, being near upon forty miles compasse, having five and thirty thousand Meskeetos, that is, Churches and Chappels: There are in her four and twenty thousand noted streets; some whereof are two miles in length, every one is locked up in the night, with a dore and Chains at each end: There is a huge number of Horsmen, under the command of so many Saniacks, which watch and gard the Town all the year long, to the number of eight and twenty thousand men, for fear of the incursions of the wild Arabs: the cause of the vastness of Gran Cairo is, that there are three Cities incorporated into one, that is, old Memphis, Babylon, and Elkhaire; for there was another City hard by, called Babylone, but by encrease of Trade, and new concourse of people, the Soldans and Mammalucks reduc'd all three to one entire City: which would be a pittiful poor place, did not the River of Nile give her a yearly visit from the Mountains of the
Moon, about the Sommer Solstice, and retire again about eighty dayes after. We will now crosse the Greek Seas to Europe, and take a quick view of most of those Cities, which are of the first magnitude; for indeed, this Parallel aymes only at the Europaean Cities; And it will be found by any impartial Reader, that London needs not vail to any of them, if regard be had. 1. To conveniency of situation, and to salubrity of air. 2. To method of strict Government. 3. To magnificence of the chief Magistrates. 4. To Regulation of Trade. 5. To variety of Artisans. 6. To a greater number of Corporations and Halls. 7. To plenty of all Provision, that Air, Earth, or Water can af∣ford. 8. To Springs, Conduits, Aqueducts, and other conveyances of fresh wholsome waters. 9. To the universality of Trafick, and bravery of the Adven∣turers. 10. To solidity, and richness of Commodities. 11. To Artillery, Ammunition, Docks, and a number of milita∣ry stout well armed Citizens. 12. To (once) a glorious Temple. 13. To an admirable great Bridge. 14. To a noble Navigable River. 15. To a chearful and wholsome green circumjacent Soyl. 16. To Hospitality, and Festival publique meetings of Corpora∣tions, and other Societies for encrease of love, and good intelligence between Neighbors. 17. To number of Coaches by Land, and all sorts of Boats by water, for the accommodation of Passengers. 18. For sundry kind of reliefs for the poor, and indigent. 19. For various kinds of honest corporal recreations and pastimes. 20. And lastly, for the number of humane souls. Many of these may be found severally in other Cities, who may haply exceed London in some particulars; but take them all together, she may vie with the best of them, and run no great hazard. But to proceed the more methodically in taking a view▪ to this purpose, though short and cursory of the greatest Cities in Europe, we will begin Eastward at Constantinople, called of old Bizantium, and now Stambole by the Turks, being the chief Court or Port, as they terme it, of the Ottoman Empire, the word being derived from Faith and Plenty: 'Tis true, she is plac'd in a fit, and advantageous posture, to be Commandresse of the World, she was raised by a Constantine, and lost by a Constantine (both of them, the Sonnes of Helens) about a thousand years after; but touching her site, she hath on the one side, the Pontus, or black Sea, and the Marmora, or Hellespont on the other: the mouthes of which Seas are so narrow, that no passage can be for∣ced
against the Castles, she is built upon the utmost levant point of Europe, and hath all the vast Continent of Asia, before her from Su∣tari; Insomuch, that she stands almost in the Center of the old World, and thereby, capable to send her Commands more speedily to other Countries; yet since the discovery of America, the new World, some modern Geographers balancing the parts of the old with the new, they find that Rome stands more appositly to command the whole Earth, because she is rather situated more towards the middle; In some things 'tis confessed, Constantinople may claim the prece∣dence of London, as first for the huge Palace of the Seraglio, which is about three miles compasse; 'Tis thought also, she exceeds for num∣ber, of humane Souls and Houses; yet in point of building, they are but low, and cottage-like, nothing comparable to those of London. And if you go to the quality of the Inhabitants, Constantinople may be called but a nest, or banner of slaves; and herein, as in many other of the particulars pointed at, before London hath the start of Her. We come now to Italy, and first to Rome, which though in circuit she be yet about as big as London; yet in point of people, she may be called a Wilderness, in comparison of her: She is also far inferior for Traffique and Wealth; as also for temperature, and wholsom∣ness of Air, that of Rome being not so healthy, which some impute to the burning of stubble, for fertilizing the bed of the Earth; others, to the ill-favour'd vapors that come from divers subterranean hol∣lowes that remain up and down, out of the ruines of old Rome; for Rome at present, may be called but a Skeleton of the old; or like a tall man, shrunk into the skin of a Pygmey, being compared to that mon∣struous stature she was of, in Vopiscus his time, who leaves it upon Re∣cord, that she was fifty miles about, and had above four hundred thousand free Citizens; and consequently, about four millions of souls with in her bosome, as some infer; She then made the Ocean to do homage unto the Tyber, she made Asia, and Afrique, feudetaries to Europe; but she who daunted the World, yielded to the Lawes of Time, who gives all great Cities a space of growing, of subsistence, and of declination; But a wonder it is, how so much of her is left, considering, that from Brennus the Britain, to the Duke of Bourbon, she was eight times sack'd, whence it may be inferr'd, that there is an extraordinary providence, that seems to watch over her. For as she subsisted before by the Pike, the Pen may be said now to support Her, I mean her Ecclesiastical Courts, which causeth a great confluence of people to resort thither, from all corners of the Earth: Insomuch, that the number of strangers in Rome, may be said to exceed the num∣ber of the Natives, because she is accounted the Communis Patria, and chief Randezvouze of all Christians, in regard of the residence of the chief Bishop, in whom every Catholique claimes an Interest: Inso∣much, that Rome may be said to be more beholden to Shepheards, then to any other profession; for as a Shepheard was her Founder, so a Shep∣heard is still her Preserver.
The next City of the first magnitude in Italy, is Milan, which of all other Towns, may be said to have this singularity, as to have no Suburbs; 'Tis true, She may pretend much for Her Doure, her Citta∣del, and Hospital, with number of excellent Artisans; yet who is well acquainted with both places, will find that London is not much in∣ferior to her, in any of these fower things; And for other particulars, as ubiquitary Traffique, by Sea as well as Land, for multitude of people, and divers other things, pointed at before, Milan comes short of London. Touching the City of Venice, 'tis true, she hath many things to glory of, as her wonderful situation, that she was born a Christian, that she hath continued a Virgin, near upon thirteen hundred years, having been never ravish'd by the assaults of any enemy, (though some out of malice would make her a Concubine to the great Turk). She may also glory of her great Arsenal, and that she hath the Sea for her Hus∣band; yet if one go to multitude of Inhabitants, to the magnitude of both Cities, to number of Corporations, with other particulars poin∣ted at before, Venice will not disdain to vail to London; But touching the last thing She glorieth of, London may claim as much interest in the Sea as she, if regard be had to Maritime Dominion and Naval power. And lastly, while Venice is steeping and pickling in Salt-water, London sports her self upon the banks of a fresh stately River, which brings into her bosom, all the Spices of the East Indies, the Treasure of the West, the Gems of the South, and the rich Furs of the North. Naples 'tis confess'd, is a populous great Mercantile Town, and hath three Castles, with handsom Buildings, and store of Nobility; but be∣sides magnitude of places, and multitude of People, with other ad∣vantages which London hath of Her, the Sun, whiles he doth as it were broyl the Neapolitan, doth with the gentle reverberations of his rayes, but guild the Walls of London. Genoa, though she be a proud City, yet she stands not upon her own legs, but she subsists most by the King of Spains money, by being a Seal to convey it by Cambio to Flanders; and else-where, having little of her own to trade withall; whereas London hath native substantial Commodities of her own, and is far superior to her for bigness, and number of souls, with other advantages. Touching Florence, there is beauty enough to be seen there, but she may partly thank London, that she is so fair, by the Trade she bears to Ligorn, of late years. Touching the rest of the Cities of Italy, though they be ranked a∣mong those of the first magnitude, yet they bear no proportion with London. Touching Sicily, there is Palermo, the residence of the Viceroy, a jol∣ly neat City, which may glory of one thing, that neither London, nor any other City in Christendom hath the like, which is a fair spacious uniform street, of above a mile long; Next to which, is that of Eden∣burgh
in Scotland, extending it self in a direct line, from the Royal Palace to the Castle. Concerning Spain, there are divers large Cities of the first mag∣nitude, as Barcelona, the metropolis of Catalonia; Saragossa the cape City of Aragon; Valencia the chief of that Kingdom; Pampelona the head of Navarr; Burgos the chief of old Castile, and Toledo of the new; Murcia, Granada, Sevill, and Lisbonne in Portugal, which is the biggest of them all. The two last are best peopled; but Madrid where the Catholique Court is kept (though a Village) hath more then any of them; but all these come short of London, in point of greatness, and populousness, with divers advantages besides. Vienna the Imperial Court is of an extraordinary bigness, being fenced about with English Walls, which Richard the first rear'd up for his Ransome: It is also well peopled; so is Prague. Which though the latter be made up of three Cities, yet they both come short of the City of London in amplitude, and number of people, with divers o∣ther properties mentioned before. Germany hath divers fair Cities, that may take place amongst them of the first magnitude, as Mentz, Colen, Frankfort, Strasburg, Norimburg, Auspurg, Magdenburg, and others, which though they beat a Land Trade, being mediterranean Cities, and abound with wealth, and numbers of Artisans, yet they are inferior to London, for many respects. Touching the Hans, and imperial Towns, there are divers of them large, wealthy, and full of Trade, as Lubeck, Danzick, and Hamburgh the biggest of them, which owes much of her prosperity to the Staple of the London Marchant Adventurers, who are there setled; but there's none of these Cities, though they be threescore more in number, that will presume to compare with London, in any of those twenty properties before mentioned. Touching Copenhagen in Denmark, and Stockholm in Swethland, they come far short; nay, if you go more Northward, upon the white Sea, as far as the gran Mosco the Emperor of Russias Court, which is a huge woodden City, and inviron'd about with a treble wall to stop the incursions of the Tartar, you will find it inferior to London, in eve∣ry of those twenty particulars. Touching Low Germany, or the Netherlands, which is one of the greatest Countries of Commerce in Christendom; 'tis true, there are there many Noble Cities. Among others, the City of Gant in Flanders, which for bigness, bears the Bell of all the Cities of Europe, being computed to be twenty miles in circuit, which makes the Fle∣mins twit the French, by saying Nous auons un Gant qui tiendra Paris dedans, We have a Glove (meaning Gant, which is a Glove in French) that will hold Paris within it; yet for number of humane souls, this great City is but a kind of Desart, being compared to London. Ant∣werp is a Noble City, both for her Cittadel, and Fortifications, which are so vast, that two Coaches may go abrest upon the Walls; She
may compare with any other City, she was in former times, one of the greatest Marts, this side the Alps: Insomuch, that Guicciardin re∣ports, that after the Intercursus Magnus was established betwixt Eng∣land and the Netherlands, the Trade 'twixt London and Antwerp, came to above twelve Millions yearly; But upon the Revolt of the Con∣federate Provinces from the King of Spain, when Secretary Walsingham told Elizabeth, that he would give both the Spaniard, and the French King such bones to gnaw, that might shake both their teeths in their heads; meaning thereby, the Revolt of the Hollander from the one, and the kindling of the Ligue in France. I say, when these tumults be∣gan, Amsterdam may be said to have risen up out of the ruines of Antwerp, which Town is come, in lesse then fourscore years, and by a stupendous course of Commerce and Negotiation, to be one of the greatest Marts of the World, being before, one of the meanest Towns of the first magnitude in Holland; but she is swoln since, twice if not thrice as big as she was: Insomuch, that she may be said to give the Law to all the rest of the united Provinces, and to smell rank of a Hans Town, or little Common-wealth of her self. Among other cau∣ses, this may be imputed to the Trade of the East and West Indies, which is appropriated unto Her, and to a mixture with the Jewes, who have there two Synagogues: yet is this fresh great Mercantile Town, much inferior to London, almost in all things. First, in point of populousness, as may be conjectured out of her weekly Bills of Mortality, which at the utmost, come but to about threescore a week; whence may be inferred, that London is five times more populous; for the number that dies in Her every week, comes commonly, to near upon three hundred. Secondly, in point of Wealth, Amsterdam comes short of London; for when Sir Ralph Freeman was Lord Mayor, it was found out by more than a probable conjecture, that He, with the 24. Aldermen, his Brethren, might have bought the Estates of one hundred of the richest Bourgemasters in Amsterdam. Then, for sweet∣nesse of Site, and salubrity of Air, she is so far inferior to London, that her Inhabitants may be said to draw in Fogs, in lieu of free Air, the Countrey being all marsh and moorish about Her; so that Amsterdam is built as it were in a bog, or quag; for in their fabriques, they are forced to dig so deep for a firm foundation, by ramming in huge Piles of Wood, that the Basis of a House, doth oftentimes cost more then the superstructure. Moreover, Amsterdam hath neither Conduit, Well, or Fountain of fresh water within her, but it is brought to her by Boats; and they wash with Rain water, which every House preserves in Cisterns, to that purpose. Touching the River of Texel, that brings her in all Commodities she is nothing comparable to the Thames, in point of security of sayl∣ing, or sweetness of water: touching the first, they say there stood a Forrest of Wood in times past, where now the Texel makes her bed, which could not be cut down so clean, but there are divers ill favoured
Trunks, and stubs of Trees, still found under water, which is a great annoyance to Ships. There are in the United Provinces, many jolly Towns besides, which may be ranked among them of the first magnitude, especially Utrecht, which hath the face of an ancient stately Town, & subsists more by her self: the rest grow great, and flourish in Wealth, Buildings, and People, by having some peculiar staple-Commodity appropria∣ted unto them, as Amsterdam hath the Trade of the East and West Indies assigned Her, (as was formerly mentioned). Rotterdam, hath the Staple of English Cloth; Dort, of the Rhenish-Wine, and Corn that comes from Germany; Haerlam hath a Charter for Weaving and Knitting; Leyden is an University; The Hague subsists by the residence of the Hoghen Moghen, the Councel of State; Middleburgh in Zeland, by the Staple of French Wines; Trevere, by the Scots Commodities, &c. but none of these bear any proportion with the City of London, who trades in all these several Commodities together, and hath particu∣lar Corporations accordingly, with many more. We will now hoyse up Sayl for France, which also hath divers Ci∣ties of the first Magnitude, as Rouen in Normandy, Bourdeaux in Gas∣cogny, Tholouse in Languedock, with the other five Courts of Parlia∣ment; as also Amiens in Picardy, and the City of Lions, and Marseilles: the one whereof, subsists by her Bank; the other, by being the chief Arsenal of the French Gallies; but none of these will offer, I think, to compare with the City of London, nor any of those Towns that stand upon the Loire, whereof there are many gentile ones. Paris I confess, may be capable of some Comparisons with London, for which she hath many helps, as being a Citè, Vilé & Universitè, a City, a Town, and an University; as also the chief residence of the French Kings, and the Parliament. But lets go a little to particulars. And first, to the populous∣ness of both Cities; They say in Paris, that the Parishes of Saint Eu∣stace, and Saint Innocent, have above one hundred thousand Commu∣nicants in them alone: and that by the last Cense that was made there, was near upon a million of humane souls, found in the City and Sub∣urbs of Paris. It may be so, but we shall find in the ensuing Discourse that London hath more. Secondly, for magnitude: 'tis true, that Paris hath the advantage of an Orbicular figure, and so is more capacious. But by the judgement of those Mathematicians, who have observed both Cities; if London were cast into a Circle, she would with all her dimensions, be alto∣gether as big as Paris. Touching the Loure, 'tis true, that it is a vast fabrick, and the like is not found in London; but it is the only Court the French King hath in Paris, whereas in London there are fower Royal Seates, with two Parks annexed to one; I hope the Bastile will not offer to compare with the Tower of London, nor the River of Seine with the Thames; much lesse I believe, will Paris offer to make any comparisons with London, in point of Traffique, and Societies of Noble adventuring Marchants,
who trade on both the Hemispheres; nor of her Provost with the Lord Mayor of London. I allow Paris to have rich Banquiers, but they are most of them strangers, and not Natives. Moreover, I think Paris would be loth to compare with London for neatness of streets, or for sweetness of site; for Paris hath scarce any verdure about her, but the Proclere; whereas London hath most delightful Fields round about Her, of a deeper greene, not so fading as that of France: and touching streets, the dirt and crott of Paris may be smelt ten miles off, and leaves such a tenacious oily stain, that it is indelible, and can never be washed off; 'tis confessed, that Paris hath waters of a singular vertue, for the die of Scarlets; but 'tis as well known to the World, what extraordinary Vertues the Thames water hath for many things. Ask the Hollander, and he will tell you, there is no such water to fatten Eeles, and all sorts of Fish. Thames water Beer bears the price of Wine, in many places beyond the Seas. And the Portugalls have found of late, such vertue in that water, that they car∣ry it away by whole Tuns, to Lisbon. I might enlarge my self further, in shewing what advantages the City of London hath of Paris, but I will suspend my Discourse till I proceed a little further, only I will conclude this Paragraffe with this one Objection, that London hath far better blood in her Veins, then Paris, I mean a greater number of wholsom Springs, Conduits, Aqueducts, and Sources of sweet waters, whereof Paris hath not so many. And now there comes into my me∣mory, a facetious passage, between Henry the 4th, and the Provost of Paris, touching those waters; which happened thus. The King had appointed the Suisse Ambassadors, whereof there were many in Com∣mission, to be lodged in the City, and that plenty of the best Wines should be provided for them; The Ambassadors having lain long upon the Parisians, and drunk daily very deep, and being at last dismissed. The Provost made an humble Remonstrance to the King, how the City had so long time win'd the Suisse Ambassadors, and their numerous retinue, which put Her in some Arreares, there∣fore he humbly prayed, in the name of the City, that his Majesty would be pleased to give leave, that a small Tax might be laid for a while upon the Water-pipes and Cesterns of fresh Waters, for the discharge of those Arrears for Wine, &c. The King pleasantly an∣swered, Ventre de Saint Gris, there must be some other way found out to do this; for 'Twas our Saviour only, that could turn water into Wine, therefore he would not presume to attempt it. Having thus rambled up and down the World, and cast some few glances upon the most renowned Cities; and having pointed before, at twenty properties, wherein London may well compare with any of the greatest Cities in Europe, we will now more particularly, treat a little of those properties, and take them all single, as they are ranked. 1. The first is, Conveniency of Situation, and salubrity of Air, wherein the wisdom of the old Britains our Ancestors, in point of E∣lection of the place, ad the benignity of the Heavens, in point of
influences and temperature, have made London as happy as any other City under the vast Canopy of the Heavens; some say, that that Ci∣ty is best situated, which resembleth a Camels back, who hath protu∣berancies, and bunches, so a City should be seated upon rising grounds, or small Hillocks; It is the posture of London; for she is builded upon the flanks, sides, and tops of divers small Hillocks, lying near the Banks of a Noble River, and being encompassed about with delightful green Medows, and Fields on all sides; and she is in so fair a distance from the Sea, that no danger of forren invasion can surprize her, but she must have notice before: The nature of her Soyl sandy, which is wholsomest for Habitation, and conduceth much goodness of Air, the barrenness whereof, is made prolifical by art. 2. Touching the second property, which is a method of strict, and punctual Government, ther's no City goes beyond her, or indeed e∣qualls her, take night and day together; for there is not the least misdemeanor, or inconvenience that can be; but there be Officers in e∣very corner of the City to pry into them, and find them out; but es∣pecially, the Wardmote Inquest, which are to be men of repute, and known integrity; They by vertue of their Office inquire, if any man outlawed, or indited of Treason, or Felony, lurk within the Ward; They inquire if the publique peace be any way disturbed, or broken; They enquire of all offences, and dammages done to the River of Thames, and make a speedy presentment of them to be redressed; They inquire after Riotors, dissolute persons, and Barrators, walking by nightertayle, without light at unseasonable houres. They inquire after those that play at unlawful Games. They inquire after Potours, Panders, and Bawds, common hazardors, Champartors, maintainers of quarrels, or embracers of Inquests. They inquire after Witches, Strumpets, common Punks, and Scolds. They inquire after hot houses, and sweating houses, whereunto any lewd Women resort, or others of ill repute. They inquire after any Inholder, Taverner, Brewer, or Huckster, that hold open at unseasonable houres. They by vertue of their Office, inquire if any manner of person, after rain, or any other time, cast or lay any dung, ordure, rubbish, Sea-coal ashes, rushes, or any other thing of noisance in the River of Thames, or the Channels of the City. They inquire, whether any manner of persons, nourish Hogs, Oxen, Kine, Ducks, or any other living thing, that may cause unwholsomness, or any grievance. They inquire, if any false Cheve∣sancers, or extortioning Usurers, dwell within their Ward. They in∣quire, if any Freeman against his Oath made, doth conceal, cover, or colour the Goods of Forreiners against the Franchises of the City. They inquire, if any Forrainer buy and sell with any other Forrainer, within they City or Suburbs thereof, any Marchandizes or Goods, to the preju∣dice of the Natives. They inquire, if every Freeman which receiveth, or taketh benefit of the Franchises of the City, but continually dwelling out of it, hath not, nor will not pay scot and lot after his Oath made, nor be partner to
the common charges of the City, when he is required. They inquire, if any conceal the Goods of Orphans, whose Ward and Ma∣riage belong to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen. They inquire, if any Officer, by colour of his Authority, do extortion to any man, or be a promoter, or maintainer of quarrels against right, or take car∣riage, and arrest victual unduly. They inquire, if any Boat-man, or Ferriman take more then is due for his Boat-hire. They are to inquire, if any pourprestures be made upon the com∣mon ground of the City by Land, or water, as in Walls, Pales, Stoops, Grieces, Doores, or Cellars; or if any Porch, Pent-house, or jetty be too low, in letting of Passengers that ride, or Carts: They are to in∣quire, that Pentises, and jetties, be at least the heighth of nine feet, and that the Stalls be not but of two foot and a half in breadth, and to be flexible, and moveable, viz. to hang by Jewmews or Garnets, so that they may be taken up, and let down. They are to inquire, if any common course of water be forclos'd, or letted to the noyance of the City. They are to inquire, if any pavement be defective, or too high in one place, and too low in another, to the disturbance of the Riders, goers, and Carts that passe along. They are to inquire after Regra∣tors, or forestallers of Victuals, or of any other Marchandizes which should come to the City to be publiquely and fairly sold. They are to inquire, if any Butcher, Fishmonger, Poulter, Vintner, Hostler, Cook, or seller of Victuals, do sell at unreasonable prizes. They are to in∣quire, if any Retaylor do sell unwholsome Victuals, or dearer then is proclaimed by the Lord Mayor. They are to inquire, whether any Vintner, Inholder, Alehouse-keeper, or any other person whatsoever, do use, or keep any Cans, stone-pots, or other measures which are un∣seal'd, and are lesse then due measure, and whether they sell any Beer or Ale above a peny a quart, and small Ale above a half peny. They are to inquire in Shops and Houses of Chandlers, and others which fell by weight, that all their Scales be right, and according to the Standard; as also, that all Yards and Ells, be of their just length, and that none do sell by Venice weights. They are to inquire, if any In∣holder do bake Bread to sell within his own House; and if any Baker of sowre bread, bake white bread to sell, and take more for the ba∣king then three pence in a Bushel. They are to inquire, if any House be covered, otherwise then with Tile, Stone, or Lead, for peril of fire. They are to inquire, if any leper, faitor, or mighty Begger re∣side in the Ward. They are to inquire, if any Baker or Brewer, bake or brew with Straw, or any other fewel, which may indanger fyring. They are to inquire, if any go with painted Viage. They are to in∣quire, if any neglecteth to hang a Lanthorn at his door, with a ndle therein burning, after the usage at the season of the year appointed. They are to inquire, whether any bring to be sold, or sell and offer, or put to sale any tall-Wood, Billets, Fagots, or other fire-wood, not be∣ing of the full assize. They are also to inquire after them, who go to the Countrey, and ingrosse any Billet, tall-wood, Fagot, Tosard, or other fire-wood, and so keep it, till they may sell it at excessive prizes,
and above the prizes set by the Lord Mayor. They are also, to inquire after Ingrossers of Butter and Cheese, in great quantities, in going into the Countrey to buy it, and after, convey it by water, or other∣wise to the City, to be sold at Excessive rates. They are to inquire, whether any use the priviledge of Freemen, being none; and to that purpose, they shall demand a sight from those whom they suspect, of a Copy of their Freedom, under the Seal of the Office of the Cham∣berlain. They shall inquire after all such as melt Tallow, contrary to an Act of the Common Councel in that case made and pro∣vided. They shall inquire after such who use any fire-presses within the City, and liberties for pressing, or dressing of netherstocks, Wollen Clothes, or other things. They shall inquire of all Armorers, and o∣ther Artificers, using to work in Metals, which have or use any Rear∣dorses, or any other places dangerous for fire. They shall inquire, if any who have undertaken to be appraysers of the Goods of any Free∣man deceased, leaving behind him any Orphan or Orphans; and the said Appraysers not having bin sworn before the Lord Mayor, or the Alderman of the Ward. They are to inquire if any Freeman buy any Wares or Marchandizes unweighed, which ought to be weighed at the Kings beam, of any stranger or Forrainer free of the City of Lon∣don. They are to inquire if any buy or sell any Cloth or Clothes in the Shop, Ware-house, or other place of any Cloth-worker; or if any Cloth-worker do receive, or harbor any Cloth, before the same be brought to Blackwell-Hall. They are to inquire, if any Carman take for Carriage of any Commodity, above the rates ordained. They are to inquire, if any make, or cause to be made, any new Buildings, or divide, or cause to be divided, any House, or Houses, or receive any Inmate, or Inmates, contrary to the Kings Majesties Proclamation, or to Law, or any Statute of the Land. They are to inquire after Hawk∣ers, which go up and down the streets, and from House to House, to sell any Wares, contrary to an Act made in that behalf. They are to inquire, if any have fraudulently, or unduly obtained the Freedom of the City. They are to inquire after Women-Brokers, such as use to resort to mens Houses, to suborn young Maydens with promise to help them to better service. They are to inquire, if any have, or use any common Privy, having issue into any common Sewer of the City. They are to inquire, if any Constable, Beadle, or other Officer▪ be neg∣ligent, and remisse, in discharging their duties, touching the executi∣on of the Statute made for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, &c. They are to inquire, if those to whom the execution of the Statute for the relief of the poor, doth appertain, be remisse in discharging their duties that way. They are to inquire, if any Executor, or others, keep in their hands any Legacy, sum of money, or other thing, given to charitable uses. They are to inquire, if any that keep Horses in their Houses, do lay their Stable dung, or such kind of noysome filth, in any streets, or lanes of the City, and do not cause the Dung-cart to be led to the Stable door.
The Ward-mote Inquest, by vertue of their Office, are bound to search into all these enormities, and to meet once a moneth, or oftner, if need require to that purpose. And whosoever doth judiciously ob∣serve these several heads, will find, there's nothing wanting to pre∣serve a City, or the people thereof in the wayes of neatness, safety, and industry, or for the advancement of Vertue, and suppression of Vice. By these particulars, with what hath bin spoken of formerly, in the Body of this Book, the Reader may observe, how exact the City of London is in her Urban Government. 3. Now touching the magnificence, gravity, and state of the chief Magistrate: neither the Pretor of Rome, or the Prefect of Milan; neither the Proctors of Saint Mark in Venice, or their Podestas in other Cities; neither the Provost of Paris, the Markgrave of Antwerp, can compare with the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London: If one go to the variety of their Robes, sometimes Scarlet richly fur'd, sometimes Purple, sometimes Violet, and Puke. What a goodly Spectacle it is to behold the Lord Mayor, and the Companies atten∣ding him in so many dainty Barges, when he goes to be sworn in Westminster-Hall; and what brave shews there are attending him by Land, at his return? what a plentiful sumptuous Dinner, consisting of so many huge Tables, is provided for him? what a variety of do∣mestick Officers wait upon him perpetually, whereof, with the Re∣membrancer, there are five of them Esquires by their places, as was hinted before? what a comely sight it is to see the Lord Mayor, She∣riffs, and Aldermen, going in their Robes upon Festivals to the Ca∣thedral Church of Saint Pauls, though they who stand not so well af∣fected to the present Government, say, that he goeth in now at the wrong end of the Church: what a goodly sight it is, when he goeth upon Easter Holidayes, to the Spittle, with the Sword, and Cap of Maintenance going before him? How his Robes are fitted for the sea∣son, as from Michaelmas to Whitsontide, he weares Violet fur'd; from Whitsontide to Michaelmas, Scarlet lined: And for distinction among the Aldermen, they who have bin Lord Mayors, have their Cloaks lined with changeable Taffata; but those that have not, with green Taffata; what great places of trust are committed to the Lord Mayor, as the keeping of the great Bridge in repair, which hath such large Reve∣nues belonging unto it, with a particular stately Seal, which of old, had the Effigies of Thomas of Becket, (a Londoner born) upon it, with this Inscription in the name of the City. Me quae te peperi, ne cesses, Thoma, tueri; But the Seal was altered in Henry the eighths Raign: what a great trust is it for the Lord Mayor to have the conservation of the Noble River of Thames, from Stanes Bridge, till She disgorgeth her self into the Sea? How stately is he attended, when he goes to take a view of the River, or a Swan-hop∣ping? and lately, what a Noble addition was it for the Lord Mayor to have a Park of Deer of his own so near the City, to find him sport, and furnish him with Venison? what an Honour is it for the Lord
Mayor to be accounted the first man of England, upon the death of the Soveraign Prince. As when King Iames was invited to come, and take the Crown of England; Robert Lee, Lord Mayor of London, was the first man who subscribed, and then the Officers of the Crown, with the chief Noblemen after him. The Recorder of London also, is pri∣mus Consiliarius Angliae, and is priviledged to plead within the Barre. The Lord Mayors of London have bin called sometime, to sit at the Councel Table, as Sir Iohn Allen was in Henry the eighths time, with others, (which Allen, gave that rich Collar of Gold, which the Lord Mayors use to wear) and the Aldermen his Brethren, were used to be called Barons. 4. We are come now to Regulation of Trade, wherein London is not inferior to any City whatsoever, witness (among others) what pru∣dential Lawes, Restraints and Cautions the Marchant Adventurers, who trade in the Golden Fleece of England, viz. in Woollen Manu∣factures, have propos'd to themselves, as likewise all other Corpora∣tions in like manner, for the improvement of that particular Trade, and preserving it from confusion. 5. Touching variety of Artisans, London yields to no other, 'tis true, that mingling with Forreiners, hath much advantag'd her in this kind; but 'tis observed, and confessed by all Nations, that though the Londoners be not so apt to invent; yet when they have got the Invention, they use alwayes to improve it, and bring it to a greater perfection. 6. Touching Corporations, Halls, Fraternities, Guilds, and Soci∣eties, London hath not her Fellow: witness the twelve Honourable Companies; out of one of which, the Lord Mayor is yearly chosen. The several Societies of those, who venter abroad in all parts of the habitable Earth, as far as the Antipodes. And threescore Companies of Citizens besides; whereunto the new Company of Coachmen, is lately added, who have their Halls, their regular Orders, and Officers accordingly; And touching all sorts of Artificers, and variety of in∣dustrious wayes to improve all kind of Manufactures, and thereby gain an honest Livelihood, and so enrich the place. London may be called a Hive of Bees, (as formerly was touched) or a Hill of Ants, which have bin alwayes made the Emblems of industry, and pro∣vidence. 7. Touching plenty, and abundance of all kinds of Provision, as Flesh, Fish, Fowle, Fruits, Fuel, variety of Drinks, and Wines, with any other Commodity, that conduceth to pleasure and delight, as well as necessity, London may glory to be as well served, as any Ci∣ty under Heaven. A knowing Spaniard said, that he thought Eastcheape Shambles alone, vends more Flesh in the year, then all the Court of Spain. Gascon Wines drink better in London, then in Bourdeaux, and so do all other, provided they be not sophisticated. Nor doth London abound with all things so plentifully, for the belly alone, but also for the back, either to keep it warm, or make it gay; what varieties of woollen Stuffs there are in every Shop, with broad Cloth equal to the
price of Silk, being come to that heighth of perfection, that some hath bin made of ten pounds a yard in price; But the Hollanders and o∣thers, have now got the art of making our Stuffs and Cloths, by those foolish giddy headed Puritans that pretended to fly for persecution of their Consciences, whereby they have done their own Countrey no little mischief in this particular, as in many things besides. But in point of plenty, it may be well avouch'd, that no Oppidan Magistrates on Earth, go beyond the Lord Mayor of London, and the two Sheriffs, for constant Hospitality all the year long: The time was, that the Lord Mayor of London feasted four Kings at once. Inso∣much, that of all other places in the Iland, those Verses of Michael, the Cornish Poet, may be most verified of London. Nobilis Anglia, pocula, prandia donat, &c. 8. Concerning wholsom, clear waters, as 'twas said before that London hath good blood in her Veins, by those many Aqueducts, Con∣duits, and conveyances of fresh waters, to serve for all uses, so she hath good Veins in her Body, by those rivulets, Springs, and Sources she hath within and about Her▪ What an Herculean work was that, to bring the River of Ware, to run through her streets, and refresh all her Houses. And what an ingenious fabrick is lately rear'd up in the Thames, to furnish the Strand, Drury Lane, the Convent Garden, and all the new Houses thereabouts, with convenient proportions of fresh water. 9. For Universality of Trade, there is no Countrey upon the Sur∣face of the Earth, no Seas that any of the Winds blow upon from the Artick to the Antartick Pole, from the rising to the setting Sun, but London by her Navigations, findes them out, and so barters, and brings all kind of Commodities; what goodly Vessels doth she send forth, to crosse the Line to the East Indies, to Italy, and the bottom of the Streights, the Turks Dominions: As also to the Baltick Sea, how she flyes ore the vast White Ocean, to Moscovy, and to hunt the great Leviathan in Groenland. How her Marchants and Factors are more reputed, and have grea∣ter priviledges every where, then any other, particularly in the huge Hause City of Hamburgh, and Rotterdam, &c. 10. In point of solid and useful Wares she hath of her own, what a substantial Commodity, and of what high esteem, all the World over is her Cloth, her Kersies, and divers other kinds of Wool∣len manufactures; together with her Lead and Tin, how she turns the first to Silk, and Cloth of Tissue, the last to Gold and Silver; what rich returns she makes of her Fish, from all the Catholick Countries? What large Ware-house, and spacious fair Shops she hath of all mercantile Commodities? And touching her Royal Exchange, those of Antwerp and Amsterdam, have but baubling Pedlery Wares, in com∣parison of hers. Insomuch, that a wager was offered once to be laid,
that Crashawes Shop alone, was able to buy all those in the Busse at Amsterdam. 11. For strength defensive and offensive, for Arms of all sorts, for Artillery, Ammunition, for Arsenals and Docks on both sides the River, for Castles and Block-houses, &c. London is not inferior to a∣ny; She hath twelve thousand Trained-Band-Citizens, perpetually in a readiness, excellently armed; which when Count Gondamar saw in a Muster one day in Saint Iames's Fields, and the King asking him what he thought of his Citizens of London; He answered, That he never saw a Company of stouter men, and better Arms in all his life∣time; but he had a sting in the Tayl of his discourse; for he told the King, that although his Majesty was well pleased with that sight at present, he feared, that those men handling their Arms so well, might do him one day a mischief, which proved true; for in the unlucky Warres with the long Parliament, the London Firelocks did him most mischief. In times passed, the City of London hath sent out strong Fleets to scoure, and secure the four Seas from depredations, and Py∣racy. And if in the year 1293. she was able to set forth a Fleet of ninety five Ships, as it stands upon Record, what would she be able to do now, if she were permitted? Moreover, If in King Stephens Raign, as another Record hath it, she raised 60000. Foot, and 2000. Horse for Land Service, how many more were she able to do now in case of necessity, that being compared to what she was then, were to compare a Gyant to a dwarf? But besides these several kind of strengths, and Arms, there's no place so well furnish'd with Amonition de bouche, as the Frenchman hath it, with munition for the mouth, viz. with Magazines of Corn, and Arms against Famine, a London is; for besides that at Leaden-Hall, and the Bridge-house, how many Halls have Store-houses of this kind? There's no place also better armed against the fury of the fire; for besides the pitched Buckets that hang in Churches and Halls, there are divers new Engines for that purpose. But it had bin wished, that the Proclamations of the two last Kings for building with Brick, had bin observed by London, for besides that, it had made Her lesse sub∣ject to casual fyrings, it had conduced much to the beauty of her Streets, and uniformity of Structure. 12. For healthful corporal Recreations, and harmless passe-times, London may go in the Van, to any place that I ever saw yet. Go and walk in her Fields, you shall see some shooting at long marks, some at Buts; some bowling upon dainty pleasant Greens, some upon Bares; some wrestling, some throwing the Barre, some the stone, some jump∣ing, some running, some with their Dogs at Ducking ponds; some riding upon Nags, some in Coaches to take the fresh Air, some at Nine-pins, some at Stool-ball, though that stradling kind of Tomboy sport be not so handsome for Mayds, as Forreiners observe, who hold▪
that dansing in a Ring, or otherwise, is a far more comely exercise for them. Within the City, what variety of Bowling Allies there are, some open, some covered? there are Tennis Courts, Shuffle-Boards, playing at Cudgels, Cock-fightings, a sport peculiar to the English; and so is Bear, & Bull-baytings, there being not such generous Dogs, and Cocks any where else. Go to the River, what a pleasure it is to go thereon, in the Summer time, in Boat or Barge? or to go a floundring among the Fishermen? There was in former times a sport used upon the Thames, which is now discontinued: it was for two Wherries to row, and run one against the other, with staves in their hands; flat at the fore-end; which kind of Recreation, is much practised among the Gondolas of Venice. The time was, that Stage-playes, and Fencing, were much used in London: The History speaks of a Play, Anno 1391. performed by the Parish Clarks of London, at the Skinners Well, besides Smithfield, which continued three several dayes: the King, Queen, and the Court be∣ing present. And of another, in the year 1409. which lasted eight dayes, the subject was touching the Creation of the World, whereunto the Court, and Nobility were invited: But those ind of Stage-playes, were turned after to Tragedies, Comedies, Histories, and Enter∣ludes; for representing whereof, there were more theaters in Lon∣don, then any where else; And it was a true observation, that those comical, and tragical Histories, did much improve, and enrich the English Language, they taught young men witty Complements, and how to carry their Bodies in a handsome posture: Add hereunto, that they instructed them in the stories of divers things, which being so lively represented to the eye, made firmer impressions in the me∣mory. Lastly, They reclaimed many from Vice and Vanity; for though a Comedy be never so wanton, yet it ends with vertue, and the punishment of vice. 13. For a stately Cathedral Temple, and Dome of devotion, the time was, that London did not yield to any City under the Sun in this par∣ticular; Saint Pauls Church being esteemed by all Nations, to be one of the eminentest, and visiblest Temple, one of the most glorious Piles of Stones under Heaven; taking all the dimensions, together with the chearful conspicuous Site thereof, being near the Center of the City, and upon a rising ground; Being also founded upon Faith's, by having a large Church of that name truckling, as one may say, un∣der her Chancel; Add hereunto, what a comfortable Object it was, to behold above twenty miles distance, round about, this goodly Structure, raysing it self above the rest, and serving as it were for a Crest to the whole City; But now this famous Fabrick, which was accounted the greatest glory of London, is become her greatest shame; For many Fortainers, (who are none of those that place any inherent
Sanctity in senseless inanimat stones) have bin overheard to say, that Pauls Church in that posture she now is, is the saddest sight, and most ruthful Spectacle upon the Surface of the whole Earth; nay, some have bin heard to say, that whereas a Stable became once a Temple in Palestine, a Temple among us hath bin made a Stable; nay, they went further, not sticking to say, that as Christ was born in a Stable, so Antichrist is like to be born in a Stable in England. The time was, that London was used to have a greater care of this Temple, when a solemn Act of the Lord Mayors, and Common Coun∣cel passed, which stands yet upon good Record, to this effect, and stands still in force. Forasmuch as the material Temples of God were first ordained for the law∣full and devout Assembly of people, there to lift their hearts, and lawd and prayse Almighty God, and to hear his Divine Service, and his holy Word, and Gospel, sincerely said, sung, and taught, and not to be used as Markets, and other prophane places, or thorow faires, by carriage of things: And for that of late years, many of the Inhabitants of the City of London, and other people repairing thither, do commonly use, and accustom themselves very unseemly, and unreverently (the more the pitty) to make their common carriage of great Vessels ll of Ale and Beere, great Baskets full of Bread, Fish, Flesh, and Fruit, d such other things, Fardels of Stuffe, and other grosse Wares, and things, through the Cathedrall Church of Saint Pauls, and some in leading Moyles, Horses, and other Beasts, through the same unreve∣rently, to the great dishonour, and displeasure of Almighty God, and the great grief also, and offence of all good people, Be it therefore for remedy and Reformation thereof, dained, enacted, and established, &c. That no person, either fie or forren, of what estate or condition soever, do at any time from henceforth, carry or convey, or cause to be carried, and conveyed through the said Cathedrall, any manner of great Vessel, or Basket with Bread, Ale, Beer, Fish, Flesh, or any other like thing or things, upon pain of forfeiture, or loosing, for every such his or their offence, three shillings four pence; for the second, six shillings eight pence; for the third, ten shillings; And for every other offence, after such third time, to forfeit ten shillings, and to suffer two dayes and two nights imprisonment, without Bayl or Mainprize, The one moyety of all which pains and penalties, shall be to Christs Hospital within Newgate, and the other half, to him that will sue for the same, in a∣ny Court of Record within the City, by Bill, original Complaint, or Informa∣tion, to be commenc'd, or sued in the name of the Chamberlain of the said City for the time being, wherein no Essoyne, or wager of Law, for the Defendant shall be admitted, or allowed, &c. Such was the Reverence, that London shewed her Cathedral Church, not long agoe, which may be said, to look now like the hulk of a great weather beaten Ship, that had cross'd the Line eight times, forward and backward, to the East Indies, and lies rotting upon the Carine: such is the condition of this stately Church, which is like to be buried shortly in her own ruines, and so become a heap of rubbish;
and then how bld London will look, let them judge, who have taken a judicious prospect of Her. Moreover, there's another Reason, that may induce London to prevent this; for if Pauls were down, She forfeits the name of a City; for all Lawyers concur in this opinion, that there can be no City, without a Cathedral Church; t'is but a Village without one, or a Town at most: therefore London hath great cause to wish, that those unlucky Scismaticks had never bin born, who first brought Pauls Church to this pittiful passe; for it may well be said, that all those casual fires which she suffered, (whereof there were many) did not do her as much mischief, as the faruous fires of some fanatical Zelots have done; as one said also of the House of Peers, that the Long Parliament was more destructive unto it, then the Powder-plot had bin, if it had taken effect. Touching particular appropriated places for the service of God. We know there were such from the beginning. As soon as Noah got footing on dry ground, he erected an Altar, which was in liue of a Church, the Patriarks had theirs; then from Altars, they came to have Arks, and ambulatory Tabernacles; and we read, what a conceit of holiness was carried towards them: Then Salomon, by Instructi∣ons from Heaven, did build a fix'd, and standing material Temple; And we well know, how highly our Saviour himself was incensed against the money changers, and others, who prophan'd that place; and what sharp reprehensions his Apostle gave afterwards to those, who used to eat and drink in those places which were appointed for devotion. That Hyper or room, where our Saviour did please to celebrate the Passe-over, and institute his last Supper, may well be thought to have more Sanctity in it, then an ordinary Chamber, considering how many holy things were done there afterwards; for our Saviour appeared in that very place, twice after his Resurrection; the Holy Ghost came down in cloven tongues in that place. Iames was created Bishop of Hierusalem, and seven Deacons were elected in that place, which in regard of so many holy transactions, was enlarged, and made afterwards a goodly Church, long before Constantine: whosoever is versed with the Primitive Fathers, knowes well how often they speak of Peculiar places, set apart to celebrate divine service; as also of set times, and that the posture must be Eastward; Among the primi∣tive Christians, those places were called by some, Basilica; by others, Dominica, or  whence the German word Kerk, was derived; by others, , by some they were termed by others, , &c. all which were but Synonyma's to Churches, or holy Oratories. One of the first Fathers saith positively, that Churches were in the Apostles time. Another saith, they continued from the Apostles time, to Constan∣tine, with whom the Roman Empire came to be Christian first.
And in all the ten Persecutions, which happened by intermissions, we may read, how that by the Edicts of the Emperors, the Oratories or Churches of the Christians, were to be in some places burnt, in others, demolished. And in the last persecution under Dioclesian, the History saith, that a great number of ancient Edifices, and Churches of the Christians were destroyed; And observable it is, that one of those Primitive Fathers, compares the Churches on the shore, to safe Har∣bors in the Sea, which surely must be interpreted, to relate to the Pla∣ces, and not to the persons only. Histories also speak plainly, how in the first and second Century after Christ, in the persecution that was in Persia, many goodly Orato∣ries and Churches of the Christians were destroyed. By these short disquisitions into the Ages of the World and Histo∣ry, it appears, that among the Patriarks, there were holy places that had an Analogy with Churches, which continues among the Iewes ever since: And touching Christians, there were Oratories, and ap∣propriate sacred places, from the very infancy of the Gospel, which served as a general Rendezvouz to celebrate Divine service all along from the Apostles time, through the three Centuries of the Primi∣tive Church: therefore they must be possessed with a strange spirit of contradiction, and prophaness, who make no account of those peculiar Houses, which pious devout souls have appropriated, rea'rd up, and dedicated to the sole service of Almighty God, but hold all places promiscuous, and indifferently proper for that use. It may justly be doubted, whether such sordid poor narrow souls, who so malign the beauty, the holiness, and decencies of Gods House here in the Church militant, will ever be admitted to behold the glory of the Church Triumphant. And now, having presumed to speak so much of Londons great Temple (than which there is not a more conspicuous Object upon Earth, except the Mount Olympus, which is said to bear up Heaven); and having with a true sense of sorrow set forth the sad condition thereof; my prayers are, that it would please God to put it into the hearts, and move the spirits of those worthy Patriots, who are now assembled to mend all breaches in the Common-wealth, to propose some way for preserving this ancient great visible Ornament from tumbling down: And there is a fair opportunity offered to this pur∣pose; for if those irregular New Buildings be questioned (whereof there are by computation, above a hundred thousand pop'd up with∣in these forty years), It would, most humbly under favour, be very proper to employ part of the Tax upon those Houses, to repair Gods House. 14. Touching a Noble Bridge, and a Navigable River, spoken of before, London is not inferior to any other City whatsoever: concer∣ning the first, what a large Rent hath it to preserve it self? what a vast Magazine of Corn is there alwayes in the Bridge-house, against a dearth? what a number of Officers, that look to the reparations
thereof, are handsomly maintained thereby, and some of them per∣sons of good quality? Touching the second, the River of Thames hath not her fellow, if re∣gard be had to the straightness and length of her course running from East to West, without many meanders, her convenient distance from the Sea, to prevent surprizals, the chearfulness of the Soyl on both sides, the wholsomness of her water, which makes the best Beer in the World, & is transported by forrein Nations for other uses; the variety of her Fish, the fatness of her mud; If regard be had also to those For∣rests of Masts, which are perpetually upon her, the variety of smaller Woodden bottoms plying up and down, the stately Palaces that are built on both sides of her banks so thick, which made divers forrein Ambassadors affirm, that the most glorious sight in the World (take water and land together) was to come upon a high Tide from Graves∣end, and shoot the Bridge to Westminster. 15. For number of humane souls, breathing in City and Suburbs; London may compare with any in Europe, in point of populousness: the last Cense that was made in Paris, came under a million; but in the year 1636. King Charles sending to the Lord Mayor, to make a scrutiny, what number of Roman Catholiques and Strangers, there were in the City, he took occasion thereby, to make a Cense of all the people; and there were of Men, Women, and Children, above seven hundred thousand that lived within the Barres of his jurisdiction a∣lone; and this being one and twenty years passed, 'tis thought, by all probable computation, that London hath more by the third part now, then she had then. Now, for Westminster, and Petty France, the Strand, Bedford Berry, St. Martins Lane, Long Acre, Drury Lane, St. Giles of the Field, High Holborn, Grayes Inne Lane, St. Iones, and St. Georges street, Clarken well, the out-lets of Red and Whitecrosse-street, the out-lets be∣yond the Barres of Bishopsgate, Aldersgate, and Southwark Barres, beyond the Tower, &c. take all these places, with divers more, which are conti∣guous, and one entire peece with London her self, I say, take all these Buildings together, there will be found by all probable conjecture, as many Inhabitants at least, as were found before within that compass, where the point of the Lord Mayors Sword reacheth, which may a∣mount in all, to a million and a half of humane souls: Now, one way to know the populousness of a great City is, to observe the Bills of Mortality, and Nativities every week. I think, there is no such Custom in Paris; but for Amsterdam, which is a very populous Mer∣cantile place, the ordinary number there, of those that go weekly out of the World, is but fifty, or thereabouts, and about so many come into the World every week; But in London, the common Weekly Bills come to near upon 300. that come in, and about so many that go out of the World, though the last years general Bill made twice as many to go out, as came in; for it gives account of fourteen thousand and odd that dyed, and but seven thousand christened; but this may be imputed (the more's the pitty) to the confusion of Sectaries, which swarm since the long Parliament, as Anabaptists, and others who use
not to christen their Children, a sad story to tell, so that there were many thousands born, which were not baptized, and whereof the Bill speaks not. Touching the form and shape of London, it may be aptly compa∣red to a Lawrel leaf, which is far more long then broad; and were London round, as Paris and other Cities are, she would appear more populous, by a more often encounter of the passengers. Concerning the length of London, take all Buildings that are conti∣guous one to another from East to West, from the utmost point of West∣minster, to the utmost point beyond the Tower, she may be well thought to be near upon five Italian miles in longitude, and about half so much in latitude, and in Circuit, above twelve miles. 'Tis true, that the Suburbs of London are larger then the Body of the City, which make some compare her to a Iesuites Hat, whose brims are far larger then the Block, which made Count Gondamar the Spanish Ambassador to say, as the Queen of Spain was discoursing with him, upon his return from England, of the City of London. Madam, I believe there will be no City left shortly; for all will run out at the Gates to the Suburbs; and for the Men, I think they are gone by this time into the Country, for I left them all booted and spur'd when I came away. But touching the amplitude, and largeness of London, whereas Charles the Emperor, to put a Complement upon Paris, said, that she might be called a Province, rather then a City, this term may bet∣ter befit London, who is a County of her self. 16. From proportions and quantity, we will now go to the quality of the persons she hath produced from time to time: whereof there have been great numbers of most gallant and generous, most wealthy and worthy, most eminent and munificent brave men, who had souls as large as their substance, I mean such that received, either their first being, or well being from Her. Charles the Quint was used to glory, that he was a Citizen of Ghent, having bin born there. Henry the Great, in answer to a Letter of the King of Spains, where∣in he had enumerated above a score of Soveraign Titles, stiled himself only Henry, Roy de France, & Bourgeois de Paris. Henry King of France, and Burgesse of Paris. But London hath greater cause to glory in this point, for Constantine, the first Christian Empe∣ror, a Britain born, was her Child. And a foul mistake it was in Him, who writ the Book of Martyrs, when in his Epistle Dedicatory he saith, that Constantine was the Son of Helena, an English Woman, (being pure British); for the name of English was not then in the World, nor did the Saxons, whence the English are derived, take foot∣ing in great Britain, but a long time after. Maud the Empress was also a Londoner born, with divers other great Kings and Princes. Thomas Becket, a man very famous in all the Catholick Countries,
and held one of the highest Saints, was born in London; he was first one of the Sheriffs Clarks, then he was Parson of St. Mary Hil then he went to Bologna in Italy, to study the Law; and at his return, he was made Chancellor of England, and Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Innu∣merable other great Clarks, and eminent Bishops, were born in Lon∣don; and of late times, Bishop Lancelot Andrews, who for his vast stock of learning, might be called, the Universal Bishop. There are now living, two great Luminaries of the Church, Doctor Wren, and Doctor Warner, born both in London, the one Bishop of Ely, the other Bishop of Rochester, a person of most acute Intellectuals, and of rare excellent knowledge. Fabian the famous Chronologer was Sheriff of London, and born there; what a number of most munificent Benefactors hath London had among her own Natives, besides those whom she bred; what a Noble useful Structure is Leaden-hall, built at the sole charge of Sir Simon Eyre Draper, and Lord Mayor of London? what a worthy Foundation is St. Iohns Colledge in Oxford, built by Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London, who was Benefactor also to Bristoll, Reading, and above twenty Towns besides? what a bountiful Benefactor was Mr. William Lambe, free of the Company of Clothworkers? what a world of charitable deeds, did he do in Town and Countrey? what a Noble soul had Sir Thomas Gresham Mercer, and Marchant, who built the Royal Exchange, Gresham Colledge, with another great Countrey Pa∣lace in Middlesex; what a notable Benefactor, was Mr. Thomas Howel, bred in his youth in Spain, and afterwards in London, who was one of the greatest Benefactors of the Company of Drapers, and, besides ma∣ny other large acts of charity, he hath left such means to Drapers Hall, that if any Mayden can derive her self from the right linage of Howel in Wales, the said Hall is to give her 21 l. towards her portion; and this to continue for ever; what a free large Soul had Mr. William Iones, Marchant, and free of the Haberdashers, who in Monmouth, the Coun∣trey where he was born, did build a fair Free School, with very large allowance to the Masters; he was Benefactor also to Hamborough, Stoad, and divers other places at home and abroad. To these two Bri∣tains, we will add a third, which is Sir Hugh Middleton, Goldsmith; what a hazardous, expenceful mighty work, did he perform, in bringing Ware-River to run through the streets of London? what an infinite universal benefit doth accrue thereby, to the whole City and Suburbs? how often did this great design take heat and cold, what faintings and fears, what oppositions did it break through, before it was perfectly finished? What a large noble Soul had Sir Baptist Hicks, Lord Vicount Campden? what a number of worthy things did he in his life, and at his death, both for the advancement of Religion and Iustice? At Campden, in the County of Glocester, he repaired, and adorned God Almighties House, and reard another for the poor, before he built any for himself; He founded also there, a very commodious Market-house, and having done many things more for the publick
good in that place, he erected afterwards, a stately Palace for his Posterity, though the hard fate of the times, and the fury of the Warre hath half destroyed it: He was also a great Benefactor to the Churches, and the poor of Hamsted, and Kensinton, to St. Bartholomewes, and Christ-Church Hospitals in London, to all the Prisons; as also to St. Laurence Church in the old Iury: He purchased divers Impropriations, and bestowed them upon the Church in divers counties; He was at the charge of erecting a convenient Session-house, for the Justices of Middlesex to meet, in the middest of St. Iohn's street, which is called Hicks Hall, and will so be called to all posterity. All these great lights he carried before him, and at his death he gave a World of Legacies, and divers Pensions to pious Ministers and others, and be∣queathed a great sum to be distributed among all his Servants. To speak of all those Noble Londoners, who have done glorious things, both for Church and State, in point of piety, stately Structures of divers natures, for the publick good, and deeds of charity, would make a large Volume of it self. I will conclude for the present, with a late worthy man, one Mr. Iohn Walter, who was Clark of Dra∣pers Hall, who, having resolved with himself, when he had attained a competent subsistence for himself and his Children, to employ the rest every year, for charitable uses, which he did constantly for many years: He built two Hospitals near London, and it was a great while before the Founder of them was known. He used to send a proporti∣on of bread to be distributed among the poor, to divers Churches; and it was not known, who sent it, till he was dead, and that he was mis∣sing. It is thought by a computation that was made, that he had em∣ployed above ten thousand pounds to charitable uses of all sorts, pri∣vate and publick, and he was so free from vain-glory, that his greatest care was to do them in such a manner, that his left hand should not know what his right hand did; And in his study after his death, there was a bag of 800 l. in Gold, with a label in paper upon it, This is none of mine, but the poor's. Lastly, for Prerogatives, Enfranchisements, Immunities, Char∣ters, and Liberties, for Hospitality, and plentiful treatments; as also for Antiquity, the City of London comes not in the arrears to any. Touching the last, 'tis true, there are some Cities in the East, that have the start of her in point of time, yet London was built 354 years before Rome, which is a fair Age. Touching the second, some call London, a lick-peny, (as Paris is called by some, a pick-purse) because of feastings, with other occasions of expence and allurements, which cause so many unthrifts among Countrey Gentlemen, and others, who flock into her, in such exces∣sive multitudes; but this must be imputed not to the place, but to the persons; for one may live in London as frugally, if he hath wit to make use of it, as in any other City whatsoever. T'is true, that the prizes of all things use to be enhanc'd by conflu∣ences, and swarms of people, which a judicious Forreiner observing in London, said, that she bore no proportion with the Iland, but might
serve a Kingdom thrice as big, and that England may be rather said, to be in London, then London in England, which made some compare her to the spleen, whose over-swelling, make the rest of the body lan∣guish; but it might be answered, that London is rather like the sto∣mack, which digests the wealth of the Land, and after a good con∣coction, disperseth it again in wholsom nutriment to all parts. Touching the third, viz. freedom and immunities, there's no City hath more. In the Raign of Richard the second, it was enacted, That the Citi∣zens of London were to enjoy their priviledges, and franchises, licet usi non fuerint, vel abusi fuerint, whether they were not us'd or abus'd, notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary, as the Lord Coke hath it in his Institutes. In the Lawes of the Land, London is called sometimes Camera Re∣gis, Reipublicae Cor, & totius Regni Epitome, the Kings Chamber, the heart of the Common-wealth, and compendium of the whole King∣dom; sometimes she is called Caput Regum & Legum, The head of Kings, and of Lawes; nay, some of the Roman Emperors in their E∣dicts, called her Augusta, which is a name alwayes of magnificence and State. And now will I take leave of the Noble Augusta, or City of London, concluding with this hearty wish, couch'd in these two Hexameters, and relating to her proportion, or shape, which is a Laurel leaf, as formerly was said. Londinum Lauri folio non impare formâ, Flore at Urbs, sicut Laurus, semper{que} virescat: London is like a Laurel leaf, may She, Be verdant still, and flourish like the Tree. FINIS.
AN INDEX POINTING At the chief Passage throughout the whole Book. A. fol. AUgusta, a name given by the Roman Emperors to Lon∣don. 2. Appellations which forrain Authors give of London. 2. Of Algate. 5. Of Amwel River brought to Lon∣don, 11. The Lord Ailwine first Alderman in England, Anno 851. 34. Of the Authority and State of the Lord Mayor of London. 35. His Attendants and Officers, with divers Prerogatives. 35. Of the ancient Court of the Hustings. 37. Austin the Monk, the English∣mens Apostle. 39. The Arms of all the Companies and Corporations of London blazon'd. 41. The antiquity of all the Companies of London. 41. Of Allhallowes Barking. 48. Of Algate Ward. 52. Of St. Andrew Undershaft. 55. Of Augustine Fryers. 72. St. Albanes, a very ancient Church in London. 301. Of Aldersgate Ward. 306. Of the ancient great Monuments in Christs Church. 311. The Antiquities of Southwark. 137. An Alderman alotted to every Ward. 340. The Abbey of Westminster,  the greatest Sanctuary. 346. Of the Court of Admiralty. 373. A Contest 'twixt the Court of Admiralty, and Westminster Hall. 374. Of Amsterdam. 339. Of Auspurg. 389. B. fol. The Britains concreated with this Iland. 2. The British Etymologies of Lon∣don. 2. The Britains were first Founders and God-fathers of London. 3. Of Bainards Castle. 5. Of the chief Banner-bearer of the City of London. 27. The Black Fryers built of the ruines of the Tower of Monsi∣quet. 29. Bishops have bin good Friends to London. 40. Of Barking Church. 48. The Bayliff of Rumford strangely executed. 56.
The common Burse at first in Lom∣bard-street. 63 Of Bishopsgate Ward. 63 Of Bethlem, now called Bedlam, and the notable deed of gift that was made thereof. 63 Of Broad-street Ward. 71 Of Billingsgate Ward. 84 Of Billingsgate some things re∣markable. 85 Of the Bridge-ward within. 87 Of Backles-berry. 113 Of Basings-Hall Ward. 123 Of Backwell-Hall. 123 The History of the Black-Fryers. 316 Of Breadstreet Ward. 318 Of Bridewell. 332 Of St. Brides. 333 Of the Bridge-House. 339 A British Prophecy, lately veri∣fied. 348 Bishop of Chesters Inne. 349 Of Bedford, York, Salisbury, Worcester-House, with others. 349 Of Bedford Berry. 350 Of Babylon, 382 C. fol, Cornelius Tacitus lived seven years in Britain. the Epist. The Character which Tacitus gives of London. 3 Constantine the Great, first Builder of London Walls. 4 Contests 'twixt the Lord Admiral, and Lord Mayor about the Thames. 14 The Conservancy of the Thames, be∣longs de jure to the Lord Mayor. 17 The Character of London Bridg in Latine and English verse 1 A City compared to a Ship. 33 Of the several Courts belonging to the City of London. 37 Ceremonies used in the Election of the Lord Mayor and the She∣riffs. 36 The Clashes 'twixt the City of London, and divers Kings. 40 No City without a Cathedral Church, and a Bishops See. 40 Of the several Companies and Corporations belonging to the City of London. 41 Corporations prejudicial to Mo∣narchy. 46 The Custom-house Key called in former times, Petty Wales. 49 Of the Crouched Fryers. 57 Of Cornhill-Ward. 77 Of Candlewick-Ward. 89 The Charter of the Styliard. 98 Of Cordwainers-ward. 107 Of Cheap-ward. 111 Of the great Crosse in Cheap. 115 Of Colemanstreet-ward. 119 Of Cripplegate-ward. 301 Of the Chappel of Jesus, hard by Pauls. 314 The Counter removed from Bread-street, to VVood-street. 319 Of Castle-Baynard-ward. 324 A Clash 'twixt the Lord Mayor and the Lawyers. 330 D. Of Diana's Chamber hard by Pauls. 3 A Description of Pauls. 7 The duty of the Lord Mayor to con∣serve the Thames. 18 Divers small Bridges in former times in London. 23 Of Drapers-Hall. 73 Of Dowgate-ward. 97 Dowgate-ward hath many things considerable. 100 Of the Dance of Death, painted at Pauls. 323 The difference 'twixt Southark and
London, in point of Govern∣ment. 340 Of the Dutchy of Lancaster and Savoy, with the Liberties there∣of. 347 Of Dorham-House. 349 E. The English converted to Christi∣anity by the Britains. 33 The Emperor Charles lodged in the Black-Fryers. 316 Of the Elms, the place of common Execution in times passed. 326 Edward the Consessors Charter to VVestminster. 355 Of the Exchequer Court. 369 Of the Court of Equity, or Chan∣cery. 365 An Encomium of the Civil Law. 377 Of the City of Florence. 387 An extravagant saying of a French Baron. In the Epist. Of the eminent Citizens of Lon∣don. 405 F. The foundation and first Rise of the City of London. 2 Fitstephen reports of London. 8 Of the fresh water Rivers that were in London. 10. A factious saying of the Lord Mayors to King James. 19 Fearful Fires on London-Bridg. 21 Of the four Inns of Court. 31 Of the present factions in Lon∣don. 47 Of Fishers Folly hard by Bishops-gate. 67 Of Fenchurch. 83 Of the Fishmongers Company. 88 Of Faringdon Intra Ward. 309 Of Faringdon Ward Extra. 327 Of Bartholomew-Fair, 328 Of Fewter or Fetter-lane. 331 G. Of the Gates of London. 4 Of the great famous River of Thames. 12 Of Grayes Inne. 32 Of Grtham Colledge. 31 The Government of London. 33 Of Knighten Guild. 49 Of Grasse-street, vulgarly called Gracious-street. 40 Of Grocers-Hall. 113 Of the Guild-Hall. 117 Of St. Giles by Cripplegate. 304 Of Golding-lane. ibid. The History of the Gray Fryers, by Newgate Market. 310 Of the great wardrobe. 325 Of St. Giles of the Field. 345 Of the Gran Cayro. 384 Of Genoa. 387 A guesse at the number of humane souls breathing in London. 403 Of the general Trade of Lon∣don. 396 Of the Gravity, and state of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen. 395 H. Of Sir Hugh Middleton, and Ware River. 11 The History of London Bridge, from its beginning. 20 The History of the great Tower of London. 24 The History of the Saxons, or En∣glishmen. 33 Of the Hustings Court. 37 Of the Holy Trinity by Algate, a famous Priory, with the great Prerogatives thereof. 50 Of St. Helens Church, sometimes a Nunnery. 70 Of the Haunce of Almain, or the Styliard. 97 Henry the eighth came in habit of a Yeoman to see the Watch. 110 The History of Cheap-side-Crosse. 115
The History of the Guild Hall. 117 The History of the Jews in Eng∣land. 120 The History of Moorfields. 301 The History of Sion Colledg. 302 The History of Pauls Church. 312 Of Houndsditch. 341 Of Hamburg and the Hans Towns. 388 fol. Of the Inns of Court. 9 Iusts and Tournments in former times upon London-Bridg. 22 Of the Inns of Chancery. 31 Julius Caesar only a Discoverer of Great Britain,  Claudius Caesar the Conqueror. 33 The ill May-day. 40 Of Jack Straw. 81 The Jews banish'd out of Eng∣land. 119 Where the Jews had their Syna∣gogue in London. 119 700 Jews murthered by the Lon∣doners. 119 Of the Jew that fell into a Iakes at Tewksbury. 121 Of James the fourth, King of Scots. 303 Of St. James Hospital, or the Charter-house. 343 Of St. James's House and Park. 356 L. fol. Of London-Stone. 4 Of Ludgate. 4 London Bridg hath two many Eyes. 20 London much beholden to her Bi∣shops. 39 London like a Hive of Bees. 41 London a Lick-peny. 406 Of Lumley-House. 48 Of Limestreet Ward. 59 Of Leaden-Hall, and the foundati∣on thereof. 59 A laudable Custom at St. Mary Spittle, for rehearsal of Ser∣mons. 67 Of Loseworth or Spittle-field, and strange Monuments that were found there. 68 Of Langborn Ward 82 Of Lombard-street. 82 Of Lothberry. 119 Of Lollards Tower. 326 Of Lincolns Inne. 344 The length of London. 404 The latitude of London. 404 M. fol. The Method of the work. 1 Of Moorgate. 5 The Lord Mayors of London had divers appellations. 34 Of the Lord Mayor, and manner of his Election. 36 Of Mart-lane, and Minchin∣lane. 48 Of the Minories. 51 Of St. Mary Spittle. 67 Of Marchantaylors-Hall. 73 Of St. Michael in Corn-hill. 81. Of Mercers Chappel. 116 Of Melitus Bishop of London. 312 Of the ancient Monuments in Pauls Church. 312 Of the Monuments in the Temple Church. 334 Of the Marshalsey. 339 The chief Monuments of West∣minster. 355 Of the Mewse. 355 N. fol. A notable saying of Count Gunda∣mar, touching the Iesuites. 9 Of Northumberland-House. 57 A new Monument of a Porter in Cheape-side. 115 Of Newgate, and the Market thereof. 317
Of the New Market in St. Cle∣ments Field. 344 Of the City of Naples. 387 O. fol. Otia Imperialia, an ancient Book of Gervase of Tilberry. 5 Of the Officers attending the Lord Mayor of London. 38 Of the old Jury. 120 Of the old Exchange. 319 Of old Fishstreet-Hill. 322 Of the Heralds Office. 326 Of Old Burn, or Holburn. 327 Of the Old Baylie. 330 Of the Clink. 337 Of St. Mary Overy. 338 Of St. Olaves. 330 P. The Proeme. 1 The Parallel. 381 Of the Posterns about London. 5 Of Pauls Church. 7 Pauls Church built partly at first, and now destroyed, by the sins of the People. 7 The passage of the Thames from her first Spring. 12 The pittiful Speech of Queen Jane when beheaded. 26 Divers priviledges given to the Lord Mayor of London. 34 Provost Marshal given the City by Queen Elizabeth. 35 The Prior of the holy Trinity at Ald∣gate, once a great man in the Go∣vernment of the City of Lon∣don. 39 Paris a Pick-purse. 406 Of Portsoken-Ward. 49 The famous Priory of the holy Trini∣ty, built by Queen Matilda. 53 The Prior of the Holy Trinity, al∣wayes an Alderman of Lon∣don. 53 Of Pawlet, or Winchester House in Broad-street. 72 Of St. Peter upon Corn-hill, and of the ancient Table that hangs there. 79 Of the Priory of St. Bartholo∣mew. 328 Of the priviledges of London. 407 The Popes-head-Tavern a Kings Palace in times passed. 81 Of the priviledges of the Styli∣ard. 98 Pauls Steeple and Church-fired. 313 Parliament kept in Black Fryers. 313 Of Puddle-Wharf. 325 A Purchase made of much Lands in Southwark by the City, of Ed∣ward the sixth. 335 Of the Prisons in Southwark. 339 Of the high Court of Parlia∣ment. 356 Of the Common Pleas. 368 Of Palermo. 387 Of Paris. 391 Q. Of Queen Hith. 322 Of the pious Queen Matilda. 345 Of the most pious Queen Elea∣nor. 356 Of the City of Quinzay, call'd the Celestial City. 383 R. Restitutus Bishop of London, ste at the Councel of Arles, in Con∣stantines time. 39 Of the Royal Exchange, and the name given unto it by Queen E∣lizabeth, with the Ceremonyes us'd. 78 Of Robert Fabian the Chroni∣cler. 81 Of the Rolls and six Clerks Of∣fice. 344 Of Rome. 386 Rome eight times sack'd. 386 Of the City of Roven. 391
S. Of the publick Schools in Lon∣don. 31 Of the Sheriffs of London, and their Election. 37 The several Courts belonging to the City of London. 38 Of the spiritual Government of London. 39 Of Sydon lane, vulgarly Sithing∣lane. 48 Of the Shaft of St. Andrew. 55 A strange accident happened in St. Michaels Church in Corn-hill. 18 A strange Tomb found in St. Mary Hill Church. 86 Of the Stock, and Salt Fishmon∣gers, and their antiquity. 89 Of the Stocks. 84 Of the Steelyard, or Guilda aula Teutonicorum. 97 Of sweet Wines. 102 Of the Standard in Cheap. 115 A Shank-bone and Tooth of a mar∣vellous bigness in St. Laurence Church. 118 Of Sion Colledge. 302 Of St. Martin le grand, and the great priviledges it had. 307 Of Smithfield. 328 Of Southwark Ward. 335 Of the Stew-houses allowed in times pass'd. 337 Of the Suburbs of London. 341 Of Suttons Hospital. 343 The strange Iudgements fallen upon the Duke of Somerset for Sacri∣ledge. 343 Of the Savoy. 347 Of the shape of London. 406 T. Of the Tower of London. 23 Of the Lyon Tower. ibid. The Tower of London delivered to Lewis of France. 24 The on the Britain, first Bishop of London. 39 Of Tower-street Ward. 48 The Prerogatives of the Tower. 48 Of the Tun, a Prison in Cornhill in times passed, now a Conduit. 77 Of the Tower Royal. 103 The Tragical end of William Fitzosbert. 109 Great Tryumph in Smithfield in times pass'd. 329 The Templer Knight arraigned in London. 333 Twenty particulars, wherein the City of London may compare with any other City. 385 V Of the Vintry Ward. 101 The Vintners of old, called Mar∣chant-Vintners of Gascogne. 103 The Lady Venetia Stanley, hath a fair Monument in Christ-Church. 311 Of the Upper Bench Court. 363 Of Venice. 386 Of Vienna. 388 W. William the Conquerors Charter to the City of London. 40 The Wardmore-Inquest a whol∣some Constitution. 39 Of the six and twenty several Wards of London. 49 Westminster first called Thorney. 80 Of Wat Tylar. 81 Of Sir William Walworth, and the manner of his knighting. 91 Of Wallbrook Ward. 83 Whittington four times Lord Mayor, and thrice buried. 103 The Weavers ancient Charter. 123 Of Watling-street. 318 Of Winchester-House. 338 Of Wapping. 341 Westminster and London com∣pared. 346 Of Westminster-Abbey, with the History thereof. 353
Of White-Hall. 356 A witty Speech of Henry the 4th of France. 391 A witty saying of Charles the Em∣peror. in Epist. Of the Wardmote lquest. 394 A witty passage of Henry the Great, of France. 404 A witty saying of Count Gandamar of London. 404 A Catalogue of Mr. Howels Works, in se∣veral Volumes. Printed by Mr. Humphrey Mosely. 1. Mr. Howels History of Lewis the thirteenth, King of France, with the life of his Cardinal de Richelieu. Fol. 2. Mr. Howels Epistolae Hoelianae, familiar Letters, Domestick and Forreign, in six Sections, partly Historical, Political, Philosaphical, the first Volume with Additions, Octavo. 3. Mr. Howels New Volume of Familiar Letters, partly Historical, Political, Philosophical; the second Volume with many Additions, Octavo. 4. Mr. Howels third Volume of additional Letters, of a fresher date, never before published, Octavo. 5. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocall Forrest, in Folio; toge∣ther, with the second part in Folio, never printed before. 6. Mr. Howels Englands Teares, for the present Warres. 7. Mr. Howels pre-eminence and pedigree of Parliament, in duodecimo in an answer to Mr. Pryn. 8. Mr. Howels Instructions and Directions for forrain Travels, in Twelves, with divers Additions for travelling into Turky, and the Le∣vant parts. 9. Mr. Howels Votes, or a Poem-Royal, presented to his Majesty, in Quarto. 10. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria, and Lachrymae in Twelves, Tumulus Thalamus, two Counter-Poems; the first an Elegy upon Edward Earl of Dorset; the second, an Epithalamium to the Lord M. of Dorchester. Parallels reflecting on the times. A German Dyet, or the Ballance of Europe, wherein the power and weakness, Glory and Reproach, Vertues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages and Defects, Antiquity and Modernness, of all the King∣doms and states of Christendom, are impartially poiz'd, by Iames Howel Esq Fol.
Parthenopoeta, or the History of the most Noble and Renowned Kingdom of Naples, with the Lists of all their Kings; the first part translated out of the Italian, by Mr. Samson Lennard; the second part continued to the present times, 1654. by Iames Howel Esq More of Mr. Howels Works, printed by other men. THe great French Dictionary refined and augmented, in a large Folio. A Survey of the Signiory of Venice, in Folio. A Dialogue 'twixt the Soul and the Body. The first part of the late Revolutions in Naples. The second part of the said Revolutions. The Warre of the Jews epitomiz'd. Sir Robert Cottons works, which he was desired to publish. Saint Pauls Progresse upon Earth. Some sober Inspections made into the Cariage and Consults of the late long Parliament. A Venetian Looking-glasse. A Winter Dream. The Trance, or Mercurius Acheronticus. A Dialogue 'twixt Patricius and Peregrin. An Inquisition after blood. The Instruments of a King. The late Kings Declaration in Latine, French, and English. Bella Scoto Anglica, or the Traverss of Warr, 'twixt England and Scotland. Mercurius Hibernicus. The Process and Pleadings in the Court of Spain, for the Death of Mr. Ascham, in Folio. Londinopolis, or a new Prospect of the City of London and Westminster. Three of all which Books are Translations, the rest his own Com∣positions.
