H665 12954228 96026
THE HAPPIEST NEWES FROM IRELAND That ever came to ENGLAND. Since their first Rebellion. BEING A TRVE AND EKACT RE∣Lation of a great Overthrovv given by the Earle of Clan∣rickards Company, Decemb. 20. being 500. foot, and 100. horse, to the three great Rebels, who tebelled lately, The Earle of Care, The great Lord Mackdavo, and The great Lord Donmadoffe Wherein is set dovvne the Number of the Cities and Tovvns, which they have taken since the Rebellion. Also the bloody Massacre which they have used to the Protestants in Clogham, three miles from the City of Carie with the Earle of Clanrickards Speech to his souldiers, and the soul∣diers Answer to the same. LONDON, Printed for IOHN GREENSMITH, 1641
The trecherous Earle of Care.
C ◆ R The happiest NEVVES From IRELAND That ever came to England, since their first Rebellion. MY Lord of Care went forth with sixe thousand Rebels, and marched to Clogham three miles from Cary and fired it, and murdered all the Protestants which lived there, that was but foure Housholds. They entred the
house of one Simon Sloper a Marchant, and ravi∣shed his wife before his face, and then hanged him at his doore: then they marched to Kilwort, a great English town, and of very great buildings, but by the way they came to Master Moulseies house, an English man, aud a trooper to the Earle of Wormod. But hee himselfe vvas not at home, for they soone entred the house, and murdered all that were in it to the number of 15 servants and children: when they had done this bloudy deed they took the old gentlewoman, and hanged her upon the walls before the gate, ripping up her belly, and so cruelly in an inhumane manner tooke out her bowels, and wrapped them about her necke, and then would have fired the house, but could not, it being all stone-worke. Then they batred downe the house, and so mar∣ched away toward Kilmouth, who presently took the towne, and batring dovvne the houses about their eares, murdering all the protestants that they could meet with, be setting the town round about, to the intent that none shuld escape there hands: thus they murdered them all in a cruell manner, some having their quarters torne in pieces, deflouring the women, and hanging their quarters upon the walls, and hanging some up by the heeles, whipping them to death, & others tare rhe flesh from their bones with pinceeres, and hanging little children upon hookes by the
throat, thus when they had searched the Tovvne in every house, and tooke armes for 300. men, in like manner dealt they with Iormoy, and Cor∣mock; for there they ripped children out of their Mothers wombes, and hanged them up, & trampled them under their feet. There lived on Marke-Davo, seven miles from the aforesaid Lord of Care, vvho had built a castle by the black-water side, which have bin many yeeres of building; for the wall was 6. foot thicke, and valted round about. Wherein he did keepe 6 Smiths at work for the space of two yeeres, making provision for vvar, & now of late hee bought all the best horse that he could get, his trechery is now discovered for upon the 20. day of Decem. he marched out the assistance of the said Lord of Care, vvith one thousand foot, and tvvo hundred horse, they marched tovvard Feather about 10. miles from him, a vvalled tovvn most inhabited with Irish, and as soone as hee came thither with his forces the gates vvere presently opened: but as soone as he vvas entred, they presently massacred the pro∣restants, and taking Mr. Lovv the Minister they cut out his tongue, fleying the skin off his head, & backe, saying, that they vvould make a Drum head of his skin, that the Hereticks may heare the sound of it.
Then they hanged his quarters on the Gates but his wife they killed not, by reason that their intent is to keepe her, and so to have her to full∣sill their Lust when they please. The Towne and Castle they keepe in their custody, and leave a strong guard for the safety of it. The other marched from thence to Clummell, a very spacious towne, it being five miles from Feather aforesaid, and they battered downe the greatest part of the towne, and murdered most of the protestants there, and got armes for a 100. men: and thus marching from thence towards Turlow, they met with that cruell and bloud-thirsty Rebell, the trecherous Earle of Care, with his forces, and so marched together towards the City Talow. But now courteous Reader, all this aforesaid being dolefull and lamentable, I will bring thee to a true and joyfull Relation. The Earle of Clanrickard having notice that the three great rebels aforesaid were marching towards Talow, he therefore caused the drums to beat up, to call his forces together, and then spake to them to this effect. Fellow souldiers and Countrey-men, give mee leave to speake some fevv vvords unto you▪ vvhich are these. The great Mackdavo and the Earle of Clare are marching tovvards Talow, intending to take the City, and to put the poors distressed Pro∣testants
to the svvord: therefore noble Countri∣men take courage, and fight vvith me your fellovv-souldier against these Rebels, vvhose delight is in nothing but to spill the blood of poore Protestants. The souldiers Reply. Most noble Earle, vvee doe not thinke our lives too deare to lose for to fight in a true and iust cause, & under such a Noble and valiant Souldier as your selfe is, vve vvill spend our dearest blood, and fight as long as we have breath to doe your honour ser∣vice. Then the drums beate up, and the Earle of Clanrickard marched towards the City of Ta∣low with his forces, which were in number 500. foot, and 100. horse, where within the space of halfe a mile they espyed the rebels forces, and there marching towards them, the Earle of Clare caused a file of men to be drawne out to play a∣gainst them, whereupon a bloody Combat did insue, and the Rebels had the worst: this btell held from 9. of the clocke in the morning till 3. in the afternoone, and in the space of 6. houtes were slaine on the rebels side about the number of 500. and of the protestants 50. whereof was 40 oot▪ and 10 horse▪ then the rebels vvere faine to flye-and it it is thoght that they are gone to renew their forces, and to have another battell with the Earle of Clanrickard. FINIS.
