H979 11467144 47780
Clavis Apocalyptica: OR, A Prophetical KEY: BY WHICH The great Mysteries in the Reve∣lation of St John, and the Prophet Daniel are opened; It beeing made apparent That the Prophetical Numbers com to an end with the year of our Lord, 1655. Written by a Germane D. and now trans∣lated out of High-Dutch. In two TREATISES. 1. Shewing what in these our times hath been ful∣filled. 2. At this present is effectually brought to pass. 3. And henceforth is to bee exspected in the years neer at hand. With an introductorie PREFACE. LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard for Thomas Matthewes, and are to bee sold by Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West-end of St Paul's, 1651.
TO THE Right Honorable OLIVER St-JOHN Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas. My most Honored Lord! WHen I reflect (as oft times I have caus to do upon the Pro∣vidence, which hath been over mee since I have offered my self unto the Publick; and upon the hand by which that Providence hath supported and directed mee in my waie; I finde that it hath made use of none to car∣rie
mee on to becom serviceable; so much as of your Lordship's favor and affection. For as you were the first that took notice of my inclination, to bee encouraged in the waies which I have followed; so your eye hath been all along upon mee therein. In my straights, whereinto my forwardness hath from time to time brought mee; I have found the tenderness of your sens, and bow∣els to bee like unto that of a Father. You have in private put to your hand, and set your heart to free mee from them; & in pub∣lick you have owned mee towards the Par∣lament, and procured an aspect from that High and Honorable Court towards mee, to set mee apart as an Agent for the Ad∣vancement of Universal Learning and the Publick Good, which I confess is an Em∣ploiment, whereunto from my youth God God hath naturalized my affections. And since this Publick designment of my Em∣ploiment, it hath been your influence upon, and concurrence with other noble and wor∣thie Instruments, whom you have quickned, which hath made that settlement, which
doth promise so much inlargement to my steps, in my future courses effectual. All this I am bound to observ and acknowledg with most heartie thankfulness unto God, not one∣ly by reason of the refreshments, which the Lord hath thereby conveighed unto mee from your hand, but by reason of the Prin∣ciple, which moved you hereunto, and the Aim which you have had therein, which I know to have been none other but the Pub∣lick; and therein the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; so that the hope which wee have to partake of the Salvation of Israël, which shall com out of Sion by a Gospel-Reformation of this Age and Com∣mon wealth, hath been the Center wherein our Aims have alwaies met. For I am per∣suaded that the ground of all the good will, of the Bountie and of the Care, which abundantly hath been bestowed upon mee, hath been none other, but the freeness of your spirit in the love of the things, which are most excellent, wherein you found mee conversant, and which you are delighted to set forward. Whence it is that I conceiv
it my dutie, to present unto your Lordship in a more direct and eminent waie then unto others, the fruits of my Negotiation, chiefly such as relate immediately unto the great Object of our Hope; of which kinde this present Treatise is a special and signal Discoverie. Therefore give mee leav to make of it a publick offer unto your Patron∣age, not onely as a Testimonie of the fore∣mentioned Obligations, by which my Spi∣rit in the sight of Christ is entirely engaged towards his Grace in You; but as a Sub∣ject of my Agencie to solicite, that by the countenance of your Autoritie it may bee recommended to such, as know what the Communion of Saints doth mean in the Kingdom of Heaven, that there may bee a reciprocation of love in the gifts of the Spirit, between us and others the Members of Jesus Christ abroad; and that the things mentioned in the Preface, as means to accomplish our hopes, which yet lie under deck, by the building up of the walls of Jerusalem in the mindes of Believers, may bee drawn
forth; and the faithful and indefatiga∣ble Co-Agent therein, beeing put in a capacitie to prepare his seed to bee sown by the working out of his proper tasks; may finde opportunities which will oblige him seasonably to sow it, by speaking out that which at present can bee but hinted, and intimated in reference to the opening of the Principles, upon which the build∣ing of the Temple in Heaven is raised, and by which it will com down from the New Heaven upon the New Earth, to bee the Tabernacle of God with men. Thus beseeching the Father of Lights to reveal more and more these glorious ap∣proaching Truths: and the Righteous Judg to give a Crown to all the labors of Love, which you have, or shall undergo for his name's sake, I subscribe my self My most Honored Lord Your truly devoted Orator and faithful Servant Samuel Hartlib.
ERRATA. In the Preface. PAg. 3. line 26. for Batemans, read Bohemians. p. 5. l. 2. f. 22. r. 2. p. 38. l. penult. f. promised. r. premised. p. 40. l. 1. f. of anie, r. anie. ibid. l. 40. f. transaction, r. transition. ibid. l. ult. f. transled, r. transacted. ibid. f. leav, r. have. p. 47. l. 6. f. partly, r. partie. In the Book. PAg. 1. line 12. deliver them. p. 6. 1, 2, 3. 360. daies are 1. year or time 720. daies are 2. years or times 180. daies are ½ year 1260. daies 12. Mon. 24. Mon. 6. Mon. 42. Mon. 42 Moneths. at the rate of 30. daies 1260. daies. p. 9. l. 22▪ f. sixtie, r. ninetie. ibid. l. 25. f. sixtie, r. ninetie. p. 10. l. 4. f. sixtie, r. ninetie. p. 24. l. 11. f. Anglia, r. Mysia. p. 31. l. 10. f. chap. 2. r. ch. 10. ibid. l. 11. f. vers 3. r. vers 2. p. 33. l. 1. f. Ezekiah, r. Zedekiah. ibid. l. 13. Zedekiah for Ezekiah. p. 34. l. 8. & 9. f. according to the supputation of, r. when wee shall reckon. p. 35. l. 15. f. Burse, r. Busse. p. 45. l. 16. f. Church, r. Christ. p. 48. l. . f. fifteen, r. is. p. 75. l. 9▪ f. lib. and, r. lib. 21. and ibid. l. 11. f. cata, r. casa. p. 76. l. ult: f. Truth, r. Turk. p. 112. f. demutation, r. deputation. p. 115. l. 7. f. usual, r. which. p. 112. l. 8. f. chap. vers, r. chap. 20. vers. p. 138. l. 8. f. was Musa, r. was by Musa.
AN Epistolical Discours, from Mr John Durie to Mr Sam: Hartlib, concerning this EXPOSITION of the Revelation. BY Waie of Preface thereunto. WHen I do reflect (loving friend!) upon the passages of Mr Come∣niu'ss Letter, which hee write's unto you, when hee sent you this little Treatise upon the Reve∣lation; and consider withal what God's waie is at present in the earth, both to∣wards us, and other Nations, and what the Contents of this book do intend to make out, unto those that read it with attention: I am much inclined to believ, that God doth intend some special advantage to his Church by the pub∣lication thereof; and that it is an effect of his good Providence towards us, to have it put at this time into our hand. Therefore let mee dis∣cours
a little with you about it;The occasion of this discours and the end thereof. that not onely the desire of our common friend, who doth engage us to this publication of the Treatise, and the declaration of our Judgment con∣cerning the same, may receiv som satisfaction, when wee shall have occasion to write unto him; but that others to whom this shall bee imparted, may have also occasion to laie the matter thereof more seriously to heart, then otherwise perhaps they would intend to do. As for Mr Comeniu's Letter which doth give mee this opportunitie to discours with you upon this Subject, the words thereof concerning this matter are tese. My Son in Law hath been away these two weeks,Gener meus per duas Hebdomadas abfuit Wra∣tislaviam missus & Bri∣gam, nihil affert praeter terrores, per Pacem, quae derelictis, & à Pace ex∣clusis nihil praeter novas Conscientiae carnificinas allatura metuitur; & prodromi non absunt. Tractatus Germanicos (de Periodicis Apocalypticis ad finem decurrentibus) en communico tibi: faxit Deus ut haec nè pereant; neque in alienas veniant manus. Sed eâ lege ut Ju∣dicium de his expromas. hujus enim eliciendi causâ nobis ista communicari voluit autor, ut quisquis legeret, judicet simul, & censuram addat. Audivi de isto libello jam nuper veram esse Apocalypsen Apocalypsin: & quod maximè solabitur (si rem acu tetigerit) quod à ter∣mino tam propè absimus. Communica quaeso ve∣stris; si quos Josephos Medes habetis; sed erit in vestratem linguam transferendum. beeing sent to Warsaw, and to Brieg, hee bring's no news but ter∣rors, by reason of the Peace, which is to bee feared will afford no∣thing but new tortures to the consciences of those that are deserted by it, and excluded from it. Nor are the forerun∣ners hereof wanting. Be∣hold, here I impart unto you these Germane Trea∣tises, concerning the Pe∣riods
of the Revelation-times, drawing to an end (Godgrant they may not bee lost, nor fall in∣to other hands) but upon this condition, that you shall let us know your Judgment thereof; for to this effect, hee that is the autor of them caused them to bee communi∣cated unto us, that who∣ëver should read, should also judg and censure. I have heard a little while ago of this book, that it is the true Revelation of the Revelations; and that which will bee most comfortable (if hee hath hit right) is, that wee are so near the terme prefixed. I praie you communicate this to your men, if yet you have anie Joseph Medes amongst you; but it must first bee translated into English. Thus much hee from Lissa in Poland, where most of the exiled Bateman's have had their re∣sidence, since the time of their banishment. And in these words I take notice, not onely of the opinion which som among them have of this book in approving of it; and of the Autor's Modestie, and Ingenuitie who sent it to him; in concealing his own name, and submitting it to
the censure of others, that by the communion of Saints the measure of light, which God hath gi∣ven to everie one may becom serviceable unto all; but chiefly of the good hand of Provi∣dence, reaching forth this Treatise unto them at this time:Observation of the Provi∣dence of God to caus this book to bee published at this time. for it is a manifest de∣monstration of the Fatherlie care of God over them, to support their hearts in their approaching trials, that they may not faint under the burden thereof. It is a true saying of the Apostle, whereunto the ex∣perience of all Saints, in all ages doth bear witness;1 Cor. 10. 13. That God is faithful, who will not suffer us to bee tempted above what wee are able, but will with the temptation also make a waie to escape; that wee may bee able to bear it. And as this is a truth in God's waie towards particular Saints, in their several occasions; so wee may conclude, that in the universal dispensation of trials, towards the whole Bodie of his Church, his cours will not bee different, but altogether consonant unto this promise,2 Cor. 1. 5. that as the sufferings of Christ abound in the Church which is his Bodie; so the consolations of the church shall also abound in Christ who is her head. So that if the trials whereunto particular Saints are put, shall bee found unto prais,1 Pet. 1. 7. and ho∣nor, and glorie at the appearing of Jesus Christ: far more shall this bee verified of the whole Congregation, and general assemblie
of the Holie ones, whose names are written in Heaven. I look then upon this book which doth open to the Bohemian exiled,For the sup∣port of the Bo∣hemian Ex∣iles with comfort. and Germane Churches, the coun∣sel of God foretold so long ago in the Revelation, and now shortly to bee accomplished; as a special cordial sent unto them from heaven, in their present affliction, and to support their hearts against the approaching visitation, wherewith God's Providence will farther visit those parts, before hee make an end of his work amongst them. And that it is now also at this juncture of time sent from thence un∣to us, to mee it doth signifie, that which is ve∣ry considerable in several respects, which I shall briefly point at before I com to speak of the Treatise it self. First then wee may observ from hence,For several uses to us also. that the same spirit who doth rais the exspectation of the Saints in these parts, doth also work the like thoughts elswhere: as it is observa∣ble, that about the time of Christ's comming in the flesh, there was much waiting for the conso∣lation of Israël, and looking for the Redemption of Jerusalem, as Luke doth intimate, chapter 22. vers 25. 38. So it is now worth our considera∣tion, that there is more then an ordinarie look∣ing out for the accomplishment of the promises, wherein the Revelation of1. To confirm us in the exspectation of the fulfilling of the Apocalyptical promises.
Jesus Christ hath caused us to hope. You know that som moneths ago, one came of pur∣pose (as he said) out of Germanie, through the Low-Countries into this Citie, to make enquirie, whether anie were here, who did look after the fulfilling of the Revelation; his design by this enquirie was, that som ground of communica∣tion, and good intelligence might bee entertein∣ed amongst us, for the better understanding of God's waies, and the observation of his foot∣steps, in working out his great work for the Churches; and to this effect hee left som books here with him whom you know, and since his return into the Low-Countries, hee hath by Letters promised a further communication with us, upon that Subject, in the name of his Col∣legue. Thus wee have had a call both from Germanie, and Poland, to entertein these thoughts; as for the Low-Countries, you know that there are manie there, whose eies are opened to look this waie; and in France I know som (though not so manie as elswhere,) whose heads are lifted up, becaus their deliverance is at hand. Nor do wee Christians onely exspect shortly som great change of affairs, but even the Jews, al∣most everie where, are also made sensible of the approaching change of their condition. So that seeing there is an universal concurrence of thoughts towards this object, wee may ratio∣nally conclude, that the Lord is hastening to fi∣nish his work in righteousness: and becaus it is apparent, that on all sides the enemie is about to
lift himself up like a flood, wee may also see it herein manifest,, that the Spirit of the Lord ac∣cording to his promise,Isa. 59. 19. is preparing to lift up a Standard against him. Secondly, this Call which is given to us from so far, doth signifie unto mee two things; First, somwhat of God's waie to accomplish his de∣sign: Secondly, somwhat of our dutie in sub∣ordination thereunto.2. To put us in minde of God's waie, by which hee will finish his work. God's waie to accomplish his design, accord∣ing to the Scriptures, is, and will bee the communion of Saints in the mysterie of Godliness, when everie member acted by the same Spirit towards God, and each to other; shall draw from him, and supplie one to another; that which hee will give to everie one, for the edifying of the whole in love: and although they have not such an exact contrivance of correspondencie setled one with another, as the politick Jesuits have in their waie; yet the Spirit by which they are led, act∣ing the same thing in them all, will make the effect of their counsels, and actings to corre∣spond, without anie special contrivance of their own; that the work in the issue may appear to bee of God, and not of men: for Sion asso as shee travelleth, nay, before shee travelleth, and her pain come's: shee shall bee delivered, and bring forth a Nation at once. Isa. 66. 7, 8. God by the Communion of Saints in one and the same spi∣rit, shall do this, by his contrivance of his own
waie amongst them; Nor shall anie gathering together of enemies (which shall not bee want∣ing) nor anie violent attempts, or destructive weapons and endevors (which will bee set afoot) bee able to obstruct the effect of this communion which will bring the Bodie of Christ to to the stature of a perfect man.Isa. 54. 15, 16, 17. Our dutie in subordination to this waie of God is cleerly this;3. To put us in minde of our dutie, in order to God's work. that wee should with all readiness of minde▪ applie our selvs to en∣tertein all spiritual motions, tending to mutual and universal edificati∣on: not onely by praiers, to strive for all the Saints; and with them to stand stedfast in the fight against all spiritual adversaries; but by counsel and endevors, as the occasion is offered to reciprocate with those that provoke us to love, and to good works, and to react with mu∣tual zeal towards them by imparting unto them the Manifestations of the Spirit, and the fruits of all the grace which God hath bestowed up∣on us; wee know not how much an occasional and small concurrence may do in God's waie, when hee is pleased to make it seasonable, and bless it; one single act of correspondence at an adventure, will do more to make his design effectual, then a whole years contrived and setled intelligence, and agencie of manie States∣men for politick designments. The third thing, which the sending of this
book from Poland hither to bee translated, and the calling upon us to communicate our thoughts to them concerning it, doth signifie unto mee; is a warning unto us,4. To warn us not to bee secure, but exspect a trial. as from the Spirit of God, to waken us from securitie; and to move us to ex∣spect, as those of Poland saie they do, both a further trial of our faith and patience, and also a gracious deliverance to follow thereupon, whereof wee shall partake, if wee hold fast the beginning and confidence of our hope, firm unto the end with joie. Wee know that no man shall bee crowned, but hee that first strive's lawfully; and that none shall reign with Christ, but hee that suffer's with him: as for mee, I cannot see that our warfare is yet, as som would have it (and to their own particular Station think it to bee) at an end; those upon that account having embraced the pleasures of brutishness, and sensualitie in this present world, have also made it a part of their happiness, to dethrone God and Christ in their ranting, and blasphemous Imagination: and so are justly given over unto a Reprobate minde; but as I have caus to griev at the dishonor which they do to God, and to the Holie pro∣fession, and at the certaintie of their endless miserie under the notion of a present perfecti∣on and felicitie; so I am awakened thereby to wait for the overflowing scourge, and the storm of Hail, which shall sweep away the re∣fuge of such lies, and the flood of waters which
shall drown the hiding places thereof. I am therefore inclined to exspect still before the times of refreshmentt (which shall com from the pre∣sence of the Lord) the last assault of the pow∣er of darkness, and of this world against the Saints; which shall bee of all other the heavi∣est and fiercest; and this I am induced to be∣liev from the Analogie, which is to bee be∣tween the sufferings of Christ in the flesh; and the sufferings of his members, under the power of Antichrist, before hee com's to his end. Christ's last sufferings, immediately before his unchangeable state of glorie, were the great∣est which befel unto him in all his life; nor was hee raised by the power of God, to sit at his right hand till hee was first laid in the grave: so must it also fare with his Bodie the Church, it must bee conformable to him in his death, as it shall bee in his resurrection; therefore the last conflict which it shall have with the Beast, shall bee the most grievous, and before it can bee raised to sit in glorie, it must in som sort bee triumphed over, and trampled upon by the world. Let us therefore not deceiv our selvs with carnal fancies, as the humor of those is, who feed greedily upon present enjoyment, and make themselvs drunk therewith; but beeing watchful and sober, let us take this call from our brethren, as a warning, to prepare to suffer with them, the last encounter of our and their enemies; and readily to communicate unto them, at their desire, the graces of the spirit,
which are given to us to profit withal, that wee may bee all fitted for the comming of the bride∣groom, and the wedding of the Lamb. These observations upon the passages of Come∣nius's letter in reference to this book, are upper∣most in my thoughts, and obviously incident to the contemplation of our present condition; and of God's counsel manifested unto us in the Re∣velation. Now to speak somwhat of this Exposition of the Apocalyptical Prophesie,Concerning the Treatise ex∣pounding the Revelation, what esteem is to bee had of it. I shall confess that it come's neerer to my sens, then anie which I remember, I have read upon that part of God's word: And to us I conceiv it ought to bee the more commendable, and of better acceptance, by how much it come's neer∣er to that which God hath heretofore made known to our own men before others: for in effect I finde that it is an abridgment of our friend Mr Mede (now with God) his interpre∣tation of the Revelation, with som additions confirming the truth thereof, and applying the same to the present State of affairs in Europe and in Asia, more closely, and circumstanti∣ally then hee did, to shew the distinct events which are shortly to bee fulfilled; hee hath grounded all upon the Synchronisms which God directed Mr Mede to observ, which cer∣tainly are demonstrable, and a true keie to the opening of the Mysterie; and hee hath taken
from him all along the chief heads of interpre∣tations, concerning the opening of the Seals, and the sounding of the Trumpets: but withal, hee hath somthing of his own, which is con∣siderable, as a more special keie, which I have not found in others with so much perspicuitie, applyable to our present times: that which hee hath concurrent with Mr Mede ought to bee look't upon as the fruit of God's grace sprung up elswhere, from the seed which was sown here, whereat wee should rejoice, as at a seal of approbation set unto the truth, which for∣merly was attested, and that which hee hath peculiar of his own, as raised upon these grounds, and applyed circumstantially, to shew the time when Antichrist's prevailing power shall com to an end, should bee look't upon (as the Autor modestly desire's us to do) with judgment and discretion; to examine that which hee saith without prejudice and partialitie; for hee doth not arrogate unto himself anie infal∣libilitie: but onely hath offered that which seemeth most likely to him to bee the minde of God in the Prophesie: whereof the truth will soon bee known, whether his conjecture bee right or no, becaus hee bring's the matter with∣in the compass of five years to bee tried by the event; which is no long time of exspectation, and whether hee hath hit right in this or no, it can bee no prejudice to us, to take warning to bee readie alwaies; for wee are sure the time is not far: Let this bee to us, a crie made at
midnight,Mat. 25. 6. behold the Bridgroom com∣meth, go yee out to meet him. As for the Mysteries themselvs,Concerning the interpeta∣tion of Apoca∣lyptical My∣steries. which are conteined in the Apoca∣lyptical visions; I have alwaies thought them to have a deeper sens then what most Interpreters have endevored to make out: nor have I ever been able to finde satisfaction in the attempts, which som (as Doctor Alabaster, and others of that strain) have made to laie open these Myste∣ries: I confess Mr Mede, and upon his grounds, this unknown autor,, hath made the visions in reference to the outward events, in their seve∣ral times, so plain, that I think no rational man can finde caus to contradict what they saie; but becaus the truth of this kinde of Interpreta∣tion doth depend upon an exact knowledg of the Historie of the times, and the Chronologie of events, since the daies of Christ and his A∣postles; and upon the knowledg of the Prophe∣tical style, which doth express harmonically the form and constitution of the societies of man∣kinde, in the civil and Ecclesiastical parts there∣of; together with the Changes incident thereun∣to,In respect of outward events, that to shew their fulfilling is not all which is intended by the Spirit. by the similitude of the parts, properties, and Changes which in their vi∣sions to them appeared to fall out, in the outward Heavens and Earth, and Sea, and things contemed therein: there∣fore
the certaintie of that interpretation is not ob∣vious to everie one; and although it might bee so fully made out, to bee an undoubted truth, that it should becom demonstrable to everie ordinarie capacitie; yet to my understanding, that would not exhaust the Mysterie, which the Spirit of God doth recommend unto us in the matter of the vision; for although a man should fully be∣liev, and bee able demonstratively to prove the truth of the Accomplishment of all the events, as this autor doth make them to mee verie pro∣bable; yet hee might fall short of that spiritual understanding whereunto this promise is made, Chapter 1. vers 3. Blessed is hee that readeth, and they that hear the words of this Prophesie, and keep those things which are written therein. I shall therefore saie, that there must bee a certain read∣ing, and hearing of this Prophesie, which bring's a blessednes with it, so that hee who read's and hear's in that kinde, is inabled to keep the things which are written therein: and as there is such a reading and hearing, so there must bee a sens, and an interpretation of that sens, which is able to fit a man for the keeping of the things which are written therein: and if there must bee such an interpretation for that kinde of hearing, then there must also bee a keie and Rule of in∣terpretation answerable to that sens, which is immediately subordinate unto the promise of blessedness; for that this bare Historical sens of the Accomplishment of the visions, is not that whereupon properly the promise of blessedness
is intailed is cleer, becaus a man may bee fully convicted of the truth of this, and believ it, and demonstrate it unto others; and yet him∣self not keep the things which are written in this Prophesie: moreover, that reading and hear∣ing whereunto the promise of a blessing is annex∣ed, must needs bee proportionate to the capa∣citie of all men, that make sincerely profession of Christianitie; but this reading and hearing, which is thus grounded upon the Historical and Chronological interpretation of the visions is not proportionate to the capacitie of all sincere professors; and therefore it cannot bee taken for that reading and hearing whereunto the pro∣mise of a blessing is annexed; and consequently there must bee som other interpretation found, which is immediately subordinate unto this ef∣fect. That which I am now intimating is this; that the Prophetical visions of the Revelation have a main matter of Mysterie in them, beyond what is here, or any where that I know by anie Interpreter directly insisted upon; for I con∣ceiv, this which is here delivered to bee indeed a true opening of the Mystical vision, as to one part of it, which is the prediction of the Hi∣storical events and Changes of things, which should befal unto the Government of the world∣lie Empire, and to the visible State of the Church therein: but besides this part of the Mystical vision, which I call the Historical pre∣signification of events; there is in the matter
presignified,But that there is a manifestation of the Mysterie of the King∣dom of Christ intend∣ed thereby, above the Historical events. a deeper My∣sterie wrapt up, which re∣quire's another keie to open it, then that which shew's the bare accomplishment of events; and this is the My∣sterie of the Kingdom of Christ, in oppositi∣on to the Mysterie of Iniquitie; for this is main∣ly to bee taken notice of in the events which are foretold, and do fall out: now hee that read's, and hear's, and keep's the things written in this Prophesie concerning this Mysterie, hee is truly blessed indeed; but except wee can read and hear the sens of this Mysterie in it, I know not what advantage the knowledg of the Hi∣storical Mysterie can bring to us further▪ then to convict us, that the penman thereof was truly inspired by God when hee wrote it, be∣caus hee did truly foretel things to com, and that the warnings, threatnings, promises, pre∣cepts, and doctrines conteined therein, deserv to bee heeded more, then the words of a bare man. And truly, although I have much valu∣ed the gift and studie of those that have set themselvs, to unfold by the observation of Hi∣stories the Mystical presignification of events; yet I could never bring my spirit much to applie it self to anie such search; becaus I found, that both in the beginning of this book, (in the place forementioned, chapter 1. vers 3.) and in the end thereof (chapter 22. vers 7. 14.) the pro∣mise of blessedness is made, to another kinde
of studie then this; and the name and scope of the whole Prophesie, which is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and a record of the testimonie of Jesus Christ (chap. 1. vers 1, 2.) doth im∣port to mee somthing more, then what is in the outward visible events; which everie ratio∣nal man, who can read Histories, and under∣stand Symbolical speeches, is able to take no∣tice of, and discern to bee fulfilled as they were foretold: therefore although, to manifest the Truth of God, the events are very useful, if not necessarie, to bee look't after; yet I am cleer, that they are neither useful to us, nor necessarie to bee known, but as they are subordinate un∣to this Mysterie of the Kingdom, and Testimo∣nie of Christ; the knowledg and keeping of which doth give us a right unto the tree of life, and an entrie thorow the Gates into the Citie. This then is the Mysterie which I look after; viz. to finde the Manifestation of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ in the Nature of man, and in humane societies so advanced, that the works of the Devil are destroied therein; and that the salvation of Israël doth thereby effectually com out of Sion, to bring back the captivitie of the people of the Lord; and to make the whole Creâtion partaker of the glorious libertie of the Sons of God; for to shew unto the eie of our Faith, by what means and waies this is to bee brought to pass in the Regenerate souls of men; and by the state of Regeneration in the outward societies and professions of believers;
I conceiv the visions were mainly sent unto the Prophet; and that it was his principal aim, by describing of them, to declare this unto us; if then by the representation of bare outward events, wee are not made capable of partaking this Mysterie, whereby Christ beeing appre∣hended in his testimonie, doth be∣com in us the hope of glorie;Colos. 1. 26, 27. all our discoveries will bee of no great advantage unto our happiness, nor shall wee reach the aim, which the Holie Ghost had in sending this Prophesie unto us: wee must there∣fore consider what the keie is, whereby the se∣cret of that dispensation, which bring's with it felicitie doth stand, is opened. I shall now briefly (till God grant a fitter opportunitie to bee larger) touch this matter onely,And what the keie of that Mysterie is in general. to let you know, that as the keie of the Hi∣storical Mysterie of the visions is the discoverie of Paralel events by Syncronisms, and the understanding of the Symbolical speeches of the Scripture, wherein the harmonie between the great and little world is expressed: So the keie of the spiritual Mysterie of the visions must bee the discoverie of the paralel perfections, which are found to bee between Christ as the head, and the Church as the Bodie, which is the fulness of him that fil∣leth all in all;Ephes. 1. 23. and the understanding of the harmonical properties of things visible, and in∣visible, wherein the correspondencie between
the outward and inward man; the temporarie and eternal natures of things; and the state of true life, as it is present in the first fruits, and as it is to com in the full harvest, are ex∣pressed. Now to finde these keies, as they are proper∣ly fitted to open the locks of this Prophesie, as it should bee our studie; so when wee have found them, our care must bee to use them discreetly. This Prophesie is not shut in respect of the matter; but yet that matter is not obvious to the capacitie of everie one, in respect of the manner of the dispensation; for it is certain, that all the counsel of God, whereby wee are made partakers of the Divine nature; if weelook up∣on the substance of the Truth, it is made mani∣fest by the Gospel, without vail, and with much plainness of speech, as the Apo∣stle saith,And the prospe∣ctive which may bee had thereof in the Apocalyptical dispensation. 2 Cor. 3. vers 6. till the end of the chapter; but here the wonderful waie, and manner of dispensing of that nature to the Church; and working out the counsel of God in all the world; as this world is to bee made subordinate to Christ and his Saints; is laid open in the Apocalyptical visions, which, although they are not covered with anie vail, which doth hide the glorie of God's work, as Moses's face was: yet they represent it onely to us as in a glass with Images, wherein the face of Christ doth appear by waie of reflexion, and
through a medium, till wee com to behold di∣rectly his glorie, face to face, without a medium, and to apprehend him in it, so as wee are appre∣hended by him; wee may not then call those visi∣ons dark Mysteries, without injurie to the Spirit of Christ; but they are livelie figures of the truth of God's presence in his Saints, and over the world, to represent it to those that have eies to see it; and to help our weak eie-sight, which may bee dazled at the resplendencie of the glo∣rie thereof; wee should make use of the prospe∣ctive waies which are offered unto us in the word elswhere; which are applyable to these vi∣sions, either as keies to unlock the dispensation of the Mysterie, conteined therein; or rather as directing and multiplying glasses, through which our understanding may bee led, and enlarged to reflect upon the spiritual objects, properly so called, which concern the state of the Kingdom, which is inwardly everlasting in it self, and to the Reasonings of men, invisible, and incomprehensible. Now the prospective waies to bee made use of, for the discoverie of this Mysterie are of two sorts; som relate unto the Matter it self,Which is of two sorts. conteined in the visions; som to the dispensation of that mat∣ter by waie of vision; the waies relating to the matter it self are the cleer, and universal Rules of Scriptural and Prophetical interpretation; and the waies relating to the dispensation of the Mysterie by waie of vision, are the special rules
of Interpretation leading us to take notice of the peculiar characters and circumstances of each vision; as they are subordinate unto the Myste∣rie of the Kingdom, which is administred by Jesus Christ unto the end, and in the end of this world. If I should enter upon these Subiects at large, you may perceiv that I would bee obliged to write, not a brief epistolical discours, as now my purpose is, but a whole Treatise: therefore I shall onely give you the summarie heads of that which might (and somtime must) bee more largely spoken to: that by the hints which shall (God willing) bee suggested, you may exer∣cise your thoughts, to dive into the Mysterie by your self, as the Lord shall guid you: for none of us can profit in these things any further then God's Spirit doth lead us forth, to meditate through faith upon Christ; and to improve pra∣ctically our talents about the work of the My∣sterie of our union with him. Thus then in reference to the matter,The Rules of Interpretation, relating to the Matter, as it is a scriptural Prophesie. the universal Rules of Prophetical Interpretation are ge∣nerally known to bee these. The first, that wee must pro∣phesie according to the Analogie of Faith. Rom. 12. v. 6. The second, that wee must keep the form of sound words delivered in the Scriptures, 2. Tim. 1. 13. The third, that wee must analyse, that is, re∣solv
and divide the text aright, 2 Tim. 2. 15. and to the effect that wee may bee able to do this, according to the minde of the Holie Ghost, the Apostle Peter tel's us: 2 Petr. 1. 20. that wee must not make the Scriptures speak in a private sens; that is, wee must not analyse and inter∣pret them so, as if the Prophesies thereof did re∣late onely to the particular occasions, and cir∣cumstances of times, of places, and of persons, in, by, and to whom they were at first uttered: and the ground why they may not bee so taken; but must bee understood in a more publick, com∣mon, and general sens, is given by the Apostle▪ vers 21. becaus saith hee, the Prophesie came not by the will of man; that is, it was not anie par∣ticular chois, or inclination of humane reason∣ing which brought forth the prophetical (that is the scriptural) word, but they were moved by the Holie Ghost, that is, the universal Spirit (whose wisdom is above all private concernments; and doth penetrate through all beeing from the cen∣ter to the circumference) did put words in their mouth which they did utter, and therefore these words must bee understood as universally, and abstractedly from particular concernments, as they were meant by the Spirit, who delivered them unto the Prophets, as for instance; when a Law was given for oxen that did tread out the Corn, that they should not bee muzzeled; the Apostle tel's us, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 10. that the mean∣ing of the Law-giver was not to take care for Oxen, but that this was said for man's sake: So
the Apostle, Gal. 4. vers 21. till the end, doth according to this Rule, interpret the Historie of the Son of the bondwoman, who was to bee cast out with her Son, who could not bee heir with the son of the free woman: and by this Rule, the dark speeches;Mat. 2. 15. 23. I have called my son out of Egypt, and hee shall bee cal∣led a Nazareth, &c. will becom plain. These Rules in their use are complicated,The right use of these Rules. and becom one pro∣spective of the sens, although their Notions bee thus distinguished; therefore in their applications to the Scriptures, if they do not go hand in hand together, wee shall never reach the sens thereof, nor bee able to divide the word, according to the spiritual rationalitie thereof, nor to shew the division thereof demonstrably, either to our own, or other's just satisfaction; and truly the want of humilitie, and ingenuitie, to seek after the full knowledg of these Rules; and the neglect of the right use of them, in the knowledg which wee have thereof: together with the presumptuous rashness and confidence, by which wee are hurried to determin all things, according to our own self-conceited notions and knowledg; which wee ambiti∣ously strive with tooth and nail to maintein,The evils attend∣ing the non-ob∣serving of them. is the caus of all our darkness and confusion in matters of Divinitie. Here again, if I should enter upon this Sub∣ject, to shew how a demonstrative scriptural
Anaysis, by the spiritual use of right reason, is atteinable, and will bee the onely waie, (next to the gracious and immediate illumination of the spirit, writing the Law in the hearts) to compose our controversies, to end our needless and sinful waies of disputing, and to banish out of Christ's Church, the high conceit of our Do∣ctoral school-Divinitie; if (I saie) I should enter upon these thoughts, you see that not a Treatise onely, but a volume should bee written thereof to do it satisfactorily; but I am resolved not to ingulf my self beyond the scope of this pre∣sent discours, which tend's onely to point at matters, that you may bee stirred up, to think upon them by your self: therefore thus much shall suffice for the finding of the universal keie of all prophetical Mysteries, as they are ratio∣nally discoverable in the Scriptures; yet above this, though not without it, there is a neerer pro∣spect to bee had of the Mysterie in the Spirit,That there is a neerer prospect of the Mysterie of the Kingdom to bee had, then by these Rules. Colos. 2. 3. which without such a disquirie doth lead us there∣into. This neerer prospect is the inward Testimonie of Jesus, in whom as in the fountain are hid∣den all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledg, and who is to all that believ in him the immediate wisdom and the power of God.1 Cor. 1. 24. Therefore the Angel who brought the great visi∣on of the Marriage of the Lamb unto John (who thereat was soRevel. 19. 10.
ravished that hee intended to have worshipped the Angel) put's him in minde (to take him off from giving him anie divine worship) that hee was no more but one of his equals, who had the Testimonie of Jesus; for (saith hee) the Te∣stimonie of Jesus is the spirit of Prophesie. Such then as have this Testimonie dwelling in them, have this Spirit; and by this Spirit they may bee led (if God bee pleased so to carrie them) a neerer waie then this is, to see in Jesus himself the whole Mysterie, and to partake of it as from him, in the wisdom and power of God; yet this must bee noted, that although they should bee admitted to this neerer waie for som special fits; nevertheless they shall still bee led so, as that their Testimonie must bee liable (in case of doubt proposed by others, or incident to them∣selvs) to bee examined by the Testimonie of the Apostles;Yet not so as not to bee liable to bee tried by these Rules. and their Spirit must bee subject to bee tried not onely by the Spirit which was in the Apostles, Pro∣phets and Evangelists. 1 John 1. 3. and chap. 4. 6. and John 17. 20 but by the spirit which is in their brethren the Prophets of these times, who have the testimonie of Jesus no less then they. 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32. Here then to com neerer by the address of these Rules, to the prospect of the Mysterie of the Kingdom, as it is represented in the Revelation, let us make use of the keie which the Angel hath given us, which is that wee should observ in
the peculiar circumstances of the matter, and scope thereof, and in all the characters of each manifestation; the special relation which they have to Jesus, to bear witness of him; for so much as each dispensation by it's peculiar Cha∣racters, shall bee found to speak of this testimo∣nie, so much it doth reveal unto us of the My∣sterie of godliness. If then wee ought not to proceed without an eie to our fore-mentioned Rules (for although, as I have already hinted, the testimonie of Jesus in our Spirit, is the Spi∣rit of Prophesie, which may somtime in the en∣lightned frame of a believing soul swallow up all the rational Acts of contemplation by a di∣rect intuitive representation of the light of life in Christ; yet that Testimonie is neither in it self inconsistent with, nor in the orderlie waie of declaring it unto others, to bee separated from the prospective of the Mysterie, which is attein∣able by the Rules of scriptural Interpretation) if then (I saie) wee ought not to put these Rules out of our eie; then let us take up, and carrie along with us, as the ground of our faith, the Rule unto which, in our apprehension, all these Pro∣phetical visions in their Mystical circumstances are to bee made proportio∣nate,What the grand princi∣ple of our Faith is, con∣cerning Christ, to which all the Interpretation of these visions must bee made proportionate. which is that Apo∣stolical Testimonie of the Mysterie of Godliness, which hee cal's great and without all Controversie in 1 Tim. 3. 16. That
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spi∣rit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glorie: to these heads then of the knowledg of Christ, which in plain, proper, and significant words express the summe of all, that is to bee known of him; our sens of this whole Prophesie, and of all the parts thereof must bee proportionate; so that when wee look upon the visions, wee must cast our eie at the same time, to observ, how both in the whole, and parts that which is offered therein, is all along relative here∣unto. If therefore you will first look upon the whole in the bulk of the matter,What to bee look't upon in the Prophesie, to finde the pro∣portion it hath to that princi∣ple. and scope of the Pro∣phesie; and in the general con∣texture, and tenor of the visi∣ons thereof; you shall finde no∣thing els mentioned therein; but what is directly tending to make out the heads of this mysterie of God in Christ, that hee may bee known more and more fully unto the world; till hee bee so fully revealed that all the earth shall bee filled with the know∣ledg of his name, even as the waters that cover the Sea. For by the contexture of the Apoca∣lyptical visions it is not onely demonstrable, that this promise shall bee accomplished; but more∣over, the waie how it shall bee brought about is plainly discoverable. Now the Bulk of the matter and scope of everie
book rationally written, may bee gathered ordinarily from the Ti∣tle,How the mat∣ter and scope of everie rational discours is to bee observed, and found out. the Preface, the Conclusion, and the main heads of matters hand led therein, if their con∣texture and coherence bee obser∣ved with a respect unto their main scope. Let us then look briefly upon these things, in this book, to see what light they will afford us. The Title tell's us, vers 1. that the book con∣tein's a Revelation of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ then is the subject-matter whereof it speak's; and to make him manifest is the scope of the book; for it is called a Revealing of him, and that this matter and scope may bee the more heeded; to this title of the book, three things are further added,Concerning the Title of the book, shewing the matter and scope thereof. who the Au∣tor of this Revelation of Christ is: to what use it is given him: and by what means it is put forth to this use. The autor of it is God, which God gave him, which add's to the matter and scope an obligation of belief, upon a discoverie of divine properties to bee seen therein. The use for which God gave it to Christ is; to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly com to pass, which is a neerer scope re∣lating to us, as wee are obliged to respect the knowledg of the glorie of Christ. The means by which the manifestation of
Christ is put forth to this use are, that hee sent and signified it by his Angel unto his Servant John, by all which wee see, that here nothing is aimed at, but the Mysterie of godlines spoken of by Paul, and our Salvation in partaking of the knowledg thereof. Next to the Title the Preface is observable it extend's from vers 2. till 8.Concerning the Preface shewing the same. and doth address the book, either generally to all, or particu∣larly to the seven Churches. The general preface tell's us. First, what John did in declaring this Reve∣lation, viz. hee bare record of the word of God, and of the Testimonie of Jesus, and of the things which hee saw. vers 2. for the word of God brought with it to the ears of his minde, the Te∣stimonie of Jesus; and that Testimonie was clothed, and represented to his eies by the things which hee saw: and of these as an ear and eie-witness of the Manifestation of Christ, hee did bear record. Secondly, it tell's us of what use and Impor∣tance this record of John is, to all that read and hear, and keep the things declared therein; viz. it will make them blessed. v. 3. all which is again fully relative to the fore-mentioned Myste∣rie of Godliness, and our Salvation thereby. The particular Preface to the seven Churches, tell's us: that this book was peculiarly inscribed and sent unto them by John; in the name of the Father, of his seven Spirits, vers 4. and of Jesus Christ, who is described.
First, by the properties and effects of his comming into the flesh, which were to bee, First, the faithful VVitness (viz. of the Father's wisdom, Truth, Power, and love.) Secondly, the first begotten of the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the earth (viz. by suffering and rising again; and receiving the Kingdom in that nature which suffered and ose again.) Thirdly, to shew his love to us, who loved us, by redeeming us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, v. 5. and by exalting us to a glorious estate; and hath made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father: for which wee are bound to give him glorie and prais; to him bee glorie and honor for ever and ever. Amen. vers 6. Secondly, hee is described by the properties and effects of his comming again from heaven to judgment, wherein hee shall manifest him∣self as man to all men, even to those who have pierced him. vers 7. and as God blessed for ever and almightie. Vers 8. Upon this Preface and address of the book (wherein wee see nothing but what is most ful∣ly consonant to the fore-named Mysterie) doth follow the Narrative of the visions from vers 9. of chap. 1. till vers 6. of chap. 22. 8. and thereup∣on the conclusion of the book doth shut up the visions, declaring in chap. 22. First,Concerning the Conclusion which doth speak still the same matter and scope. the certaintie of the things conteined there∣in, vers 6. with the im∣portance and use thereof, vers 7.
Secondly, the effect which the manifestation thereof wrought upon John, viz. that it moved him to such admiration, that hee was inclined to worship the Angel, vers 8. but that the Angel forbad him to do so, becaus hee acknowledged himself to bee nothing more then they who should keep the sayings of this book. v. 9. Thirdly, the command which hee received, not to seal the Prophesies of this book, and the reasons wherefore, v. 10. till 16. Fourthly, the Autoritie of this Prophesie is held forth in the conclusion. 1. By the Autor thereof who is Christ. vers 16. 2. By the Approbation of the intent thereof, which it hath from the Spirit, from the Bride, from all believers, and from all that desire the good things promised therein. v. 17. 3. By the perfection thereof which is such, that nothing may bee added to it, nor taken from it. vers 18, 19, 20, 21. By all which wee see that the matter and scope of this Prophesie, as to the Bulk thereof, is none other, but to set forth the glorie of Christ, as manifested in the flesh, and justified in the Spi∣rit; as seen of Angels, and preached unto the Gentiles, as believed on in the world, and ex∣alted by the perfection of his Church, (which hee filleth with his glorie) unto the fulness of glorie, both in himself, and in all his members. Wee conclude therefore, that the whole My∣sterie of Godliness is intended here to bee ma∣nifested
in respect of the waie, by which it is to bee carried on unto the end of the world, and fully accomplished at the end thereof, by the de∣struction of the enemies of that Kingdom, which hee erected in the nature of man, over the whole Creätion, by the renewing of all things for the elect's sake, to put them in full possession thereof, as is promised, Revel▪ 21. 5, 6, 7. and by uniting them to God for ever, Revelations 22. 4. 5. This beeing the full intent and purpose of the Prophesie;Concerning the pars of the matter, as they reach the main Scope. let us now briefly look upon the heads of matters handled therein, to see how suitable the particulars are to reach this main aim, and bow this design is thereby made known to bee carried on. The things handled in the Prophesie are of three kinds, as they are in the first vision by Christ himself commanded to bee written,The division of the book. chap. 1. vers 19. Write (saith hee) the things which thou hast seen; and the things which are; and the things which shall bee hereafter. The things which hee had seen are written, Chp. 1. The things which then were, are written in chap. 2. and 3. And the things which should bee afterward are from chap. 4. till chap. 22. vers 6. The things which John saw in chap. 1. are
Christ's presence with his Churches, revealed in the first vision, whereof the properties shew him to bee. First the Mediator and High-Priest of the Churches,The substance of the first vision. admini∣string the affairs thereof in things perteining to God, by his walking in the midst of the golden Candlesticks. Secondly, the King who hath all power to support the Rulers thereof; as holding the se∣ven Stars of the Churches in his right hand. Thirdly, the Prophet of the Churches, who dispenseth the word of God unto them, which as a two-edged sword com's out of his mouth. chap. 1. vers. 12. till 17. These are the chief properties of his presence re∣lating to the Churches, which are heightned with other circumstantial perfections of his head, eies, feet, and whole countenance, &c. and withal, there are other properties of glorie expressed, which relate to his person in himself considered; by which hee is manifested to bee the first and the last, hee that was dead and is alive, and living for evermore, and having all power of hell and death. vers 11. 17, 18. This vision then tend's cleerly, to set him forth in his Mediatorie office by the properties of his inherent and relative glorie. The things which then were, are the seven Churches under Christ's What Christ's intent in the seven Epistles written to the Churches is, and how it is gathered from the matter and words of them.
care and administration, which are set forth in the seven Epistles, which by Christ's ap∣pointment and inditement are written unto them, in Chap. 2. & 3. wherein I conceiv, that under the Characters of perfection, and imper∣fection given to the Churches, and under the threatnings and promises, together with the ad∣monitions, reproofs, exhortations, and com∣mandements annexed thereunto; all the de∣grees, both of the defection from Grace, and of the progress in Grace, which our nature is capable of; together with the changeable con∣ditions, under which the Churches should bee, till the Marriage of the Lamb com to pass, are set forth. For if wee should call to minde the Rule of scriptural interpretation, heretofore mentioned; that no Prophesie is of private in∣terpretation; it will appear from the words of the text, that these Epistles are by Christ in∣tended, not onely to those particular Churches, or to the Angels thereof alone, which are named; but to all the Churches, which then were elswhere in the world, and which should bee in all ages till his second comming; and to all the men of any spiritual understanding that should hear thereof till the end of the world. Becaus it is not onely certain that Christ still hold's the seven Stars in his right hand, and walk's between the seven Candlesticks, and speak's unto them; but it is evident by the mat∣ter of the promises, that they are universally ap∣pliable unto all the professors, in all ages, who
shall overcom, and bee faithful unto the end and the peculiar admonitions at the close of everie Epistle do intimate no less; for to my understanding these words, Hee that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches; doth speak this much; that others, even all who ever should hear the tenor of these Epistles, ought to think themselvs spoken to, and concerned therein; although they should bee no visible members of these particular Churches. For what els can bee the meaning of that expression, hee that hath an ear; but that everie one should take that to himself which is said of and to these? And then if wee observ the expression to run in the plural number; what the Spirit saith unto the Churches, this will make it yet more manifest; that these seven are here put in stead of all: for no doubt the Spirit then spake effectually, and doth still speak to more Churches then to these: and therefore wee may conclude, that the things spoken off to them are taken as relative unto all, both men and Churches, not at that time onely, but at all times, so long as the seven Candlesticks should bee on earth, and the Spirit hath a voice to speak unto them; for to daie if you will hear his voice, out of Psal. 95. was not onely meant for that daie, but for this also, as the Apostle make's it plain, Heb. 3. If then the narrow limits of this dis∣cours would give mee leav; it might bee made out, that in the cases of these seven Stars and Churches as here they are described; all the va∣rieties
of the conditions of Professors, and all the fundamental defects of Church-societies, in all the Churches which have been since the Apo∣stle's times, are set forth; and that in the pro∣mises made unto them, all the degrees of perfe∣ction atteinable in this life by single believers, or Societies, are expressed; but this would bee a matter of inlargement beyond my present pur∣pose: I shall therefore leav it till another season; onely this may bee further observed as a transla∣tion from this first to the second vision:The difference of the first and second vi∣sion. that in the first, John saw the Administration of Christ's Kingdom, as then it was on earth: but in the following vision which begin's chapter 4th, hee is taken up from earth into Heaven, to see the administration of the Kingdom there also, and from thence how it should bee managed over the whole world for the Churche's sake in time to com: So that wee ought to take notice that the Manifestation of Christ, and in him the Mysterie of Godliness doth fill not onely the Churches on Earth, but the Church also in Heaven; and that God by him, as hee is in the Church, both in heaven and earth, doth govern the world for Christ's interest, towards the fulfilling of his own coun∣sel; which tend's mainly to reveal the glorie of Christ over all, and the felicitie of those that partake with him in his glorie; as also by what means the world is subdued under him, and conquered by him for the good of his Church;
for this is the issue of all, as in the close of this Prophesie doth appear by the coming down of the New Jerusalem from Heaven, and the making of all things new, to give unto the Saints their inheritance. The second vision then doth shew distinctly four things. First,The substance of the second vision. what the frame and con∣stitution of the Church in Hea∣ven is; How it is ordered round about the throne of God, and set in his presence that it should take notice of the passages of his glorie, to acknowledg and declare the same. chap. 4. Secondly, what the administration of affairs in heaven, and Government of the Church is over the world; how the decrees and coun∣sels of God, and by whom they are brought to an issue? Here it is shewed unto the Prophet; that the whole administration of the govern∣ment is put into the hand, and upon the shoulder of Jesus Christ alone; who by the Sacrifice of himself, as of a lamb without spot, did merito∣ously purchase to himself this honor; and by his seven eies of wisdom, and seven horns of al∣mightie power, is alone able to discharge so great a Trust, as to open all the Seals of God's decrees in their due times and seasons, concern∣ing the government of the whole world for the good of his Church. chap. 5. Thirdly, what changes are brought forth in the affairs of the world, and what the condi∣tion
of the Church and Saints is therein; by the opening of six of the Seals, where is shew∣ed, how after the preaching of the Gospel through the world; great troubles and terrible wars arise in the earth amongst men: in which the witnesses of Christ are slain, and lie as sa∣crifices at his Altar; but they are comforted with the hope of just vengeance to bee exe∣cuted upon the earth for their sakes, after a sea∣son; and the enemies of Christianitie are ter∣rified at the beginning of the execution of Christ's wrath against them chap. 6. And lest the Judgments which were to bee executed against the enemies, should take hold of the friends of Christ; there is a careful Provision made for the preservation of these from danger, and the Hopes of future glorie are assured un∣to them by the first fruits thereof. chap. 7. Fourthly, what the destruction is which at the opening of the seventh Seal is brought upon the world; and what the glorie and settlement is, which is brought unto the Church of Saints therein: for the seventh Seal doth contein, and produce all what ever doth follow till the end of the Revelation. Here then seven Angels with seven Trumpets, are appointed to sound and declare the Judgments of God over the Earth, which accordingly are executed, where the four first trumpets are remarkably distin∣guished from the three last; becaus to the last three, a warning of great wo is promised by an Angel over the inhabitants of the Earth. As
for the four first; they all tend to deprive the world of the third part of the Creatures, which are great comforts to the life of mankinde; as of trees the third part, and of all green grass, which in proportion may bee the third part of lesser plants; the third part of the Sea, and of Creatures living therein, and of the ships that sail thereon; the third part of the Rivers and fountains of waters; and the third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and of the light of the daie and night: where wee may take notice of a gradual progress from the lesser to the greater judgments, from earth rising up to heaven: and from the effects to the causes. Chap. 8. As for the woes, the first of them by Locusts is a tor∣menting judgment; not putting men to death, but vexing them: so that they should seek death and not finde it: and the second of them by hors∣men is a destroying judgment, by which the third part of men on earth are cut off. Chap. 9. Thus then by the second vision is shewed what in heaven is sealed in the hand of God, and what from thence is published to all the world; by the progress of the Gospel; by the sufferings of the Saints and their comforts; and by the Judgments befalling to the world for their hatred to the Gospel: for their Idolatrie, and for their other sins of Murder, witchcraft, fornication and theft: of which they repented not: and therefore the third wo is to bee brought upon them, when the seventh Angel shall sound: for at the time of his sounding,
there shall bee to time of forbearance of anie more; but the full mysterie, both of wrath against the wicked, and of Mercie to the god∣lie, shall bee fulfilled towards the world, and towards the Church, both in heaven and earth. Here then to shew this,Concerning the third vision. the third and last vision is given to the Prophet; which hee again re∣ceiveth on earth by the hand of the mightie An∣gel, which come's from heaven with the open book; and stands both upon the Sea, and upon the earth where I observ▪ First for a Translation from the two former to this last vision; that as there are but three substantial differences of things revealed to the Prophet:And wherefore the whole Book is to bee reduced to three visions. so there are but three substantial diversi∣ties of places mentioned, where they are revealed, and three main changes in the frame of his Spirit in receiv∣ing them. The first substantial matter of vision is Christ's administration of his offices on earth amongst his Churches. The second is his ad∣ministration of his offices in Heaven, over all the world, to propagate and preserv his Church: And the third is his administration both in Hea∣ven and earth, to make an end of all wickedness in the world, and to perfect the glorie and hap∣piness of his Church; each of these matters are shewed to the Prophet, in the places where they were chiefly to bee translated; for to leav the
sight of the first hee was on earth, as amongst men: at the sight of the second, hee was in Heaven, as in the presence of God, and of the Saints perfected, and of Angels. At the sight of the third hee is on earth again; but so, as communicating still with Heaven, and look∣ing into it back again, as one com down from thence, and having still a relation to it. The frames of his spirit appear to mee diversified su∣tably unto these matters and places. For in the first vision hee is meerly passive, as a dead man to bee quickned. In the second hee is Actively passive (as I may so say) that is, as one concern∣ed in the businesses, which are transacted: hee is an inquisitive observer of the passages thereof. And in the third hee is effectually emploied as a coagent, to help to fulfil the Mysterie of God by the spirit of Prophesie: and in each of these Manifestations Christ is represented to him, su∣tably to the administration which is revealed. In the first as a Man▪ in dealing with men; in the second, as a Lamb offered up to God in deal∣ing with God; and in the third, as a mightie Angel, in dealing with Satan and his Angels, and with the powers of darkness in the world. Secondly, for the opening of the matter of this vision,And what the summe of the third vision is. I observ, that the summe of all is, to shew when and how the Mysterie of God, which hee hath spoken by the Prophets should bee finished; and to shew
this. First two means are used to lead John to the knowledg thereof: then secondly, the thing it self is summarily related, by word of mouth un∣to him, and afterward thirdly it is represented in several visions. The means leading to the know∣ledg of the finishing of the Mysterie, are two. First, an open little Book inable's him to pro∣phesie. Chap. 10. Secondly, a Reed given him like unto a Rod, to measure the Temple, the Al∣tar and those that worship therein. The summarie relation of the whole business by word of mouth, doth concern the time of the treading of the utter court under foot, the power of prophesiing given to the two Wit∣nesses during that time; the war which the Beast shall make with them while's they pro∣phesie, and the issue of that war set forth in the circumstances of their death and resurrection; and that which immediately doth follow there∣upon, both in earth and in Heaven. In earth, there was an earthquake which made the tenth part of the Citie to fall, and killed seven thou∣sand men, and frighted the rest. The second wo doth pass; and the seventh Angel doth sound his Trumpet. In Heaven there is great joie and and thanksgiving offered unto God, becaus hee hath taken the Kingdom to himself, and doth reign over the Kingdoms of the world, to give rewards unto his servants. chap. 11. Hitherto the whole Series of matters concern∣ing the Mysterie of God, hath been related in plain terms; to shew the things by which it
should bee accomplished: now followeth the description of the visions; by which the parti∣culars of the things summarily mentioned in this Narrative are more at large reveled: whereby the Prophet is made to understand concerning the Mysterie of God (which is, Christ in the Church. Ephes. 5. 32. or which is all one, Christ in us the hope of glorie. Colos. 1. 27.) what the state of the Church was in Hea∣ven at that time;The visions shewing the fulfilling of the Mysterie of God have a respect to four times. and what it should afterward bee on earth, during the time of the Churche's abode in the Wilderness; during the time of her comming out of the wilderness; and during the time of her Reign over the earth, as the Spous of the Lamb with her bride∣groom. At that time the temple of God in Heaven beeing opened,1. Before she Church fli's into the Wilder∣ness. and the Ark of the Testament therein bee∣ing seen; the Church as shee was constituted by the Apostles appeared, and brought forth a Man-child, against whom the Dragon did set himself to de∣vour it; but the child was to bee caught up to Heaven; and the Dragon to bee cast out of Heaven upon the earth; where hee set's himself to persecute the woman which fled into the Wilderness, and to make war with the remnant of her seed. chap. 12. During the time of the Churche's abode in the
Wilderness the mysterie of iniqui∣tie is set up,2. Whiles shee is in the wildernes. and come's to it's per∣fection in the earth, & God send's his judgments upon it when it is com to it's height. c. 13 till 19▪ This Mysterie of Iniquitie hath two parts; the Mysterie of the Beast,The Mysterie of iniquitie ap∣pears, which hath two parts. and the Mysterie of the Woman riding upon the Beast. The Mysterie of the Beast ruling over the earth,One of the Beast, another of the Whore. is seen in one Beast coming out of the Sea with ten horns; and another coming out of the earth with two horns. Chap. 13. during the time of the rising and reign∣ing of these Beasts over the earth, the state of the Church upon Mount Sion, and God's ad∣ministrations for the knowledg of his will thereby unto the world;And the State of the Church, though in the Wilder∣ness, yet also upon Sion, ap∣pear's in like manner. concerning the everla∣sting Gospel concerning the future fall of Babylon; and concerning the punishment of those that ad∣here unto the Beast; and for the waie of gathering up the harvest and vintage of the earth;The Judg∣ments of God in his last wrath is poured out upon the Beast. are re∣vealed. chap. 14. God's Judgments upon the Beast are poured out in the Phials of his last wrath, whereunto se∣ven Angels are appointed, and prepared. Chap. 15. and com∣manded to put the Judgments in execution. Chap. 16.
The Mysterie of the Whore of Babylon riding upon the Beast,And the My∣sterie of the Whore and her judgment ap∣pear's also. is shewed to the Prophet. chap. 17. and the Judgment which befal∣leth unto her, for her destruction is described▪ chap. 18. The state of the Church in her comming out of the Wilderness, is described in the congratulatorie acclamations,3. Whiles shee is coming out of the Wilderness. given to God in Heaven at the destruction of Babylon, and at the preparations of the wife of the Lamb for the Marriage-Supper, and in the war which the Armies of Heaven under Christ's conduct do make against the Beast, the fals Prophet, and the Kings of the Earth. For by this means the power of all her adversaries beeing destroied, shee is fitted to appear visibly upon the stage of the world. Chap. 19. The state of the Church dur∣ing her Reign with Christ on earth,4. After that shee is com out of the Wilder∣ness, during the time of her Reign with Christ. is before the last Judgment a thousand years; and after the universal Resurrection, both in Heaven and earth, for ever and ever. Chap. 20. 21. and 22. till vers 6. Thus wee see the contexture and coherence of the matter and parts of the whole Book: if then wee should consider how these particulars relate unto the main scope of the Prophesie, which is to reveal Jesus Christ unto us, in the
Mysterie of his Kingdom, wee see that everie thing is most directly subordinate thereunto, and that the whole doth most completely reach a full discoverie of the accomplishment of the Myste∣rie, whereof the brief summe is this. That the professors of the name of Jesus Christ;The brief summe of the whole Mysterie of God, as set forth in the two last visions of the Reveltion. by their suffer∣ings for his sake; by their testi∣monie of him in opposition to the Dragon, to the Beasts, and to the Whore; by the Judgments of God against all these, to de∣stroie their power, by the war of the Saints against them, by the setling of the Kingdom of Christ in the hands of his Saints; and by the Manifestation of the Glorie of the heavenlie Jerusalem, comming unto them from Heaven to earth▪ whereinto the Kings of the earth shall bring their glorie; shall get the full victorie over the world, and with the purchase of the Inheritance of all things in the New Heavens, and the New earth; they shall have the enjoiment of the presence of God for ever. In all which at this time, as to our present con∣dition the opposition which the Beast hath to the Lamb; the fals Prophet to the two Witnesses, and the Whore to the Bride;And the things which at pre∣sent are most considerable therein, which are▪ and the manner of their warfare is most considerable: for in the opposite properties of their Na∣tures and waies, the Mysteries of Iniquitie and of Godliness are
most completely revealed; and by the manner of the war which is between them, and the issue thereof; the state and relation wherein our inward man doth stand, as to either of the My∣steries, will bee seen: that wee may not onely know what partly to chuse in this quarrel, but also what to judg of the advancement of the partie wherein wee are found, towards the at∣teinment of the Hope which is set before us in the Kingdom of Christ. These things are worth a larger discours and discoverie; then my design is at this time to be∣stow upon them: but in reference to what hath been said already; and to that which is the scope of the following Treatise somthing is fit to bee added, though but very briefly, to give you matter of further thoughts. If it bee expedient then for us to take notice of the Mysterie of Iniquitie, and of Godliness as they are now working; and have been long ago wresling against one another in the publick transactions of this present world; wee must look out for the Beast to finde him by the Pro∣perties of his Nature, and by the effects of the Government which hee hath exercised, and doth exercise upon the Earth; and for the Lamb to finde him by the same Characters. The Beastlie nature of the life of man,The discoverie of the Beast. is that which the Dra∣gon doth exalt, and impower with all his might, as his vice-gerent, to have Dominion over the Inhabitants of the Earth;
for by this nature hee can onely have access now to us, and power over us: seeing hee is cast out of our heavenlie places, and overcom there in our nature, by the blood of the Lamb. The general properties of this brutish nature are these. First to bee led without reason by meer sens. Secondly, to satisfie the sensual imaginati∣ons and lusts of the flesh; and thirdly, to do all things by a Brutish and bodilie violence and force, rather then in a friendlie and amiable waie; And fourthly, in case of opposition, to destroie without mercie all that stand's in the waie of his will. Hence it is that in the 13th of the Revelation, this beastlie nature is said, to bee like a Leopard full of spots, swift and cruel; to have the feet of a Bear; which grasp's both with the hindermost and formost legs and claws, and to have the mouth of a Lion, to tear and devour. The Government which this na∣ture doth affect is absolute, to have all in sub∣jection to it's will, without anie other Rule or Law. So that it ruleth over others, as men use to rule over beasts, guiding them by meer sen∣sual and imaginarie inducements which relate nothing to the will of God at all. If then the Governors of a people make use of their power, to satisfie the inclinations of flesh and blood, in fulfilling their lusts and sen∣sual affections, without anie due respect unto the end of their place: but seek by meer force to make their will a Law to their Subjects, by bringing them to an absolute Subjection, that
they may suffer themselvs to bee ruled, as beasts use to bee ruled by men; who beeing ignorant of the designs of men, are led onely by sensu∣al objects of pleasure and of terror: if (I saie) anie Governors have this aim, and follow the waies, by which this kinde of greatness over others may bee established; they ought to take notice of themselvs, and others may observ it also of them, that they are none other but the Dragon's Vice-gerents on earth, and that they rule in his name, and in his waie over the sons of men. Now how manie Potentates have hitherto in all the Nations of the Earth, in∣tended to rule over their Subjects in another waie, I confess I am not able to relate. But how manie have apparently studied to bee abso∣lute over their Subjects, as over beasts, and in cases of opposition have shewed themselvs as Leopards, Bears, and Lions against them; and have made these properties of their waie, their glorie; is so apparent, that I shall need to saie no more of it; but shall leav it un∣to your thoughts. But the Lamb-like nature of the life of man;The discoverie of the Lamb. and the waie of the Government which is su∣table thereunto, is that which Christ as a spiritual man doth exalt in the so∣cieties of mankinde. The properties of a Lamb may bee seen in the relation which it hath to other beasts, to the creatures of it's own kinde,
and chiefly to mankinde. In respect of other Creatures it is most meek, and most harmless; the horns which they have are not for offence but for defence, in respect of their own kinde, they are most fit to live in a societie. For if they bee alone, they are lost, and becom a prey to other beasts. In respect of man, the Lamb or sheep is the most useful, and most service∣able creature of anie other; for they both feed him and cloth him; and that without much trouble unto him. As for the waie of Govern∣ment which is sutable to the nature of the Lamb; wee see that it is none other, when they are without a Shepherd; but the Imitati∣on of example; that when one goeth before, then all the rest do follow: and if they have a Shepherd, they follow him, and take notice of his voice, to distinguish it from the voice of a stranger. If then the Governors who are over the Flock of Christ have not these properties, in the waie of ruling the Common-wealth of Israël; that is, if they are not eminent for meekness, and harmlesness towards all men, making use of their horns, and power onely for defence and not for offence; if they are not sociable, and by condescension of spirit hum∣bly equal to those that belong to their societie; but seek to keep themselvs high, and at a di∣stance, and solitarie from others; and if they are not willing to give themselvs up, both their wool and their substance for the service
of mankinde; they are not Christian Magi∣strates, nor they rule over their Subjects, as Christ's Vice-gerents, or in his name and waie. For hee as the first Lamb of the Flock, in his precedencie did never carrie himself other∣wise, then thus before the Flock, to oblige all to follow him, but chiefly they who professing his name, are in the formost rank before o∣thers to lead them, ought to follow him closest. If now wee should compare these two My∣steries together in their opposition to each o∣ther, wee may observ that as Leopards, Bears, and Lions live not in Flocks and societies, as Lambs do, but alone by themselvs; so it is with Potentates and Monarchs. Imperium non patitur duos. Caesárve priorem,The comparison of the Govern∣ment of he and of the Lamb. Pompeiúsve parem ferre nequit. Leopards, Bears, and Lions live by preying and devouring other weaker Creatures, wherein they are the embleme of the Tyrannie of Monarchs, and wee see that most of them were these Creatures as the glorie of their scutch∣eons: but Lambs and sheep living in flocks to strengthen each other, represent the equali∣tie of a Common-wealth, and the waie of it's strength. Leopards, Bears, and Lions need no protection, nor can they bee ruled but by a prison; becaus they make themselvs formida∣ble unto all other Creatures; but sheep and
Lambs are a prey to all other Creatures, ex∣cept they bee protected by a Shepherd, and kept in folds, which doth represent that Chri∣stian Common-wealths, except they bee pro∣tected by an higher power then their own, which is as far above the nature of man, as man's na∣ture is above sheep and Lambs; they cannot bee in safetie. The dependencie then of sheep upon their Shepherd is an embleme of the life of Faith; but the absoluteness of power, in wilde Beasts, to trust to their own strength, is the embleme of the greatness of Potentates, and such as betake themselvs to stand by their own sufficiencie, in reference to Man, these wilde beasts can never bee brought to do him anie service; but prey upon him, and devour his substance; but sheep and Lambs are the support of his life, and are without resistance slaughtered and sacrificed for his good, which is the embleme of self-denial, wherein Jesus Christ the chief Shepherd of the flock is gone before all the Governors of the Common-wealth of Israël; to shew them that they ought to give up themselvs as a sacrifice for the publick good of their Flocks. Lastly, it is the beast's waie of Government to enforce obe∣dience by violence; but it is said of the Lamb upon Mount Sion that his Flock of 144000. Lambs did follow him whether soëver hee went; to shew that the Vice-gerents of Christ, which are appointed to rule his people in his
name; go before their brethren in the waie of Righteousness, and such as are true Christi∣ans indeed, follow them out of a loving inclina∣tion; and this is the best waie of Government that can bee settled amongst men; namely to bring all to imitate Christ Jesus on all sides, both they that bear rule, and they that are ruled. Now how far our Rulers are bent this waie, I shall refer it to their own conscience to consider; and how far their Subjects set themselvs through love, to follow that where∣in they go before them in righteousness: I shall not need to mention; but I may take up a woful lamentation; that som who ought most to encourage their fellow-Subjects to this dutie; are most avers from it themselvs, and disaffect others from it. But I shall not insist further upon this mysterie of Iniquitie, this shall briefly suffice for the opening thereof at this time. The second thing which I proposed to touch, was the mysterie of the fals Prophet, and of the two Witnesses, and hereof briefly thus. The fals Prophet his work is to uphold and to advance the in∣terest of the power,The discoverie of the fals Pro∣phet. and the ab∣soluteness of the beastlie Go∣vernment, and to bring all men to bee in subjection thereunto, the means which hee useth to effect this is two-fold; the one is a deceitfulness of persuasion, and bewitching
of the Imaginations of ignorant men by lying miracles, to make them believ, that in the beast there is a Divinitie, and that his image ought to bee worshipped; the other is a coër∣cive power of punishment to bee inflicted by the fals Prophet's procurement upon all those who do not subject themselvs vnto the beast; either by waie of Adoration, to fall down be∣fore this Image; or by waie of receiving as a token of subjection the mark, the name, or the number of the name of the beast: namely, that such as should not worship his Image should bee killed; and such as should neither take his marke, nor his name, nor the number of his name upon them, should have no libertie of commerce; and to prosecute these designs, is the whole emploiment of the fals Prophet; which that wee may the bet∣ter understand, let us consider the particu∣lars. The Image of the Beast which is to bee worshipped, I take it to bee that absolute great∣ness which the second Beast doth attribute unto himself, and doth exercise over the Sub∣jects of the first Beast in his presence; for the text saith, that hee exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, chapter 13. vers 12. that is, hee doth set up a waie of Government, as absolute, as that of the first Beasts, is in conformitie thereunto, to establish it, and hee had power to give life unto the Image of the Beast,
as the text saith, vers 15. which I understand thus; that the second Beast had power given him, by the first Beast's permission; to give life to the Image of his absoluteness, and to the exercising of his power in the hand of the second Beast; and to make it both speak, and caus all to bee killed that should not worship his Image, to make the Image speak, is to make his power give sentence of death; and to caus all to bee killed, is to see that sentence exe∣cuted against all such as should not acknow∣ledg the Autoritie, form of Government, and Laws and Canons of his making to bee di∣vine sanctions. For the Canon-Laws are made in imitation of the civil Jurisdiction, and in their kinde of a like power, or the same with that of the first Beast, the one relating to the Civil, the other to the Ecclesiastical State. By the mark of the Beast, I understand the Irrationalitie of obedience, and brutalitie of those that subject themselvs blindfold in all things, without respect to Conscience, or the knowledg of anie rule in order to God's will; such then who by a blinde submission through worldlie and sensual motives subject them∣selvs as Beasts use to do, to those that ride upon them; and are led wheresoëver their ri∣ders will drive them, have the mark of the Beast upon their spirits: and if they make open profession of this kinde of blinde obedi∣ence to bee their dutie, they take the mark of
the Beast in their forehead; but if they pra∣ctise it as hirelings for a reward, they take the mark of the beast in their hand. By the name of the Beast I understand, the names which for distinction's sake, the fals Prophets everie where take unto themselvs, that they may thereby set up themselvs to bee followed, and owned by their Disciples; which how this is practised, no man can bee ignorant of. And by the number of the beast's name, I un∣derstand the partialitie of reckoning, and in∣equalitie of account, which the fals Prophets oblige their followers to make of men, in or∣to their parties; for according to the relation which men are thought to have to this, or that faction and pattie; so they are esteemed of, more or less, for that name's sake where∣by they are characterized, and under which they are numbered; nay, in these our unchri∣stian fractions, by the zelots of parties it is reckoned upon, as a Dutie; not to account of anie man (let his worth bee otherwise what it will) further then as hee doth own them, and the name of their partie; and this I sup∣pose amongst manie other things, included in the number 666. may bee represented there∣in, in respect that this number is nothing els, but a threefold repetition of it self in units, in tenths, and in hundreds: and cannot bee mul∣tiplied by anie square root without a fracti∣on;
and in it self six is but the half of twelv, which is the number of the Tribes of Israël; but upon these numerical Mysteries I love not to stand. I shall therefore conclude with this one word; that all, who pretend to have a mission from the Lamb, and think them∣selvs his true Prophets; should do well to ex∣amine by these characters the ground where∣upon they stand, and the waies wherein they walk, lest they mistake themselvs in their account of themselvs and bee found in the end the Prophets of the Beast, and not of Christ. As for the two Witnesses,The discoverie of the two witnesses. they are set forth as opposites unto the Beast, for it is said, that the Beast doth make war with them. Chap. 11. 7. their Character is, that they prophesie in Sackcloth as mourners, that their design is nothing els, but to bear witness unto Christ, by the manifestation of the Truth without humane Interests; and consequently, that they studie not by out∣ward means, to set up themselvs, or gain fol∣lowers who should bee in subjection to them, and under their spiritual jurisdiction; nor do they applie themselvs to the fancies of their hearers, to work som strange impressions upon them, by raising them to the admiration of their Notions, of their Eloquence or parts; but speaking the plain truth in love; a word of fire to melt the Conscience of sinners doth go
out of their mouth, which doth slaie the wicked spirits, who set themselvs against them, and according to their word, the Heavens are shut up in the daies of their Prophesie from sending anie shewers of blessings upon men's souls; and the earthlie and outward estate of men is smitten with all manner of plagues, for not receiving the word of their testimonie, as Egypt was by Moses and Aaron. These two Witnesses are said to bee the two Olive trees, and anointed ones, who stand before the God of all the Earth, Chapter 11. vers 4. which beeing compared with Zach. chap. 3. and 4. tel's us, who are meant by these two Wit∣nesses: for there Jehoshua and Zerubbabel are anointed, and established to bring back the captivitie of Judah and Jerusalem out of Ba∣bylon, which they were to do not by the might and power of men, but by the Spirit of the Lord, and the efficacie of his grace. The difference then of these two Witnesses from the fals Prophet is in this.The comparison of the fals Pro∣phet, and of the two Witnesses. First, that hee is but one who doth exercise a twofold power; that of the Beast, and that of his own devising, which is a pre∣tended one of Miracles; these are two whose testimonie is one and the same, and the effect thereof towards men, but one from them both. Secondly, that hee taketh upon him a Coërcive power; and to bring people under
his yoke, hee set's up differential tokens, viz. the Beast's Image, his mark and name; but these make use of none other power, but of that which is properly prophetical; nor do they press anie distinct and particular notes of subjection to themselvs upon anie coërcively; but have power onely to plague such as re∣ceiv not the Testimonie of Jesus. Thirdly, hee doth work upon the ignorant imaginations of sillie people, strange impressions of admi∣ration concerning the Divinitie of his own waie; by deceitful persuasions which are a kinde of witch-craft, whereby people are made to cleav unto his worldlie interest, as a slave unto the same; but these labor not to gain to themselvs, the affections and fancies of peo∣ple; but to gain their understandings to the knowledg of the Truth, and their consciences to the Subjection which is due to Christ Je∣sus without partialitie. So then fourthly, the fals Prophet in a word, exalt's and seek's to set up himself in the spirits of men; but the two Witnesses humble and denie themselvs, that the Cross of Christ may bee exalted over their spirits, and hee onelie set up in the hearts of men. Fifthly and lastly, the fals Prophet med∣ling with State-matters, take's both the Mi∣nisterie and Magistracie upon him, making the one subordinately to serv the other's turns, in reference to men; but the two Wit∣nesses who are faithful Magistrates and Mini∣sters,
join their Testimonies in their places coordinately; to make out one waie of righte∣ousness and truth, to the consciences of men, in reference to God in Christ. And this much concerning these. The third thing to bee spoken of; is the My∣sterie of the Whore, and of the Bride. The Angel telleth John plain∣ly,The discoverie of the Whore. chap. 17. vers 18. that the woman which hee had seen ride∣ing upon the scarlet-colored Beast, with a name written on her fore∣head,Vers 5. Mysterie Babylon the Great; the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the earth, was that great Citie which reigneth over the Kings of the earth. Now it is evident that Rome alone as Papal, hath reigned in a Mysterie over the Kings of the Earth; ever since heathenish Rome determined, which reigned not in a Mysterie, but with outward force over these Kings, and in that respect was the fourth Beast seen by Daniel: therefore if wee can observ what the Properties of her whorish nature and practice hath been; and how shee hath brought forth Harlots and all abominations in the earth, wee shall discern this Mysterie, and discover those that partake therein with her. The text saith, Chapter 17. vers 4. that shee was arraied in purple and Scar∣let; and decked with Gold, with precious stones and pearls; and that shee had in her hand a Cup
full of abominations and filthiness of her forni∣nications; and chapter 14. vers 8▪ It is said shee made the Nations drink of the wine of these fornications▪ and Chapter 18. vers 3. that the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with her. By the woman is understood the Romane Hierarchie, which hath born Rule over all the world, and rid in triumph upon the mindes of all men, as upon Beasts. Her decking and raiment of purple, of Scarlet, of Gold, of precious stones, and of Pearls, is the outward visible magnificence of that worship which shee set's up, which hath none other beautie, but such ornaments to amuse the Imaginations of foolish people, and bewitch them with the formalities of Cere∣monies. Her Fornications are the love of this pre∣sent world, whereunto shee doth allure men to commit Whoredom with her: by the enjoi∣ment of power, of profit, and of pleasures, which shee studieth to furnish her lovers withal, and to deprive other men off. Her abominations are all manner of sinful, and unconscionable practices which shee doth allow of in all who serv her ends thereby, whereof shee make's a trade, although they bee never so abhorrent from the light of Christianitie, and of Nature; these abomina∣tions are the Idolatries which shee hath set up;
and the dispensations which shee hath given to all unnatural sins, and unjust practices, as Sodomie, Incest, Murther, Breach of Cove∣nant, and oath in all manner of Contracts. Rebellion of Children to Parents, and of Sub∣jects to Magistrates, all manner of fraudulent circumventions, and oppressions of the inno∣cent, and such like. The Cup which is in her hand, whereby shee causeth all Nations to drink, and swal∣low down these abominations; is her pretend∣ed Autoritie, as the unerring Church ha∣ving power to binde and loose all things in Heaven, and on Earth, in order to men's Consciences; and to manage all the reasons of State, and publick affairs of the world; with supreme Jurisdiction, in ordine ad spiritualia. And the Fornication which the Kings of the Earth have committed with her, hath been their compliance and correspondence with her, to make use of her power and influence, to∣wards their neighbors and Subjects, to gain credit thereby unto themselvs; together with the studie of her Policies, to learn from her the maximes of deceit, which are the reasons of State-advantages, to get power, by which means shee hath intelligence of all the Coun∣sels of Princes, becaus they are brought to drink them out of her Cup, and make use of her embraces and favors to bring them to pass: and her whorish studie is onely to keep
them all at variance one with another, and to make them severally depend on her Love, that shee may alwayes arbitrate their affairs, and their interests may bee subject onely to her favor, and so far as anie Hierarchie on Earth, or Church-constitution doth make it self by these waies considerable in a State, or by waies like unto these seek's to bee re∣spected by the meaner or higher sort of peo∣ple, they all drink of the same Cup of her fornications. Let not therefore anie form of outward worship recommend it self to the fol∣lowers of the Lamb by anie interests of State; nor let anie sort of men, who pretend to Re∣ligious administrations, applie themselvs to the practices of this natrue, nor anie true Christian Magistrates intend the compliances and correspondencies of this kinde, and for such ends; with anie Masters of formalities, who go a whoring after the appearances of outward things in matters of worship and of State, which take either onely, or most with sensual imaginations, who may bee rid upon like beasts. As for the Bride,The discoverie of the Bride. wee exspect her from Heaven, for it is ap∣parent, that as yet wee have no permanent Citie here on Earth, such as the Apostle hath described the Lamb's wife to bee in Revelation Chap. 22. vers 10. till the end. wee therefore seek this Citie which hath foun∣dations;
and if wee walk by faith to get an entrance into her, Let us wait through the Spirit for the Hope of Righteousness, which is promised to the Saints, and walking after the Spirit and not after the flesh, so far as wee are advanced in the new Creature, so far are wee fitted and prepared for the Bride∣groom's comming, to enter with him into his wedding-Chamber. How far anie Socie∣ties of Churches, or single Church-Congre∣gations have received the favor to bee arraied in fine linnen,Revel. 19. vers 8. clean and white, which is the righteousness of Saints; is to mee, as yet not ap∣parent; for I must confess that I have not seen anie perfection in anie of them; and I know that I have made it a good part of my work to visit them all, and to consider them in their waies, aswel abroad as at home, in respect of their several associations: and truly the Laodicean temper is over us all; and if wee repent not and becom zealous in the waie of Righteousness; and of holie Communion without partialitie and without Hypocrisie; no-doubt Christ will spue us all out of his mouth, and call unto him another people, which shall bee made readie for the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb; and although this seem's to bee a sad sentence over the Churches which are now counted wise Virgins; yet there is neither want of Charitie in it towards them,
as if I did not wish them well; nor want of Hope for them, as if I did not exspect their Reformation; but in both these respects I do bear witness, that none of them all are the Bride whose comming out of the wilderness is ex∣spected; but that all their visible estates are the outward Court, which is given to the Gen∣tiles, wherein to this daie, they tread the Ho∣lie Citie under foot; and are in the wilderness of spiritual desolation and confusion; but that out of their invisible state, which is the inner Court and Temple, wherein they have Com∣munion with God, and one with another; a Citie at last will rise up and appear, is my con∣fident exspectation, and that this may com to pass speedily, it shall bee my constant praier; but to bring this to pass, I finde by the Reve∣lation, that not onely Babylon is to bee destroi∣ed with mightie Judgments from Heaven, and that the Beast is to bee plagued and pu∣nished, but that the armies of Saints under Christ's conduct shall from Heaven com, in Battel-array, and war against the Beast, and fals Prophet, and the Kings of the earth; now how far this battel is carried on in these our daies, and to what parties wee are engaged, and in what waie wee put forth our strength to fight, and what interest wee fight for, whe∣ther for Christ's purely, or for our own also, as it is mixed with that of the King's of the earth, and in them with the beast's, will bee
our wisedom seriously to consider; and I wish that my Countrie-men in Scotland, who have fixed so strong an interest upon the terms of the Covenant, and are counted a wise Nation in the world, might bee made so spiritually wise as to discern their own station, and what help they give unto the Beast; by their present proceedings, and it is my heartie desire that the Brethren here, who for the sake of Scotland in reference to the Covenant, keep themselvs at a distance from the main work; and ob∣struct by their non-concurrence in things good and lawful, the progress of our Reformation, might bee wakened to see the posture wherein they stand, in this their warfare, and if this plain discoverie of the state of the Quarrel be∣tween the Beast and the Lamb; between the fals Prophet and the two Witnesses, and be∣tween the Whore and the Bride that is now comming out of the Wilderness, may bee a means to open the eies, and undeceiv anie of them; I should rejoice at it: however I have herein discharged my Conscience, and born witness without partialitie to the Truth, so far as it is reveled unto mee, which I hope I shall never refuse to seal with my death, if need bee, and this I conceiv is the onely waie of our warfare,The manner of the warfare. who pre∣tend to bee followers of the Lamb, in the work of the Ministerie, that was should have none other weapons of our
warfare, but one Sword amongst us all, which is that, which proceedeth out of his mouth; and that our waie to fight with this weapon, against our adversaries should bee none other; but to follow Christ in our lawful Calling (which is our white hors) and with an holie blameless personal conversation towards all men, (which is our fine linnen white and clean) for herein doth lie our whole strength, and what applica∣tion soëver wee make to other weapons, which the powers of darkness can make use of aswel as wee; they will but weaken us, and in the encountring with the In∣habitants of the earth, wee shall finde them stronger at those weapons them wee can bee: so that by such means, I exspect not that they shall fall before us, although our victories bee never so great; therefore as for mine own part, till I can perceiv, that wee who pretend to bee in the first rank of the Lamb's followers; can make better use of these spiritual weapons then hitherto wee have don; and can in the Communion of Saints join our forces together, otherwise then now wee do, to imitate the Captain of our Salvation;
I shall bee a man of no great exspectation; yet becaus I believ that these things shall com to pass; and that by the armor of light the Children of light will at last prevail; therefore I do speak, and becaus I both believ and speak, therefore I am not inclined to make haste; as som (who take the shadows of their own conceits; for the substance of Christ's Kingdom) are inclined to do; for this caus, although I will not contradict the appearances of Hopes, which the autor of this Treatise doth give unto the Protestant Caus, to rife within a few years in a considerable Po∣sture against Poperie; yet I must take leav to confess, that although the splendor of the Whore, and her influence upon the Kings of the Earth, and the power of the Papal Sea as it is Hierarchical, were utterly consumed and abolished; by the brightness of Christ's appearing in the Spirit on the one hand, and by the hatred of the whore's Lovers, and the turning of their hearts a∣gainst her on the other hand; yet that the war with the beast, aud with the fals Pro∣phet; and with the Kings of the Earth shall continue; and that the beast and the
fals Prophet, with the Kings of the earth will bee found to have their friends not onely amongst those who are called Pa∣pists; but even amongst those that are most fierce enemies to Poperie, and count them∣selvs the best of Christians and reformed Protestants. It is one thing to bee no friend to the State, and predominant power and craftiness of the Whore, as shee appear's from without, and in another place at a distance from us: and another thing it is to renounce the beastlie nature, and the de∣ceitfulness by which wee are led to em∣brace the Image, the mark, the name, and the number of the name of the Beast within our selvs, that is for our own interest, and the concernments of flesh and blood. I do not finde in the last battel the Whore named at all; I finde onely as leaders of the partie opposite to Christ; the Beast and the Kings of the earth; which I take to bee the Beast, with his horns; for the Horns which are in the heads of the Beast, are the Kings of the Earth,Chap. 19. 12, 13. which make use of the Bodie of the Beast, and of her strength, and are made use of, by the heads of the Beast
to war against the Lamb, and I finde, that these horns, although they fight against the Lamb; yet that they are not alwayes friends with the Whore; and for their own interest's sake, not onely rob her of her ornaments; but feed upon her flesh, although for a season, whiles it was their supposed advantage, they suffered her to ride upon them, aud govern them with the bridle of her autoritie: but when shee is cast off from the beast's back, the Beast and his horns are as strong as ever; and more fit to fight in their brutal waie against the Lamb then before; I believ therefore, that the Whore as shee is alreadie little considerable in comparison of what shee hath been; may vanish and bee made de∣solate by her own beastlie complices be∣fore the last battel; but I believ not, that wee shall have anie great earthlie Poten∣tates at all, ever to appear for the Lamb in this battel; but that they shall all join alwayes with the beastlie nature of men, against the Lamb-like holie nature of the Saints; to discountenance, to oppose and to destroie it; but wee have a promise, that although the two Witnesses of the Lamb
shall bee killed by the Beast, when they have finished their prophesying in Sack∣cloth; yet that the Lamb, when hee shall com in his own appearance, with more witnesses then two or three; even with a whole armie of witnesses; not in Sackcloth upon earth, but in their fine linnen, white and clean; and upon their white horses, in their spiritual emploiments, as Citizens of the Kingdom of Heaven, fol∣lowing their leader against the powers of the earth; when (I saie) the Lamb shall com thus attended, the promise is, that the Beast, and all his horns shall bee over∣com by him: for there is no power in the world able to resist the united strength of the holie ones, and the dints of the sword which hath two edges,Heb. 4. 4. which beeing able to divide between the soul and the Spirit, and to discern the subtilest thoughts, and the deceitfullest intents of the beastlie heart of man it shall undoubted slaie them; therefore although I finde not the fals Prophet here menti∣oned as active in leading on the war (whereunto certainly for the contrivance of it on the Beast's part, hee cannot bee
wanting) yet hee is found to bee taken pri∣soner with the Beast; and with him cast into the Lake which burneth with fire and Brimstone.Revel. 19. 20. The Whore and the fals Prophet are cleerly di∣stinct Mysteries, and have their several waies of Acting, though with a concur∣rence; for so long as the Mysterie of the Whore doth last, which the fals Prophet (who is the intellectual subtiltie of the Serpent's nature in man; as the Beast is his brutish sensualitie and strength) fed with prosperitie, and delicacies did beget, and set upon the beast's back, the said fals Pro∣phet doth make use of her, that by her baits and allurements hee may draw the Inhabitants of the earth to drink out of the cup of her fornications; but when pro∣speritie and delicacies ceas, by reason of the Phials of God's wrath upon the Beast, and the distress of Nations, then shee is not of use any more; but the fals Prophet which begat her, will to serv the Beast's interest destroie her also, and will bee active in another waie against the Lamb without her. And thus I conceiv the bat∣tel will bee, or is alreadie formed, on the
side of the beastlie partie, which fight's onely to maintein the interest of flesh and blood, which is self-greatness, and the conveniences of pleasure; with all out∣ward force and deceit, against the interest of the Spirit; which is self-denial, and the conveniences of serving others in the Kingdom of Christ through love: and by the other side the battel is formed in the spirits of the Saints, to maintein the interest of the Lamb of God, who having taken away the sins of the world, will now appear to destroie the works of the Devil, by setting up the power of his life amongst men; till therefore I shall see either the Characters of this life apparent in the beautie of Love and Holiness amongst us; or the waies fully opened and prepared, by which the power of the life of Christ by his word will becom prevalent, to lead all men's thoughts and affections captive to the obedience of his will; I shall not much rejoice, nor greatly triumph at anie of our outward Conquests. I remember that the Whore was long ago cast out from amongst us (for our Hierarchie by the King and Queen's consent was abo∣lished)
before the Beast begun to rage and fight; so then as amongst us; so also in all Europe, the Papal Hierarchie may bee cast off, and yet the Beast's rage bee greater then ever for the interest of a ty∣rannical power; aswel over the Consci∣ences, as over the bodies and estates of men, and that two manner of waies, ei∣ther by the absoluteness of a governing power, through the necessities of war, enforcing all men to concur with the in∣terests which it settles, for common safe∣tie, to preserv us in freedom from a for∣reign power; or by a total dissolution of all government, wherein everie man who hath more might then his neighbor, may take a libertie to tyrannize over him, and oppress him without controul: by both these waies the Beast may rage over all Eu∣rope, against the Lamb-like state of Chri∣stianitie, a long while after the destru∣ction of the Pope; and Protestants may, by the means of the fals Prophet bee in∣tangled amongst themselvs, and embroil∣ed into quarrels, and beastlie animosities, for the designs of flesh and blood as much as ever; for if God send not forth another
Spirit, then as yet is apparent in the greatest part of our Professors, to unite us in his waie, and to guid us in this warfare, wee shall bee found as much as anie to favor the Beast. Till therefore I can perceiv, that the banner of this Spirit is lifted up amongst us; and that those who are upright in heart rank themselvs under it; and make use of the weapons of Righte∣ousness, and the armor of Salvation; for the end for which Christ hath put them in their hands; I shall not conceiv much of anie sud∣den enjoiment of the glorious libertie of the Sons of God; nor of anie full deliverance from the bondage, whereinto Satan by the power of darkness, and the spiritualitie of ma∣lice, hath brought our beastlie nature. I watch therefore, and look out more after the appearances, and discoveries of these things, then after other outward events and changes. I know that the shakings and Changes of States tend to make waie for this object of my Hope; but I know also, that before I can partake of it there shall bee a greater change brought upon the Spirits of men, then now is upon their outward Estates. God hath hither∣to been shaking the earth to some purpose; but hee hath said that hee will also shake Hea∣ven; this hee hath begun to do, and will do more fully; becau his aim is, as the Apostle saith, not onely to shake these things,Hebr. 12. 26. but also to remove the
things which are shaken, that the things which cannot bee shaken may remain. I therefore look out to see the foot-steps of his proceedings towards the accomplishment of this promise; for till the things which are shaken in the Spi∣rits of Professors, bee removed out of them, I cannot exspect a cleer manifestation in, and set∣tlement of their spirit about the things which must remain; and till this appear, and break forth amongst us, I cannot also saie, that the Bride is com out of the Wilderness, or that wee have gotten the conquest over the Beast, and over the fals Prophet. When therefore the banner of the Spirit of love without partialitie, shall bee lifted up in the beautie of Holiness, as the Ensign of the unitie of Faith, and the badg of the common profession of Christianitie amongst Professors, and when the Magistrates and Ministers shall understand their true conjunction in the waie of their Testimonie; when by this means the Lord shall have washed the visible filth of the daughters of Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst there∣of, and shall also create upon everie dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon the assem∣blies and glorie thereof, a defence; also the Prophets shall not studie to make themselvs anie more considerable by a peculiar interest upon believers; but shall know how to pro∣pose in common the waies of edification, so
demonstrably, that everie one who shall sin∣cerely affect the knowledg of Truth shall finde no difficultie to com by it: when the names of the Idols, which everie partie for distincti∣on's sake have made unto themselvs, shall bee cut off: when the mercinarie waie of serving the Common-wealth of Israël, chiefly in things belonging unto God shall ceas, when the just measures and dimensions of the Citie of God shall bee known to the Master-buil∣ders, and the waie discerned how to open the dores thereof unto those that have a right un∣to the tree of life: when the Temple in Hea∣ven shall bee opened, and the ark of the Co∣venant seen therein, when the Children of Israël shall com, they and the children of Ju∣dah together, going and weeping and seeking the Lord their God, and asking the waie to Zion with their faces thitherward, then and not till then, shall I exspect that the Bride will bee suddenly prepared, and com out of the Wilderness to celebrate the marriage with the Lamb. And when together with these prepa∣rations of her comming, and of the Supper of the Lamb; the sword of the Spirit, the word of God according to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testimonie; shall bee drawn out of the sheath thereof by that evi∣dence of the Rules of Interpretation, which none shall bee able to contradict: and by that exactness of order of the waie of Pro∣phetical
exercitation: so that none shall bee able to complain of the want of just freedom, to propose Truths or Scruples; and yet bee restrained from the licentiousness of passio∣nate railing, proud disputing, and vain jang∣ling; and by that meekness of love, power of zeal, and prudence with discretion in the application, to correct the particular errors of men's waies, so that there shall bee no caus of offence offered to the single-hearted, al∣though the wicked one shall bee discovered and slain in them: when (I saie) the sword of the Spirit shall bee thus unsheathed, then I shall exspect, that Judgment shall bee laid to the line, and Righteousnes to the plum∣met, against the unrighteous self-seekings of the Beast, and that the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters overflow the hiding places, which the fals Prophets have made unto themselvs: for then the foun∣dation which is laid in Sion will bee seen; and by the conformitie which everie thing in the Spirit of man shall bee obliged to have to Christ, it shall bee tried (whether it bee matter of theorie, or of affection, or of Pra∣ctice) that the all-sufficiencie of the anointing of Christ in his Saints; may appear, and bee found alone effectual (without the tricks of Humane Philosophie, of Policie, and of power) to slaie the wicked, and to direct the Spirit of man to all the secrets of Divine and
Humane wisedom: which shall bee found no∣thing but meer fallacies, further then it hath a direct relation, and subordination to manifest the life and glorie of Christ Jesus: when I saie this Sword shall bee thus made use of, and ap∣plied, then, and not till then, shall I exspect that the Beast and the fals Prophet shall bee taken alive, and destroied▪ and till this bee don, Satan cannot bee bound up from seducing the Nations of the Earth. Thus you see the grounds of the Hopes of Your friend in Christ John Durie. At my Chamber Novemb. 28. 1650.
Clavis Apocalyptica, OR A Prophetical KEY, BY WHICH The Great Mysteries in the Reve∣lation of St John, and in the Prophet Daniel are opened; It beeing made apparent That the Prophetical Numbers com to an end With the year of our Lord 1655. Judicious Reader! I Doubt not, but there bee manie, especially those, who have anie Interest in the condition of Common∣wealths, that are desirous to know what at length may bee the end, and
issue of this present Combustion and Continuance of Wars, that are spread over the face of Europe. Whereof the Revelation of St John doth give information. But in respect it is commonly held and reputed a Mysteri∣ous and dark book, I offer here a Key. Whosoëver doth well applie the same, and observeth the Method and Harmo∣nie of the Revelation, and also dili∣gently pondereth and considereth the second and seventh chapter of the Pro∣phet Daniel, hee will finde his de∣sire satisfied, and easily discover the Event of these wars. Farewel, (Wel∣meaning Reader!) and bee patient for a short time, thou shalt see the end of these distractions in great Revolutions both in Church and State, within and without Europe.
Clavis Apocalyptica. THe eternal and true God, to ma∣nifest his Fatherlie and faithful Providence, which hee, without intermission, dispenseth to his People, hath severally, in the Old Testament, for the comfort of the godlie, and warning of the wicked, set and prefixed cer∣tain times, how long hee would con∣nive at the distresses and persecutions of his own, and when hee would de∣liver and punish the wicked. 1. Before the Flood, hee gave to them, who would not anie more hearken to the reproof of his Spirit, a hundred and twentie years respite. Genes. 6. v. 3. When this time was exspired, God came with the punishment of the Flood, and destroied all that was liv∣ing upon the face of the Earth, except Noah, and what was with him under God's protection in the Ark. Gen. 7. v. 23.
2. God did declare to the Patriark Abraham, that his seed should bee a stran∣ger in a Land that was not theirs, and should serv them, and they should afflict them for four hundred years. But that Na∣tion, whom they should serv, hee would judg, and afterwards they should com out with great substance. Genes. 15. ver. 13, 14. Which promise God did faithfully perform: and after the time was ex∣spired, hee brought forth his people by a strong and mightie hand out of the Egyptian bondage, and drowned Pha∣rach with his Host in the Red Sea. Ex∣od. 12. v. 13, 14. 3. To the Captivitie of Babylon was set a period of seventie years. Ierem. 29. 10. When the time was accom∣plished, the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, to the end that hee might let his people go up again to Ierusalem. 2 Chronic. 36. v. 22, 23. 4. To Daniel shewed God that seventie weeks, (which are annual or
yearlie weeks, or four hundred nintie years) were determined upon the Iewish people, in which time the Messiah should com, and bee cut off, and at length the Citie of Ierusalem bee destroied. Daniel c. 9. v. 24, 25, 26, 27. How truly all these things were accomplish∣ed, is sufficiently evident. In like manner there is a certain time set, and determined upon the Church of God in the New Te∣stament, how long shee shall bee sub∣ject and exposed to persecution, and when shee shall bee delivered from it, as it doth appear by the Prophet Da∣niel, and by the Revelation of St Iohn. Whereof these Positions or Aphorisms may bee collected. 1. This determined time is expressed in these following places of the Holie Scrip∣ture. Daniel 7. v. 25. They, (the Saints) shall bee given into his (the fourth beast's) hand, until a time, and times and the dividing of time. And in the
12. Chapt. v. 7. An Angel doth ask the question. How long shall it bee to the end of these wonders? Another return∣eth this answer: That it shall bee for a time, times, and a half. Revelat. 12. v. 14. The Woman (which is the Church of God) shall bee in the wilderness for a time, times, and half a time; which is to saie, as it is expres∣sed in the sixth vers of the same Chap∣ter, a thousand two hundred and three∣score daies. Chapter 11. v. 3. The two witnesses shall bee clothed with Sackcloth one thou∣sand two hundred sixtie daies. Chapter 11. v. 2. The Gentiles shall tread under foot the holie Citie fourtie two moneths. Chap. 13. vers. 5. The blasphemies of the beast shall continue fourtie two moneths. 2. These three sorts of numbers and times, as a time, times, and half a time, one thousand two hundred sixtie daies, and fortie two moneths, are of one and the same kinde, and correspondent one to another.
None would bee able to understand what a time, times, and half a time is, which are determined for the fourth beast, Dan. 7. vers 15. For the won∣ders. Dan. 12. vers 7. And for the woman in the wilderness. Revelat. 12. vers 14. unless it had been said also of the Woman; that shee shall bee nou∣rished there one thousand two hundred sixtie daies, which doth explain the other. So that the Woman's 3 ½ times are equivalent to one thousand two hundred sixtie daies. Likewise, be∣cause the 3 ½ times of the Beast menti∣oned in the Prophet Daniel, are de∣clared by fortie two moneths, in the Revelation of St Iohn. 13. vers 15. it doth of necessitie follow, that the for∣tie two moneths are equivalent to one thousand two hundred sixtie daies, which maketh up the accompt, thirtie daies beeing computed for a moneth, as is usual amongst the Hebrews.
360 daies are 1. year or time 12 moneths. 42 moneths. at the rate of 30. daies. 1260. daies. 720 2. years. 24. 180 ½ year. 6. 1260 daies 42. moneths 3. These one thousand two hundred six∣tie daies do signifie one thousand two hun∣dred sixtie years. Manie are of this opinion, that here are meant natural daies, and conse∣quently but 3 ½ years. But experi∣ence doth contradict the same, in re∣gard the Holie Citie hath been trodden under foot, the two witnesses clothed with sackcloth, the woman continued in the wilderness, and the Beast with ten horns spoken blasphemies and great things long ago. Besides, it is impossible to accomplish in so short a time, what els is said, that it shall com to pass in these 3 ½ years. So that hereby Prophetical daies, or so manie years are meant. Wee finde examples in the holie
Scriptures, that by the daies expressed, years are to bee understood, as Daniel 9. vers 24. in the seventie weeks everie daie signifieth a year, and the seventie weeks make up four hundred ninetie years according to the Chronologer's Computation. Numbers 14. vers 33. 34. Your Children shall wander in the wilderness fortie years after the number of the daies, in which yee searched the Land, even for∣tie daies, (each daie for an year.) Ezekiel 4. vers 6. Thou shalt bear their iniquitie fortie daies, and I have appointed thee each daie for an year. Read upon this subject the first and sixteenth Proposition of Iohn Napier upon the Revelation. Nature furnisheth such like example. As in the Astrological direction, by a degree, which the Sun by his cours doth finish in one daie, is meant a year in operation; and a whole circle, which consisteth of three hundred sixtie de∣grees, and is run over by the Sun in
one year, signifieth three hundred six∣tie years, or a full time, as is sufficient∣ly known to the Astrologers. 4. These 3 ½ times, fortie two Moneths, one thousand two hundred sixtie daies, as they do comprehend times and years of one sort; so they begin together, and end to∣gether. 1. These 3 ½ times of the Beast, and of the woman in the wilderness do begin to∣gether. For when the red Dragon Revel. 12. vers 9. 13. was cast down to the earth by the ruine of the Heathenish Idola∣trie, hee persecuted the Woman by the Beast, having ten horns, to which hee gave his power; and his seat and great Autoritie. Revel. 13. vers 2. The Woman fled into the wilderness, that shee might bee nourished there for one thousand two hundred sixtie daies. Revel. 12. vers 14. And to the Beast it was given to remain with him fortie two moneths. 2. The time of the Beast and of the two
witnesses doth exspire with the sixth Trum∣pet, wherefore of necessitie they began to∣gether. For when the spirit of life from God entred into the two witnesses, and bee∣ing no more clothed with sackcloth, ascended up to heaven in a cloud; in the same hour was there a great earth∣quake and fierce war, wherein the tenth part of the Citie fell, and also the second wo passed. Revel. 11. vers 11, 12, 13, & 14. 3. That the time of the Gentiles which tread under foot the holie Citie, and the time of the witnesses clothed with Sack∣cloth, do begin together, it appeareth by the 11. Chapter of the Revelations, vers 2, 3. as a thing undoubted. 5. To the Prophet Daniel the Angel spoke of 3 ½ times. Chap. 7. vers 25. and Chapter 12. vers 6. but afterwards hee spoke also of one thousand two hundred sixtie daies. Wherefore it is called into Question, whether 3 ½ times and one thousand two hundred sixtie daies are one and the same times?
Answ. The Teachers do expound it generally to that effect; as if by the 3 ½ times, and one thousand two hun∣dred sixtie daies one and the same time is understood. But the Text doth make no mention of it. For the words are these. Chapter 7. vers 25. The Saints shall bee given into his hand, until a time and times, and the dividing of time, which is one thousand two hundred sixtie years. Chap. 12. v. 6. & 7. That it shall bee for a time, times and an half, which is one thousand two hundred sixtie years. So that these two places speak of the duration, how long the Beast with ten horns shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints. But in the Chap. 12. vers 11. is given a terminus à quo, a certain character and token, from which begin the Compu∣tation until one thousand two hundred nintie years, with which the 3 ½ times or one thousand two hundred six∣tie
years do exspire together. 6. The one thousand two hundred ninetie daies, Dan. 12. vers 11. do begin with the year of our Lord three hundred ninetie three, or three hundred ninetie five, when the terrible devastation and destruction of the Temple of Ierusalem, under the Ro∣man Emperour, Julian the Apostate hap∣pened. The words of the the text, chapter 12. vers 11. are these: from the time that the dailie sacrifice shall bee taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate, set up, there shall bee a thousand two hundred and ninetie daies. By the dailie Sacrifice is understood the Jewish worship, which although by the destruction of the Citie of Je∣rusalem: and of the Temple was taken away, yet it was not quite abolished, seeing the Jews under the Emperor Constantine the Great did yet celebrate their Passover, as you may read in the tenth book twelf and twentie fourth
chapter of Nicephorus; and were still in a continued hope to build up the Temple again. By the abomination of desolation, or by the abominable desolation is understood the final and last destruction of the Temple, whereof Christ Math. 24. vers 2. said, that there shall not bee left one stone upon another that shall not bee thrown down. The Abomination of desolation doth point out Caussam efficientem, the effici∣ent caus, which in Dan. 9. vers 27. out of the Hebrew Schikkuzim Mescho∣mem, is there well rendred, by the wings shall stand abominations of de∣solation, namely such abominations, whereby the holie place shall bee de∣stroied. But in the chap. 12. vers 11. wee read Schikkuz Schomem, which doth intimate a fulness and perfection, and must bee rendered the abominable deso∣lation. Vide Conradum Graserum in cap. 9. Dan. Exerc. 5. pag. 405. Ubi it à disserit:
Schomem rationem nominis videtur ha∣bere, ut magìs rem operatam quàm ipsam operationem, id est, magìs effectum quàm effectûs caussam significet: Cùm contrà per alterum meschomem causa effìciens profa∣nandi sanctuarii indicetur. Wherefore the true meaning and sens of these words is this: From the time that the dailie Sacrifice at Jerusalem is taken away, and the abominable deso∣lation of the Temple, wherein the wor∣ship and service of God onely could bee performed, shall bee fully and thorowly accomplished, there bee one thousand two hundred ninetie years. This total desolation and destruction of the Temple happened under the Emperor Julian, the Apostate, in the year of our Lord, three hundred sixtie three, or three hundred sixtie five, ac∣cording to som Chronologer's com∣putation. For, when Julian in despight of the Christians had recalled the Jews, that were dispersed to and fro, to return
into their land, and furnished them with monie, handie-craftsmen, work∣men, materials, and other helps, and commanded them, to build up the Temple again, and re-establish the Le∣vitical service; And the Jews had imbraced such offers of assistance, laid the foundation; and begun the build∣ing thereof: God himself did destroie their work by thunder and lightning from Heaven, with terrible earthquakes and fire-bals, and totally overthrew the foundation of the Temple; inso∣much that Cyrillus, then Bishop at Ie∣rusalem, was forced to confess and to acknowledg, that now the words of Christ, which hee spoke of the Tem∣ple unto his disciples, Matthew 24. vers 2. were fulfilled: That there shall not bee left one stone upon another, that shall not bee thrown down. Hereof may bee further read Am∣mianus Marcellinus lib. 23. Socrates lib. 3. c. 17. Theodoretus: lib. 3. c. 17. at the end. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 21. Tri∣part.
lib. 6. cap. 44. and others more. 7. The one thousand two hundred sixtie years must for the space of thirtie years bee protracted, and begin later, and at lest with the year of our Lord three hundred ninetie five, becaus they expire together with the one thousand two hundred nine∣tie years. Here wee must observ and look whether the Characters and Tokens, which are set upon the beginning of the one thousand two hundred sixtie years, may bee applied to the three hundred ninetie fifth year. Wee have three several Characters. 1. The Division of the Romane Em∣pire into two parts. Revel. chapter 12. vers 14. 2. The beginning of the treading under foot of the holie Citie. Chap. 11. vers 2. 3. The rising of the Beast out of the Sea. chapter 13. vers 2. The first Character is described in the Revel. 12. vers 14. in these words: And
to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that shee might flee into the wilderness, into her place, where shee is nourished. By the great Eagle is understood the Romane Empire; by the two Wings is meant the division of the same into two parts. Constantine the great, though hee removed the Imperial Seat from Rome to Byzance, or Constantinople; yet hee reteined to himself the Go∣vernment over the whole Empire, du∣ring his life; after his death, it was divided among his three Sons, into three parts. But this Division did not last long, but did soon determine, for Constantius did reign after his Brother's death over the whole Romane Em∣pire himself alone, as also after him Iulian, and other Emperors following. But after the death of Theodose the Great, who died the 17. of Ianuarie 395, the Romane Empire was divided between his two sons, Arcadius and and Honorius, so that Arcadius reigned
in the East, and Honorius in the West. And thus this Character may bee well applied to the three hundred nine∣tie fifth years. 1. Becaus of the division of the Ro∣mane Empire into two parts, whereby the wings of the Eagle are spread. 2. Becaus the Barbarous Nations did invade, and over-run the Romane Empire on all sides in the verie same year, whereby the holie Citie was horribly trodden under foot, and the Woman put to flight in the wilder∣ness. The second Character is expressed in the Revelations 11. vers 2. in these words: It is given unto the Gentiles that they shall tread the holie Citie under foot. By the Conversion of Constantine the Great, was the Child, which the Wo∣man (the christian Church) had brought forth, established upon the seat of God, and by that means the Christian Emperors came to the Go∣vernment, and the Heathenish service of
the Dragon got thereby a huge great downfal. But in the daies of Theodosius the Great, the great Dragon in the Romane Empire was quite overthrown, and cast to the ground. At that time the Church of God did triumph, and was glori∣ously built and propagated. But after Theodosius in the year of our Lord three hundred ninetie five in Ianuarie, was dead, and his two sons Arcadius and Honorius had entred into the Govern∣ment, the treading under foot of the holie Citie did soon begin; when the Goths, Huns, Alans, with other barbarous Na∣tions, under the Command of their King Alaricus, invaded first the Ori∣ental, other made an irruption into the Occidental Empire, and took the Ci∣tie of Rome in the year four hundred ten. Now by these desolations how the Christian Churches were destroied, the Countries spoiled, the Christians persecuted and reduced to a most piti∣ful
condition may bee gathered from the lamentation of the old Father Ie∣rome; whereof you may read in his first Tom. the Epist. 3d pag. 18. and Epist. 11. pag. 44. Likewise Augustine in his books of the Citie of God, doth give a further information hereof, and espe∣cially Ludovicus Vives in his Preface up∣on the same. 3. The third Character is set down in the Revelation chap. 13. vers 2. in these words; And a beast rose up out of the Sea, having seaven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns, ten Crowns. The Old Heathenish Empire is com∣pared to the red Dragon which hath seven heads, (seven Mountains in the Citie of Rome) and ten horns (Pro∣vinces) and upon his heads (in the Ci∣tie of Rome) seven Crowns (seven sorts of Government) namely: Reges, Consules, Dictatores, Decemviros, Tri∣bunos militum, Caesares. 10. Reges. Here the new Romane Empire under the Christian Emperours, and Kings is
brought in, which hath not seven Crowns upon the seven heads (up∣on the Mountains in the Citie of Rome,) but hath ten Crowns upon the ten horns; that is in the Kingdoms, into which the Romane Empire is divided. But wee must not seek the beginning of this beast in the time, when it had already fully his horns (Kingdoms) but but when it rose up out of the Sea; that is, when it invaded the Romane Empire by force of Arms, and made such a progress in it, that it subdued the Citie of Rome. And although the Barbarous Sep∣tentrional Nations have manie times invaded the Romane Empire with great power, yet they could never so far prevail, that they could take Rome. Ala∣ricus was the first, who, as was men∣tioned already in the second Character, in the year of our Lord three hun∣dred ninetie five, made an irruption in∣to the Romane Empire, with two hun∣dred thousand Goths, Huns, Alans, pre∣vailed
against the Romans, and at length took Rome in the year four hundred ten. About the same time som other Nations invaded the Romane Empire, which they tore into so manie pieces, that in the year of our Lord four hun∣dred fiftie five, and also sixtie years af∣ter the first Invasion ten Kings, each by himself, reigned in the Romane Empire. Wherefore the beginning of the Beast with ten horns, or the rising of the same out of the Sea, is referred to that year, when Alaricus with his Nati∣ons invaded the Roman Empire, name∣ly to the three hundred ninetie fifth year since the birth of Christ. Wee see also, that all the three Cha∣racters are incident into the three hun∣dred ninetie fifth year, as, 1. The spreading of the two wings of the great Eagle, by the division of the Romane Empire into two parts, whereby the Woman, (the Christian Church) doth flee into the wilder∣ness.
2. The rising of the Beast with ten horns out of the Sea, by the Invasion of Alaricus with his Nations. 3. The beginning of treading under foot the holie Citie, the Christian Church. The Historians also make a singular observation of that time, which fol∣lowed the death of Theodosius the Great, and refer unto the changes of the Ro∣man Empire. Carion in his Treatise of the four Monarchies, printed in the year one thousand five hundred thirtie one, doth prefix before the description of Arca∣dius and Honorius this title: the Destru∣ction of the fourth Monarchie. Philippus Peucerus writeth in his reviewed Chro∣nicles of Carion under Theodosius, p. 302. Theodosius hath been the last Empe∣ror, who possessed and maintained the whole Romane Empire, both in the East and West. For immediately after his death, under the reign of his son
Honorius, the Franconians entred into France, took the same, and their Duke Warmundus named himself King of France, and reigned as King without anie hinderance. In like manner was Rome taken of Alaricus King of the Goths. And pag. 306. After him (Theodosius the great) was the Empire pitifully torn and divided by the Goths and Vandals into Hungarie, Italie and Spain, but France was possessed partly by the Franconians, partly by the Burgundians. Under Honorius pag. 313. The be∣ginning of the Kingdom of France is derived from the taking of the Citie of Trier, in the year of our Lord four hundred three. This hath been the beginning, and occasion of the division of the Romane Empire towards France. The second breach or diminution, of the Romane Empire, from the Hun∣garians towards Italie, happened by the Goths. And hereunto agreeth Munsterus in
in his Cosmographie, printed in the year one thousand six hundred fourteen, pag. 381. and of the Edition of one thousand six hundred twentie eight, pag. 356. sub quaestione, How and when the Citie of Rome was taken again? where hee writeth thus: When the Goths had rebelled against the Romane Empire, and set up Alaricus for their King; they subdued and reduced not onely the Provinces of Thracia and Anglia, un∣der their power, and plucked two strong Feathers out of the High-flying Eagle's wings; but attempted also to cut off his head quite. Daniel Pareus writeth thus in Medulla Hist. Eccles. universalis, pag. 195. Fuit mors Theodosii verè fatalis ad ruinam & interitum Imperii Occidentalis, ut se∣cum abstulisse pacem Ecclesiae & Reip. pe∣nè omnem videatur. Seeing now the Characters of the begin∣ning of the Apocalyptical one thousand two hundred sixtie years, are applied to the three hundred ninetie fifth year,
since the birth of Christ: As also the Character of the beginning of the one thousand two hundred nine∣tie years of Daniel, applied unto the three hundred sixtie fifth year; And the difference of thirtie years be∣twixt the one thousand two hundred sixtie, and one thousand two hundred ninetie years are punctually found out; And contrariwise, it doth not appear by the histories, where such two times may bee found, which have thirtie years with such accidents following one to another, whereunto the afore∣said Characters can bee more suitably applied; Wee have reason to stand firm to this opinion, so long as wee are not convinced of a better, and con∣clude▪ That the one thousand two hundred nine∣tie years of the Prophet Daniel, 12. vers 11. begun with the last abominable desola∣tion of the Temple at Ierusalem, in the year of our Lord three hundred sixtie fifth, and the Apocalyptical one thousand two
hundred sixtie years, with the Invasion of the Roman Empire by the Goths, in the year three hundred ninteie five, and that both together do exspire with the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year, which is now shortly at hand. 2. With the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year, since the birth of Christ, do exspire the six thousand years since the Creation of the world. The Chronologer's supputation in general is this, that this present one thousand six hundred fiftieth year, since the birth of Christ, is the five thousand five hundred ninetie ninth year since the Creation of the world. But if wee do well consider the Chronological numbers expressed in the Scripture, it will evidently appear, that in this pre∣sent one thousand six hundred fiftieth year of our Lord, the five thousand nine hundred ninetie fifth year since the Creation of the world, doth exspire, and the six thousand year of the world will end with the one thousand six hun∣dred
fiftie fifth year of our Lord. According to the vulgar Supputation of years, the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord will bee the five thou∣sand six hundred fourth year since the Crea∣tion of the world. Unto these add the years, which either by the Chronologers have been omitted, or made too few, and left out. 1. One year, whilest the Flood lasted▪ Genes. c. 7. vers 11. and chapter 8. vers. 14. after the supputation of Funccius, Reusnerus, Partiltius, and others. 2. Sixtie years until the birth of Abraham; who was not born in the seventieth, but in the one hundred thir∣tieth year of Terah. For Terah died in Haran, Gen. 11. vers 32. when hee was old two hundred five years. Immediately after the death of Terah Abraham departed out of Haran, Gen. 12. vers. 4. Acts 7. 4. beeing old seven∣tie five years. From thence it doth follow, that Abraham was born, when Terah was
old one hundred thirtie years. 3. Two hundred fifteen years of the so∣journing of the Children of Israel in Egypt. In Exodus 12. vers 40, 41. wee read these words: The sojourning of the Chil∣dren of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirtie years. Which the aera vulgaris, or the common sup∣putation doth derive from the time of Abraham's calling, when hee was seventie five years old, Genes. 12. vers 4. in this manner as followeth. Until the birth of Isaac Gen. 21. vers 5. twentie five years. Until the birth of Iacob, Gen. 35. vers 26. sixtie years. Iacob was old when hee went into Egypt, Gen. 47. vers 9. one hundred thir∣tie years. Which make up two hundred fifteen years.
The Children of Israel dwelt in Egypt two hundred fifteen years. Which is against the clear text, which doth not speak of the times of the Fathers, but of the children of Is∣rael; not of the pilgrimage, but of the sojourning and bondage, not with∣out and in Egypt, but onely in Egypt. Abraham indeed went down into E∣gypt, Gen. 12. vers 10. but sojourned there not long, and was not in anie bon∣dage: Isaac came not at all into Egypt beeing forbidden. Gen. 29. vers 2. Jacob was one hundred thirtie years old before wee went down into Egypt. So that the four hundred thirtie years, of the sojourning of the Children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, Exod. 12. vers. 40. and when the seed of Abraham was a stranger in a Land that was not their's, and served them, and was afflicted there, Ge∣nesis 15. vers. 13. are to begin their supputation, from the one hundred thirtieth year of Jacob, and his en∣trance
into Egypt, unto which must bee added here two hundred fifteen years. 4. One hundred years from going forth out of Egypt, until the building of the Tem∣ple of Solomon. Aera vulgaris doth reckon in this period of time four hundred eightie years, as they are plainly set down, 1 Kings 6. vers 1. But by the book of Iudges, and other places of the Scrip∣ture, it doth appear that they were five hundred eightie years. As: Fortie years in the Wilderness. Deut. 1. vers 3. Acts 13. 18. Seven years of Ioshua in the taking of possession, and division of the Land of Canaan. Ioshua 14. vers 10. Four hundred fiftie years until Sa∣muel. Acts 13. vers 2. As namely, Eight under King Chushan Rishatha▪ ïm. Iudges 3. vers 8. Fortie under Othniel. vers 11. Eighteen under Eglon. vers 14.
Eightie under Ehud. vers 30. Twentie under Iabin. chap. 4. vers 3. Fortie under Deborah and Barak. Chapter 5. vers 31. Seven under the Midianites. chap. 6. vers 1. Fortie under Gideon. chap. 8. vers 28. Three under Abimeleck the Tyrant. chap. 9. vers 22. Twentie three under Tola. chap. 2. vers 3. Twentie two under Iair. vers 3. Sa. Three hundred one, as Iephthah saith. Three hundred, chap. 11. vers 26. Eighteen under the Philistines. ch. 10. vers 8. Six under Iephthah. chap. 12. v. 7. Seven under Ibzan. vers 10. Ten under Elon. vers 11. Eight under Abdon. vers 14. Fortie under the Philistines, chap. 13. vers 1. Twentie under Sampson. c. 16. v. 31.
Fortie under Eli. 1 Sam. chap. 4. vers 18. Sa. Four hundred fiftie, as above, Acts Chap. 13. vers 20. Fortie years under Samuel and Saul. Acts 13. vers 21. Fortie under David. first of Kings, chap. 2. vers 11. Three under Solomon, first of Kings, chap. 6. vers 1. Sa. Five hundred eightie years from the going out of Egypt until the build∣ing of the Temple of Solomon. Here do concur two Characters, as in the three hundred years, whereof Iephthah speaketh, Iudges 11. vers 26. Four hundred fiftie years of the Iudges until the Prophet Samuel, where∣of St Paul. Acts 13. vers 2. Which in the vulgar supputation, whereby are numbred but four hundred eightie years, are not found.
5. Eleven years of Ezekiah the last King of Iudah. In the vulgar supputation indeed are reckoned up from the building of the Temple, until the destruction of of the same, four hundred seventeen years; But there must bee eleven years taken off again, in respect the beginning of the Captivitie of Babylon is counted the eleventh year of Iechoniah, that was King immediately before, instead it should bee upon good ground, referred to the eleventh year of Ezekiah, at which time the Temple was destroied; As you may read hereof Michaël Mest∣linum quaest. 7. Chronolog. pag. 67. & seqq. Etiam Reusnerum de supput. anno∣rum mundi, pag. 28. & Iohannem Pisca∣torem in suo Chronol. Indice pag. 15. with som others more. 6. Seven years in the times of the Kings of Persia, as of Cyrus six years, and of Xerxes the second one year. 2. Whereof Mestlinus Quaest. Chro∣nol. pag. 3. 5. 38.
7. Two years, which Scaliger, Calvisius, and Helvicus do refer to the supputation of years since the birth of Christ. Now these mentioned years, which together amount to three hundred nine∣tie six years, beeing added to the five thousand six hundred four years, since the Creation of the world, according to the supputation of one thousand six hundred fiftie five years of our Lord; it will bee manifest that the six thou∣sand years since the Creation of the world, do exspire with the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year, since the Birth of Christ. 3. In the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year since the Birth of Christ, doth also exspire the period and time, from the beginning of the world until the Flood. The Flood came, when the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie sixth year from the Creation of the world was exspired. The end of the one thousand six hundred fiftie sixth year since the birth of Christ, is, according to the vulgar supputation,
incident into the end of one thousand six hundred fiftie fourth, or begining of one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year. Now the conjectures of som famous learned men have been these; that at the end of these years, great revoluti∣ons and changes may bee looked for; as especially do mention hereof. Leonard Krentheim in suis conject. p. 53. Euchstadius in discursu de conjunct. M. pag. H. 3. Wencestaus Budowez in circulo Horol. &c. pag. 15. Paulus Crellius in Prompt. Biblico, un∣der the word Burse, or title of repen∣tance, pag. 119. Seeing the mystical numbers, which are expressed in the Prophet Daniel, and in the Revelation of St John: the six thousand years, since the Creation of the world, and also the period since the beginning of the world until the Flood do meet with the ending of the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord, which draweth neer:
It is very likelie that for certain, som great things are at the door, and that wee may look for fearful and terrible revolutions. For now it is the time, wherein the Son of God doth call upon us, Watch, praie, look up, and lift up your heads; becaus your redemption is at hand. But the result of it, is this, which hee declareth, Luke 18 vers 8. When the Son of man cometh, shall hee finde faith on the earth? namely, that Faith which the widow had and used against the unjust Iudg; by her importunitie, prai∣ers, and supplications, until shee was avenged of her adversaries. Surely this faith is not found among them that dwell on the earth. The poor Woman put to flight, and wandring in the Wil∣derness, Revel. 12. vers 14. onely mak∣eth use of this weapon against her Ad∣versarie, and continueth in the same with crying, without intermission to God the righteous Judg. And shall hee not avenge her? Shall hee not avenge
his own elect, which crie daie and night unto him, though hee bear long with them? I tell you that hee will avenge them speedily. But those that live in securitie, and persist in their ma∣lice, and wickedness when they shall saie: Peace and safetie; then sudden de∣struction shall com upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. 1 Thes. 5. vers 2, 3. For the daie of the Lord shall com as a thief in the night. Wherefore watch and praie.
Apocalypsis Reserata: OR, THE REVELATION OF St IOHN OPENED: Wherein the distribution of the times of the New Testament being made Into The Kingdom of the Dragon, The Lievtenantship of Antichrist, The quiet state of the Church in the Kingdom of Christ, By the EXPOSITION of the XI, and XVI, Chapters, is shewed What in these our present times 1. Hitherto hath been fulfilled, 2. At this present is effectually brought to pass, 3. And henceforth is to bee exspected in the years neer at hand. REVEL. Chap. 22. v. 12. Behold I com quickly, and my reward is with mee, to give everie man according as his work shall bee. LONDON, Printed in the year 1650.
THE REVELATION OF St JOHN DEscribeth the State of the Christian Church in the New Testament, and also the things which shall com to pass in the Romane Empire, or in the fourth Mo∣narchie, under which the Church of God doth subsist. This description comprehendeth three pe∣riods, or three sorts of times. The first Period containeth Regnum Dra∣conis Ethnicum, the time of the Dragon, until the three hundred nintie fifth year of our Lord. This is the time, in which the seven
Crowns stood upon the seven heads of the Dragon: Revelations 12. vers 3. and the Dragon himself under the Hea∣thenish Emperors was publickly ador∣ed and worshipped; but the Christi∣ans persecuted, banished, and put to death; till at last Constantine the Great came to the Imperial seat, whereby the reign of the Dragon came to an end, the Dragon was cast out of the Church, Heaven, the Church prevailed, and triumphed, until the death of the Em∣peror Theodosius, at which time the Devil left his shape of a Dragon, and resigned his Host, his residence and seat, with his great autoritie unto the Beast with ten horns, when it rose up out of the sea. Revel. 13. vers 2. The second Period comprehendeth vica∣riatum Draconis Antichristianum: or the time from the three hundred ninetie fifth, until the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord, in which the Pope at Rome, as the Antichrist, and instal∣led Lievtenant of the Dragon, blasphem∣eth
God, and his name, and persecuteth his Saints for the space of one thousand two hundred sixtie years. Revel. 13. vers 2. when the Dragon was overcom, and cast out of the Church-Heaven; hee did cast out of his mouth water, as a flood after the woman, Revel. 12. vers 15. that is, hee stirred up the Septentrional Nations, to invade the Romane Em∣pire; intending thereby to root out and destroie the Church; But the Earth swallowed up the flood; in re∣gard these Nations imbraced the Chri∣stian Faith, remained in the Romane Empire, and erected several Kingdoms in it. Seeing then the Dragon saw, that hee could not maintain the Heathe∣nism, wherein hee openly was wor∣shipped and served, hee resigneth to the Beast, (which riseth up out of the sea, Revelations 13. vers 1. and is rid∣den and governed by the great Whore of Babylon, 17. vers 3. &c.) that is, to the Antichrist, who in the time of
these wars doth creep out in the Ro∣mane Empire, his power and his seat, and great autoritie, chapter 13. vers 2. and so make's him his Vicar and Liev∣tenant, by giving over to him his seat and residence, the Citie of Rome, and the whole Romane Empire. Whence it came to pass that about this time the Bishops of Rome begun to oppose the marriage of Priests, and to seek to have the Primacie and preeminencie both in Church and State. The Dragon doth resigne to his Lievtenant  his whole Host, (for in this sens the LXX In∣terpreters do use this word  as Exodus 14. vers 14. and 15. vers 4. and in other places, as Matthew 24. vers 29, 30. &c.) The host of the Dragon are his Angels or Devils, and the Idols, in which the Dragon and the Devils are worshipped and served by the Hea∣then. These (viz. Idols) the Antichri∣stian Popedome hath received and
worshipped, under the name and shape of Saints, the Dragon, and his Vicege∣rent; as hereof the text in the words following, vers 3. and 4. doth speak: The whole Earth did wonder at the Beast, and they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the Beast, and they wor∣shipped the Beast, &c. The Dragon doth give also unto him great Autoritie, and make's him a Head over great Countries; whereof David did prophesie in the Psal. 110. vers 6. The time of this Lievtenantship shall continue fortie two moneths, that is, one thousand two hundred sixtie years, since then it did begin in the three hun∣dred ninetie fifth year of our Lord, therefore it doth end in the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year, short∣ly to com. Upon this followeth the third Period, which bringeth Statum Ecclesiae tran∣quillum; the true peace and quiet condition of the Church here on earth. Seeing at the sound of the trumpet
of the seventh Angel, the seventh plague, or the third woe doth com upon the Romane Empire, and at the same time the seventh Vial of God's wrath is poured out, where∣with the Enemies of the Church are wholly cut off and destroied, yea, even the Devil himself shut up in the bot∣tomless pit, Revel. 20. vers 1, 2, 3. therefore now nothing but a true and constant peace can ensue. Whence it is that the Church of God rejoiceth with a great voice, Revel. 11. vers 15. saying: The Kingdoms of this world are becom the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Church, and hee shall reign for ever and ever. And in the v. 17. Shee giveth also thanks to the Lord God Almightie, because hee hath taken to himself his great power, and reigneth. Unto these three times, all the three parts of the Revelation of St Iohn are di∣rected. For the Son of God describeth in this Revelation the state of the Chri∣stian
Church, and the things befalling to the Romane Empire, in a threefold manner; as, 1. By seven Epistles, chap. 2. and 3. 2. By a book sealed. chap. 4, 5, 6, 7. 3. By a little book open. chap. 10. And following. Hee doth appear also to John everie time in an other shape. As 1. In the likeness of a son of man, chapter 1. who suffereth in the first pe∣riod. 2. As a Beast in the shape of a Lamb, having seven horns and seven eies, ch. 5. which doth fight in the second pe∣riod. 3. As a mightie strong Angel clothed with a cloud, chapter 10. who in the third period hath all things put under his feet, and reigneth. 1. In the likeness of a Son of man in the midst of the seven Candlesticks, &c. chapter 1. vers 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Hee declareth the condition of the Church in general, by seven Epistles,
whereof the first and second belong to the first period; the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh to the second; and the promises, chap. 2. and 3. to the third. 2. As a beast, in the shape of a Lamb, with seven horns, and seven eies, hee openeth the book sealed (the secret and hidden Decree of God,) and inti∣mateth thereby the things befalling to the Romane Empire, under which the Church is built up and preserved, chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and distinctly how things shall bee carried. In the Political State. In the first Period until the three hundred ninetie fifth year of our Lord, which by opening of the first six seals is perform∣ed, chapter 6. where in the first five seals, the condition under the heathenish Emperors; but in the sixth, the fall of Heathenism under the Christian Em∣perors, from Constantine the Great un∣til the death of Theodosius, who died the 17. of Ianuarie Anno three hundred
ninetie five, fifteen prefigured. In the second Period from the three hun∣dred ninetie fifth, until the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord, where the seventh seal is opened, and seven Angels with seven Trumpets de∣clare to the Romane Empire by seven judgments it's ruine, chap. 8. which plagues have been fulfilled. The first: by the Invasions of bar∣barous Nations. Anno three hundred ninetie five vers 7. The second by the destruction of the Citie of Rome, which first hapned by Alaricus. Anno four hundred ten, ver. 8. The third by taking away Imperial dignitie in Augustulus▪ Anno four hun∣dred seventie six, vers 10. The fourth, by the Abolition of all eminent publick charges at Rome. Anno five hundred fiftie two, vers 12. The fifth, by the Saracens, as the first wo. Chap. 9. vers 1. until the twelfth. The sixth, by the Turks, chap. 9. vers 13. until the nineteenth, and the
abominable Idolatrie, murthers, sor∣ceries, fornications and thefts, vers 20, 21. of the Papists, as the second wo. In the third Period when the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year doth be∣gin, the seventh Angel doth sound, and withal the seventh judgment is executed upon the Enemies of the Church, with the third wo, whereby the Mysterie of God is fulfilled, Revel. 10. vers 7. 3. Appeareth the Son of God to John, as a mightie strong Angel from Heaven clothed with a cloud, having a little book open, which Iohn swallowed down, and thereupon prophesieth, how things shall come to pass, especially, In the Ecclesiastical State. In the first Period until the three hun∣dred ninetie fifth year. 1. The Church is built up under great persecution, chap. 11. vers 1. 2. The Church is gloriously beauti∣fied, and clothed with the Son (of
righteousness) hath the Moon under her feet (despiseth all worldlie and earthlie things, and reigneth over the works of darkness;) and upon her head a Crown of twelv stars, the Apostles and the wholsom Doctrine of the same. Chap. 12. vers 1, 2. 3 The red Dragon, the Devil stir∣reth up manie heresies, persecuteth the Church, Constantine the great cometh to the Imperial Seat, the Dragon is overcom, and Heathenism exstirpated, vers 4. and following. In the second Period from the three hun∣dred ninetie fifth, until the one thousand six hundred fiftie fift year, these seven Synchronisms or concurrent times are de∣scribed. 1. The Holie Citie is trodden under foot by the Gentiles, chap. 11. vers 2. 2. The two Witnesses clothed with sackcloth, vers third until the tenth. 3. The Woman fled into the
wilderness, and is fed there, chap. 12. vers 6. until the fourteenth. 4. The Beast with ten horns blas∣phemeth God, and maketh war with the Saints. chap. 13. vers 5, 6, 7. 5. The Beast with two horns at the same time drive's a trade with his pedling wares, vers 11. until the eighteenth. 6. The one hundred fortie four thou∣sand sing a new song, and live without blame, chap. 14. vers 1. until the sixth. 7. The Whore of Babylon, the Po∣pish Hierarchie ride's, and rule's the beast with ten horns, the Princes and Potentates, which adhere unto the Papacie at their own chusing and liking, chap∣ter 17. Herewith God causeth Babylon to bee forewarned. Chap. 14. vers 6. with fol∣lowing.
Declareth and denounceth unto her the punishments and plagues. Chap∣ter 15. and 16. And when no Reformation doth fol∣low, hee passeth the sentence upon her, and destroieth her. Chap. 17. and 18. Whereupon in the third Period followeth the description of the great joie and Triumph of the Church, over the to∣tal ruine and destruction of her ene∣mies. chapter 19. and the desired tran∣quillitie and peace of the Christian Church. These things wee may see and learn in general out of the Revelation of St Iohn. But seeing there bee manie particular and important things conteined there∣in, which do relate unto our present times, and are set down for the com∣fort of the Church, which is now af∣flicted; wee think good and expedi∣ent to make a collection of the same. Now of these our times doth speak ex∣actly and particularly the eleventh chapter in the Historie of the two Witnesses.
And the sixteenth chapter in the descrip∣tion of the seven vials of the wrath of God. The eleventh chapter describeth the beginning of the third part of the Pro∣phesie, out of the little open book, and and goe's through all the three Periods of the times of the New Testament, and becaus it is as it were an abridg∣ment of the whole Revelation, and de∣scribeth the whole time of the New Testament; wee will take the whole into our thought, and consider the con∣tents thereof. Now it consisteth of two parts, wherein is described 1. What is declared unto St Iohn by word of mouth, how things shall com to pass. 1. in the first period, at the building up of the Christian Church. 2. In the second period, under the Antichristian Vicar in two Synchro∣nisms or concurrencies of times. Where, 1. The Gentiles tread the holie Citie un∣der
foot, for the space of fortie two moneths. vers 2. 2. The two Witnesses are clothed with sackcloth, one thousand two hundred sixtie daies, vers 3. And following. 2. What in the beginning of the third Period is represented to Iohn by a sudden change in a vision. In the first period under the Empire of the Dragon, the Son of God causeth his Temple and Church to bee built up. The place of the Sacrifices to bee measured, and doth faithfully protect his persecuted Christians. For thus writeth Iohn. Vers 1. And there was given mee a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood saying: Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein. Mow seeing the building and gather∣ing of the Christian Church is here commended to Iohn, under the mea∣suring of the Iewish Temple at Ierusa∣lem; therefore wee must consider the
condition and form of the Tem∣ple, that wee may attain unto the true proper meaning of this text. 1. The Temple stood in the Citie of Ierusalem upon the Mountain Moria, the length thereof was threescore Cubits, the breadth twentie cubits, and the height an hundred and twentie cubits. 2 Chro∣nic. 3. vers 3. and 4. Iosep. antiq. lib. 8. cap. 3. It was divided into two parts. 1. The hinder part towards the West was twentie cubits long, and twentie cubits broad; and called Sanctum San∣ctorum, the most holie place, into which the High-Priest alone entred but once a year in his High-Priests attire, first of Kings 6. vers 16. and 8. vers 6. 2 Chron. 5. vers 7. 2. The Forepart towards the East was fortie cubits long, and twentie cubits broad, and was called Sanctum, the holie place into which onely the Priests entred. 1. Reg. 6. vers 17. 2 Chron. 5 v. 11. and this is called here in the text, The Temple of God.
(Nota. Numerus cubicus dimensionum Templi Judaici exhibet Templi Mystici numerum Novi Testamenti. 144000. Longitudo. 60. cubitorum. Latitudo. 20. facit 1200. Altitudo. 120. facit 144000. numerum signatorum. cap. 7. & 14.) 2. Before this hous and Temple of God, were two Courts; whereof you may read in the second of Kings 21. vers 5. 2 Chron. 4. vers 9. 1. The Inner Court, first of Kings 6. vers 36. which was called the Court of the Priests. 2 Chron. 4. vers 6. into which none was permitted to enter, but the Cohanim and Priests, according to the appointed order, there they served God with sacrifices and praiers. In the middle of this Inner Court stood the Altar for the Burnt-Offer∣ings,
which was twentie cubits long and broad; and ten cubits high. This whole place of the Inner Court is called here Thysiasterium. 2. Without this was the great Court. 2 Chron. 4. vers 9. Iosephus. lib. 8. c. 3. compassed with a wall of white Mar∣ble; The Outward Court, Ezekiel 40. vers 17. called the Court (in the Temp∣le) of the people, or of the Israëlites. This place did contein in it's circum∣ference four furlongs, and none durst enter into it, but the Israëlites, which were purified according to the Law. The unclean Jews, and Gentiles durst not com into it. It is called in the Greek text, , the Outward Court. 3. About this Court Herod caussed yet another great place to bee inclosed with a wall, for the Gentiles and un∣clean, which was called the Court of the Gentiles; whereof here no menti∣on is made. By this Iewish Temple doth the Angel
represent unto John the condition of the Church, and Congregation of God in the New Testament, giving him a reed, and commandeth him to measure. By the measuring is signified the build∣ing and propagating of the Church. (Ezech. 40. and following, Zach. 2. vers 1, 2. Revelations 22.) God's Fa∣therlie providence, and faithful care; and how exactly and narrowly hee doth observ the actions and sufferings of his believing people. Iohn should measure 1. The Temple of God; that is, the Christian Congregation, the true, in∣visible, hidden Church, which God will build up in the hearts of Believers. 1 Cor. 3. vers 16, 17. and 16. vers 9. 2 Cor. 6. vers 16. 1 Peter 2. 5. Ephes. 3. 17. Iohn 14. vers 23. 2. The Altar  the place, where the Sacrifices were offered, the place of oblations, which was the in∣ner Court, where the Altar of burnt-offerings stood, where the Priests did
sacrifice, and performed their service, and praiers, That is: Becaus the Christian Church will bee exposed to afflictions, and persecu∣cutions, and is to suffer manie grie∣vous torments and tribulations, in re∣gard the true Professors and servants of God, shall bee delivered up and killed like sheep appointed for the slaughter, there∣fore hee causeth the sufferings, and miseries which they should undergo, to bee measured out unto them, whereby hee setteth certain bounds to the Tyrants, beyond which they cannot go; and when they are com so far, then must vengeance overtake them. Hence it is, that the sacrificed souls of the Martyrs, who were slain for the word of God, and lie under the altar, (as slaughtered sacrifices) crie with a loud voice to the Lord, holie and true, for vengeance. Revel. 6. vers 9, 10. 3. And them that worship therein. Them therein, not in the Altar, but in
the inner Court, in the Court of the Priests; as Kings and Priests, Re∣vel. 1. vers 9. and 5. vers 10. as the Roial Priesthood, 1 Petr. 2. 9. in the beauties of his holiness, Psal. 110. pure and undefiled. Worship, serv God, with perseverance until the end, and stick close to him, in all sorts of persecutions, even to the yielding up, and sacrificing of their bodies and lives. Now followeth the Description of the condition of the Church in the second Pe∣riod, in the time of Poperie from the three hundred ninetie fifth untill the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year, in two Synchronisms, or concurrences of times. 1. The first of the treading under foot the holie Citie, vers 2. But the Court, which is without the Tem∣ple, leav out, and measure it not, for it is given unto the Gentiles. ; wee read in the old greek versions: which doth agree
with the above-mentioned description of the Courts of the Temple. For the Inner Court is in the first vers in∣timated by the world Thysiasterium. But by the Outward Court, here is understood the Outward worship, or ser∣vice of God, which consisteth but in the Outward appearance and Ceremo∣nies, whereof God will take no no∣tice, and therefore rejecteth it. Leav it out, and measure it not saith the Angel. For it given unto the Gentiles, and the holie Citie they shall tread under foot. Here wee must reflect and look, First, upon the invasion of the Heathe∣nish Barbarous Nations. For from the three hundred twelfth year of our Lord; when Constantine the great was converted unto the Christian Faith, until the three hundred ninetie fifth year; when Theodosius the great died, the Church of God did triumph over the Gentiles, and destroied the
worship of the Dragon, and their ido∣latrous Temples. But immediately af∣ter the death of Theodosius the Great, the Goths, Huns, Alans, with other Barbarous Nations, invaded the Ro∣mane Empire, ruined and destroied the same on all sides, whereby the Church, as the holie Citie begun to bee troden under foot, and the Anti∣christ had an occasion given to break forth, and shew himself. vid. Hieron. Epist. 3. & 11. 2. Upon the Heathenish Idolatrie, which in Poperie hath been brought in again. The Heathen worshipped Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Hercu∣les, Juno, Venus, &c. In the Popish Religion, Marie, Peter, Paul, George, &c. are set up instead of those, and called upon in time of distress, so that there is but little difference between them. 3. Upon the horrible Sodomie, and other abominable sins, which in time past have been committed by the Heathen,
and then afterwards practised, and in publick books defended, and are as yet commended, and permitted in the Popish Church by the Clergie and others, without anie shame, or re∣straint. This treading under foot shall continue fortie two moneths, that is, one thou∣sand two hundred sixtie years, as doth appear in clavi Apocalypt. 2. The second Synchronismus, or concurrencie of times, of the two Witnesses clothed with sackcloth, &c. while's the Holie Citie is troden under foot, God will not forget his own people, but will faithfully care for them, where∣fore hee saith: V. 3. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophesie a thousand two hundred and threescore daies, clothed with sackcloth. By the two Witnesses are understood faithful Teachers, and Governors of the Church, both Ecclesiastical and Political. To such hee will give, that
they may edifie, and propagate the Church of God, and preserv the same against all Heresies, and hostile attempts. The number of the witnesses is small, beeing but two of them; which is the least number, yet sufficient for the testimonie of the truth. For at the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter bee established. Deuter. 19. vers 15. Matth. 18. vers 16. John 8. vers 17. 2 Cor. 13. vers 15. The Angel saith, Unto my two Wit∣nesses: whereby it doth appear, that hee that speaketh here unto Iohn, is the Son of God himself. They shall prophesie clothed with sack∣cloth. The whore of Babylon is araied in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stones and pearls, Re∣velations 17. vers 4. But the wit∣nesses of Christ are clothed with sack∣cloth; that is, their cloths are but poor and despicable, as those were of the Prophets of God in times of old,
who wore also sackcloth, Isaiah 20. v. 2. a rough garment, Zechar. 13. vers 4. Elijah was girt with a girdle of leather, 2 Kings 1. vers 8. preaching repen∣tance, and the suffering of the Cross, and persecutions, and were exposed to all manner of tribulations and perse∣cutions. A thousand two hundred and threescore daies; that is, as manie years from the three hundred ninetie fifth year of our Lord, until the one thousand six hun∣dred fiftie fifth year, as it doth appear in Clavi Apocalypt: Vers 4. These are the two Olive-trees, and the two Candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. Thus are the High-Priest Ioshua and the Prince Zerubbabel described, Zach. 4. vers 14. Vers 5. And if anie man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies, and if anie man will hurt them, hee must in this man∣ner bee killed.
This is taken out of the historie of the Prophet Elijah, when at his request fire came down from Heaven and con∣sumed the Captain, with his fiftie men. 2 King. 1. vers 10. 12. Which likewise the Disciples of Christ would have don, when the Sa∣maritans would not receiv Christ and them, Luke 9. vers 54. Vers 6. These have power to shut Hea∣ven, that it rain not in the daies of their Prophesie, which is also taken out of the historie of Elijah, 1 Kings 1. V. 1. And have power over the wa∣ters, to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will, which is out of Moses's and Aa∣ron's expedition in Egypt, applied and referred hereto, whereof wee read in Exodus 7. vers 20. and in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. chapters. By this description of the two Wit∣nesses, God doth declare that, what mercies in times of old hee hath shewed unto his people, the Children of
Israël, the same hee will also shew in the New Testament unto them that believ. Hee will give them Ioshuas and Ze∣rubbabels; faithful Teachers, and reli∣gious Rulers, and Governors, who shall fit and edifie them unto the Tem∣ple of God, and as Candlesticks give light unto them with their pure do∣ctrine, and as Olive-trees assist them with powerful consolation. Hee will give them zealous Elijahs, and Elishahs, who shall fight against the whore Jezabel, the Priests of Baal, and other persecutors. Hee will also at length send them his Moses's and Aarons, who shall deliver them, and bring them forth out of the Antichristian bondage. Vers 7. And when they have or shall have finished their Testimonie: cùm finierint vel peregerint. Thus the versions do render it, either in the perfect, or future perfect tens, whereby the Teachers and Expositors have been mistaken, to think that this
last war should not begin till then; when the determined one thousand two hundred sixtie years of the two Witnesses should bee exspired. But becaus by this means the two Witnesses should remain in sackcloth, and the Woman in the wilderness, be∣yond the time appointed, and also the fourth beast should continue to blas∣pheme longer then 3½ times, or for∣tie two moneths. To all which, not onely the plain text, but also the swearing of the Angel, Daniel 12. vers 7. and the great Oath of the Son of God, Revelations 10. vers 6. are contradictorie; therefore wee must look upon the propertie of the text in the original tongue;  is the indefinitum primum, which indeed may bee rendred in the perfect tens, when they have finished, or in the future, perfect tens, when they shall have fi∣nished. But this exposition beeing al∣so repugnant and contrarie to this, and other texts in the Revelation; wee
must reject it, and render the words in futuro simplici cùm finituri sunt; When they shall finish: namely, when the one thousand two hundred sixtie years shall draw to an end, as Ioannes Clove∣rius in primo diluculo Apocalyptico prop. 14. p. 124. and in Comment. post∣humo Tom. 3. page 28. doth observ. Likewise Iosephus Medeus in Comment. in Apocalypsin. In the one thousand two hundred sixtie years, first the one thousand years do expire in the year one thou∣sand three hundred ninetie five. Then the two hundred years expire in the year one thousand five hundred nine∣tie five, whereupon do follow the six∣tie years, as the end: So that these words; when they shall finish their te∣stimonie, are to have this sens; when in the one thousand five hundred ninetie fith year of our Lord, the sixtie years shall begin. Then the Beaest that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against
them, and shall overcom them and kill them. By the Beast here is meant, the Beast with ten horns, which Chapter 13. vers 1. riseth up out of the Sea; whereof the Angel in the 17. Chapter vers 8. saith to Iohn, The Beast that thou sawest, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit. And vers 11. The Beast that was, and is not, even hee is the eighth, and is of the seven, &c. That is: the Empire or Government, hath been under the Heathenish Romane Empe∣rors, where the Dragon did reign, and was openly worshipped in Paganism. And is not. The Dragon was thrown from his seat, and is not any more worshipped openly, becaus Chri∣stian Emperors and Governors are com to the Imperial dignitie, who have destroied heathenism. And ascendeth again out of the bottom∣less pit. When the Dragon's govern∣ment was destroied, and the Heathe∣nish Idolatrie abolished, the Dragon
creep's in again by the means of the Beast with ten horns (when the Ro∣mane Empire is divided into manie Kingdoms) give's him his power, and his seat, and great autoritie; and bring's it to this that a new and more holie form of Idolatrie is established, and that hee, the Dra∣gon, together with the Beast is wor∣shipped again, Revelations 13. vers 2, 3, 4. This Beast is the eighth, and is of the seven; that is, the Rider (the wo∣man sitting upon the Beast) which John seeth in a vision, Chapter 13. vers 3. doth govern the civil State in the divided Romane Empire, as the Beast with ten horns (and this is the seventh sort of Government) and withal the Ecclesiastical, Popish Go∣vernment also, which is the eighth sort. But becaus the Woman sit's up on the Beast, and both doth make one Com∣plexum, or a Rider; And the Woman doth after her pleasure, ride and go∣vern the Beast; therefore both the
last forms of the Romane Common∣wealth, the Ecclesiastical and Politi∣cal Government in Poperie are count∣ed for One, wherefore the Angel saith, The eighth is of the seven. Whence wee conclude, that by the Beast, which ascended out of the bot∣tomless pit, is understood the Popish Ecclesiastical Government, which useth the Temporal sword, and the power of worldlie Potentates, as a Rider maketh use of the power and and strength of his hors. Of this Beast is said here, that it shall make war against the two witnesses, and shall overcom them, and kill them: That is, there shall bee in the Romane Empire, a persecution set a foot against the Evangelical Prote∣stants, by the instigation of the Pope and the Prelats, towards the end of the appointed time, in the last sixtie years, from the one thousand five hun∣dred ninetie fifth, until the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year.
The two Witnesses shall bee over∣com and killed: That is, they shall bee removed, and thrust out of all Eccle∣siastical and Political Offices and im∣ploiments. (Vers 8. And their dead bodies shall lie) in the street of the great Citie, which spi∣ritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. Here is the place described, where the persecution shall happen. It is not an universal persecution, which goe's throughout the whole Romane Em∣pire, but a particular Act, becaus the dead bodies of the two Witnesses do not lie in all the streets, but onely in One; in the street of the great Ci∣tie. By the great Citie is understood the Citie of Rome, of which the Angel saith, in the 17. chapter, vers 18. The Wo∣man which thou sawest is that great Ci∣tie, which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth; Which is called in the 14. chapter vers 8. Babylon the great Ci∣tie.
And that by Babylon is meant the Citie of Rome, is granted by the Je∣suits themselvs, as Blasius Viegas in cap. 17. Apoc. sect. 3. Remacius de Vaulx in Harpocrate divino part 1. fol. 235. Bellarm. lib. 2. Pontif. Rom. c. 2. & lib. 3. c. 5. But by the Citie with the streets, is the whole Romane Popish Empire set forth; as it is elswhere compared unto a Beast with ten horns, chap. 13. and 17. and unto the Sea with rivers and fountains, Chapter 16. Compare also Luc. 14. vers 21. 23. The Citie of Rome is called spiritually, that is, the Citie of Rome, or the Ro∣mane Papacie. Is among the Hebrews, especially the Prophets to bee called; signifieth as much as to bee; and that in a singular high manner and waie, as appeareth by Isaiah chapter 1. vers 26. chapter 7. vers 14 chapter 9. vers 6. chapter 56. vers 7. chapter 60. vers 14. chap. 26. vers 4. Ierem. 3. vers 17. chap. 23. vers 6. Ezech. 48. vers 35. Zach. 6.
vers 12. chap. 8. vers 3. Finkius. Can. 49. Cent. 11.) Spiritually, that is Mystically, in a mysterious sens and resemblance. Another Sodom, becaus of their Pae∣derastia, and other horrible Sodomiti∣cal Abominations and sins, which not onely are committed, but com∣mended there. As Sleidan lib. and Ba∣laeus in Catalogo, do write concerning Io∣annes de la Cata Archbishop of Bene∣vent, that hee published in print a Treatise to commend Sodomie: so that this is fully agreeable to that which the Prophet Isaiah saith, chap. 3. vers 9. The shew of their countenance doth witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Shee is another Egypt, becaus of the great blindness and hardness of heart, as also becaus of the Tyrannie and grievous bondage, wherewith shee doth afflict the people of God, driving and compelling them to a slavish ser∣vitude of Poperie.
Shee is also a true likeness of Ierusalem, becaus shee, like the Iews, doth de∣spise God and his word, killeth the Prophets, nay, refuseth to hear, and to receiv the Son of God himself, blaspheming, calumniating, persecut∣ing, and crucifying him in his mem∣bers, as by experience is cleerly seen. And their dead bodies (shal lie) in the street. These words are spoken, as it were with som amazement, abruptly, and without the concluding word to make up the sens. The dead bodies of the Witnesses in this street? But which street? A Citie hath manie streets; and so hath the papal State, which is here called the great Citie, having under it manie streets and Kingdoms in subjection, those wee must reflect upon to discover, where such wars and persecutions in these years from the one thousand five hundred ninetie fifth of our Lord are hapned. Three principal streets or Kingdoms hath the Oriental Antichrist, the Truth
in his subjection, hee hath not used anie such persecution against the Christians in his Dominions. Seven are under the Occidental An∣tichrist. In Italie, France, Spain, and the British Kingdoms, no such remarkable persecution did happen within this time, nor also in Poland: The attempt, which was made in Prussia in the one thousand five hundred ninetie fifth year of our Lord, was of no long continuance. What came to pass in Hungarie and Transylvania in the year one thousand six hundred two, and som following was quieted by the Putshkeyish insurrection; and cannot bee referred to this. The tenth Horn yet remain's; Germa∣nie, or the Germane Empire, which in the whole Beast or Empire cannot bee counted otherwise, but one horn, and a Kingdom by it self in the whole bodie of the fourth Monarchie. This is the principal street in the
great Citie, the principal horn of the Beast, the principal Kingdom in the fourth Monarchie, whose head is repre∣sented by the Citie of Rome. This Germane Empire is here called the street, per excellentiam, becaus it is the principal street in the Empire, which doth appear hence. 1. By reason it is called the Romane Empire. 2. By reason it is, as it were a figure and Image of the old Romane Empire, having seven heads, in regard of the seven Princes Electors, and ten Pro∣vinces, in respect of the ten Circles, into which it is distributed. 3. By reason that the head of the Germane Empire hath still the name of a Romane Emperor, and hath the the preeminencie above all other Kings adhering to the Papal State. Now in this street wee must seek the warr; and wee shall also finde it, if wee consider what is passed from the one thousand fiue hundred ninetie fifth
year, until this present hour, against the true Professors of the Gospel. The Pope indeed hath from the be∣ginning of the Reformation, which hapned by Doctor Luther, alwaies aim∣ed at this, how hee might wholly root out and destroie the Professors of the Gospel, and to this effect, the Counsel of Trent was called in a spe∣cial manner. But this would not take place in Ger∣manie, until the Jesuitical Sect prevail∣ed, and brought things to that pass, that the peaceable and meek hearts of Potentates have given too too much credit, and yielded to their flatterings, calumnies, and deceits. Whereupon, in the year one thousand five hundred ninetie eighth begun the persecution, against the Evangelical Protestants in Styria, Carniola, and Krain: and what success it had, and what thereupon followed in other parts of the Empire, especially in the Kingdom of Bohemia, and in all the hereditarie Lands of the
mightie and eminent hous of Austria; is manifest to the world, and there is in all these proceedings, which are here described, nothing els wanting but the last Act, which shall yet bee put in execution in Silesia. When this Act shall bee finished, then shall this war, victorie, and execution bee at an end, and therewith shall the 3 ½ years begin, at which time the dead bodies of the two Witnesses shall lie in the street, whereof the text speaks. V. 9. And som of the people and kindreds,(the two Wit∣nesses.) and tongues and Nations shall see their dead bodies three daies and a half. Strange people, forreign Nations, and people of strange tongues did meet in this Germane war for Religion. And at Munster and Osnabruck were in like manner such kinde of people at the Treaties of Peace, of which is said: Som (of the people) shall see the dead bodies of the two Witnesses. When the Treatie of Peace shall bee fully exe∣cuted, then shall the forreign Nations,
which have mainteined the Evangeli∣cal caus, cleerly discover what they have neglected in that Treatie and con∣clusion of Peace, how manie dead bo∣dies they have made, and how manie they have in the hereditarie Provinces, shut up and excluded by this Pacifica∣tion, from the Exercise of Religion, from Libertie of Conscience, from their Privileges, &c. and how they have wholly cut them off, and de∣prived them of all hope, which be∣fore this Pacification they yet had, and which by their victorious arms was at last held forth unto them. What are the Evangelical Professors in the hereditarie Provinces at this time, els then dead bodies or corps, which civilly have neither breath, nor life in them; nay, how manie thou∣sand souls shall yet bee killed, by the execution of this Pacification? This they shall see three daies and an half. That is, three years and an half, from
the time that the execution of the Pa∣cification shall bee fully accomplished, the last Act of the persecution finish∣ed, and the Evangelical Ministers ex∣pelled, and deposed out of the heredi∣tarie Principalities of Silesia. Thus far, namely till the 3 ½ years be∣fore the end of the appointed one thousand two hundred sixtie years, should this last persecution reach: whereby it appeareth, that there is none other intimated in this text, but this, whereof mention hath been made in Germanie. But they shall not onely see the dead bo∣dies of the two Witnesses, but they shall al∣so have som consideration over them. Which the word  doth import, which as Budeus doth prove out of Aristotle, doth signifie rationem habere, to look to a thing, and to have som care for it, as it doth appear by the text following: And shall not suffer their dead bodies to bee put in graves. Here the question is, whether these
words are to bee understood of the friends, or of the enemies of the Pro∣fessors of the true Religion? Com∣monly these words use to bee referred to the enemies of the Evangelical Pro∣fessors, and are expounded; That in this last persecution there shall bee such crueltie used, that the dead bodies shall not have so much as earth given them to bee buried in. But wee must take notice, that these words are not propriè▪ and according to the meaning of the Letter to bee understood. For as in the eleventh and twelfth verses, there quickning and rising must bee taken in a civil sens, so likewise their killing a lying in the street must bee civilly understood. Moreover the tenth vers following doth describe al∣so the enemies by the name of them that dwell upon the earth: wherefore wee do infer, That the forreign Nations will not wholly laie down the sword, but will have at all times a watchful eye upon the designs of Papists in Germa∣nie,
and will not give waie, that the Evangelical Protestants shall bee total∣ly destroied, and buried under ground. Vide Josephum Medum, and M. Gott∣licb. Heyland super hunc locum. philipp. Nicolai de R. Christi. p. 6. 4. Read also Wisd. chap. 3. vers 1. 9. Vers 10. And they that dwell upon the earth. That is, The Papists in general, who have their heaven here upon earth. Finckius-Can. Theol. Cent. 11. can. 90. In scriptura S. peccatores appellan∣tur habitatores Terrae, non autem justi. Hi enim passim appellantur Advenae, pe∣regrini, incolae. Ex Hieron. Epist. 129. ad Dardanum. Shall rejoice over them, and make mer∣rie, and shall send gifts one to another. These words are taken out of the book of Esther, chap. 9. vers 19. 22. and they have their peculiar sens, the effect whereof is found in that which doth actually appear. Because these two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt on the earth vers 5. is said of the two Witnesses, that they are hurt unjustly; here is attributed unto them, that they torment their enemies, by sifting and searching out their Do∣ctrine and conversation, by examining and trying all things in them, according to the Divine Scriptures, by contra∣dicting their fals Doctrine, and abomi∣nable Idolatrie, and by laying their shameful, abominable, Sodomitical life before them. Thus did Eliah and Micah torment the King Ahab. 1 King. 18. v. 17, 18. Jere∣miah, the Priests and the Prophets, Je∣remiah 27. vers 11. the Prophet Amos the people of Israel, Amos 7. vers 10. The Son of God the Devils. Mattthew 8. vers 29. Which must now bee called, to do injurie, to rais sedition, and to oppose the Magistrates; The fault is in thine own people said the Officers of the Children of Israël, Exodus 5. vers 16. For this is found most true: Mali cùm injuriam facere non
sinuntur injuriam se accipere existimant. As Grotius in his Annotation upon Mat. chap, 8. ver. 29. writeth. Hitherto hath John written what the Son of God hath declared unto him by word of mouth. Hereupon followeth a sudden change in the vision, and thereby is represented a sudden change in the Romane Em∣pire. In respect that the Son of God doth end his Prophecie and speech; and John tronsported in a vision, seeth before his eies, what after the issue of of 3 ½ years befel to the Witnesses, and what terrible, unexspected events, and alterations suddenly and unawares com to pass. Here beginneth now the third Period in the year one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth of our Lord. Where the enemies of the Gospel are quel∣led, and therewith doth break forth the true peace and tranquillitie of the Church. Vers 11. And after three daies and an half the Spirit of life from God entred into them, &c,
When these 3 ½ daies, or years com to an end, with the one thousand six hun∣dred fiftie fifth year; then also toge∣ther therewith do exspire the fortie two moneths of treading the holie Citie under foot, chap. 11. vers. 2. The one thousand two hundred sixtie daies of the two Witnesses clothed with sackcloth, vers 3. The one thousand two hundred sixtie daies of the Woman in the wilderness, chap. 12. vers 6. The fortie two moneths of the Beast, and of his blasphemies, chap. 13. vers 5. The time of the Image of King Nebu∣chadnezzar. Dan. chap. 2. The determined time of the four Monar∣chies. Dan. chapter 17. vers 12. 25. The one thousand two hundred ninetie daies of Dan. chap. 12. vers 11. &c. The spirit of life from God entered into them. In the chapter 37. vers 14. of Eze∣kiel, God in the behalf of the Jews in the Captivitie of Babylon, doth use such
an expression, saying: I will put my spi∣rit in you, and yee shall live, and I shall place you in your own Land, &c. The same will befal to the exiled, and oppressed Evangelical Professors, God will send them an unexspected help by such means, which never en∣tred into anie man's thoughts. God will revive them again, bring them in∣to their own Land, re-establish them in their dignities, and publick functi∣ons, and give them greater and higher Privileges, and Liberties, then they ever had before. And they stood upon their feet. The Exiled Evangelical Professors do appear again, and take possession of their Land and places. The oppressed also com forth again, and are delivered from their heavie yoak. And great fear fell upon them, which saw them. As now there is great joie and exsul∣tation, amongst the Papists, about the issue of this war: so there will bee
great terror, when they shall see the Exiled return into the hereditarie Pro∣vinces again, and the Oppressed take possession of their former dignities, and honorable functions. Then will bee a livelie example set before us, of that which is written in the book of Wisdom, chap. 5. Vers 12. And they heard a great voice from Heaven saying unto them: Com up hither, &c. By the Heaven the Church is under∣stood. By the great voice is signified, that after the end of three years and an half, a great and chief Instrument, an high Potentate amongst the Evangelical Professors, shall rise and bee exalted, who to the great fear, and terror of Papists, shall open again a free cours to the Gospel, and Call with a great voice upon the exiled and oppressed; re∣establish them into their publick im∣ployments, and possessions, and saie unto them: Com up hither.
This is the Divine Diploma, or Letters Patents, the vocation, or calling which is published by that High Po∣tentate. The exiled do obeie; They ascend up to Heaven, that is, they enter into their charges again, and perform that in the Church, which is committed to their trust. In a Cloud; that is, with great auto∣ritie, respect, power and glorie. Isa. 14. vers 13. 14. And their enemies beheld them: namely, those that formerly did rejoice at their afflictions and miseries. , doth signifie con∣templari, ludos spectare vel celebrare, to see a Comedie, or plaie. The Papists had hitherto acted as it were a Comedie, with the Euangelical Professors, and tormented them with all sorts of plagues; Now they see the event and issue thereof, wherin doth befal un∣to them, what is threatned, Jer. 50. vers 10, 11, 12, 13.
Vers 13. And the same hour was there a great Earth-quake. All the Peace which the Papists do imagine to themselvs, is now at an end. For immediately the reformation of this Evangelical Potentate causeth an exceeding great insurrection, and com∣bustion in the Romane Empire. And the tenth part of the Citie fell. By the Citie is here meant 1. Either the whole Papacie, and thus one of the ten streets hath its fall. Namely, the Germane Empire, which is the street where the dead bodies of the two Witnesses had lien, who are now standing again upon their feet. 2. Or the Citie of Rome it self, which in regard of the old Citie of Rome, when shee was in her florishing con∣dition, is counted this daie but the tenth part. As the same is proved by Lipsius lib. 3. admirand. And there were slain. That is, cut off and destroid. In the Earthquake. That is, in this war.
Seven thousand. That is, a great num∣ber, or multitude. Of men. That is, high and great per∣sons, chief heads and noble families. And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glorie to the God of Heaven. The rest of the Papists stand ama∣zed, and do acknowledg the just judg∣ments of God, which hee poured out over them. Vers 14. The second wo is past. These words do not import, that by the destruction of the Citie of Rome, and the other things, which have been set down in the aforegoing words; the second wo is brought to an end: but the overthrow of the Turkish Empire is thereby especially inti∣mated. Revelations 8. vers 13. St John be∣held and heard an Angel flying thorough the midst of Heaven, saying with a loud voice: Wo, wo, wo to the inhabitants of the Earth, by reason of the other voices of the Trumpet of the three Angels, which are yet to sound.
The first Wo hapned by the Saracens, and Arabians; whereof in Revel. 9. vers first till the twelfth. The second Wo hapned by the Turks. Re∣velations 9 vers 13. till the 19. Hereunto do agree almost all the Expositors, and refer this second Wo unanimously to the Turkish Empire. And do infer from thence: becaus it is said here, the second Wo is past, that immediately after the destruction of the Citie of Rome, and these Revolu∣tions in the Germane Empire, the Turk∣ish Empire shall have it's fall. Vers 14. Behold the third Wo cometh quickly. All the three Woes are poured over the Popish Romane Empire. But the third Wo is the last, and be∣ginneth at the sound of the seventh Trumpet. Wherefore, these words do immediately follow. Vers 15. And the seventh Angel sounded. Wherewith beginneth the seventh
and last plague poured out over Babel. And withal is briefly described 1. The great joie, which ariseth in the Evangelical Church. 1. Becaus they have gotten an Evangelical head. Vers 11. 2. Becaus the Citie of Rome is de∣stroied, and Germanie is fallen away from the Papal State. vers 13. 3. Becaus the Turkish Empire is com to an end. Vers 14. 4. Becaus the Son of God hath ta∣ken possession of the Kingdoms of this world, and useth his great power, and reigneth. vers 15, 16, 17. This joie is also described in the 19. chapter, vers 17. And upon this joie did David in the spirit reflect. In the 93. Psal. The Lord reigneth, and is cloathed with Majestie, &c. In the 97. Psal. The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice.
And in the 99. Psal. The Lord reigneth, bee the people never so impatient. 2. The wrath of the Heathen: That is, the furie and rage of the Papists; against these the Lord riseth, becaus the daie of his wrath is com; utterly cut∣ting them off, and destroying them, vers 18. This Act is with a double sign con∣firmed. 1. The Temple of God is opened, and there was seen in his Temple, the ark of his Testament. 2. There were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an Earth-quake, and great hail. vers 19. The contents of these words are de∣scribed more at large in the ninteenth and twentieth chapters; where the Son of God, and with him the whole Ar∣mies which were in heaven do appear, sit∣ting upon white horses, chap. 19. v. 11. 14. Where also the Beast and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies are gathered together to make war, vers 19. And are
overcom and utterly destroied, vers 20, 21. 3. The time of the dead to bee judged, and to give reward unto the Prophets and Saints, &c. This also is rehersed in the twentieth chapter, vers 4, 5, 6. But becaus it is there (ccording to the common opi∣nion, as darkly set down as here, and the Son of God himself speaking of this time in the tenth chapter doth call it vers 7. the Mysterie of God; And also what the seven thunders have spoken of this Kingdom, cannot bee written; wee will herein acquiesce, and proceed herein to the sixteenth chapter. CHAP. XVI. LIke as in the second part of the Re∣velation of St John, by the se∣ven Trumpeting Angels, seven Judg∣ments are described, which should com upon the Romane Empire in the
second period; So also here in the third part are set down seven plagues, which by the seven vials should bee poured out over the same. Where the seventh Judgment, and the seventh Vial, at the end of the one thousand two hundred sixtie years, do concur in the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord, and fill up the wrath of God. Revelations chap. 11. vers 18. and chap. 15. vers 1. The seven judgments com upon the Political State, and shew forth the fall thereof; but the seven Vials are poured out, over both the Political and Eccle∣siastical State, and describe their pu∣nishments. Those begin in the year three hundred ninetie five. But these begin under the sixth Judgment, a lit∣tle before the total ruine. But the seven plagues proceed from the Lord, who hath a cup in his hand, full mixt with red wine, who hither∣to to hath poured out of the same upon his little flock; But now the un∣godlie
shall drink the dregs thereof, and suck them out. Psal. 75. vers 9, 10. The seven Angels having the seven plagues, com out of the Temple of the Ta∣bernacle of the Testimonie of Heaven, Re∣velations chap. 15. vers 5, 6. that is, from the seat and habitation of God. And one of the four Beasts (that is, the first Beast, the Lion of the tribe of Judah) gave unto the seven Angels, se∣ven golden Vials full of the wrath of God. vers 7. The Angels receiv commandement from God, to pour out the seven Vials of the wrath of God, chapter 16. vers 1. Upon the Earth▪ that is, upon the in∣habitants of the earth, who rejoice over the victorie of the Beast, chapter 11. vers 10. To whom the Devil is com down. Chapter 12. vers 12. Nay upon the whole world, which wan∣dred after the Beast, and worshipped the Dragon with the Beast, chapter 13. v. 4. So that by the word Earth is under∣stood the whole extent, and latitude of
the Romane Popish Empire. The Angels obeie God's Comman∣dement, and pour out their Vials. First Upon the Earth. Secondly, up∣on the Sea. Thirdly, upon the rivers and fountains. Fourthly, upon the Sun. Fifthly, upon the seat of the Beast. Sixthly upon Euphrates. Seventhly, up∣on the Aër. Vers 1. The first Angel went, and pour∣ed out his Vial upon the Earth, and there fell a noisom and grievous sore upon the men which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them, which worshipped his Image. By the Earth here is understood the whole extent, and latitude of the Ro∣mane Empire, as in the first vers. But there is reflexion made upon Statum tranquillum, the peaceable condition in the Romane Empire, and upon the Beast coming up out of the Earth, Revel. 13. vers 11. This Beast is the Pope, and his Cler∣gie, the Ecclesiastical State and Go∣vernment
in the Papacie, which did not break out by wars, or outward power and might, like unto the Beast with ten horns, but crept in by little and lit∣tle, softly and quietly, even as the grass and the trees use to grow up of the ground. Upon this earthlie Beast was the first Vial of the wrath of God, in a time of Peace, poured out by the Reformation of Poperie. Now since those who are true Professors of the Gospel, do vehemently oppose, and contradict the Papists, and reprove them for their shameful conversation, fals doctrine, and abominable Idolatrie; thence doth arise in those that adhere and stand firm to Poperie A noisom and grievous sore, that is, a fierce anger, hatred, wrath, and enmi∣tie against the Evangelical Professors, especially, seeing they are not able to overcom, and destroie them by force and might, nor to perswade and se∣duce them to Poperie again, by fair and sweet words.
Vers 3. The second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and everie living soul died in the Sea. By the Sea, the Beast with ten horns is here pointed at, which riseth up out of the Sea, chapter 13. vers 1. And upon Statum in Imperio Romano turba∣tum. Whereby is signified, that the second Vial shall beee poured out, over the Political State in the Romane Em∣pire, and the Government, and formae rerum publicarum tam in universali quàm particulari, shall bee disturbed, and overthrown. How by these wars in Germanie the wrath of God hath been poured out, and that this hath been accomplished, is sufficiently known to the world, and everie rational man can make the application. The Statûs Ra∣tio, or reason of State which hath been set up, and the shameful abuse of it hath no small share therein, whereof a State's-man writeth thus: Justitia cùm esse desiit in mundo, successit Sta∣tûs
ratio calamitatum mare. The blood of a dead man intimateth the horrible effusions of blood, and how everie living soul died in the Sea, is evident in the eies of all men. Everie living soul: that is, all sorts of Nations, people, and tongues, that in this raging Sea, and floods of water, during this war were ingaged; as also all sorts of people in all the Provinces of the Romane Empire, which are emptied of men and cattel. In this signification the word all is used, Ex∣odus 9. vers 6. where it is rendred all the Cattel of the Egyptians. Vers 4. And the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the rivers and fountains of water, and they became blood. Frequens est sacris Literis per flumina significare Imperia, quod & Graeci Lati∣níque faciunt. Hugo Grotius, in Anno∣tatis, ad V. Testam. Esaiae. c. 11. v. 15. The Romane Empire is elswhere compared to a Beast with ten horns, to
a Citie with its streets: So likewise here to a Sea with it's rivers. The rivers are the Kingdoms, which although they are not at this present members of the Political State in the Romane Empire, yet they have their tie and dependance upon the Popish Romane Empire: as Spain, France, England, Poland, Hungarie, &c. For the greatest Whore sit's upon manie waters, Revel chap. 17. vers 1. aud reigneth over the Kings of the earth, vers 18. The fountains of water are the Kings, their Roial Council is Parlaments, and other great and prime Lords in those Kingdoms, who are interessed in the Government: How this Vial of the wrath of God hath been poured out over great Brittanie and the well thereof, and how the river and the head-Spring there became blood, and doth yet sprout out, is alas evident to all the world. And although those who are the Fax and Clamor sive Tub in these proceedings, wee know not
how to excuse; yet wee must by vir∣tue of this cleer text, saie with the Angel: Lord thou art righteous, becaus thou hast judged thus. How France doth feel the pouring out of the wrath of God out of this third Vial, and how much more it will bee sensible of it in time to com, time will disco∣ver. The caus which the Angel maketh mention of here, in the sixth vers, say∣ing: For they have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink, for they are wor∣thie; concerneth France more particu∣larly, becaus there was so much inno∣cent Christian blood shed therein, in these hundred years last past. How the other Kingdoms in this Classis shall fare, time will shew; chiefly that whose head-spring did flow out the eighth of April, Anno one thou∣sand six hundred five. The Ecclips of the Sun, which on the seventh of April one thousand six hundred fiftie two,
will darken the locum Hylegialem thereof whereupon, within a short time it may stop happily the flowing out of the same, and change it's river into blood. Vers 7. And I heard another Angel out of the altar saie, &c. A voice is heard out of the Thysiaste∣rion, or place of Sacrifices, where the souls of them that were slain did lie, whereof wee may read in the sixth chapter, vers 9, 10. that they crie to the Lord for vengeance. The sens and meaning of which words is this, that the Martyrs prais God for the hear∣ing of their praiers, and the executi∣on of vengeance, applauding the An∣gel saying: Even so, Lord God Almigh∣tie, true and righteous are thy Judg∣ments. Hence also may bee concluded, that this vengeance shall then begin, when the last war against the two Witnesses shall bee finished, whereof hath been spoken in the 11. chap. Vers 8. And the fourth Angel poured
out his Vial upon the Sun, &c. By the Sun all the Expositors com∣monly understand the Sun of righteous∣ness. Mal. 4. vers 2. Jesus Christ, wherewith the Woman is clothed, Revel. chap. 12. vers 1. But this is repugnant to the scope and intention of these plagues, which are poured all over the earth, that is upon the Systema mun∣di Papistici, over the Popish world, which is opposed to the Church-Hea∣ven of the faithful Children of God, wherein the Lord Jesus is the Head. Therefore wee must seek this Sun in the popish Heaven, and search, what in the Revelation of John is represent∣ed by the Sun in other places. The Sun became black, as a sackcloth of hair, Revelations 6. vers 12. whereby the ruine of the Imperial dignitie in the Heathenish Church-heaven, which happened in the time of Constantine the great, is intimated. The third part of the Sun was smitten, according to the prophesie of the
fourth Trumpet. Chapter 8. vers 12. That is: The smal remainder of the greatness, and brightness of the old Romane Empire shall wholly bee abo∣lished, and pass away. An Angel did stand in the Sun. Revela∣tions 19. vers 17. That is, a great Po∣tentate, an Evangelical valiant Prince gathered together a great Armie against the Papists. The Citie hath no need of the Sun, nei∣ther of the Moon to shine in it, chap. 21. vers 23. That is: hath no need of anie Temporal Potentate to govern it. If wee compare these texts with the Sun, upon which the Angel poureth out the fourth Vial; wee finde that thereby a great and high head of the State is signified, who in Systemate Mundi Papistici doth uphold all, and by his splendor and government giveth strength unto all; like as the Sun Syste∣mate Mundi Physico by it's light and motion, doth guide and move the forces of nature.
And power was given unto him to scorch men with fire; And men were scorched with great heat, &c. When the Head, which hath been a mightie support hitherto to the Pa∣pal State, shall lie down and rest; then the fire of God's wrath will extremely scorch the Papists. The Lord will make them like a fierie oven, Psal. 21. vers 9. But for all this they will not amend, nor repent, and give God the glorie, but rather continue in blaspheming the name of God, and grow more and more obstinate. Vers 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of the Beast, and his Kingdom was full of darkness. Assoon as the Beast with ten horns was risen up out of the Sea, Revelations 13. vers 1. the Dragon immediately gave him his power, and his seat, and Ci∣tie of residence, the Citie of Rome. Which the Beast hath possessed hi∣therto, without beeing disturbed from thence, and reigned over the Kings of
the earth, chapter 17. vers 18. Now the Angel poureth out the fifth Vial of the wrath of God upon this seat, the Citie of Rome, as mention hath been made hereof above, in the 11th. chap. vers 13. that after the two Witnesses were ascended up, there was a great Earth-quake, and the tenth part of the Ci∣tie fell, and was destroied. And the Kingdom was full of dark∣ness, &c. By the distruction of the Citie of Rome, shall the Government and pow∣er of the Pope, which hitherto hee hath used, bee made extremely void, and all his dispatches, or commissions suspended. But the Papacie shall not yet by this means bee utterly dissolved, and taken away. For this doth follow afterwards, at the pouring out of the seventh Vial, in the last war, in a place called in the Hebrew tongue Ar∣mageddon. vers 16. Whereof i spoken more at large in the 19. chapter vers 17. until the 21. by this plague the
Papists are yet more embittered, and more and more hardned. Vers 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great river Euphra∣tes, and the water thereof was dried up. &c. By Euphrates are understood the Nations which border thereupon, that is, the Turks. But by the drying up of the water is meant, the ruine and overthrow of those Nations, as it is evident out of the Prophets, as Isaiah chapter 19. vers 5. chap. 44 vers 27. Jeremiah chap. 48. vers 34. chap. 50. vers 38. chap. 51. vers 36. Ezekiel chap. 30. vers 12. chap. 31. vers 4. The Application of this text to the ruine of the Turkish Empire, doth agree with the eleventh chap. of Isa. vers 13. 14. whereupon soon follow∣eth the destruction of the Citie of Rome. The second Wo; that is, the Turkish Empire is past: Moreover, the drying up of Euphrates
is a preparation for the great work, which shall bee performed at the pour∣ing out of the seventh Vial. For as in times of old the red Sea was divided, to make a drie waie for the Children of Israël, when at their going out of Egypt they were pursued by Pharaoh; to the end that they might pass thorough safe, and Pharaoh should bee drowned. Exodus 14. vers 12. un∣til the twentie ninth. And as God did drie up the river of Jordan, and made a waie thorough it, so that Israël could go through it on drie Land, and en∣ter into the promised Land; so is here Euphrates spiritually dried up, and the Turkish Empire ruined. That the waie of the Kings of the East might bee prepared. By this the conversion of the Jews is intimated; which immediately af∣ter the destruction of the Citie of Rome shall bee advanced; as also may bee seen by the 19. chapter, vers 6, 7. whereunto may bee referred what Isaiah
writeth: chapter 14. vers 10. until the sixteenth. Zach. chap. 10. vers 11. 4. Esr. chap. 13. vers 47. Hereupon followeth the pouring out of the seventh and last Vial of the wrath of God, wherewith also the seventh Angel soundeth, and the seventh plague, and the third and last Wo over the Papacie of Rome, and the fourth Monarchie doth take effect, bringing with it the total ru∣ine and destruction thereof. The preparations of this are de∣scribed before hand thus: Vers 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, com out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the fals Pro∣phet. The Dragon, the Beast, and the fals Prophet are three companions, and fellow-Commoners, who, from the beginning of the demutation (as it ap∣peareth by the thirteenth chapter) have stuck close one to another, and have been equally honored and worshipped
by those that were under their power: Now at the end of their reign they al∣so agree, and need requiring it, they send their Ambassadors and Agents abroad, unclean talkative Spirits, Spi∣rits of Devils, working Miracles, &c. That is, when the Citie of Rome shall bee destroied, and the Papal seat overthrown, the Turkish Empire ru∣ined, and the Jews converted unto Christ; The Devil, the Romane Pa∣pacie, and the whole Clergie shall not bee able to conclude anie thing els, but that their end is now at hand, and that they will bee utterly destroied: Therefore they trie their utmost ende∣vors, and call together the best men of their orders, and such as are most fit for this work, chiefly those that have made profession in the eleventh Classis; these they send to the Courts of all Catholick Potentates through∣out the whole Romane Popish Em∣pire, persuading them, and the Pro∣fessors of their Religion, to stir up the
utmost of their power, and to join and offer themselvs together with o∣thers to the war, against the Profes∣sors of the Gospel. In that great daie of God Almightie (at the pouring out of the seventh Vial.) The time when Constantine the great destroied the Empire of the Dragon, and overthrew the Dragon with the hea∣thenish worship of the same, is called, the great daie of his wrath, Rev. c. 6. v. 17. But the time here, when the Beast and the fals Prophet shall bee cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, and the Dragon shall bee shut up in the bottom∣less pit, is called: That great daie of God Almightie: Above in the 11. ch. v. 18. at the sound of the Trumpet of the seventh Angel, it is called the time of the dead, that they should bee judged, and to give a reward, &c. By the Prophets in the Old Testament, and by Christ and the Apostles in the New Testa∣ment, it is frequently called, that daie. But to shew what properly is meant,
and understood by this great daie of God, would require a large and particu∣liar exposition. And becaus the Holie Scripture, especially the Revelation of St John, and the Prophets do not agree with the common opinion, usual to prove, and to make out at large at this time, is contrarie to the scope and intention of this present Treatise; Therefore it is is thought expedient to defer it till another time. Vers 15. Behold, I com as a thief, Blessed is hee that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest hee walk naked and see his shame. Here is declared the sudden and un∣exspected pouring out of the seventh Vial and plague, which unawares, and suddenly shall light upon the Papal State. Therefore the Son of God himself doth exhort all men to watch, and to stand continually in readiness by serious repentance, and a godlie conversation.
And hee gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue, Ar∣mageddon. In these words is described the place, in which the Papists shall have the Rendez vous of their Armies, which they shall have gathered against the Professors of the Gospel: The place is called Harmageddon, Mountain of Lamentations; whereby is intimated the place, where King Josiah fought a battel unhappily, where hee was slain. 2 Chron. chapter 35. vers 24, 25. For which the Jews made manie and great lamentations, and at last it be∣came a custom, that when they would mourn for som extraordinarie sad accident, they used to make men∣tion of this defeat given at Megiddo. Upon this lamentation of the Jews, and Custom doth St John here point, shewing thereby, that the Papists will lament and mourn over the issue of this war, as the Jews did mourn for the death of King Josiah, and the great
overthrow they received at Megiddo. Vers 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Aër. The aforegoing Vials have been poured out upon particular places. The first upon the Ecclesiastical State and Popish Religion in com∣mon. The second upon the Political State, by the means of this Germane war. The third upon the particular Po∣pish Kingdoms, and their Heads. The fourth upon an High-head, a strong pillar of the Papacie. The fifth upon the Citie of Rome. The sixth upon the Turkish Empire, which keep's a great part of the old Ro∣mane Empire in subjection, and as an open Antichrist, sit's in the seat of the Dragon. Now followeth the seventh Vial, which is poured out upon the Aër: And as the Aër doth contein all things, so likewise this pouring out is univer∣sal, and doth reach the whole Papa∣cie;
nay, it doth take hold also of the Dragon and his Spirits, becaus the said Dragon (as heretofore hath been said) hath given up to the Beast his seat, his Armie, and great power, and hath cooperated in this second Period, and together with the Beast caused himself to bee worshipped. The Dragon is the Devil, and the Prince of the power of the Aër, Ephe∣sians 2. vers 2. with the wicked spirits under the heaven. Ephes. chapter 6. vers 12. In the eighth chapter of Mat∣thew vers 29. these spirits do expostu∣late with the Lord Jesus, saying: What have wee to do with thee? art thou com hither to torment us before the time? At the pouring out of this Vial upon the Aër no expostulation will serv tnrn, for the time is at hand, and shall bee accomplished, what the Son of God saith, Matthew 24. vers 29. . The migh∣tie Host of Devils, which dwell un∣der the Heaven in the Aër, shall bee
moved with a terrible nois and tu∣mult. Then their torments shall begin, when they shall bee cast down from the aër, and their Head the Dragon shall bee shut up in the bottomless pit, as beneath in Revelations chapter 20. vers 1, 2, 3. at the issue of this war may bee seen. And there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the throne, saying: It is don. Here sit's the Ancient of daies upon the fierie flaming seat, Daniel chap. 7. v. 9. and pronounceth the sentence against the fourth Beast, and becaus the mea∣sure is full, and the determined time over him is run to an end, hee break's the rod, and denounceth the irrevoca∣ble judgment, saying: It is don: The Beast shall bee slain, and bee cast into the burning flame, as in the said place followeth, Dan. 7. ver. 11. Vers 18. And there were voices and thunders, and lightnings, and there was a great Earth-quake, such as was not,
since men were upon the earth, so mightie an Earth quake and so great. Now beginneth the Execution: Upon the Devil and his whole Ar∣mie: Upon his Vicar and what depend∣eth on him. Upon the whole Romane Papacie, and it's Kingdoms. Now Heaven and earth are shaken for the second time, and the mightie Kingdoms of the Heathen are destroied, Hagg. chapter 2. vers 22, 23. In the Aër are heard dreadful thun∣ders, and lightnings, terrible voices, lamenting and crying of the Devils. Upon the earth will bee nothing but war, and rumor of wars; In all parts shall bee heard tumults, seditions, in∣surrections, terrible distractions, and grievous bloodsheds; such as never were since the beginning of the world to this time, nor ever were heard of, Daniel chapter 12. vers 1. Matthew 24. v. 21. Vers 19. And the great Citie was di∣vided into three parts.
By the great Citie is understood, ei∣ther the Citie of Rome, as the seat and Citie of residence for the Beast and his rider: Or the whole Papal State, the Citie together with the streets. The Citie of Rome was already by the fifth Vial darkned, and ruined. Wherefore it is spoken here of the whole Papacie, which is divided into three parts: By the accomplishment of these words it will appear, that the Pope doth not wear his triple Crown in vain, for under the same do sit and reign: 1. The Dragon. 2. The Beast. 3. The fals Prophet. Under the Command of these three Generals, shall on the Popish side the battel bee set in arraie▪ and led forth. For these three, eah of them have raised their men severally. ver. 13. 14. They stand all three in battel-arraie, and are readie to fall on.
But what success have they? The Beast is taken, and with him the fals Prophet, and both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, Revelations chapter 19. vers 20, 21. But the Generalissimus, the Dragon is laid hold on, and cast into the bottomless pit, and shut up. Chap. vers 1, 2, 3. And the Cities of the Nations fell. The Heathenish life and conversati∣on, the Heathenish Idolatrie, Sodo∣mie, and other Heathenish sins, and abominations, which hitherto have been practised in the Popish State are at once altogether abolished and ut∣terly removed, as that nothing more is heard thereof. And great Babylon came in remem∣brance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. God sate still hitherto, and seemed, as if hee knew nothing of the Beast's blaspheming and persecution. But when the determined time of the fortie two moneths were exspired, hee remem∣ber's
Babylon, fill's unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, and punishing her, hee doth re∣ward her according to her deserving. Vers 20. And everie Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found: All whatsoëver had anie relation or dependance on the Papacie, even the remotest pleces, and all whatsoëver was highly exalted therein, is not seen any more, whereby the total ruine and destruction of the Papacie is signi∣fied. Vers 21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, everie stone about the weight of a talent, and men blasphemed God, becaus of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great. By the great hail-stones are under∣stood the great punishments of God's wrath, and by the words (about the weight of a talent) are meant the hea∣viest and most dreadful Judgments; the weight of a talent beeing the hea∣viest and greatest weight; yet all this
notwithstanding men will not know the righteous judgment of God, but by their blasphemies of the name of God are cast into everlasting perdition. Hitherto the sixteenth Chapter. AGainst this plain and cleer exposition, manie will have different apprehensi∣ons, and esteem these things impertinent, and incredible Paradoxes. To these is opposed 1. That the cleer text not beeing forced, but as it is literally, or figura∣tively referred to the times, so it hath been explained. 2. That the figures and Images, which make this work difficult and dark, are cleered out of other places of the Revelation, or out of the Old Testament, especially the Prophets, from whom the whole Revelation of St John is taken; and are applyed to the civil and Ecclesiastical State, as the text and the time doth require.
3. That what is past, or is now in full action, cannot bee overthrown by a bare contradiction, or doubt; but search should bee made in the Acts of the Romane Empire, to see what things may bee more sutably applyed another waie. Yet so, that the Me∣thod and Harmonie may nt bee di∣sturbed, or rather that a better waie may bee shewed and offered. 4. That the Text and Method doth shew what is shortly to bee exspected, especially, the end of the determined time by God over the fourth Monar∣chie, wherein the Romane Papacie shall blaspheme God, and make war against the Saints, for the space of for∣tie two moneths, that is, one thousand two hundred sixtie years. Hereupon ariseth the greatest and principal scruple or doubt. Whether the Epocha, or the beginning of the Apocalyptical one thousand two hundred sixtie years bee rightly referred to
the three hundred ninetie fifth year of our Lord? In the Prophetical keie, certain cha∣racters and marks have been set down and applied, whereby the certaintie doth appear, which wee shall here re∣peat, and confirm with more proofs. As, 1. First, becaus the Epocha of the one thousand two hundred ninetie years of the Prophet Daniel, chapter 12. vers 11. is exactly incident into the three hundred sixtie fifth year, it fol∣loweth that the one thousand two hun∣dred sixtie years must com thirtie years later, and so begin Anno three hun∣dred ninetie five, becaus they end toge∣ther. 2. Secondly, becaus by the division of the old Romane Empire into two parts, in the three hundred ninetie fifth year, the Romane Eagle got two wings, and becaus in the verie same year the Septentrional Barbarous Nations inva∣ded the Romane Empire; whereby the
Woman (the Christian Church) fled into the Wilderness, wherein shee should bee preserved and nourished, during the space of one thousand two hundred sixtie years, or 3 ½ times, chap. 12. vers 6. till the 14. 3. Thirdly, Becaus with the beginning of the invasion of these Barbarous Nati∣ons in the three hundred ninetie fifth year, the treading under foot of the holie Citie begun, which should continue fortie and two moneths. Revelations 11. vers 2. 4. Fourthly, becaus by this invasion, the Beast with ten horns rose up out of the Sea: That is: becaus by this war, which began in the three hundred nine∣tie fifth year, the Romane Empire was by little and little so divided, that in the four hundred third year alrea∣die som horns, and in the four hun∣dred fiftie fifth year fully ten horns, or Kingdoms appeared in it. 5. All the Historians generally do agree, that the ruine of the Romane Empire did begin in the three hundred
ninetie fifth year, as som of them were quoted in Clavi Apocalypt. Now both the antient and later Teachers of the Church, do conclude by the words of the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians 2. vers 6, 7, 8. That the Antichrist should then com, when the Romane Empire should begin to fall. As wee read in Tertulliano in Apologetico c. 32. Item de resurrect. carnis. Irenaeo lib. 5. adver∣sus Haereses. Hieronymo quaest. 2. ad Al∣gasiam. Chrysost. Homil. 4. in Thes. 2. Hence it is, that Joannes Cluverius in Comentario posthumo in Apol. Tom. 111. writeth thus: Totius Negotii car∣do versatur in inveniendo exordio An∣tichristi; quod in ruinam Imperii Romani incidere, ostendimus. 6. The Beast with two horns, the An∣tichristian Pope of Rome came out of the Earth quietly, about the time of the three hundred ninetie fifth year, Revelations 13. vers 11. when hee ar∣rogated unto himself the Primacie and preeminencie, over the Ecclesiastical
and civil State. Before the Nicene Sy∣nod which was held in three hundred twentie fifth year of our Lord, the preeminencie of the Bishop of Rome over other Churches was not known. Wherefore Aeneas Sylvius in Epistola 288. writeth. Ante Nicaenum Concilium quisque sibi vivebat, & ad Romanam se∣dem parvus habebatur respectus. Besides, the succeeding Popes, Liberius I. Fe∣lix II. and Damasus did not seek anie such matter. Nay, in the three hundred ninetieth year, in the third Council of Carthage, Can. 26. this Canon was made: Ut primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Prin∣ceps Sacerdotum aut summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid hujusmodi, sed tantùm primae se∣dis Episcopus. Tom. Concil. p. 544. Innocent the first, who in the four hundred second year of our Lord, suc∣ceeded Anastasius at Rome, was the first, that made an Act, that the Here∣ticks should bee compelled to imbrace the Catholick faith: And hath also at∣tributed
unto himself Autoritie and power, not onely over the common people; but also over the Highest Ci∣vil Autoritie in Christendom, in that hee excommunicated Arcadius the Em∣peror at Constantinople, when hee re∣moved Chrysostome from his function. In like manner hee did vehemently bestir himself to obtain the Primacie for the Romane Church, and especi∣ally hee endevored to get the Govern∣ment of the Bishops, and Churches in Africa. The like was practised also by Zosimus. Bonifacius 1. Celestine 1. whereof Daniel Paraeus in Medullâ Hist. Eccles. universali pag. 200. Whence it is that Socrates lib. 7. Hist. Eccles. cap. 3. where relating, how in the time of Celistine the 1. it fared with the Novatians, hee addeth these words: Episcopatus Romanus non aliter atque Alexandrinus, quasi extra Sacerdotii fi∣nes egressus, ad secularem Principatum jam antè delapsus erat. In like manner Sericius, who after
Damasus from the three hundred eigh∣tie fifth, until the three hundred nine∣tie eighth year was Bishop of Rome, was the first, who held the Priests, who companied with their married wives, uncapable of the Ministerie. As wee read hereof in his first Epistle, chap. 7. and Epist. 4. c. 6. Tom. 1. Con∣cil. page 530. 534. In Jure Canonico Distin. 82. And in concilio Taurinatensi in the three hundred ninetie seventh year of our Lord was determined. chap. 7. qui in Ministerio genuerunt filios, nè ad majores gradus ordinum permittantur, Synodi decrevit autoritas. In Concilio Carthaginensi in the three hundred ninetie eighth year sub Anasta∣sio was concluded on. Cap. 3. Placuit Episcopos, & Presbyteros, & Di∣aconos, secundùm propria priora vel pri∣ma statuta etiam ab uxoribus continere. Quod nisi fecerint, ab Ecclesiastico remo∣veantur officio. Tom. 1. Concil. p. 517. Vid. Distinct. 84. cap. 3, 4, 5. 7. In the eleventh chapter wee have
seen, that the two Witnesses at the end of the one thousand two hundred six∣tie years shall bee fought against, over∣com and killed: which as hath been proved above; is hitherto com to pass. The last Act is now shortly to bee exspected in the Province of Silesia. Whether now this bee performed in this, or in the next following year, there∣upon their raising again will follow, after 3 ½ years. And becaus the seventh Trumpet shall sound in the one thousand six hun∣dred fiftie fifth year, and between it and the raising again of the two Wit∣nesses, two accidents happen, as 1. The destruction of the Citie of Rome. 2. And the ending of the second Wo: therefore the two Witnesses may well bee raised again, before the one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth year shall begin. For Modicum nec Praetor curat nec Pro∣pheta.
Unto this may also bee added these fol∣lowing reasons as secondarie Argu∣ments. 1. The Prophesie of the Apostle Peter, whereof Augustin. lib. 18. c. 53. and 54. de Civit. Dei. writeth: That the Gentiles in his time did re∣port, that the Apostle Peter had thought that the Christian Religion should con∣tinue but three hundred sixtie five years: Which Augustine holdeth to bee a Fiction, wherewith the Heathen would cast a reproch upon the Chri∣stian Religion. But if this bee well considered, it may well prove so in∣deed, that Peter did declare, that the Christian Religion, should, for three hundred sixtie five years without inter∣ruption, bee propagated untill the three hundred ninetie fifth year of our Lord, in which the Antichrist should com, who should suppress the same. For in the thirtieth year of his age was the Son of God baptized, where∣on hee entred into the Ministerie, and
began to preach: These thirtie years beeing added unto the three hundred sixtie five years, make up the three hundred ninetie fifth year, in which the Antichrist came forth, the holie Citie was trodden under foot, the two Witnesses were cloathed with sackcloth, and the woman (the Church) fled into the Wilderness. 2. That the six thousand years from the Creation of the world do exspire with the one thousand six hundred fif∣tie fifth year, as was made apparent in Clavi Apocalypt. 3. That also the number of years, which were from the beginning of the world until the deluge: and in the time of the New Testament since the Birth of our Lord, reckoned thus far do end alike. So as there the wicked world was punished, and cut off by the Deluge, so here the enemies of the Church shall bee destroied with fire and brimstone, Revelations 19. vers 20. Dan. 7. vers 11.
4. The Romane Monarchie began at that time, when the Eccentricitas So∣lis was the greatest; and whereby som Astrologers conclude cum Georgio Jo∣achimo Rhetico, that the same shall de∣caie and end, when the said Eccentri∣citas shall bee least. And becaus som Astronomers do refer that to the one thousand six hundred fiftie third year, which com's verie nigh to our term, I thought good to make here mention of it, leaving vim probandi to the trial of the Reader. Dolingius conclude's in suo Antichristo Tymbogeronte verie well out of the Prophet Daniel: chapter 6. vers 27. that by this revolution the Saints of the most High shall possess the Kingdom. 5. Two Prophesies of the Turks, con∣cerning the Turkish Empire, according to which this present young Turkish Emperor is the last, and so hee under whom the Turkish Empire shall have it's final period. Of the first Prophecie doth Franciscus
Sansoninus make mention in a little book, which hee Anno 1570. publish∣ed in Print, wherein hee made a col∣lection of som Prophesies, among which also this is set down, as Joannes Wolsius. Tom. 2. lect. memor. p. 803. writeth: That under the fifteenth Turkish Emperor, the Turkish Empire shall have an end. Antonius Torquatus Medec. D. Profes∣sor. Ferrariensis, & Astrologus insignis maketh also mention hereof among his Prophesies, which hee adscribed to Matthias, King of Hungaria, in the one thousand four hundred eightïeth year, when hee writeth thus: The Ottoman hous shall in 13. 14. or 15. heads (Wolfius Tom. 2. pag. 896. cal∣leth it, ramum, that is, branch or bough:) diminish and decaie, and shall not go be∣yond that number; For after this shall hee by a terrible chance bee defeated and cut off: After this Turkish Em∣peror's death there shall arise among their Princes, and those that relate to
the Ottoman Familie such a dissention, and combustion, that they shall piti∣fully cut one another's throats, and afterwards bee horribly spoiled, and destroied by forreign Nations, &c. This number of 15 heads must bee computed from the first Ottoman, not according to the heads of the Turkish Emperors, who have reigned, for there are a great manie more of them, but according to the members, or branches of the Ottoman Familie. Ottomannus, or Ozman Gazi is the root and Origine of this house, and so stipes communis. Hee was by the King of Persia esta∣blished in the possession of Carmania, and dignified with the roial title. From this did spring 1. Urchan Gasi, who died in the one thousand three hundred fiftieth year. 2. Murat, who took Adrianople, in the one thousand three hundred sixtieth year: and died Anno 1390. 3. Bajaze 1. whom Tamerlan carried away prisoner.
4. Solyman 1. otherwise called Cale∣pinus: After him reigned his two bro∣thers, namely Musa who was killed by Mahomet. Mahomet 1. died Anno 1422. These three Brothers belong to one Member, or branch, nay, som do not compute Solyman and Musa at all, becaus Solyman was Musa, and Musa by Mahomet suddenly dispossest of the Imperial Government. 5. Murat 2d died Anno 1450. 6. Mahomet 2d who took Constan∣tinople Anno 1453, and died 1481. 7. Bajazet 2d was poisoned by his son Selim, in the one thousand five hun∣dred twelfth year. 8. Selim 1. died Anno 1520. 9. Solyman 2d died at Ziget, in Hungaria, in the one thousand five hun∣dred sixtie six year. 10. Selim 2d died Anno 1575. 11. Murat. 3d born of a Jewish woman Solomon Swiccard in his Itine∣rarie relateth, died Anno 1595. 12. Mahomet 3d died Anno 1603.
13. Achmet 1. died Anno 1617. Whereupon was Mustaff, brother of this Achmet, chosen Anno 1617. And becaus hee was found to bee of so soft a disposition, that hee was unfit to govern, the Mufties and the principal Bassas partly by fair means, and partly by threatnings, wrought so far with him, that hee resigned the Empire. 14. These set up Osman or Ottoman. 2d the Son of Achmet. This same caused not Mustaff to bee strangled, as it is usual; but onely restrained him. Wherefore, when Anno 1622. this Osman was in a tumult thrust out of the Imperial Seat, and strangled; and the Janizaries found this Mustaff under restraint, it happened that they exalted him the second time unto the Imperial Crown. But becaus hee liked not the the emploiment, hee resigned it to Os∣man his brother. So that Murath the se∣cond Son of Achmet came to the Impe∣rial dignitie Anno 1622, and died in the beginning of the one thousand six hundred fortieth year.
To him succeeded Ibrahim the third son of Achmet, the 20th of Februarie 1640. Hee and his brother Osman had the same misfortune, they were both strangled with three of his Sul∣tanaes in Sept. Anno 1648. by the re∣bellious Janizaries. These three brothers, Sons of Ach∣met belong to one branch. 15. Achmet second Son of Ibrahim, an uncircumcised child of six years of age, was set upon the Imperial Seat, in Sept: 1648. and made the Head over manie barbarous Nations, and will bee (if this Prophesie hold's) the last Em∣peror of the Ottoman Government. The second Prophesie is described by Bar∣tholomew Georgieviez in his Epitome, and after him by Philippus Lonicerus in his Turkish Chronicl. lib. 3. in the be∣ginning, pag. 204. As also by Adam Nachen Moser in Prognostico Theolog. lib. 3. pag. 65. seqq. Wolfius Tom. 2. lect. mem. pag. 293. Christoph. Besol∣dus in consider. legis Sectae Sarac. pag. 47. which is to this effect.
Our (Turkish) Emperor shall com, and take from a Heathenish (so they call the Christians) Emperor, King, or Prince, his Kingdom, hee will bring under his power, and conquer a red Apple. In case the Christians in the seventh year shall not draw their swords, hee shall reign over them twelv years, build houses, plant Vineyards, hedg in gardens, be∣get children. But after twelv years, when hee hath had the red apple under his power, the Christians shall draw their swords, and put themselvs into a posture of defence, and put the Turk to flight. By the red Apple is understood the Ori∣ental, or Constantinopolitan Empire, be∣caus the occidental was long before ex∣spired. By the twelv years are signifi∣ed twelv times under twelv Turkish heads, who should reign after the tak∣ing of Constantinople. Now Constanti∣nople was taken in the one thousand four hundred fiftie third year by Ma∣homet the second: so that the twelv years,
or times are computed in manner fol∣lowing: The first under Mahomet the second until 1483. The second under Bajazet the second until 1512. The third under Selim the first until 1520. The fourth under Solyman the second until 1566. The fifth under Selim the second nntil 1575. The sixth under Murat the third un∣til 1595. The seventh under Mahomet the third until 1603. The eighth under Achmet the first, until 1617. The ninth under Osman the second, until Zomaii 1622. The tenth under Murat the fourth, un∣til 1640. The eleventh under Ibrahim, until 1648. The twelfth under Achmet the second the present Emperor until the end.
By the words in case the Christians in the seventh year shall not draw their swords, &c. is signified, that under the se∣venth Emperor, namely Mahomet the third, who Anno 1595. came to the Imperial Crown, the Turks shall bee in danger. And in case the Christians should not then take their opportuni∣tie, to emploie their strength; the Turkish Empire should attein unto the twelfth time. But what good success the Christians had during the reign of this Mahomet the third, may bee seen in the Hungarian Chronicles of Jerome Ortelius; where it appeareth that An∣no 1595 Sigismund Bathori Prince of Transilvania, did defeat Ferrat Bassa in the Moneths of March, and Maie, twice one after another, as also Sinan Bassa in the moneth of September, whom, when in the Moneth of October hee re∣turned with great power, hee put to flight, and pursued most fiercely, and took several strong holds from him. The 26th of October, 1596. the Chri∣stians
also obteined at first the victorie neer Erla; where the Turkish Emperor, and Ibrahim Bassa were put to flight, and if the Christians had not neglect∣ed their opportunitie, by plundering and dividing the spoil, in the Turkish Camp; then this Prophesie might have been accomplished. Wherefore it shall com to pass under this childe, as beeing the twelfth, whereof wee shall know the certaintie by the event. Now seeing these two Prophesies may bee verie well applied to this pur∣pose, I could not but relate them here, especially, becaus the Turks do re∣member the same very often, with great trouble and lamentations, and men of note do put much weight up∣on them, as things of great moment. But wee shall leav them for what they are, becaus none can see upon what grounds, these and such like Prophe∣sies are built. These are the motives and reasons, which lead to a conjecture, that the time
which God hath determined, and in∣dulged to the rage and furie of the ene∣mies of the Church, is now running to an end with the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord. Whereby it doth evidently appear: 1. That the application of the Cha∣racters, at the beginning of the two numbers of years (one thousand two hundred ninetie and one thousand two hundred sixtie, is punctually and with∣out anie force incident to the three hun∣dred sixtie fifth, and three hundred nine∣tie fifth year of our Lord. 2. That the beginning of the one thou∣sand two hundred ninetie years cannot bee applied to anie other year, neither before nor after, then the three hun∣dred sixtie fifth year of our Lord, in which the foundation of the Temple at Jerusalem was destroied by God himself: As it appeareth in Clavi Apo∣calypt. 3. That when the Epocha of the one thousand two hundred ninetie years is
referred to the three hundred sixtie fifth year of our Lord, the one thousand two hundred sixtie years must of neces∣sitie begin from the one thousand three hundred ninetie fifth year, becaus both numbers must together run to an end, as may bee read in Daniel chap. 12. v. 7. and 11. 4. That the Characters and Argu∣ments formerly alleged do sufficiently prove, that the one thousand two hun∣dred sixtie years must begin in the three hundred ninetie fifth year. 5. That the Beast with ten horns is risen up from the three hundred ninetie fifth until the four hundred fiftie fifth year. Becaus Anno 395. the first di∣vision of the Romane Empire hapned, whereby the Beast got two horns, and in the year four hundred fiftie five all the ten horns in the Beast appeared. 6. That in the Romane Histories, not anie year betwixt the three hundred ninetie fifth, and four hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord can bee found
out, where the Characters may bee so punctually and suitably applied, as to the three hundred ninetie fifth year. Wherefore wee have good reason to stand to the three hundred ninetie fifth year, and to exspect the issue with the one thousand six hundred fiftie fifth year of our Lord; especially, becaus the killing of the two Witnesses, be∣sides all this, doth eventually prove the thing. The first Objection. BUt if perhaps som bodie should still conceiv, notwithstanding the forementioned grounds, whereby it is made out, that the numbers have their accomplishment in the year one thou∣sand six hundred fiftie fifth, yet that wee ought not so precisely to set all our exspectation upon that year, him I shall leav to his opinion. But wish him to consider withal
1. That the Angel Daniel, chap. 12. vers 7. held up his right hand, and his left hand unto Heaven, and swore by him that liveth for ever, that it shall bee for a time, times and a half, that is, one thou∣sand two hundred sixtie years. And that from the abominable desolation of the Temple, till that time, there shall bee one thousand two hundred ninetie years. 2. That the Son of God himself Re∣vel. chap. 10. vers 5, 6. lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swore by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created Heaven and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there shall bee time no lon∣ger. That is, there shall bee no delaie, Luke 12. 45. Hebrews 10. 37. or that anie other time should com between but in the daies of the voice of the se∣venth Angel, when hee shall sound the Trumpet, the Mysterie of God should bee accomplished, as hee hath declared unto his Servants and Prophets.
These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eies like unto a flame of fire, Re∣vel. chap. 2. vers 18. These things saith hee that is holie, hee that is true, chap. 3. vers 7. These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, chap. 3. vers 14. Who would not then believ him? Seeing then, according to God's eter∣nal decree Antichrist shall rage no lon∣ger then 3 ½ times, or one thousand two hundred sixtie years, and when these are exspired, that the Mysterie of God shall immediately bee fulfilled, as the Angel and the Son of God do testifie with a great Oath: Wee have no rea∣son to doubt of the event, but good reason to look up, and lift up our heads, for our Redemption draweth nigh. Luke 21. vers 28. The second Objection. IT may bee also objected, that such things ought not to bee dived and
searched into, becaus they are meer My∣steries & hidden things, wherein a great manie by their extravagancies have lost themselvs, insomuch, that even the greatest Divines, and scholars are very warie and cautious how to meddle with the Revelation, therefore that it is and should remain a Book sealed, till such time that the accomplishment of things doth reveal it; But especially it is to bee observed, what answer Christ re∣turned to his Disciples upon their cu∣rious question concerning the restaura∣tion of the Kingdom of Israël, Acts 1. vers 7. when hee said: It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power. Whereupon wee answer: that the Revelation of St John is indeed full of Mysteries, which will remain Myste∣ries and hidden things, till the accom∣plishment doth discover, and reveal them to us, and till wee by the appli∣cation of Histories, and events, see before our eies the effect, and what by
this and that thing hath been meant. But it doth not follow therefore, that the Revelation ought to bee laid aside, and that wee ought not at all to search what hath been already fulfilled, or is shortly to bee exspected, chiefly con∣cerning the fulfilling of the determined time, when the Enemies of the Church shall bee destroied, and the Church bee brought to a quiet and peaceable condition. Whereas Daniel did the like, and did observ by Books the number of the years whereof the Lord spoke &c. Daniel 9. vers 2. And St John writeth concerning his Revelation, chapter 1. vers 3. Blessed is hee that readeth, and they that hear the words of this Prophesie, and keep those things, which are written therein. For the Revelation is a book of Me∣morable Acts. Wherein is foretold, how, and what things shall befal to the Church of God, and to the Ro∣mane Empire, under which the Church doth subsist; Now manie things have
been already fulfilled in the one thou∣sand five hundred fiftie years by-past; and if wee compare the Histories, and the things hapned in the Romane Em∣pire, with the Revelation; wee shall discover cleerly, how far the accom∣plishment reacheth, and what wee may exspect, ere long; so that the things represented are no more Myste∣ries, and hidden things, but cleer and accomplished Acts unto us. But hee that forbeareth to read this Revelation, and is not versed in the Old and New Ro∣mane Histories, and knoweth not how to distinguish the times of the Revolu∣tions and changes, but confoundeth the Apocalyptical numbers, and doth make manie Epoches, (whereas they comprehend nothing but relata and Correlata) or carelesly passeth by the application of the numbers as an hidden Mysterie (which indeed is the main keie of the Revelation:) To him must the Revelation needs bee full of Myste∣ries and obscurities, and remain a
sealed and unopened Revelation. But why manie learned men of note (wee do not speak of all) have been much mistaken in their expositions; The causes amongst others have been these. 1. That the antient Interpreters in the primitive times have applied to their times, manie things, which yet as then had no relation to them. The Modern Interpreters do follow their steps, (not minding so much the Hi∣storie, as the Autoritie of the Interpre∣ters, whereby they lead themselves and others out of the waie. 2. Secondly, the Method and Harmo∣nie is not observed. In the Revelation all things are set down in good order, what from time to time should com to pass, the Synchronismes or concur∣rencies of times are set down, one after another, and the Revolutions and changes in the Ecclesiastical and civil States, are exactly and punctually di∣stinguished; even as an excellent and
well-versed Historian is wont to do in the description of humane actions; but contrarie to all this the Interpre∣ters do pervert, overturn, and disturb the Method, seek and finde out by-waies of error the things as relata belong to one and the same time, they set down as following one another. What shall com to pass after the fall of Babylon, they do place before it, oftentimes not knowing themselvs, where they stick, or how they shall winde themselvs out. 3. Besides they mistake and con∣found the States one with another, not observing where mention is made of the Ecclesiastical, or civil State; so that manie times they applie Monasti∣cal matters, and the actions of Anti∣christ, to that which in the Revelation is spoken of the civil State. And hence it is, that the more one doth read Expositors, the more one is con∣founded. But that therefore the Revelation
should bee a book shut up, is contra∣rie to the letter of the cleer text; for, 1. The seven Epistles were never sealed. 2. The Lamb opened the book seal∣ed, Revel. chap. 6. and 8. 3. The third was a little open book, chap. 10. vers 2. 8. 4. And in the end of the Revelati∣on the Son of God saith to John: Seal not the sayings of the Prophesie of this book, for the time is at hand. chap. 22. ver. 10. And although the Prophet Daniel was commanded to close up, and seal the book of his Prophesie, chap. 12. vers 4. 9. yet no longer till the time of the end; for afterwards the said Pro∣phesie was unsealed by the Revelation of St John. Therefore it is added: Man shall run to and fro, and knowledg shall bee increased. The answer our Saviour Christ gave, Acts 1. vers 7. is very impertinently
applied, and objected to this purpose. For hee speaketh there of times and seasons, that is, de tempore occasionato sive tempestivo, as Ausonius declareth it, when a good opportunitie is pre∣sented, to go on in a business, as in the Gospel of St John, chapter 2. vers 4. when Christ saith, Mine hour is not yet com; and yet nevertheless within a lit∣tle while hee doth supplie Wine, But here wee consider the time in general, which is determined upon the Blas∣phemies and persecution of the Anti∣christ, and in what year it should be∣gin or end, but wee do not compute the daie or hour, wherein hee shall bee overthrown. Besides Christ doth speak of the times and seasons, which the Father hath put in his own pow∣er, and hath not revealed: Here wee consider the years which the Father hath not reserved as a secret to his own power, but revealed to us by his Son.
The third objection. THe strongest and chiefest objecti∣on is: That in general all the Di∣vines and States-men write, and hold, that the fourth Monarchie, and Ro∣mane Papacie shall continue until the end of the world, and shall be re∣moved, and come to an end, with the comming of Christ to the last Judg∣ment. Answer. The Revelation of St John doth intimate no such thing, but con∣tradicteth it plainly. For after the de∣struction of the Citie of Rome, chapter 18. There was heard a great joie in hea∣ven, chapter 19. vers first till the ninth. The heaven is opened, and the Son of God, who chapter 6. vers 2. at the opening of the first seal went forth con∣quering and to conquer upon a white hors, presenteth himself here again upon a white hors as a Conqueror, &c. vers 11, 12, 15, 16. Whom the Armies which
are in heaven follow upon white-horses, cloathed in fine linnen, white and clean. vers 14. These are the Martyrs, to eve∣rie one of whom are given white robes, chapter 6. vers 11. Nay, These are they which came out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, chap. 7. vers 14. These are they that are called and chosen and faithful. Chap. 17. vers 14. Against these are gathered the Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their armies to make war against them. The end and issue of this war is, that the Beast, and with him the fals Prophet (that is, the Romane Empire and Popedom) shall bee taken, and both cast alive into a lake of fire burn∣ing with brimstone. chapter 19. vers 19, 20. But the Dragon, as their Ge∣neral hath quarters given him in this war, hee is laid hold on, and cast into the bottomless pit, and shut up, where∣in hee remain's bound a thousand years, that hee should deceiv the Nations no more, nor bee able to stir them up
against the Church. Chapter 20. vers 1, 2, 3. In the mean while the faithful Children of God have their rest. Hebr. 4. vers 1. like as God did rest the se∣venth daie from all his works, vers 4. But the last Judgment and the end of the world is afterwards described, chap. 20. vers 11. till the 15th. Hereunto agreeth the Prophesie of Daniel, chap. 2. vers 34, 35. where the Image, which representeth the four Monarchies is seen, so long, till the stone smite's the Image upon his feet, (not at the beginning of the fourth Monarchie; for then the feet and toes were not as yet, but at the end thereof) and break's it to pieces. But the stone, that smite's the Image, becom's a great mountain (after the breaking and grinding of the four Monarchies to dust; that is, a Kingdom that shall break to pieces, and grinde to dust all these Kingdoms, which are represent∣ed by the great Image, vers 44, 45. And in the 7th chapter vers 1. till the
8th, by the four Beasts are described the four Monarchies, which Daniel beheld, vers 9. till the thrones were cast down, as the words are in the Origi∣nal. For the ancient of daies did sit, vers 9. not for the universal and last judgment which hath been committed unto the Son, Iohn Chap. 5. v. 22. but for the particular judgment over the enemies of the Church in the fourth Monarchie, over the fourth Beast of the Romane Popedome, which Daniel beheld even till the Beast was slain, and his bodie de∣stroied and given to the burning flame; and the power of the other beasts came to an end, vers 11, 12. For a set time was determined over them, how long each of them should last; The Saints shall bee given into the hands of the fourth Beast (so long as the Woman rideth on the Beast) until a time, and times and the dividing of time, vers 25. And when these 3 ½ times, Anno 1655▪ shall com to an end, the Judgment of
the judgment of the Ancient shall sit, and then his power is taken away, so that it wholly is abolished, and come's to an end. Vers 26. But the world therewith is not destroied, but the Kingdom and dominion, and the great∣ness under the whole Heaven shall bee gi∣ven to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serv and obeie him. Vers 27. compare vers 13, 14. The words of St Paul, 2 Thes. chap. 2. vers 8. where hee writeth: And the Lord shall destroie him with the bright∣ness of his coming; are expounded in the Revelations chap. 19. vers 11. till 21. But what may bee the true mean∣ing and sens of these words, ; I leav to the considerati∣on of judicious Divines. It seem's, they do not speak of the universal and last Judgment, which St John describeth in his Revelation. chap. 20. vers 11, 12, 13, 14. Nay, the text
doth not bear, that the two Acts in the said 19. chapter, vers 11. till 21. and chapter 20. vers 11. till 15. shall bee counted for one, or reduced to∣gether to one and the same time; Be∣caus it appeareth that one thousand years are interposed. For the two great Guests, the Beast, and the fals Prophet are one thousand years before lodged in the Inn; in the Lake of fire burning with brimstone, then the Hoast, the Devil come's, who after the one thousand years is associ∣ated to them, at the end of the world. chapter 20. vers 4. Whereupon im∣mediately vers 11. the last Judgment is held. Wee are here led into the Myste∣ries of God, into which wee will not too much presume, to penetrate, nor search too far into them; but wee turn and address our selvs, both with ears and hearts to the Son of God, who standeth at the door, knocketh and calleth; If anie man hear my voice
and open the door, I will com into him, and will sup with him, and hee with mee. To him that overcometh, will I grant to sit with mee in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. Revelations c. 3. vers 20, 21. Blessed is now hee that readeth, and they that hear the words of this Prophesie, and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at hand. Chap. 1. vers. 3. Elessed is hee that keepeth the sayings of of the Poophesie of this book. c. 22. v. 7. Nay, blessed are they, that do his Com∣mandements, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in thorow the gates into the Citie. v. 14. To him, which is, and which was, and which is to com, the Almightie bee glorie and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Revel. chap. 1. v. 6. 8.
A List of the things which are shortly to com to pass, collected out of the XI. and XVI. Chapters of the REVELATION. 1. THe last Actus reformationis sive evacuationis of the Evan∣gelical Protestant Churches, which will appear in Silesia. chap. 11. v. 7. 2. The 3 ½ years following thereon, when the dead bodies of the two Witnesses lie in the street. v. 9. till 11. 3. The continuance of wars in those King∣doms, wherein the innocent blood of the Martyrs is avenged. chap. 16. v. 4. 4. The sudden fall of the strong pillar of the Papacie. vers 8. 5. The exaltation of an Evangelical Pro∣testant head. chap. 11. v. 12. 6. A Reformation in Germanie. v. 11. 12.
7. The destruction of the Citie of Rome. chap. 11. v. 13. c. 16. vers 10. 8. The end of the Turkish Empire. chap. 11. v. 14. c. 16. v. 12. 9. The controversie of the Jews. c. 16. v. 12. 10. The great endevors of the Papists, and gathering of all their utmost power. c. 16. vers 13. c. 19. v. 16. 11. The ruine of the whole Papacie. chap. 16. vers 18. till the 21. c. 19. v. 20. 21. 12. The accomplishment of the Mysterie of God. c. 10. v. 7. By which means 1. The Devil is cast and shut up in the bottomless pit. chap. 20. v. 1, 2, 3. 2. The Son of God taketh the possession of the Kingdom, and reigneth. chap. 11. v. 15. c. 11. v. 6. &c. And the Church liveth in peace and tranquillitie. FINIS.
