I862 16156359 104907
C2 R DIEV·ET MON·DROIT HONI·SOIT·QVI·MAL·Y·PENSE· By the Lords Justices and Council. MAU. EUSTACE Canc. ORRERY. WHereas Robert Brown Vicar of Castle-Lyons, Oliver Parr, Henry Parr, Edward Morly, Dennis Kearny, and Iohn Patt, petitioned us in the behalf of themselves, and several other Inhabitants of the Town of Ca∣stle-Lyons in the Country of Cork; setting forth, That on Wednesday the eleventh of Iune last, 1662. there hapned in the Town of Castle-Lyons a sudden and violent fire, which through the height of the wind, and by reason of the absence of the men inhabiting, the said Town (who were most of them that day about their necessary traffick and imployments, at the fair of Fermoy, within two miles of the said Town) did in the space of half an hour or thereabouts, burn and consume to the ground, one and thirty dwelling houses of the Petitioners, besides many Out-houses, Barns, Stables, and Mault-houses, together with most of the houshold-stuff, and other goods of many of the Petitioners, and all the houshold-stuff, and other goods of some of them, to the value of One thousand, five hundred pounds: The truth of which Allegati∣ons hath been made to appear unto us by certificate under the hands of several of the Justices of peace for the Country of CORK, at the general Sessions of peace held at Bandonbridge the 25 of Iune, 1662. Upon due consideration whereof, we have thought fit, and do hereby pray and require all Mayors, She∣riffs, Justices of peace, Portriffs, Bailiffs, and all other his Majesties Officers, Ministers, and loving Subjects whatsoever, within this Kingdom of Ireland, not onely to permit and suffer the Petitioners by themselves and their Substitutes, quietly and peaceably to pass and repass by them, without any their lets or molestation, they behaving themselves as becometh dutiful Subjects to his Majestie, but also to be aiding and assisting unto them and their Substitutes herein, that the Petitioners and their Substitutes may repair to all Churches, Fairs, Markets, and other publique places of meeting within this Kingdom, to intreat and receive the charitable benevolence of all well disposed people; to whose pity and consi∣deration in such a deplorable condition the Petitioners are hereby very heartily recommended. And we do further hereby pray and require all Deans, Archdeacons, Ministers and Preachers of the Word, with∣in their several and respective Parishes in this Kingdom, that they do upon the Sabbath, and other Ho∣ly days, signifie and read publiquely the contents hereof, unto their several Congregations there gather∣ed together. Provided, That this our Licence shall continue and be of force no longer, then for the space of nine moneths next ensuing the date hereof, Any former Proclamation, or general Restriction to the contrary notwithstanding Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 16 day of Iuly, 1662. Jo. ARMACHANUS. JA. DUBLIN. ROBERT FORTH. ROB. MEREDITH. THEO. JONES. ARTHUR HILL. DVBLIN, Printed by Iohn Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty: An. Dom. 1662.
