J1030 11217493 46861
DIVINITY AND MORALITY IN ROBES OF POETRY: Composed for the Recreations of the Courteous and Ingenious. By the Author Tho. Iordan. Quod meus hortus habet, sumas impunè licebit, Si dederis nobis, quod tuus hortus habet. LONDON Printed by R. A.
DIVINITY AND MORALITY IN ROBES OF POETRY. A Sacred New-yeares Gift; Dedicated unto all Lovers of Christianity, Professors of Piety, and Moral Honesty. Preambulation. IF pious Gifts (by curious disquisition) Prove not the Badg of antique Superstition; Or if a Rhyme, reduc'd to holy Reason, May be allovv'd to celebrate the season, And find admission in a noble heart, As much as they, vvhose Riches can impart Gold of Peru, or those admired vvorks, That spread the Tables of Triumphant Turks.
I hope the low Oblation of a friend (That only makes your fair esteem his end) May find (as it deserves) more grace then he Whose bounty is a Baud to treachery: My gift is made of Wishes, such as may (If granted) live with you, when night and day Admit of no distinction: perfect bliss Is now my Theam, and that I wish is this. The New years Gift. A New Soul blanch'd in sin-dissolving tears, And pious promises for future years, Possess your mortal Mansion, may no Times Witness the guilt of our re-acted crimes: May you disband your bosom Sins, and be Atton'd with God's immortal Monarchy: Although each day ye pay (in sighs and groans Your penitential contributions: May the red Rain vvhich our rude vvrath let fall In num'rous showres of vengeance National, Be all wash'd out, and may Religions fame In England, bear but one celestial Name: May all those desperate distinctions that Have made our Island much unfortunate, Be so composed by Religious Laws, That rigour may no more dispute the Cause: For (I confess to my intelligence, That hath relation but to common sense)
It is a Paradox, that all the wise Holy and Learned in large Misteries, Of Church and State, that in convention sit Crown'd with the Genius of a Nation's wit, With all the aids that Art and Nature can Contract within the circuit of man, Should flight the Helm and let the peoples fate Be left unto the rageing stormes of state; Such is a Civil War, whose fury vents Artillery, instead of Arguments; As if the Holy Ghost (Spirit of Love) That once descended like a Turtle Dove: Should now resigne his function, and appeare Like a devouring Vulture: may this yeare Register no such Apparitions, but May all tranquility (that God e're put Into the Power of Vnion, on a Nation Receiv'd to Grace by true Humiliation) Fall on your Souls, may a New Spring of tears Renew your Graces, Health, Wealth, Beauty, Years: And may your fair Posterity nere know The wild Confusion of our moderne woe; May Peace and verity (conjoyn'd in Glory) Crown the Conclusion of our tragick Story, May Schism sink, and Truth be held supream, (Whose Robe of Sanctity hath nere a seam) And let that foole which well deserves the Rod, For saying in his heart there is no God; Be better principl'd, for he speakes Treason, Not onely 'gainst Religion but Reason▪
May the gross mists of error be dispel'd, That curious heresies (so hotly held) May be display'd, for then the radiant Beams Of righteousness vvill dissipate their dreams, Let nothing enter in your hearts, but vvhat The Holy Spirit doth communicate By sacred Law and Gospel; vvhat is vvrit I them, vve must obey, vvhat not, omit: May you be charitable, yet live free From any Popish censure; may you be Fil'd with firm faith, not that vvhich yeilds the Turks Preheminence, before ye in good werks: May you believe, God's stock of mercy is Larger then all mens crimes, yet let not this ffess ye vvith such vvarrant of salvation, To think one sin may not destroy a Nation: May you believe that the Apostles Creed (Which some late Novelists forbear to read) Is of such povver, that you vvithout it are Farther from bliss, then Saints from Civil War. Let God's ovvn Prayer be your daily task, For it contains all that vve ought to ask: Those deprecations sum up every want, And vvhatsoever God is pleas'd to grant: that Petition cannot be ill vvrit, When he that made it, means to answer it. Let not bright Gospels Exposition be A Lock and Key to its ovvn mystery: What Scripture hath begun, let Scripture finish, Who comments false, doth both add and diminish;
Which is a fearful crime, may you be free From such transgression, may Divinity Illuminate your Intellect; may no Fallacious disputations overthrow The Pillars of your Piety, or make The Fundamentals of your Faith to shake. When these effects (for which I pray) appear, You will confess it is a good New-year; For if all come to pass which I have said, 'Tis the best New years-Gift that e're you had. On forgetfulness in holy Duties. FOrgetfulness can be no Plea for folly, For God commands, Remember thou keep holy. On the Heart. OUr God requireth the whole heart, or none, And yet he will accept a Broken one. On rash Iudgment. CAll not thy Brother Reprobate, for sure Where God wil heal, there is no wound past cure. On an Evil Tongue. THe Tongue as wel as Hand, deep wounds affords, Ther's but one Letter betwixt Swords and words.
A Dialogue betwixt the Flesh, and the Spirit. Fle. COme prethee leave this reading; let me hear Some jests, or want on tales, then shall my ear Be link'd unto your Oratory, now I am so dull, and drowsie, that (I vow) I can no more give audience, what dost call This petty Book thou art so pleas'd withall? (Spi.) It is the cure of souls, and it contains Our life or death, our glory, or our pains, Here's the great Law of God, where man may view What he ought most to covet, most eschew; The glass of purity, where mighty Kings Behold their bodies to be earthen things; And (with the wisest wise man) lowdly cry, All worldly honors are but vanity: Here is thy first Creation, where 'tis shown How thou and I first met, and joyn'd in one; This shews the state we liv'd in, how we were Blest with the plenty of a pregnant year The Husbandman nere toyl'd for: there we knew No hate, no strife, nor where black Malice grew: We had no envious Neighbours, but were free From doing, or receiving injury; The Beasts were made your subjects; and as true Unto each other, as they were to you: They had no Civil Wars, no envy neither, For Wolves & Lambs might eat their meat together:
They liv'd secure within their proper holes, And Lions did disdain to tread on Moles: This was thy Paradise, where all was free Unto thy use, but one excluded Tree; Where thou hadst liv'd till now, had Gods Command Prevail'd with thee before the womans hand: Under what misery doth poor man groan, When as the flesh must suffer for the bone? This is the Bible which I read; by this I hope to tread the perfect path to bliss. Fle. What kind of bliss I pray? Spi. Heaven. Fle. What's that? Spi. A City built for the Regenerate: So scituate, that neither Sun nor Moon Need rise or set to make it night or noon: They both are useless, light and brightness there, Are not confin'd in Centre, or in Sphere: Each Angel's face is more resplendent fair, Then Phoebus when he guilds the Western Ayr: The sacred Citizens do never fear The furious famine of a fruitless year, They live in such sweet plenty; and where none Need fly the City from infection; Ther's no defraud, no greedy great man plyes The good Kings ear for base Monopolies, For his peculiar gain; the poorer sort Nere suffer for the Riot of the Court. This is that place of Bliss, who more would know, Must first crave Faith, he may believe it so:
Fle. The place is fraught with Glory; there is more Essential joy, then I e're heard before: But, tell me one thing (pray) May we not there Enjoy our Mistrisses, as we do here? Kiss and imbrace them? May we not drink high? Swagger and roar? Spi. No, 'tis Impiety. 'Tis that which ruines Earth; when you are there You'l feel no spark of such prophane desire, That's no true heaven, but a fained one, By Mahomet in his black Alcoron. Fle. Thou know'st (dear Spirit) that I long have lov'd Fair Iesabel. Spi. An Harlot most ayprov'd. Fle. A sweet unblemish'd Beauty, in each eye An Angel sits. Spi. Beware Idolatry. Fle. Shall I not meet her there? Spi. Yes, if from me Ye both will take advice. Fle. Most willingly. Spi. Repent. Fle. What's that? Spi. A thing ye both must know; Or els nor you, nor she can thither go: Joyn both your hands, then (with as great desire As e're ye met) disjoyn, part, and retire: Weep, sigh, and wring your hands, not that ye part, But 'cause ye met together. Fle. Oh! my heart!
Spi. It must be done, then to your Chambers goe To Knele, and Pray ye may continue so; Now she seems fair, but then you'l think her fowle As is an Ethiop, both in face and Soul. Fle. Not for a thousand worlds, these Eyes I weare I cherish cause they tell me she is faire; For nothing I adore th' Omnipotence Of my Creator, more then this one sence, Which shewes her Beauty, and so much I prize, That I could wish all sences e'ls were Eyes: Had Argus seen this object, Sleep had never Gave Hermes power to make him sleep for ever: Not though his oaten reed were as acute, In Art and sweetness as Apollo's Lute; When underneath his lovely Daphne he Sate sweetly warbling forth her Elegie. Spi. He vvhom you do adore, for that one sence Dispos'd it not unto that End, from thence Nere came an ill effect, He nere gave eyes To be adult'rate vvith Idolatryes. Fle. Novv let thy resolution be as free To answer one thing I shall question thee; I'le tell thee hovv thy Counsell thrives. Spi. Say on, I freely grant thee my attention. Fle. 'Tis thus then, may not some familiar friend Conveigh my mind in Letters? Spi. To vvhat end? 'Tis ill to think on her, vvould you reveale Your sinfull thoughts, under your Hand and Seale?
Think (when you are a happy Convert) how The fatal Legend will discourage you. Fle. Then Iesabel farewel; Oh! how her Name Creates in me an unexpiring flame, 'Tis a strange Riddle I should part with thee, And from thy presence find felicity, A thing I will not credit, therefore cease Vain Spirit; so to interrupt the peace 'Twixt me and my fair Love, I will be gone To reunite my first affection: Tell fools your tales of heaven, all is hell, That doth not appertain to Iesabel. Spirit alone. THus am I daily hurried to and fro, From vice to vice, still am I forc'd to go With him to each lewd practise, Thou whose might Is most Omnipotent and infinite, Send me a guard of vertues, such as are Perfect, and powerful for a Civil War. Faith, thou shalt be my General, and lead My warlike Troops, thou on sure ground dost tread: Let us march on then, victory is sure, When as the Lord of Hosts makes all secure; Prepare thee Flesh, I come to war, not woo, Although thou bring the world and Divel too; And e're this sacred Battel we conclude, Thy might, or mine, or both, shall be subdu'd.
An Acrostich on my very worthy friend Mr. MARKE WARD. May all the real joys that can appear Within the Circle of the next new year Attend your wish; may no true pleasures be Above the reach of your capacity: Religion guard your Conscience, may your health Replenish; may you wallow in your Wealth: Knowledg support you, may you never vow Divided Love; and when soever you Enter the List of Wedlock; may that prize Be loving, vertuous▪ young, rich, fair, and wise. An Epitaph in an Acrostich, composed on the Name of his vertuous Sister Mrs. Joane Ward. Jn this plain piece of humble earth lies one, Whom no unworthy feet should tread upon, One whose chast life did very much improve A Daughters duty, and a Sisters love: Almighty God was still her contemplation, Religion was her daly recreation; Nothing came in her Maiden thoughts that cou'd Defile the Fountain of her Virgin Bloud; Eternal joys contain her now; let's then Mourn, until we meet with her agen.
An Elegiack, in a double Acrostich, sacred to the memory of the most truly vertuous Mrs. MARGARET JESSOP, VVife to the much honoured WILLIAM JESSOP Esq. who deceased the first of November, 1651. Mourn, or depart, for they whose cheeks be dry, Are not for our confluent CompanI All that we talk is tears; and when we see One smile, we look upon't like HeresiE Reader, within this Marble Mansion lyes A motive would make tears in Tyrants eyeS Grief would becom their Mistriss, they would dress Themselves in nothing but unhappinesS All the small vertues God did e're bestow On Woman-kind, lyes here in FoliO Religion was her Pilot, and her prop, From whose sententious tongue did always droP Eternal Language; such as Angels sip In sighs and Prayers from a Convert's LiP To speak her larger, he that further dives, Must Summon in all the Superlatives.
The CHARACTER of a Corrupt STATES-MAN, that is solely devoted to Selfe-Ends, But pretends to Piety. A Corrupt Statist is a thing in whom There is contract all Evill that can come: The soule of Satan in a Saint's disguise, The grand Elixir of Hypocrisies: The secret Issue of long-lurking spight, The Prince of darknesse in a robe of light. His tongue is tipt with Mercy, but his Maw (If he be mov'd) disgorgeth Golgotha: He is the root of Ruine, Mischief's Mint, The Alcharon put in Geneva print; The saddest object Peace can fix her eyes on, Whose Prayers are Pistolls, and his Tears are Poyson▪ He hath (if the old Maxime doe not misse) Iudas his soule by Metempsychosis: And (that it may profoundly be undone) Can kisse a Country to confusion: To that point where Ambition doth conduct, All Evil shall assist, no Bloud obstruct: He is the Peoples Servant in esteem, But (in effect) they are all Slaves to him: He hath a vayle to varnish every vice He doth commit, but monstrous Avarice; That sin is so gygantick, all his wit (Put in pretences) cannot cover it:
As AEsop's Cat transform,d into a Maid, Sate simpering at Supper, unbetray'd, Till (by unusuall chance) a Mouse she saw Crosse ore the Board, then she began to claw: So is his nature sleek'd with soft applause, Till Pride or Profit make him spread his Pawes: From him all sly dissimulations issue, His loyns bear Sack-cloth when his heart wears tissue▪ He seemes to pray and unto God alone, Though (in his heart) he doth beleeve there's none. Where he bears rule, that Nation needs no Rod, He is a Devill in the Name of God. Attend, and you shall heare him (though in brief) Rehearse the Articles of his Belief. The Politician in Person. GReatnesse is summum bonum; to be high Tempted the Angels in their Clarity (Creatures to whom the Sun is but a Shade Before that Sin had Birth, or Man was made) Nor could this lust of optimacy misse Innocent Adam in his Genesis; Then though our bloud to Thrones cannot advance, We have Ambition by inheritance: If to be Great be the best thing we know, No Actions are amiss that make us so; Since to be High is that all men intend, No matter by what steps we do ascend.
That Man that hates a rising States-man, would O're-top his highest Neighbours if he could, And cares not if vast Families do fade By him with Suits of Law and tricks in Trade: He will seize Houses though he can't take Townes, 'Tis the same Crime for Compters as for Crownes: A Princes Throne is chain'd as much to chance, As is the meanest Man's inheritance. Nature it selfe, our most indulgent Mother, Doth ruine one thing to erect another; Observe the flux and reflux of the Ocean, Progresse and regresse are the soule of motion: Can it be ill to climbe the highest seat, Since Men are Good, on purpose to be Great? Why should those Causes merit our neglect Whose subtile series reach to the effect? Or if our fortunes would not have us high, Why then doe all Concurrences comply? If it be not the destiny's intents To make us Great, why have we great Events? Councils, and Armes, in strange Meanders flow, Yet meet, sure Providence would have it so: Though Mariners can Ship and Tackling finde Fit to set Saile, they cannot raise a Winde: The Gamester boldly doth his hand advance To throw the Die, but cannot guide the Chance: This (well promised) what is done, must be By an inevitable Destinie;
The wisest man that ever was writes thus In his sublime Ecclesiasticus: Ecclus. 1.5. How many Kings have on the ground sat down, And one ne're thought upon hath worn the Crowne? How comes it then to be a lineall Function, By right of Bloud made consecrate with Vnction? This trick was hatch'd by some great Monarch's Mi∣nion To blind the world, but I am of opinion None doth more fitly fill a Chaire of State, Than he that is anoynted by his Fate. The Author. THis is his Creed, and all that do oppose This (although God and Angels) are his Foes; But stay (if Fansie faile not) sure I see A reverend Doctor in Theologie, Approach his Presence, who doth look upon His Pride with holy indignation: If he do speak to him, we soon shall see How Policy and Piety agree. The Doctor. PRoud Polititian, whither wilt thou flye With thy imperious Impiety? Dost think a Cable made of twisted sands Can Anchor thee against Almighty hands?
Dar'st thou believe thy Machivillian Arts Can vaile thee from the searcher of all Hearts? He doth make war against Gods sacred seat, Who treads upon the good to make him Great: The Civil War of Heaven did foretell, Men shall not rise by that which Angels fell: Methinks those Powers thy strength hath over∣thrown, Should tell thee so obnoxious are thy own; What man is he that can in such Seas swim, Where one or other dares not follow him, And sink him too? In our Morality We take it for an Axiom, that he Who pulls Superiors down, to raise his fame, Shewes his own Servants how to doe the same: If this will not suffice, but still your eye Mounts to (that Sphere of Mischief) Majesty; Look on Eternity, and well revise The vile Gradations, which make such men rise: The usuall steps of Corrupt States-men are Envy, Pride, Wealth, Hypocrisie, and Warre, Covetousnesse, Oppression, Tyranny: And all these cemented with Perjury, Painted with Piety, but how they are In opposition, Scripture will declare. Envy. Iames 3.16. WHere Envy and seditious strife doth lurk, Confusion is, and every evill work.
Iames 3.17. The wiseome that descendeth from Above Is fill'd with Peace, with Purity, and Love: Iames 3.15. Envy, Strife, Malice, though they serve your wish, Are earthly, sensuall, and devilish. Pride. Porverbs 16.19. AN humble spirit better is allow'd Than to divide a rich spoile with the proud. Ecclus. 10.12. When Man begins to make Pride his Partaker, He doth depart from God, turne from his Maker. Prov. 10.18. When fierce destruction followes to Hell-gate, Pride doth most commonly preambulate. Riches. Prov. 23.4. Luke 16.13. LAbour not to be rich, Wealth is a rod, You cannot serve at once Mammon and God. 1 Iohn 2.15. The Love of God doth not in that soule move, Who for this World forsakes the God of Love. Luke 6 24. Wo to yee Rich, where will yee seek Salvation, When God sayes yee have had your Consolation?
Hypocrisie. Math: 23.27. WO to you Hypocrites whose sin appeares Like dead mens bones in silver Sepulchers. Mathew 23. I send yee Prophets but you doe bely 'um. And with your Power, kill, Scourge, and crucifie 'um. Mathew 23.33. Yee Serpents, Vipers, how can yee expell The wrath of God, and free your soules from Hell? Warre. Iames 4.1. FRom whence comes War and wrath? are they not embers Of lawless lusts that war within your members? Prov. 16.32. That man hath more of Wisdome, Power, and Pity, Who rules his wrath, than he that takes a City. Prov. 28.17. He that doth violence unto the bloud Of any man, shall perish in the floud. Covetousnesse. 1 Thes. 2.5. PAul calls God witnesse that he never spoke VVith flattering words, nor wore a Covetous Cloak
Ecclus. 10.9. A Covetous man doth in all Evills rowle. For such a one makes sale of his owne soule. 1 Cor. 6.10. When God will execute without Reprieves, He puts the Covetous among the Thieves. Oppression. Prov. 22.2. and 23.10. ROb not the Poore, nor grieved soule oppresse, And doe not take Fields from the Fatherlesse. 1 Thes. 4 6. He that will goe beyond, or doth defraud His Brother, is by God himselfe out law'd. Malac. 3.5. God will destroy that Soul which takes delight To turn away the Stranger from his right. Tyranny. Pro. 28.15. UNrighteous Rulers, holy writ compares To roaring Lyons and to ranging Beares. Prov. 29.2. The People joy when men rule with compassion, But wicked Magistrates destroy a Nation. Prov. 30.22 23. Two things there are which make the Earth to groan, A fatted foole, A Servant in the Throan.
Perjurie. Leviticus 19.12. THou shalt not make thy Makers name to be A Covenant to cover falsitie. Deut. 23.21. When thou wouldst vow a vow to God, first weigh it, Then (though it be unto thy loss) obey it. Zech. 5 4.1.4. Good Zechariah (in the flying Roll) Saw that the perjur'd Man would lose his soule. The Doctor. THus have I shewn the nature of those sinnes That move his imploration, who begins To wear forbidden Purple, without these He cannot sayl thorough the swelling seas Of Princes Power, and Popular applause; For though he beare Religion and the Lawes In his Main top, yet shall his Anchor be Cast in the ooes of self-security. Envy stirrs us, Pride prompts, Riches invite, Hypocrisie calls faction to the sight. Warre wins the victory, Covetousnesse Sayes ye must begger those whom ye suppress. Oppression, and grim Tyranny proclaime A legall Conquest in the victors Name, Which Perjurie will justifie, this tract Doth lead him to the end of the fourth Act:
What shall ensue, that Power can onely tell Whose Love, and Vengeance doth fill Heav'n and Hell. The Author. A Sad Conclusion if this Composition Be the ingredients of a Poltitian; Lord let my spirit flye with humble wings, And I shall be able to pity Kings. On Ambition. WHen bold Ambition seeks a Nation's ruine, Pride little thinks what vengeance is a brew∣ing. On Peace. THe People cry aloud when warres encrease, They must needs cry that cannot hold their peace. On these Civill Warres. GOD is the Potter, we the Pots, dear Brother, Tis sin that breaks us one against another. On our Saviour, his being called the Carpenter. CHrist was, they say, a Carpenter by birth, But a great Workman; He built Heaven & Earth.
A Paraphrase upon the Pater Noster, PRotect us, Lord, from that prophane Imposter, That would perswade us from out Pater noster In what a wretched State that Common-weale is, That is mis-led from thee Qui es in Caelis, Christ's Spouse is lovely, Christians should intreat her With sighs, not swords, and sing — Sanctificetur Who so prevaricate from this endue'um, Good Lord, with Grace to worship — Nomen tuum. Great Common-wealths must fall if thou pursue 'um, When States displease thee — Veniat Regnum tuum. VVhat private Plots, or publike Power dare flye at The Lord of Hosts? whose battaile-word is — Fiat VVhat is mans strength if thou dost not renew a Right heart in him to do — Voluntas tua, VVe are but Men, none but an Angel's fellow Can lead a life on Earth — Sicut in Caelo, The Pious Poore complain, they who refresh 'um, Shall, when they want, from thee have — ita etiam
He that would Heaven gaine must not defer a Work of such Piety, whilst hee's — In terra. Thy Saints are succourlesse, unlesse we foster 'um, How can we beg at thy hands — Panem nostrum Nor let us hate our Enemies, but gaine 'um With acts of worthiness — Quotidianum Though men afflict us both in Soule and Bodie, Yet Lord, thy sustenance — Da nobis hodie, Truth dwells not alwayes where the Purple Robe is, Then grant us mercy — Et remitte nobis We all have felt thy stroaks, but who dares foster a Mis-apprehension? 'Tis not — Debita nostra, Oh! Let the Enemies no longer cross The truth, but mend their lives — Sicut & nos Let us no longer be afflicted thus, But let our foes proclaime — Remittimus Free our obliged Lands where each impostor is Master of all, but — Debitoribus nostris. Into their paths, who for our zeale rebuke us, Let us not enter — Et ne nos inducas
Satan usurpes, Lord let us dis-inthrone him, Or we shall ever be — In tentationem, Let not the world and flesh thy Servants swallow, Sweet are their baits — Sed libera nos à malo, And grant us such an Vnion, that when This Prayer is said, we all may cry — Amen. To an unnaturall Elder Brother that beguiled him of his Portion. WEll may a strangers fatall hand annoy us, When our own Bloud conspireth to destroy us; Hadst thou no other way to gaine from me The livelyhood of my Posterity, But by a Fathers sudden fall, to raise Thy riches from the dust of my decayes? It is not well, nor can have good event, For 'tis an ill exceeds all precedent. Iacob had Esau's Birth-right, but he gave Him Porrage for his Portion, thou wouldst have All mine for nothing; dost thou think that God's Justice can prosper such unequall odds? Or dost thou think that Yonger Brothers have No title, but to Ruine, and the Grave? You are deceived, and you ere long will be Mistaken in my Birth-right, as in Me. To force a Brothers Right (if understood) Is like the taking of a Brothers Blood.
An Allarme in 1645. 1. BRing a Light, The Foe's in fight; Pre thee forgive me, That I must thus leave thee in the Night; My Bliss, Take this, and this, Sleep well, I'le keep 'till My happy returne, a parting kisse, Thou wouldst free my life from feares, Yet thy wet Eye Drownes me with teares, Wipe those faire pearles from thine eye, And heare thy Souldiers Lullaby. 2. Sweet sleep, lye still my Deare, Dangers be strangers For ever, unto thy eye or eare No sounds, or wo for wounds, Number thy slumbers, Or dare to approach within thy bounds; But such Songs as Seraphs sing, Which move by Love Unto their King. That thy sight, touch, tast, or smells May say, all joy In hearing dwells.
3. And when thou wakest agen, Fortune importune Thy senses to see us happy Men, — That we may so agree, Dangers of strangers May never destroy our Unity: So shall Peace ascend her Throne, For than each man May claime his owne; We like raging seas will run, That meet and fight, Then flow in one. 4. So shall all sweete Joyes content thee, That Ayre, Earth, or sea affords, Tables shall be spread with plenty, Sickles shall be made of swords: Horses shall no more weare Armour, That were plunder'd from the Plow, Whilst the doubtfull frighted Farmour, Questiond is, For whom are you? 5. Private jarres shall be relinquish'd, Every man shall have his owne. Thine and mine shall be distinguish'd, And no Seeds of sorrow sowne; Comfort come to all complayners, That were frighted back with frowns, Governours no more be gayners, Which are now the Kings of Townes.
6. Mountains shall no more grow myrish With so many noble bloods, Fickle French and idle Irish That come over for our Goods, And have had so much enjoyment In the ruine of the Land, Shall be set to fit employment By the power of strong Command. 7. Bulwarks then shall all the slighted To let in our Trades encrease, Church and State shall be united 'Tis the Paradise of Peace; Merchants feare no navall dangers Or from their own Colours go, But hold free Commerce with strangers, Neighbour-nations should do so. 8. Midnight calls, and I must leave thee, This shall purchase my release, May not such sweet dreames deceive thee That pretend a prudent Peace? War with this dark night fly over And all joy rise with the Light: Thus thy Lipps with mine I cover One kiss more, and then Good night.
An Elegy and Epitaph composed on the death of an Infant Lady. GReat King of Golgotha, grim God of fears, Whose Throne is made of thirsty Sepulchers, That (by the vertue of thy cold commands) Destroy'st more lives, then there be stars or sands, From vvhose cadaverous imbraces, none Are free'd until the Resurrection; Attend my Summons (for the powers divine Decree, that I must one day bow to thine) And tell me why thou hast imploy'd that dart Which perforated Alexanders heart Upon this Infant Lady? whose fair eyes Could not but quell the keenest cruelties, The fiercest Tyrant that red Ireland bears, Might have been conquer'd with one smile of hers: Her dumb complaints would have wrought more contrition, Then all the reason of the best Logitian. Do but consider death what thou hast done Upon our Albion Isle since Forty one; Remember who have suffer'd by thy frown These ten years, 'twixt the Cottage and the Crown; What souls are fled, will not all these suffice, But thou wilt deal in Cradle cruelties? Methinks the mother of that fragrant bud (As fruitful in her vertue as her bloud) Might have prevail'd with thee, but oh I see No reason can reduce thy tyranny.
Therefore wee'l stop the floud of further Passion With this Celestial consideration; That though thou hast tore oft her fleshly clothing, Her Soul shall be a Saint, when thou art nothing. The Epitaph. 1 LAdies that are young and wise, Shall I tell ye of a Prize? Here a Box of Beauty lies. 2 A Iewel hid from vulgar view, Whose excellency if you knew, Your eyes would drop like morning dew. 3 Dame-Natures Diamond, which when She saw it was too bright for men, Shew'd it, and shut it up agen. On the event of these Wars betwixt the Dutch and English. SOme are such silly Statists, that they wish Our English loss may fill the Dutchman's dish; But most of them (I know) be such as are A suffering Party in our Civil War: I feel the same disease too, but would never Exchange an Ague for a Burning Feaver.
On those women, who pretend that poverty provoketh to inchastity. SHall poverty destroy us? Is the mind (The noble temper of the soul) confin'd To such a baseness, that we cannot be Our selves, unless we hug prosperity? Shall we confess an Hell? conceit withall, There is an Heaven, where the Angelical Receive immortal joy? Shall we believe It vvas ordain'd for poor ones, such as grieve In a continual vvant? and hourly groan Under the burthen of affliction? And shall vve be so senseless to agree, That vertuous souls can fall by poverty? Tell me, intemperate creatures, in vvhat state Did ye salute the vvorld at first? vvhat rate Were your gay garments priz'd at, vvhen you cry'd For needful coverture, no Robes for pride? When as the pregnant brest gave more content Then the prosusest Banquets ye have spent, Usher'd vvith Wine and Musique? when nor wit, Nor best inventions could your Pallat sit? When all your learned Cooks could not retain Sufficient Art to vvast your vvealth in vain? But novv the Spring of riot is dravvn dry, Ye cannot as you vvould; true proverty Contents it self vvith nought, and scorns to raise A vvretched riches by sinister vvayes:
Yet this recalls not you, but makes you guess Ye have a warrant for your wickedness, For when some virtuous Soul desires to see The Cause ye have, you shew your Poverty, And som small charge of Children, which you say You must provide for 'gainst their Marriage day: Thus, fed by vice, they live, when they'r at Age, Tis your damnation, proves their Heritage: Admit your care be less, that y'are beguil'd The procreated Blessing of a child, Your Cause is so much lesser, will you give Your pretious Soul to make one Body live? Sure your kind Parents were not so unwise As not to teach your hands some mysteries, To keep your Body spotless, and preserve Your Soule, which (of the two's most like to starve) Endeavour then, they'r poor beyond all fear, That are not worth the flesh and blood they wear; Tell me (ye pitied Spectacles of woe) How will your pride, and your rich rayment show, When as your sordid Suitors shall proclaim Ye won them by an Act ye dare not name? When they shall tell their neighb'ring Lechers how They wrought upon your willingness, and shew (In their rank Ribaldry) how hot and high Your wantonness advanc'd their luxury? Who will conceit such a lewd thing as this Did e're know chastity? or that there is So great a vertue resident? or think She ever priz'd it, that thus low could sink?
Not I, believe me, I'le as soon allow Poyson and Balm may from one issue flow; For she whom want will make a Wanton, doth Make foul Adultery the Nurse of Sloth. The Proselite. 1 FArewel thou dearest of my Crimes, Be never more th' abuser of my Times, Lest that I curse too late The errors of that Fate, Which made me love thee; All ye Deities divine Strengthen this request of mine; Then may I say, Frail delight pass away, I am rul'd by a Power that is above thee. 2 No more shall thy seducing smiles, Thy winning looks, or other sweet beguiles Have power to withdraw My heart from Love, by Law Seal'd to another: Cupid I thy power defie, Thou'rt a flatte'ring Deity; And there are none, But confess thee the Son Of a fair, foolish, fickle wanton Mother.
To the much honored Pair, and most pious Pre∣servers of Love and Loyalty in Wedlock, Mr. Nathaniel Lownes Merchant Ad∣venturer, &c. and the perfect Patern of Vertue Mrs. Melior Lownes his beloved Consort. MY Muse salutes ye both, who to your worth Devotes her love, and holds my service forth. All happiness that the Celestial Powers Ordain for men, wait upon you and yours. Treasure, long life, love, liberty, and myrth Dwell with ye, till ye find heaven upon earth; True Concord be your guide, and may no passion On either side, provoke a separation. In medio consistit virtus; vve Find in your loves a meliority: (Which is most permanent) what is belovv That, or above it, is too fast, or slow: Health, peace, and plenty, vvith all joyes that can Add vigour to the noble soul of man; Erect your spirits, may ye never be Expos'd to any infelicity; But may that God, vvhich hath heaven for his home, Guide you in this vvorld, and the vvorld to come. Such are the wishes of a Servant to both your Vertues; THO. JORDAN.
On Reason. WOuldst thou have all things subject unto thee? Be subject then to Reasons Monarchy; Thou shalt be Conqueror of many, if Reason may be thy Governor in chief: Wouldst thou command a little world? then be King of thy self, 'tis a safe Soveraignty. On Henry the VIII. HArry the VIII. as story saith, Was a King so unjust, He nere did spare man in his vvrath, Nor vvoman in his lust. An Epigram on one, who said, He liv'd by his wits. PAmphlet last vveek in his fantastique fits, Was ask'd hovv he did live, He said, By's wits: Pamphlet I see vvill tell lyes by the Clock, Hovv can he live upon so poor a stock? On Ribaldry. OF all detested vices, none (to me) Appears more vain then verbal Rihaldry: For he who to such talk his mind doth bend, Is like that dog, vvhose tail is at's tongues end.
Good Wits may Iump. A Good Wit brought unto a Stationer A Manuscript, that so he might prefer His volume to the Press; but e're that he Could make a Bargain for his Poesie, The Book-seller (whose aimes were for his profit) Desires the Author he would read some of it; The Writer reads some six or seven leaves, Which having done, the Stationer conceives That it was old, a strait begins to look (As memory led him) in a printed book, Lays it before our Author on the board, And reads the Transcript to him word for word: The Puet puzled at it, 'gins to pump For an excuse, and cryes, Good Wits may Iump. On a School-Master. A Country Pedant of soul soft and silly, (Whose reading nere exceeded William Lilly In's Ranks and Files of Substantives) began His Brags to a more learned Countryman, And said, he took a Child the other day, From women-tutors, which (e're long) should say His Grammer Rules by heart, and (in two years) He'd make him a good Scholar; th' other fleers, And tnswers him agen, Come Doctor, come, You know that Charity begins at home.
An Elegy and Epitaph on the deplored death of the much worthy William Barklay Esquire, one of the Aldermen of the City of London; dedicate to Mr. Hen. Barklay. STay, and release my wonder! you that can Resolve what may compleat a perfect man So absolute, that future times may well Admire at, but shall never parallel; Let him be wise and learn'd, his better part Be richly furnish'd with transcendent Art; Let Nature be his friend, and in his mind Let vertues choice indovvments be refin'd: He vvill come short of him, whose body lyes At this time floating in his Mourners eyes; For in this Monument is one in whom Faith, Hope, and Charity ook up their room; One who hath gather'd vertues (since his birth) Enough to crovvn a man in heaven and earth; When acts of equity were in his trust, He ever vvas both merciful and just; The poor he pitied, but his soul vvould nere To vitious greatness turn Idolater: He had (indeed) a heart vvhich the vvorst times Could never tempt to profitable crimes; His thoughts vvere pure, his actions free, his store Was made a good Exchequer for the poor; Though envy oft on vertue doth attend, He forced envy's self to be his friend:
By this the knowing Reader well may see The brittle State of best mortality: Let man be nere so perfect in his parts, And have the accomplishments of all the Arts, Though he live long and well, yet shall he have No earthly gratulation, but a grave: Forbear more words (my phantsie) thou'rt too weak, Great griefs are silent, whil'st small sorrows speak: Although his body sleep, till the day come Shall reunite him to his antient home; His soul is mounted on Seraphick wings, Unto the Mansion of the King of Kings. The Epitaph. 1 WEep Reader, weep, for if we see Thy Fountains dry, no man will be Perswaded to relent for thee. 2 In this monumental clay Lies pious dust, till it obey The Summons of the latter day. 3 You that ransack earth and Skies For all worth which good men prize, Look no further, Here it lies. 4 Let your truer tears attend it, When all studious men have pen'd it, This mans Name will comprehend it;
5 But (to sum up all in brief) He whose eyes are void of grief, Hath a heart without belief. 6 HE whose soul doth not desire To weep before he do retire, Would laugh, were all the world on fire. On Intemperance. HE that devotes himself to wrath, or wine, Is not his own friend, and can nere be mine. On pious Poverty. NOne but a vicious rich man will defie The low estate of pious poverty. On vain delights. IN seeking to obtain delights we lose 'um, Dalila's lap leads not to Abrahams bosom. On the Eucharist. SEe the wide difference 'twixt wine and grace, One warms the Spirit, tother fires the face. So he whose faith drinks oth' Communion Bowl. Shall feel the inflammation in his soul.
The material substance of our Creed ced in twelve lines. I Do believe in God, Lord of Creation▪ And in his Son Christ Iesus (ou Conceived by the Holy Ghost, (who Both from the Father and the Son Born of the Virgin Mary's womb A cruel death, by Pilat crucified; Was dead and buried, did descend, The third day rise on earth, next  one; From thence he'l come to Judgment ve One Church, one Spirit, and I do Saints have Communion, Reprobates n, Sins pardon, soul and body's Resurrn. The ten Commandements iines. GOd spake these words, and  am thy God, That brought thee from the  of Egypts rod, And thou shalt have no other God but me, Thou shalt not worship any Imagery; Thou shalt not take my sacred Name in vain, The holy Sabbath day thou shalt maintain; Honor thy Parents, and thy daies I'le further With length and plenty, Thou shalt do no murther: Thou shalt no vile Adultery commit, Thou shalt not steal, no nor purloin (by wit) Thou shalt not bear false witness' gainst thy Neighbor, Nor covet what is his (by right, or labour.)
The happy estate of the Blessed, Matth. 5, 1 YE wealthy souls, that being poor in merit, Are by Gods sentence allow'd rich in spirit; Heaven is made your Kingdom, Angels be Your glorious guides to bliss—Blessed are ye. 2 You that with grief do mourn and relent, Bedew your cheeks, till your wet eyes are spent, You shall be comforted by Gods Decree, And one day joy as much—Blessed are ye. 3 You that are meek and humble in your minds Mark what felicity your meekness finds; The large earth your inheritance shall be And heaven at the last—Blessed are ye. 4 You hungry thirsty souls, whose appetite Desires but righteousness, receive your mite, You shall be filled, Christ your bread will be, Feed and be thankful then—Blessed are ye. 5 You that are merciful, hope to obtain Mercy again, ye cannot hope in vain; God is your stedfast Anchor, and will he Leave you to shipwrack? no—Blessed are ye.
6 You that in mind, in heart, in soul are pure, Gold purg'd from dross, that can the touch indure, Happy are ye, your excellence shall see Gods brightness face to face— Blessed are ye. 7 You whom vile men unrighteously revile, If you remain but patient all the while For Iesus sake, shall sure rewarded be More then an hundred fold— Blessed are ye. 8 Ye persecuted souls that suffer wrong For righteousness, and want a pleading tongue To tell your grief, your joy compleat shall be, Your Kingdom Heaven is— Blessed are ye. 9 Rejoyce and be exceeding glad, for great Will your reward be from Gods Mercy Seat; Can a rewarding Master better be, Then our dear Saviour Christ?— Blessed are ye. 10 So were the Prophets persecuted, they Suffer'd your wrongs▪ whom cruel men did slay; They have their Saviours bounty, then agree To bear their sorrows, and— Blessed are ye.
The wretched estate of the cursed, Deut. 27. 1 THere is a cruel wretch, whose watchful eye Stands Centinel; that he (most secretly) Might smite his Neighbour where so e're he be, God's curse o'retakes his fact— Cursed is he. 2 That faithless man, who for his sole defence Cleaves to mans frailty without care, or sense Of God, or his just power, let all agree With one consent, to cry— Cursed is he. 3 There is a slave so cruel and unkind, That will pervert the footsteps of the blind, And lead them from their journey, all that be Christians, will surely say— Cursed is he. 4 A vile transgressor too, I cannot miss An Image-worshipper, and one that is A friend to Wooden Saints, let him not be A patern for our lives—Cursed is he. 5 He that's unmerciful, adulterous, A Fornicator, or one covetous, And many such great evils, God will see His true amendment, els— Cursed is he.
6 He that in Judgment hindereth the right Of Fatherless, or Widows, in God's sight His unjust Judgment stands, who will not see His sin unpunished— Cursed is he: 7 But ther's a Iudas, who reward will take To murther Innocents, (my Saviours sake Doth make me now relent) but let him be Subject unto his bane— Cursed is he. 8 But now a Caytiff, heathenish and vile, I must declare, a disobedient Child; A Parent-Curser, who deserves to be Cursed of all the world— Cursed is he. 9 There is a craft crep't in the Country Sir, Which is to bear his Neighbours Landmark far From its true place of residence, to be For his unlawful use— Cursed is he. 10 Here is another Iustice will not spare, An hot, lascivious, loose Adulterer, That whores his Neighbours wife, and makes him be The laughing-stock of Fools— Cursed is he. FINIS.
