J992 12576542 63595
Elymas the Sorcerer: OR, A MEMORIAL Towards the DISCOVERY Of the Bottom of this Popish-PLOT, And how far his R. HIGHNESS's Directors have been Faithful to his Honour and Interest, or the Peace of the NATION. Publish'd upon occasion of a Passage in the Late Dutch∣ess of YORK's Declaration for changing her RELIGION. BY THO: JONES sometime Domestick and Naval Chap∣lain to his R. Highness the Duke of York. Cur aliquid vidi? Cur noxia Lumina feci? 2 Cor. 12, 9. My Strength is made perfect weakness. LONDON: Printed for H. Jones, MDCLXXXII.
A Memorial towards the Discovery of the Original of this Popish-Plot, &c. MOnsieur Maimbourg, in his History of Calvinisme, very lately put out, this present year 1682, in several Editions, recites therein with great Catholick boast and hopes, A Declaration of her late Highness the Dutchess of York, of the Reasons and Mo∣tives she had to change her Religion. I regarded one passage therein, more upon my own experience, than the cre∣dit of a Stranger, which justified a suspition, I endur'd long trouble for many years, to adhere to, out of fidelity to my Church and Country, though severe∣ly lash'd with the Imputations of Pride and disobedience for it, for which I am to bless. The passage is this, J'ay este particulierement & fortement convaincue de la presence reele de Jesus-Christ au Saint Sacrement de l' Autel, de l'infaillibilite de l' Eglise, de la Confession & de la priere pour les morts. J'ay voulu conferer de ces marieres par maniere, dentretien avec les deux plus habiles Evesques que nous ayons en Angleterre: & tous deux m'ont avoue ingenument qu'ily a bien des choses dans l'Eglise Romaine qu'il seroit a desirer que l' Eglise Anglicane eust toujours observees, comme la Confession qu'on ne scau∣roit desavouer que ieu mesme n'ait commandee, & la priere pour les morts, qui est une des plus authentiques & les plus anciennes pratiques de la Religion Chrestienne; que pour eux ils s'en servoient en particulier sans en faire une profession publique. Comme je pressois un de ces Evesques sur les autres points de concroverse, & prin∣cipalement sur la presence reele de Jesus Christ au Saint Sacrament de l' Autel: il me repondit librement, que s'il estoit Catholique, il ne voudroit pas changer de Religion mais qu'ayant este eleve dans une Eglise dans laquelle il croyoit avoir tout ce qui est∣necessaire au salus, & y ayant receu son Baptesme, il ne croyoit pas la pouvoir quitter sans un grand scandale. Tout ce discours neservit qu'a augmenter le desir ardent que j'avois de me rendre Ca∣tholique, & je sentis des peines interieures & d'horribles inquietudes ensuite de la con∣versation que j'eus avec ces deux Evesques. I was particularly and strongly convinced of the real presence of Jesus Christ in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, of the Infallibility of the Church, Confes∣sion and Prayer for the Dead, I was willing to conferr of these matters by way of Discourse, with the Two most able Bishops that we have in England, and both confest to me ingeniously, That there are many things in the Church of Rome, which it was to be wished that the Church of England had still observed, as Confes∣sion, which it could not be denied but that God had commanded it, and Prayer for the Dead which is one of the most authentick and Antient Practices of the Christian Religion; but as to themselves they made use thereof in private without making pub∣lick profession thereof. As I pressed one of these Bishops upon the other points of Controversy, and principally on the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, he answered me freely, that were he a Catholick, he would not change Religion; but that having been educated in a Church in which he believed there was all that was necessary to Salvation, and there having received his Baptisme, he thought he could not quit it without great Scandal. All this discourse served but to increase the Ardent desire which I had to be∣come a Catholick; and I felt inward Pains and horrible disquiets after the con∣versation I had with these Two Bishops. The Author of the Apology in behalf of the Papists, Printed in 1666, (who well knew me and the cause of my sufferings) dropt an Early Intimation of the like Import:
We dare with submission say, Let a Publick Invitation be put up against any Party whatsoever; Nay, against the Reverend Bishops themselves, and some malicious (in his Lordships sense) Informer, or other, will alledge that, which may be far better to con∣ceal. There are but few to be found, so forsaken of God and their own Reasons, as are not able to discern and allow, that Secret Enemies are far more dange∣rous to all Men and Communities, than open and profesl'd: and that Men hate to be betrayed worse, than to be Destroyed. They therefore that countenance or cover the Masquerade Enemies of the Church of England, prove themselves to be of the same pernicious conspiracy; the greater they are in Place and Power, the greater is the danger to the Pub∣lick from them, and their detection therefore the greater service and Glory. Her late Highness expresses not what Bishops those Two were in Particular, whom all sober Protestants must look on, as the betrayers of her Soul, and this Church. It seems duty and fidelity to our Church and Nation, to contri∣bute Intelligence and Observations to detect them farther. They are not in Reason Fathers, who are condemned Persons in Law. And the danger and scan∣dal of their ill example is the less, because they never shewed so much Learn∣ing and Integrity, as to justifie before the world their new Perswasions by Pen, or open Practice, or Resignation. A Papist or a Mahometan that is sincere and Resolute in the profession of his errour, shews more Religon, and ver∣tue, than the most Reverend two fac'd Renegado, that's false to his Faith, and trust, and Countrey, for wordly Interest. And Indeed, he that is so false to him∣self, will hardly be true to any other; Therefore Campanella advises to chuse for confessor non qui te diligit, sed qui diligit animam Suam, such who loves his own Soul, not thee. To these Judas's amongst our Apostles is cheiflly owing the present mi∣sery and Redivision of these flourishing Kingdoms by new Fears, and fewds: and not a little perhaps to the Eternal Frailties of great ones, that had rather be Pleas'd than Lovd. How happy were it for the Nation, if such carnal com∣pliers for the sake of Grandeur, were as hateful to our Princes, as they are to God and the rest of Mankinde, I have no better account to give to God and the World, of the latter part of my life, than some zeal and Adventures against such Betrayers, which I have preferred before all worldly offers and Peace. I should therefore hide my Candle under a Bushel, If I did not give some acount, and communicate to the world, these ensuing Passages at east, which have passed from me, to his R. H. Chaplains, and Officers, and several Reverend Bishops, before, and long before, Maimbourg's Book came out, which I humbly recommend to all true hearted, and Generous Sons and Fathers of the Church of England, to peruse, and freely to judge of their own, and countries concerns, and my weak, but sincere Endeavours, as their Consciences shall direct: being ever firm to their Loyal Communion, and resolv'd through Gods Grace to persevere; though with some difference from other pretenders, or this Invincible infirmity, as al∣ways to believe, (though never much for Persecution) any R. Bishop, who were false to his Church, where he enjoys such maintenance, and honour, to deserve Hanging infinitely better, than any lawless trayterous Jesuit, who would avowedly destroy it, out of Blind Zeal and sidelity to his own. A Letter to Doctor W. Chaplain to his R. H. Dated April the 5th 1682. Reverend Sir, YOu have had now time enough from February 23 and some of your Brethren in the same mystery, monish'd alike, much longer space, to consult your Duty and safety. I shall not, and I think, ought not to publish any of your Letters that you
have, or may send in answer, without your leave and desire; nor my second part as yet consisting of more particulars from first to last, as long as I find so little exception against the first, or indeed none at all, that either is or can be with any Truth. Which I see no reason therefore why I may not Print, as well for publick Information and Benefit, (with submission) to be tendered above all smaller respects, as for necessary Private vindication of my good name, before I dye; which next to good Conscience, hath an Immortal, Spiritual exist∣ance to be fairly preserved in minds, against all Temporal hindrance; as also for a Lawful and laudable Interest and fellow-feeling from Innumerable True Protestants throughout the Nation, upon knowledge of my Case, which by two much Patience and tenderness toward unnatural and disguis'd Beings, I have so long disregarded and wav'd. Because you may apprehend me as an Enemy for minding and setting you upon ungrate∣ful Truth, I shall therefore forbear to advise you: But the Apostle directs us to suffer, if Gods will be so, in a good work, rather than in an Evil: And I take it to be a better work, to contribute to save Church and Countrey, though with Trouble and Danger, than to be want∣ing to either, with Peace and Plenty. Which choice hath been my support and solace for many years, against the subtel and Merciless assaults and pressures of Catholick Zeal, tram∣pling Antichristianly, as usual, upon the Laws of God and Man, on Faith and Truth, and Conscience, and Honour, and Civility, and Humanity, and fair and Generous Hostility. For what greater satisfaction to a Subject, or Glory to a Prince, (let France now be judge) than to be Gods Instruments to deliver our Church and Country from Spiritual Captivity? or what greater blot or Curse, than to be Slaves to Knaves to betray a delivered Nation anew into it? If I therefore reccomend to you the same hazards and comforts I my self have chosen, and preferred before all offers, and Sums, and greater Princely favour and Interest, than all can well pretend to, wherein can you complain of any unworthiness in me, but that I have discharged the part of an honest and a Loyal Subject, and because Protestant is not so pleasing to you, of your Dated April 5. 82. For the Reverend Dr. Chap∣lain to his R. H. Rector of near Malborough. Christian Friend THO. JONES. Another to the same Person, Dated February, 1681. Reverend Sir, I Suppose I have given sufficient proof to you, and the world, of patience and quietness, under long hard usage, from 1664 to this present, without the passion of a Troden Worm. Not for want of life, or sence, but out of regard and tenderness to Adversaries and De∣sertors, and a dumb grief and astonishment at the sad condition of this Chuch upon its reco∣very, to have, as I much suspected, disguised Wolves amongst its chief Pastors and Watchmen, not to be concealed without great danger, nor discovered without greater scandal and confusion. The oppression it self, though reaching (not directly to blood, but) to several more precious Lives, was not so fore and insupportable, as the unkindness and treachery, and the e∣verlasting wrath and reprobation, that attended it, without bounds, or Sun-sets, or any vi∣sible cause or Provocation, the Spirit and cloathing of Calvin, dexterously concealing from me, and others, the killing Red Letter within. Neither was it a pleasant Riddle, to find the Fathers of my own Church to Execute Po∣pish threats and predictions against me, and that in a mysterious prevalent opposition to his R. Highness, who overruled several times for me, against them, and his late Duchess, and Commanded me to depend upon his favour and protection to the end; in so much, that my Lord of W. sent for me on purpose, to declare that the Dutchess desired him to trouble me no more, because the Duke was so firm unto me; and desired me to acquiesce and he would acquiesce, and being taken off my watch and guard, I was immediately destroyed for my Faith. Neither was it easie then with me to believe, what principles might necessitate, or legiti∣mate such methods, till subsequent revolts gave some light, first of her late Highness, (won∣dered at in 1670.) by her Father in his Letters, and foretold by me to several Private Friends, in 1666. from some passages in concurrence with him and my Lord of W. to suppress and discourage, and at last to Sacrifice me to some of the other Chappel at St.
James's, for no other cause, but my executing her Orders against Popery in her Family; whereby I conjectured and inferred, her own Religion would be her next oblation. But that of his Highness when rumoured shortly after, I could not so easily believe, because he was, or seemed ignorant of their designs, and defended me against their assaults, though his Gui∣ders and Directors; unless it may be thought, that they who were able to make him quit his Promises, might also be able to make him quit his Faith, taking an old Proverb to their assistance, My Mother loves to be killed. The pain and smart of suffering being well over, and worn out by long use and familia∣rity, the unfading comforts of Integrity remain. And I bless God that he hath given me Grace to chuse Affliction rather than Sin; and to suffer in Innocence, and for no other cause, but my fidelity to this Apostolical Protestant Church providentially Restored and Re-esta∣blished, by our Renowned Princes of Brittish Line; (which God may order for its strength in his time) and that I was no Scandal or Stumbling-block to my Prince by carnal comply∣ance with his frailties for advantage, but adhear'd to my duty and truth against all Tem∣ptations of worldly interest and Dignity on the one hand, and extreamest hardships on the other; that the adverse dissenting party cannot boast that none of the Church of England are so firm against Popery as themselves: Though I doubt not there are many thousand right Sons of this Church in obscurity, and many in dignity, that have the same Integrity, though not the same circumstances and tryal, believing the Truth by private Christians, may be bet∣ter defended by patience and trust in God, than by discontents and its effects; though all must confess, that Persons in publick Trust, may, and ought to proceed by other measures, for the just defence of themselves and their Dependants, as the fear and courage of all Creatures is not the same, when they have, or have not, young ones to defend. And I found much Art and Endeavours used to deprive me of the honour of my Suffer∣ings, and the credit of my Testimony, by misrepresenting me to my Prince and Master, and to the World, in characters not what themselves believed, but what he or they might hate or despise. 1. That I was a Presbyterian, and an Enemy to the Governours and Government of this Church; upon which issue I desired a Tryal, but this they soon waved; it being known unto them by Testimonials, upon my admission to his R. H. Service, and otherways, how I act∣ed and suffered upon the contrary principle (being Episcopally Ordained in 1654. and pro∣curing others of Parts and Fortunes to be then so Ordained) with considerable Service to this Church, and check to its Adversaries and greatest Regicides, in the times of Usurpation, though not so violent, as the mode is, after they were down. And though I had the honour (to use a Phrase) and perhaps the sole honour and danger of expressing at Assizes in the way of my Calling, my detestation of the Murder of the King, and the oppression of his Party, &c. And owned my Principles before the Bloody Judge concerned, when I was then call'd before him, yet I found more clearness and huma∣nity from him, than from your Enigmatical Party; for he offered me protection in my Call∣ing and Principles, on condition I medled not with State-matters, as he stiled those publick Sins. Neither was it unknown to them, that his Highness writ in my behalf for the Deanry of St. Asaph, upon such merits, attested by the Bishop himself, and the chiefest of those parts, where the passages are yet well known and remembred: while some of you per∣haps in your more safe recess abroad, through distrust in God, or discontent, Bartered some of the Articles of your Faith for your worldly convenience, or Revenge; and I Expected not, to be accounted a Presbyterian, for adhearing faithfully to the Church of England against Popery by any true Protestancy; yet always believed Protestants of your Stamp, with our un∣reclaimable Dissenters, did Equally promote the Designs of Rome, with, or against their Wills, as outwitted or trappaned by their contrary Passions. And perhaps some of your chiefs have Artificially promoted and indulged, this their dissent and separation, so useful to Papists in dividing Protestancy, and so befriending Athiests in slighting our Liturgy and publick worship and Ministry, when at the same time they might be thought to wish them but one neck, from their good will; And I was denied the same time the benefit of the false accusations that cloathed me in their Skin.
The next Objection that I heard, did Alienate both their Highnesies from me, was my de∣nying the Sacrament to the Family on Assention day, 1666, because the Dutchess was not there to receive, and that therefore I scorned to give it to the Rest. And the Testimony of Several Persons of quality and vertue, who then and there at the time in question, Actually Received the Sacrament at my hands, and are still Living and remembring, would hard∣ly suffice; for your Party, my Accusers knew the truth as well as any of them, and that they had excluded me from all manner of Officiating before the Dutchess long before; and the small interuption that was, about half a minute, between the first and second Service, was from the contrivance, I observed, of many of you together making use of the Sacrament, when you wanted other means to destroy your Brother. This also was waved; however now and then insisted on, and alledg'd in private behind my Back, by your Party, against their Consciences, when they had no other answer to make to a Question asked them, Why did the Duke cast off such a Servant? The Third exception they had a mind to insist on, but that it could not brook Examina∣tion, was, for speaking Irreverently of the Bishop of Winton's prohibiting my Preaching at Sea: but this also was solemnly waved by him, before the late Arch-Bishop, at the Dean of the Chappels Lodgings at White-Hall. There being a manifest Treachery, in the In∣former, who perverted my words and design; and a great irregularity in that action of my Lord of Wintons against the Fleet-Statute, which required Preaching, and the Seamen's needs, and good Example in the Fleet, and against particular Orders to the contrary from his Highness, through his Almoner to me, and being in no trust or superiority over me, in Relation to the Sea, only out of a particular pique against me, for no Cause but what you know, and I suspect: yet the only pretence for my ruine at first, was, my want of submission to this charge, which himself had wav'd; neither was I wanting to ask his pardon for any occasion of displeasure given him howsoever, being desired and com∣manded thereto by the D. my Diocesan, and a great Friend. I heard of some other general Exceptions against me, that I was Proud, and Turbulent, but for no particular Reason as I could ever learn, but that I was not so humble, and Peace∣able, as to connive, and consent to suffer this Church to be wrong'd, and undermin'd, but was steddy and Faithful, in my Post, and Trust; which was the Reason perhaps, that on falslly swore for your Party, that I delighted to contend with great Bishops, who yet lived not long after it, to enjoy the Interest, and benefit of his Swearing; For I had decla∣red to the contrary, that I delighted not to contend with great or small, or equal, with my Reasons for each. Another, and not the least, was, that I should call Mr. M. a Court Jack-pudding; and I confess I told him, that drollery was not wit, but a Jack-Pudding dialect, when I obser∣ved him countenanc'd to Buffoon, and abuse me (and also my Man) daily and publickly, when I was at the same time as frequently extold by the Duke and Dutchess: but the Gen∣tleman since asked me forgiveness, ond confessed his wrong, and who had set him on, &c. shewing more signs of true Christianity, and a sense of Conscience, then I observed in the Holi∣est of your Party, who wanted the Manners and Loyalty, that is observed in Noah, who curst not Cbam (though in fault) because Blessed by God just before, Gen. 9.15. with 1. And to reckon all as I have heard, or can Remember, (my Lord of W. Threatning that he would search me to my Cradle) one of his Lordships Exceptions against me, out of his Simplicity and Ingratitude, was my Extraction out of Wales, which I was not ashamed to own, (though born and bred in England, for reasons then given his Lordship: From the Antiqui∣ty and Loyalty of the People, among whom he had his first preferment; and since to the World, in my small Book against a Position, publickly asserted by his Lordship (as I was credibly informed) that Rome was Mother Church to England, the admitting where∣of I fear'd, from my observations, might operate upon his Highness Instability. And since I hear of another of his Lordships exceptions about my being no Schollar, which I know not well how to answer, nor whether it be worth; though upon no other score, but the contrary character, and that not ordinary; Was I recommended for his High∣ness Service, by some of the most Learned in our Nation; and had been Chaplain before
to the Kings President and Council, in the parts I liv'd in, upon the Recommendation of some Reverend Bishops, who knew me better? And his Lordships Objection was answered by a per∣son of quality and Learning to whom it was made, and who was heretofore of the same College with me, That my Neighbours esteemed otherwise of me in the University; and I have reasons to think that his Lordship. spoke against his own belief and good information to the contrary. I have taken great and constant pains, for many years together, to the empair∣ment of my Sight, not to be culpably Ignorant in any part of Learning belonging to my profession, and I found by the Resentment of Auditors and Judges, in all publick places of Court or City, or Countrey, wherever I Preached, that my Labour was not misspent; and I observed a great industry in your Party to promote Early, and all along, this Smother∣ing Objection, and to overlay me when I was grown too big. Lord Ch. H. in 1666. about the time of De Macedo's escape, and return, stop't me from proceeding D. D. without any cause, against common right, and respect to the Duke, and large voluntary promises of all Favour made to me a little before, I having more then time, and willing to do all my Exercises. Wherein your Party had a Fairer oppertunity to convince me of my Ignorance, if they had trusted to their objection: and was about the same time Excluded from Preaching my Diocesans consecration Sermon at Lambeth (which he requested) Two very ominous In∣dications of the Impending Storm (which immediately followed) before half of your Arti∣cles against me were invented. But afterwards I found Friends also discouraged from ac∣cepting of my assistance in their Pulpits upon occasions, as wont, and a silence designed at last upon me, and Effected for many years in the Country, as well as at Court, and City, and Sea; and all for no reason, as I thought at first, but for being observed to outpitch your Party in Preaching; Aut it was afterwards made manifest, it was not want of Learning, but want of compliance with dark designs, (Stiled disobedence to Superiors) that kept me from Hon∣our and Dignity; for I would not enslave and debauch my Conscience knowingly in the least Sin, for the greatest advantage in this world; least in time, as I observed some Instances, I should not have the least grain of Conscience, or Religion, or Honesty, or Modesty, or any Truth, or Grace left, which Vertues I prefer'd before all Learning whatsoever, as ends ought to be before means: Which I believed the more to be the true cause, and not the o∣ther, because I observed some of the greatest then, and most Reverend of your Party, not to Read or Pronounce according to true Grammar and conjugation, their Common Institu∣tion over my Head. But if this would put a Period to my trouble, and Disgrace, from your Party, I would be willing to undergo a strict Examination yet, of my Studies, provided it be in publick, and before others. For I observed, when my small Treatise came first out, (which cured me of this, and the following Imputation, as easie as the Philosopher proved Motion, by walking) what pittiful shifts your Party were reduced to use, to support their tottering Objection, He did not write the Book; another writ it for him, at least he writ not the Epistle Dedicatory. &c. And when that would not do, other Arts must be used to suppress the Sale, and decry and slight the Book, though I received good thanks and re∣spects for the Argument, Levelled to the Capacities I design'd it for, from many unconcer∣ned, and unpensioned in your Parties design against me, and those of the most Learned of our English Nation; and of all Degrees, and Dignities, and Qualities, and Professions, and Perswasions. I had almost forgot the other notable Charge, and Engine, of considerable use to secure your Party, and stifle my repute and testimony, that was (when all exceptions failed) that I was Mad and Distracted, which by their venerable Authority (such was their Power, and Guidance over his Highness) they made the Duke believe to be true (in contradiction to his fresh commendations) and many other considerable persons besides, to my very Great detriment in the world; It being easier with well meaning People, to believe me to be Mad, then such persons to be Lyars; But I could not hear of any Instances and Signs of this Distemper in me, saving Two: The first was, the neglecting so fair an Interest, as I had in the Duke, to adhere to an Opinion; wherein I hope the Duke will, or ought, before any, to forgive and heal me, who venters Infinitely higher upon the like principle; and I did it not without Study, and Oaths, and the Laws, and Councels, and Interest of the Nation on my Side. The Second (as nothing can be hid which will not be made known) was, because
they found by my Servant, that I had not been in bed, but in my Closet the whole night, before I set out for Sea; And he was solicited by your party with great offers and promises, to swear something of that, or any other nature against me, for that I was a falling person, and not like to help him; and I heard others were encouraged by the other Chappel to second your party in promoting this re∣port, which none of your selves did at all believe, though you abus'd the credu∣lity and weakness of others, to give it countenance, against your consciences. For this charge (as any wise and good man may easily discern) is contradictory and inconsistent with their former Articles and Subsequent Actions at Law against me, for who ever heard of a non compos mentis Accus'd to Princes, or Sued at Law for expressions? Therefore my Lord of W. ought in Reason and Logick to restore me either to my sences, or my money: In all conscience to both; whe∣ther he be Innocent or Guilty; for wherefore should he have pleaded his privi∣ledge (and that against his promise to the contrary in writing) to withhold 300 l. or (600. l. as was proved at Kings Bench,) recovered against a distracted man, for certain words misconstrued and perverted? and which he knows are since re∣covered at Law in part against his Farmers, (who flye the Country) upon his il∣legal proceedings, himself hardly escapeing being fined by the Court. When all accusations failed, my Ruine was contrived by way of preferment, not to Bedlam, in pursuance of the former calumny, but in confutation of it, into a considerable living in order to a Bishoprick, viz. Llandyrnog in dyffrin-cluid in Wales, which the Bishops of Bangor usually held in commendam, for their conve∣nient Residence and the Sine-Cures which were held in commendam by Bishop Roberts deceased, and were more consistent with my Residence in the Dukes service, were disposed to others to make room for an Objection of Inconfistency) and I was com∣manded to repair from Sea to Oxford to accept of the said living, when the Roads were all Infected, and 9000. per week dyed at London, by which I was to pass; upon my arrival first to Oxford, and next to my living, I discerned a double snare therein, one to supplant me out of the Dukes service, (as I was kindly inform'd by one of your party;) which the Duke upon my application, assured should never be, and ordered me to take out the Seales. Another, no likelyhood of enjoying it quietly, by Incommoding my Diocesan, whereupon I petitioned to relinquish it, but was over ruled and dis∣missed unto it, as a Princely provision: Whereupon my Lord of W. instigated my Diocesan against me at Lambeth, that I, or his Lordship was the greatest Rogue in England, and threatned me by another, that he would make the three Kingdoms too hot to hold me, by a third Reverend person, that he would per∣secute me whithersoever I went to the utmost of his power: And I answered, that then I must put on a patience as large as his power; now there was no sore touched as yet, adequate to this winching. Whereupon my Diocesan having a declar'd liking to my living, (and I denying now to exchange, or quit it, as dear bought,) and finding I had great Enemies, and no protection, joyn'd with your party, by new contrivances, 1. Of a frivolous controversy about a reading seat, (not to be paraleld in this Age or Nation,) 2. Of an Action of Scandalum Magnatum to second it, to wrest both my living and calling from me, which he wanted not power to effect, by the Oaths of In∣struments, (which I knew to be as false, as the accusations of their Principals to heave me out of Court) and therefore could not, and would not accept of their 300. l.Verdict to be remitted, nor of greater offers, to submit, and allow them to be true: yea I heard their encouraged Agents offered them oaths that would take away my life, which they have not produced before Authority from that time to this. So that no Innocence, or Vigilance, could secure me from their power, in that Place and Station, where I was wholy a stranger; and thus for ma∣ny years, and those my best, I have been exposed to live without imployment or maintenance, or credit, or peace, upon the relief of my next Relations, where∣by this preferment, with the long trouble and charge attending it (which ended at last through the help of Providence in their shame and disappointment) was rendred insignificant, and worse than none at all, against the declared Intentions of his Highness to the contrary, if not against his Princely Honour and Justice,
who counts it part of Glory, you know, to be a good Master and a Man of his word. Notwithstanding it was known to your party, that I had waved a good offer to adhere to the Dukes service (counting it improper to desert a Prince on a sud∣den for advantage) which to another proved a Dignity of about a Thousand pounds per annum, and might have proved so to me in all probability, neither did I pre∣sume at first to seek His Highness service, but was sought for, being a Stranger to all in his Family, as likewise to those Learned Prebends of Westminster, upon whose reports of some Sermons Preached at Westminister-Abby, I was enquired for by the Dukes Almoner who had order from Her late Highness to enquire out a fit Person to take the constant charge of her Family, while the other four Chap∣lains were to wait quarterly in her Closet, and to Preach by turns with me in the Chappel throughout the year, all our Salaries being Fifty pound per annum. And as I came in by Providence, and without the precarious help of interest, so I continued in the Family with good love and respect, and (seeing you force me) with far more then you, or those of your party, my equals, had, as may, if need appear by several instances, till that in 1664. the Bishop of W. began to frown upon me, upon my relieving De. Macedo &c. and to set you, and others to decry me, and to make a new distinction, and difference between the Chap∣laines (which since my letter in June last to Dr. T. is endeavoured to be revived, and supported, as I hear, but with poor and lame success, and after the Blot was hit) and to report me to be no chaplain to the Duke (to please your envy and his own design) but as it were an Impostor for assumeing it, (which I remember did not a litle greive me) and that because, as was objected, I came not in through my Lord of W. of whose right to Introduce Chaplains solely, I was then, and am to this day Ignorant, but since guess'd at the design; who therefore caused my Salary to be reduced from Fifty pound to Forty, because he was not consenting to my admission; Though Dr. Killigrew, His Highness Al∣moner, and Dr. Triplet, both his Lotdships good Friends, gave it under their hands, which I delivered his Lordship, that his Lordship was privy and consenting to my setlement and salary according to Fifty pound, but his Lordship answered, he was not bound to follow their testimony against his own conscience, yet the Duke over ruled in this matter by his order for me; and indeed my place, for Interest and Profit, was the more eligible, as I told his Lordship. His Highness likewise sent me to the late Arch-Bishop, to see me fully setled by Law, both in his Service and my Living (for the inconsistency thereof was another exception to remove me from him, which themselves had contrived) who returned his answer by me, that he could not understand, how one body could be in two places, which His High∣ness over ruled: but how can you expect to thrive, said Sir A. A. to me, who have the Arch-Bishop and Bishop of Winton against you? Accordingly some other secret matter was whispred against me to his Highness by them, which took of his Favour irrecoverably from me, from that time to this. Some years after, when I petitioned His Highness for Restoration, upon the score of Innocence, or else, for common ordinary Justice, and equity, between any Master and Servant in three particulars, 1. Arrears of Salarie. 2. A Bene discessit and leave to take another Patron. 3. Some reparation of detriment by occasion of his Service, His Highness was graciously pleased with kind circumstances, to give me his answer by my Lord Craven, to this effect, that his Lordship doubted not to see me suddainly made a Bishop, if I submitted to the Bishops. And I answered I had given His Highness Reasons in Paper, why I could not (because their Terms were indispensably, to renounce my Innocence and Truth, to secure and justify them) if then said his Lordship, you cannot, and will not submit to the Bishops, His Highness's last answer is, that he can do nothing for you, but as he is directed by the Bishops, which was agreable to former answers of His Highness to me, that he referd them matters to the Bishops, and I heard it from others, of different interests, who well knew His Highness's mind in this matter: That he would do nothing for me against the mind of the Bishops, but if I could get the Bishops of
my side, he would be as kind as ever Sr. W. C. C. W. L. C. M. Neither would the Bishops give His Highness way to shew me Favour, or do me Just∣ice, as above, without such submission, which they had not power enough to bring me to, (as I told them, when I was lowest) and so it continues still with me, though the one be in His Grave, the other gone off the Stage, and Bishop Blanford of Worcester (desired by the Duke to search my cause) reported on my behalf in the matter of the reading Pew, against my Diocesan, but as to the concern of the greater Bishops, he thought fit, . So that I could not well and fully make use of a great Patronage within reach, most necessary for me in my deserted condition, for want of leave; neither did His Highness recommend me to any other Patron; and I was neglected by my own Church, for which I had studyed, and suffered all my days, and my Principles allowed me not to joyn with other Protestants, who more respected me for my Suf∣ferrings and Integrity, though differing ever from them (for the wrongs of some mortal Governours of the church, was no exception or prejudice to me against the good Laws and Government it self, as I answered some of them that invited me) neither was I to repair to my Living the Master-gin of my adversaries, where old snares continued, and my Cow was milked, and submission was expected to unjust, scandalous, and-over ruled Censures, and their watch and frown upon my Converse every where, made it difficult to live or breath, yet I was unwilling, for the reason at first, to cry out for help against my Fathers, or to make their op∣pression known to the Nation for my relief and vindication. Now I can discern no difference between being wounded by the hands of Pa∣pists, as Principals, or of Reverend Protestants (if for no other cause but Protes∣tancie) as Instruments, but that my Guard against Enemies in the shape of friends in Superioritie, was more difficult, and their Wounds pierced deeper by the Tra∣chery and Indignity, and that the Master is to be rever'd above the Servant: nor how any other Clergie man in the same Circumstances should have escaped the same mysterious and unaccountable Danger and Trouble, if he had been as proud, and mad, as to prefer his Duty and Fidelity to his Church and Country, before his Worldly Interest and Advantage; surely from the beginning (of the Re∣formation) it was not so New whether it be of publick Concern and Conse∣quence to prevent the like discouragement to others, from those who should ra∣ther encourage their Inferiors in such Fidelity, I humbly leave it to the Govern∣ment to Judge. Now I perceived that you well knew of this design and storm against me, about two yeres before the Duke understood it, and I must say it to your Honour, that none of my adversaries dealt more plainly with me, in fore telling both my dan∣ger, and its cause, than you did, whereby I suspect you could not be then igno∣rant of this Popish Plot, in its first rise and management. For I remember, when upon Her late Highnesses Her Order to me in 1664. to watch, and oppose the intollerable incroachments of the other Chappel at St. James, I had, amongst other instances to check them, recommended D. M. in great distress and miserie, to her Charitie and Protection, with much acceptance then, she being a zealous Protestant in her own inclination; and he likewise under a good Charracter for Life and Birth, which the Portugal Chaplains (whom I was commanded to found) had nothing to except against; I did not find them so incens'd against him, and me, as I found you and your partie against us both, before any other Good, or Evil, was known of him, or objected against me. For publiquely at Gentle-men-Waiters Table (among other molestations) you reproved me upon his score, and were angry with him for changing his Religi∣on, and communicating with the French Church, (having then little or no En∣glish) and that the French and we differed not only in Dicipline but in Doctrine, and that you would keep him from your Sacrament at St. Jams's if he offer'd to come there. And when I told you, the Bishop of W. did countenance him, and weekly relieved him with Her Highnesses Charity, you assur'd me the Bi∣shop was not for him, which afterwards appeared true to some purpose; and a∣nother time, the same yere, before a private Sacrament, order'd Her Highness in Her closet by Her Confessor my Lord of Winton, for the recovery of the Duke
of Cambridge's health (which seemed a strange use of a Protestant Sacrament to me) when I desired to be in Charity with you, and to know the true cause of your displeasure against me, with a purpose to give you Christian satisfaction, you answered, that I had never done you any wrong, but that I should be turn∣ed out of the Family for unsound Principles, which I then desired to know what they were, seeing I had been firm to the Church of England, before the Resto∣ration, and had no reason to desert it since; but you would not then assign what they were, but you and your partie from that time, daily set your selves to mo∣lest me, and decry me, and diminish my Salary as afore, to diminish my Quali∣lity, against contract with consideration, and to exclude me from Preaching and officiating at all before the Dutches at St. Jams's. For, besides her monthly Sacrament days, (wherein she remained at St. James's) you know, if you please, when it was my turn to Preach, she began to stay the other Sundays, on which I was to Preach, at home to hear me, and not to goe to White-Hall, and I remember, when she found you were to Preach, when she expected me, being as yet ignorant of the prohibition against my Preaching be∣fore Her, She came not to Chappel, when you served, but sent for me from the Kings Chappel to read Prayers to Her in Her Closet, whereby I found She did not set on the Bishop of W. as he alledg'd, but was set on by him against me, which is of great use and importance to know, in order to find, by whom She was perverted. And you staid not here, but likwise prohibitted my Preaching and Officiating before the Duke at Sea, in his firist Dutch-War, and though I was the Chaplain appointed to attend him, and priviledg'd with a Cabbin, (which you knew to your sorrow) and the Salary of the Ship, and at no other expedition had His Highness more than one Chaplain, yet as soon as I went to Sea, you were, as soon (after another that fell sick) dispatch'd after me, to make me a cipher, and to Officiate alone to His Highness all the while, and to Administer Sacraments to him monthly in stead of Sermons, which were suppressed by my Lord of W. contrivance, against His Highness's first orders by His Almoner to me: and when I endeavour'd to have this order altered, (which was scandalous to the Fleet, and uncharitable to the Sea-mens needs, and desires) against my return after the fight to Sea, whither the Duke commanded me before him, with an intention to follow, this was the first and only colour and pretence of displea∣sure that ever the Bishop had, while I was at St. James's, to object against me, Bona fide and with any truth, whatever it were, though he began to under∣mine me upon the score of De Macedo about a yeare before: so that this pre∣tence (which the Duke was made to countenance) was like the Lambs trou∣bling the River below stream, to the other Creature that drank above. Among several passages at Sea, I could never forget one, which was, that if the Dutch should be then beaten, the neck of the Protestant interest should be broken; (and their deliverance then from being totally destroyed, I thought they owed not to Sleep or slackening Sails by night, as was rumoured, but to too much faith in men, and guides by day, in not falling on at an opportunity, as the Duke himself had a mind; a Providential pledge that Popery will be defeated by its own Principles.) This strange expression (which reverence to the Government, made me then disregard) I found afterwards too well to agree with passages in Coleman, Fitz-Harris, and Common's Address, and the strange alteration in France, against the Protestants, and when I asked you then, what Religion you were of, you said you were of the Universal Church, and that Protestancy was a name of Schisme: to which your prejudice I had a particular respect in my Booke, least His Highness had imbib'd the same from you, or your party, as sometimes the patient is to be Administred unto, through the Nurse. Now I hear'd, and you better know, I am sure, that there was a Popish Priest in the Ship, But, if there was another in a Protestant mask, to celebrate Protes∣tant Sacraments, with a design'd malice the same time against the very throat of Protestancy, the dissimulation of our Tyburn Jesuites comes short of this, in some respects: but it could never sink into my suspition and belief, how any ge∣nerous Person of clear Honour, and Courage, or of understanding as to know and
recognize the right Soveraign of his heart, could be won, or bewitched by any damnable dispensation, to dissemble with God and man, on Deaths borders, for any Worldly design or end. And if Pretestants have been out-witted to massacre and ruine one another by collision of their vast force and treasure, yet Heaven appeard remarkably against it, to hinder and part them, by miraculous mists, and an unparalel'd Plague and Fire, in which last permitted judgment the subservient malice of Rome visibly crossed its own designs, and suffered Amsterdam to escape for once, to pursue a studied opportunity (never else to be regained) of retor∣ting, 666. on London, And if this be so, The Lord in mercy watch over this poor Nation, our Cities, Fleet, Universities, Libraries, &c. And teach our Senators Wisdom, and deliver me and (others) from Blood guiltness O God, thou God of my Salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness, Psal. 51. The Even before the fight, June 2.65. when both Fleets were neare together, I was commanded (because you were unwilling) to Officiate and exhort, (which I did with Protestant sincerity) and with what an acknowledg'd omen of victory, annnex'd to the duty, you may perhaps remember, for you among others told me then of his Highness's beliefe, declard to that purpose: but neither the recom∣mendation of Heaven believed, nor intense Favour by other laudable means ac∣quir'd, and Graciously attested to his Majesty, and the World; nor false accu∣sations baffled and confuted, and innocency fully cleared, nor the undoubted Di∣vine right and charge, and glory of Rulers to punish knaves rather than honest men, (which I did humbly intimate and insist on) could secure me from being de∣stroyed in a moment (and that as soon as I was newly delivered from the same publick dangers) according to your infallible prediction as afore, now seconded with other Popish threats, both Forraign and Domestick about the time of De. Macedo's miraculous escape at Portsmouth, and his appearing to me at St. James's after he had been burnt for Sodomy at Paris, about half a yere before, (as some of your party publickly affirmed to my face) and complaining of a conspiracy be∣tween some of your party, and the Popish Chaplains against his life, made very probable to me, by other good Testimonies, and Cadaverous faces, and Gentile tricks, and Parliaments from this time awakened to enquire into the insolence, &c. of Popery. Now though I can, and daily have prayed, that God would forgive your wrongs to me, yet I am not to forgive your wrongs to my Friends, especially to the Duke and Nation; nor the cause and root of this general disturbance to all manner of People, and of the high and unheard of debates between Suc∣cession, and Salus publica, and care of the Kings Life, and of our Laws, and Liberties, and Religion, least they become Articles of Nants (for to use the un∣expired right and duty of a Chaplain) I take them to be the first Authors of the doleful bill of exclusion, who for preferments, have at first complyed, and encou∣rag'd to those revolts, that work the (once darling Prince) out of the hearts and trusts of the People, to the great infelicitie of both. Whereby the Nation is nigh dissolved in fiction, as in a separation of Soul and Body, for what is a Nation, though never formidable and renoun'd, without a Prince, they can trust, but a dead unactive Carcass? or what is a Prince, though never so magnanimous, with∣out the hearts and trusts of his People, but a lean wandering Ghost and Appariti∣on? An army without a general, or a general without an Army, signified the same in Caesars, as a Kingdom divided against it self, in our Saviours account, but the Blind man in the fable, that could go, taking the cripple upon his back, that could see, enabled both to see and walk. And some States-men describe the vnlgus or part ruled, to be as a blind Creature, that cannot see, but feel; the resignation of its sight, being its trust and submission; the retention of its feeling, its right and custome to taste and judge, whether it were righted or betrayed, whether it trusted Gods or Devils: for never was their Genuine unrepentable trust, but in order to be holpe and defended by another, as a God. And Gods part is truly act∣ed by all those, that count it Divine Honour, dearer than life it self, to be true in trust. Now the infinite God himself, the King of Kings, and true measure of all right Governing, (if it could be imagin'd his Creatures could expect nought but sham's and snares, and destruction, from him) could never gain their trust, which is essenti∣tially
correlate to Truth and Love; upon which score, some assertions about absolute Decrees, and Reprobation, are suspected as unsound, because known to lead to despe∣ration, and to take off the trust of the Soul. Our Roman Catholicks likewise, though the best of Christians and Subjects, (with some) would hardly trust a Luther to be their Pope, or an Hugenot to be their King, though a right Heir. And there are the same Natural instincts, to preserve themselves and their posterities, in o∣thers, preliminary to all other ties: and the Church of England is too unkindly requited, to be slighted and abandoned as Heretical, and Carnal, which hath num∣bers of her Sons of a more sublime and Primitive-like Loyalty, who think it Conscience to forget the English-man, to make good the Christian, as if their several rights and interests were inconsistent, or, as if Magna-Charta and our other good Laws, (which are conceived to be in danger by this revolt) were not Juris divini in some sense, and confirmed by the 13th. to the Romans, Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, such Statutes being undoubtedly the deliberate, and most certain and solemn Will and Declaration, of the Supream Powers in Eng∣land, which the Apostolical Injunction requires all due obedience to (being our true Loyalty according to the true sense and etymology of the word) upon the peril of Damnation as well as Treason: insomuch that many suspect, and object, it must be preferment; or the belly, and not Conscience, that sways, where the Divine will is so neglected, and the Heaven that is preferr'd before Earth, and be∣fore the Laws and Liberties of their Country, by a counterfeit Zeal and Loyal∣ty, is their own Paramount Private ends, and phancied accommodations and pen∣tions, and advancement, being a sort of Lust and disorder (in exhalting a part be∣fore the whole, against Law and Conscience) that Tyburn and Hell, were erected and constituted, to correct and punish the like Principle in the general, in every Malèfactor, and Sinner, that ever did, or shall suffer in, or on them: on the like inducements, the single will and pleasure of an old crazie Pope seduced by lusts and flatteries, finds more votaries and voices at Rome (such as they be) for its infallible Authority, than their general Councils can, which seldome meete, and bestow fewer promotions, though both Popes themselves, and their Catholick Church, and God himself are acknowledg'd by them to be present in the latter, without dispute. Besides the Pope himself (who must needs smile to himself, at mens devout preference of his Quacke-interest before the good of their own Country) was more faithful and careful of His Highness's safety, when he advised him to be wary in declaring, as knowing perhaps the Divine and Noble constitution of this Realm, which knows no error in the Crown, spares no treason in the Subject. Therefore the Commitment of Henry the first, when Prince, is recorded in our Histories, without censure, yea with the eulogy of the King his Father, for the courage and impartiality of his Courts, and the submission of his Son. The Laws interposing and revengeing all wrong, and violation, by any Creature, or Subject, either unto the Divine State and Prerogative, and Person of the King (who answers to the hallowed deity Above) or against the cognate safety of the publick, (which is, as the whole to the part, Below, or as end to means, or God to Creature) the King, Laws, and publick safety (if I rightly understand the Government, I am bound to obey and preserve) these three with us, being as one, and none but State Hereticks and Traytors deny this Trinity, or divide this Unity. But neither His Holyness, nor your party, were true to his Highness's Ho∣nour or Conscience, in allowing him to act secretly, against the Religion he pro∣fess'd openly, before he had as openly renounc'd it. For Turks, and Heathens, and Papists themselves, (if the case were against themselves) would abhor such prac∣tices by the mere light of Nature, which is the reason that by the Laws of Nati∣ons, broad sides at Sea are never given under false Coulours: and was the direc∣tion clear and English-like, to be given or followed, to entertain a Protestant Chaplain into service, to be ruin'd for his honesty, and openness in his Profession, by secret underboard Arts? (which I mention not for private concern, but for the certainty of the instance) what will be thought of them that fared better by their prudence and flexibility? or those specially, who were active instruments in such designs against one of their own Coat and Profession?
But in nothing is this change and revolt from all truth and goodness, more pal∣pably unnatural and irreligious, than that it wounded the Glorious Fathers Ho∣nor in his grave, making him accessary to what he did forbid, and much justifying the Fears and Calumnies of his Enemies, and flurring the cause of his suffering friends: and casts his only Brother and Soveraign, that stands in the way, into a manifest and daily Jeopardy of his Life, by inevitable consequence, from the known practises and principles of Rome, though no actual Plot, or design to assa∣sinat his Royal Person had been proved, or believed: And which is as unplea∣sant as death it self, disturbs his dayes with a most ungrateful dilemma, and ne∣cessity, of loving a Brother before the Community, or the Community before a Brother, when neither part can be chosen without a great and general distur∣bance, or unkindness: All which inconvenience had been easily prevented by con∣tinuance in his blessed Fathers Religion, (wherein none of your party were runed for their councils) and I trust, might be still redressed by his return to the Truth, to be our blessing, in the manner I humbly described in a Letter to Edenburrough in June last, and in another to Sir A. A. some while before, and insinuated also as much in 1677. in my Dedicatory Epistle to His Highness himself. For sure the Nation and City in General design no hurt to the Duke, to a haire of his head, or line of his Picture, but have very strong desires to be effectually safe in their dearest concerns from the sworn Enemies of their Religion and Coun∣try, too much hearkned to: I know a person that was torn, and like to be destroy∣ed by a tame and generous Mastiff, when a little Childe, for dallying too long and withholding his bit from him when he was hungry; I know no greater Enemies to the Duke, than your servile parasfitical party who by Loyal complyance with all his feavorish appetites, for their advantage, have betrayed him into this disease, and perplexity, and danger, and strange revenge, not against Enemies, but best friends, and the Glory of his Fathers memory, by loading it with an odious and ob∣vious new discovery of a probable cause of his sad difaster permitted by providence (which overrules the Malice of Men and Devils to this Glorious ends) while all will easily see and judge that the Revolt of the Son (the sorrow and trouble of all good men, the open boast and shelter of Papists, &c. the Secret joy and mockery of Republicans) was the likely effect of his unequal marriage, and the Blood and Massacre and confusion, that is feared, the likely effect of this revolte. All foreseen, and disliked by the omniscient Wisdom, which chasteneth in whom it loveth, any root, or cause of mischeif, there being besides a particular Remarka∣ble providence over this Isle, which makes kind Aspects towards Popery inauspi∣cious to our British Crown, and an effectual sincere Zeal to suppress it, Fortunate and Glorious to our Princes, as I offer to consideration, pag. 373. Hearts Sove∣raigne. But the truth is, when I was well fitted by His Highness's extraordinary Favour and good opinion (as is well known to all about then him) to direct, or retard him, by love, or argument, or supplications, from such hazardous and degenerate moti∣ons, (upon mistaken Zeal) against our Church, and Kingdom, and Himself, in all his Interests, Temporal, Moral, and Eternal, and to recommend to him the Exam∣ple of Queen Elizabeth to be gloriously useful and dear to GOD and his Coun∣try (as I do in my Book) or of Queen Christina to merit a Heaven and kinde tribute by being civil, (which I leave to others to advise:) How did your party never rest, to hazard their Honour and Salvation, by multiplying false testimo∣nies, to remove such Lumber from about His Highness: though I observed none of the Bed-Chamber that joyned in this Intrigue against me but only one, Sir A. A. but rather of their own accord did intercede often for me; nor indeed any within, or without the House, but the Relations, and Creatures, and Subcreatures of an unfortunat Grandee, then in very great Power, and your old P. if I well remember. Could any English man or Christian refrain to oppose, or testify to his power against such wrongs and abuses to his Prince and Nation from bo∣some Friends? Seek the Peace of the City, faith the Prophet, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace, Jer. 27.7. Therefore in 1668. after the remove of the Lord Chancelor H. (the head of your party and designe, upon the score of matches, as I imagined and felt) I
applyed my self upon a just occasion to some Reverend Bishops, met near my Parish, to desire their assistance to have this matter searched and examined, least there were a Plot laid against this Church, hoping by the sounder part to detect, and work out the more unsound, with less scandal and danger then by any other method I could use, or think of; but instead of being holpe or directed, I was oppressed, and betrayed, and instead of being produced a witness for the Publick, made a defendant to an action of Scandalum magnatum, by wilful misconstruction of my discourse, against a paper to the contrary lest with them under my hand, to pro∣ceed on, which they concealed from that time to this: the coppy whereof can be produced. And in December 1678. after the breaking out of this Popish Plot, In obedience to his Majesties Proclamations, I communicated what light I could thereunto by a a-breviate of my sufferings and for what cause, delivered to an Honorable, and fit Person of the Privy-Council, but nothing was made thereof, nor I enquired af∣ter any more. Only I observed an unexpected retrograd motion (like a Resur∣rection from the dead) from Farnham to London thereupon, to joyn with other great Bishops to recover the Duke to the Church, or perhaps to cover one of their number from contrary suspition, by a kind absolution, of which boast hath been made, but what ever was the design, the event of the meeting, as I heard, was to let the World see, that his Highness neither was, nor would be directed by the Bishops; in some contrariety, and check to his last answer to me, as afore, wherewith I was crushed and tantalized, by their directions, for so ma∣ny years: so much their care was more for some of their own safeties, then of His Highness's honour; but I observed no such displeasure against them for shutting the Stable door so late, as from His Highness, and one of them against me with∣out end, for giving the alarme and warning, before the Steed was gone. By all I have nothing to boast, but that I have made good my innocence, and Loyal integrity against all exceptions and colours whatsoever; and neither pro∣mises, nor protection, nor justice, nor equity, nor mercy, nor truth, nor any plain∣dealing have been made good (save only from your self) unto me, to this day, and I have Overcome Evil with Good, and have not been overcome by it, to GOD I give the Praise. Such being the harmless victory of Martyrs over Heathenish Pow∣ers, as St. Hierom notes, Non cessisse, vicisse est. But now the most open publication of this dark Mystery, to the consideration of Authority, and the World is sufficiently safe and seasonable, and necessary: the whole Nation being now known to it self, to be entirely united and resolved a∣gainst Popery, in which point, both Addressers and Excluders, and his Majesty, all agree, and the danger of Fanatical Confusion and Sacriledge, and striking at the Antient Order for the faults of Persons, litle feared: or the like defect and danger better to be rectified, and remedied another way, without wrong to the King and Publick Councils, or wound and scandal to Religion. So that your masquerad party appear very small and contemptible, and mista∣ken, and easily to be blown off to publick Satifaction: who while undiscerned and unremoved, were for divers years very considerable, by their neerness to vitals, & great influence and power, especially over the Clergy and Universities to help, or hurt, or corrupt, or (as in my case,) to vex and oppress to death, by a new colour and mystery of a through-paced obedience required to superiours, right or wrong, and leading, the Lord knowes whither, as in a string, (contrary to the Tenor of Canonical Oaths, which bind only to things lawful and just) enough to put in mind of the Plot in Sparta, where the Guards were strictly charged to obey their Chief Officer in all things whatsoever, while he himself had secret Instructions to kill and new mould the Government. So that and effectual convictive discovery of the remainder of your party would be of more use to unite and establish this Nation perhaps, than the hanging of 1000. Je∣suits, which could not do us half that hurt without, as they within, and none better fitted for such a discovery then your self, (and some others whom I can name) as any may gather from your early and infallible prediction of my ruine, long before the Duke did know, or consent thereto: And conspiracies of this nature against our Church, are better discovered by Actors in them, then sufferers by them, the one evidence to the other being but as a Coppy to the Original,
though yet not altogether useless, in the detection of such dark designes. All this in short, Reverend Sir, is humbly and truly, to represent, what faithful Guides and Directors, the Chief of your party have been to his Highness, as to his Honour, and Concience, and interest in this Protestant Nation; And to exhort and monish you, (as I have done others) to become a discoverer of the Ecclesi∣astical part of this Popish Plot, or (if you will not) to leave it to the Publick, to Judge of us both, as to the discharge of our several duties. The Oath of Allegi∣ance, &c. bind you to make your best discovery; And the Nation would be glad of a Grave and unexceptionable evidence at this juncture (if you have a heart to serve your Nation) you are bound thereto, for safety as well as duty, and for fear as well as conscience; for if you are a Protestant, you ought not to deny it, or if a Papist, not to be tollerated in such a place and charge. It cannot be thought that I write all this now for private advantage or splean, but rather out of conscience and duty to the Publick, before I dye, because your whole party are not able to make me sufficient reparation for what I have suffered these sixteen or eighteen Years together in my calling, and credit, and fortunes, and peace, and time, and loss of the Dukes special Favour, and wrong of next Orphan relations, and hasten'd deaths of others, but I verily believe, that some of the chiefest of your party have been beholding many years to my patience and tenderness for the Duke and the Church, to the neglect of my own opportunities, and interest, and relief. Sir, You had a right to this freedom for several respects, from, Your humble Servant, Thomas Iones. February, 22. 1681. Kingstreet, &c. A Letter sent to SCOTLAND, To the Reverend Dr. Turner, His Royal Highness Chaplain at∣tending his Houshould in Edenburgh. Reverend Sir, TO none it is better known perhaps, then to you, how, and for what cause for many years together, I have had my fortunes wholy ruined, my good name wounded, my calling disturbed, my converse streightened, my sences questioned, and my truth and testimony at last, attempted to be wrested from me, by Importunities and Curses, by Power and Fraud, by great Offers, and long Streits and Seidge, but in vain, and without effect, this last possession being more within my power. And I have survived, I bless God to see (as the reward and victory of Truth and Patience, the proper trophee becoming our calling) all my Enemies from the greatest to your self, basted and condemned in all their pretences and Reproaches, not only before God and their own consciences, and my knowledge, as ever, but also, at last before the World, by detection of Plots, and decisions of providence, and voluntary confessions, in parties penitent; and shameful retreats and contra∣dictions, and checkmates, in contrary dispositions, as will appear in the ensuing Narrative: And as to you, by your present Imployment at Edenburgh, which is not to Read Mass in the Closet, I suppose, but to serve the Family, wherein you are
become my successor, as well as Drs. Doughty, and Lake by Land, and Woodroff by Sea: and yet time was, that I was to be no Chaplain for it, but to be shun'd and disown'd by you, and your party, and hindered to Chatechise, or to Preach before the Duchess at St. James, or to the Duke at Sea, and to have my Salary diminished, and withheld from me, in that part, and more, to this day, with many other unschollar-like and barbarous passages, not Inferior to Infamous Cravats, to weary me out of the Family, and my Life, for no Cause in the World, but for appearing early against Popery, at St. Jame's, and Introduceing De Macedo, and being a probable and likely Instrument perhaps (by a passionate favour and good opinion) of preserving His Highness in His Fathers Religion, and endevouring at last to bring this Plot to Light in. 1668. This Preface therefore I judged fit to direct to you afore hand, who have so Zealously concern'd your self in most part of this Tragedy (in obedience to Su∣periours I suppose) either to awaken your Lethargick conscience, better to mind the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which enjoyns upon the peril of perjury to disclose conspiracies of this nature, as well for our own as the Nations safety; and I doubt not but you can positively prove by hearing and seeing what I can mostly prove by sufferring: for I observ'd you, and your party, to foretell as∣suredly my ruine, when the Duke was ignorant of the delign, and fully resolv'd against it; and you will be truer also to the Church, and the Duke (whose bread you eat) as well as to your conscience, by discovering those false guids, who either by direct Influence, or Obediential Parasitical compliance, and destruction of faithful obstructors, have encourag'd his Gracious Highness, in designs, so disturbing and hazardous to himself and Roman Catholicks, as well as to the whole nation. Or, if I fail herein, to warn the Nation further, as my last part, to read in my sufferings their own great danger from Masquerade Protestants, and a few dis∣guis'd Woolves got within the Sheepfold, more hurtful and pernicious, than hun∣dreds of Whitebreads and Hartcourts from without; for if an approv'd servant, and companion of dangers, and alwayes Episcopal, and Loyal, have been so se∣verely and coursly used for Protestancy, by their means, professing themselves as yet the same Religion, what must other more unrighteous and stuborn Hereticks throughout the Nation, in proper time expect? And though I have been sufficiently haras'd, by prevalent unprovoked Adver∣saries (with the help of my own trust and reverence towards them) yet I shall not yield my self fully conquer'd, till I am beaten out of my Principles, and faith to King and Nation, as well as out of my accommodations; and therefore out of invict duty and fidelity shall not fear to add, That if Popery, and slavery, be more desirable than publick Peace and Crowns, it will yet be more Princely and Generous to come to our Church once more, and discover, for publick satisfaction and reparation, those treacherous carnal guides, who for a present preferment, betrayed a sincere and pious Prince, through such disguise, to hurt himself, and friends, before declaration; else how can it be said, that he suffers, as a Christian, or a Catholick for a true, but rather for the unwor∣thy fruits, and dangerous malignity of a false Religion: neither will this be dis∣honourable or difficult; for Princes who have a right to the utmost fidelity of all men, may with greater honour and glory, before God and man, Sacrifice Knaves for treachery, than honest men for truth: and then turn Papist again, to our ter∣ror, and spate not, but with English valour, and fair warning; and He turn Papist too, though none others will; and renegue this ancient and Apostolical Mother-Church, and all her Rights, provided any principle in my Prefaces, or Chap∣ter in my small Book, can be unsetled; till then, for better, for worse, I shall through Gods Grace, continue, Your Protestant Servant, Thomas Iones. June 18. 1681. Kingstreet, &c. THis Letter had prefixed before it, a Preface to my intended Memorial for the Discovery of Masquerad Protestants, with the Text, Judg. 19, 30. but the Town being full of News from Edenburgh thereupon, that His Highness did intend to return to our Church, I forbore farther thoughts thereof for some time.
A Letter to Sir A. A. Sir, I am well informed, that you were lately pleas'd to traduce me to D. O. a publick Person, bestowing hard characters upon me unworthy of your self or me, &c. The ground and provocation I find, was, for demanding of my own, whereof I sent you the state and account, at Mr. Swifts desire, and amply proved the Dukes will and order for payment thereof, to D. O. his satisfaction against your mean sugestions, whereby there is owing to me about or 1. You give me occasion hereby to recollect how privy and instrumental you were in an early Assasination I endur'd from great tongues in 1666. at St. James's, for no cause, but Protestancy, and that under the covert of a friend, and in ma∣nifest contempt of the Dukes declar'd kindness and frequent defences, which was not very Mannerly nor Loyal, nor safe perhaps in you, or your party (as some would have though) but that you well understood your grounds, and that occult inclination which would ensure you, when you most thwarted his Royal Will and Ho∣nour: for others of the Bed-Chamber, as much strangers to me, as your self, who discern'd not then this Catholick byas, could not forbear to mind His Highness free∣ly, that it was not for His Highness's Honour to destroy his innocent servant, who stood to him in his dangers, and himself had publickly commended. Whether or no you likewise forgot the Oath of Allegiance, &c. and concealed those Persons, that then, or since, perverted their Royal Highnesses traiterously from the Church (as well as treacherously from me) will then best appear, when this matter, so much tending to discover the Root and bottom of this Hellish Plot (which some would make a Fable for their Security) shall by Authority be throughly searched, in proper time. Its a satisfaction to me above all preferment, or Salary, that I preferred my fidelity to His Royal Highness Honour, and Conscience, and Interest in these Pro∣testant Nations, in times of tryall, though ruined for it in barbarous manner: Nei∣ther do I envy, or dread the despicable felicity and grandeur of any of a con∣trary complyance, and success. How soon will this prosperity be Sowred, If God (who can do it in an instant to the great joy of Prince and People) should in∣cline his Highness heart, to be more guided by the Laws and Councils of this Nation, then by forreign Cheats, or Domestick Slaves and Parasites, and to do as Con∣stantius Chlorus did at York, to such his Servants, as denyed Christ to please the Emperour. Sir, though I forgive your calumnies, yet Ile make bold humbly to mind your conscience to think of Reparations to the publick. And likewise not to wrong His R. Highness's Justice and Honour, in witholding my due Salary any longer from me, for I am no gainer by the Dukes Service, or his living (in Wales.) Some of your penitent Brethren, in the same intrigue, have gone further, as to make some Christian acknowledgments of the many wrongs, they with you, with∣out cause, have done to, Honourable Sir. Your, &c. July. 7. 1680. A Letter to Sir J. W. Sir, HAving resolved to adhear ever to my Duty, and fidelity to His Royal High∣ness, and the Publick, whatever were my tryals, or desertion; in pursuance of the same Loyal Fidelity, I have presumed in this method through you, being discouraged in all other addresses, humbly to request his Royal Highness to peruse and consider a short explicit Letter of concern and moment lately writ on a just occasion to Sir. A. A. From his long oppressed Servant, Thomas Iones, July, 21. 1680.
To His Royal Highness, JAMES Duke of York and Albany, &c. May it please your Royal Highness, AS the Peace of Kingdoms,My Epistle Dedicatory to His R. H. de∣livered with my Book of the Hearts Right Sove∣raign into His R. H. Hands at St. James's Oct. 31. 1677 which your Royal Highness excellently knows, and the duty and safety of Subjects, together with the great ease of Princes, consist in one short, easie rule, and equitable, well maintaind, and practiced, The submission of the Creature to its Creator; or the Obedience of Inferiours, in the low condition of the one, to their respective Superiours over them, in the Authority, and high Character of the other; so it may be affirm'd, that the Peace and welfare of the Church depends no less upon the like lesson and method. For what are Conventicles, Schismes, Heresies, Idolatries, which disturbe the Peace, and destroy the being of the one; but like so many Riots, Factions, Seditions, Trea∣sons, which alike undermine, and overthrow the Constitution of the other? so that in short, the Disturbers of the World, are those alone, who disobey Superiours. Who, in the time, and under the Covert, of Peace, are of two sorts; such as unduti∣fully despise the Right, or treacherosly erect a Wrong Soveraign over themselves. The first are those, who from Avarice, or Pride, or Ambition, by craft or force, disobey the Laws, and usurp and encroach upon the Rights, and Prerogatives of their lawful Governours; where every inconsiderable Inceptor, and Puny Recusant, is a Cromwel, or Luciser, in his Path and tendency. The next those, who through fear, or easiness, will admit, or submit, to any wrong pretender in his usurpations, and be∣lieve the Serpent against God: And then it cannot be expected, but that they, who mistake their Sovereign in the first place, will mistake their Loyalty in the next; And Allegiance misplac'd shall make men Rebels, as much as the failer or subduction. The prime indispensable charge thereof, first of Heaven's King, next of every King on Earth that represent him, is that known Commandment; Thou shalt have no other Gods but me. The Peace therefore of Churches and States manifestly consists in two points. 1. In the exact knowledge and discovery, who are our Right, and lawful Superiou s on Earth. 2. In exact obedience performed to their Laws and Will, and no other. Nor to Them, acting beyond their Sphere, and usurping upon Gods Rights in Heaven, under whom all Eartly Superiours and Inferiours are Equally Fellow subjects. And not to be al∣lowed the liberty of eyes, and understanding, or private judgment, to discerne between right or wrong Leaders, which is of such temporal concern and preservation to every man in this World; nor between the will of God, and his Creature, where they inter∣fere, which is of such Eternal moment in the other, (wherein lies the Radical errour of some Modern Christian Heathenism) were to be depos'd from being men any more, or reduced to an Eternal Non-age and inability, to discern between good and evil, and fitter therefore to be governed, than to govern either themselves, or others. Having therefore, for the establishment of Friends, and the comfort of Regular, and recovery of Irregular, and seduc'd sufferers for Religion, bestowed endeavours, to distin∣guish the several parts of Divine and Human Soverainty, whereon the Peace of Com∣munities, and the Salvation of Souls depends, (being as manifestly distinguishable, as Heaven and Earth, or Soul and Body,) and stated also, and evinced the Title of Right Mother-Church, to our own Britain; (though its known, a Harlot can bid fair for a true Mother, where she lights not on Solomons for Judges, and where she does, be willing the Child be divided into Sects, and parcels, which she is not like to enjoy to her self entire,) and sufficiently demonstrated, (to any whose invincible minds and Spirits are unreduced from their Loyalty to God and Truth,) That Popery, in its Leaders, is an uniform in invasion, and in its followers, a necessary disobedience to
right Soveraignes, in Heaven and Earth, and Protestancy in its Principles to be safe and clear from such disorders; I judged fit to dedicate the Argument, to whom it was duty to present the first Copy, to your Royal Highness, my Gracious Prince, and Master, having afore-hand weighed and considered, (as I ought,) it would make for your Highness Honour, and publick love, either at Home, or Abroad, in the disjunctive, whatever were its resent∣ment, or success: At Home, with God and the Country, if it serv'd in the least to fortifie your Royal Breast against temptations, or at least with Forreign Lords of Celesti∣al Crowns, and Canonizations, if it fayl'd; against whose Sacred Avarice, and Catholick canting, for Tribute and Subjection, and other Politick Arts, which are not unknown, and infallible errours and Idolatries, which are not unconfuted, such plain and manifest Truth could so little prevail; though from clean hands and ends, and seconded, with the sense of the whole Nation, and the rights of this Ancient Apostolical Church, undoubtedly Senior, if not Mother to Rome it self. Withal, the Subject being of the Heart, and Conscience, and comprizing, as the heart doth, in a narrow Rome, a competent stock of Divine Rules, and Measure, to judge of Truth, (and about Church matters) seem'd therefore the fitter present for a Prince, so nigh to Soveraign, who is a nation contracted in one man. And Princes, like God whom they represent, delight in hearts: And no Prince in Story was ever the Darling, of more English Hearts, than your R. H. and strange and unjust it were, you should suffer any abatement of that Glory, for no other rea∣son, but your exalted superlative zeal for God, and your Conscience, above Crowns, or Kingdoms, being the highest streign and pitch of sublime and transcendant Honour, that Mortality could ever exert or phancy; and higher still, if that zeal were well guided with descretion, (as the Apostle requires,) and not taken upon undue trust; whereof if there were not some manifest cause to doubt, or fear, none were more inexcusable, and worthy to be deserted for ever by Your R. H. than him, who having had once the Honour, to adhere to you in your military dangers, should want a heart at last to follow you in your Exclesiastical motions after truth, my proper Element and Profession. Having therefore, as I ought, doubted my self not a little, and reviewed my Prin∣ciples upon this occasion, and with best endeavours of Brain and Knee, studied to know the Truth, and God's Mind , with a heart resolved to be of its side, to my Power, against the World, it seemed agreeable to Ministerial Obligation, as well as Loyal Reputation, to communicate my satisfactions to the World, in the view of your R. H. that all might see that nothing else was able to make a Loyal Britain shrink from the steps of his Prince but a greater Loyalty to the manifest rights of God, and the King, and the Truth. Which I trust, will not be construed Contempt, but constancy, nothing being more the Duty of every Loyal servant, (and a Minister especially) than to be as faithful to his Prince, (and consequently to God and the Nation,) as Conscience is in every breast, which will never approve, or agree to any disloyal revolt from Heaven and Truth, but will chuse rather to be silenc'd for a time than consent, and with Patient agony refer the matter to God himself. Nor are any to be reckon'd straight-way unfortunate (as is the manner of some Weak and Carnal reasons, and Turba Remi, and also the Divinity of some grave Deacons of the belly, and present ease and greatness,) for any wound, or inconveni∣ence, they may bring upon themselves, for such fidelity to the Temporal and Eternal Inte∣rests of their Master, either from declar'd, which is more fair, or undeclar'd, and invisible Hostilities, which is less: For such suffer in their manifest duties, which is therefore to be presum'd to be their choice by consequence, (when such need require) and their right, and best self-preservation, (if they be right men and Christians,) for if we are bound to love our Neigbours as our selves at the least, so much more our Prince, and Countrey, above our selves, as the hand doth the head. And greater and truer love cannot be expressed, than by long misery and durance for the Truth, like an Anchor under Waves, to hold fast the great Soul of ones Prince (composed of Grace and Mercy, and the fear of God,) by his Bowels and Compassion, stronger than any Cable, from running against Eternal Rocks, and clashing with His Heavenly Sovereign; which is the first, and Original disloyalty, and insurrection against the Chief, whereof the Tumults of subjects against Secondary Mortal Soveraigns, are usually but copies, and fatal consequences, by mans manifest fault, but Gods se∣cret righteous judgment, as the fear and subjection of the Creature is observed by Di∣vines to be abated and impaired towards Adam, after his fall. And no Prince can more deserve such Matyrial fidelity from Servants, and Sub∣jects, than your R. H. not only upon the score of Loyalty and Conscience, common to all
Princes, but of Personal, and peculiar, merit and exemplary frequent fatigues, and hazzards, and lovely deportments on the confines of life and death, for the glory of your Countrey, which your, R. H. valued above your Life, and present, and hereditary greatness, as much, as many mean and vulgar spirits, do below their petty selfends and differences. And that great sight cannot easily depart from my remembrance of your serene Magnanimity, and cheerful unconcernedness on Quarter Deck, June 3d. 1665. which betoken'd to my hopes a great distance of dangers from your R. H., even then, when Roar∣ing deaths hail'd thick about your R. Person, aod besprinkled your Buff with the blood of your ever memorable Companions, that fell by you. Such contempt of Death, and the Pomp, and Glory of this World, for the defence of your King, and Country, be∣ing a lively resemblance of that true Christian Charity, which doth the like for Christ, and souls: and fits the understanding to receive, and embrace the truth. And I have just cause often to bless God, for a kind of publick reward then, of my many Prayers in private for your R. H. (which was my chief, and sole Armour in your defence) that your R. H. should observe, and declare it as an Omen of Victory, annext to the publick Service and Exhortation performed by me the even before the fight, by your R. H. appointment, that one of the greatest Ships of the Enemy, should take fire in that moment in the sight of both Fleets, reported to be one of the number that were particularly bound to destroy you. And why should I distrust in God, or the power of truth, or the success of sincere Love, and Loyalty, but that these my prostrate sentiments, proved, and preferred, through much patience, before all the offers of this World, may not contribute with the Prayers of all good Christians, and farr greater Abilities, and Councels, and the consideration, and candor of your R. H. own breast, and Princely Loyalty to God and Truth, the greatest of all, to beget that satisfaction, and stability in your R. H. as may kindle more Bon-fires in our Streets, than did that your renowned Victory? Quinctius the Roman General, proclaiming in the Name of the Senate by sound of Trumpet, unexpected Liberty to all the Cities of Greece, then newly Conque∣red, as the Nation met to begin their Olimpick-games, did so discompose, and lick up all their inclinations after their sports, with the suddainness of the good tydings, that when they could believe it to be true, they could think on nothing else; And rush∣ing, one upon another, with excess of joy and thankfulness, to kiss his hands, and to cast their Crowns and Garlands at his feet, went nigh, to put him in manifest danger of his Life, with their Crowd, and immoderate Transports, that forgot all manners and distance, had not his great strength of body, and the Vigour of his years, being 33, saith Livy, and some Content, and satisfaction to observe whence their Rudeness sprang, served to Rescue him from the danger of too great love. Such a Jubile to our Britain, and such a lovely danger to your R. H. (as may be gather'd from the General pulse) the dismission of some soruples would soon produce, which many suspect, and fear, but I never did, nor can, (before a special declarati∣on) being so over-ruled to the contrary by your Princely Wisdom and justice; for what greater violation of the Law of Nations can there be, (to the dissolution of all Faith and Truth among men, whereon Allegiance to Princes, and the Peace of the World hang) than openly, or secretly, to oppose, or prejudice a Religion professed, be∣fore it be Renounced? or wherein can the Catholick plaister of dispensation to equivo∣cate, mend the matter with Generous and sober understandings, whereby the soul is licences'd to be damn'd, to save the skin? Least therefore by any pretence, or whisper of Right, or colour of conscience, (where∣in all the fear can lye) your R. H. should be mis-led to espouse unnaturally a For∣reign, and wrong Superiour, to the mauifest dethroning of our right Mother Church of Britain, more Ancient, as well as more sound and Orthodox, than the other; I have (leaveing all speculative controversies, and hard questions, to Schollers and Stu∣dents,) throughly handled one Practical point of plain Right, and Title, or meum and tuum, or the Pretences, and Immunities of both Churches; which will give great light, if not a final end to all the rest, and which all sorts of men, as well Lay, as Clergy, are bound to know upon their Duty, and Allegiance to God and their Coun∣try, and justice, and civility to their Neighbours, least they be betrayed by willful ig∣norance, to aid an Usurper against the Right Heir; wherein no more learning, or Logick is required, to master and understand the point, but so much temper and judg∣ment, as serves to hear an Evidence, and discern between soul and Body, or God and Creature, or Christianity and Heathenism, or Loyalty and Treason, and to lay hand upon heart, and to follow, either the Laws of God and Man, whereby all men are Rul'd, or fate and Providence, whereby they are Over-rul'd.
But whether in Gods mercy, or Judgment we are to be freed, or continued under our fears and anxieties, to the fixed, and resolved in Faith, it signifies no more, than putting on a Winter, or a Summer habit, either the militant Garb of Patience, to our great reward and comfort, (and your great account, which alone can abate it,) or the triumphant of thanksgiving, to the mutual solace and bliss of both. But as for the weaker flock, whereof Paternal Princely bowels, and pastoral charge, are e∣ver the most tender; with what security and content, will they lye down beside the still waters in green Pastures, When they shall have such a Shepheard, to be their guard and back, and a terrour (much less a harbour) to the Roman Wolves, that would devour them? How will the Mountains skip like Rams, and our little Hills Like Lambs? Great and unparallel'd was our joy, for your R. Brothers Restoration, and your own together, to your Antient Rights, and Dignities over us, that the whole Nation seem'd like men that Dream'd; but so great is the sense and fear of Spiritu∣al Slavery upon them and their Children, more insupportable than any Temporal (which it also may draw along with it) that the joy of that day is like to be but a Dream indeed, compared to those exultations, and full content, and streins of hearty Triumphs, (if heart-strings can hold) that shall break out in every street and corner of the whole Nation, with Bon-fires, and Feasts, and praises, reaching up to Heaven, and thence to earth again, in the responses of Angels to our Anthems, at the day of your return, from the danger of errour, to our Church, and our Blessing, and the Truth. That your R. H. will be more glorious in the end, than in the beginning, af∣ter Victories over temptations, and Deceitful Guides, like the Sun after an Eclipse; which is the present trust, or shall ever be, as is ought, the daily Prayer, and Study, and Patience of Your Royal Highness, most Humble, most Dutyful and Faithful Servant Thomas Jones. For the Right Reverend Dr. Barrow Lord Bishop of St. Asaph. At Ely House. My LORD, I am inform'd that your Lordship concerns your self with other Reverend Per∣sons in other parts, to bring new trouble and disgrace upon me, since my Re∣storation to Landurnog (which is within your Diocess and Neighborhood, but out of your Jurisdiction) and to begin to give directions to your Clergie, to avoid and shun my company and converse, as a perfidious Person. I trust, I am no way guilty of that hard Character, or any other Crime, have∣ing lived all my days, just to all men, and firm to my King and Church, though wholly a stranger to your Lordship. I was born, and brought up at Oswestry in Shropshire, and lived in the late times at Castle in Montgomerishire, both within your Diocess; where it is well known, and well attested by the Principal Gentry and Clergy of those parts, how far ser∣viceable I was to King and Church, against their Enemies, Bradshaw and the Pro∣pagators, with considerable success, though with Persecution: Whither I repair'd at the request and advice of the Loyal Gentry and Clergy thereabouts, and par∣ticularly Dr. Griffiths (afterwards one of your Lordships predecessors) and left a fellowship in University Colledg, and took Holy-Orders in 1654. and studied the welsh Tongue, to serve those parts, when the Orthodoxe Clergy was miserably consum'd, by an act of Propagation so called. The Title stood thus (as repre∣sented to me upon best enquiry) Puleston the last Lawful incumbent dyed Anno. 1645. Wyn the next was put in by Parliament Committees, & put out again by the same powers, for scandal about 1651 And the Church shut up till 1654. when I and others were desired to come from Oxford to the assistance of the Country to pre∣vent Taylors and Weavers &c. setling upon the Parishes. Upon his Majesties Re∣storation, Wyn discovers a dormant Title (simoniacally procur'd about 1646) the Commissioners for consirming and restoring, with the advice of Bishop Griffiths, up∣on their hearing of the cause between Wyn and me, setled me, because Wyn had not read the 39 Articles: Wyn afterwards at a tryal at Law at Bridgenorth, had one to prove his reading the Articles, and I was Ejected. Then Bishop Griffiths de∣prives Wyn in his consistory for scandal, and confers Castle on Langford a monyed man, &c. Wyn appeals and overthrows the Bishop, who lived not long after.
This Rectory being worth 140 pound, per Annum I abode the loss thereof, with much arrears, rather than I would recover the same, by bringing the frailties of such Patrons upon the Stage, whereof I had good proofs offerd me, and have them by me. From thence I removed to the service of the Lord President and Councel of Wales at Ludlow Castle, Recommended by the R Bishops of Gloucester and St. Asaph, about 1661. and thence to His R. Highness the Duke of York in 1663. upon no interest or acquaintance, but after some Sermons Preached by me in Westminister-Abby, and about the same time waved an Invitation from Dr. Mar∣getson the most R. Primate of England, to be His Graces Chaplain, thinking it not fit to desert the Duke on a suddain for advantage, in all which places, (which are the stages of my life,) I lived in good Name, and Fame, and Love, untill I fell into the displeasure of the Reverend Bishop of Winton, (and my Lords Grace of Canterbury upon his score) to whom I was as much a stran∣ger, as to your Lordship, (saving that I was recommended by an Eminent hand unto the one for Loyal actings and sufferings in the late times) who became in∣exorable towards me, from 1666 and before, to this present time, for no real cause, as I could ever find or conjecture, but recommending one De Macedo, (being In great distress and want upon his leaving the Church of Rome,) to Her late R. Highness's Charity, (then very zealous for Protestantisme) who proving a great Eye-sore to the Romish Chappel at St James's, upon Her Highness's countenan∣cing of him, was strangely removed out of the way after I went to Sea to attend the Duke in 1664 and 1665. But if he (through provocation or discou∣ragement or scandal given him) carried himself unworthy of his maintenance and respect, which he received from the Dutches, and also from my Lord of W., he might surely have been laid aside with English Christian fairness, (being a stranger) without arts and Snare, and the fowl imputations of being burnt for Sodomy in Paris, about ten years before he died, and without annexing my distruction to his escape at Ports∣mouth (whore he had like to have been conveyed to be more really burnt in his own Country) By whose means this was contriv'd, deserves enquiry, but my fall was ma∣nifestly then wrought, by the means of the said Bishop of W. through her said Highness, (whose reputed Confessor he then was) against the Dukes mind and inclination, when I was newly returned from Sea, with the special and publick approbation of his High∣ness.Vide S. Cressy Epistle Apo∣logetical, Pag. 115. Apology for the Papists answered pag. 36. A presage and proem to this trouble, was the late Lord high Chancellor H. desiring me not to take my degree of Dr. when I moved him for his letter, As Chan∣cellor of the University (granted of Course to any) being recommended to his favour by the Duke a little before. Shortly after the great Bishops accuse an innocent Servant to his Prince and Master, who had but newly before recommended me to them; The exceptions were (1.) That the Bishop of W. having adviz'd the Duke to have no Preaching at Sea, I should speak irreverently hereof to a friend (as contrary to a Fleet Statute and Sea mens needs, as well as out of present pique against me.) 2. That I scor∣n'd to Administer the Sacrament to the Family in the absence of the Dutches. 3. That I was an enemy to the Governours, and Government of the Church. But they were soon waved and quitted, as soon a I pleaded innocence, and desired to be tryed upon any of them, or any other, and the Duke acquainted, that now my Cross was without a Title. But though I was cleard, I was nevertheless remov'd (whether I would or no) to Landurnog (usually held in commendam and resided upon by the Bishops of Bangor) under coulour of preferment, and reward for service. Her Highness being in∣form'd, as she was pleas'd to declare to me before the Duke, that I could not hold the Dukes service and my living together with a good Conscience: whereupon His Highness commanded me, to go to a great Bishop to desire him, as from his Highness to see me setled by Law in both: and the great Bishops answer to His Highness mes∣sage was, that he had not learning enough to satisfy His Highness, how by Law one body could be in two places, but the Duke overrul'd for me, and secur'd me his kind∣ness, whereupon my Lord of W. sent for me to tell me, that the Dutches did desire him to rest, because the Duke was so firm unto me, and he promised to rest, and to trou∣ble me no more in the House, and desired me to confide therein, for he would take his remedy at Law for the words pretended to be spoken by me touching his prohibiting preaching at Sea, and my credulity was my ruine, for in few dayes the Duke was al∣tered by them, and I dismissed his Service, and delivered over to the mercy of my Enemies: one of His Highness bedchamber undesir'd, then Interposed, will your High∣ness desert your Chaplain, who stuck to you in your dangers, and you have publickly commended, it will not be for your Highness's Honour, and the Dukes answer was, The Bishops are against him: So I was dismissed not for any crime, but some secret expedient.
About a Month before I was dismissed, the Bishop of W. had excited Dr. Morgan Bishop of Bangor against me, at his Consecration at Lambeth, July 1. 1666. in these or the like words, to my face, (Mr. S. Ll. my Diocesans Chap∣lain being then present) either he, or I am the erranst Rogue in England, use him accordingly when he comes to his Living: to which I then made no reply. Ano∣ther time, shortly after I was dismiss'd, the late Bishop of Lincoln (whom a Per∣son of Honour desired to intercede for me) told me (that for the words touch∣ing no Preaching at Sea) my Lord of Winton would persecute me to the utmost of his Power, wheresoever I went, whom I then answered, that I would put on a Patience as large as his Power. Accordingly the said Bishop of Bangor, (when I refused to exchange Landurnog worth 160. l. with him for Lanvair, worth but 50. l per ann.) began to trouble me in my living; He, his Chaplains, Mr. S. Ll. and Mr. G. having by threats, and promises to save harmless, and en∣tertainments, procured illiterate Church-Wardens (new-comers to Landurnog) to make a presentment against me about August (1668.) (an unusual time) for not reading Prayers in the usual and most convenient place, contrary to the truth, and the Judgment of all the Parish, and their own Inclination; to ground his proceedings upon, (see depositions in the Arches) they commenced a con∣troversie in his consistory against me for not reading Prayers, in the antient, usual, and most convenient place (for want of other exceptions,) the frivolous∣ness whereof, in the sense of all the Country, if your Lordship hath not heard, your Intelligence in that Neighbourhood is very short.) And denying upon his Oath in the Arches his Order that he had given, upon M. H. moneys towards a new reading Pew, which lay cross to his proceedings, caused me to be censured ab Officio & beneficio, upon a pretended disobedience to an Order that was contra∣ry: And no submission for any possible misapprehension would be accepted by the Ecclesiastical Courts, or his great Agents therein, to Salve my Canonical Obe∣dience, or my Function, or my Christian Communion; but I must confess ab∣solute disobedience, being certain or the contrary. And their unjust Excom∣munication of me, upon this sole pretence, pronounced against me, nomine Christi implorato, lasted against me for a long space of time, as if they meant to make me an Insidel, or a Schismatique: yet one of the Judges delegates the late Bishop of Worcester, did not like the proceedings, and appeared afterwards for me: But this Curse and Censure was worn and blown off at last by providence, and my Patient enduring the Law. And how farr the guilt thereof reverts and stayes upon the Authors, and strong Abbettors, in the sight of God and reason, accor∣ding to primitive Rules, your Lordships Learning can better tell. Photij Nomocanon tit. 9. & 12. Waiting on my Diocesan, Octob. 3. 1668. at Lanynnis to render an account of my Obedience to his Order, and to prevent (what lay in me) such a scan∣dalous frivolous controversie in the esteem of all people; he then and there minds and ubraids me to my face, (as he did often behind my back, as I heard, to weaken me) with my Lord of W. Character at Lambeth, now seconded with my rejection from the Duke, of the one, or the other, being a great Rogue, and that he was not to believe the Bishop of W. to be such. To which Ianswered, that my Lord of W. had no reason for his displeasure, or such his Character of me, but my introducing the Portugues aforesaid, and the Dukes favour, and desired my Diocesan's assistance to have this matter searched, by competent Au∣thority, and I examined, of what I had seen and observed, when I lived at Saint James, (least there were any design laid against this Church) and I should then befound an honest man, being very careful, for several reasons, from affirming any thing positively, of so great a Person, as my Lord of W. But to leave that part to those, to whom it belonged to Judge, and desired my Diocesan, then and there, to take particular notice of the tenour of my discourse against private affirming, and judging of superiours. Do you intend then, said my Diocesan to me to make me an Informer, to which I answered, that as he had more maintenance and honour from the Church, so he ought the more to appear in its Defence, and my Testimony would better come in, when introduced by his Lordship. But there was nothing done in several Months upon this panage between us, onely all manner of unfavourable proceedings used against me in the matter of the Reading Pew, when my Diocesan came again to Llanynnis, in May, 1669. I then delivered him in Writing under my hand, the sum of the aforesaid Discourse
used Octob. 3. 1668. at the same place touching my Lord of W. for his bet∣ter certainty, Bishop G. of Saint Asaph being then present. The passage in the said paper, being thus; That the same time (viz. Oct. 3. 1668. Jones did, and doth submit his whole Life for 30 Years backward, to the strictest examination of my Lord of Winton and Bangor (who have sufficient Power and Jurisdiction over him, And if in all that time no flaw, or blame can be found in his Loyal∣ty, Conversation, or Principles, he then did, and still doth declare, that the true cause of my Lord of Winton's Wrath and War against him was, First, his Intro∣duction of a Portugues Noble-man Convert, to her R. Highness Favour and Charity, who complains, (and Jones conceaves not without grounds) of wrongs and Snares against his life, from my Lord of Winton, who for his quality and unblameable∣ness (confessed by his adversaries) was useful, while encouraged, to prevent the growth of Popery (which Jones had speciall orders to endeavour) in (and a∣bout) his R. Highness Family, whereof he had charge of Souls, and by that, and other Instances did effect, with Gods assistance, in good part; Secondly when his R. Highness began kindly and frequently to mention Jones his performance of his Duty with him at Sea, and especially when his Majesty and Highness were pleased to point at him in the Royal Chappel in time of Divine Service in view of many, my Lord of Winton from that time, never ceas'd to imploy his utmost Power and Interest to ruine Jones in Court and Country. Jones therefore doth humbly desire, the right Reverend Bishops of Bangor and St. Asaph to cause this Matter to be search'd, least there be any design, laid against this Church; or Judgments he multiplied upon this Nation by unsincere Oaths, or the Presbyter party bearian away the Glory of Defending the Protestant Interest, and the late glorious Kings Cause and Martyrdome recieve wrong, and old Fears and jealousies be justified. And Particularly least by any misinformation, Jones be oppressed by the Church, for his fidelity to the Church, as well against the Schismatical party, when it formerly prevail'd, as against the Popish, when it be∣gan Clandestinely to prevaile. May 26. 1669. Tho. Jones. Neither was there any thing made of, or upon this Information in writeing (saving the sending a Copy attested by a Public notary, to the great Bishops) for the compass of a whole Year (my Lord Ch. H. being now out of the way, &c.) But in the Year 1670, when I was pursuing my appeal to the Ar∣ches against my Diocesan, touching the said reading Pew, my Diocesan and my Lord of W. Consulted upon an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, which my Lord of W. Commenc'd against me in Easter Term of the said Year 1670, for words pretended to have been spoken by me at Lanynnis, Octob. 3. 1668. and what∣ever their Importance were, so long conceal'd. The words of my Lord of W. De∣claration (put in Trinity Term following,) where these. My Lord of W. hath en∣gaged you (Bishop of Bangor) to do me all the mischief you can, for his part, he hath discountenanc'd my Catechizing at St. James's, and my Preaching in the Fleet; he is a Promotor of Popery, and a Subvertor of the Church of England. Which words, I mean the last Clause, as soon as I met them in the Declaration, I was amaz'd thereat, and declared to my Lord of W. Agents and Friends, (for I could not be admitted either before or after to speake with his Lordship,) that I never spoke those words, neither did I own them; I and an other then and there present would take our Oaths upon it; what I did speake of my Lord of W. I gave the same under my hand in writing, which I did own and stand to: my Lord of W. notwithstanding would proceed upon these words: But in Michaelmas Term he was not ready, and I had an opportunity to be dismiss'd upon motion, being the third Term, as I was informed, and my Lord of W. could never have renewed this suite any more, because of the Statute of limitation: Here my Lord of W. is beholding for his verdict and conquest to my respects to the late Bishop of London, (where of both were told betimes) who pretending kindness to me, and good Will, did advize and prevaile upon me to desist. Hillary Term 1670, the Bishop of Bangor and his Chaplain and Mr. S. Ll. Swore the words aforesaid at Kings Bench before Lord Chief Justice Keeling, Middlesex, and Mr. Ll. ex abundante Swore, that I there said, I delighted to contend with great Bishops, which was a great Collusion, for I had us'd those words there, by way of disowning, and charge against the said Mr, Ll. for raising in the
Country such a false report concerning me, who delighted not to contend with any sort of men, either superiors, or Inferiours, or equalls, for reasons which I then and there gave to them both. My Lord of W. having recover'd a verdict of 317 l. against me for the words so proved, seiz'd upon my Living of Llandurnog, which was all my preferment, for three Years together for the same (being worth 200 l. per annum at least in those years, where∣in there hapned a dearth in those parts) not allowing me 6 d. thereout towards my main∣tenance, being silenc'd also from my calling the said years in the Ecclesiastical Courts, upon the score of reading Pew aforesaid. My Lord of W. and his Friends, about the said three years end, by trick about 20 l. (being my own moneys in over-plus, for which they gain'd a receipt from under my hand by craft,) have raised a report thereup∣on, that he secretly maintained me in those years, wronging my next Relations, who sole∣ly did, to whom I am to Lease Llandurnog from time, to time for their reimbursements; yet my Lord of W. Lawyers affirm'd at the King's Bench, that he had bestowed the verdict moneys, saving 50 l. upon Bangor Cathedral, the said, Court wondring at so cruel a Charity, neither of which vain glorious reports were true, most of the moneys being still in the hands of his Sequestrators, towards uses limited by a Deed kept secret, as I have been credibly inform'd. Though his Lordship had received (or might have received) all his moneys well nigh twice over, yet he still withheld my Living from me till I mov'd the Court of Kings Bench, Trin. 1674, where the late Bishop of Bangor, his principal Wit∣ness, being detected in Illegal malitious proceedings, escap'd being fined by the Court for the same, by a Plea of Death in his behalf. Neither was I wanting to tender my Lord of W. through Persons of Quality and honour such a Submission betimes (as was due foro soli, upon such words prov'd against me) which I can well swear I never spoke: and upon his refusal of the same, yielded to pay him his Monyes quietly rather, then make any accknowledgment against my Con∣science, which he expected. The Duke of York the same time vz 1671, was graciously pleas'd to intercede through the late Bishop of Worcester, for remission of his verdict, and an end of troubling me. And my Lord of W. promised by his secretary Mr. Gar∣rard, to the Bishop of Worcester, that he did remit the same upon the Duke's Account, as the Bishop told me, but then went soon off from that promise, sequestring me a new (as it were) in my belief and hopes. Now it is to be observ'd, my Lord of W. never made any manner of vindication against the said paper, which I did always own; and have been since more Confirm'd in, by the Rumour'd Instability of her late Highness in 1671, (whereof I had Apprehenfions to my self in 1666,) and as I adhaer'd to my opinion deliver'd in the said paper from the date thereof to this present, amidst variety of Deaths, so, God helping, I shall continue in the same, Martyrially, to my lifes end, unless I be convinc'd there from by better Methods, then have hitherto been used, Vid. Mercyless pressures without any end, upon wilful misconstruction of my words; offers of great preferments, Dukes favour, and sums of monies in my streights, if I make some confession against the Truth, and my self, to clear my Lord of W. which hath been term'd Submission, and due Obedience to Superiours: deterring of my Friends and acquantance from me, incesing great Persons every where against me, and perhaps your Lordship, allowing me no more right to their Truth, than if I were an Heretick, or some Vermine. And which argues much guilt and fear, sup∣pressing my repute, by spreading a report in Court and Country, that I am distracted and mad, contrary to their own belief and knowledg, because contradictory to all their other proceedings. And this my opinion, is in a manner confessed, and given for gran∣ted, by the parties themselves, by several late experiences, 1. In an eminent and great Divine, who concern'd himself alike, to charge me lately about this matter, but was forc'd to retreat upon this Plea: 2. In a great friend of my Lord of W. (privy and Instrumental to all his original displeasure against me, but since a Penitent,) who upon my Case so stated and read to him, could not assign any other real cause besides, and in my Lord of W. himself, to whose Conscience I put it, in my Letter of the 13th Instant. And neither he nor they, nor your Lordship to their assistance, have or can assigne any real cause in all my life, adaequate and proportionable to such lasting wrath, besides that alone of the said Portugues his Introduction, and my actings so timely against the unsufferable encroachments of Popery about St. James (then too much conniv'd at) ac∣cording to my place, and trust, and orders; and fidelity to my Royal Masters Interest, and Love in these Protestant Nations, and those Oaths also of Allegiance and Supremacy, which your Lordship, and your R. Brethren have taken, and Administer daily to your Inferiour Clergy. And if so, then my wrongs and sufferings, become your own, and the wrongs of any other true and sound Father, or Son
of the Church of England, and the wrongs of any other sincere Protestant whatso∣ever, and in all equity your Lordship ought to assist and aid me, and procure as many as you can of your R. Brethren to do the like, (because I am so over powr'd) and to bring the matter to examination according to the Import of that British proverb. Nid gwaeth Cywir er i chwilio I may venture to say, no Romish Preist or Domestique Nonconformist (I speak not from envy to them) hath been known to be so continually followed and annoyed, by Sea and Land, by Court and Country, for Ten or Eleaven Years together, as I have been, and that by one Protestant Father of this Church, (for I suppose the rest that appear'd a∣gainst me were mislead derivately from him although it be well known to the World, that I am, and ever was a declar'd Portestant, always conformable to the Laws of this Church and Nation, and open to no other exceptions against my life and Principles, But, those two Contriv'd aspersions of Reading pew, and Sandalum pretended, which by Gods good providence begin to turn to my Credit, and my Enamies thame and contradictions. I hoped rather to have been approv'd and encourag'd by one in my Lord of W. place and trust, for my sincere Actings, than suddainly destroyed amidst fresh favour, for no other cause, but my adhaering to the Church, and the Truth in wavering times (which your Lordship is pleas'd to call perfidiousness in me: others, Pride, Cbstinacy, (as if car∣nal fear and Compliance, were true Humility) I have observ'd after some Mortality, and changes of Affairs, and Credibly heard that my Lord of W. of late hath shewed his Zeal for Protestantisme, even to extreams, as they say, but he still continues more hard to be entreated towards me than ever, perhaps for putting him on such necessity. Particularly in point of Justice, my Lord, as you are a Christian Bishop, fearing God (for the ninth Commandment reaches your Spiritual Lordships as well as other Mortals,) I humbly expect and require, that either your Lordship make good your charge afore∣said, or any other, if you can; or that you recal effectually your desamation, and Inhibitions against my converse, which from a Person of your Authority are very praejudical to my good name and calling amongst my Friends and Relations and Charge, and therefore very hard to be endur'd. Its conceav'd my Friends and Defenders are fewer, and my Enemies more in number and combination (than perhaps they would be) by reason of my over-much patience and forbearing to make my Case fully known to good men, and to the World, against the ways of my Potent Accusers; which is the reason I have put so large a trouble upon your Lordship, and shall be further ready to give ampler satisfaction, in Case of any doubt or scruple, whereby others, as well as your Lordship, may the better escape that spiritual Infelicity mentioned by our Saviour, Matth. 12.7. of condemning the Innocent, where it becomes a duty rather to open mouths in their defence. My Lord, No man shall be more ready to express all Honour, Reverence, Obedience, and Submission to your Losdship, and all Persons of your Degree and Dignity, (as far as Allegiance and Fidelity to King, Laws, Oaths, and Truth will permit, than Decemb. 28. 1675. At Mr. S. Apothecary at the Black Spread-Eagle near Arundel House. Your Humble Servant, Tho. Jones. A POSTSCRIP. Some Facts that herein occur touching Deceased, or great Persons, which none else could know, I relate as in the presence of God, to discover the whole na∣ked truth, for my own necessary defence: and for publick use, if there be need. T. J. The Bishop of St. Asaph, within concerned, sent his Secretary to my Lodging, Jan. 4. following to acquaint: That his Lordship had not spoak any such words against me: That he reproved his Brother the Bishop of Bangor for troubling me about such a frivolous mat∣ter, as was the Reading-Pew; That he was a stranger to me, that I might have the paper back again, if I desired it. I answered, that I had a Copy of it: That it was fit it should be communicated to his Reverend Bre∣thren, to know what they had to except; That if I suffer'd for my Fidelity to the Church (in a time of Tryal) it was fit the Bishops should defend me, before any others; he replied, That his Lordship had shewed the same already to the B. R. &c. I have heard of no exceptions against it from that time to this. The said Bishop never appearing after∣wards at London in several Years, and at his Death, ordering a strange Inscription for his Grave in St. Asaph Cathedral, which is called by the Neighbours in British, Escob-Ty. i. e. The Bishops House. About April, 1676. This paper was shewed to Sir T. M. and S. T. C. of the House of Commons, and the substance thereof in Decemb. 78. to an Honourable and Right Beverend Privy-Councceiler: and the B. of W. sent for thereupon to London to Recover the Duke to our Church (who had so strenuously kept his Dutchess from Revolting from us). So much the pretence and covering of a Bigid Calvinist, had imposed upon the Best, and Wisest, and Greatest.
A Deposition in the Arches, taken January 1669. Inter Jones Appellant, & Ridge & Jones, & Episcopum Bangor Appellat, touching the rise and Occasion of the Action of Scandalum Magnatum, in the Courts Temporal, and controversies about Reading Pew in Courts Ecclesiastical. THe said Appellant the Third day of October last was Twelve-month, went to the said Simon Lloid's House, to wait on the Bishop, and render him an account of the Letter he had formerly received from him, whereby the appellant was requir'd to read in the most usual Reading seat, in the Church, and being asked by the Bishop, why he did not obey the said Letter of his, the Appellant answered he did obey him, by Reading where his Predecessors, Rectors of the said Parish had formerly Read, whereupon the Bishop said, he intended the Curat's seat, the Appellant replied, his Lordship had con∣demned the same as unfit and undecent, giving him to understand, where, and when, and upon what account, which the said Appellant Related to the Effect following, that is to say, for that he had acquainted his Lordship, that some of the most Eminent Per∣sons in the Parish had complained unto him, they could neither see, nor hear him read in the said Curates Seat, and withal that he had Forty Shillings given him by a Person of Quality in or about St. Jams's Court, to be disposed off in the said Church, to supply what was wanting therein, and that after the Bishop had Enquired what was wanting therein, and being told by the appellant the Curat's seat was undecent, and dislik'd, and complain'd of, as aforesaid, his Lordship Ordered the Appellant to publish the unfitness thereof, and that the Parish should erect a new Decent Seat, more to∣wards the Body of the Church, and that such as should be aggrieved thereat, should repair to his Lordship to Ruthin, where a Correction or Visitation was to be kept, to give him the reason of their grievance, and also that the Parish should contribute Twenty Shillings more to the said Forty Shillings for the Purpose aforesaid, which publication the said Simon Lloyd said was not true, saying, we should have heard of it, if it had been so, or words to that Effect, whereupon the Bishop asked the Appellant, whether he had such Order under his Hand? And the Appellant, answer∣ing, he had not under his hand, but by word of Mouth, the Bishop replyed and said, I deny I gave you such Order, my Word shall be taken before your Oath, meaning the said Appellants, and told the said Appellant Three times over, he Lyed, and said unto him, you must contend with great Bishops, I will Order you, whereupon the Appellant said, that the Bishop of Winchester had provok'd his Lordship against him, for he the said Bishop of Winchester said to his Lordship, in presence of the Appellant, that he the Appellant was the Erranst Rogue in England, or else he the said Bishop was, use him accordingly when he comes to his Living, which sayings, or words to that Effect, the Bishop of Bangor did then admit where spoken by the Bishop of Winchester, wherupon the Appellant desired to be Examined before some competent Judicatory touching a great concern of the Church of England, to which the Bishop answered, and said, what, will you make me an Informer? or the like Effect past then between them. And further saith, and believes it to be true, that the said Bishop long before this causless Trouble and Molestation sent his Chaplains, Gethin and Lloyd, unto him, desiring him to Ex∣change his Rectory for another Benefice the said Bishop would give for it, which offer the Appellant refusing, was the occasion of his Persecution, as this deponent verily believes, and the said Bishop having often times decalred a liking to the said Rectory, as this Deponent was credibly informed by several of the best of the Parish, by all which proceedings, and practices, it is manifest what wrong the Appellant hath had, Occasioned as this Depo∣nent believes, for refusing to Exchange his Rectory aforesaid, and lastly this Deponent saith and believeth, that the said Appellant did not at at all disobey the Bishops Commands, but in respect of the Contradictions thereof, he knew not how to obey him, without dis∣pleasing or rendring himself Guilty, of Publishing an untruth at the Altar, which if the Appellant had yeilded unto, this Deponent believes the Bishop would soon have ta∣ken the Advantage thereof to expell him his Rectory, so much desir'd by the Bishop, and if this Deponent had not been Privy to most of the aforesaid proceeding, he would hardly have believed a Reverend Person would have acted such things. William Jones Gentleman. When I could not prevent the trouble, to prevent the scandal of this Controrversy on my side, I declared in my Church on a Sunday about the the latter end of October 1668. That it was the Duty of a Clerk by his Oath to be Obedient to his Diocesan; That I
left Reading in the Curate Seat in Obedienceto my Diocesan, who judg'd it Unfit to Read Prayers in; That I continued to Read Prayers in this Upper Seat, in obedience to my Diocesans present monition, to Read Loco consueto & maxime Convenienti, in the Ac∣custom'd and most convenient place, as all of you agree this Seat to be, that I was rea∣dy and willing to Officiate in any other Third place the Bishop and the Parish shall agree, which declaration is attested by Numbers of my Parishoners upon their Oaths in the Arches, ut supra. Yet by the Influence of the Two great Bishops and their Creatures, Sir Leolin Jenkyns, B. R. and others, I was condemned and censured ab Officio & beneficio at the Arches and Delegates, as well as at the Court of Bangor, and no acknowledgement of a Possible mistake would be admitted to restore me unto my calling unless I did confess and ac∣knowledg an absolute disobedience to my Diocesan, which I knew whither it tended, and I resolved to appeal to Heaven, by patient suffering, against such Diabolical contrivance, (as it seem'd to me) till God relieved me by the Death of my Diocesan, and an Act of Grace in 1672. whereby both Censures, and the conditional costs, were extinguished as the Bishop of R. acknowledged being the only Judge Delegate (saving one other) surviving and favouring at first my Diocesans-side, but yet my present Diocesan insisted, I should take Absolution, before I Officiated in his Diocess, which I ever refused to do, before either the Act of Oblivion, or the Death of my former Bishop, because Innocent. My Diocesan chusing rather to proceed against me in the matter of the Reading Pew, than to assist me, to be Examin'd touching the Churches Danger, which I suspected, Hearing of the Meeting of another Bishop in the Neighbourhood, I delivered to both, the following Paper, May, 26. 1669. Mr. Jones his Case, Rector of Landurnog in Wales, Chaplain attending his Royal Highness, at St. James, and abroad, humbly presented to the Right Reverend Fa∣thers in God, the Bishops of Bangor and St. Asaph; at Lannunnis in Dyssrin Cluid, May 26. 1669. THat on the first of July 1666. at a Consecration Dinner at Lambeth, it pleased the Right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of Winton to incense and pro∣voke the Bishop of Bangor, Mr Jones his Diocesan, in these or the like words, That he was the Errant'st Rogue in England, and that my Lord of Bangor should use him accor∣dingly when he came to his Living. That from that time, and especially from August 1668. (after other Attempts fail'd) upon a pretence about a Reading seat in the Parish Church of Landurnog, my Lord of Bangor did sufficiently answer and gratifie my Lord of Wintons pleasure touching Mr. Jones, by all manner of unfavourable proceedings, Excommunications, Censures ab ingressu Ecclesiae, ab Officio & Beneficio, and other defamations against Mr. Jones, the Living being in my Lord of Bangors own Gift and Patronage. That Mr. Jones upon Appeal being restored to his Church, March 14. 1668. Did by way of Appology Verify his Life and Innocence from his Infancy at the Altar (for the satisfaction of his Parishoners) in point of Loyalty, and Principles, and conversation; and particularly his Obedience to his Diocesan, touching the Reading Seat, declaring there∣withal, that my Lord of Winton who had privately accused Mr. Jones to his R. Master, and diligently incens'd several great Persons in Church and State against him, was driv∣en to wave and clear Mr. Jones from all manner of Charge, and exception against him, before he was willing to accept, or repair to his Living at Landurnog (the usual Residence by Commendam of the Bishop of Bangor) he having before refused the Bishoprick it self preferring his R. Highness Rays and Service before an untimely Dignity. That the same time Mr. Jones did, and doth submit his whole life for Thirty Years Backward to the strictest Examination of my Lord of Winton and Bangor, (who have sufficient jurisdiction and Power over him) and If in all that time, no Flaw or blame can be found in his Loyalty, conversation, or Principles, He then did, and still doth Declare, that the true cause of my Lord of Wintons Wrath and War against him, was, First his intro∣duction of a Portugues Nobleman and convert to her R. Highness Favour and Chari∣ty, who complains (and Mr. J. conceives not without Ground) of wrongs and snares from my L. of W. against his Life, who for his quality and unblameableness (confessed by his Adversaries) was useful while encouraged to prevent the growth of Popery (which Mr. Jones had special Orders to Endeavour) in his R. Highness's Family, whereof he had Charge of Souls, & by that, & other Instances, did effect (with Gods assistance) in good part.
2dly. when his R. Highness began kindly and frequently to mention Mr. Jones his performance of his Duty with him in his Dangers at Sea, and especially when his sacred Majesty and R. Highness were pleased to take notice of him in the Royal Chappel in time of Divine Service in view of many, my Lord of Winton from that time never ceased to employ his utmost Power, and interest to ruine Mr. Jones in Court and Country. Mr. Jones Therefore doth Humbly desire the Right Reverend Bishops of Bangor and St. Asaph, to cause this matter to be search'd by competent Authority, as in their Wisdoms they shall think fit, least there be any Design laid against the Church, or Judgements be multiplied upon the Nation by unsincere Oaths, or the Presbyterian Party bear away the Glory of defending the Protestant interest, and the late glorious King's Cause and Martyr∣dom receive Wrong, or Old Fears and jealousies be justified. And particularly least by any misinformation Mr. Jones be oppressed by the Church, for his Fidelity to the Church as well against the Schismatical Interest, when it formerly prevailed, as against the Popish, when it began clandestinly to prevail. Tho. Jones. But my Diocesan made no regard notwithstanding of this Information under my hand, only sent up a Coppy thereof attested by a Publi{que} Notary, as the Notary himself told me. In Hilary term following, I went to London to pursue my Appeal, where after some space, I was Arrested by the Bishop of Winchester upon an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, and coursely used. In Es Term he put in his Declaration for the words. He is a Promotor of Popery, and a subverter of the Church of England, as spoken by me at Lanunnis, October 3. 1668. I told his Agent that I did not speak, nor own such words; But the Bishops proved them for him at Kings-Bench, and a Verdict of 317 l. recovered thereupon against me in February 1670, and my Rectory Sequestred, also my House seiz'd and abused, and Family turn'd out of Doors by an obsolete Writ vi Laica Amovenda, to supply their Writ of Sequestra∣tion, and Glebelands plowed, and all held from me for Three years without any Contene∣ment or Allowance whatsoever, (whereby I was much disabled to maintain my Appeal) till his Agents received near Twice his Verdict, as was prov'd at Kings-Bench. When they had wrested my Calling and Living from me, they set friends upon me, to perswade me to submit, and ask forgivoness, for the words I never spoke, nor own'd, and to recede from the Paper under my hand, which I over own'd, and was now more confirm∣ed in by the Rumour'd Apostacy of the Dutchess in 1671. which I did suspect and fear from 1666. And such importunities of Friends and Superiors, with offers of Remission, and resto∣ration, I never could shake off till I declared my Resolution to his Highness in this Paper following. My last Address to the Duke, April 20. 1673. The Submission of Tho. Jones; with his humble request to his R. Highness. HAving serv'd your Highness with my utmost love and fidelity to the best of my Skill and judgment, as I ought, it was my fate to be approv'd by your Princely knowledg, and suddenly destroyed upon hear-say. Neither find I any hope left, after many years patience, of recovering your promised favour, as long as your Highness is politickly possessed, that I refuse to submit to the Bishops, against all that I have, or can speak, or act to the contrary, unless your High∣ness would admit me to submit to their Lordships (or their Proxies) in your Highness presence, that your Highness your self may see, and be satisfied, as well with my submission, as I hope you are, with my Innocence and Integrity. The number of my Submissions tender'd from time to time, (esteem'd satisfactory in the judgment of Gentry, Clergy, Lawyers, Civilians, Bishops, Nobles) I have made known to the R. Bp. of Worcester, as also my manner of Life and Loyalty, for 20 or 30 years past, and the passages of my calling with Bradshaw in his Circuits, against his execrable Act, to support the Loyalty of my Country-men against him, (which was not the way in those days to thrive) But his Lordship is slow, or loath to make his report to your Highness, in a concern of his Reverend Brethren, whom neither Innocence nor Submission, nor Intercession, nor satisfaction, nor the Example of His Majesty in Pardoning, nor any method whereby God is reconciled to man, or men to one another, could in Seven years appease or reconcile.
If it be expected, that I am to bear false Testimony against my self, and acknowledge my self guilty, where I know, and am known to be innocent, to justify any thereby that have accused me wrongfully, and against their knowledge of my innocence, to my Prince and Master, meerly to prevent the effects of his fresh favour towards me, or for some other intrigue, then I plainly declare, that I hold this to be unnatural, and slavish, and sinful for me to do, and Satanical for any to expect it: And do remit and quit the hopes of your Highnesses favour, if it is to be obtain'd upon no other terms. Nevertheless in common ordinary justice between any Master and Servant, your Highness may well grant me these Three requests following, which I humbly make to your Highness. (1.) My arrear of Salary, and also of Chamber Rent, which are about  l. for I have not had 6 d. allowed me from my Living these 2 or 3 years, to buy me Bread, nor the Liberty of my calling to Earn it. (2.) Your Highness Pass, Certificate, or dimissory letter to look out a New Patron, for otherwise men fear and shun me, for fear of some personal displeasure in your Highness towards me. (3.) Some Equitable Compensation for my detriment and loss, for it is well known that I am (in all probability), about 600 l. per annum the worse by accepting your Hignesses Ser∣vice, and waving the present Primate of Irelands, and about 500 l. out of Purse the worse by the Living in Wales, and the snares and contrived troubles that attend it, (more intollera∣ble than Death) & lasting upon me about 7 years (which is Life in Law) under the Preten∣ces of a Reading-Pew, and rash words, manag'd by Power against me. And I shall, &c. I added, to Sir A. A. (to make him witness of this Address.) That I am, and was of opinion ever, from 1665. that the true causes of my Troubles, were not any of those things Objected against me by my Lord of Winton or any other; but, my excecuting her late Highnesses Orders against Popery, in her Family, and my be∣ginning to be considerable in his Higenesses Favour after my attendance at Sea. The Dukes Answer to me by Sir A. A. and my Lord C. August 14. 1673. The Duke is willing, but is not able to do any thing for you, but as the Bps direct him, &c. I delivered likewise to Sir A. A. a Certificate of Mr. Wren, Secretary to the late Chancellor Hide, touching my Actings and sufferings in times of Usurpation, as also a state of my Ac∣counts and arrears which I left with him. A Letter to the Bishop of Winton, July 6. 75. My Lord, YOU were pleased (for some occult cause) to continue an endless enmity against me, now about Ten years, like the Goddess in the Poets, (quam nec longa Dies, Pietas nec mitigat ulla, &c.) though Innocent and Infinitely an unequal Match to your Lordship, and all along kneeling to your Power. Neither do I remember any advantage, or Victory you ever gain'd over me, but when I laid down my defence and guard at your feet, trusting to your Lordship and your R. Brethrens words and Counsel, out of entire respect to your Dignities and Persons: and being now necessitated to be Plt. and to take a little benefit of the Law against you, you presently take Sanctuary in your Priviledges against me, tho' in a contro∣versy first begun by your Lordship. And after disowning your Messages by Mr. Markham, and Mr. J. Apothecary (through your Secretary) which they still avow, you lately sent another to me, by my R. Diocesan, the Bp. of Bangor, which if it be stood to, by your Ldp. or Rightly understood by me, implies that your Ldp. is willing to forgive me your verdict Moneys, if I acknowledge that I wrong'd your Ldp. which signifies to me in effect, that if I wrongfully accuse my self to justifie your Ldp. who have so accused me to the Duke (to my greater prejudice than you are now able to repair) that then your Ldp. will bestow that Monys upon me, which you declared at Kings-Beneh, and by other Acts and Deeds, to have bestowed on Bangor Church. My Lord, I am ready to do my Duty without Hire, and any thing Else, (to recover your Ldps. Peace and Charity,) but sin, as you find in my Let∣ter, by Mr. Markham, for your Ldps satisfaction. My Ld. I have lately made 2 or 3 requests to his Highness, that his Highness would be pleased to pay me the remaining part of my Sa∣lary, and Grant me a Dimissory Letter, or recommend me to some new Patron; that he would make me some equitable reparation for my great detriment occasioned by his Ser∣vice and Favour. His Highnesses gratious Answer was, that he could do nothing for me, but as he was directed by the Bps. meaning I suppose, your Ldp. I hope therefore that if your Ldp. will not allow his Highness to readmit me to his favour, (which his Higness ever was, and is willing to) that you will not Ecclipse his justice from July 6. 75. Your most Humble Servant, Tho. Jones. For the Right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of Winton, at his House in Chelsey, these with Reverence. The Bishop return'd Answer to this Letter, by Mr. Isaac W. to Dr. J. that I might have my Moneys re∣stor'd, and what else I desir'd, if I submitted to him.
Some Submissions tendered in the Controversy about Reading Pew. THe Bishop in his answer upon Oath, Affirming, he never gave me order to Publish the Curate seat, as unfit; to prevent all colour of Disobedi∣ence, I desired my Advocate to draw such a submission as might fully satisfie the Bishop of Bangor, and Sir Leolin Jenkins who it enuously appeared against me at Doctors Commons though neither Judge nor Advocate in the Cause, but as Amicus Curiae as he term'd it, whereupon Dr. L. Now Sir R. L. Drew for me this draught ensuing, of which he said, no Person, or Court on Earth could require more. And this I did, because Sir Leolin told me, the Duke was offended with me, because I submitted not to the great Bishops, nor to my own Diocesan. As the case stands between my Lord Bishop of Bangor and Mr. Jones Rector of Landurnog, He having published at the Altar his Diocesan s Order for Con∣demning the Reading Seat in the Church of Landurnog, as undecent, and in∣convenient, which Order his Diocesan denieth in his Answer in the Arches Court, to have given him, This is humbly proposed in behalf of Mr. Jones, as a way to extinguish all Imputations of Disobedience, and to end all differences between his Diocesan and him, viz. in regard he is convinced in his Conscience, that he published but the Truth, he may be allowed to declare it at the same Altar upon his voluntary Oath, That he delivered nothing to his Parishioners but what his Diocesan gave him Order to do, or what he apprehended to be his Diocesans Order, which done, he shall openly acknowledge in the same place, that it is his Duty to Read in the Seat in question, or in whatever other Seat his Diocesan shall think more convenient. But no submission of this Nature for Peace sake, would be admitted, though it was tendered in the Courts of Bangor, and Arches, and Delegates, and judg'd sufficient by Persons of all Qualities, Divines, Civilians, Gentlemen, Noblemen, Bishops; But it was expected and insisted by Sir Leulin and his party, that I should acknowledg, that I had absolutely disobeyed my Diocesan, (and was sorry for it) which I, and my Parishioners knew to be false, and I saw it rended to make me Guilty of the violation of my Canonical Oath, and thereby to Invalidate my Testimony for ever against the Bishop, whom I suspected of Perverting the late Dutchess in her Religion, &c. Therefore I was resolved to adhere to my Innocence and the Truth to the End, against all prospect of Relief from Man. In fine, when they had Wrested my Estate and Galling from me, and I still re∣fused to submit, notwithstanding all threats, and kind offers, they proceeded at last to deprive me of my Liberty, and when I was Informed of their Writs of Excomunicato capiendo issued out into the Country, in order to put me to farther Charges, and to seize me at last here at London, I prevented that trouble to them and my self, by this Surrender to the chief Bishop-Delegate and my unkind old Friend Sir Leolin Jenkins, one of the Chief Sollicitors in this Cause, July 2. 1672. Whereas I stand Excommunicate and Liable to Imprisonment, for not paying certain Charges recovered against me, in the Honourable Court of Delegates, to the Bishop of Bangor and Wardens of Landurnog, and it is well known that my Living of Landurnog hath been for these two years and above sequestred by the said Eishop, for the use of the Bishop of Winton, so that I receive not one Peny of the Profits thereof, and have no other Benefice or preferment to subsist on. This is humbly to signify to the Honourable Court of Delegates, that in sub∣mission to their Sentence, I shall at there call (because of my present Disabili∣ties to deposite ready Mony) Surrender my Self to Prison, at their Pleasure, that they may not use Bayliffs, or force to take me, for I hear Writs are Ihuing forth to that purpose.
Or be willing that the said Bishop of Bangor, pay himself the said Charges, out of the first Profits, as shall be due to me out of the said Living; or sooner, if my Lord of Winton give leave. And I do further most humbly Declare, that I am very sorry, it is conceived, or imputed to me, to have disobeyed my Diocesan in the least, it being against my Oath and Principles to be disobedient to Superiors. And shall therefore when restored to my Living, be willing to leave my own Seat again, and as far as sight and light will give Leave, Read Prayers again in the other Seat, which as I now apprehend is determined to be the intended, and most convenient place to Read Service in, by the Bishops Affirmation, I before apprehending in my Con∣science before God, that my Diocesan gave me his Command to Publish the same in my Church to be undecent and unfit to Read Prayers in, upon the com∣plaint of me, and my Parishioners. And I do promise to use all care and waryness to prevent the like mistake of my Diocesans Orders for the future. For the Right Worshipful Sir Leolin Jenkins at Doctors-Commons. Noble Sir, I Was forc'd to take notice, that in the Grand Controversie about Reading Pew (parallell'd of late to the Transgression in Paradice, as if it re∣quir'd a new Messiah) you were greatly intrusted and engaged against me, by my Adversaries, not only by your voluntary Pleading without a Call, but also by your restless egging on the slow-pac'd Sollicitor to hunt me out of my Livelyhood, whereof the one seem'd below your Dignity, and neither part well agreeable with that converse or friendship which on my part to∣wards you was ever sincere. You left room thereby to conjecture, that you were acted herein by an Obligation, to which Morality, and Inclination, were in worldly prudence to give place. Tantaene animis Coeleslibus irae? Can Grace and Serenity be so implacably bent for about Seven years together, to oppress and ruine, for no original Cause, or Provocation, but that the kind Prince was inclined to exalt one's Sheaf. O! ye Judges, and Gods, Learn to do as you would be done by, though there were no Adonibezek for an Example. To prevent Charge and trouble, and the Indignity of being pursued with Swords and Clubs, I have directed to you the enclos'd surrender, who stand so near my chiefest Adversaries, to give your Instrumental activity, and Powerful intermedling, the honour of the last Stroke, and final Conquest over me. For being, by Arts and Power, interrupted of the Prince's coun∣tenance, and external reputation; of all maintenance and livelyhood, which is Life and Blood; of Function and Communion, which is dearer than Life; I had nothing left to part with, to satiate my enemies thirst, but my Liberty; which being now surrender'd, betokens a near approach of detection and de∣liverance, if Truth, and Innocence, and Trust in God, can never be suppres∣sed, as I believe they cannot. I shall therefore be ready to obey your call, or those that entrust you, with∣in what warning you please to send, or leave, at the Eagle and Child in the Strand, where you shall find, or hear from July 2. 1672. Your, &c.
The Death of my Diocesan, and an Act of Oblivion shortly ensu∣ing, delivered me from this present trouble about the Reading Pew, and likewise from the Costs, which the Delegates declar'd at the time of their Sentence, should not be allowed at all to the Church-Wardens, nor to the Bishop of Bangor, but on Condition, to be refunded again to me upon my submission; which the Bishops death, and the Act of Grace supplied; as was acknowledged. Orders from her Late Highness in 1664. to me, to pre∣vent the growth of Popery in her Family, deliver'd to me by the R. Bishop of Winchester to Transcribe, and the Original to be restored to him, for Reasons best known to himself. I. TO enter upon Reading Prayers every Morning at Seven a Clock, beside the other hours of Ten. II. To procure a List of all the Family that are Book'd from Sir H de Vic's Office, or Sir Allen Apsly. III. To make another List of those that are not Book'd, and of all Children and Servants that pertain to any of the D's Family. IV. To know distinctly the Profession of each person, whether of the Church of England, or the Roman. V. To oblige all the Servants, &c. whose imploiment will not permit them to attend the other hour, to be at the Morning Prayers at Seven a Clock. VI. To have a care that others who are free, observe the other hour of Prayer, and to admonish them if they do not. VII. To dispense with the absence of either sort rarely on the Week days, but not at all, if in health, on Sundays. VIII. Those who are refractory or uncounsellable, to present a Schedule of their names to her Highness. IX. To Catechise and instruct the Pages and others who want instruction, very constantly, according to the Orders of the Church of England. X. To have a particular eye of the Pages, as well the Dukes as Dutchess, to keep them steady in our Religion, her High∣ness being inform'd, that the Roman Priests find oppor∣tunity of discoursing with them, and to find what you can of their private conferences. XI. To oblige all the Congregation to be constant at Evening-Prayer
as well as Morning, and if their due imployments will not permit them to attend an Hour, to chuse an Hour convenient for them, and in that oase to Read twice in the Afternoon as well as in the Morning. Observations on these ORDERS. 1. HER Highness was acquainted, by my means, of the Practices of the other Chappel, upon Young, and Sick, and the weak∣er Sex, in and about St. James's, to obtain her countenance to support me in my Duty. 2. The first Order tended to bring me and the Liturgy into con∣tempt, for on Seven in the Morning on Sundays, all chose to go to the Morning Sermon at White hall; and this was never us'd, atter I was remov'd. 3. The forth tended to enrage several in the Family against me. 4. I did begin to Catechise, but was discouraged in it by the Arts of the said Bishop. The Introduction of Ferdinando De Macedo, to the late Dutchess of York, Anno. 1664. HIS Father, Damiano Rangel De Macedo, Provedor, or Lord Justice of the Province of Beira Dezembargador, or Privy Councellor to the King of Portugal, and Chancellor or the Kingdom, dyed a∣bout the Year 1656. Leaving Issue. 1. Antonius de Silveira de Macedo, 2. Ferdinandus Rangell de Macedo, 3. Cosmo Rangel de Macedo, 4. Donna Isabella de Moira. 1. Antonius the Eldest, was Admiral of their Brazil Armada in their War against the Dutch, he sank himself and his Ship, in a Sea-fight, with Blake, when over pour'd in their War with Cromwel. 2. Ferdinandus, now the Eldest, a Monk. 3. Cosmo. 18. Year old, now the Hoir. At present a Student at Law: Anno. 25. of his Age, He will be Chancellor of the Kingdom of course, by the Kings Favour to that Family for these 100. Years, his Uncle at present is Chancellor in his slead, and his Governour. 4. Donna Isabella Married to Andraeas de Carveliosa, a Privy Counsel∣lor, and Son to the President of the Kings Council. Ferdinandus was brought up in the Schools of the Jesuits at Lisbone, Commenc'd Batchelor at Law at the University of Coimbria, became a Franciscan Recolet at 18 Years of Age, continued 20. is now 43 Years, Old. He was Chaplain and Kinsman to the Portugal Ambassador, SA, here in Cromwels time for 3 Years: For 3 Years Missionary in the East Indies, whither he travail'd by Sea and Land, having viewed the Holy Land in his Course; Accused before the Cardinals for laying aside
Images (wherewith he saw the Heathens scandaliz'd, a Preacher in Rome for divers years, Preached several times before Allexander and Ʋrban Popes. He was Guardian of the great Monastry of Pisae in Italy, Missionary in Fandors, for 3 Years, and Missionary in Languedoc, in Frunce. He conceal'd as yet his Relation to the Queen, he e in England, as Clerk of her Closet, and how he Preach'd against Invocation of Saints upon St. Ulsulas's day, and was sent to Rome with Letters, and su∣specting the Contents became a Protestant in France, where (he declared) he was taken upon the King of France his Edict against Apostates, and sen∣tenc'd to death by the Parliament of Tholous, upon his Appeal delivered, because no Subject of France He was Imprisoned and chain'd, Arms, Legs, and Neck, by the P. of Conti, but would not turn for fair or fowl means, he is conveyed by a Party of 25 men towards Catalonia, to be delivered to the Spanish Inquisiton: Rescued by a Switzer Collonel on the way, a Protestant, and one that knew him. Liv'd in Woods for a Quartor of a Year, got over to England in November 1663. Liv'd in obscurity, want, and Sickness for half a year; In the mean time so∣licited by the Queens Chaplain, with large offers from the Queen, and of Pardon from the Pope; The Queens Confessor, his Tutor, Conju∣ring him to return in the name of St. Francis, &c. And that they Fasted and Prayed in the Queens Chappel for his recovery to their Church; against all which he stood out, living upon Bread and Water, till his Case, by good Providence to him, came to be made known to the late Dutchess of York, which was upon this occasion. The Noble Lord B accompanying his Lady near her time at a Sacra∣ment at St. James's on Easter day (where I Preached, and celebrated) greatly enlarg'd the usual offering, and Appointed me shortly after to Christen his second Son, now his Eldest, and Lord B. And ordered me by his Secretary Mr Aldridge Ten pound for the same, Five pound to my self, and the other Five pound by my hands, to what poor I pleas'd, concealing his Lordships Name; Enquiring for a fit object, and most remote from private Ends, for so generous a Charity, I was di∣rected to a stranger at the Fox in Drury Lane, that was believed to be a Gentleman, and in great Want and Misery, and with little English to make his case known: who happened to be this Ferdinandus de Mace∣do; I took this Examination of him, or the most part thereof, where∣with the Dutchess of York being acquainted was greatly pleas'd, espe∣cially with the passage about a Fast in the Queens Chappel, for she said, she knew that they had a Fast in their Chappel, about a Month before for a lost Sheep, but could never find before, who it was; and she liberally relieved him, by the hands of the Bishop of W. as did others by her Example, and Ordered me to found the Priests of the other Chappel, what Exceptions they had against him, and I found they had none at last, either against his Birth, or Life, but only his Revolt from them. Then one was sent by her Highness to the Bishops, to know in what manner he was to be received, who returned sad, and Blank, with a Story there told, that there was no great difference between the two Religions, and that two Brothers had converted one another, the Papist the Prote∣stant, and the Protestant the Papist, which was the first time I did su∣spect
Danger from the said Bishops, which no Innocence or Favour of Duke or Dutchess, could afterwards avert. De Macedo is order'd to go for Oxford, against his will, (under colour to be preserved from the threats of the Queens Chaplains, to whom he was an Eye-sore, whom he did not fear) being to be there maintained upon the Contribution of the Dutchess, Arch-Bishop, and Bishop of Winton, the Dutchess sincerely then at his departure, advizing him, to be constant to us, and she would be constant to him: But in Oxon several miscarriages were soon laid to his Charge, and I was blamed for appearing for him, and by the Bishop of Winton's Order Writ this following Letter to Oxon to him. DIssimulare ultra non potui, Egregie Domine, nec debui forsan, creber. rimos hos nuntios, huc nuper allatos, Criminum non Levium existi∣mationi tuae adhaerentium; quod, exemplo Academicis periculosissimo, illi∣citis compotationibus, Pictis{que} chartis, honores Principum & Studendi spatia turpiter impendas, & leviter offendentibus cultros passim at{que} Pugiones mi∣niteris, nec a sacro nomine temere Ʋsurpando temperes: ut ambigere aliquo∣ties adigas candidissimos judices, qua fidei Integritate Patrios, nec corruptos mores deserueris. Quod{que} Natalitiorum Historiam, Dictorum{que} fidem omnem intentat adhuc at{que} Labefactat, Oratoris Lusitani te sacellanum Commentus sis, cum nec esses, alius esset. Ego ut has maculas videam atq agnoscam, enecor, cum Adducor, cum nullas, hic dum esses, deprehenderim, & diligen∣ter contra Praecaverim, at{que} ob eam quam ostenderas animi deiq: fiduciam, alienissimum crediderim. Adeo ut, Gallorum Elogiis, Popularium artibus, & Providentiae miraculis, ulterius insignitum, Illustrissimae Heroinae Domi∣nae Duci Eboracensi Commendatissimum exoptatissimum{que} dare, non dubitave∣rim. Ipse, at stylo proprio, aut alterius vitae conscii, authoritate, aut Gal∣lorum hic Interpretum ope, melius eluas at{que} depellas, graviter consulo, imo benevolentiae jure, expecto, quam & tibi semper habui Integerrimam, & non immerenti aeternum, habiturum praesto. Ex Aedibus scti Jacobi, Oct. 22. 1664. For his much respected Friend Don Fer∣dinando de Macedo at Ch. Ch. In Oxon: Tui Studiosissimus Tho. Jones. To which he returned this Answer, Domine & Amice. LIteras a Londino Accepi, quibus mihi innotescit, me passim; & in qui∣bus libet platearum Angulis tanquam furentem leonem & Rabidam Ti∣grida describi, sed noseas, nec te lateat, Omnia venanata tela, orbis{que} bilem, a me Extorquere non posse virtutem meam quae altius in me Radices egit quam ut istis procellis, aut minitante Fortuna, quassari valeat. Hae jam sunt ter∣tiae literae quas ad te rescribo; Credideram me in aquam scripsisse, & lineas in arena Duxisse, cum ne verbum quidem a te receperim. Semper te ex∣istimaram mihi amicum; sed jam video jam scenam mutatam esse, & pror∣sus te diversa opinari, quam mihimet persuaseram; Cum jam ad me de∣feratur te paenitere, quod unquam mihi favorem ullum impartitus sis; Ʋbi multorum auxilio opus fuit, ut in Dominae Ducis gratiam & Patrocinium in∣derer.
Sed tu solus instar omnium potes in me Celsitudinis suoe rugas & sup er∣cilia contrahere. Vix tamen mihimet persuadere possum te Velle deprimere & in proeceps deturbare, quem adeo Magnifice Extulisti; tibi est fovere & protegere, quem benigne, ut ita Dicam, plantasti, contra omnium Invidorum, Spicula Spero me Londinum cito profecturum, Salutesquaeso humiliter Dominam Kylvert. Tibi Divinctissimus, & Humilimus servus. De Macedo Whereby I perceiv'd his Letters to me were intercepted and the poor. Stranger unjustly traduced and abus'd, as was well attested to me. Mr. G. being set on (among other Snares) to molest and affront him, which he had both Strength and Courage to resent, &c. After I went to Sea, in November following, with the Duke, he was soon sent for up to London, and Spirited into France, where he was reliev'd by my Lord Hollis, and had a Miraculous escape at Portsmouth in his return, (which was well attested) some great Persons of both Churches discovered and Named, who conspired together, to have him sent into Portu∣gal to be burnt. The Dutchess upon his return to London, deserted him, and M. D. his good Friend was alienated from him. C. P. Miles Veteranus a Pa∣pist, and a suspected Priest, with whom I had acquaintance formerly in Wales, telling me in Westmister-Hall, now Macedo is a Confessor of your Church, who owns him? doth the Dutchess of York, or Bishop of W. or Arch Bishop of C. C? which proved too true. And though I was but lately return'd from Sea, and in special Favour with both their Highnesses, I was nevertheless, by the means of the Dutchess and Bishop of W. and Arch-Bishop, suddenly dismiss'd from the Dukes Service, a∣gainst his will, and Divers resolutions to the contrary, with disgrace and ruine, notwithstanding all intercessions, and clear'd Innocence in my behalf: And Macedo Scandaliz'd, went over to the Dissenters, for said he to me in his free stile; Episcopus W. Nec habet anima, neque Dignitatem; and liv'd for about Ten years under various reports at London, after he had been burnt for Sodomy in Paris, as afore, and the Persecution afterwards turn'd and continued by the Bishop of W. against me for many Years. FINIS.
