K228 12033631 52823
THE Universall free grace of the Gospell asserted OR THE LIGHT Of the Glorious Gospell of JESUS CHRIST, Shining forth universally, and enlightning every Man that coms into the World, and therby giving unto every Man, a day of visitation, wherin it is possible for him to be saved. Which is glad tydings unto all People. BEING Witnessed and Testifyed unto, by us the People called in derision Quakers. And in opposition to all Denyers of it, of one sort and another prov∣ed by many infallible arguments, in the evidence and demon∣stration of the Spirit of Truth, according to Scrip∣ture Testimonies and sound Reason. With the objections of any seeming weight against it, answered BY GEORGE KEITH. Printed in the Year, 1671.
THE PREFACE. THER be two maine and principall things held forth by us, which are as it wer the two hinges and fundamentall principles, upon which all other things relating either to Doctrins or Prac∣tises affirmed by us, doe hang, and depend. The first is, that ther is no saving knowledge of God, or the things of his King∣dome attainable, but by the Immediate revelation of Iesus Christ, who is the Image, Word and Light of the invisible God, in which alone, he can be manifest, unto the Salvation of men. The second is, that this Image, Word and Light, which is Jesus Christ, the Son of the Fathers love, doth shine forth in some measure universally, and enlighten every man that coms into the World, and therby giveth unto him, a day of visitation wherin it is possible for him to be saved. Both which  they are indeed in the truth, are generally denyed, but affirmed by us, which two not withstanding, I may truly say, as they are indeed known and witnessed in the truth, ar the cheife and principall veins, and arteries, which convey the very Blood, Life and Spirit of the Christian Religion, into the true members of that body, wherof Jesus Christ is the head. And the Lord hath made me plainly to see, why the whole body of every Sect professing the Christian Religion, up and downe the world is so leane, barren, dead and emptie of that Life, and Spirit, which becoms the true Church to have, and which the true Church had, in the Primitive times, even becaus of their ignorance of, and opposition unto these two blessed testimonies of truth; and I may boldly say it, never any society of people did flourish, or ever shall, or can, with excellent induements of either piety, or know∣ledge, which denyeth these two testimonies of truth, seing they are the very principall means, and Ordinances of God, which hee hath appointed, as through conduits, to convey both Piy and knowledge, and all other hevenly gifts, and blessings unto men, and seeing these are denyed, the blessed effect, which would follow, upon the using of them, cannot but be much wanting, as where there is an obstruction, or stop in the principall veins, arteries, and nervs of the naturall body, that body cannot flou∣rish, but must needs be a very sick Paralitick diseased body, and near unto death. And for this cause it is, that the whole body of Christendom so called, is in a most lamtable condition, and death reigns in it, and a thick cloud of darknes fills it, and very few there be, who know by sensible experience, the life, kernell, and sub∣stance of the Christian Religion, among all the many professions in it, and that small remnant, who doe know any thing thereof, it is very weakly and faintly, and their sight of the things of God, is but like the poor blind mans halfe sight, after Christ had a little cured him, who saw men, walking as trees, the Reason of all this, has beene the ignorance of, and opposition unto these two testimonies aforsaid, for the
ignorance of the true manner of receiving either Piety or pious and Godly wisedome, which is by way of immediat Revelation, from the Father by Jesus Christ, through the holy Spirit, this hath hindred and stopped the growth and encrease of holines and piety, and the Wisedome and knowledge there unto appertaining as to the Intension, i. e. measur or degree of it in the particular, which otherwise by this time, might have been like the waters of the Sanctuary, at a great height; and againe, the ignorance of that other blessed testimony of truth, (concerning the universality of the Light, word, Grace, and spirit of God, towards, and upon all, in a day of visitation, for the saving, and endueing them, with holines and holy knowlegd and wisedom) hath been a most mischeivous hindrance and lett, unto the Extension, or spreading of tru piety, and knowledg abroad among people in the world. The ignorance of the One I say hath hindred the Intension of it, and the ignorance of the other, its Extension: as may be manifest to any, who will consider these things, wer it, but with halfe an eye. For what can tend so much to the universall gathering of all the na∣tions, Kingdoms, languages and kinreds of the earth, as to hold forth this universall principle unto them all, the Light, which lighteth all and every one of them; and to informe them, that therby and therthrough salvation is attainable by every one and peace & reconciliation with God, in their beleife of the light, and obedience ther∣unto? And what can more hinder this universall gathering, then that particular, narrow, straitning, limiting, principle, of men, of a pettish narrow heart, and spirit, who say, that salvation never was, is, nor shall be possible unto the most part of men. That God by an eternall decree hath wholly passed them by, and left them in darknes, without any light to shine in their darknes, that can possibly at any time, lead them out of it. Doth not this discourage people, and rather lay a block in the way of their Faith, then to point, ordirect them, unto a pillar and ground of it? Yea doth not this Doctrine, that other being added to it, viz. that immediate Revelation is ceased, lay a much more probable foundation, for any mans unbeleif, and distrust in the Lords mercy and willingnes to save him, then for his faith therupon? For when any man comes with a call unto them, to beleiv that they may be saved, and therwithall tells them, that God hath left most men, without providing them any power, by which it is possible for them to beleiv may not all begin to doubt, or question, with more ground, then to beleive, whether they be the persons, that are thus passed by, of the Lord, yea, or nay? When the Lord said but to his disciples, one of you, shall betray me, they wer exceeding sorrowfull, all of them, and began  Question, Master is it, I. How much more then occasion have they to be sorrowfull, and to question the very mercy of God, for their salvation, if it be told them, that this mercy is denyed not only to a few, but most of men, and to many under the visible profession, of the Christian Religion. And for asmuch as they say, immediate Revelation is ceased, this shuts out all, from receiving any knowledge from God himselfe, whether they be∣long to that number, that is absolutely rejected, yea, or nay: Weigh, and consider these things: Oh all people, and be awakened and roused up, out of your slumberings, in which, your teachers, have lulled you, that you may once at last perceive these blind guides, who deny the Light, that is universall, and whether they are leading you,
even into a very pitt of darknes, and impiety, while they tell you, God hath not given, to every one of you, nay, nor to any one of you, who may be in a naturall state, any thing through which it is possible for you, to come out of that darknes, and death, in which you lye: sure when you shall come to any Nobility of understanding, you will find, that though your teachers say, the Quakers teach pernicions principles unto the Nation, that indeed wee bring glad tydings unto it. Whose principles in the twofold testimony aforsaid, as they come to be received and beleived by the Nation, will make it a happy and blessed Nation, which is now miserable, becaus of that ignorance and iniquity that abounds in it. By the true faith and beleif of these two principles, the nation that is now as a barren wildernes, as to fruits of righteousnes, would become as the garden and Paradice of God. The glory of Lebanon, and excellency of Carmell would be given unto it, and it would become a married land and nation unto the Lord, and so would all other nations, through the true beleif and faith of this twofold testimony, which hath long beene suppressed, and warred against, and the few witnesses there of, by the Dragon and his followers, so that the two witnesses have been slain for three long dayes, and a half, in asmuch as (beside other accounts) that this twofold testimony hath not lived and flourished in, and among them, but hath been always knocked down, and slain, through the deceit and violenc of earthly minded men, who have ha∣ted the tru life of Christ, and yet for their earthly and selfish ends, have made use of the form and words of it, which without the life and spirit of Christ is but a dead car∣cas, and as it wer the dead bodies of the slain witnesses, which have lain in the streets of Sodom and Egypt, spiritually so called, that is to say, of the fals and Antichri∣stian Sinagogue, Babylon, the Mother of fornications with her daughters, as all thse are, howmuch soever pretending to a Reformation, who are not yet come to witnes the true Light, Power and spirit of the Gospell to work in them, both the will, and the deed. Now these Marchants of Babylon, and bloody Butchers, and Mur∣derers of the two witnesses, and testimonies of God, have traded and made their merchandise of these dead bodies, viz. the words and forms of truth, after they had slain the life that appeared therein (and murdered Gods faithfull Saints, who held forth the living testimony of truth) and sold them, in the streets, or market places, of the false Church, as ever the Butchers, doe their flesh in the shambles, in the streets of market Towns, Cities and Villages. Well! the judgement of this great whore is com, and is truly begun. The spirit of life from God is entred into the two slain witnesses, and shall yet more abundantly enter, to the affrighting and allaruming all that dwell upon the earth: and truly in nothing more can wee rickon, upon the raising of the witnesses, then in that the Lord God almighty hath raised this twofold testi∣mony (that hath been so much opposed and resisted, even by them, who made a trade of the words, which witnesse ther unto.) and made it to appear, and shine forth in great Glory, Power and Beauty, and raised up many to witnes therefor, and thereunto, which no deceit, nor violence of men, or principalities and powers of darknes shall ever any more be able to prevail against. This twofold testimony, and the wit∣nesses theirof, shall prophocy, and that not in sackcloth and weaknes, as formerly, but in their beautifull garments, in power, glory, and dominion, to the staining the
glory of all flesh, and bringing down the pride thereof, that the Lord alone, and his truth may be exalted. Now unto the one of these two testimonies, Viz. that of immediate Revelation, a large testimony from the Lord, hath been given me to bear, and somewhat is published on that Subject, for the generall service of truth. And also as to this other I find it with me to give testimony thereunto, and with others of my Dear Freinds in the truth, to leave a publick standing Record and testimony, unto the truth hereof, in opposion to all denyers of it. And becaus that many of our adversaries, som through ignorance, and others through malice & prejudice alledge that this our principle concerning the Light, &c. its being universally saving, as to its nature, is the very same, which the Papists and Arminians hold who maintaine universall grace, therfor I find it fitt to clear this matter for the undeceiving the simple, for indeed, though the Arminians and Papists also, speake of universall grace as given and offred unto all, yet the thing is self, which is the universall grace, as to what it is indeed, and in truth, and in true manner and way of its operation, they both deny and oppose it, for asmuch as they both deny, that the universall light, which is given unto all, it the light evangelicall, or a light for the faith of the Gospell to rest in, therfor they doe not hold it forth, as the immediat object of the Christian saith. Secondly they deny the way and manner of its operation to be by immediate Revelation. Thirdly they say, this light coms from Christ, but Christ himselfe is not in man, in the true seed of Regeneration, yea and the tru and reall indwelling of Christ in the divine seed, and birth in the very, Saints, they generally deny as also, that this divine seed and birth is a reall substance, or that the divine life is substantiall, or subsisteth in any substantiall principle of its owne nature, and so I say truly that both Arminians and Papists, deny the true universall grace, as to what it is indeed, and as to the true way of its operation, and therfor may be justly putt in the roll with others, as unskilfull Physicians, through their ignorance of, and opposition unto this universall medicine and cure, which hath truly the vertu to cure all men, and all diseases of men, and is administred of the Lord unto all, wherby it is possible for them to be cured. But not withstanding the great cloud of darknes and ignorance, which hath been generally over the understandings of peo∣ple, it is to be acknowledged that through the infinite mercy of God som, among one and another both Papists and Protestants so called, have received som tasts therof, and been partakers of its vertu, wherby their souls have lived unto God, in som measur, but under much weaknes and leannes, yet so, as who have been truly single towards him, have been accepted. For the times of this ignorance, God winked at, but now comman∣deth all men every where to repent. The night is far spent, and the day is at band, yea it is already dawned, and the tru light shineth out of the darknes, which shall run, and spread, and cover the face of the whole earth, with its glory, as an overflowing stream. Amen.
A few words concerning the state of the contro∣versy, and the explication of the Terms. 1. WHEN wee speak of the Light, as given unto all men that they may be saved, and as being sufficient unto all for salva∣tion: by Light wee doe not simply understand a thing, that hath but this one Property or Quality, of enlightning, or mani∣festing, as only to give a true understanding of things, and to work out ignorance and error from out of the minds of men, but this light hath life in it, and an universall vertue and power to reach unto the whole man, not only to cure the blindnes of his understanding, but the perversnes of his Will, and the de∣pravednes of his affections, it hath not only an enlighting property, but it hath all these other properties as to quicken, to sanctify, to purify, to heal, to mortify, &c. For it being the image of God, it hath its perfections answerable unto those which are in God: so that as in God, there is Light, Life, Love, Goodnes, Mercy, Righteousnes, Wisdome, Power, &c. So in this light, which cometh from him, there are all these things, by way of participation, or communication. 2. Wee doe not understand this Light and Grace, or Gift of God, and Iesus Christ, as separate from God, or Christ, for that it is as impossible as to separate the beams from the Sun, for God and Christ are one with the light that coms from them forever. Yea as the Father, and the Son are inseparable, so is the light which cometh from them, inseparable from both. And accordingly as wee say, there is a saving light from the Father of lights and from Iesus Christ com∣municated unto all men, and which is in all men, so God and Christ are together with this light in all men, present with it, and in it cooperating therewith; for as Christ said, I can doe nothing of my selfe, and my Father worketh hitherto, and I work, so the light which cometh from the Father and the Son, cannot doe the work alone, but the Father and the Son, doe cooperate therwith, and therein, hence in Scripture every good thing or Motion in any man, is ascri∣bed unto God himselfe, as immediatly present, the immediat Author and Wor∣ker of it. It is God that worketh in you, said Paul, and no man can come unto me said Christ, unlesse the Father draw him, and said Christ concerning himselfe, without me yee can doe nothing, I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man cometh unto the Father, but by me, and also the whole work of mans salvation is ascri∣bed unto the Holy Ghost, the quickner and Comforter. So that this heavenly seed of grace, needeth the continuall influence and presence of God and Christ, toge∣ther with the Holy Spirit to raise it and forme it, and concurre with it, in the renewing and regenerating of man. But besides this presence and inbeing of God and Christ, which is in all men, unto salvation, in a day of the gracious visitation
of God unto them. There is a more speeciall way of the inbeing of God and Christ in men, which is proper only unto the Saints and children of God, who both have God in them, and are again in God by Union, and Christ is formed in them, and so they have Christ in them, and they are in Christ, through a heavenly and spirituall birth in which they are one with God and Christ. And of this sort, or manner of in-being, which is by Union, and Christ formed within, the scripture speaketh frequently. And doth hold it forth as only belonging unto the Saints, but as concerning this particular, how God and Christ is in all men unto salvation, within a day of the visitation of the love of God unto them, and also how God and Christ is not in all, but only in the Saints and children of God according to a spirituall birth and Union, the third part of this treatise following, in which the objections are answered, doth more fully and largely give an account. 3. And for the better understanding of the matter in hand, how that the saving and Evangelicall light of Iesus Christ hath been communicated unto all men, in all ages and generations of the world, wee are to consider the words of the Apostle to this purpose, There are diversity of administrations said he, but one spirit, and diversity of administrations, but one Lord, which diversity of opera∣tions and administrations are reducoable unto these two, the law, and the Gospell, or the first covenant, and the second. Which two as they were very distinguisha∣ble among the Iewes, so were they also among the Gentiles. As concerning the Iewes, they had first, the law, which came by Moses, and secondly they had the grace and truth which came by Iesus Christ. The Righteousnes of the law, and the Righteousnes of faith, and these two, though they were distinguishable yet as they were administred of God, they were not separated, nor divided, but the Gospell lay hid within the law, as within a vail, which the outward Tabernacle did plainly figure, and hold forth. For what did the Holy of Holyes signify, within the outward court, and holy place▪ but the Gospell, and the administration ther∣of within the law, and its administration? And thus Christ Iesus was in the law, and under it, but as within and under the vail and here the light shined in darknes, but the darknes did not comprehend it. The dispensation of the law was as darknes, in respect of the clear dispensation of the Gospell, yet even in this darknes, did Christ Iesus the true light shine. And also in, or among the Gen∣tils universally, there was and is somewhat which by way of proportion, doth answer unto the law, and Gospell, first covenant and second, which was so distinctly held forth among the Iewes; and, as among the Iewes, therwas Moses and the Prophets, in the letter, so universally in all men, both Iewes and Gen∣tiles, there hath beene Moses and the Prophets in the spirit, and also Christ: else what can bee understood by these words, Death reigned over all from Adam unto Moses? here is an Adam, which related unto all men, both Iewes and Gentiles, and here is also a Moses that related unto all, which certainly cannot be that individuall, or particular man Moses, but a dispensation of God unto men, answerable unto Moses, according to which, Christ said, as concerning men
then alive upon earth, long after Moses and the Prophets were dead, they have Moses & the Prophets. And speaking of that universall law of righteousnes; what∣soever yee would that men should doe unto you, doe yee also the same unto them. For this, said he, is the Law and the Prophets. So here is, first, Adam, Second∣ly Moses, Thirdly the Prophets, unto Iohn, who is a burning and shining light, and a Voice crying in the wildernes, prepare the way of the Lord. And Moses the Prophets and Iohn, or Elias, are the forerunners of the Lord in Spirit, who cometh after them, and yet is befor them all, and in them all, but as it wer vaild, even as Moses outwardly put a vail befor his face, becaus the people could not behold his Glory, so Christ Iesus, (both when hee came outwardly into the World, and now when hee cometh inwardly in mens hearts) in his first appearance, putteth on a vail, and his Flesh is called that vail, and as hee had his Flesh in the outward, which was a vail, so he hath his Flesh in the in∣ward, which is a vail also; The Word became Flesh, and dwelt in us, said Iohn. And this inward appearance of Christ in Flesh, is his appearance in Weaknes, as Naturall, and yet Spirituall, the Mystery hid within the vail of Flesh, or naturall Spirit. The Treasure hid in the field, the least of all Seeds. And this Christ doeth becaus of mens weaknes in the naturall state, they are na∣turall, their eye is naturall, their ear naturall, their understanding naturall. And how can that which is naturall apprehend or receive that which is spirituall, but as it appeareth in, or clotheth it selfe with a naturall medium? For Unum quodque quod recipitur ad modum recipientis, i. e. Every thing that is re∣ceived, is received according to the manner of the Recipient. And this is the body of Christ, that is indeed spirituall, but, for our cause, descendeth into a naturall forme, or appearance, and changing us, by and with it selfe, ascendeth againe in∣to its spirituall appearance of glory. Thus it is sowne naturall, but is raised spiritu∣all, and thus also wee become changed therby, both in the soul and body, so as being sowne naturall, we come to be raised spirituall. And indeed ther was no other way, that wee could be made spirituall who were naturall, but that Christ Iesus, who was and is spirituall, should become (so to speak) naturall. Hence hee is called the  i. e. The word in-naturalised, or be∣come naturall in us, which in it selfe is spirituall. This is for our weaknes, he must descend that wee may ascend. And according to this acceptation of the word [naturall] wee should not contend with those who call this inward divine light naturall if they did not call & judge it so naturall, as if it were only a meer naturall humane thing; as a property or quality of mans corrupt nature, be∣caus of which their error, our controversy is just with them. The considera∣tion of this twofold appearance of Christ even inwardly in men, should stirre all up, not to rest in the first, but to presse forward into the second, so as to know, a dying through his first appearance unto our naturall, which is the first Birth, and a putting on the spirituall, wherin the rising with Christ is witnessed, and a  downe in him, in heavenly plases. This first appearance or ministration of Christ in men, is as a Law-giver, ans∣werable
unto Moses, which Law requireth of men obedience unto it, without letting them see, or propounding unto them, the Seed, wherin the ability is received to fulfill the Righteousnes of the Law. And indeed at first, Man hath no inclination to look after the Seed, which is the Elect and promised Seed. But he aspireth to doe what is required of him through the Seed and birth of his na∣turall being. But after al that hee so doth, or can doe, the Law, which is light discovers the emptynes and imperfection of it, it being not only a shining, but a burning light, and here man is sore discouraged, afflicted and grieved, under the sence and sight of his weaknes, vanity, misery and unrighteousnes. This divine and heavenly light in him doth not only discover his best Righteousnes, to be im∣perfect and an unclean thing, but it burneth as fire against it, to consume and destroy it. Therfor is a man to give up the first birth, and all the Righteousnes, wisdome, and glory of it, unto death, and burning, that this divine and hea∣venly fire may mortifie and burne it, to the end, that the second or new birth may be attained, by which also that which dyed, that was naturall and cor∣rupt, cometh to be quickned and raised up, pure and spirituall. And this Christ himselfe taught expressly, that a man must deny himselfe, and take up his crosse daily, and follow him, if hee wold be his Disciple. And this Selfe, that hee is to deny, is his first birth whether of unrighteousnes, or righteousnes, the first birth, even with all its Glory, Wisdome, Righteousnes, hee must give up to the crosse, which crosse is the very light or life of Christ in him, even in its ve∣ry first appearance, which crosseth the naturall birth with its Righteousnes, Will, and Wisdome, and is not given to cherish, and strengthen it, but indeed to weaken, kill and mortifie it, and then to raise it up againe, not any more bearing the image of the naturall and earthly but of the spirituall and heavenly. This denyall, and giving up of a mans selfe and the righteousnes thereof unto death is attained by Faith in the Light, Life, and Spirit of God and Christ: the Word and Spirit of Faith. 4. And as concerning the sufficiency of this light unto salvation, wee doe not un∣derstand it in opposition, to either the necessity or usefulnes of the outward com∣ing of Christ, and his sufferings and death for our sins, nor in opposition unto the service and use of any teachings in the outward, that come from the Spirit of God, or any outward things to be done or practised, which his spirit leadeth unto, all which is more largely shewed in the third Section, which answereth the particular objections, wher diverse others things serviceable for clearing the state of the controversy are treated of. 5. Nor do we assert that by this light the will of all men, nor of any man, in his naturall state, at all times, is so posited, liberated or freed from the Power and Captivity of the Devill, whose Servant and Vassall man is become, in the fall and degenerate state, through a voluntary giving up of his members, as ser∣vants to iniquity; as that he can, at all times, at his owne will and pleasure, avert himself from the service of the Devill, rescue himself from under his Power, and convert himself to, and seek God, so as to find him: but onely then, and
at such speciall and particular times and seasons, as it pleaseth the Lord in the riches of mercy to touch, stir, and move him, by a visitation from on high, upon, in, and through this light, both enlightning his understanding & inclining his will, in the strength, power and vertue of which divine touch, the soule and will is so far liberated and freed, that it can follow that which draweth it, without which drawings of the Father, Christ saith, No man can come unto him. The which the Lord is no ways bound to continue for ever. 6. And therefore neither do we assert that men that have received this Light and Spirit of God, and have given themselvs up unto it, to obey it, and so are becom Servants of Righteousnes, doe receive at once, a full and sufficient mea∣sure, for the whole course of their Lives, but onely sufficient for the present state, condition, opportunity, and case, to preserve, protect and defend them from all evill, so that the Creature must be continually exercised in a perpetuall dependance and wayting upon the Lord, to receive the renewed and fresh in∣fluences of this divine Light and Life, according as its present State, Condition, and Necessity may require, there being no security of the soule out of this de∣pendant, wayting, receiving frame. SECTION. I. Holding forth the Arguments according to Scrip∣ture Testimonies, and a vindication of them, from the corrupt Glosses of our Adversaries. Argument 2. from Ioh. 1. cap. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, &c. IN this Chapter wee have a full and clear Testimony both from Iohn the Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Iesus Christ, and also from Iohn the Baptist his forerunnor, concerning this matter. Iohn the Evangelist saith, concerning him, that he was the Word which was in the beginning, and was with God, and was God, that all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made, and that in him was life, and the life was the light of Men. In which words hee declareth two things, 1. That generall Relation hee hath towards all the Creaturs, that he is their Maker: All things were made by him. Secondly, that speciall Relation hee hath towards Men, in asmuch as hee is not only their Maker, as of other things, but hee is their light. In him was life, and the life was the light of Men: Which words doe import very plainly, that hee is the Saviour of Men, and given unto them, for the light of Salvation, to renew and restore them, out of their fal∣len
condition, which is a State of death and of darknes; and so Iohn here doeth the work of a true Evangelist, in preaching glad tydings to lost Men, they ar dead, but in him is life, they ar darkned through the fall, yea and Darknes, as it is Eph. 5. 8. But the life is the light of Men, and the light shineth in darknes. Now Christ was the Life and Light of Men, befor the fall, in a more near Re∣lation then of any other visible Creatures, so as that hee lived in them, and shin∣ed in them, to give them the knowledge of the glory of God in his owne face, which is his image in which man was made, so hee was the life & light of Men, before men became darknes, and also he is the Light & Life of Men, which shineth in them while they are darknes, to bring them out of it, into his owne life and light: But now this darknes, doth not apprehend the light, doth not embrace it, nor enjoy it, hath not fellowship with it so much doth the word [comprehend] import, never∣thelesse by the workings of the light in the darknes, men may be changed, from being darknes, to become light in the Lord. and many have witnessed this blessed charge, and so when men are become light, through the workings of the ori∣ginall light in them, they can apprehend the light, and enjoy it. Light can apprehend light, though darkes cannot, by all which it may plainly appear, that Iohn, is in this place holding forth, Christ to be the Light and Life unto Men, more then simply according to naturall Illumination, for that had not been to doe the work of an Evangelist, or to preach the Gospell unto Men, simply and barely to tell them, that Christ doth enlighten them naturally, as with naturall Reason and understanding. The Gospell, wherof Iohn was a Mi∣nister, and of which this is a most comfortable declaration, holds forth Christ, to be the Life, the Word, and the Light, in a much more deep and compre∣hensive signification, not excluding the more inferiour kinds and degrees of life, communicated unto the Creatures, in their capacities, but superadding a more excellent degree of Light and Life, communicable unto Man from Christ, then that which is naturall unto him, simply as a naturall Man, for in∣deed every degree of life which Man hath, as 1. the Life of Vegetation, 2. of Sensation, 3. of Reason, 4. of Grace, is from Christ, the universall fountain and spring of Life, and hee is justly called the Life, in all these considerations. But now, to limit, this universall signification of Light and Life, to the 3 in∣feriour degrees of it, & exclude the fourth, which is the Supreame, doth plainly manifest a partiall spirit, which is prejudiced against the Truth. Let all the Scripturs be searched, and it will never be found, that Christ is called the Light and the Life simply and barely in Relation, to the naturall quickning and Illumi∣nation of the Creaturs, excluding the spirituall; but rather that the spirituall quickning and enlightning is alwayes mostly pointed at, not excluding the other, as Joh. 11. 25. I am the Resurrection & the Life, hee that beleeveth in me though hee r dead, yet shall hee Live, and Joh. 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man cometh unto the Father but by me: in which places Christ is held forth principally in Relation, to his influence of spirituall Life, upon Men, and Joh. 8. 12. I am the Light of the world, hee tht followeth me, shall not walk in
darknes, but shall have the Light of Life. Which cannot be understood thus, hee that followes me, as I enlighten naturally shall have the Light of Life, which is false, but thus, hee that followes me, as I enlighten spiritually, hee shall have the Light of Life. Againe in that hee is called the Light of Men, this is not to be understood particularly of some men, viz. beleevers, but of all men, both beleevers and unbeleevers, within the day of their visitation, 1. Becaus it is not said, the Life is the Light of some men, but of men, indefinitly; now an indefinit term signifyeth mostly universally, and is alwayes so to be under∣stood, where no sufficient reason, moveth to the contrary. 2. Becaus Iohn the Evangelist, and Iohn the Baptist much agree in their testimony, now Iohn Baptists testimonie was, that hee enlightneth every man. 3. Becaus this is not only the Light of Beleevers, that they may more and more believ, but hee is the Light of, or unto Unbeleevers, in a day of visitation, that they may become Beleevers, for, many Unbeleevers have become Beleevers. And how? but by the Lighting, wherby the Light did lighten them, in their unbeleef; for when the light first lighteth a man, it findeth him in unbeleef and darknes, and it lighteth him, that hee may beleev and come out of it, and so 4. If by men here, wer on∣ly understood Beleevers, then Iohn could not have said, the Light shineth in darknes, and the darknes apprehended it not; for Beleevers are not darknes, but light, wheras Unbeleevers are darkned, and unbelief is darknes, now the Light shi∣neth in this darknes, to change men, who are darknes, to be Light in the Lord. Now followeth Iohn Baptist his testimony of him, Ther was a man sent from God, whos name was Iohn, the same came for a witnes, to bear witnes of the Light, that ALL through him might beleiv, and this was his testimony that hee was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world; His words are such a plaine proof, that Christ enlightned every man, so as that hee might believ and so be saved, that no words could be desired, more plainly to evidence it, and yet what miserable evasions have men made, who are prejudiced against this precious Truth, to darken it by their corrupt Glosses. 1. Some will have it only to be understood of the light of nature, or a naturall light. And if we reply, the words speake of Christ, and Christ is not naturall but spirituall, they answer, its true, but yet Christ who is spirituall hath diverse manners of enlightnings, hee enlightneth some only naturally, say they, and others spiritually, to which I reply, Granting that hee doth enlighten after divers manners, as naturaly and spiritually: but notwithstanding, all men whom hee doth lighten natural∣ly, hee doth also lighten spiritually, for that, as is said, hee is called light in no place of scripture simply and Barely in Relation to a naturall inlightning, ex∣cluding the spirituall, I challenge the adversaries to produce one plaine and evident proof for it. And againe, this wer not to doe the work of an Evange∣list to preach him to every man, as inlightning but naturally, wheras the Apostle received his Commission from Christ, to preach the Gospell to every Creature, (i. e. every man) But besides these reasons prosecuted above, Iohn the Baptists plaine
words doe evince it, that hee enlightens every man spiritually, and so as that hee may beleve; wherfor this is an inlightning of a saving, or salutiferous Na∣ture: For Iohn came to bear witnes of him, that all through him might beleeve. Hence I thus argue, That enlightning, which hath a speciall Relation to beleeving, is of a spirituall and salutiferous or saving nature. But this enlightning here mentio∣ned hath a speciall Relation to beleving. Therfor, &c. The first Proposition is manifest, becaus the enlightning which is but naturall, hath its speciall Relation, not to faith, but to naturall Reason. The second Proposition is proved from Iohns Testimony, who said, Hee cam to bear witnes of the Light, that all might beleeve through him; Secondly I thus argue. That lightning by which all men might bleev, is of a spirituall and saving nature. But this lightning is such. Therefore, &c. The first Proposition is clear, becaus by no other inlightning, but that which is spirituall and saving CAN any beleev. The second Proposition is proved from Iohns words, Hee came to bear witnes of the light, that all through him MIGHT beleeve; Therefor it was such an enlightning, that all through him MIGHT beleeve, and so I desire the Reader to take notice of the word MIGHT. Which Imports a Power or ability to beleeve, so, in somuch as Iohn said, all might beleev, its evident, its possible for all to beleev. Now to evade this; some reply, that its said, through him, to wit, Iohn, and not through Christ simply as hee enlightens them. To which I answer. 1. Supposing it were to be understood so, through Iohn, yet this doth not in the lest, prove that this enlightning of all men is only naturall, wherof I give this most evident Reason. Because by the most powerfull naturall enlightning, and Iohn both, neither all nor any man, are putt into a condition, that they might beleev; for, no Ministry of the best of men, with a bare naturall inlightning concurring, is sufficient to put men into a condition, that they might beleev. But secondly, for them to say, that through him, is to be understood, through Iohn, is but a beg∣ging of the thing in Question, and it is more agreeable to the words to be un∣derstood of Christ, through whom all might beleeve without Iohn, but to un∣derstand it of Iohn would Imply, as if hee were an universall Instrument, so as none could beleev, but through him, wheras many have beleeved, both with∣out the Ministry of Iohn, or any men on Earth. Others againe, finding the strength of these Arguments, which prove the en∣lightning here mentioned to be spirituall, and of a saving nature, betake them∣selvs to another evasion, but as groundles, and weak as the former. By every man, say they, is to be understood, not Singula generum, but Genera singulo∣rum, i. e. not all particular men, but some of all sorts of men, for the words [every and all] doe sometimes so signify in Scripture. To which I answer. 1. That the words [all and every] doe somtimes signify so in Scripture, doth not prove, that they so signify here, unles they could prove that they doe alwayes so signify, which is so far otherways, that wher in one place they signify some of all sorts, in one hundred of places they signify al particulars. Now, would our Adversaries think it faire, to put this their Glosse upon these words, In Adam all die, i. e.
not all particulars; but some of all sorts? But 2. according to that generall Maxime of understanding Scripture, which is, that Scripture words are to be understood in their whol Latitude and Extent, where no cogent Reason movs to the contrary. The words then [all, and every] are to be understood of every particular, becaus no cogent Reason movs to the contrary. Its true, our Ad∣versaries pretend to divers cogent Reasons, the weaknes of which wee may come afterwards to shew. And 3. its evident they are to be understood of all particulars, becaus Iohn and other Ministers of the Gospell sent of God, preached to all particulars, as they had occasion, whose day of visitation was re∣maining; and did not offer it unto some, and refuse it to others, which they should have done, if Christ had enlightned but some, and not others; for how could they preach to them, wher there was no enlightning from Christ, to answer them, or the end of their Ministry? As now, it wer a most ridicu∣lous thing for any men, to offer the things of humane Reason, to Beasts, becaus there is no Rationall Capacity in them; wherby they can receive them, so were it as ridiculous a thing for man to offer the things of faith and salvation to any men, where there is no illumination that is saving and spirituall, wherby they can receive them: And as the Principle of Reason, answers in men, to the things of Reason, so the principle of Faith, which is the Word of faith in men, answers to the things of Faith, and therfor the true Ministers of the Gospell, offer Faith un∣to all men, there being in all men, some measure of illumination, by which they are capable to receiv it. Now, Iohn saith further, hee was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; by the World it is manifest hee understandeth Men, for that hee maks it, a culpable thing, that hee being in the World, yet the World did not know him, and so it cannot be understood of the outward frame of Heaven and Earth, which are not in a capacity to know him: Therefor ac∣cording to Iohn, hee was in men, who knew him not, and so in them, who did not beleive in him, nor receive him; He came to his owne, and his owne re∣ceived him not. viz. Those who wer his owne, 1. by the Right of Creation, 2. by the Right of Donation, all men, yea and all things wer delivered unto him, of his Father, and they, to wit all men, wer given him, that hee might enlighten them, as hee is given unto them, for the same, and so distributeth unto them their severall Talents, that they might putt them to usury, and at his coming to Iudgement, might give an account of them. Now here some reply, That by these words in the 10. 11. vers. is understood, his coming outwardly in the land of Iudea, but I answer, as hee came there, and was a light in the outward, which shined gloriously, and yet they did neither know him, nor receive him, so hee did come in the inward, in some measure, both then, unto them, and to all others, yea and from the beginning forasmuch as hee hath ever beene the light of the world, enlightning every man that coms into it, therefore Iohn bears testimo∣ny unto him, not only in what hee was at present, but in what hee had been from the beginning, both what hee then was, and what hee was to be after∣wards.
So by his being in the world, and coming unto his owne, cannot be simply understood, his coming in the outward, excluding his inward coming. And bsides, his coming IN THE OUTWARD, excluding his inward coming could not so enlighten them, that they might beleev. But hee came, enlighte∣ning them so, that they might beleve. Therfore his coming outwardly is not simply, nor principally here understood; For to his outward coming the following ver∣ses doe rather relate. Morover John bare testimony of him, saying, The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Iesus Christ, by which it is evident, that Iohn is here preaching Christ, as an universall Light unto all, not according to a naturall illumination, but according to that which is saving and spirituall. Grace and Truth, saith he cometh by Iesus Christ. And of his fulnes, said hee, have we all received, Grace for Grace. Now what ALL is this, only the Saints and Beleevers? No; for if Saints and Beleevers only received Grace from Christ, then no Unbeleevers could ever become Saints, and also no Saints ever were Unbeleivers, which is false. For now, when Grace first cometh unto men, from Christ, out of his fulnes, it findeth them Unbeleevers, and it is given them, while they are such, to the end, that they may be converted from their unbeleef. So then Unbeleevers receive Grace, that they may beleeve, and Beleevers receive it, that they may beleeve more and more; yet now some yea many and most Unbeleevers suffer not this Grace, which they have received, to have its operation in them, which would change them, and make them Be∣leevers, but like the slothfull Servant, hide their Masters mony in the earth in a napkin; therefore it doth not encrease, nor bring forth the fruits of Grace, which it doth in them, who yeeld & submitt unto its operation. But some may say, if they had received Grace, they had received him, and so they should have become the Sons of God, according to vers. 12. I answer, the Word [receive] hath divers significations, 1. If a thing be put in such a place, it is said to be recei∣ved, as if Seed be sowne in barren earth. So the slothfull Servant, which hid his Masters mony in the earth, is said to have received it, Math 25. 24. But 2. a thing is said to be received, when it is suffered to have its due operation, in that, wher it is put, and if not, it is said to be rejected, so the Earth may be said not to receive the Seed, which though sowne in it▪ yet it suffers it not to spring up; and the Body which receivs good Physick into it, yet resisting the operation thereof, it may be said not to receive it, but reject it; And thus many words in Scripture have divers significations, which in one is true, in another false; and so all men, of his fulnes received Grace, but some receie it, no otherwise, then the barren Earth or Womb receivs the Seed, or as the slothfull Servant his Talent, and so it proves their condemnation, even as the body, which recei∣ving good Physick, resisting it, and working against it, is killed thereby; Others receive it, so as to yeeld to its operation, and so they are as the good Ground which receiving the good Seed, bringeth forth fruit, some 30, some 60, and some 100 fold.
Argument 2. From Ioh. 3. vers. 16. 17. &c. to 22. compared with Ioh. 8. 12. IN these words. Joh. 3. from v. 16. to 22. Our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, doth from his owne mouth, bear a large and plaine Testimony unto this Truth. God (said he) so loved the world, that hee gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever beleeveth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life; Wherby hee doth shew forth, the cause of mans perishing and misery, to be from mans owne selfe, and not from the Lord, for the Lord so loved men, that hee sent his Son to save them, but men did not beleeve in him, whom the Father had sent. Now, that this love of God is universall towards all men, and that the Son is come into all, to be a Saviour unto them, is manifest, in that hee saith, God so loved the World, that whosoever beleeved in him, should not perish. But here also, they have sought out an evasion, to darken and corrupt this clear Testimony; by [the World] say they, hee means, not all men, but only the Elect. In opposition to which I say. 1. Its but a meer allegation without any ground, for they can shew us no place in all the Scripture, wher only the Elect are called the World. Indeed, evill men and unbelievers are oft called the World, and sometyms all men are called the World, but no wher the Elect alone. But 2. supposing the World wer sometyms understood to be only the Elect, yet it cannot be so understood here, for that it would render these words of our blessed Lord, void of sence, and nonsensicall, which were blas∣phemous to think; For according to that acceptation, the words would run thus, God so loved the Elect, that whosoever of them (Elect) beleevs, should not perish, which is void of sence, forasmuch as none of the Elect, but must be∣leeve, and yet the Particle whosoever distributeth those who are understood here, by [the World] into Beleevers, and Unbeleevers, shewing that God so loved all, that hee gave an opportunity unto them to be saved, by beleeving, and if they did not beleeve, their perishing was not for want of the Love of God towards them, but because they did not beleev in him, whom God had sent. 3. In that he sayes, God sent not his Son, into the world, to condemne the world, but that the world through him might be saved; And yet many are condemned, it is manifest that even these who are condemned, had an opportunity once to be saved, and so the Love of God reached once towards them, or elce, it might be said, God sent his Son, even mainly and principally to them, for their con∣demnation. Againe, in that hee sayes, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and man loved darknes rather then the light; These two things are plainly held forth, 1. that whoever are condemned, it is for loving the darknes, rather then the light. 2. That the light is come, and hath ap∣peared unto them all who are condemned, for how can any be condemned,
for not loving that which never came nor appeared unto them? Againe it is plaine, that every evill Door, hath had the light appearing unto him, becaus hee is said to hate it. Now hee could not hate that, which never appeared nor was manifest, and that is the light which reproveth his evill deeds. More∣over it is also evident, that the light did come unto them, in a way, wherin they could have been saved, becaus, their condemnation, was, that they did not beleeve in his Name, but loved the darknes rather. But they could not be condemned, for not beleeving in that which coms not in a saving way. Againe, If every one who beleeveth not, is condemned, for unbelief then they have had a Law commanding them to beleev, for wher no Law, is, there is no transgres∣sion; which Law, could be no other then the Law, according to the Grace of spirituall and saving Illumination, and not according to a meer Naturall en∣lightning, for no light of a mans owne nature, can ever give him a Law to beleeve. And farther, This Illumination can shew, if a mans work be wrought in God, therefor it is spirituall and sufficient to salvation. Againe Iohn. 8. 12. He hears a Testimony to the same Truth, I am, (said hee) the light of the World, he that followes me, shall not walk in darknes, but shall have the light of life. Now, that he is the light of the world, lighting it according to a spirituall and saving Illumination, is hence manifest, and not according to that which is but natu∣rall onely: for hee alone that followes him, as hee doth spiritually and savingly enlighten, hath the Light of Life, or is saved. And as to their evasion, that by the [World] is meant only the Elect, that which is aforsaid, doth refute it, and besides Christ said to the Jewes, many of whom did perish, and so were Reprobats, While yee have, the light, beleev in it, that yee may be the children thereof. But that I may overturne the foundation of this evasion, I say, none are the Elect of God, but in relation, unto beleeving in the light and loving thereof, and none are Reprobate, but in Relation unto their unbelief, hating and rejecting it, for the Lord never reprobated, or rejected any, but who re∣jected the Gift of his Love offered unto them, so that whoever are elected, they are elected according to the foreknowledge of God, who did foreknow, or foresee, that they would beleev, and embrace the offer of his love, which is Iesus Christ, and whoever are Reprobated, are Reprobated according to the foreknowledge of God, who did foreknow, or foresee, that they would reject the offer, and not believe; yet I doe not say, that either the Faith of the one, or the unbelief of the other, was the cause of Gods Eternall decree, which hath no cause without himself, but this I say, men beleeving, are the Object of Election, and men disbeleiving and rejecting Iesus Christ, are the Object of Re∣probation, [not the moving, but the terminating] so that their unbelief is not the cause of Gods Decree, but the cause of their Condemnation and destructi∣on, which is decreed. And so in Scripture this gift of the Fathers love, the Lord Iesus Christ, is said to be disallowed or rejected of men. Now, they could not have rejected him, if hee had not come a light unto them, and been truly offered, for none can reject, that which is not offered. And if hee was
offered, hee could be offered, under no lesse Terms, then making salvation possible to them, for the offer of the Lord doth proceed from a true and reall willingnes, to give that which is offered; & who-ever dare say the contrary, doe charge the Lord with hypocrisy and dissimulation, which is blasphemous; but if the Lord hath a true and reall willingnes to give his Son, unto all, who re∣ject him; Then it was possible for them, at sometime to have received him, for the Lord willeth nothing, that is Impossible, and it is below that infinite Goodnes and Nobility of the Lord to offer unto poor men, that which it is Im∣possible for them to receive, as now it were below all Ingeunity and Humanity in us, to offer Alms unto a poor man, in such a way, as hee could not receive it; as, if he were bound in fetters, and we should stand at a distance, and hold it forth unto him, but so as hee could not reach it. Argument 3. From Rom. 1. v. 18, 19, 20, 21, &c, compared with Col. 1. 23. THe Apostle Paul whose Ministry was mostly unto the Gentils and therfore is called the Apostle of the Gentils, doth in this Epistle hold forth many things concerning the Gentiles, both as touching the Pri∣viledges which they had received from the Lord, and also the use that they made of them, some improved them to advantage, but others, and that for the most part did misimprove them, for which the Lord was provoked against them, to give them up to a Reprobate mind. And this hee doeth, according to the Wisdome given him of God, to make way for the more abundant Reception and spreading of the Faith among the Nations, which, becaus of the want of these outward Priviledges, that the Iewes had, wer looked upon by the Jewes, as out∣casts, and rejected of God to whom the preaching of the Doctrine of Salvation, did not belong, which was even the error of Peter, and his brethren generally till the Lord convinced him thereof, by a vision from Heaven. Acts 10. Now, in this Epistle, among divers other things of importance, hee declareth these two things, 1. That though the Iewes had Priviledges, in the outward, above the Gentils, as the Law, and Circumcision, yet the Lord had not wholly passed by, the Gentils, and left them destitute of the Truth, or of what might he knowne of him, 2. That those of the Gentiles who improved what was given them inwardly from the Lord and kept the Law, inwardly delivered unto them, were more accepta∣ble unto God, then the Iewes, who had the outward priviledges of the Law and Circumcision, and did not rightly use them, so that the Uncircumcision, was coun∣ted Circumcision, and the Circumcision, Uncircumcision, and hereby hee takes oc∣casion to beat downe the Pride and conceitednes of the Iewes, as if they were the only people of God, and God were only their God, wheras the Apostle saith, is hee the God of the Iewes only, is hee not also the God of the Gentiles? yea of the Gen∣tiles also. 3. Rom. 29. And also by this means hee encourageth the Gentiles and
preacheth Glad tydings among them, to take away all ground of despaire, or unbeliefe from them, as if the Lord had utterly rejected them, becaus of the want of these outward Priviledges bestowed upon the Iewes. With which glad tydings hee begins this Epistle; shewing First, that hee had received Grace and Apostleship, to his Brethren, for obedience to the Faith among all nations, i. e. that all nations might give obedience to the Word of Faith, which hee preached, which imports a Call from God unto all nations to beleeve, Secondly hee sayeth that hee was a Debter, both to the Greeks and Barbarians, which holds sorth the obligation that was upon him, from the Lord, who had called him, to preach the Gospell unto them; then he proceeds to declare, what the Gospell was, and what was revealed therein, both to beleevers and unbeleevers, to the just and to the unjust, whether Iewes or Gentiles; as to them who believed it was the power of God unto Salvation, and therein was the righteousnes of God revealed unto the just, from Faith to Faith, but to them who believed not, but wer unrighteous, and held the Truth in unrighteousnes, therein was the wrath of God revealed against all their ungodlines and unrighteousnes. Now in the 19. verse hee answereth secretly an Objection, which is to this purpose, How is it Paul, that thou sayest, in the Gospell is revealed, the righteousnes of God from Faith to Faith, unto the just, and also that the wrath of God is from heaven revealed therein against the unrighteous, seing the Gentiles have not had the Gospell preached unto them, all this tyme by past in which they have lived in their ungodlines and unrighteousnes. To this Paul answers, That which might be knowne of God was manifest in them, for God had shewed it unto them, which is as much as to say, though the Gospell came not unto them outwardly, by the ministry of man, yet it came unto them inwardly by the ministry of God himselfe, becaus, That which may be knowne of God is manifest in them, for God hath shewed it unto them. So that it is manifest, that by this expression, That which may be knowne of God, and as it is in the Greek , is understood the Gospell, which is a very significant way of expressing it, the Gospell is that which may be known of God, by men, being that which hee hath made manifest, and hath shewed un∣to them, The Word that was in the begining with God, in which was life, and the life is the light of men, which is the true light which ligteth every man that cometh into the world, that all through him might beleeve. This is that which may or can be knowne of God. and no more can be knowne of him, but what the Gospell, which is the Word of God, doth reveal; and this Word is the Light of men, which ligh∣teth every man that cometh into the world, which is not only the Power of God, unto Salvation unto every one that beleeveth, but is the Power of God unto every one, that they may beleeve, in the day of their visitation. Agreeable, unto this is that the same Apostle writeth unto the Colossians 1. cap. 23. that the Gospell has beene preached unto every creature, which is under heaven, but according to the Greek it is, which is preached in every creature under heaven, , in eve∣ry creature i. e. in every man, as when Christ said to his Disciples, preach the Gospell to every creature, i. e. to every man, in which Gospell, has the righteousnes of God, beene revealed unto men, in all ages and Generations, even among the very
Gentiles, both the just and the unjust: to the just, therein hath beene revealed from heaven, the righteousnes of God from Faith to Faith, to the unjust therein hath beene revealed the wrath of God from heaven, against all their ungodlines and unrighteousnes, who held the Truth in unrighteousnes, and this was a righteous thing with God so to doe, so that none of the Gentiles but have had the righteousnes of God revealed unto them, in rewarding the Just and Well-doers, and in pu∣nishing with wrath from heaven, the unrighteous and evill-doers, as it is Rom. 2. 9. 10. Tribulation and anguish upon every soule of man that doth evill, both Iew and Gentil, but glory, honour and peace to every man that worketh good, both to Iew and gentile also. But by this manifestation of God, in the Gentiles our Adversaries deny, that the Gospell, or any manifestation, that is of a saving nature is understood, and it hath passed generally among them, that it is but some naturall illumination which they have called the light of nature, and the Law of nature which flowes, from a mans owne mind and understanding, as a meer naturall man, which is woe∣full ignorance & darknes in them so to doe, as may appear from what is already said, If no more should be added to refute this their corrupt Glosse. Yet I find it with me to ad somethings further, for the clearing of this matter, and here I give notice to the Reader, that whatever this manifestation of God be, there is no question, or debate betwixt our adversaries and us, concerning the Universali∣ty of it, for they grant, that it is given to every man, only they deny, that it is Evan∣gelicall, and of a saving and spirituall nature, which I prove it to be; for 1. if it wer not Evangelicall, and the very Gospell it selfe, in an inward ministration, it would quite render the words of the Apostle, impertinent and contrary to the purpose hee treats of: for Paul is here shewing, what the Gospell was, and what was revealed in it, both to the just and the unjust, and becaus the unjust among all the Gentiles and Nations, had not the Gospell outwardly administred hee shewes, they had it inwardly; God having shewed it unto them; and this hee gives as the cause of what hee had affirmed of the Gospell. Now if Paul had understood this inward manifestation, to have beene only the naturall Illumination of mans owne understanding hee could not have given it as a cause of what hee affirmed, or de∣sined the Gospell to be. For the naturall illumination is no part of the Gospell, nor doth reveal any part of it, and so cannot be given as a cause, of what hee affir∣med of the Gospell. Let the Iudicious Reader weigh and ponder this; in the true Ballance, and hee wil find it weighty. But 2. the naturall Illumination cannot re∣veale from heaven, the wrath of God, against all ungoodlines and unrighteousnes of men, But, the manifestation here spoken of, doth so, Therefore, this manifestation is not the naturall Illumination. The first Proposition is proved, from our Adversaries owne concession, who affirme that the naturall illumination which is in all mens doth not discover all sins, but some onely, & especially those against the second Table as unrighteousnes betwixt men and men, for if it did discover all sin, then it would discover all duty, becaus by the same, that I know such a thing to be sin, I know the contrary to be a duty, and if it did discover al duty, then it would
things pertaining to the true Faith and Worship of God. Which the meer naturall Illumination cannot doe therefore I say, our Adversaries grant, that the naturall Illumination cannot discover all sin, and if it cannot discover all sin, then it can∣not discover, the wrath of God, against all sin, for that which discovers the one, discovers the other, yea in so far is sin knowne to be sin, as the wrath of God is re∣vealed against it. The second Proposition is proved from the Apostles words, for (saith hee) the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodlines and un∣righteousnes of men, now these two, all ungodlines and unrighteousnes, compre∣hends all sin. 3. This Manifestation is said to be a Revelation from heaven, There∣fore it hath a higher rise, then mans owne naturall understanding. 4. This Mani∣festation is said to be that which may be knowne of God, which hee had shewed unto them; Therefore it is of an Evangelick and saving nature; for so is that, which may be knowne of God, wheras the naturall Illumination, is not that which may be knowne of God nether deservs it such a high name, for that which may be knowne of God, Imports all that can be knowne of him, for all that can be knowne of him, is but  that which may be knowne of him; Now the naturall illumi∣nation, is but a very small discovery of him, and very darkly, so that in these words is plainly held forth, that whatever may be known of God, of his light, life, glory, goodnes, mercy, and saving power, is manifest in men, in a seed or principle, which as it is permitted to spring up, in them, gives them the knowledge of all that is needfull, or may be knowne of him, and so the words may be translated that which is needfull or ought to be knowne of God is manifest in them, Quod est co∣gosendum, , but the naturall Illumination discovers neither that which may be knowne of him, or ought or is needfull, to be knowne of him, &c. 5. By this Manifestation here mentioned, they did clearly see the Invisible things of God, even his eternall Power, and Godhead, as it is said, therefor it was not the na∣turall manifestation or illumination, which givs not clearly to see the invisible things of God, but very dimly and darkly to apprehend them; all the knowledge of mans naturall light or reason, concerning the invisible things of God, being but an abstractive knowledge gathered from things visible by Inferences and Deductions of the Reasoning Part which is farre from a clear seing of them, which is the In∣tuitive knowledge which the revelation of the Son only giveth. 6. By this Mani∣festation they were left without excuse, Therefore it was not a meer naturall illumi∣nation, I prove the Consequence, becaus a meer naturall illumination is not suffi∣cient to render any man without excuse; which I thus evince, That is only sufficient to render a man without excuse, which is sufficient, if it wer duly Improved, to render him excusable, and acceptable unto God. But the naturall illumination is not such, ac∣cording to our Adversaries own confession. Therfor the first Proposition is manifest, to any of sound Judgment, for if it wer not hee should have an excuse, Viz. the insufficiency of the thing, As now, if a Master should give to his servant a piece of Mony, to improve, among Marchands and Exchangers, if the Mony wer not suf∣ficient enough, so that hee Could not improve it and be approved of his Master, when his Master called him to give an account of his Mony. Hee could not be
without excuse, but would have an excuse sufficient, Viz. the Insufficiency of the mony. But of this more afterwards. This manifestation here mentioned is the Truth, which they ar said to have held in unrighteousnes verse 18. for which the wrath of God was revealed against them. But The naturall Illumination is no where in Scripture called the Truth; nor indeed doth it deserve such a Name; for that it is corruptible, and become very Corrupt and Impure through sin; whereas the truth is eternally pure and incorruptible. Now by [Truth] in Scripture, is sometimes understood Christ himselfe, sometimes the Spirit of Christ as Iohn said, the Spirit is truth; 1. Joh. 5. 6. And sometimes that heavenly and Divine Seed of Regeneration is cal∣led the truth in which the Son, and the Spirit is manifest; and so it is understood Psal. 85. 11. Truth shall spring out of the earth, Now, what earth is this? but the hearts of the children of men, which is the field where this Divine and heavenly Seed is sown, which through the preyalence of Error, & unrighteousnes hath long beene choaked, and supprest, and laine barren, but here is a Prophecy that it shall spring up, yea and else where it is promised that it shall fill the Earth, and Righ∣teousnes shall looke downe from heaven, i. e. the Spirit, Light and Life of righ∣teousnes shall influence it from heaven, and cause it to grow up, and loose it out of its bonds, wherin it hath beene so long detained; As it is here Rom. 1. 18. they had the truth given them, but they held it in unrighteousnes, were not obedient to it, as Rom. 2. 8. received it not in love, As 2. Thess. 2. 10. but resisted it as 2. Tim. 3. 9. and in many other places of Scripture, the Truth is held forth to be the very Saving Gift of God, which Sanctifieth and begetteth unto God, and set∣teth free from sin, and it is joined, with things of a heavenly and saving natu∣re as Grace asid Truth, Mercy and Truth, Peace and Truth, Righteousnes and Truth, and they who fear God are called Men of truth, Exod. 18. 21. and said Christ, every one that is of the truth heareth me. Joh. 18. 37. And for this end (said he) came I into the world, to witnes unto the Truth, by all which cannot be meant the naturall Illumination, and indeed as concerning the naturall Illumination, the Gentiles could not be said to detaine IT for they gave but too much way unto IT. And Thereby, sought to find out Wisdome, but could not, for since the fall, the naturall light or illumination of man, is exceedingly corrupted, and yet men have loved IT, and set IT up above the Gift of God, and fed upon IT, as if IT had beene the Tree of life. And IT hath beene permitted to grow, and become a very large Tree but the fruit of IT, is corrupt and Impure, in all naturall men, and not good for food; so unrighteousnes cannot be said to detaine or hinder the growth of the naturall Illumination, as it is corrupt, for many men, who are very unrighteous and wicked have much of it, and many times more then the Righ∣teous; so that Christ said, The children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children of God. Now, the naturall Illumination, as it was pure, before transgression, so in them, who come to be purified from transgression it doth be∣come pure; for the Truth purifieth it, and it groweth up under its shadow, and is good unto men, for divers uses, and so unrighteousnes hindreth its growth as its pure, but not as it is impure. And this has been the generall Losse of men, in
that they have still sought after that satisfaction, in the naturall Illumination, which they should have sought after, in this heavenly and Divine Principle of truth, and so have missed IT, and seeking Wisdome, have become fooles, so as to exchange the truth of God, for a lye, as it is here Imputed unto these Gentiles. Now, as in the Scripture it is said, Poor men are vanity, and Rich men are alye, vers. 13. becaus they were apprehended and judged to be what they were not; so it may be said, the naturall light, or illumination, as it is now corrupted, since the fall, is a Lye, in such an Acceptation, becaus, it is judged by men, to be what it is not; They love and esteeme it more then the Precious Truth, and seek after wis∣dome and knowledge in it, which is not the true knowledge and Wisdome of God, that maks wise unto Salvation; And of this, the Gentiles wer extreamly guil∣ty, for thereby they lost any measure of the true knowledge they had received and became vaine in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkned, for which cause, God gave them over to a Reprobate mind to doe those things which are not convenient, & this is the 8. Reason, why this manifestation is not the naturall illumination becaus through it, God kept them as by a chaine, from doing these abominations, which afterwards hee gave them up to committ; There was a time, when God dwelt in their knowledge, wherby they knew him, through what hee had made manifest of his eternall power in them and hee being thus manifest in them, stood as in their way, and withheld them, from doing those things till afterwards, that hee was provoked through their unthankfulnes, who when they knew him, did not glorify him, even to give them up to a Reprobate mind, not from the beginning, but after much provocation and long suffering of God, and therfor they could not but be under a Possibility, of Salvation befor they were thus given up for a man is alwayes under this Possibility, till hee be given up to a Reprobate mind or Spirit, so that the Spirit of the Lord ceaseth to strive with him any more. But say our Adversaries, This is but the naturall Illumination becaus it is said; the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seene, being under∣stood by the things that are made; so that what they knew of God, they gathered it but from the creatures, and things that were made, and therefor it was but the Light of na∣ture, or naturall Illumination. To which I answer, supposing that by these words, the things that are made, which are according to the Greek  Should be understood the Works of the outward creation, yet it doth not follow in the least, that what they did know, or understand of the invisible things of God, was either meerly or principally from or by them. I doe willingly Indeed ac∣knowledge that ther is a Book of Creation, in which many things of God, which require great consideration, are writt: but I say this book is sealed, and can no mo∣re be truly and sufficiently understood, then the Book of the Scriptures, unles that Divine and spirituall Illumination of the Holy Spirit of God, doe unseal it, doe re∣veale and open and make knowne the things that are therein recorded. Now, the Apostle doth not say that they understood the invisible things of God either only or principally, by the things that are made, for before hee maks any mention
of the things that are made, hee speaks of that which may be knowne of God, which was manifest in them, which God had shewed unto them, and so this was a Light to reveal these things of God, which were writ in the Creaturs, and as a key to open them up, and as an Interpreter to Interpret those Characters of the Divine Power, Wisdome, and Goodnes of God, imprinted in the Creatures. But Secondly, the Words may be no lesse truly, yea more properly and war∣rantably translated in the Creatures, or things made, as thus, the invisible things of God are seene clearly in the things that are made, so that they who looke upon the Invisible things of God, with the Light of Divine Illumination which proceeds from him, Can and doe, see God, and his invisible things, in all the Creaturs, or things that are made, so that the Creaturs are not in them∣selves a Vail to hinder the sight of God, from any man, if the Vail of iniquity were but rent off from the Eye of his mind, and that Eye were filled with the Divine Light of God, hee could clearly see the Lord and his invisible things, even his Glory, Power, and Majesty in all things that are made, as really as with our naturall Eyes wee can see visible things in such and such places. Now, I may see a man, in such a place, and yet the place contribute nothing, by way of a cause, to give me the sight of him, so I may see the Lord clearly in Creaturs, and yet the Creaturs, not be the cause of my sight, and indeed so it is. The Creaturs and things that are made of this visible World, God is in them, and filleth them with his heavenly presence, and may be seene in them, by men, who behold, him, in the Divine and Heavenly Light, which pro∣ceeds from him; but they cannot be called the cause, so much as by way of either Object, or Instrument, why hee is clearly seene. I doe not deny, but there is a certaine abstractive knowledge of God, to be gathered from the Crea∣tures which are visible, and wherof they may be called the cause, by way of Object and Instrument, but this is not the clear sight of God, being not Intui∣tive, but abstractive, and so the Creaturs cannot administer or afford unto us the clear sight of God, becaus they cannot exhibit or emit unto us the image of God, but only some Prints and footsteps of him, but the clear sight of God, which is the Intuitive knowledge of him, can only bee had in the Son, as hee is manifest in the expressed Word and Image, which is the Light that giveth, with open face, only to behold him. Now, though the Invisible things of God may be clearly seene i. e, intuitively in the Creatures, yet if the Creaturs have no Cau∣sality hereof, this knowledge cannot in the least be imputed unto the Creaturs, and so not unto any naturall illumination, which is either acquired or encreased by them. And this is a manifest Reason, why the Creaturs of this visible world, can not be said to be the cause of this knowledge here mentioned, becaus no knowledge wee can receive by them, though, but as by Instruments, is a clear seing of the Invisible things of God, wheras this here mentioned is a clear seeing of them, which might be in the Creaturs, but not by them: So that if all Crea∣turs wer removed, yea and turned to nothing save only that Creature, which hath this clear sight, yet the Invisible things o, God, could be seene. As now,
if I should see clearly some Excellent Object, in, or through Glasse, which if the Glasse were removed, I could see as well without it, I could not impute any thing to the Glasse, as having influence upon my sight: So it is, as to this sight of God, the Creaturs are as it were a Christall Glasse, in, and through which the Beauty and Glory of the Lord doth shine, which those who are of a pure mind can see in them, and through them, so that they are no Vail, nor hinderance in themselvs, and yet they are no cause of this sight neither; for if they were removed yet the Lord could be seene. Now, I shall not say, that all these Gentiles had such a sight of the Invisible things of God, as to have these Immediate manifestations of his Love, Ioy, Peace, Goodnes, and Excel∣lency, which the Saints have, but there is a Manifestation of God, which is in a mixture of Wrath and Mercy, Iudgement and Compassion, that the Lord ad∣ministers unto men, befor their conversion, in order thereunto, through which hee appears in them as a Consuming fire, and yet not wholly to destroy, but to purifie them, and consume the iniquity; Which Manifestation cannot be imputed unto the Creatures without, but is inwardly felt, and seene: And such a Manifestation had these Gentiles, and in some measure every man that coms into the world, otherwise hee could not be left without excuse, if he had not clearly seene somewhat of the Invisible things of God, even his Eternall Power and God head revealing his wrath from Heaven against all ungodlines and unrigh∣teousnes which is called a clear sight, in respect of the Wrath and Iudgement of God, made manifest in them, becaus of sin. And thus farre, every Eye shall see him, who have pierced him, that is to say caused the Seed to suffer in their owne particulars. But 3. By [the things that are made] (if any man will so translate the words) may be understood those things which are inwardly made, those marve∣lous works of the Lord, which are wrought in mens hearts, both of Judgement and Mercy; through the appearance of God, and the Revelation of his al∣mighty arme and power, in that Heavenly and Divine Principle of his owne Seed, by which indeed the Invisible things of him, are clearly seen; And untill a man come to see the Lord, in the things that are made of him, in himselfe, hee can ne∣ver see him, in the things that are made without him, which gave occasion to many of the Gentile Philosophers, to bid people, seek God within themselvs, as Seneca said, Intra te quere Deum, i. e. Seek God within thy self. But now, if a man would seek God within himselfe, and desire to see him clearly and enjoy him, hee must seek him, in the Divine Seed, and in the things that are made, therin, and thereof, hee must seeke him, in the righteousnes, purity, holi∣nes, meeknes, and temperance, which spring up in the Divine Seed, and are the works of God, and the things which are made, by which hee is clearly seene, and also enjoyed and possessed, for this Seed and the Birth thereof, by the sprin∣ging up of these Heavenly powers and vertues, which issue there from, Can and doth truly represent the Divine, Pwer, ad God head, being the expresse Image of God. This hath beene the Lamentable losse of many, who have sought God, even within themselves, that they might see him, and enjoy him,
but have sought him, in the naturall illumination, and in the perishing and cor∣ruptible thoughts and imaginations, & willings, & runnings of their owne hearts, which are a Vail to darken and blind the Eye, instead of helping it to see him, wheras they should have sought him in the Divine Seed, which generally they set at naught, for it has beene the stone, that the builders in all ages have despised, and trode upon, and held it in unrighteousnes, but to us, who be∣leeve it is precious, and therein, and thereby wee have seen those things of God, which are too wonderfull for us to declare. Now, where these hea∣venly and Divine works of Truth, and Righteousnes, and Holines, are made and brought forth in the Divine Seed there the Lord hath his Throne, which is as it were built of these heavenly materialls, these Saphirs, and Carbuncles, and Precious stones, according to which it is said, Psal. 89: 14. Istice and Iudge∣ment, are the habitation of his Throne, and Mercy and Truth shall goe before his face. For here, doth the Glory of the Lord manifest it selfe▪ as the Heavens; here is the Lord seene, and tasted, and enjoyed, as hee is all sweetnes, all love, all meeknes and gentlenes, his Anger, and Wrath, and severity being turned away, which was manifested in the day, when Iniquity had power in the heart. But as David said, If I goe up to Heaven, thou art there also. Now, as the heart, where Righ∣teousnes, and Holines, Purity and humility have place, doth represent Heaven, wher∣in God dwelleth and revealeth himselfe in most sweet and comfortable manife∣stations, so the heart where unrighteousnes, unholines, pride and impurity &c. have place, doth fitly represent Hell, yet even in this Hell, God is, and doth make his Invisible power and God-head clearly to be seene therin, but not in the sweet and comfortable manifestations aforesaid, but in such as are very dreadfull and terri∣ble, as a consuming fire, to devour the Adversary. As an angry and Jealous God all anger, all wrath, all severity and Iustice, and no otherwise, to be Immediatly seene till iniquity be turned from, only unto whom the day of their visitation yet remains, the mercy and Compassion of the Lord doth let forth some remote Glimpses, and flashes, as it were, but giveth not it selfe to be enjoyed by the soule that is not turned from iniquity, and the love thereof unto Righ∣teousnes, purity and holines, for without these, No man can see the Lord, in the sweet and comfortable manifestations of himselfe. And Lastly these words  may be understood of men themselvs, which very word the Apostle useth to signifie men, Eph. 2. 10. And may be applied, both to the Saints, and to others who are but under convincement, and judgement, and those preparatory works, which goe before a through-conversion, who are the workmanship of God, in whom, or by whom, or to whom, the Invisible things of God are clearly seene, and understood. And thus, however these words be translated, I have shewne, that no proof can be gathered from them, that the manifestation here mentioned, is only that of naturall Illumination. I have found my heart drawn forth the more largely upon this place, for that it is much misunderstood and wrested, by the corrupt glosses of men.
Argument 4. From Romans. 2. Chapter THe same Apostle in this 2. Chapter proceeds yet more fully to hold forth, the Priviledges of the Gentiles, which they had of God, and that they were not so left of him, but whoever among them, did that which was good, a Reward of glory, honour and peace was provided for them of the Lord no lesse then for the Iewes, and who ever did that which was evill, a punishment also was ordained, unto the one, no lesse then unto the other, Tribula∣tion and anguish upon every soule that doeth evill, of the Iew first, and also of the Gen∣tile, but Glory, honour and peace to every man that worketh good, to the Iew first and also to the Gentile, for there is no respect of persons with God. vers. 9. 10. 11. Then hee comes to answer a weighty objection, which might be propounded against what hee said, as thus, How can the Gentiles be either rewarded, or punished seing they have had no Law given them, for all reward is in relation unto obedience of the Law of God, and all punishment is in relation unto the disobedience thereof? To this the Apostle answers, that they had the Law inwardly, though not as the Iewes had it, in an outward administration, and according to this Law, they should be judged, and accused, or excused, according to their evill or well doing. vers. 12. 13. 14. 15. Now, let it be considered that the Apostle in both these Chapters is speaking of the Gentiles, who were under no outward administration either of Law, or Gospell, as appears by his answers that hee givs, unto the Objections afor∣said, wherin hee grants, that they had not the outward administration of the Lawes and oracles of God, but affirms they had that inwardly made manifest in them which God had shewed unto them, wherby they were condemned who did evill, and justified who did well. Now say our Adversaries; the Law, here mentioned, which the Apostle grants, that the Gentiles had, was but only the Law, and light of a mans owne nature, and not any principle of light, or life that was of a spirituall and saving nature. To which I answer, The contrary is very demonstrable from the Apostles words as may ap∣pear, from these following Reasons. 1. There was such a Principle in them, whereby they did the things contained in the Law. Therefore it was a principle of the very saving light and life of Iesus Christ, which is that Divine nature mentio∣ned 2. Pet. 1. 4. for by a mans owne nature, hee cannot doe the things contained in the Law, becaus it is corrupted in the fall and is that evill tree, which cannot bring forth good fruit, till it be renewed and healed by the vertue of this Divine nature and principle. 2. It is evident, that this inward principle was the very prin∣ciple of the Gospell in them, in that Paul sayth that God will render to every man, according to his deeds, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, by Iesus Christ, according to my Gospell, i. e. the gospell which hee preached. Now, if the Gentiles shall be judged according to the Gospell, then the gospell behoved in some
measure to be manifest unto them, for no man shall be judged according to that, which is not made manifest, it being a most certaine Maxime, a law, not pro∣mulgate doth not oblige, and the Law, which doth not oblige, doth not con∣demne the transgressors therof, and the law that doth not condemn the trans∣gressors thereof, can not be a Law, according to which they shall be judged. But say they: By a mans owne nature, and the light and power therof, though corrupt and degenerat, hee may doe somthings required in the Law, which are good, materially, though hee cannot doe them well, nor so as to be justified in the doing of them, or to receive the reward of eternall life. To which I answer, But these Gen∣tiles did the things containd in the Law, so that they were excused yea and justi∣fied, and did receive the reward of Glory, Honour, and Peace, in so doing, for, said the Apostle, even concerning these same Gentiles, Glory, Honour, and Peace to every man that worketh good, to the Iew first and also to the Gentile, which importeth, that some of these Gentiles, did work good, and also received Glory, &c. as the Reward therof. Now, see how abundantly the Apostle clears this matter not the hearers of the Law (said he) but the doers of the Law are justified, vers. 13. and vers. 14. The Gentiles were doers of the Law, foras∣much as they did the things contained in the Law, and therefor it followes that they are justified. And againe vers. 15. hee sayeth, they were excused, in their minds, who did that which was good, as they were accused, who did evill; yea hee proceeds so farre to hod forth the Iustification of some of these Gen∣tiles, that hee plainly affirmes, though they were not Iewes outwardly, and outwardly circumcised, yet they keeping (or as it is in the greek) fulfilling the Law their uncircumcision is counted for circumcision, and they were Iewes inward∣ly having the circumcision in the heart and spirit, though not in the letter, and so had praise of God, though not of men. By all which it is plaine, that the na∣ture here spoken of, cannot be, mans owne nature, which is corrupt, but that Divine nature aforsaid, wherof such of the Gentiles, who were obedient to the Truth inwardly made manifest, were partakers, and so, were justified through faith, though they were the uncircumcision, as the circumcision was ju∣stified by faith also. And herein was that great errour of Pelagius that hee af∣firmed the Gentiles were justified by their owne Nature, without the Grace of Christ; judging the Nature here mentioned to be mans owne Nature, wheras it was that Divine Nature, aforsaid, that is, the very Grace or Gift of Christ. But, that the Gentiles could not be justified, by their doing the things contain∣ed in the Law, they thus argue. 1. Becaus the Apostle saith, by the works of the Law; shall no flesh be justified: To which I say. By Law there is understood the Law of the first covenant, which came by Moses, and its true, no Justification is by that Law, whether it be understood of Moses his outward ministration, or of the same ministration of Moses in the spirit, wher the Law is writ but in ta∣bles of stone, till the Seed be raised, by which the Law is fulfilled. But in di∣vers of these Gentiles, the Seed was raised, which is that Divine Nature or Birth, by which they did the things contained in the Law, and so were justified by him,
who gave them power to fulfill it, which if it had not beene, there could have beene no Iustification. 2. They argue, that Paul saith, he has proved all, both Iewes and Gentiles to be under sin, and therfore they could not be justified. Answer. That is, all those both Jewes and Gentiles, who did not seek righteousnes in Christ, the true light and life inwardly manifested, but sought it in other things, as the Jewes, in their outward performances, and the Gentiles in their naturall wisdome. Nor can our adversaries deny, but that divers Jewes were justified, even then, and in all ages before, there were among the Iewes, who were the true Saints and Children of God, and sought after righteousnes, in the True Principle where it was to be found, but, its true, they were but few, in respect of them who had confidence in the flesh, and fleshly performances. Now, if these words of Paul aforesaid, [that hee had proved all to be under sin] hin∣der not but that some Iewes were justified, neither doe they hinder, but that some Gentiles were justified also. 3. They argue, there can be no Iustification, without faith in Christ. But these Gentiles had not faith in Christ. Therfore, &c. Answ. I deny the second proposition, for if they did cleave unto, and beleeve in the light, they beleeved in Christ, for hee is the light, nor is the outward name that which saves, but the inward nature, vertue and power, signified their∣by, which was made manifest in them, and thus is Christ even that , that which may or must be knowne of God, for Christ is only that which may or is to be knowne of him, becaus no man knoweth the Father, but as the Son reveals him, and no man can know more of the Father, then hee makes knowne unto them. If any object, that formerly I understood that  to be the Gospell, and now I understand it of Christ, and say, how doe these hang together? Is Christ the Gospell? I answer. The Gospell is either taken objectively, or declaratively. i. e. either as that Divine Principle, which is both the object of what is declared, and also the spring from which it floweth, or as the living declaration therof, issuing from that spring. And so Christ is the Gospell ob∣jectively, or that which is declared of by the Gospell, and is its object and spring, and thus the Apostle saith, the Gospell is the power of God, unto salva∣tion. Inasmuch then, as the Divine Power, is manifest unto any, for Salva∣tion, wee doe justly say, there is the Gospell preached, for that Power doth declare it selfe, both in words and works, where it is kindly received, to be glad tydings, which [Evangile] signifieth: and to be the Word of God, which [Gospell] an old Saxone word doth signifie in that language.
Argument 5. Erom Romans 5. vers. 18. IN this Chapter the Apostle doth hold forth a parallell in divers particu∣lars, betwixt the first Adam, and Iesus Christ the second Adam, of whom the first Adam was a figure, as it is said vers. 14. which parallell doth not run, in Relation, unto the things, which are come upon us, through both, for they are contrary, but in Relation unto the Persons, upon which the things are come, viz. That as universally as the first Adam hath brought a disadvantage and losse upon all the Children of men, so universally hath Christ the second Adam brought a free gift upon them, wherby it is possible for them to recover all that they lost in, or by Adam, and be delivered from any, and all the evills which accompanied that losse. But as the first Adam brought on the evill upon men, by his disobedience, on the contrary Christ the second Adam hath brought on the good and free gift of God upon us, by his obedience. And this is clearly proposed and affirmed in this 18. vers. Therfore as by the offence of one (said hee) Iudgement came upon all men to condemnation, even so, by the righte∣ousnes of one, the free gift came upon all men unto Iustification of life. Where note, that the word [Iudgement] is not in the Greek, nor any word for it, but there is something understood, as neither the [free gift] in this vers. But it is manifest, the free gift is to be understood, as is clear from vers. 15. 16. Now, what can be more evident, for this truth, then these words, which are as plaine and full a Testimony as any can be desired, for this which wee plead for? And yet our Adversaries betake themselves to their old corrupt glosse to get an evasion, affirming that by [ALL] in the latter part of the verse, is understood, not Singula Generum, but Genera Singulorum, i. e. not all particulars, but some of all sorts. To which I answer. This sheweth their prejudice against the truth, who passe from the sence, which the words plainly import, and seek out an∣other sence, to the words, not from any necessity, but becaus it pleaseth not their corrupt judgement. Now, what is above said, upon the words [all and every] in the first Argument might suffice here, but I shall ad somewhat more, which the very place it selfe, here adduced, giveth an occasion for, affording us very good ground, to refuse this their corrupt glosse; For beside that the word [ALL] being understood, by themselvs, in the first part of the verse Universally for all particulars, is a good Reason to evince, that it should be so understood, in the latter part, there being no Cogent Reason to the con∣trary. This following consideration doth evidently prove, that the second [All] must be understood, as Universally as the first, becaus otherwise the Pa∣rallell, could not hold, and the Apostles words, would be impertinent, as if hee had said, as by the offence of one, somwhat is come upon all men to condemna∣tion,
So, by the Righteousnes of one, somwhat (viz. the free gift) is come, not upon all men, nor upon the most of men, but upon the fewest, unto Iustification of life; who cannot but see, that this cannot be the sence of the Apostles words? for that it quite destroyes the Parallell, which is made in Relation to the persons, who, as they suffered a losse Universally by the first Adam, so by the second, the grace or gift of God is come upon them, wherby they may recover it, as Universally, and so the Parallell runs betwixt universall and universall, and not betwixt universall and particular, and it is contrary to the nature of Parallells to be narrower one way then another. But say they. The Parallell holds thus; That as all in the first Adam, or who are begot of him, doe receive hurt, and Iudgement is come upon them all to condem∣nation, even so the free gift is come upon all, who are in the second Adam, and are begot of him, unto Iustification of life. And thus, as Adam is the head of all sprang from him, so Christ the second Adam is the head of all sprang from him; who conveyeth life and spirit, unto them all, As Adam hath conveyed death, unto all, who are come of him, by ordinary generation. To which I answer. The free grace or gift, which cometh by the obedience of Christ, doth not find any of the children of men, in Christ, or begot of him, according to the new birth, for when it first cometh upon them, it findeth them without God, and without Christ in the world, with Adam, in the fall, and therfore the Parallell can not run, according to what is alledged above, as to say, even so the free gift is come upon all, who are in the second Adam, and are begot of him, for none are in him, nor begot of him, upon whom the free gift first cometh, but it cometh upon Unbeleevers, that therby they may become Beleevers, and upon the Unbegotten, that therby they may be Begotten, and upon them, who are out of him, that therby they may come to be planted in him. And as to what is said, of Adams being the head of all, as they are come of him, and of Christ his being the head of all come of him, it holds good. But this further is to be considered, how Christ is the head of men, for somtimes hee is called the head of the body, which is the Church, and somtimes the head of every man, as it is 1. Cor. 11. 3. Now after what manner did Christ become the head of his Church, who are the Saints? not by finding them Saints, when hee first came unto them, and so joining them unto him, as finding them, a sutable body for such a Head. No, no, for hee found them, not Saints, but ungodly and unrigh∣teous, and hee was given of the Father, as a head, full of Grace and Truth, to begett them, to be the Saints and children of God, that so they might be a su∣table body for him, as their head. And thus hee is the Head of the Saints by union, and comunion, they are joined to him, and receive life and spirit from him, as the Members doe from the Head, and they doe serve and obey him, as their Head, and thus, hee is the Head of none but the Saints. But againe de jure, i. e. of right, hee is the Head of every man, whom every man ought to receive, and acknowledge for his Head, and give obedience thereunto, as the Members doe unto the Head, and therfore it is, that the whole world shall be
judged by Iesus Christ, and who have received him, as their Head, shall re∣ceive the reward of eternall life, and who have not received him, but denyed that obedience and subjection to him, which the Members ow to the Head, shall be punished with everlasting destruction, becaus of their rebellion and disobedience. Now there is such a mutuall Relation of duty, betwixt the Head and Members, that as the Members are bound to serve and obey the Head, so the Head is bound to convey that influence of life and spirit, unto the Members wherby it is possible for them, to doe all things, which the Head requires. And from hence I thus argue, Seing Iesus Christ is the Head of every man, de Iure. i. e. of right, and is given of the Father, to be the head of all men, and hath received that power and authority from the Father, to be the head of all men, de Jure, Therfore hee is bound, from the Relation hee hath unto all men, even all particulars, as their head, to convey that influence of life and spirit unto them, wherby it is possible for them, to doe all things hee requires of them. And consequently the free gift is conveyed unto them, wherby it is possible for them, that they may be saved, and so hee is justly called the second Adam, in that hee is the Head of all men, from whom a spirituall seed is conveyed unto all men, even as the first Adam was the head of all men, from whom a natu∣rall seed was conveyed. But say they, If the free gift had come upon all particulars, then all would have beene justified. 1. Becaus it is said, that the free gift is come upon all unto Iustifi∣cation of life. 2. Becaus, by the disobedience of the first Adam, condemnation is come upon all, and therfore, if the free gift is come upon all particulars, then Iusti∣fication is come upon all. Answer, to the 1. becaus it is said, the free gift is come upon all, unto Justification of life, it will not follow, that Justification it selfe is come upon all, for it is not said, Justification is come upon all, but the free gift is come upon all unto Iustification, which imports that Iustification is the effect which the free gift would produce were it received by faith, but now all doe not receive this free gift by faith, and therefor it doth not produce this effect in all. And to the 2. I answer, denying that by the disobedience of the first Adam, simply, condemnation is come upon all, for the Scripture doth not say so, but thus, there is somewhat by his disobedience come upon all unto condemnation, which somewhat is the seed of sin, that is transmitted from Adam to all his naturall posterity, and doth produce condemnation as its fruit and effect, wher it is obeyed, and yeelded unto, and suffred to spring up, but in none else. Morover the Apostle saith, that where sin did abound, grace did much more abound, but if grace hath not come upon all, as universally as sin, Viz. the seed of sin aforesaid, then grace should not have so much abounded. But now it hath much more abounded, or superabounded, which therfore it is justly said to have done, inasmuch as it hath given to every man that coms into the world, a possibility to overcome sin, and the power thereof, for that which is able to overcome in all, is more superaboundant then that which is overcome, or may
be overcome in all. And though this seed of Grace and of Righteousnes suf∣fer in many for a time, yet in due tyme, the Lord will raise it up in all, and crowne it with dominion, over all, unto the Salvation of all, who have re∣ceived it in saith, but for the everlasting destruction of them who did not be∣leeve, nor were obedient thereunto. Argument 6. From Rom. 10. THE Apostle Paul in this 10. Chapter, doth againe fall upon this Sub∣ject to compare the Iewes and the Gentiles together, shewing that the Gentiles were not so cast off, but that, as to what was the maine and principall thing, To wit the word of faith, the Gentiles did share with the Iewes, and that whoever among the Gentiles did beleeve and call upon the name of the Lord were saved, no lesse then the Iewes, for (said he) there is no difference betwixt the Iew and the Greek, for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him, and whoever beleeveth on him, shall not be ashamed. Now in the 3. and 4. Chapter, hee giveth the Reason, why the Iewes, who sought after Righteousnes did not attaine it, even becaus they sought it not in Christ, but in the Law, and the legall ministration, wheras God had not appointed that for Righteousnes but to point unto Christ who is the end of it, for Righte∣ousnes, unto every one that beleevs, vers. 5. And this hee proveth, Viz. that Christ is the end of Law for Righteousnes, from Moses words, Deuter. 30. shewing that by that word of faith, which Moses said was nigh unto the Iewes, and in their heart, (so that they needed not say, who shall ascend into heaven for it, or descend into the deep,) is understood Christ. Otherwise hee could not have brought Moses words as the Reason, or proof, why Christ was the end of the Law, as here hee doth. Againe, hee affirmeth for a man to say in his heart, who shall ascend into heaven, were to bring downe Christ from above, or to say, who shall descend into the deep, were to bring him up from the grave, which can∣not be, wherby it is manifest, that by the word he understands Christ, whom hee calls the word of faith, which hee and his Brethren did preach. And so they preached him, nearer unto men, then either Heaven, or the grave; The word is nigh unto thee, even in thy heart and in thy mouth. Some may say, how is Christ to be understood, to be in the mouth? I answer, It may be in Relation unto his being given unto men, for the food of their soules, according to what Christ said, hee that cateth me, shall live by me. Now the food is put in the mouth, that it may be nourishment unto the body, so here is an allusion unto that, as if Moses and Paul had said, thou needs not perish for want of Christ, the food
and the life of thy soule, for hee is as nigh unto thee, as thou canst desire him, as the very meat when it is in thy mouth, yea hee is yet noarer, Even in thy heart for now the meat may be put into the mouth and yet becaus of weaknes, or some Impediment in the body the vertue & strength of it may be hindred to goe unto the heart, for the strengthning & comforting or quickning of the same, & so though it wer in the mouth, yet a man might die, as being so weak, that hee could not draw the vertue of it into his heart, and indeed so it is, with us men, in the unconverted state, wee are in such an impotent condition, to doe any thing for our selvs, that if life and vertue from God, were not brought so near us, as to be put in our very hearts, wee could not live, for wee are not only weak, and sick, but wee are dead in sins, and trespasses, and this is the wonderfull mercy of the Lord, that hee hath brought this bread of life as near us, as is possible for our quickning and salvation, hee hath put it not only in our mouth, but in our heart, yet if the heart doth not kindly receive it, nor suffer it to have its operation therein, notwithstanding it is brought so near, it will not give life unto the heart, but be a savour of death unto death thereunto. But wher the heart doth receive it, so as to unite therwith, it not only becometh life unto the heart, soo as to fill it with pure Heavenly refreshment and joy, and with most excellent and Heavenly breathings, thoughts, desires, and meditations, concerning the Mercy, Goodnes, Power, and Love of the Lord, and of his Wis∣dome, Righteousnes Purity and Holines, or whatever else it tasteth of, and en∣joyeth in him, but also becometh a most abundant wellspring of life unto the mouth, wherby it is opened, after a marvelous manner, to utter and expresse the thoughts and feellings, and joyes of the heart, in living words, which are spirit and life, having of the very vertue of the divine life in them, which as they are a most sweet and acceptable favour unto God, so are they of great use and service unto men, both for quickning the dead and for refreshing and buil∣ding up the living yet more abundantly, in the power of that life which has quickned them. And thus the word springeth up from the heart into the mouth, but here it, as it were, descendeth from the mouth into the heart, therfore it is first said to be in the mouth, the word is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart. Now that this was the priviledge of the Gentiles, no lesse then of the Iews, to have this word so near unto them, as to be in the mouth and in the heart. The Apostle doth plainly affirme, and so that the Gentiles who beleeved, were saved, no lesse then the Iewes for saith hee, There is no difference betwixt Iew or Greeke, but the same Lord is rich unto all that call on him. And that these Gentiles, who did call upon the name of the Lord, and were saved, were not under any out∣ward administration of the Gospell, is most evident from the Objection framed by the Apostle vers. 14. 15. and his Answer thereunto. The Objection is occa∣sioned by Pauls saying, that the Gentils, who called upon the name of the Lord, were saved. Now, it might be objected, How shall the Gentiles call on him, in whom they have not beleeved. And if it should be replyed, that some of them did beleeve, The Objection is, How shall they beleeve in him, of whom they have
not heard. And if it be replyed, they have heard, the Objection remains, How shall they hear without a Preacher? and if it be replyed, they have had a Prea∣cher, the Objection in the last place is, who, or what Preacher hath beene sent to them? for how can they preach unlesse they be sent? As it is written, How beauti∣full are the feet, &c. Hereunto the Apostle doth not reply that Preachers have beene outwardly sent unto them, for at this time, The Gospell, as to its out∣ward administration had not gone over all the world, but this hee givs for the direct and positive Answer, But they have not all obeyed the Gospell, &c. So then, faith come by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. So hee grants that they could not beleeve without hearing; and that they could not hear without a Preacher, which Preacher hee doth not say was any man, sent unto them, by whom they did hear, but thus. So then (saith he) Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word, even that word which was in their mouth, and in their heart, therefore hee adds, But I say, have they not all heard? Yes verely, the sound went into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world, which words hee ci∣teth out of the 19. Psalme, where they are understood of that Universall lan∣guage, which the Heavens and Firmament, Day and Night hath unto all men, even all particulars without exception, and are not cited by him, for that end to prove, that the visible creation did preach the Gospell unto them in the li∣ving clear & powerfull Ministration thereof, for that it cannot do; but hee ma∣keth use of them, by way of allusion, to signifie, that as Universall, as the lan∣guage of these creatures was unto men outwardly, even so universall was the language of this Word of faith, which is Christ, the Messenger of the everlast∣ing Covenant sent to preach unto men, in the inward, even unto all without exception of any, so that all among the Gentiles have heard this Word, both Beleevers and Unbeleevers. Now as concerning the Beleevers, it is certaine, for how could they beleeve in him, of whom they had not heard, and concerning Unbe∣leevers, it is as evident from the Apostles words, who saith, They have not all obeyed the Gospell, for Esaias saith, who hath beleeved our report? Now Marke, the Apostle doth not say, They have not all obeyed the Law of nature, or the Light of nature, but they have not all obeyed the Gospell, so that the very Gospell has beene preached unto all, otherwise they should never have beene charged with not having obeyed it. Againe hee saith, But have they not heard? Even that which they disobeyed, to wit the Gospell? Hee answereth, Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world; alluding, as is said, unto that Universall language of the Heavens and Firmament, Day and Night, which speaks not only unto some of all sorts of men, but to all particulars, so that this Word hath had its language not only unto some of all sorts, but Universally unto all and every particular, otherwise the allusion, unto the words of the 19. Psalme, had been impertinent. Moreover the Apostle proceedeth to shew, how the Gentiles, who follow∣ed not after Righteousnes, had attained to Righteousnes, even that of faith, and yet the Iewes missed of it, of which as hee gave the reason, in the close
of the last Chapter, why the Iewes missed of it, Viz. Beealls they sought it not by faith, so in the close of this 10. Chapter hee further adds, that notwithstan∣ding all the high thoughts, the Iewes had of themselvs, as if they were the onely elect people of God, and the Gentils, cast of, that the Lord had said long agoe, I will provoke you to jealousie by a people that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you And that Esaias is so bold, as to affirme, that the Lord was more readily found of the Gentiles, then of the Iewes, for of the Gentiles hee saith, I was found of them that sought me not, but to Israel hee saith, All the day long I have stretched out my hands to a rebellious and gain-saying people. So that though the Jewes weremuch seeking, and asking, and praying, yet they did not find the Lord, becaus it was but in hypocrisie, they were in their hearts a gainsaying and rebellious people, whereas the Gentiles many of them had not such a shew of externall devotion, and Prayers, but were more righteous in heart before the Lord, and so did more readily find him, and know him, yea and did more readily receive the testimony of truth as it was outwardly published by the Apostles, then did the Iewes notwithstanding all their great Profession. Oh that the late Professors could read their figure in this, at this day. Some may object, that its said, theres no difference betwixt Iew and Gentile, but the same Lord is rich unto all that call upon him, which would seeme to import, that such a rich mercy, as the grace of God, is only given to Beleevers, and them that call on his name, as it is else where said, hee giveth grace to the humble, wheras wee say, hee giveth grace unto all. To which I answer, these Scripturs doe not im∣port, that hee giveth not Grace to all, but only that hee giveth more Grace unto them, who beleeve, and truly call upon him, and are humble even to enjoy his love, and the comfort of his holy spirit, and to none else; yet hee giveth Grace even unto the Unbeleevers, and Proud, and Forgetters of him, that they may become Beleevers, and true and humble Seekers of him, as ma∣ny have become such, who were as bad as any, but who doe resist the Lord, and the Grace offred, and continue so doing, till the day of their visitation passe over them, the Lord ceaseth any more graciously to visit, and hee cau∣seth the same word, by which they might have beene saved, had they beleeved, to become their condemnation, becaus of their unbelief. And here I desire the reader to observe, that the Grace held forth, both in this place, and all others aforsaid is the very Grace that is evangelicall, being the word of faith, and the Light which is to be beleeved in; and no other Grace making salvation possible to all men, doth the Scripture declare of. So that, it may plainly appear, that the universall, non-evangelicall, grace, which Pa∣pists and Arminians speake of, is but a figment, and not the truth which is ow∣ned by us.
Argument 7. From Titus 2. 11. 12. compared with 1. Corinthians 12. 7. FOR the Grace of God, that bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all men, (or as in the translation of Beza himself hath shined in upon all men) teac∣hing us that denying ungodlines and wordly lusts, wee should live soberly righteously and Godly in this present world, &c. And this hee gives as the Reason, why Titus should exhort ALL those among whom hee lived, unto Temporance, Righteousnes and Godlines, old men, old women, yong men, yong women, and servants, &c. even becaus the grace of God had appeared not un∣to them, only, but unto all men, which taught them the same things inward∣ly, as they who were sent of God, did teach and exhort them unto outward∣ly, and did not only teach men to deny and forsake the evills and lusts of the world, but did appear bringing along with it, a power to save from these things, and indeed, this is the very foundation, and fundamentall ground, of all outward teaching, and instruction and exhortation, in relation unto the things which per∣taine unto Holines and Godlines, that there is an inward principle, which is the free grace or gift of God planted in every man, to answer and witnes unto the truth of the things which are outwardly taught and exhorted unto, even as face answereth unto face in a glasse, by and through which inward principle, the true Teachers and Ministers of Iesus Christ, and the things by them published and taught, were beleeved, and received, among those, unto whom they were sent, and if any beleeved not, as many did not beleeve, they were left with∣out excuse, for that there was that in their very hearts that did answer unto the truth. And hereby their ignorance may appear, who object, that if there be an inward principle, which doth or can teach all things pertaining unto truth and righteousnes, then all outward teaching of men is in vaine. Whereas the plaine contrary is the true consequence, For were there not an inward principle, to teach them all things, and to enable to beleeve and performe the things which are required; all teaching of men would be in vaine, BECAUS that there would be nothing in people to answer, or witnes unto the truth of what is taught, by which they could be convinced or perswaded, nor would there be any thing in them, by which they could doe the things required of them, and this would indeed make all teaching as vaine, as for a man to goe teach the things of humane Rea∣son, unto a Beast or to exhort it, to doe such and such reasonable things, be∣caus in a beast there is no principle of humane reason, by which it can be reach∣ed, either to understand, or doe those things. Now, it is a bad conse∣quence thus to argue, there is a principle of reason in every man, therefore it is needles, that there should be any men, to teach unto others, the things of rea∣son, wheras this is the great and onely encouragement, that the greatest Ma∣sters
in the things of naturall Reason, (as in the sciences Physicall and Mathe∣maticall) have, to teach, in that there is a Principle of Reason, in their Schol∣lars, to answer unto the truth of the things taught by them, who beleeve those things, not simply becaus of their Masters authority, but becaus of that evi∣dence, which the Principle of Reason in themselvs, giveth unto them. And for as much as there is an universall Principle of Reason in men, therefor it is, that men are so usefull unto one another, in propagating knowledge in the things thereof, and so it is, as touching the things of Faith and Godlines, be∣caus there is an universall Principle of Faith and Godlines in all men, which is the free gift of God, therfore it is, that men can be so usefull unto one another in the propagation thereof, and the knowledge thereunto appertaining; so that, those in whom this Principle is raised, and come to have its free course and ope∣ration, are only appointed to be usefull unto others, in a ministry, for the rai∣sing up of the same Principle in them, and turning them towards it: most per∣tinently therfor doth the Apostle, according to the Wisdome given him of God, hold forth this universall Principle, of the Grace of God, which hath appeared unto all men bringing salvation, as the cause why Titus should exhort all, unto those things, which did pertaine unto Godlines. Now, this place of Scripture is such a plaine proof, of this blessed truth, that a plainer cannot be desired, and yet our adversaries goe about, to cast a mist of darknes over it, by their old corrupt glosse, that by [all] here is again meant, not, Singulagenerum, but Genera singulorum, i. e. not all particulars, but some of all sorts. Which is so frequently before refuted, that I need say the lesse here. But doe they think so to baffle the understanding of people, that they must take their meaning all along, of such plaine and full scripture proofs only becaus they say it, and that it crosses their private and narrow spirit. This acceptation of the word [all and every] given by them, is but improper, and sel∣dom used in Scripture, in respect of the many times, it is used, in an univer∣sall fence, and shall wee therefor passe from the proper, and more usuall sence of the word, becaus of their bare affirmation? Indeed they have but too long Lorded it over the consciences and understandings of people, to get them to beleeve any thing for truth, if they have but said it, but now an Eye is ope∣ning among many, and will open yet more abundantly, to see their naked∣nes, and not any more to take things upon trust from them, as they have done. And truly, it is the singular providence of God, that in all these places, which hold forth this universall gift of God, there is abundant matter, in the very words, or before or after, to evince the truth, and overturne their false and unsound glosse therabout; as there is also here, for now the Apostle bids teach and exhort, not only some of all sorts, but all, not some aged Men & Women, yong Men, yong Women, and Servants, but ALL, among whom hee lived, and to whom hee had opportunity, and this is the Reason he gives, for the grace of God hath appeared unto all; Teach, instruct, exhort ALL, even all particulars, becaus the grace of God hath appeared unto ALL, and
a litle after, in the next Chapter, vers. 4. 5. hee giveth the originall cause and spring, from whence this universall gift did slow upon all men, even the kind∣nes and love of God towards man, , whch signifieth the love of God towards Mankind, in the generall, which comprehends all particulars without exception of any, as even the terme [Man] doth generally signifie in scripture, and therefor as the Lord had appeared in love and kindnes to∣wards all men, hee wisheth them, herein to be like unto their Heavenly Fa∣ther, to be gentle shewing all meeknes unto all men, that is not to some of all sorts, but to all particulars, vers. 2. Againe, This doth overturne their glosse, that in all, even all particulars, there is such a principle to be found, which teacheth to deny the lusts of the world, and to live soberly and righteously, and the same which teacheth to deny the world∣ly lusts, saith the Apostle teacheth to deny ungodlines, and the same, which teacheth to live soberly and righteously, hee saith teacheth to live Godly, and hee doth not tell us of a naturall light, which can teach to live soberly and righteously, but of the grace of God, and which is such a Grace, that it bringeth salvation with it, according then to the Apostle, it is the very saving, or salutiferous Grace of God, which teacheth to deny the lusts of the world, and to live so∣berly and righteously, and such a principle I say is to be found in all men, and our Adversaries themselvs confesse, that there is an universall Principle in all men, teaching sobriety and righteousnes betwixt men and men, but they will not acknowledge that it teacheth or can teach Godlines, or to deny ungodlines, wheras the Apostle holdeth forth the same, which teacheth the one, to be that which teacheth the other. Now, if it be objected, Then why are not the things pertaining unto Godlines, as universally knowne as the things pertaining un∣to temperance, and righteousnes, among men. I answer, becaus the principle it selfe is not so improved, as it should be, yet there is no man, but it teacheth them somewhat of God, and Godlines, and revealeth in them from heaven, the wrath of God, in some measure, not only against all unrighteousnes, but all ungod∣lines also, as it is Rom. 1. 18. So that, they are without excuse, who have not the knowledge of God and Godlines, for what might be knowne of God was manifest in them. And that most men are so ignorant of the knowledge of God and Godlines doth not inferre that there is no Principle in them, which can or would give it, wer it improved, but this is the matter, they hide their Ta∣lent in the earth, and doe not improve it, and put their Candle under a bush∣ell; and so its no wonder that they doe not see, or know, what otherwise they might, if they did not imprison this light of truth in themselvs, and yet they cannot so imprison it, but it shines forth to give them some discoveries of things, to render them inexcusable. Now, some things lye more near and obvious, and are discerned with a lesse degree of light others are more re∣mote, and lye deeper, and so require a further degree of light to reach unto them, and yet the light in the nature of it, is one and the same, and thus the things pertaining immediatly to the worship of God, as to the true way and
manner of it, are more remote and profound, then those which pertaine unto common equity and moderation among men. Agreeable here unto, is that Scripture, 1. Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of the spirit is given unto every man to profit with all, which profit is to be understood in an inward and spirituall sence, Viz. unto the salvation of his soule, otherwise what can it profit him, to gaine the whole world, and loose his soule; And if it be said, that by every man, here is to be understood every man, within the Church, but not every one both within and without also. I answer, the Apostle doth not so Li∣mit it and wher hee doth not limit wee are not to limit neither. And besides it is evident, that it is to be understood, not onely of every one, within the Church, for that the manifestation of the Spirit must be given them, to lead in∣to the Church, who were once out of it, and are now brought into it, for who are now in the Church, were once out of it, in the world. Now, they needed a Light or manifestation of the Spirit, when they were in the world, to let them see the misery they were in, and to light and direct them unto the true Church, to be as it were a light unto their feet, and a lanterne unto their path, in their travell betwixt the world and the Church, the Kingdome of darknes, in which all men, are by Nature, and the Kingdome of Gods dear Son; and to this the Light which appeared, unto the Israelits in Egypt was a Type, before they came into the promised land, the light was given them of God, which di∣rected them the way, from Egypt to Canaan, through the wildernes, and so the Lord has given a light to the people who sat in darknes, and are in spirituall Egypt, to direct and lead them unto the spirituall Canaan, and that not to Iewes only, but to Gentiles also, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his people Israell. Therfore the Lord is said to give light unto them that sit in darknes, and in the shadow of death, Luk. 1. 79. Now, who are these, who sit in darknes, and in the shadow of death? Even they who are out of the Church, for they of the true Church are not in darknes, as it is said, 1. Thess. 5. 4. but are delivered from the power of it, as Col. 1. 13. Argument 8. From a Collation of divers Scriptures, which hold forth the In-being of the Heavenly Gift in Men, before they be∣leeved, as Eph. 3. 8. Col. 1. 27. and 23. and 28. 1. Tim. 3. 16. Gal. 3. 1. 1. Cor. 2. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 5. 19. Acts. 17. 27. 28. Luc. 17. 21. 1. Ioh. 5. 10. 11. Acts. 26. 18. 23. Ioh. 16. 7. 2. Cor. 13. 5. THE great obstruction, that is in the way, unto many, that they doe not acknowledge this Heavenly Gift to be universall, is, becaus they doe not conceive, How it can be in Unbeleevers, and in them who are not con∣verted;
Now, here are divers Scriptures, which in a most excellent harmony, bear a testimony hereunto, most of them also holding forth the thing universally. As Eph. 3. 8. Unto me, said Paul, who am lesse then the least of all Saints is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the un∣searchable riches of Christ; but according to the Greek it is thus, That I should preach, the unsearchable riches of Christ in the Gentiles; Now, when Paul first preached unto the Gentiles, they were not Beleevers, and yet hee preached the unsearchable riches of Christ in them, hee told of the mony that would make them rich forever, that it was in themselvs, to be found in their owne house, as the parable declares, of the lost peece of mony. Coloss. 1. 27. To whom God would make knowne what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ, in you the hope of Glory, whom wee preach, warning every man, and teaching every man, &c. But according to the Greek, it is thus, Which is the riches of the glory of this mystery in the Gentiles, which is Christ, in you the hope of glory, so that Christ was in the Gentiles both Beleevers and Unbeleevers, but in Beleevers, hee was the hope of glory, i. e. gave them hope, but in the Unbe∣leevers, he was the mystery hid, as the piece of mony, or treasure that is hid in the house or field, according to which Paul saith, vers. 23. That the Gospell was preached in every creature (for so it is in the Greek) i. e. in every man. Now, this was it, that the Apostle preached, Viz. Christ, warning every man, and teaching every man, and he preached him, not afarre off, but near, even so near, as in them, the riches of the Glory of the mystery in them, which is Christ. 1. Tim. 3. 16. And without controversie great is the mystery of Godlines, God was manifest in the flesh justified in the spirit, seene of Angels, preached in the Gen∣tiles, for so it is in the Greeke, so when the Apostles preached Christ first unto the Gentiles, they preached him, in them, yea and hee preached himselfe in them, so that al had heard, but all had not obeyed the Gospell, as is above shewed on Rom. 10. Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Galathians, who hath bewitched you, that yee should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Iesus Christ bath beene evidently set forth crucified among you; But according to the Greek, it is crucified in you, this was in the time of their unbelief, 1. Cor. 2. 1. 2. And I Brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdome, declaring unto you, the testimony of God, for I determined, not to know any thing among you, save Iesus Christ, and him cruci∣fied, but according to the Greek it is thus, not to know any thing IN YOU, save Iesus Christ and him crucified, so Paul preached, a crucified Christ both in Iewes and Gentiles, when hee came among them: which is understood of the seed, which suffered in them, by their unbelief and disobedience, which is the principle in which Christ doth manifest his life and his glory▪ as it comes to rise and spring up, and in so far as IT suffers, HEE is said to suffer, and in so farre as it is crucified, hee is said to be crucified, even, as what that blessed seed and body in the outward suffered is said to be his sufferings. Now that was
it, that Paul laboured and travelled for, when hee came among any people, not to tickle and please their carnall ears with pleasant words, and excellency of speech, but in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit and of power, to reach unto the suffering seed in them, that it might come to be acquainted with it, and with the vertue and power, that is therein, for the salvation of their souls. But some may say what vertue or power, is there unto salvation, in that which is crucified? Unto this Paul answers, 1. Cor. 1. 22. 23. 24. 25. For the Iewes require a signe, and the Greeks, or Gentiles, seek after wisdome, But wee preach Christ crucified, unto the Iewes a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishnes, but unto them who are called both Iewes and Greeks, Christ, the power of God, and the wisdome of God, becaus the foolishnes of God is wiser then men, and the weaknes of God is stronger then men. So that, Christ, even inwardly crucified, is both the wisdome of God, and the power of God, unto them who beleeve, though in a weak and foolish appearance, to that eye which is but naturall, and there∣for is called the foolishnes of God, and the weaknes of God, but which is wiser and stronger then men, and thus it hath pleased the Lord to send his Son into the world, both in the outward, and inward, in a low and weak appearance, that hee might shew forth the more abundant glory, in that which was so low and weak in appearance, to prevail over the greatest power that stood in his way, for thus doth the seed of the woman bruise the serpents head. 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himselfe, not impu∣ting their trespasses unto them, and hath committed unto us the word of reconcilia∣tion, but according to the Greek, it is, and hath put in us the word of reconcilia∣tion, which is understood not only in relation to the Saints, but even the world, for it is said, God was in Christ reconciling, the world unto himselfe, wheras the Saints are reconciled through this Word already, but the world is not, yet the word is put in them, wherby they may be reconciled, therefor its said God was in Christ reconciling the world, but of the Saints it is said, vers. 18. all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himselfe, so then they are reconciled. Now say our adversaries▪ these and such places, are to be translated among or unto, for  doth signifie so at somtimes; Answer, though  doth somtimes signifie [among, or unto,] yet the most proper and usuall signification of it, is [in,] Now wee are alwayes to take the most proper and usuall signification of the word, where no cogent reason movs to the contrary, as none doeth here, whatever they pretend, yea the very intent and scope of the places doe prove, that it is to be translated [in,] and so to be understood, for Christ was not crucified outwardly, either among the Galathians, or Corinthians, and the Riches of Christ, that Paul told the Gentiles of, was not any outward thing, which they were to find outwardly, nor did he bid them goe any where with∣out to find these Riches, but preached God and Christ, and the King∣dome, and the Word near, even in themselvs. Acts. 17. 26. 27. 28. God hath made the world, & all things therein, &c. hath made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath deter∣mined
the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him, though hee be not far from every one of us, for in him, wee live, and move, and have our being, as certaine also of your owne Poets have said, for wee are also his off spring. Now by this speech hee calleth off the Athenians from seeking to find the Lord or to worship him, in Temples made with hands, or images of gold and silver, to seek and find the Lord, in themselvs, as being the off spring of God, in which, hee insinuats that near relation, which all men have unto God, which is nearer, then that of the visible Creatures, who are the Creatures of God, but not his offspring; whereas men, are not only the Creatures, but the offspring of God, forasmuch as man was made after the image of God, which was put in him, in which he was to know and find the Lord, and feel after, and worship him. But now, through the fall, it is true, this Heavenly and Divine image of God in man, is staine, yet the Lord is more to be felt, and found in this slaine image of him∣selfe in man, becaus of the breathings of his life therein, then in all images that men can grave, or in any of the visible Creatures, yea this is the Tabernacle of David, that is fallen downe, which the Lord cometh to raise up in every man, and will certainly raise it up in every one, for a Temple for himselfe to manifest, his eternall love and mercy in, unto them, who beleeve, but his eter∣nall wrath and displeasure in them, who remaine in unbeleef: and so, in regard of this near relation, which every man hath unto God, that hee is his off∣spring, through his image, which is in him, though it doth not live in every one, (even as a dead Child, is the offspring of his Father, though hee bear not his living image,) thus the Apostle doth preach God near unto the Athenians, even so near that they might feel after him, and find him, to wit, in his owne image in them, which though crucified and slaine in them, yet, as is said, there is more of God to be knowne and felt, even therein, then in Temples made with mans bands, gold and solver, graven by art and mans device, or in any visible creature, so that it is great ignorance, in them who affirm, that the Apostle is here onely holding forth, that knowledge of God, which the Athe∣nians might gather simply from the creatures without them; for of these crea∣tures, it cannot be said, they are the offspring of God, but of men, it is said, they are his offspring. Now God is more to be knowne in his offspring, that in these creatures, which are not his offspring, in so much that men may feel after God, whose offspring they are; But say they, God is a spirit, and can∣not properly be felt. To which I say, as bee is in himselfe simply, hee cannot be felt, but as hee is, in his expressed image or word, hee may, to wit, in his owne seed wherby the Saints have a most precious feeling, and tasting of his love, goodnes, and mercy, and the Wicked, when hee pleaseth to touch them, have a most sharp & peircing feeling of his wrath and indignation against them, yet qualified with the mercy of God, so long as the day of their visitation re∣mains, through which, they may seek him and find him, unto the salvation of their soules.
Luke. 17. 21. Neither shall they say lo here, or lo there, for behold, the King∣dome of God is within you. This Christ spoke to the very Pharisees, who were unbeleevers, and so is such a plaine proof as a plainer could not be desired, yet our adversaries goe about to darken it with their corrupt glosse, saying, By the Kingdome of God is means the reaching or declaration of the Kingdome, and the words [within you] may be translated [among you,] Answer. This glosse cannot hold, 1. Becaus no where in all the Scripture, can it be demonstrated, that by [the Kingdome of God] is to be understood, the externall declaration or preach∣ing of the Kingdome; They may alledge some places, but to the spirituall mind it will appear, that they are not so to be understood. 2, Becaus the Pharisees did not question him, of the Kingdome of God, in relation to this understanding of it, as if they had said to him, when shall the preaching of the Kingdome of God come? for they knew, that was come already, forasmuch as they did daily hear Christ, and the Disciples preach of the Kingdome of God, for this was it, that they preached, as the maine thing, and hee gave his Dis∣ciples charge mostly concerning this, that they should preach the Kingdome of God, as near at hand, and come, and yet more abundantly coming, and this Kingdome, was also mostly the subject, or theame of Christs owne preach∣ing, which for most part hee held forth under Parables and figures, in great plenty, which gave occasion to the Pharisees, to have many thoughts of the Kingdome of God; as also becaus the Prophets had spoke great things of this Kingdome of God, the Iewes and Pharisees were in great expectation of it, and conceived it to be some very great and glorious earthly and outward Kingdome, that they should enjoy under the Messiah, which should come with great ob∣servation, and outward shew, and even the Disciples themselvs had some such apprehensions of this Nature, till their understandings were further opened. Now Christ here, doth plainly declare, that the Kingdome of God, was not such a thing, as they understood, nor to come in such away as they expected, who looked for it to come without, in some great outward appearance, but hee pointed them inwards unto it in themselvs. That it was to come from within, and not from without. That it was to spring up from a seed which was sowne in their hearts, and according to the coming up, and raising, and appearing, and growth of this seed in mens hearts, so should the Kingdome of God come, arise, appear, and be made manifest, and so these who waited for it outward∣ly, were disappointed, but who waited for it inwardly, and sought after it in the divine seed of regeneration came to find it, and be partakers thereof, therefor Christ taught plainly that the way for people to find the Kingdome, and to enter into it, was by being borne againe of that divine seed, and not by going abroad after them, who cry lo here, or lo there, for the Kingdome of God, said hee, cometh not with observation, or outward shew, neither shall they say lo here, or lo there, for behold the Kingdome of God is within you: And wheras they say, the words may be translated among you; I say, the words most pro∣perly signifie within you, as they are rendred in our English translation, now
wee are to keep to the most proper signification, wher no cogent reason movs to the contrary, as here none doth; but leads indeed to understand them in you. For this Kingdome being an inward and invisible thing, and not of this world, but of heaven, it can no wayes be understood to be among people, but in so farre as it is in them, the hearts and spirits of men, being the proper place of this Kingdome, even as the Kingdome of darknes, and of Sathan, is within, and hath its place inwardly in men, so the Kingdome of Gods dear Son, that is con∣trary thereunto, is within also, and through the destruction of the one, cometh the other to be built up. But say they, wee can not conceive how the Kingdome of God it selfe, which is righteousnes, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, can be within Unbeleevers. Answer, It can not be within them, as sprung up, and arisen, in the power and glory of it, but it can be with in them, in a seed, and thus the seed of the Kingdome was in them, which seed, Christ calleth the King∣dome of God, very frequently, and held it forth much under the figure of a seed, The Kingdome of Heaven said he (Math. 13. 31.) is like unto a graine of must∣ard seed, which a man tooke and sowed in his field, which is indeed the least of all seeds, &c. Now it is very fitly called the Kingdome of God, becaus it hath in it, what ever is in the universall Kingdome of God, incorporated, and is a most rich and pure extraction thereof, containing therein a measure of all the powers, virtues, spirits, qualities, and properties, of the whole universall Kingdome, which as it springeth up, and attaineth unto its due stature in man, it doth bring forth and manifest in most wonderfull and excellent variety, but of this seed, and the figures and parables under which it is represented more afterwards: Now when it is said, The Kingdome of God is righteousnes, peace, and joy, &c. this is to be understood of the Kingdome, as it is sprung up, from a seed, bearing its heavenly fruit, which is righteousnes, peace, and joy, &c. which wee acknowledge cannot be in Unbeleevers, but the seed may be in them, yea, no man who is an Unbeleever, can become a Beleever, but through this seed, which is sowne in him, when hee is an Unbeleever, & thereby hee becoms a Beleever, as hee doth joine to it, & cleave unto the appearance of God therein. 1. Joh. 5. 10. 11. Hee that beleeveth on the Son of God hath the witnes in himselfe, hee that beleeveth not God, hath made him a lyar, becaus hee beleeveth not the record, that God gave of his Son, and this is the record, that God hath given to us eternall life, and this life is in his Son. Now what (US) is this, to whom God hah given eternall life? Surely both hee who beleevs, and hee who be∣leevs not, for thus hee who beleevs, bears a true witnesse and testimony unto the record of God, holding forth that eternall life which is given him, in a true beleef thereof, and confession thereunto, in word and deed: but the Un∣beleever is a lyar, and why so? becaus that God has given him eternall life, but his unbeleeving heart saith No, hee hath not given it unto me. As now, if I should give a thing unto a man, to make use of, and hee burieth it in some place, and denyeth that hee ever had such a thing from me, hee would be a lyar, so the Unbeleever, by his unbeleef denying the gift of God, which
is given unto him, hee lyeth. But now, if this gift which is eternall life, had ne∣ver beene given unto him, hee could not be called a lyar, for to lye is to deny that which is true, therefor it is true that God hath given him eternall life, viz. in the seed▪ which would have brought forth life in him, had hee beleeved, And thus the slothfull servant who hid his masters mony in the earth, was a lyar, in that hee said, his Lord was a hard Master, and that what hee had given him, was not sufficient enough, & so did not beleeve the record, viz. that God had given him eternall life. Acts. 26. 18. 23. Paul saith he was sent of God to turne the Gentiles from darknes unto light, even unto Christ, who lighteth every man that cometh into the world. whom Paul here preached, that hee did suffer and rise from the dead, and did shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles, and yet when Paul first came unto them, they were in unbeleef and darknes; Now it is great ignorance and darknes for man to say, that this light, which Paul turned them unto was not within them, for they might as well say, that the darknes and power of Sathan, from which he was to turn them to God, was not in them, and seeing hee turned them to God, sure it was that they might find him, and his light and li in them, for wee cannot find God, to the salvation of our souls, but in our selvs, becaus the light which gives the knowledge of the glory of God shines in the heart, 2. Cor. 4. 6. And wee never find that Paul directed the Gentiles to seek God, on his light, otherwise then a near, even in their hearts; Morover out adversaries confesse, that which is meerly outward, is not sufficient unto salvation; Hence I thus argue, The Apostle was to turne them to that which was sufficient unto salvation; Therfor it was the light, which is of a saving nature, that was in them, the consequence is plaine from our adversaries confession aforsaid, that nothing meerly otward is sufficient unto salvation, the Antecedent is proved, from this, that he turned them to that, wherby their eves might be opened, and they niight receive forgivenes of sins, &c. Againe the Apostles wer able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit, and so they directed people unto that which was sufficient for salvation, they both ministred from the spirit in themselvs, and directed the people, to whom they preached unto a measure of the same spi∣rit, and to the light and life thereof in themselvs. Joh. 16. 7. I will send the comforter unto you, and when hee is come, hee will re∣prove the world of sin, of righteousnes, and of judgement, of sin becaus they beleev∣ed not in me, &c. This answereth unto what is said immediately above, as the Apostles did preach from the Spirit of God, and of Christ in themselvs, so they directed the world unto a measure of the same spirit in themselvs, which was given to the end their ministry might prevaile in the world, for had not the spirit beene given to convince the world, and bear testimony unto the truth pu∣blished by the Apostles, they could have had no encouragement to preach, but this was their encouragement, that the spirit was sent into the world, wher∣by the whole world should be convinced, and so either saved, or left without excuse. Now it is very observable that hee saith, hee shall reprove the world of
sin, becaus they beleeved not in Christ, wherby it is manifest, that the great sin of the world is unbeleef, for which it is reproved; But if the world be re∣proved for that they did not beleeve in Christ, then certainly they ought to have beleeved in him, and if they ought to have beleeved in him, hee hath beene given and held forth unto them, in such a way as was sufficient unto salvation, for no man can be bound to beleeve in that which coms not in a sufficient way, and under what smaller terms, could hee be held forth unto them, then as ma∣king salvation possible unto them, which yet is only possible through an in∣ward principle. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Know yee not your owne selvs, how that Christ is in you, unles yee be reprobats. This Scripture holds forth that Christ is in all men, unto salvation, who are not Reprobats, Now none are simply Reprobats, but whose day of vi∣sitation is past, and their house left desolate, its true the state of unbeleef, and impenitence is a state of of reprobation, and so those who are in it, may be said, Secundum quid; or in so farre to be reprobate, but none are, or can be said to be simply Reprobats, but who remaine in unbeleef, and impeniten∣cy after their day of visitation is expired, for while their Day remains, in which salvation is possible unto them, and wherin the Lord visits them, and strives with them, for their recovery, they cannot be called simply Repro∣bates, for reprobate, is as much as left or rejected of God, whom the Lord hath ceased to deal with in order unto their salvation, yea and even our adver∣saries affirme that all Unbeleevers and unconverted are not reprobated; Hence I thus argue, that therefor at least Christ is in some unbeleevers and uncoverted, becaus hee is in all, who are not Reprobats, and that unto salvation, for other∣wise hee is in the very Reprobats, viz. unto condemnatiom, and yet they deny that Christ is in any unto salvation, who are unbeleevers and unconverted, which is proved against them. Now if people wer convinced, that Christ wer in any unbeleevers and unconverted, unto salvation, this would be a great step, unto their being convinced that hee is in all, unto salvation, within a day or time of visitation given them of God, for that the greatest objection they commonly make, is that Christ is in none, in a saving way, but who beleeve; which is here proved false, for hee is in them, who beleeve not, in a way to save them from unbeleef, as many can witnes, who now beleeve, but were once unbeleevers, and that hee appeared in them, when unbeleevers, and turned them therefrom to beleeve in himself, but many resist the operation of Christ in them, and so remaine in unbeleef.
Argument 8. From a Collation of divers Scriptures in the OldTestament, so called, answering to those above cited, out of the wri∣tings of the Evangelists and Apostles, holding forth the self-same thing, as Deuteronomy 4. 29. 30. Amos 4. 13. Provs 1. 21. 22. 23. Genes. 6. 3. Deut. 30. 14. 32. 43. Job 24. 13. & 28. 12. Psal. 2. 12. & 98. 2. 117. Prov. 8. 1. & 9. 1. & Isai. 49. 6. Deuter. 4. 29. 30. But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him; if thou seek him in all thy heart, and in all thy soule, And if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and hear∣ken in his voice. THE words being thus truly rendered, as they are, word for word, in the Hebrew; do most plainly hold forth, that God is in the wicked and unbeleevers, that have forgot him, days without number, as the Prophet saith, concerning Israel Apostate, of whom Moses spake these words, who had forgotten God and his Covenant; made graven images, and likenesses, worshipping the works of mens hands, and serving other Gods, for which God was provoked to scatter them among the Heathen. Yet, to this people, thus Apostatized from, and punished by God, scattered from God in the heathenish imaginations of their hearts, doth Moses say; If they shall from hence, even from hence, seek the Lord aright, where he is to be found, that is, in their whole heart, and in their whole soule, and turn to him, (which presupposeth his being there, to be turned to) and hearken in his voyce, (which necessarily argues his in-speaking to be hearkned to) they shall surely find him. Is it not hence evident, that the Reason why so many that have sought God, affectionatly, and zealously, without, in their self-Righteous acts, perfor∣mances, Applications of promises, &c. have not found him, is, because they have not sought him where he is, even within? as Augustine the great Antient Father of the Church, so called, lamenteth his mispent time and paines in so seeking; saying, I sought thee, o God, and sound thee not, because I sought thee without, and thou wert within, I was abroad, from thee, and thou wert within me, yea more inwardly within me then my most inward parts. Thus may many a one say now, and smite upon their heart, and turn to the Lord, and seek him in their whole heart, and in their whole soule. Had the Translators been but more inwardly minded, and knowne the manifestation of the spirit of God in their inward parts, to have given them a sence of the mind of the spirit, in the words of Scripture; how might they have been instrumentall to have directed peoples minds where they were to wayt for, & seek and turn to God, as well as to inform them that they must seek him? but they spake, or trans∣lated
according to the misty understanding they had, and so have, by their de∣fective translations, cast a vaile of thick darknes upon the Scriptures in many pla∣ces, as may in due time, God assisting, be shewn at large, where of some instances may be given at the end of this Treatise. The day is now dawned, and the light broken forth, and the vayle of thick darkness that hath been over the Tabernacle of God, is rent and rending, and he hath discovered his habitation, where he will be found, and his Temple where he will be worshipped and honoured, to be, even in the hearts and soules of men and women; where he hath been lost, and how? But by their minds being extroverted, and averted from him, and converted to perishing ob∣jects, that perish with the using, by which the Lord hath been forgotten even days without number, and is become a stranger in the earth, to men and Wom∣en, and they estranged from the life of God, although they live move, & have their being in it; Even in Christ the Word, and Power, and Wisdome of God, which Proverb. 1. 20. 21. 22. 23. Lifteth up her voice in the streets, and crieth in the chief places of concourse, in the openings of the gates of the City, (which is the heart of man, where the throng and press of thoughts pass to and fro) saying; How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and scorners delight in scorning and fooles hate knowledge? What more plain from hence, then that Christ, who is the eternall Word and Wisdome of the Father, lifteth up his voice unto all men? even to the sim∣ple ones that love simplicity, to the Scorners that delight in scorning, to fooles that hate knowledge? and worse cannot be found, unbeleevers, unbeleevers, with a witnesse; and wherefore doth she this? to what purpose? what doth she intend by and in this her visitation and cry unto them? onely to boast her self against them? onely in scorne to upbraid them? onely tauntingly to triumph over them? onely to harden them, that she might destroy them? onely to aggravate their sins, that she might increase their damnation? Nay, Nay, surely Nay, for wisedome, as a certain writer saith, is a holy spirit living, cleare, undesiled, plain, not subject to hurt; loving the thing that is good' ready TO DOE GOOD, AND KIND TO MAN; preventing, them that desire her, in making her self first knowne unto them; that so they may seek her, for unless she prevents all mankind first, and cals unto them, and makes her self first known unto them; they cannot desire nor seeke her; but when she lifteth up her voice, if they hearken (and then they may) they shall have no great travell (saith this Author) for they shall find her sitting at their DOORES, to think upon her, saith he, is perfection of wisedome, for she goeth about, seeking such as are worthy of her, sheweth her self favourably unto them IN THE WAYES and meeteth them IN EVERY THOUGHT: Lo here is a description of wisdome, of THE DOORES, of THE GATES, of THE WAYS, the STREETS in which she lifteth up her voice, and to what end, with what good purpose, intent, and mean∣ing towards man, & this is consonant to the testimony which Solomon him∣self
gives of her; in her calling upon, and crying out to these simple, scornefull fooles, to wit, that they may turn; turn to what? to her, at her reproofs; and to what purpose? that they may grow wise through the out-powrings of the spirit of wisedome upon them. For lo, this is her counsell to them, having reproved them for their folly and expostulated with them about it; Turne you at my re∣proofe, and this is her promise, if they do, Behold I will powre out my spirit (the spirit of wisdome) upon you. And did she give them this Counsell, and not heartily and unfainedly desire that they might receive it? and did she pro∣mise this, and not truly and really intend, and resolve to perform it? what! did she onely mock, onely dissemble, onely pretend a great deale of good will, and intend a great deale of, yea nought elce but, ill-will & destruction? yet thus malicious do the crooked conceits of some men render Wisedome: but I had rather beleeve the Testimony which the Apocrypha givs of wisedome; That she is not subject to hurt, ready to do good, and kind to man, sted fast and sure; the very breath of the power of God, a pure streame flowing from the glory of the Almigh∣ty, into which, therefore, no such defiled thing, as cruelty, or dissimulation can fall. And this I am sure is most agreeing to the Testimony which the Evangelists and Apostles give of Christ; that he came not to do hurt to any, but good to all; not to condemne, primarily, but to save. So let every man mind that which convin∣ceth him of his folly in secret; expostulats with him about it, saying, how long wilt thou love this evill way of thy owne heart? and lovingly adviseth him, kindly woeth him to turn at the Reproofs of instruction, if he intends to get in to the way of life, or witness the out-pourings of the spirit of wisdome upon him. Consonant to this is Amos. 4. 13. Loe he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind (or the spirit) and declareth unto Man what is this thought, &c. The Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name. He that created the spirit (for so the Hebrew word also signifies, and so the Septuagint renders it) the spirit of man, the same upholdeth it to this day, dwelleth within it, in his owne divine seed, and principle; and in it, it is that Man lives, and moves; and hath his being; This is he who sheweth unto Man, unto Man indefinitly, that is to Mankind, to every Man, his thought, what it is, what his heart, soule, mind, & spirit runs out after, and the Lord God of Hosts, saith the Prophet is his Name. Now the thoughts of man are within him, hid from every eye, save that which is so inwardly present every where, that all things are naked and bare before him; and the thoughts being thus within, can not be shewne unto man, but by an inward conviction; even there, where his thoughts are, and he that doth thus convince, man, within, of that which is within, must be within, and there exercise and manifest his convincing power; and every man that cometh into the world, having that in him that thus sheweth him his thoughts (as there is no man that lives that hath it not) and the Prophet asserting that he which doth thus shew unto Man, his thoughts is no other then God
himself, the Lord God of Hosts, who created Man, and his spirit, out of which his thoughts arise (and consequently knoweth them all) It doth most necessarily follow that this God, who searcheth the heart, and tryeth the reines is in every man that cometh into the world; This is so cleare and consequentiall, that no reasonable Man, that conside∣reth it, in an un-prejudicate mind can deny it. But this Doctrine is further confirmed by God himself. 6. Genesis 3. My spirit shall not always strive (judge, plead or contend) in man, for that he is flesh, &c. Thus is it in the Hebrew, and thus it ought to be rendred rather then [with Man]; and it being so, what's more plain from these words of God himself concerning the wicked old world, Then first, that even to this unbeleiving ungodly generation; who by their impenitency had provoked God to repent that ever he had made man, and to resolve now to cut of mankind; He, God, had first given them a day of visitation, in which, he did strive, plead and con∣tend with them, by his spirit in them, before he gave them up to destruction. And secondly (which naturally flowes from this) that that which strives, and judges for God, in Man, and pleads Gods righteous cause with man, in the se∣cret of his heart and conscience, is not, a bare, meere naturall light, as the dark, dreaming Divines of our days do say, which can not save, but onely con∣demne, destroy, and leave without excuse; But is the very salutiferous spirit of God himself which created man; and alone hath power to save or destroy him, as he answereth the long-sufferance and goodness of God, which the Apostle saith leads to Repentance; or despiseth it, and sets it at naught. But as plaine as this Testimony of God himself is in the case; yet because it thwarts the preconceived opinion of these men, and overturns the whole fa∣brick of their Divinity and Analogy of their faith so called; it must not be suf∣fered to passe under a double vayle. First of an ambiguous translation of the words, Secondly of a misty meaning put upon the words so ambiguously translated, on purpose to make way for it. viz. That God did not strive with this ungodly world by his spirit in themselvs, but onely by the ministry and preaching of Noah. And for both these they have their somewhat-to-say. First as to their translation, they say, The Hebrew language is concise, and so by one word in it, many words in other languages are often times ex∣pressed, and that particularly this word by me precisely rendred [in] signifies also with, from, among, by, and sometimes into. Answer. The Hebrew language is not so concise, but that it hath proper words for every one of those English words, and in the Greek and Latin lan∣guages, how copious soever they be, the same Word hath divers significations; yet it follows not but that both in those languages and in the Hebrew, these words have their most naturall and proper signification which must be kept to, unless some weighty Reason requires an other word to be used; so that, as to the traslation, this is First, plaine from their owne concession; that the word
doth signify [in] as well as [with] in the Hebrew language, and so I have as much ground from the Hebrew to render it [in] as they can have to render it [with]; And Secondly I do assert (and any man that is but a little skild in the Hebrew Grammar knows, that [in] is the very proper, & most naturall signification of the word, and consequently if the sence doth not command another word to be used, (as it doth not here) in, is to be kept to: although [with] be as good grammaticall sence, and as proper a word (if it were not ambiguous) to ex∣press the mind of the spirit of God by in this place, for when the Lord striveth in any man by his spirit, he striveth with him; But becaus [with] seems to leave some scope for their gloomy glosse, That God onely strove with them out∣wardly, therefore [in] which puts it out of all controversy, that the spirit of God strove with them, in themselvs, is to be kept to; [in] being as much the proper signification of [] in Hebrew: as it is of [] in Greeke or of [in] in Latin when the sence doth not necessarily require another word; And thus the Sep∣tuagint, The Vulgar and Interlineary Versions (whose opinions in Religion did not sway their judgments in Translating) have rendred it, and thus much for the translation. Now as to their glosse, that God onely strove with them by the ministry of Noah, who is called a Preacher of righteousnes. I answer; that granting them that their Ambiguous translation, which is calcu∣lated to accommodate this their misty meaning; yet it dothnot follow, that the words must be understood of any outward striving with man, by outward preach∣ing to them; but may be still understood of that inward striving of the spirit of God, by which God did strive with them, to convert them, that they might not be destroyed, but saved; much lesse doth it speake of a bare outward striving: for though we grant, and deny not, but that God did outwardly, as it were, strive with them by Noah a Preacher of righteousnes in his day; and hath in all ages, and at this day doth so strive with the wicked, by the Preachers of righ∣teousnes, of his sending forth, who preach in, and by, and from the imme∣diate Revelation, motion, and guidance of the spirit of God, whence it may be said that the sirit of God, in his Ministers, strives with them, because they preach from, and in the demonstration of the spirit & power, yet this secludes not this striving with them also, by his spirit in themselvs. Without which, all outward preaching, is unsufficient to conversion, according to the Doctrine of these gloomy glossers themselvs, in favour and honour of whose soule-merchandizing trade this translation, and interpretation is framed; But alas! what is the Chaff to the wheat? What the Ministers of unrighteousnes to the Preachers of righteousnes? how much so ever transformed to the deceiving of many simple ones as the Mi∣nisters of righteousnes? what are the quaint Orations of these Academick Oratorian hirelings, to the immediate ministry of the spirit of God, in, and through his Ser∣vants? these are they, and they alone by whom God works his good pleasure, and no self-running hireling hath any part or portion in this ministry, or service.
If then we prove that this striving of the spirit of God with them, was in order to their conversion, and seriously and uprightly so intended on Gods part; then it will necessarily follow, from these mens owne Doctrine, that God must also have strove inwardly with them, by his spirit in them, as well as outwardly, by his spirit in Noah; For all such outward striving, is, even according to them, insufficient to effect or procure the salvation or conversion of one man, and Reason shews that the Wisedome and Iustice of God, requires that he must needs use meanes, at least sufficient on his part, for the effecting, of what he real∣ly intended, and not onely feignedly pretended, That God then really intended the Good, the Conversion, the Repentance, and saving of these men, I prove from the Testimony of Peter 1. 3. 20. where he saith, the long suffering of God waited upon these disobedient men in the dayes of Noah; and that Christ, then, by the spirit, preached unto them, which is no more then what God himself here presupposeth, when he saith, his spirit shall no longer strive in them, which I say, presupposeth that it had strove with them, and wayted upon them, and if so, for what did it strive with them? was it that they might be converted, and become righteous, or that they might grow more wicked? Surely nay, the pure spirit of God, strives neither outwardly nor inwardly with any to make them more wicked, but to bring them out of their wicked ways; 'tis the wicked spirit of Satan, that strives to bring forth such effects, and naturally doth; where the spirit of God, being long resisted, doth but once cease to strive The long sufferance of God, saith the Apostle, waited. What waited it for? He that waits doth earnestly expect, and hope for some thing as the issue of his wayting? Now what was it God hoped to effect by his long sufferance? their conversion from their evill to himself that they might be saved, or their confirmation and obduration in sin that they might be damned? This would not to be wayt, to beare with long-sufferance, to strive, that he might spare them, and not finally cut them of, (which God was loath to do;) but to watch for their haltings, to lye upon the catch with them, to insnare them, to pretend one thing, and intend another towards them, by sending Noah amongst them to aggravate their condemnation; Oh! for shame away with these blasphemous conceits of the mercyfull and true God; But I know, rather then yee will yield to the truth, ye will assert those horrid, cruel hypocriticall con∣ceits concerning the holy God, which if any man should but suggest, concer∣ning any of your selvs, yee would with indignation, flee in his face. But if it be as yee will have it, right or wrong, that God, from the beginning, onely intended, their temporall and eternall perdition and damnation. What need∣ed he have wayted for that? what need of striving and labouring for occasion against them? had not one sin, by them committed, been ground enough for him to have taken the forfeit? if that were it he onely eyed? yea according to your owne desperate Doctrine, the one sin of Adam alone; although they had never committed any in their owne persons, had been enough: What need then all this wayting, striving, sending of Noah to them, &c? When will
yee cease this senceles prattle? when will yee leave accusing God to Man? and heightening the enmity between God and Man? when will you learne to think well, and speak the thing that is right concerning the righteous God; to unrighteous Men? that they may be perswaded to imbrace the word of Reconci∣liation, which God hath put in them, that in and by it, they may be reconci∣led to him? But who sees not that your interest (as hirelings) lyes on the other side the way? You and your work are seen, yee boast your selvs to be the Mi∣nisters of Christ, and of the Gospell; but of Antichrist yee are, and the Anti-Gospell of evill tydings to poore mankind yee preach; and not good will to men on earth. Your work is to dethrone Christ, and enthrone your selvs in the hearts and consciences of men and women, by keeping them under a necessity of your ministry, and from the immediate ministration of the pure Iudgements of God, from his spirit and witnes in their inward parts; therefore, is the Lord disco∣vering your nakednes, and laying open your shame, dethroning you, and re-in∣throning himself, recovering his Iudgment seat, Authority, and Dominion; & his slain witnes, is he raising up again, & power hath he given unto it, more than in the days of old, to judge the inhabitants of the earth; Thousands have already bowed to his Scepter, and ten thousands submitted to its Iudgment, and have there-through, in their measures, known Redemption, and witnessed cleansing, and under his Banner are they travelling on, untill Iudgment be brought forth into perfect Victory: and your Authority Esteem, and Dignity is falne and fal∣ling, and shall fall, before the Iudgment of the spirit of God; in every heart and conscience, in every Nation, Kindred, and Tongue, that submiteth to the Judg∣ment of God. This is it of which David in the spirit prophesyed, Psalms. 9. 97. and 98. saying, The Lord hath prepared his Throne for Iudgment, & shall judge the world in Righteousnes, and minister Iudgment to the people in righteousnes. He cometh, behold he cometh to judge the earth: the world he shall judge with righteousnes, and the people with truth and equity. This is the everlasting Gospell, which the An∣gell, whom Iohn saw fly through the midst of heaven, had to preach to them that dwell on the earth, even to every Nation, Kindred, and Tongue, saying with aloud voice, Feare God, and give glory to him, for the houre of his Iudgment is come. Which is now fullfilled, and fullfilling, and therfore is Babylon falne and falling in Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, even so, oh Lord, let her and hir Merchants fall never more to rise. Amen. Deuteronomy 30. 14. But the Word is nigh unto thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart that thou mayst do it. These words are to be understood of the Word of Faith, which is Christ, as Paul doth expound and apply it, both to the Jew and Gentile, Rom. 10. as is above shewed. Now these words [that thou mayst do it] are very observa∣ble, as holding forth an ability or Power given them, in the Word, as it is received, by faith, wherby they may do whatever it commands, and conse∣quently, that it is sufficient unto salvation, see Argum. 6. where this place is at large opened.
Deuteronomy. 32. vers. 43. compared with Rom. 15. vers. 10. &c. Rejoice O yee Nations (or Gentiles) with his People, &c. and why should the Nations re∣joice with his people? even becaus they had the same mercy of God, as to what was the maine and substantiall thing, bestowed upon them, Paul in his Epistle to the Romans cap. 15. vers. 10. takes notice of these words of Moses, and makes use of them to shew, that the Gentiles were not so cast off of God, but that they had the same mercy, as had the Iewes, in relation unto the chiefe and substantiall thing, as he expresly saith vers. 9. Let the Gentiles glorify God for his mercy; and this hee confirmeth out of the Psalmes, Moses, and Isaiah, out of the Psalmes, hee bringeth these Testimonies, first, Psal. 18. 49. For this cause I will confesse to thee among the Gentiles (but in the Gentiles it is in the Hebrew and Greek) and sing unto thy name, so that the Lord was among and in the Gentiles, and had a Name in and among them, which was a Name of mercy. The second Testimony is from Psal. 117. O praise the Lord all yee Na∣tions, praise him al yee people, for his mercifull kindnes is great towards us, and the truth of the Lord endureth forever, praise yee the Lord. Now, what [us] is this to whom his mercifull kindnes is great? even the Nations and Gentiles, & that all of them, no lesse then to the Jewes, who are also in this Psalme called to praise the Lord, becaus of the mercy bestowed upon them, and becaus of the truth which endureth forever. And that the Mercy in these places aformentioned, is Christ himselfe, without which nothing is a mercy, is plaine, both from the intent and scope of the Apostles words, who is speaking of Christ, and also from the other citation out of Isaiah. 11. 10. There shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand for an ensigne of the people, and hee that shall rise to reigne over the Gen∣tiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust, which Scriptures as they hold forth the more abundant manifestation of Christ unto the Gentiles, after his coming in the flesh, so doe they point unto some manifestation of him, in and among the Gentiles in all ages, sufficient unto salvation, for that Moses in his day, and David in his, required the Nations, even all of them, to glorifie God with the Iewes, for his mercy, the Riches of the glory of this mistery in the Gentiles, which is Christ, as is above declared. Iob. 24. 13. They are of those that rebell against the light, they know not the wayes thereof, nor abide in the pathes thereof. This, Job spake of the wicked and oppressors; Now, what light is this, that they rebelled against but the light of Gods holy Spirit? Which witnessed against their evill deeds? For that it was not the light of mans owne corrupt nature is manifest, becaus its said, they know not the wayes thereof, wheras the wayes of the naturall light or understand∣ing they did know, for wicked men, can digg deep in that naturall light, and find out the pathes thereof, but the pathes of this Divine and Supernaturall light they cannot find out. Job. 28. vers. 12. compared with vers. 28. But wher shall wisdome be found, and wher is the place of understanding? This is answered, First Negatively, The depth saith, it is not in me, and the sea saith, it is not with me, &c. Secondly
Positively; And unto Man he said, behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is understanding. That is to say, that which enclineth the heart to fear the Lord, and to depart from evil, is Wisdom and Understanding. Now, what Man is this to whom God hath so said? was it only unto Iob? surely none will say it. Or was it only unto the Iews? nor can this with Truth be said. For Iob neither lived among the Jews, nor was he of the Jewish Nation; Was it then only unto some particulars of the Gentiles? Neither can this be said; for, there is no place of Scripture that calls only a few Gentiles, by that large indefinite Name [Man] By [Man] then we must understand Mankind, as comprehending every Individual and particular man in the World, as it is most usually taken in the Scri∣pture. Parralel to this place is Micah. 6. 8. He hath shewed unto thee O man what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. This is more then the Light of Nature can shew. Psalm 2. 12. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish, from the way; when his wroth is kindled but a little, &c. This is a most sweet and joyful call unto the Gentiles, no less then to the Iews; even to these who were combining against the Lord and his anointed, or Christ. Now that they are bid to kiss the Son, doth plainly import that the Son was held forth, and given unto them of the Father in true love, that they might kiss him, i. e. that they might enjoy him, which doth again inferre that there was such a manifestation of the Son let forth into them, which was sufficient unto salvation, elce, how could they be required to kiss him, if he were not offered and made manifest un∣to them? and how could he be offered unto the Gentiles, to kiss him, if it were impossible for them so to do? this were contrary to that righteousness and sincerity that is in God; so that in these Words, is plainly held forth a day or time of visitation, wherein it was possible for them to be saved and escape the wrath of God; Kiss the Son, least he be angry and ye perish from the way. Psalm 50. 1. The mighty God, or the God of Gods even the Lord hath spoken, and called the Earth from the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof. This is an universal call unto all Nations.
Psalm 98. 2. The Lord hath made known his salvation, his righ∣teousness hath he openly shewed, (or revealed) in the sight of the Hea∣thens. Now, what was this but the Gospel, in which (as said Paul) the Righteousness of God is revealed? &c. And Christ in Scriptureis called the salvation of God, which was, in some measure, made known, or manifest, in them; though not as to the outward Name, yet, the power, light and life, thereby signified, was made mani∣fest in them. Proverb. 8. 1. Doth not Wisdom cry, and understanding put forth her voice? vers. 4. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the Sons of men. verse 5. O ye simple, understand Wisdom, and ye fools (for to these she also calleth, none excepted) be ye of an understanding heart. verse 6. Hear, give Ear, or hearken (there, in the heart) for I will speak of excellent things. And verse 31. She tells us, she rejoiceth in the habitable part of Gods earth, yea, that her delights are with the Sons of men. Who, of all the Creatures, alone, are created capable of her inhabitation, cohabitation, fellowship and Communion in the Spirit. And therefore unto them alone she speaketh on this wise. Verse 32. Hearken unto me, O ye Children, for blessed are they that keep my ways. Verse. 34. Blessed is the man, that heareth me: watching daily at my gates, waiting at the ports of my doors. Why so? what shall he reap thereby? doth thy appearance, Wisdom, in and unto the Sons of Men, even to fools and simple ones, tend to their blessedness, to bring them to a blessed State? Yes. Verse 25. for who so findeth me, findeth life (life indeed, life eternal) and shall ob∣tain favour of the Lord. But he that sinneth against me (that doth not love and receive me, but rejecteth my instruction) wrongeth his own Soul: all they that hate me (which none can be said to do to whom she hath never appeared, seeking their love) love death. What can be spoken more plain to the holding forth a day of visitation for good, not watching only for evil (as some Apostles of darkness speak) to the Sons of men indefinitly! Tantamount to this is, Proverb. 9. 1. 4. Wisdom hath builded, her house: she hath hewen out her seven pillars. She crieth, who so is simple, let him turn in hither; turn in! whither? to whom? to what? let him turn in (saith wis∣dom) hither, to me, who am within, cry within, call within,
lift up my voice within. Therefore to the simple she saith, let him turn in hither, and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, &c. What! doth wisdom appear, speak to, visit such? Yes, she doth if we may believe her. Who is then, this man that wanteth under∣standing? is he a Saint or a Sinner? a believer or unbeliever? a Rege∣nerate or unregenerate one? I think none will be so sottish as to say that the Saints, the Believers, the Regenerate, are these fooles, that are void of understanding: It necessarily follows then that they are the unconverted, the unbelievers, the unregenerate; and consequently that to such, while such, Wisdom appears, and speaks, and what saith she to them? why! Verse 5. Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Verse 6. forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. For thee then though a foole, though void of understanding, without the knowledge of God, and so without God, and without Christ in the World, for thee, even for thee, I say, Wisdom taketh care, for thee, even for thee, she hath prepared bread, and mingled wine; and to thee she saith, come eat of my bread (the bread of life) and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Behold the Visitation, the loving, the kind visitation, and tender of wisdom, to those that know her not, that heed her, that regard her not, that believe not in her. But who, or what is this Wisdom here spoken of? is it not some common gift, some natural thing that's common to all, elect and Reprobates, only Common, restrayning, but not saving grace, which convinceth, and condemns, but con∣verts not, nor hath power so to do? No, no, this Wisdom of which the holy Scripture here treats, is the highest wisdom, the wisdom of the most high, even Christ Iesus, the wis∣dom of God, the Son and wisdom of the Father, whom he hath given to be a light to the Gentiles, and his Salvation to the ends of the Earth, who calleth and cryeth unto all, directing and pointing all men to turn in, to with in themselves, that they may hear his voice & live. Whose Ministers, then are all those that would perswade the greatest part of mankind that Christ appears not to them, intends nothing for them, but doth all that he doth, with them, in them, towards them; only to augment their Damnation? Surely these are not the maydens that wis∣dom; nor Ministers that Christ hath sent forth, though they pretend to
come in his Name, but are the right ministers of Antichrist. The same truth is again confirmed. Isaiah 42. 6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousnes, & will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, & give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a Light to the Gentiles &c. The like place follows. Isaiah. 49. 6. It is a Light thing that thou shouldst be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Iacob, & to restore the preserved of Israël; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles that thou may be my salva∣tion to the end of the earth. Many other places might be produced to shew the same thing, but these are testimony sufficient, that not onely the Apostles but Moses and the Prophets declared of this universal dispensation of Light giv∣en unto all men for salvation. Argument 10. From a Collation of divers Parables given forth by Christ clearly pointing at the same thing. Matth. 13. From Verse 3. To the 24. Here is the Parable of the sower expressed at large & the interpretation of it given by Christ himself, holding forth that it was one and the same seed, that was sown in all the foure grounds, though onely One ground brought forth the fruit. WHich foure grounds do signify and represent all men, in whom the seed, which is called the Word of God, hath been sown, even that Word before mentioned, the very seed of Regeneration: for in the good ground, which is the heart that receivs and keeps it, it (the seed) sprung up, and brought forth fruit; therefore it could be no other thing, but that true & real seed of Regeneration which was sowne in all the foure grounds. Objection. But say our adversaries, the seed which cometh to a true birth and fruit in the good ground is not One and the same, with that which is sown in the other grounds; wher the seed did either not spring up at all, or springing up in some measure, did wither.
Answer. Who sees not (that will but seriously mind what he reads) that this objection, is rather the fruit of their owne prejudice against the truth; then any naturall consequence of the Parable it self, which gives not the least ground, for any such groundles surmise as if the seed had not bene One and the same in all: The blame is layd wholly upon the grounds, by Christ, not at all upon the seed. Wheras had the seed, in either of the grounds, been insufficient, or not true, Reall seed which could have sprung up unto maturity and brought forth its fruit, the blame would have been layd upon the seed it self, and not upon the grounds; but this was not, Therefore the seed was One and the same in all. Another Parable we find Matth. 13. 31. 32. The Kingdome of heaven, said he, is like unto a grain of mustard seed which a man tooke and sowed in his field which in∣deed is the least of all seeds, but when it is grown is the greatest among herbs; and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the aire come and lodge in the branches thereof. Now, this can be no other then the tru seed of Regeneration, which becometh a Tree when it is grown, and is the preservation of men, in whom it springs up. Therefor they are said to lodge in the branches of it under the figure of the Birds of the aire. And it is very observable, that its said to be the least of all seeds, when it is fown; which doth plainly imply, that it is sown, in the hearts of men that are unbeleevers, and unconverted, for, onely in such, can it be said to be the least of all seeds; in whose hearts unbelief, lust, pride, Covetousnes, and other sins are very powerfull, but this seed very small, the least of all, as having the least place and power in them; which cannot be so said of the saints and converted, nay nor of them which are but in the converting; and truly entred into any tru beginnings of Conversion; for, even in them the seed cannot be said to be the least of all seeds, yea there are none in the least measure partakers of tru faith, and truly turned towards God, but the seed of truth, Righteousnes, Purity and holynes hath a place in their hearts, some∣what more then other things, that are of a contrary Nature, and so cannot be said, in them, to be the least of al seeds. But in unbelee∣vers it may be, and is really so. Again. Matth. 13. 33. The King∣dom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a Wom an tooke and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
What can any man understand by this Leaven, but the grace of God, which is of a saving nature? even the Seed of Regeneration? for, thereby it is that men become leavened, that is, purified and sanctified. Now, the leaven is put into the meal, while it is yet unleavened; and this meal signifies mankind, men who are unholy, and unsavory unto God, into whom while so, the leaven is put, which leaveneth them, not in an instant, but by degrees, first one measure then another, then the whole lump, if not impeded in it's operation; for if the meale (the mind) be not duly applied unto the leaven of Gods grace, operating to render it savory to God, but resists the operation there∣of, it will remain unleavened. Again Matt. 13. 44. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid in the field, which when a man hath found he hideth, and for joy thereof, goeth and selleth all that be hath and buyeth that field. All these Parables point at one and the same thing, which is, That Divine Principle of God, given unto Men, in order to their Salva∣tion; which is likened unto so many useful things, in this World, because of its excellency and usefulness unto men. Now, here it is signified expresly, that this Treasure, is hid in the field, before men find IT, and also, that a man may find IT, be∣fore he possesseth IT, yea he may find IT, before he goeth and selleth all for IT: by which going and selling ALL, is understood Mans true Self-denial, and Resignation of himself unto God, with∣out which he cannot possess the field, nor the Pearl that therein is. Now, before this Self-Denial, or Resignation of himself, he may indeed find, but cannot enjoy the Treasure. Yea, 'tis his finding the Treasure, or rather being found of it, that is the cause and occasion of his going and selling all for IT: therefore when he first found IT, he was not resigned, but stood in a selfish Spirit, and was Self-Rich, calling every thing he had, his ovvn, which is plainly the state of an unbeliever and unconverted man, who may be convinced of the truth and find the workings of it in him, and yet cannot possess the Truth, in that State; till he come to a true Self-Denial and Resignation of all, to be poor, and have his heart weaned from all those things in which he took pleasure more than in God, and then he becomes blessed, as it's said, Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
And, whereas it's said he goeth and buyeth the field, where this Treasure is hid. By the field, is understood, his own heart and mind, which no unbeliever is possessor of, but is under the possession of ano∣ther, even the Devil. Now, till the field be redeemed, the Devil and sin cast out, and dispossessed of his Heart and Soul, and his heart come to be purified, sanctified unto God, a man cannot enjoy the Treasure; for, in the unsanctified heart, the Treasure lyeth hid, and buried, and doth not send forth that Uertu, Beauty and Glory, which IT hath in IT; because of the Impurity of the heart, which stoppeth, and hindreth it, for IT cannot communicate it's pure glory, to that which is impure, because of it's pure and incorruptible nature. Yet, it worketh even in this field (which is full of impurity) as a fire to purge and purifie it; that so after it's being purified thereby, IT may shine forth and display IT'S pure glory therein. But the Heart sanctified and resigned unto God, is the field, where the Treasure is no more hid, but manifest, in which IT doth unseal and disclose it's wonderful Vertue and Povvers, in most admira∣ble variety and glory. Again Matt. 13. 45. 46. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Marchant man seeking goodly pearls, vvho vvhen he had found one pearl of great price, he vvent and sold all that he had and bought it. The explication of which is clear from the above said; here 'tis a∣gain very observable, that he found the pearl before he sold all for it, and bought it; which signifies that men may be convinced of the truth, and find it in them, in the state of Non-Conversion and Non-Resignation (which our adversaries deny) but in that state they cannot enjoy it, but must first sell all. Again, Luke 15. 8. 9. We have another Parable holding forth, the same thing under the similitude of a piece of silver lost in the house. Which piece of silver, betokeneth that Divine principle, which, by man's fall from God, came to be lost, in man's heart, through the abounding of sin which covered this noble Pearl, and made it to disappear, as if it had not been: But, though it be lost, it still retains it's Existence, and is to be found in the house where it was lost, that is, in mans heart. Now this piece of mony is said to be lost,
in divers respects; it is lost unto Man, and it is lost, (so to speak) unto God, being so smothered and buryed, under the filth and im∣purity of sin in mans heart, that the Lord hath not that use of IT, so as to appear and shine forth therein, and convey the maniestations, of his glory, there through, unto man's soule. And thus it may be said, to be lost unto God. Who is here signifyed by the woman that lights a Candle, and sweeps the house and seeks dilgently till she finds IT. And, if man would find this piece of mony, he must seek IT, in the Light of this Candle which God hath lighted him with, and not in the Light of his own kindling; and he must concur with the Lord to sweep the house, and seek IT diligently in the vertue and Power of that true Light of God, which hath inlightned him, and so he will find it, in the house, where it was lost, even in his own heart. Again, though this piece of mony doth remain, as it were, in many men lost unto God, yet certainly the Lord will not give over the seeking of it, till he find IT in ALL, and raise IT up in ALL, to have that use in them, which he hath appointed in which he will appear in ever∣lasting joy, peace and refreshment, unto the soules of them who have beleeved and been obedient, but eternally be revealed, in flames of fire, taking Vengeance on all them who have continued in unbelief and disobedience, till the day of their mercifull visitation be over. Matth. 25. From Verse 19. to 31. Compared with Luke 19. Verse 12. to 19. These two Parables are much of a kind, most evi∣dently and truly pointing at the same thing with these already men∣tioned. For what elce do these Talents, which the Lord gave unto ALL the servants of his house signify; but the divine Grace or Gift which Christ hath received of the Father, and given unto every man, to profit with all to the salvation, of his soule? And is it ought elce but partiality and prejudice against the Truth, in our Adversaries, to say that the One Talent, which the one received, was not in kind and Nature, one and the same, with the other Talents, and so not of a saving nature? For from the Words of Scripture they have not the least occasion to thinke and judge so. As if the one had not been suf∣ficient enough for him to have traded with and increased it, and con∣sequently have been accepted of God, as well as the others. True it is
one of the Parables holds forth a difference in respect of the Quantity, but not at all of the Quality, nature or kind. Now, least some might yet think the slothfull servant had not received what was sufficient; the singular providence of God gives us another Parable: declaring that the slothfull servant had his Pound given him, as the other; Eve∣ry one their Pound. Which imports that some may have, not onely the same grace given them as others, but even the same measure, and yet prove slothfull servants. Besides, that this Talent was not any Natural gift, but indeed supernaturall, spirituall, and suffi∣cient to salvation, is most evident from these ensuing Reasons. &c. 1. Because the Kingdome of heaven is held forth by this Parable, but no meer naturall gift hath relation thereunto. Therefore this Ta∣lent, is no meere Naturall gift. 2. Because the slothfull servant is said to have hid his Talent in the Earth, and made no use therof. But there is no meer Naturall man, but doth more or less use the naturall gift of Wisdome or knowledge that is given him. Yea the worst of men have very much used the naturall light, and abused it to serve their lusts. Wheras this is hid in the earth, and not used at all. 3. Because otherwise the slothfull servant might have had an excuse Viz. that his Talent was not sufficient, with all his industry, to pro∣cure any increase, that might be accepted of his Lord. But the sloth∣full servant himself pleads not this, onely charges the Lord (though falsly too) with hardness and austereness. Thus I have the more briefly ran through these Parables, not insisting upon the many circumstances, but onely pointing at the main thing intended in them, as knowing that the scope of a Parable is mostly to be heeded.
SECTION II. Holding forth the same thing, in divers Arguments from the in∣trinsick evidence of the Truth it self, consonant to sound Reason. 1. Argument. From the Righteousness of God. GOD, the righteous Judge of the whole earth hath appoint∣ed a day in which he will judge the world in Righteousness, and give unto every man according to his deeds done in the body, whether good or evill. Now the sentence of his righteous judgement against all workers of iniquity will be for their disobedience to his righteous will and Pleasure. For, God having made all men to dwell upon the earth, and been good unto them, 'tis a righteous thing in him to require of them all ser∣vice and obedience, even to love him above all, to fear, and worship him, and do the things that are well pleasing in his sight. But, as it is righteous with the Lord to require this of all men, so is it also as righteous that he should give unto every man of whom he requires this obedience, such a manifestation of his will as is sufficient to give them the knowledg of all that he requireth of them; and also administer to them that power & ability, whereby it is, at least, pos∣sible for them so to do the things required of them as to be accepted of him. Seing then, that men can neither sufficiently know, nor be able to do, the will of God, without an inward principle of light & life from God, sufficient to that effect; Therefore, it is manifest, that there is such a Principle given to them. Even to every man that cometh into the world. Object. To this our Adversaries object, That ability hath been gi∣ven unto every man both to know, and do the Will of God; but they, by their sin, have lost it, and so it is righteous with the Lord, now to re∣quire
obedience of them, though they cannot perform it, because they once had it, and their playing the prodigall with it diminishes not the Lords right of exacting it from them still. Answ. But of these men we ask, when or how was this Power & ability given to all men? how and when, did they loose it? If they say in Adam. I reply, that this is but a deceitfull mist cast before mens eyes to blind them from seing the truth. But the day is dawned, and dawning, the glorious light of which will go on to dispell all such mists of deceit. But, that I may make this the more plainly appear, I shall first premise some things. First, I grant, Adam had, when God made him, an ability or Power given him, in a divine principle of light and life, both to know and do the will of God. Secondly: That Adam, by his fall, came to loose this ability, by loosing the divine Principle in which the ability stood. Which though he lost, yet it remained in his own house: but the light and life thereof be∣came though the prevalency of the fall extinguished, it died in him, remained shut up in death, till the Lord raised it up againe by administring unto it somewhat of its owne nature that was living which HE was no way obliged to do, but might of Adam have required obedience, even after this losse, because it was the fruit and consequent of his own Personall disobedience. Thirdly its also true, this losse is descended upon all Adams posterity, so that (as they come from him) they are impotent, and unable, from any Principle con∣veyed from him, either to know or do the will of God: and the Image of God lies slain and lost in them. But I deny, that this loss is, by God, imputed unto Adams Posterity, before their own actuall or Personall transgression: for they brought not this loss upon them∣selvs, they having then no personall Being, but Adam brought it upon them. Object. If they say, they brought it upon themselvs, because, being in Adam, they sinned (though not personally and actually) when he sin∣ned, and so his sin was their sin. Answ. I reply, that all men were in Adam when he sinned, this imports no more, then that Adam was the stock or root of all mankind, but not, that all men had a personall existence in Adam; Therefore I deny that they can be said to have sinned in Adam. That is to say,
as the word [ADAM] signifieth the first Man that was made upon the earth: And there is no ground for it in Scripture. It is therefore a meere deceitfull figment invented, to blind the minds of people from the truth. For the Scriptures Testimony is plain, that every man shall give an account to God, for the things done by himself per∣sonally, and that the iniquity of the fathers, shall not be imputed to the children, unless they follow their example by actuall trans∣gression. Object. But say they, as Levi, payd tithes to Melchisedech in Abra∣ham, so did Adams Sons and daughters sin in him. Answ. I deny the consequence. And if this argument doth any thing, it overdoes; and proves against themselves, that children are guilty of all the sins, not onely of Adam, but of all their forefathers: Whereas, themselves say they are not guilty of any but Adams first sin onely. They must needs then say, That Infants are not guilty of sin, meerly & simply because descend∣ed from Adam. But because of some speciall Covenant or transaction, which God made with ADAM, and with all his posterity in him, by reason of which his sin, should be their sin even before their own actuall transgression. But let them prove this if they can, for we deny it, as ano∣ther figment of the same Calibre with the former. Not that we deny that there was a Covenant & Transaction made, & that when Adam sinned, his children thereby suffered a great losse, so as to come Dead into the world as to spirituall life; and to have a seed of all sin and evill transmitted unto them, from him; but this I say, cannot be imputed unto them, as if THEY had lost it, or brought it upon themselvs, or were the punishment of their sin. No, that is false, its the punishment and consequent of Adams sin, onely. And as to these words Levi payd Tithes in Abraham. The Apostle doth not absolutely say so, but qualifies it with an as I may-so-say, &c. which plainly implyes that they are not to be taken strictly. Object. But say they, how could God punish infants with this losse, if they had not been guilty with Adam. Answ. It is not, to speake properly, their punishment, nor can it prove them sinners, no more then that the curse that came upon the
earth through Adams sin, was a punishment to it, as well as to Adam, or that it was guilty. Adam brought this losse upon his children, nor was it unrighteous in God to suffer him so to doe, though they were guiltless of it. Just as if Adam should have layd violent hands upon any of his children, or any man now should do the like; it is no un∣righteousness in God to suffer such a thing, and yet this murther cannot be imputed to the poor children, as if they were guilty of it. And indeed just thus it was; Adam, as it may be said, did by his sin murther his children, for had he not sinned his posterity should not have come into the world with a Dead image, and brought the very seed of the serpents image along with them, which, in the nature of it is sin, being contrary to the purity and righteousness of Gods Nature, which is the first law. But still I say, its not their sin, nor imputed unto them, before their actuall transgression. Now, let none through ignorance or prejudice say, that we here∣in, deny original sin, for originall sin, in the true sence, we deny not, that is to say; that there is a seed of sin, transmitted from Adam unto all his posterity in the naturall birth, which becomes the origine, source and spring or root of all actuall transgressions, where ever it springs up, in which all sin is committed, but, we say this is not mens sin, nor imputed unto them before actuall transgression. Of the propagation of sin thus in a corrupt seed, the scriptures do indeed declare, but no where, that this seed, is the sin of in∣fants or that God chargeth it upon them, before their actuall trans∣gression. Yet this figment, they would fain hammer out from those words of the Apostle Rom. 5: 12, 14, 18. But I shall plainly shew that these words do prove no such thing, Verse 12. saith. By one man sin en∣tred into the world, and death by sin, so death passed, upon all men, for that all have sinned. Now, we grant, that sin entered into the world by Adam, and death by sin, but it is the spirituall death that is here mainly intended, even that principle of death which killeth the soule; and, where it is suf∣fered to spring up, hindreth its living unto God. Object. But they urge, that the Apostle saith, all have sinned. But all have not sinned actually and personally, as infants, Ergo they have sinned Viz in Adam.
Answ. By all, in the first proposition 't is cleare that MEN are to be understood: for its said, death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, or (as it may be rendred) in which all have sinned. But this place speaketh not at all of infants, who are not Men and Women, but children. Object. But they would again infer their fiction from another translation of the words [] rendring them (not for that, but) in whom (that is, say they, in Adam) all have sinned. Answ. To this we say, that though the words be rendred in whom, or in which, there is not onely no necessity, but no ground to under∣stand it of Adams person. For there is another Antecedent unto which it more nearly relates, Viz the sin that entred into the world by which came death. And indeed is death it self, to wit, that cursed seed of sin, in wich all have sinned, that ever did sin. All sin being committed in it. And this seed and birth of sin is called Adam, i. e. the old Adam or old Man: as the seed and birth of righteousness, is called the New-Man or second Adam. And in this sence, the translation [in whom] may be admitted and the explication, to wit, in Adam all have sinned. The word Adam not being understood of that first person whose name was Adam, but of that sinfull and sinning nature wich being derived from him beares his Name. Obj. They Object further that because its said death reigned over them who have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, therefore infants are sinners, for by that phrase, say they, are infants understood. Answ. Suppose that infants are there understood, it is so farre from proving them sinners, that it doth rather the contrary. Saying that death reigned over them who had not sinned, &c. Obj. But say they, Infants are sinners because lyable to death, as many do actually dy in their infancy. Ergo they are sinners. Answ. I deny the consequence, their death no more proves them sinners, then it proves the Apostles and other holy men deceased, to be still sinners, because they are dead, or do still continue in the state of the dead, and shall, till the resurrection of the body. But this they themselves beleev not. Therefore this argument overdoes again, if it does any thing.
Object. They argue againe from the 18 Verse. That judgment is come upon all men Ergo all have sinned. Answ. This word judgement is not the Apostles, but Translators, not being found in the Greek. Where somewhat is left to be under∣stood (which the Apostle expresseth not) as being come upon all men unto condemnation. But what this [somewhat] is the letter doth not ex∣press. Onely this is observable that it is not jugdment. The Apostle not saying that judgment or condemnation is come upon all men but some what [Viz the seed of sin] is come upon all unto condemnation. i. e. some what which hath condemnation as its effect where it is suffered to bring forth. Object. They indeavour once more to infer their assertion from these words, Verse 19. where it is said, by one mans disobedience many were made sinners. Answ. This proves not that his disobedience, was formally their disobedience, but onely a cause, and that remote thereof. Even as by the obedience of Christ many are made righteous, not that his righteousness is imputed unto them who are not actually righteous. Object. They object again, that as a mans debt is chargeable upon his children, so is Adams upon his posterity. Answ. This is so, and is just, where a man leaves as much behind him, as will pay his debts; or where the heir voluntarily accepts. But otherwise unjust; but they grant, and that truly, that Adam hath not left any such ability to his children wherewith to satisfy God, or answer his requirings. How plainly now doth appear the groundless and unwarrantable∣ness of their doctrine? That God requires of men obedience, and punishes them for their disobedience since the fall, to whom he gives nei∣ther light sufficient to discerne, nor ability enough to answer, his requirings, and that alone because they, in Adam, on rather he for them, (for they could not, having then no existence,) prodigally wasted and lost all spi∣rituall light and life. Look upon it, read it again, and tell me whether this looks, or sounds like the Doctrine of Christ the truth it self, the Doctrine of the Gos∣pell of Salvation? Hence then I argue, That Doctrine which serves to cleare the righ∣teousness
of God, in his punishing the wicked for their disobedience, is to be owned, and on the contrary that which tends to the obscur∣ing it, and casting an imputation of cruelty and injustice upon God, to be denyed. But this Doctrine which asserts a principle of light and life sufficient, to be from God imparted to all mankind, servs to clear his righteous∣ness &c. and the contrary Doctrine to obscure it, &c. Therefore &c. The first proposition is so clear that it needs no proofe. The second doth again as clearly flow from that. For, if God hath de novo, or of a new, given unto all men a sufficient principle of light and life, to know and do his will, then he may say, as in Isayah, and now oh men of Iudah and inhabitants of Ierusalem, what could have been done more unto my Vineyard that I have not done in it? Viz. in point of righteous∣ness, he hath done all that was needfull to cleare his Iustice in giving the Vineyard that which was sufficient to enable it to bring forth good fruit, and consequently in punishing it for remayning unfruitfull. Wheras, if he had not given that which was sufficient, his righteous∣ness could not have been cleared. For the law of righteousness requi∣res of no man more then it allows him ability to perform. And hence is very manifest, the ridiculous unreasonableness of that assertion, that they that perish, have that given them which is sufficient to make them inexcusable, but not sufficient to salvation, howmuchsoever improved. For notoriously evident it is, that that alone is sufficient to leave a man without excuse, which, being duly improved, is ab∣solutly sufficient to render him excused; and this again, infers suffi∣ciency unto salvation. Besides, why do they put themselvs to that trouble, of saying, that they have that given them, that is sufficient to leave them without excuse; seing they may as easily lay the inexcusableness it self, upon Adams sin, as the insufficiency to save; and tell us they are without all excuse, not for any thing particularly or personally given to them, but for Adams sin. But let the Scriptures be searched throughout, and it shall never be found, that any are simply condemned, or made inexcusable for Adams sin; but for their owne sins in the first place, and for those of their Ancestors but consequentially. This is the Con∣demnation
of the World, saith Christ, that Light is come into it, and they love darkness, &c. But no where is it said, this is their condem∣nation simply that Adam sinned. Argument. 2. From the Mercy, Love, and Goodness of God, extended in a day unto all men. THat the Mercy, Love and Goodnes of the Lord, is extended unto al men, in a day of visitation, the Scriptures testimony is most ample. Some few of the more significant of them I shall alledge Viz. Psal. 14. 5. 8. 9. The Lord is gratious and full of compassion, slow to anger and of great mercy, Good unto ALL, and his TENDER MERCIES are over ALL his Works. Psalm 107. 8. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his GOOD∣NESS, and for his wonderfull works to the CHILDREN OF MEN. And this is foure times repeated in that Psalme. Psalm 81. 1. 4. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in ALL THE EARTH. What is MAN that thou are mindfull of him, and the SON OF MAN, that thou visitest him. Psalm 62. 12. Also unto thee O Lord, belongeth MERCY, for thou rendrest unto EVERY MAN according to his works. Here observe the connexion, which is very signall, importing that the evill doers shalbe condemned, from the very mercy of the Lord, which they have sinned against, and out-sinned the visitation thereof. Matth. 5. 44. Love your enemies, blesse them that curse you, do Good to them that hate you &c. that you may be the children of your father, which is in heaven, for he maketh his sun to rise on the evill and on the Good, and sendeth rain, on the just and unjust. Here again the connexion is very signall, they are bid to love their enemies, which must certainly be taken universally, even all their enemies, of mankind; and why? that therein they may be like their
heavenly father, who loveth them ALL, and doth Good unto ALL just, and unjust, &c. Actor. 14: 17. Nevertheless he left not himself without a witness, doing GOOD and giving us raine from heaven, and fruit full seasons, filling OUR HEARTS WITH FOOD AND GLADNESS. Rom. 2. 4. Despisest thou the RICHES of his GOODNESS, forbearance and long sufferance, not knowingthat the GOODNESS OF GOD, leadeth THEE to repentance. Which Scriptures do all plainly declare the mercy, and Goodness of the Lord toward ALL MEN, not onely, no nor yet principally, in relation to outward things, but to the salvation and welfare of their soules. For, in that God loveth all men, he loveth their soules, which is the principall part of men, Now, if he love their soules, then he hath provided somewhat for the welfare and happyness of them. And in that its said, the Goodness of God leadeth them to repentance, it manifestly followeth that repentance, was once possible unto them. For the Goodness of God leadeth no man to that which is impossible. Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way, and live, &c. 1 Tim. 2. Verse 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers &c. be made for ALL MEN, for Kings, and for ALL that are in Authority &c. For this is Good and accep∣table in the Sight of God our savior who will that ALL MEN Shalbe SAVED and come to the acknowledgment of the truth, for, there is One God, and One Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Iesus who gave HIMSELF a ransome for ALL to be testified in due time. 1 Tim. 4. 10. Because we trust in the living God who is the saviour of ALL MEN, especially of those that beleeve. &c. Joh. 4. 42. Christ is called the SAVIOUR of the WORLD. and Joh. 1. 2. 2. The reconciliation not onely for the sins of the Saints or beleevers, that were chosen out of the World [not onely for our sins, saith the Apostle,] but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD.
What more plain, and evident! can more emphaticall and signi∣ficant expressions be used by men? But besides these plain testimonies of Scripture, which need no explication, nor application of mine, there is an universall testimony and witness of this truth in the heart of every man that cometh into the world. For that very same thing, that in his heart beares witness to the existence or being of God, is also a witness, that he is Good, loving, mercifull, long-suffering, gracious and fa∣vourable unto him, till he by his wickedness hath out-sinned the day of Gods mercifull visitation. And then, the same which before wit∣nessed unto him of the love and mercy of God, doth now beare wit∣ness of his wrath unappeasable, and fiery indignation against him. This have divers felt sealed in their hearts, as Cain after the murther of his Brother, Judas after his betraying Christ, and many Apostates. But I say, before this time, in whichmens wickedness be come to the heighth, and the cup of theiriniquity full; there that is in all men, that which certainly witnesseth unto them, that God is mercifull, good, and favourable unto them; even the same I say, that Witnesseth that he is, so that there is no man who can, or dares to say, the Lord is not, nor ever was mercyfull, and loving to me. For in so saying, he should ly against the inward Testimony of God in his conscience, yea the daily mercies of the Lord dayly conferred upon him, would also be as a thousand witnesses against him. Object. If it be now Objected, 'tis true, there is such a witness in every man, of the love and goodness of God to him, in relation to things temporall and externall, but not to things spirituall and eternall. Answ. It is as easily answered that this distinction is frivolous, ri∣diculous and absurd: For the same that witnesseth that God is good to his body witnesseth also that he is good to his Soul much more, be∣cause the soule is more worthy then the body, and the more Princip∣all part of man; yea, is rather the man then the body. Therefore if God be good unto ALL men; he is good urto the soules of all men: and if he be good unto their soules, then he hath certainly provided, that which is sufficient for the health and wellfare of the soul, and conse∣quently that which is sufficient unto salvation. O Man! who ever thou art, whether Iew, or Gentile. Scythian or Barbarian, let the witness of God in thy conscience answer,
which tels thee there is a God, who hath made the heavens and the Earth, and created thee, with all mankind to dwell upon the face thereof, given thee a body and provided abundantly for the welfare and comfort of it, and of the life thereof, causing the sun to shine, and raine to descend upon thee, the Earth to give thee bread, the water drink, the Aire breath, the fire warmth, the heavens light, and many other benign influences: hath, I say, this bountifull God, and Creator, who hath given thee, besides all this, a soule im∣mortall, so carefully provided forthy body, and the life and com∣fort thereof, &c. wholly neglected to provide for thy soule, and the immortal life and good thereof? hath he given nothing to feed it? no food convenient for it? appointed no bread for the mouth therof! no water for thy inward, as well as outward man, to quench his thirst! no aire to give it a comfortable breath, no fire to warm it no light to lead it in its way, in which it ought to walk! nothing to refresh it in its path! I say, hath the same Lord provided so many, so abun∣dant remedies to cure the maladies and distempers of thy mortall body which is but dust, and no remedy at all for the discrasy and distempers of thy soule (of a more excellent and noble substance) by which they may be removed, and thy soule cured! let the witness of God in every man answer; and I am certain it will not faile to beare this Testimony unto the goodness of God: That he hath as abundant∣ly provided for the good of thy soul; as of thy body. And if he has provided for the good of the soul of every man; that good must beare Analogy or proportion, to the soule, so as to answer unto the nature thereof which is immortall, or eternall and without and. Therefore it must be an immortall and eternall good, and con∣sequently sufficient unto salvation and eternall bliss. For, its said of the Lord that he openeth his hand and giveth unto everyliving thing its meat, that is, that which is good for it. So to the Beasts of the field he hath appointed food convenient for them, to the foules of the Aire their meat, to the fishes of the sea theirs, which is not one and the same to them all, but distributeth to every one according as their nature requires, what's consonant thereunto. Now, is it in the least measure probable that this bountifull Creator, who hath so abun∣dantly provided for the Vegetable, and animall life in plants, and
the beasts of the field, as also in men, food convenient therunto, should have provided no food for the rationall soule of man, which is an eternall and everlasting substance? no food I say, convenient for it, by which it might live in comfort and joy as other creatures do? In∣deed, had the soules of all men sinned personally, as the Angels who fell, God had as justly passed them by, and deprived them of that which was good, as he did the falne Angels. But, to conceive that the righteous God, hath thus passed by, and deprived most, or∣indeed all the soules of mankind, before their own Personall or actuall transgression, is most injurious, against both that abundant righte∣ousness, moderation and mercy, unto which, both the Scriptures, in most ample manner, and the inward Testimony of God in every man, do bear witness. But again, if God were not a lover of the soule of every man, and provided not for their good; but on the contrary hated the souls of some, yea of most men, even before they had a being, denying or depriving them of that which is for their eternall good; then surely, it could in no propriety of speech, or Justice, be said, that God were good, loving and merciful to all men; though he did confer upon them never so many outward things, good for the body or outward man: For what advantageth it men to have all the good things of this life if they loose their soules, they being past by and from all eternity irreversibly appointed to eternall wrath and misery? yea, are they not hereby but rendred the more miserable and unhappy! and what can such a conceit beget in them, but blasphemous and injurious thoughts of their maker, so as to look upon his dealings with them (which is horrid to be thought) as as cruell as those of the inhumane Cannibals towards some, whom (poore miserable creatures) they feed with good fare, to fatten them that they may feed upon them with the more pleasure? How is it now possible for any to imagine these Cannibals, to beare any love to those whom they thus fairly feed, that themselvs may with the greater pleasur feed upon them? And yet, doth not the Doctrine of these men, who teach that God hath passed by the soules of most men without providing any food at all for them, represent the mercyfull and just God as onely seding their bodies Canniball like, or worse (Oh dreadfull and astonishing to be thought!)
with the abundance of the good things of this world, onely in order to the making them more miserable in the condition of their soules, devoted to the insatiable wrath of God to feed upon to eternity; never giving them any sufficient occasion whereby they might be in a possi∣bility of salvation? Wheras, the contrary doctrine which asserts that God hath pro∣vided, that which is good for the soules of all men, even sufficient for their salvation, in a day, or time of visitation allotted them, wherein it was possible to have been, though they never actually be, saved, but do perish eternally, doth abundantly clear both the righteous∣ness and mercy of God; as not wanting on his part, being willing to have saved them, but they would not embrace it: and so their con∣demnation is just, and they can have no plea, neither from the righ∣teousness, nor mercy of God; which mercy it self, doth most deser∣vedly condemn them, because they have finned against it, and despi∣sed the riches therof, which did lead unto repentance. Thus shall they be judged by, and left without all excuse from the very mercy of God. Wheras, had not the Lord visited them with what was good for their souls and sufficient to salvation. They might have had this strong plea. Lord we desire to plead at the tribunall of thy mercy, even at thy mercy seat; though we cannot stand, we acknowledge, to plead at the throne of thy strict justice, yet let us plead at the throne of thy mercy: Lord thou hast indeed required us to serve thee with our souls, but in all our life time thy mercy never visited our soules, with any measure of light and life sufficient to enlighten, quicken or inable them, either to know the service thou requiredst of them, or ability to perform it. Therefore Lord how can they mercy condemn us; we never having sinned against thy mercy; thy healing, thy saving, thy enlightening, thy quickening mercy to the salvation of the soule. Therefore we put up our plea to thy mercy, that we may at least be preserved from eternall wrath through thy abundant mercy. Now, let the witness of God in every man judge in this matter, and it will certainly determine that because the mercy of the Lord shall condemn all that perish, the same mercy must needs have visited them, with some measure of light and life sufficient unto salvation.
Which saving mercy of the Lord visits every man, till he hath wholly filled up the cup of his iniquity against it, and then he is left to himself. A threefold instance of this thing the Scripture gives us, first of the Amorites, Idolaters that possessed the Land of Canaan, in Abra∣hams time. The iniquity of the Amorites (saith the Lord to him) is not yet full. How, not yet full! because the mercy of the Lord con∣tinued yet to visit them, and they had not yet wholly outsinned the time of the mercifull visitation of God, given them. The second is that of the Jews over whom Luc. 13. 34. Christ lamented, saying, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, &c. O that thou hadst known in this THY▪ DAT, the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thy eyes. And again, how faine would I have gatherd thee, as an hen gathereth her chickens, but thou wouldst not, therefore thy house is left unto thee desolate. The third instance, is that of the people of the old World, of whom the Lord said, my Spirit shall not alway strive in man, for that he is also flesh, &c. All which do plainly imply a day of visitation, unto them that perish and consequently that salvation was possible, unto them, through the appearance of God in that day. Argument. 3. From that universall duty that is upon every man, to believe and call upon the Name of the Lord. THat it is the duty of every man that comes into the World to beleeve in and call upon the Name of the Lord is evident from Scripture. Powre out thy wrath upon the heathen, that have not known thee, and upon the kingdomes that have not cal∣led upon thy Name. Jer. 10. 25. And why so? doubtless because they ought to have known him and called upon his Name: For punish∣ment implies, and is the wages of, sin. Now, if not to know and call upon the name of the Lord were their sin: then to know and call upon him was their duty. Again these words [who have not known thee] import saving faith and knowledge; Viz. who have not known
thee in a believing way. Again, Prayer, true prayer and faith are in∣seperable companions joyned together by God. So that if the Lord hath required the heathen, and Kingdomes of the world, to call upon his name, then he hath required them to beleeve; as it is plain from these words, how shall they call on him in whom they have not be∣lieved, Rom. 10. 14. Psal. 62. 7, 8. 65. 2. And if he hath required of them to beleeve, then (Christ, the name of God) the object of faith, the , hath been, in some measure manifested and held forth unto them as the Apostle again answers to that objection, Isayah 45. 22. have they not all heard? yes, No doubt, their sound went out through all the Earth, and their words unto the end of the world. Rom. 10. 18. Psal. 19. 3. In all which places faith and prayer are conjoyned. And remarkable it is, that God is said to be Psal. 65. 2, 5. the hope and confidence of all the ends of the earth, unto whom all flesh come because he heareth prayer. He is the ground of their hope and confidence, and in him they ought and may confide as the God of their salvation. This is further shewed, by that inward Testimony in the heart of every man, which sheweth him that there is a God or supreame Being, for the same that sheweth man the existence of God, sheweth him that he is to confide and trust in him, to worship and call upon his Name, to love, feare, and obey him &c. Of which Paul spake, saying to the Athenians, That God made all nations of one blood that they should seek him &c. Act. 17. 27. And hereunto he giveth them, even all Nations, atwofold ground of encouragement. First because God is not far from every one of them, that is to say, because he is nigh unto them, Very nigh, yea so nigh, that in him they live, and move, and have their being. Secondly, because they are his of-spring and children, and he their father; which holds forth most sweet and comfortable things unto the children of men, Viz that the Lord doth regard them in so neare a relation, notwithstanding their degene∣ration. And thus much is clearly held forth by our blessed Lord and saviour, in the Parable of the Prodigal son, whose father still reckon∣ed him as his son, saying, this my son, was dead and is now alive, was lost and is now found.
So that all men in a naturall condition, while the day of Gods mer∣cifull visitation remains towards them, in some sence, are the children of God; that is to say, his dead and lost children, whom he visits to quicken and find them. And this is for the seeds sake, there is a seed of God in them, of which it is possible for them to become the children of God, as it springeth up in them, to leaven and change them into the image of God. And so in the naturall & unconverted state they are his children, not actualy, but potentially, that is, they are in a capa∣city to become his children, through that divine seed which is in them: Therefore God is nigh unto them, and lookes upon them in so neare a relation; And this is the foundation, or moving cause, why all men should trust in the Lord, worship and call upon him: wherefore the nighness mentioned by the Apostle must needs signify a nighness of the Lord unto all men, in mercy, as a father unto his children; he sees them dead and lost, and the bowells of his tender love, yearns towards them, so that he comes nigh unto them, in the tender love and mercy of a father to quicken and find them. But to the falne Angels he stands in no such near relation. It is I say, the nighness of the Lord, even in his saving mercy, and in a saving way, to all men, that is the ground and foundation (by the Schoolmen called [Objectum formale,] the formall object) why they should beleeve and call upon him. For the act always praesupposes its formall object. So that, if the Lord requires all men to beleeve in, and come unto him, as children unto a father, and seek from him, that which is good for them in that relation, then certainly he doth hold forth himself unto them in such a way as its possible for them to be∣leeve in, and find him. For, it is as unreasonable a thing to require a man to beleev in that which is not held forth, as an object of faith, as to bid a man hear and yet speak nothing, or look upon this or that thing, when there is no such thing to be seen or presented to his sight, or to bid a man smell, tast or feel when nothing is exhibited to be smelt, tasted, or felt. And so, if the Lord ought to be beleeved in, by all, and that as a God of mercy, as nigh, as a father &c. then certainly he doth reveal himself in such a way in some measure: For how can they beleev in him of whom they have not heard? and how can they hear without a prea∣cher?
and who is this Preacher that all nations must hear? but the word of God? seeing all never heard any outward Preacher? And seing its the duty of all to call upon the Lord what should they call upon him for, if not for saving-mercy, healing and quickning mercy, if not for salvation and for that which is sufficient to save them? should the soule when its to seek the Lord, onely seek him for the things pertaining to the body? and neglect to petition for its self that it may be saved from sin and wrath, from death and evill? Now, if the soule may, yea ought to pray for these things, must it not pray in faith, beleeving it's possible to attain them, & if the soule, in its seeking, must so beleev then are they attainable at least. Elce the Lord should require men to beleev a lye, and that which is false, even to beleev that to be attaina∣ble, which is not so, if salvation be not, at least, possible to every soule in a day of visitation; but to say that God requireth any man to beleev a lye is injurious unto the veracity and righteousness of God, which his witness in every Conscience declareth. Some may say Arminius argued thus for universall grace, having just such an Argument. To which I answer, if it were so, I have not received it from him, but from the Spirit of truth wich hath let me see the truth of the thing in my owne heart: and any that are acquainted with Arminius his writings can not but see, that I prosecute it not in his way. But in another more convincing, and which hath a deeper reach to the inferring of grace universall Evangelicall, de primo, given unto all, wich Armi∣nius never pleaded for nor affirmed. But it may again be objected, that this seems to contradict another principle which we hold, Uiz. that wicked men should not pray. To which I answer. No such matter, for we onely say that wicked men, abiding in wickedness, impenitence and unbeleef, ought not to pray: but first to repent and beleeve and then pray.
Argument. 4. From the very Nature and intent of the Gospell. THe very Nature, summe and import of the Gospell is, glad tydings of salvation unto all people; holding forth the Good will of God towards them, pointing at, and directing them to a principle, by closing with which, peace and reconciliation with God is obtained, and the forgiveness of sin received. And thus did the Angel of the Lord publish the Gospell, unto the shepheards at the nativity of Christ according to the flesh. Behold (said he) I bring you Good tydings of great Ioy, which shal be unto all people Luc. 2: 20, 19. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multi∣tude of the heavenly host praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, Good will towards men. According to what the Lord said unto Abraham in his day, in thy seed, which is Christ, shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Object. But our Adversaries, according to their old corrupt glosse, say, that by [all people] is to be understood, not all particulars, but some of all sorts. Answ. This is manifestly contradicted, by another principle of their owne, Viz. that immediate Revelation is ceased. From which, and their concession that the Gospell is really glad tydings, and holds forth the reall love and good will of God, unto some, I thus argue ad hominem, (as they speak.) If the Gospell be no otherways glad tydings to any, but as it is to all, and every, particular; then it is glad tydings to all and every particular. But the first is true. Therefore the latter. The connexion of the first proposition, is so cleare, that nothing needs to be said to it. The second proposition, (Viz. that the Gospell is no otherwise glad tydings to any then to all, and every one in particular) is thus proved. The knowledge that any particular among you can have of the Gospels being glad tydings unto them, and holding forth the love and good will of God towards them, is, either because they know the Gospell to be so uni∣versally
to all and every one; or elce, because of some speciall immediate Revelation from God, assuring them, that though the Gospell be not glad tydings unto all men, but that many are, (yea the far greater part of mankind) excepted, yet it is so to them in speciall, God having revealed it unto them, by name, that they are included in that particular, small number, to whom the Gospell is glad tydings. But this way you wave, as denying immediat Revelation. Therefore must run to the former there being no third way conceivable. And indeed upon that ground it is clearly deducible, for, if the Gos∣pell be glad tydings to all particulars, then any particular may without hesitation conclude it so to him. For, from the universall to the parti∣cular or particulars, is a most certain and infallible consequence. As for example, I, or any man may conclude our selvs as descended, from Adam because all men universally are so. And on the contrary, from never so many particulars, if there be any exception, of but any one, it doth not follow unto any particular whatsoever. So, no man can conclude himself descended from Abra∣ham, because 't is most certain many are so. Just thus, if the Gospell be onely glad tydings, unto many, and not unto all, and every particular, it follows not that it is just so to me or thee. For that, it is as probable that we may be among the secluded, as included, if the Lord hath not particularly revealed it to us. Now, before any man can beleeve the Gospell, it must be held forth as a thing certaine, and as such must be made knowne unto him. For, what is a mans faith, but the particular application of the Gospell, or thing therein held forth, unto a mans self; or mans laying hold on the Grace offered, and beleeving that it belongs to him? Which he can never doe, untill it be so made knowne to him, and that cer∣tainly; not by faint or rash conjecture. For true divine faith relys not, cannot leane, upon meer conjecture, but onely upon certainty. And herein faith differs from Opinion, which always relyes upon conjecture; and therefore is but faint and fluctuating, weak and feeble, as is the foundation upon which it relyes. Wheras, that certainty which is the right basis and foundation of true faith, is strong and can never faile. Again, the Gospell can not be glad tydings to any, further then it is certainly known to belong to them, because uncertain tydings can
never be glad tydings: the uncertainty thereof so hindring the heart in closing there with, that it cannot come to have joy therein, but is ra∣ther kept in an anxious sadness, till it knows the certainty of it. Now how can they be glad tydings to any (except through a speciall and immediat revelation) but from this ground, that they are so to all. If it be replyed, it may to some be knowne, through their effectuall calling, the Lord secretly persuading them; by the secret operation and influence of his Spirit, to apply the grace of the Gospell ontwardly held forth. To this I answer. How shall they, in what manner can they, be assur∣ed of the efficacy of their calling, and that their beleef of it, is not a meer presumption, and groundless imagination? for this again, must either be knowne, by its having an objective evidence of its owne; or, from the evidence of the Scripture; If the first, that I affirm to be, as it indeed is, immediat Revelation exparte objects. Which thing these men utterly deny in this age. For, that secret operation, influence or impression of Gods Spirit, they will allow to be onely subjective and not objective. Which therefore, I may justly call (as they understand it) a blind impulse, or impression; From whence consequently, they cannot infer the certainty of the Gospels belonging to them. If they say the evidence is from the Scripture. Then certainly it must be from the Scriptures holding forth the Gospell universally to all, as glad tydings, and so by consequence to them. Because there is no Scripture that holds any such thing forth parti∣cularly as to them, more then to others. For, as is already shewed that it is held forth as glad tydings to some, gives no man firm ground to conclude it so to him, as one of those some. But, waving now this principle of theirs [that immediat revela∣tion is ceased] (through most true it is, that there is at this day immediat revelation, and that no man can truly apply the Gospell to himself but by immediate revelation) yet this Argument is of great weight and force. As for example, First, it cannot be denyed that, the truth of the universall being knowne and beleeved, is a great and comfortable, confirmation to the strengthening of mens faith in the particular application. For, if the Gospell hold forth good will unto
all then certainly unto me. So Secondly. As I can savingly beleev the Gospell no other way, but as held forth unto me by immediat reve∣lation. So by this immediat revelation, it is not any singular or parti∣cular principle that is thus held forth unto me, but that which is the universall, the common salvation, Viz, the Light, the word, the seed, which I sind revealed and made manifest in me, reproving sin, in heart, word and deed, and secretly drawing me from it, unto righteousness, which principle is revealed in me, to be the grace of the Gospell; not, I say, as any particular principle given unto me, and not unto others, but, as that which is universally given, and works, so to speak, univer∣sally, answering every where; to me in others, and to others in me. And so it is both outwardly preached, and inwardly manifested to be that universall principle which is the grace of the Gospell. Through closing with which, peace with the Lord is obtained. And because it is an univer∣sall principle and is so inwardly revealed, therefore is my heart the more persuaded to close with it, especially at first, or in my first entrance. For, coming to hear that that which secretly reprovs for sin, and appears against it in every conscience is the very grace of the Gospell, and find∣ing the same thing revealed in my particular, this is an occasion or ground for me to beleev it. Wheras, if the principle were not universall, and that there were two principles, reproving and convincing of sin, the one universal not saving, the other particular and saving, I might have much reason to question, whether what I have, be the saving and speciall principle or no. Thus I say. The principle being in the first pla∣ce declared, so to speak, as an universall thing, it is a great help unto the poor soule, at its entrance, to facilitate its belief: Of which thing I have had experience in my own particular who witnessed it revealed in me, as universall, and so closed with it, not that I durst say that there was any speciall principle revealed, or given to me; For, such was the darkness confusion, and inclearness that was over my mind, that I could not have distinguished it; but yet I manifestly felt in my heart that which re∣proved all sin, and weighted me for it, working as fire against it. But this I knew to be nothing but what was common to others; For the same that made me know it in my self, made me know, and feel it in others. And now, this universall thing, being by Gods faithfull messengers preached unto me, as the very grace of the Gospell, and the very saving
Light of Iesus Christ. O! how glad tydings was it to my soule! which closed with the truth thereof, by the secret operation of Gods holy Spirit. And truly, in that day, I must needs say, that the greatest, most manifest and clear prop, or ground of my faith (that was visible unto my mind) that I had in my heart what was saving; was, even because I found in me that little, universall, common, despised thing, the least, of all seeds, which is at this day more precious unto my soule, and more excellent then all the mountains of prey: seing that was held forth to be the saving grace, wich was universall; which I found in mee, answering to it in others: yea, when it was the least of all seeds, in me, it did wonderfully answer to its self in others, in whom it was grown up to be the greatest of all herbs, full of heavenly fruit and vertue: and while it was yet burthened and oppressed and impri∣soned in me, it answered to the same (the same I say, for nature and kind) in others, where it was in Dominion and perfect liberty, over all that oppressed it: whereby I was exceedingly reached, strengthened and confirmed to beleeve that it was of a saving nature, conceiving a blessed hope, that it would in due time be raised in me, into the same Dominion, victory and liberty, that I felt it to be in, in them; which now, in a measure, I do witness; all glory and praise be unto the Lord for ever. So I say, feeling that universal Principle in me; and being perswaded of the Lord that it was universally saving, I was thereby helped to beleeve that it was saving in me. And indeed, that immediate revelation by which faith at first, is usually or commonly wrought in the heart; is not so much given in a distinct form of words particularly saying this or that thing to the soule: as, in a manifestation of the divine power and vertu of Gods Spirit in that little seed, which the heart is made to feel secretly working in it, as sire, soap and water, as an hammer, and two edged sword, as a magnet, or Load stone, drawing the heart to it self; And thus is faith, at first, wrought by the word of God speaking forth it selfe simply in power, vertue, Light and life, rather then in words; for that the soule, being in confusion, darkness, and unacquaintedness with the way of God, cannot so easily apprehend it, so as to discern it from an imagination, as it can apprehend the vertue and life it self, and distinguish it from any other thing, but afterwards, when the
ear is well opened and formed, words are given, and that very distinctly heard and apprehended, which are very precious and excellent, full of heavenly vertue and glory. Argument. 5. From the exceeding great usefulness of this truth, in order to the gathering of people, into the true faith of Christ: even to the universall conversion of all Nations. As also, from the great prejudice of the contrary Opinion, in order thereunto. THE Scriptures Testimony is Very large and ample, that in the latter days there shalbe a very great (and so to speak) uni∣versall gathering of the children of men; in all nations unto the faith of Iesus Christ; and that is it which all true Christians find themselvs much concerned in, to pray, travell, and labour for, even the gathering and turning people unto the faith of our Lord Je∣sus Christ; and that holyness, and vertue and righteousness, may spread and abound in and among them. Now, what is more usefull, and conducible to this universall gathering; then this universal prin∣ciple, and what more pernicious and prejudiciall therunto then the contrary? hence I thus argue. That Doctrine which is most conducive of that universall gather∣ing and conversion of all Nations to faith and holyness is to be im∣braced. And that which is most prejudiciall and impeditive of it, is to be rejected. But this Doctrine which holds forth an universal, sufficient Evan∣lic principle is most conducive &c. and the contrary most impedi∣tive &c. Therefore, The first proposition is so clear that nothing needs be added for proof of it. And the second is thus proved. That Doctrine is most usefull and conducive of holyness &c. which informeth unholy, and unbeleev∣ing people universally, of a principle given them of God through which they may come to beleeve, and be made holy. And that
Doctrine which not onely informeth people of no such thing, but plainly denyes any such principle, as to the greatest part of men; is most prejudiciall, and impeditive of holyness &c. But so are, respectively the aforesaid Doctrines. Therefore, &c. And the thing is indeed, most plaine, with little reasoning about it. For let a man or company of men go forth to preach to a multi∣tude, and bid them beleeve in God and Christ, become holy righ∣teous, and pure, and not point at, direct them to, nor imform them of any principle, capacity or power given them, whereby it is possi∣ble for them to come to beleev, to become holy and righteous: yea, perpetually to be inculcating upon the minds of their hearers in their preachments, that they, being the messengers of God, Ministers, and Amdassadors of Christ, do certainly know, and assure them in the name of God, that there is not onely no such principle, power, or capacity given by God to the greatest part of mankind, but that there never shalbe any such given them, from all eternity, God ha∣veing of his owne free-will and pleasure, irrevocably determined, never to give them any such thing, without which it is impossible for them ever to become beleevers, holy, just and good men: And this because they might remaine unholy, unjust, unrighteous, and that remayning so, he might magnify his justice in damning them for ever and ever, to endless torments without intermission or ceasing. Is it not apparent to the weakest understanding that this is no great, ready or probable way, to become instrumentall to bring people to faith, holyness &c. but really and indeed to hinder, discourage and turn them back? would not this be as unreasonable and ridiculous, as for a Physitian to come into an hospitall of sick men, and tell them, he was come to cure them, and mean while never produce, nor di∣rect them to any medicament that is able to cure them, but on the contrary tell them the greatest part of them are incurable, and (to say the right of it) though he beleevs severall of them may be cured, yet he knows not which of them, nor indeed certainly whether any of them, (to whom he speaks) or no. And yet still cry upon them to be whole to be whole. What think yee would not these poore people think this man rather
a foole then a Physitian, out of his wits rather then a rationall man, ex∣cept they should take him to be some scoffing varlet, that made himself merry at their misery? and could they possibly take any delight to heare him talk, or in the least beleeve that he were like to do them any good? This is plainly the case of the nationall Ministers who are still crying to their people, be holy, be holy, be righteous, be pure, who ge∣nerally are in their naturall unconverted condition though they have lived all their days under their ministry: For, these very men that thus cry to them to be holy &c. often tell them at the same time, that there is no sufficient principle of grace given to any one unconverted, or naturall man (so far are they from saying it is universall) wherby it is possible for him to be converted. Pray then! what is their ministery good for! are they sufficient ministers (of any thing but unbelief) that turn people who are in darkness to no sufficient thing to lead them out of it? Physitians of no value they may wel be called. Surely, there is no Doctrine, more prejudiciall to the setting up of Christs Kingdome among men, and none more advantagious for the upholding, and propagating the divels, then this Doctrine of theirs. But they who bring the contrary Doctrine, to the nations who ly in darkness & wickedness, as having received it from the Lord Viz. That Christ, the Light of the world hath enlightned them, and given them a principle sufficient whereby they may be led out of that state of darkness and wickedness, and be quickned and sanctifyed unto God; These are indeed messengers of glad tydings to the nations, whose feet are beautifull upon the Mountains: as not onely bidding them be holy, but pointing them to a principle in their own hearts whereby they may so become; these bind no heavy burdens upon them as do those that deny this universall principle; for what more grievous burden, then to put people upon impossibilities! They that bear testimony unto this universall principle, from the vertue of it felt in their own hearts; are like unto those skilfull Phisi∣tians, who coming to a company of diseased people, should tell them of a substance hid, underground even in their own house, that is able to cure them if found and duly applyed helping them to dig for it and informing them how they shall find, and know it, telling
them what it is, and how they are to use it; which whosoever doth, comes to be cured thereby. By the preaching of which universall principle we can reach unto the most Barbarous Nations, unto their convincement and conver∣sion, this principle which is in them, answering to the same in us, as face unto face in a glass; and so servs for a ground and foundation un∣to us wherby we may be, and are incouraged to declare unto them, the things pertaining to the faith of the Gospell: even as the princi∣ple of Reason in men, becomes a ground and foundation for a Master to instruct his Schollars in humane arts and sciences the proper object of Reason, without which there would be no incouragement for Ma∣sters to take upon them to teach any body any thing. For if there were no principle of humane Reason in the hearers to answer to, and apprehend the things taught, they might as well go teach the beasts of the field. Just thus it is in this matter; if there were no divine principle of faith in the unconverted, and unbelieving, to no pur∣pose would it be to declare unto them the things of divine faith; there being nothing in them that could answer to, or were susceptible of them. But this being opened above, I shall proceed no further in it. Yet though I say there is such a ground or foundation in all, I must not be understood, as if I said that this foundation were laid in all: for the foundation cannot properly be said to be layd in any, till it hath obtained its proper place, in them. Now this divine princi∣ple, which indeed is the onely ground and foundation of divine faith, and of all religion (that is truly so) though it be in all, yet it hath not got its due and proper place in all. But, as I may say, is in many or most displaced, out of its place and order where it ought to be, through the hearts being joined unto the contrary seed and principle, which usurps the place and roome of this divine seed & principle. The work now of the true ministers of Christ, is, as his instruments, through the influence of life and vertue, from this divine principle in themselvs raised, to reach unto the same in others that it may in them find and attain its due and proper place: And this is as it were the laying of the foundation; according to which Paul as a wise master builder, said, he had laid the foundation in the Corinthians: which foundation, to wit, this universal principle was in them before, but not layd in that
proper, due place, that it ought to have had in them, which he was, in his ministry, instrumentall to bring it to. And indeed this is the great cause, why this Noble seed remaineth as it were barren in so many people, to wit because it is not permitted to have its due place in their hearts, which is as requisit to its fructifying, as it is necessary to every other Seed to be cast into its proper place, as into its matrix, out of which it cannot grow, and come forth to the birth. This divine Seed therefore requires the most inwards of the heart, to cleave unto it, in true love, and that the contrary seed be expelled, and then the seed of God will spring up and prosper, bearing the most pretious fruits of vertue and knowledge, by and through which the hearts of people will come in due time to receive every thing, one after another, that is of God, according to the growth of this principle in them; so that the hearers will as readily, close, joine with, and assent unto the things declared, as the speakers can utter or express them; life answering unto life, and light unto light in an excellent and wonderfull harmo∣ny; And indeed, this is the true and only method which should be used by Preachers, for the bringing people in to the faith and acknow∣ledgment of the Christian Religion; First to inform them of this uni∣versall principle, what it is, and turne them towards it, that they may observe its operation in them, as it appeareth against the lusts of this world, and for righteousness, and temperance: And so as wise builders, to lay this true foundation in its proper place; and as wise husbandmen and planters to place this divine Seed, where it ought to be in order to its growth, that it may spring up in them, and the life, power and vertue of God in it may be felt; And this will naturally bring people to owne the Scriptures, and things therin declared; to owne Moses and the Prophets, to own the dispensation of God to the Jews in that day; and to own Christ in the flesh, his miracu∣lous birth, his Doctrine, miracles, sufferings, death, resurrection, and ascension, together with the wonderfull end and designe of God therin; to own the Evangelists and Apostles, and the dispensation of life and glory through the spirituall and inward appearance of Christ among them, in their day, which was very powerfull and excellent; and finally to own the same as it is now again revealed in this day after the Apostacy: For this inward and universall principle beareth a most
excellent concord and unity with all these, and doth witness and answer unto them, in most near and dear respects, with kissings and embracings, as it riseth or springeth up in any Vessell, in the manifesta∣tion of its own life. And thus men should be first turned towards this inward principle, light, word, and seed of the Kingdom, which being in them, and they coming to feel it there, they may the more readi∣ly be perswaded to own and believe it. And as they come so to joine to it, that it springs up in them in the light and glory thereof, they will see and feel the Scriptures, and the things therein declared, to be of God, and will tast, relish and savour them, in the life of this di∣vine seed. And this is good method and order in the preaching of the Gospell. So that evident it is, though it be ordinarily objected, that the Quakers, so called, have no method; that we have the best and only tru method in our words and writings, as hath been declared, first to turn people to the light that they may beleeve it, which finding in them, they can the more easily doe: & then to direct them to, and in∣form them of the Scriptures, and things therein declared; which they cannot receive, beleev, or understand, but in the divine light. But to come to the Nations, that have not, nor do own, the Scriptures and but few of the things therein declared, and press them to beleev the Scriptures, and own them as the words and oracles of God in the first place, without first directing them to the great word and oracle of God in their own hearts, in that to beleev and receiv them, in which alone they can be truly and duly received, is most contrary unto the tru method and order of the Gospell, and against all tru method and order held in the knowledg of things naturall, which always proceeds from the more known to the less: And begins at such a principle or principles, as makes way for the receiving other things that are more remote. And, to speak the truth, hence it is, even for want of this tru order in preaching of the Gospell that men have had so little success hitherto: nor can they rationally expect better, till they come to this method and order, which the Lord hath taught and given us, and in the use of which we have found the large blessing of the Lord, in the wonderfull success that it hath had among people and the Lord will, we know it, continue to bless it, to the gathering of all the nations of the earth to the knowledg of himself, which shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. Amen.
Argument. 6. From the discovery of the Nature of this universall princi∣ple of light, which our Adversaries grant to be in eve∣ry man, but deny to be saving. HEre our Adversaries are not a little at odds among themselvs, the greater part of the Nationall, and Congregationall tea∣chers, whether Prelaticall, Presbyteriall, Independent or Baptists do affirm this universall light, which they all con∣fess to be in all men, to be onely a Naturall light, or light of, and proceeding from mans owne nature. Others among them, grant it to be a light Supernaturall, but onely given to most men to leave them without excuse, and aggravate their condemnation, being but common grace and insufficient to their salvation. Others, that agree with the Arminians and Papists in this point▪ do acknowledg it not onely to be supernaturall, but given of God to all men in order to salvation; & consequently having a tendency, though remote, thereunto, in so farre that they say, that whosoever do im∣prove this light or grace universall, and are faithfull thereunto, shall certainly obtain from God grace Evangelicall, whereby they may be∣saved: so that they do not acknowledg this universall Grace, to be the Very grace Evangelicall; or Gospell grace, but onely a certain supernaturall grace, which, if improved, loadeth therunto. But we, in opposition to all these Opinionists do averre this uni∣versal grace, to be that very Evangelicall, Gospell and saving grace and not another, through which, it being closed with in faith and love, salvation is obtained. Hence then it may appear, how unjustly and unreasonably most of the nationall teachers and others, do charge us with agreeing with the Papists and Arminians in this weighty point. For, how do we agree with them while they deny, and we affirm it to be the very grace of the Gospell, and object of the faith thereof? But say they: yee agree with them in the generall, in that you, as well as they, say, that this grace is both universall, and sufficient in order to salvation.
To this I answer, that we may by the like inference charge them of agreeing in generall with the Pelagians against whom they do so much cry out, For Pelagius, as well as they, and they as well as he, do affirm this universall principle to be no other then mans own na∣ture, and the light and power thereof; and so in generall they agree as much with the Pelagians, as we with Papists and Arminians. Now its  Pelagius said that men might attain unto Justification by it, although he judged, it to be but the Light of a mans own na∣ture; which these men deny, and so do differ in speciall. As we also do from Papists and Arminians. And thus as we do agree with them in some remote generall on the one hand, so do they in opposition to us on the other hand. For, they (with the Papists and Arminians) do deny this to be grace Evangelicall, averring it to be some other thing. But that the nature of this universall principle may be discovered, we are to observ that it is generally acknowledged that this universall principle, is a witness in every mans conscience and heart (and that per∣petually and unchangeably) unto temperance and righteousness, as things pleasing unto God: and against intemperance and unrighteousnes as contrary and displeasing to him. Yea they further grant that disobe∣dience unto this principle in every man, which tcheth sobriety and righ∣teousness, is a sin against God, and to be punished eternally, if not re∣pented of and forgiven. From this concession then, it is evident, that this universall principle is pure and incorrupt in the nature of it: because it is a perpetual and unchangeable witness in man against unrighteous∣ness, and could never be byassed, nor bribed so as to give way or consent unto mens doing unrighteously, or speak peace to them therin; but still reproveth and witnesseth against it: Which, were it impure or corrupt it might and doubtless would do. Again, seing disobedience against it, is sin against God, it must certainly be the Law of God. And if it be the Law of God it must be pure and divine. For it cannot be supposed that ever God did or shall require men to obey any Law that is not of him or that is impure and corrupt. More over all unrighteousness and intemperance is impure, therefore that which witnesseth against, and is contrary unto it, is pure. Hence I thus argue. That Principle wich is pure and incorrupt, is not mans own nature, neither of, or proceeding from the same.
But this universall principle is pure and incorrupt as hath been shewn. Therefore &c. The first proposition is evident from this, That mans own nature, by the fall was not only in part, but wholly corrupted and defiled by transgres∣sion, as our adversaries grant, therefore, seing this principle is pure and incorrupt, it cannot be mans owne nature nor proceeding therefrom. For that which is pure cannot proceed from that which is impure, a cor∣rupt fountain cannot send forth pure water; nor an evill tree bring forth good fruit. By the force now of this Argument are many convinced that this universall principle is really supernaturall, but then they deny it to have any infallible tendency to salvation, how much so ever it be im∣proved, for that it is not a gift or grace given (say they) to man, de novo, or of a new, after the fall, universally for his salvation; but some Remnant, or Relick of that supernaturall light, which God gave Adam before the sall: which still remaines in all men, since the fall; like a little spark of fire among the ashes, or in the ruines of a house burnt down. And so, though mans nature be wholly corrupted, yet, this being supernaturall remains therein incorrupt, retaining its owne primitive purity, not being defiled with, but witnessing against, and reproving the corruption of mans nature, and mans nature in it. If we should now ask; seing its pure in the nature of it, how comes, it to be unable to purify mans nature? and save it from its im∣purity? was it not purifying, and saving in its nature before the fall; and if so, is it not saving and purifying after the fall? If it be said, it nor doth nor can save and purify mans corrupt na∣ture, because of its being so weak and small, being onely a very small remnant or Relict of what man had before the fall. To this I reply and say. Answ. That this very Answer then, grants it to be still of a saving nature, in so much that if it save not this or that man, in whom it is; it is not any defect in the nature, but onely in the degree or quantity of it. But others that foresee the consequence of this concession, will not allow it. For if it be saving in the nature of it, though it be the least of all seeds, yet it may save, as Christ compared the tru seed of
Regeneration unto a Very little thing, even the least of all seeds. But that they say this universall pricciple is only som relict of that su∣pernaturall Light which Adam had before the fall, and nothing de no∣vo, or of a new superadded, is not to be granted. For, if by super∣naturall Light they understand the image of God in man, that image did wholly dye, & the light thereof become wholly extinguisht and so the image remayned indeed in man, but as a dead body without life, or as a candle whose light is blown out and extinguished, for the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world, and, by the fall, Christ came to be crucifyed, in man, Viz. according to the life of the ex∣pressed word, which being crucified, he is said to be crucified, though according to the life of the word as it is immanent or dwelling in God, (and not externally emanant or expressed in man) he could never suffer or be crucified. And thus, as that supernaturall principle became crucified in man through the fall, the light thereof came to be wholly extinguished, for the light proceedeth from the life. An example whereof we have in every naturall thing which liveth. Which, so soone as they are slain, or mortified, send forth no more vertu, till quickened again. And thus a live coale after it is killed, giveth no more light, till it be revived again by somewhat that is liv∣ing administred and communicated de novo to it. That supernaturall light then, which is in all men since the fall, is not any relict, as aforesaid, but some what given of a new to quicken and enlighten the dead body of the divine image, and (thereby and there through) the soule of man, which onely can live unto God & be a partaker of his life, through that life which he breaths into this slain image, in which man onely hath fellowship with God, accord∣ing to which man was made in the beginning, and because of which he excelled all the other visible creatures, for that this divine image expressed, or breathed Concerning this image of God in man, or Breath of life breathed into man, by which he became a living soul, see the Testimonies of the Antients, especially of Athana∣sius, Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Proc∣pius Gazaus, &c. some of which may possibly be given at the end of this booke. into him whe∣reby he became a living soule, i. e. did partake of a life that in the very nature and kind of it, excelled the life of all other Visible creaturs, which did repre∣sent God, and give the knowledg of him, unto man, so far as he was capable of it.
Now, in the last place we have to doe with Arminians, and Pa∣pists who deny this universall principle to be the grace Evangelicall, and consequently that the true seed of Regeneration is sowne in every man: which is sufficiently refuted from what hath been said. For, if this Light or principle be given a new to quicken and raise up the divine image which dyed, and was slain by mans fall, what can it be but the tru seed of Regeneration? For, any other principle would be altogether Heterogeneous, and so could not serve to quic∣ken or raise it up. Let also the many excellent Scripture proofs ad∣duced and opened in the 2 Section, and elce where, be but well weigh∣ed and considered, and it will plainly appear, that the grace they de∣clare of, is truly Evangelicall, being called the word of faith, and the Gospell Rom, 10: 8. v. 16. compared, and Colossians. 1. 23. 27. As also John 1. 9. 7. &c. where its called the tru light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world, that all through him might beleeve &c.
SECTION III. The objections of any seeming weight answered. Object. 1. NAturall and unconverted men are said Ephes: 5. 8. to be darkness, how then can saving light be in them? Answ. It may be in them notwithstanding in a seed as well as darkness, by your own prin∣ciples, is said to be in the Saints so long as they are in this body, who yet, are in that place said to be Light in the Lord. Why may not then as well light be in them that are called darkness, as darkness, accord∣ing to your principles, be in them that are called Light in the Lord! yea, it must have been in them while darkness, or they could never have been brought out of that state, to be light in the Lord: for, t'is by the shining of the true light, in such, that those that resist not its operation, come to be so changed. Object. 2. All men have not faith: therefore all men have not sav∣ing light. Answ. I deny the consequence. For faith is the effect of this sav∣ing light onely in those that resist not its meek and gentle operation, not in those that resist it, for in them it produceth, not faith, but condemnation: so, we grant all men have not faith, hope, love, nor any of those blessed effects and Vertues of the spirit mentiond, Galat. 5. 22. 23. which the Saints alone, or the converted onely; have but this hinders not but that all might have them, the seed (which would bring forth these fruits in them, did they not oppress it) being in them. Object. 3. Some are said Jude. 19. Not to have the spirit. Therefore such have no saving light. Answ. The word [have] hath various significations, some∣times it signifyes possession, enjoyment, union, and thus all have not the spirit. Yea, thus none but the Saints have it. Other whiles it signifies the presence, or in-being of the Spirit in men, according to that influence of light and life, which prepareth for union and enjoy∣ment;
and thus, all men have the spirit so long as the day of their Vi∣sitation remaineth. Object. 4. It's said the World cannot receive the spirit of truth, be∣cause it sees him not neither knows him. Therefore &c. Answ. The same answer servs: For, the word[receive]as well as[have] is of Various acceptations. Thus the World can neither receive nor know the spirit of truth, as to union, possession and fruition of it. But the world, that is, worldly, naturall, carnall men may receive the spirit according to that influence which prepareth for union &c. for, many a wordly and naturall man hath become a child of God; But how could any man witness such a change, but by receiving the word and spirit of truth, while naturall and carnall? as its said, as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God; By which receiving here, is understood beleeving, but there is a more generall receiving of the Spirit by which unbeleevers may come to beleeve, and so become the Sons of God who were not. Object. 5. Unconverted men are said to be without God and without Christ in the World. And Rom. 18. 10. Its said If Christ be in you the body is dead &c. Therefore Christ is not in all, nor any of the unconverted in a saving way. Answ. The former answer suffices here again, Christ is not in the unconverted by faith, by union, and enjoyment &c. this being the proper state, of the Saints. But he is in them according to that in-being and presence which by his influence upon them prepareth for union &c. For how is elce any unconverted man, ever converted, but by the in-being of Christ, and his coming to them while unconverted? he visits men while in spirituall Egypt, and coms unto them in that state, to lead them out of it, but many do not follow him: as the words of Christ do most plainly import. I am the light of the world he that follows me shall not abide in darkness but &c. So, some follow, and some follow not, yea, he said to the very un∣beleevers, while ye have the light beleve in it. Jo. 12. 36. And the slothfull servant is said to have RECEIVED his Talent. Though he hid it in the Earth, according to which Christ said, from him that hath not shall be taken away that which he hath. How could he be said
to have received it; and how could he again be said not to have it, if the words [have, and receive] did not admit of Various significa∣tions? Object. 6. Its said, the naturall man receivs not the things of the spirit of God &c. neither can he know them. Therefore &c. Answ. The things which the Apostle here speaks of, are relative to the things mentiond 1 Cor. 2. 9. which eye hath not seen, nor eare heard, neither have entred into the heart of man which God hath pre∣pared for them that love him; which things (Viz. the peace and joy of the holy Ghost, and sweet fellow ship of the Saints with God, & things thereunto pertaining) the naturall man, or man in his naturall state receiveth not, nor can he, so much as know them; And what wonder! while he is in a state uncapable of them. But; there are other things, and those of God too, which they may receiv and know, Viz. the things of his Judgment, qualified with mercy, which are preparatory to their conversion and restoration, which are proper to their state and condition. But the conditions of the Saints, and things thereunto appertaining none can know, till they come to be Saints themselvs. And then they will have an eye to see, and heart to understand even those deep things of God. Object. Its said unto the Saints Heb. 10. 32. after ye were enlight∣ed, yee indured a great fight of afflictions, which imports that once they were not, and onely the Saints are enlightned. Answ. No such matter, it onely denotes a two fold, enlightning, and that the unconverted are not so, or in that sence, said to be enlightned as the Saints. For there are diversity of illuminations, ministrations and operations, but one spirit, one word, one power, one saving light and grace, common to, and working in, all, according to their respective states and conditions. Thus the Saints are inlightned to see and know the things proper to their state, and others to see and know the things proper to theirs, but not the conditions, attain ments and enjoyments, of which at presen they are utterly uncapa∣ble, being onely capable of knowing their own conditions, and things that are preparatory, and of tendency to their sanctification, or becoming Saints. Object. Christ saith, he prayeth not for the world, therefore he doth not savingly enlighten them.
Answ. The word [World] is either understood relatively, as a society and fellowship of men whose Government, Dominion and course of life, is directly contrary to the Government, Dominion, & way of Christ, and the course of life and conversation of his Saints. And thus the world, and the Church, are diametrically opposit to each other. So that in this sence Christ prayeth not for the world; for that were to pray for the upholding and continuance of wickedness, which is, as it were the band which knits the World together into a body in∣corporate against Christ. But this, nor he nor his do pray for but against. Or the [world] is singly understood, of men living in the world in a naturall condition, and thus he prayeth for them that they may be converted and beleeve as John 17. 21. and he prayed for his ene∣mies, when he suffered upon the crosse. But they say. If he prayed for the world, then the whole world should be converted, for the Father heareth him alwayes. Answ. He prayeth for the world in a submission to the will of God, who willeth all men to be saved, not absolutly, but in relation to their beleeving, by which will of God to save them, all men are visited, with such an houre and power of the love, mercy and grace of God, that they may beleeve; And for this Christ prayed, and all the Saints do pray; even for all men, that they may be more and more so visited, for this is good and acceptable unto God. 1 Tim. 2: 1, 2, 3, 4. Object. 9. Christ dyed not for all men therefore, &c. Answ. I may well form the contrary Argument, Christ dyed for all men, therefore he hath savingly enlightned them. For, that Christ dyed for all, is most expressly affirmed. 2 Cor. 5. 2. Hebr. 2: 9. com∣pared with 1 Tim. 2: 6. But say they, the word [all] is here to be taken not for singula generum, but genera singulorum, i. e. not for every particular, but for some of all sorts. Answ. For the refutation of this fond fancy I refer the reader to the above Arguments, espetially to Argument 1. 5. 7. Pag. 12. 31. 32. 38. 39. Where it is at large proved that by [all] is to be understood all particulars. But they further Object, If Christ had dyed for all, then all should
be justifyed and saved, or elce his death would be in vaine and of no effect unto many. And Rom. 8: 34. its said who is he that condemneth; it is Christ that dyed. Answ. We say not, nor ever did, that all the benefits of Christs death come upon all, for the benefits of Christs death are many, whereof some come onely upon some, others upon all. Viz. Justifi∣cation and the things accompanying it do come onely upon them that beleeve, but the free gift or grace is come upon all, not whereby all are actually justified, but whereby they might beleeve and be justified. Nor doth the unbeleef of some make the death of Christ of none effect; For it hath its effect to render them without excuse, as guilty of the body and blood of Christ. And thus is that other cavill answered, If God willed all men to be∣saved, then his will should be ineffectuall, because many are not saved. For God willeth not all to be saved absolutly, but conditionally (ex parte Objecti) upon their beleeving. And whereas it is again by them objected. Either God willeth them to beleeve absolutly, or conditionally. Answ. We say conditionally. Yet not so, as if God required any thing to be done by them previous to their beleeving. But upon their non-resistence of his operation when he worketh in them. For, when the Lord appeareth in that divine seed, which he hath sown in all men, to produce in them the very act of beleeving and to draw the will of man along with him to concur therin, some do resist even when their bands are so far released that they might yield. Thus we say that God willeth all men to beleeve, upon their non-resistence of him when he works in them, to the producing faith; which is a being passive, and not active. For, before faith they cannot be active to any thing that is good. Hosea 11: 4. Object. 10. This doctrine seems to hold forth that all men even the unconverted have free will, whereas according to the Scriptures testimony, all unconverted men are in bondage and captivity so that they cannot do the things that are good. Answ. Any freedom that men wholly unconverted may be said to have, must be understood passively not actively. For indeed, in that state they cannot act that which is good, but they can forbear to resist that which works in them towards their conversion.
And yet even this passive freedome., is not of or from themselvs, but of and from the Grace of God. But some will perhaps infer from hence that they have an active free∣dome because beleeving is a being active, and according to your Doctrine (say they) they may beleeve. Answ. None can beleeve, but as faith is wrought in them, by the operation of the Spirit of God, in his own seed, by which, they not resisting it, faith would certainly be begot in them. And in this sence it may be truly said they may or can beleev. And though the soule be truly active in its faith afterwards, yet, at its first beleeving, it may rather be said to be passive then active. For, what is its first beleeving, but a suffering the seed of faith to cleave unto, and unite with it? And thus the first step of beleeving in Christ, is called a receiving him, which may be taken passively. Now, at the souls first beleeving, it receivs power to be active, and to act, from a free will, that which is good: which freedome it doth not receive all at once, but it groweth in the soule, according as its faith groweth, which beginneth in a very small thing; nor can the soule beleeve, at all times, but only at such times, as the Lord by his Spirit, in his own seed, breaths and movs upon the heart. Object. 11. By this Doctrine, it seems that the reason why one man is converted, and another not, is to be imputed unto man himself and so he should make himself to differ from another, contrary to the Do∣ctrine of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4. 7. Answ. No such thing. The reason being always to be imputed to the principall cause, which is God: and man, at best, but the in∣strument in his own conversion, whatsoever he doth so, as an in∣strument, it is all from God, and not of himself: So that, as for him, the difference is to be imputed to God, for man neither hath nor doth any good, but what he hath received from him. Object. None have saving Light and Grace, but the Elect, all others being, by God, passed by and reprobated from all eternity. Answ. That there is a decree of election and reprobation, and that from everlasting, we grant, but in another sence then the Na∣tionall teachers do assert it The understanding whereof the Lord by his spirit hath given us; on this wise.
There are two seeds one elect, and of God, the other Reprobate and of the Divell, the divine seed, which is elect, is that seed of which we have said, that God hath sown it in every man that comes in to the world, who so now cleave to this elect seed, in true faith, and persevere so to do, to the end of the day of their tryall and temptation, these are the elect of God, who are chosen of him before the founda∣tion of the world, as fore knowing, and fore seeing them in unity with this seed, which is Christ, in whom they are therefore said to be cho∣sen Ephes. The reprobate seed, is that seed of darkness and unrighteousness in men, which is of the Divell. They now which cleave thereunto, and continue in unity therewith till the day of their visitation from the Lord expire, they are the Reprobate, whom God from everlasting did fore know, would reject his elect, and cleav unto this Reprobate seed, to the very end of their day, and so accordingly did reprobate them. Thus then, though the decree of Election and Reprobation be from everlasting, yet it respects men, not simply as men, but as finally ad∣hering and cleaving, to the elect or reprobate seed. So that, none are at first passed by, but all are once visited, with a day of mercy and grace, wherin it is possible for them to be saved. But this their odd Doctrin, that God hath altogether passed by all those that perish, without ever making salvation, so much as, possi∣ble to them, they indeavour to prove from these Scriptures. Rom. 8: 29. Rom. 9. Act. 13: 48. Jud. 4. John. 6: 37. Which Scriptures they wofully wrest, and wring to that purpose, as I shall shew in the vindication of each of them. And first, to the first; Rom. 8: 29, 30. From whence they would infer, that none are called, with a call sufficient to salvation but who are pre∣destinat, and justifyed, because the Apostle saith, for whom he did pre∣destinat, them he called, and whom he called them ho did Iustify, &c. Ergo none are called, Viz. Sufficiently, &c. But who are Iustified. Answ. There is a more generall call, whereby unconverted are called unto faith and renovation; And there is a more speciall call and Vocation, proper onely unto the converted, wherby they are called unto the glorious liberty of the children of God; being called
the Sons and Daughters of the living God: and so, called unto such things as do pertain to such a state: of which calling, many Scriptures do speak, as Rom. 9. 26. Eph. 4. 1. 4. 2 Tim. 1. 9. Hebr. 9. 15. Jud. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 10. of which speciall calling this place by them addu∣ced, is to be understood; For, whom he predestinated, them did he thus call his people, the children of the living God, his Sons and Daughters, and all these he justified. Yet, according to that Generall call, many are called, who are not predestinate; for its said many are called, but few are chosen. Yea I have already proved that all are called by God, in their day, and to say that God calls any insufficiently, is to reflect both upon his goodnes, power and righteousness. The next Scripture they lay violent hands on is Rom. 9. Where, they say, its said Iacob have I loved and Esau have I hated, before the children were born &c. Answ. 1. There's no such thing said there, nor any where elce; but those words [Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated] are by the Apostle cited out of Malachy 1. 2. 3. Which were spoken long after the children were borne, and gone. And all that the Apostle saith, that was said before the children were borne, is onely, the Elder shall serve the yonger. 2. Though the decree of God concerning them was not onely be∣fore their birth but (as hath been said) from everlasting. Yet it did not respect, as its Object, Iacob and Esau simply, before they were born: but as born, and having a day of visitation given them; the one Iacob, as seeking after and obtaining the elect seed, signifyed by the birth right; the other Esau, as rejecting and despising it, till the time, of finding it was elapsed, and then though he sought it, and that with∣tears, he could not find it. 3. The Apostle doth plainly signify this whole matter of Iacob and Esau, to be a figure, signifying that the Election runs not in a car∣nall line, as the Jews apprehended, as if they were elected because descended of Iacob, and others reprobated; to give check now to this carnal conceit, the Apostle shews that it doth not run in any line of carnall generation, but in that of Spirituall regeneration. Vers 7. 8. In Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, saith he (opening the thing sig∣nifyed
by the figure) they which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God; but the children of the promise (i. e. who are born of that elect and divine seed) are counted for the seed. And thus Iacob in the figure represents all beleevers, that are born of the elect seed: And Esau all others. Now, to Iacob and his posterity was given the promised Land, which signifyeth the kingdome of heaven, which is given to the truly regenerate. But Esau and his posterity are shut out unto the wast and desolate mountains; signifying the outer darkness into which the children of unrighteousness are cast. Yet this doth not prove that either Esau himself or all his posterity were absolutly rejected of God. Yea divers Protestants as Luther, Oecolampadius and Mollerus, do not concede that Esau himself did perish but was rather saved. They urge againe Vers 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy &c. as being Pauls answer to that Objection, is there unrigh∣teousness with God? From whence they inferre, that God hath not mercy upon all, but upon some onely. Answ. These words relate not, to mens first coming into the world, but unto a time after which the much long suffering of God, was extended unto them, which they despising, and resisting, do provoke the Lord, to withdraw his mercy from them, and yet perhaps visit others with his mercy, after as much or more provocation, and never leave them till he hath gained them to himself, which is a wonderfull discrimination of the free love of God. And thus, after a time of gratious visitation, though never so small; he may have mercy upon some, to give them yet a longer time, and yet not have mercy upon others, so as to give them any longer time of forbearance or repentance; which is no unrighteousness with God; but a very cleare demonstration both of his righteousness and mercy. They urge again Vers 17. For this cause have I raised thee up, mea∣ning Pharoah, that I might shew my power in thee, which was for his destruction. Answ. It is not said, for this cause I raised thee up from the begin∣ginning; without giving thee any time of mercy, and long suffering, wherin thou mightst have repented. Nay, its plain it relates to the time of Pharoahs great provocation.
Lastly they urge from this Chapter Vers 21. &c. Hath not the power potter over the clay, &c. Answ. The Apostle alledgeth this example to clear the righteous∣ness of God, by reasoning from the lesser to the greater thus: If the Potter may do so with the clay, much more the Lord do so with men, i. e. have more abundant mercy upon some, and appoint others unto destruction, after he hath indured them with much long suffering, and given them space and place for repentance, wherin salvation was pos∣sible to them: Peter testifying, that the long suffering of God is sal∣vation, i. e. tendeth thereunto, as Paul also testifyeth saying the riches of his for bearance leads to repentance, which yet some despised. It is also said, that Iesebell had given unto her space to repent, &c. But repented not and so have others neglected the space and day given them. So that the Lord deals not altogether with men, as the Potter with the clay; for the clay being a substance, void of sence and Reason, inanimate, and uncapable of all sence of honour or dishonour; the potter may use it as he pleaseth any way. But men being capable of reason and understanding, and consequently of righteousness and unrighteousness, the Lord deals with them onely in such ways, as may be answered by the very testimony in their own consciences, that his ways towards them are ways both of mercy and righteousness, as is al∣ready demonstrated, so that not onely the righteousness of God, but his very mercy shall condemne the reprobate, because they have sinned against the mercy of the Lord and rejected it; & so become vessels of dishonour. The Lord dishonouring them, because they have dishonourd him, through unbeleef and impenitence. Another Scripture which they presse into their service, is, Act. 13: 48. And as many as were ordained to eternall life beleeved. Answ. The words may be translated thus; And who ever (or as many as) beleeved, were ordained unto eternall life, or ordered or placed into eternall life. But, although, the common translation should be admitted, it provs not what they intend. For we grant, that as whoever beleeve are ordained to eternall life so whoever are ordained unto eternall life do beleeve: which hinders not but that others may have had a day of visitation wherin it was pos∣sible
for them to have beleed, but God did fore know that they would not beleev and so de did not predestinate them to life. Another place they call to their assistance is, Jude 4. which speaks of some which were before, of old, ordained unto condemnation. Answ. We grant that some are ordained from old unto condem∣nation, but say, its for their unbeleef turning the grace of God into Wantonness &c. as Jude there speaks. Another place they build upon, is Jo. 6. 37. which saith, all that the father giveth me, shall come; whence they would inferre, that none can come unto Christ, but who are given him, that is who are elected, and they all shall. Answ. There is a more Generall giving, and so all men, yea all things are given unto Christ. Matth. 11. 27. Jo. 3. 35. and there is a more speciall giving, which is onely applicable to the Saints. Who are his children, and these cannot but come unto him, as Peter said Lord to whom shall goe but unto thee? &c. There are other places urged by them, but these adduced are the most usuall, and the answers given unto them, will, being rightly applyed, suffice to any other; so that, who judge of this matter ac∣cording to the witness of God in their hearts, and do therein, pon∣der the Scriptures, will find the Doctrin of the Nationall Teachers, concerning Election and Reprobation, not to be according to the truth nor Scripturall; but indeed a most pernicious Doctrine to the hindring of the growth and spreading of piety in the world, as may appear from what is already said; I shall now descend to weigh the few small Reasons they have, and usually give, for their adhering to so absurd an Opinion. First then, they say, if election be according to faith foreseen, then it is not free. Answ. It followeth not at all, for election is free, though it be not without respect to faith, even as justification is free, which them∣selvs say is not without respect to faith. They must then either deny justification to be free, or say that it hath no respect to faith, or confess that election is, free not withstanding its respect to faith. Secondly they argue, if Election and reprobation be according to faith foreseen, then something in the creature was the moving cause of Gods decree.
Answ. Nor doth this follow. For, though men beleeving, be the ob∣ject of the decree of Election, yet they are not the moving cause there∣of: in like manner men unbeleeving are the object, but not moving cause of reprobation. Unbeleef is indeed a cause of the Destruction of the wicked, which destruction is decreed, so is also faith an instru∣mentall cause of the salvation of the Saints, which is also decreed, but not of the decree of God, which hath no cause, without him∣selfs. And by these Answers any other reasons they bring may be confuted. Object. 13. If saving grace andilight were given unto all, then all should be saued, otherwise grace were not effectuall, as not having its efficacy. Answ. It followeth not; grace is effectuall, and hath its sufficient efficacy, in that in its own nature it is able to save all, who do not resist it, even as Physick may be very effectuall, to cure such and such diseases, if duly applyed, and yet if it be not permitted to have its due operation, it may not onely not cure, but kill. But more over, grace hath its efficacy in all, in that it makes all inexcusable, who do resist it, and persist in their gainstauding. And thus, it tend∣eth to the glory of God in their condemnation. But say some, a morall suasion is sufficient to leave men without ex∣cuse. Answ. I deny it. For, nothing can render men unexcusable, but that, which being improved can excuse, which no morall sua∣sion can doe. Object. 14. Saving light and grace is irresistible therefore it must have its effect to salvation. Answ. That the Lord may work irresistibly in some, we deny not, but that he doth so work, in all that are or may be saved, is the meer brain-sick fancy of these men, and contrary to the tenor of the whole Scriptures, which complain of mens resisting the holy Ghost. withstanding the truth, holding it under in unrighteousness, cruci∣fying the Lord of glory in themselvs, doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace, oppressing and choaking the good seed &c. What is more effectuall then the sun, and then fire, unto which Christ, the word of grace and tru light is compared? yet, what more
easily resisted then the light of the sun, without all pains, by the bare wink of the ey. And fire, though suffered to break out to a flame can be quenched. To divers other naturall & powerfull causes which have efficacy enough in them to procur their proper effects, if not impeded, is this word of grace compared. Object. 15. Its said of some that they could not beleeve Jo. 12. 39. Ergo &c. Answ. True; but no where is it said that from the begininng they could not beleeve. Yea, the very reason why they could not at that time beleeve is expressly rendred by Matth. 13. 13. because they had closed their eys and in seing did not see; for which cause the Lord, being provoked, gave them up (read v. 14. 15.) to hardness of heart that they could not beleeve. Object. 16. God so hardned Pharoahs heart that he could not obey the Lord, and let the people goe. Answ. True again, but where is it said that Pharoahs heart was so hardned from the beginning of the time that he was capable of un∣derstanding? no where. Pharoah had provoked the Lord by his cruell oppressing the Israelites, & causing their male children to be killed a just provocation of the Lord thus to give him up to obduracy of heart, so that he could not obey. Now, we never said that all men may beleeve and obey the Lord, at all times, but onely at such times and seasons as the Lord breaths and moves upon them within the day of their visitation. Object: 17. Its said of the People of Israell Deut. 29. 4. The Lord hath not given you a heart to perceive, and eys to see, and ears to heare &c. Therefore he had not given them all, saving light and grace. Answ. It follows not; for the perceiving heart, seing eyes, hear∣ing ears, are the effect of this saving light and grace, onely in those, in whom it is not resisted. Now, God had given his good Spirit to instruct them. Nehem. 9: v. 20. but they rebelled against and vexed his holy Spirit, Isayah. 63: verse. 10. But some would fain limit these words only to those who prophesied, or at least to the faithfull, unto whom God gave his good Spirit to in struct the people, which they rebelled against, not in themselvs, but in the faithfull who did instruct them.
Answ. This cannot be, for it had been to no purpose to give his good Spirit unto the teachers to instruct the people, if no measure of the same had been given to the people to learn. For, as none can sufficiently teach the things of God, without the Spirit, so can none can truly learn them without it. Again, so far as any man resists the Spirit of God in another, he first resists it in himself: yea, it is said expresly they tempted God in their hearts Psa. 78. verse 18. And it is already proved that the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withall. Object. 18. Some are said to have no light in them Isayah 8. 20. Answ. According to the Hebrew, even as the margent intimates, it is thus, because they have no morning in them. Now, its true all have not the morning light in them which imports the day star to be arisen; but with many it is as it were midnight for darkness, yet the light shineth in this darkness, even as the darkest night hath some light, and that from the sun at least by the reflection of its beams. Object. 19. Its said Matth. 6. 23. If thine ey be evill thy whole body shalbe full of darkness, if therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? That it is said the whole body is full of darkness where the eye is evill, (that is, where the heart is false) hinders not, but that the true sa∣ving light, in a seed, may be in that body: according to the very concession of our adversaries; who (although it besaid if the Eye be single the wholy body is full of Light) do earnestly contend that the most single hearted and best of all the Saints that ever lived upon the earth, have still some darkness in them, in a seed. And more over, the word in, in this place, signifieth, as in other places, union, enjoyment, &c. Now, most certain it is, that all that which men of corrupt minds do take for their light, rule and guide, so as there with to unite and thereby to be lead, is but Light falsly so called, and reall darkness. For, there is a generation that call reall darkness light and true light darkness, to whom the day of the Lord is said to be darkness, Amos 5: 18. against whom the Spirit and true light pronounceth a Woe. That Christ here speaketh of the woefull state of such people is plain whose light is darkness: For it is utterly impossible that the true light,
even in its least measure, should really be darkness. The light then which is darkness (in whomsoever upon the face of the earth) is not the tru light, but a false thing by them taken on, and set up in them, in∣stead of the true light, as the most pleasant thing to the blinded eyes of their minds. But what doth this hinder but that the true light may be in them, a reprover and condemner of them, and their false light? which because they joine not to nor improve it, is, as it were, not in them, but in order to their further condemnation, as it is written Jo. 3. 19. Yea, that the tru and saving light hath been in them, whose body was full of darkness, & ey evill, is most palpably evident from this. That the Light indeed in them as they were turned towards it by the Ministry of Gods faithfull servants, hath proved an eye-salve, to make the eye single, which was evill; by which in process of time the darkness hath been wrought out and dispelled, and the soule and its body filled with light, as the bright shining of a candle gives light to the eyes, as it is written. Luke 11. 36. Object. 20. Its said Jo. 5. 37. 38. Yee have neither heard his voice, nor seen his shape at any time. And ye have not his word abiding in you. Answ. That's the voice by which he speaketh unto his children, which is full of heavenly sweetness, joy and refreshment, which is spoke from mount Sion; which comes after the wind, the fire and the Earth∣quake &c. But there is also a voice from mount Sinai, which is a voice of reproof, and correction, of judgment and condemnation, which yet hath some mercy, as it were, secretly in it, wherby God speaketh unto all men both Jews and Gentiles, as it is Ps. 50. 1. The mighty God even the Lord hath spoke, and called the earth from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof. And Rom. 10. 18. have they not heard? yes Verily &c. And so, according to the various states and conditions of men, the Lord hath divers voices wherby he speaketh unto them, & they as men, have an ear to heare. And this voice the Lord formeth or frameth sutable to the ear he speaks to. Now the Saints and children of God, have an ear and ey formed in them, in the divine birth, which others have not: yet God can speak unto them according to the eare which they have. Deus loquitur linguâ filiorum hominum. i. c. God speaketh
in the language of the Sons of men. Yea, he hath a voice wherby he speaketh unto the most unsensible creaturs, so as that they obey him. Thus hath the Lord also, a speciall, peculiar, and singular way of manifesting himself unto the Saints, by them to be seen, in his image raised and formed in them; which may be called his shape. And thus none but such can see him. Yet he maketh his invisible things, even his eternall power and God-head clearly to be seen, in some mea∣sure, even by them who beleeve not, so that they are without excuse. And, wheras its said that they have not his word abiding in them. That is, not springing up, and bringing forth fruit in them; as a seed which being sown in the earth is not permitted to take root in it, by reason of some impediment, and so, is not said to abide in it: for the word [abide] signifyeth union as Jo. 15. 3. Abide in me, i. e. keep in union with me &c. otherwise the word was nigh unto them, in their mouth and in their heart Rom. 10. Object. 21. This universall Light, can lead no further then heathe∣nish morality, i. e. morall righteousness of temperance, and justice be∣tween man and man, and therefore is not a saving and Evangelicall Light. Other such objections also there are, that may fitly be taken in here. As, that it cannot discover all sin; nor the root of sin, called ori∣ginall sin; nor the remedy Viz. the Lord Iesus Christ, nor the right way of worshipping God. Ergo not saving. And all this they thinke they sufficiently demonstrate, when they say; the Gentiles that had not the Gospell outwardly preached to them, know no more but heathenish morality as being Idolaters and worshipping false Gods, or the true God in a false way. Answ. This is a miserable way of concluding, voyd of all reason; to argue from the non-existence of the effect to the non sufficiency or in∣ability of the cause. And servs equally to the accusing of the Scrip∣tures insufficiency in discovering the will of God; because many that own and profess the Scriptures are found worshipping of Idols, and of the true God in a false manner, and practising many enormities against the Testimony of the Scriptures and witness of God in their own consciences. So that, though all the Gentiles had been universally ignorant of these things that will not prove the light to be insufficient to salvation,
because their ignorance proceeded not from the insufficiency and in∣ability of the light, but from their not being faithfull unto it; nor diligent improvers thereof. I am (saith Christ) the Light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness; importing that those that do not follow him, though he lighten them, shall remain in darkness. But secondly, how do they prove that none of the Gentiles did know sin, nor the root thereof? nor the Lord Jesus, nor the tru worship of God? They instance indeed, many that knew not all these things, quoting Scriptures that speak so of many of them, but not of all. Now, to argue from the particular, or particulars, to the universall, is but an unreasonable way of argumentation; and no better then to conclude all men to be blind because some are so. Thirdly. I have already shewed, in Argument 3. 4. and 6. from Rom: 1. 2. and 10. Chapters, that some of the Gentiles who were under no outward administration of the Gospell, did call upon the Name of the Lord, and were saved: and so consequently knew both sin and the remedy thereof the Lord Jesus. But, what though they knew not the outward Name, if they knew the Nature, the Spirit, the life which slays sin and cures the soule? It is not the meer outward name that saves, but the life, the power of Christ that quickens, cleanses, purifies: and by this they might be∣saved; For it is the life that saveth Rom. 5. 10. I also shewed from Rom. 2. That some of these Gentiles did so fulfill the Law of God, that they were accounted the Iews and cir∣cumcision in heart before the Lord, had praise of him; and were iu∣stifyed. And this was a great error among the Jews, that the Lord had not a people among the Gentiles who were accepted of him; yea, it was even the mistake of the Apostles themselvs, till the Lord convinced Peter by a vision from heaven, Acts. 10. But after he was con∣vinced (both by the heavenly Vision, as also by meeting with Corne∣lius, a Gentile and uncircumcised, and yet a just and devout man, one that feared God and all his houshold) he broke forth with these words, of a truth I now perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears God and worketh righteousness is
accepted. Which plainly imports that there were some in divers Nations who both feared God, wrought righteousness and were ac∣cepted. And what do those words, Acts 10. 28, call thou no man unclean, import, but that God hath not absolutly passed by any man without giving him an opportunity, by which he might be saved? But say they, Paul said he had not known sin but by the Law. Rom. 7. wheras you say, the light by which he might have kown sin was with him from his child hood: again he saith, when the commandement came sin revived and he dyed; how can this be understood of that Light, which was with him from his child hood? Answ: Very well: yea, how can it be understood of any thing elce but that Light, which now so wrought in him that he saw that which before he saw not? For, though the Light was with him from his child-hood, yet his mind was not turned in towards it, and so he did neither see nor know sin so distinctly as was needfull for him, to be saved from it. And so, though the Law in the light, and the commandement came unto him, from his child-hood, yet it came not in that power and force as afterwards, when his mind came to be turned towards it. For, the power of the Light is then onely suf∣ficiently felt in its discovery of sin, and the remedy thereof as the mind is turned towards it. Besides, this Argument lies much more forcibly against the Scriptures being this Law and commandement, not onely because he had the outward Law and commandements in the Scripture, from his child∣hood, and was always directed to it as his rule, and trained up at the foot of Gamaliel a Doctor of this Law. But also, because the Law never said more at one time then at another to him or any man; so that the change that was made in him, cannot be ascribed to the Law, which he was always a very zealous Professor of; but to that light which opened his mind to the understanding of the things of God, by which he might understand the Scriptures. But they urge further this Light cannot discover the Birth, Sufferings death, Resurrection and Ascention of the Lord Iesus, in the outward, the knowledg of which is essentially necessary to salvation, The∣refore, &c.
Answ. Our own experience teaches us the contrary, for we never came to know the mistery of his birth, death & sufferings (as to the true and comfortable use thereof) till our minds were turned to the Light. And how did the wise men from the East know him? Surely, the star which outwardly appeared unto them had never been sufficient, had not his starre. i. e. his Light shined in their hearts. Also, how did the Centurion and the Canaanitisch woman know and acknowledge him in the outward; & had greater faith in him then the very Jews? And how did the disciples themselvs know him? For, his outward appearance simply was not sufficient to convince them, yea he forbad them to judge according to the outward appea∣rance. Of this matter John gives a clear account, who first de∣clares him, as he is, as the light, that lighteth every man, before he declareh of him in the outward: Forasmuch as he could be known onely by the Light, even what he was outwardly. By this it was that they beheld his Glory; as the Glory of the onely begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. But the unbeleevers who beleeved not in the Light, wherewith he had enlightned them, and whose minds were turned from it, in to their own carnall reasonings, did not know him though they had the Scriptures that testifyed of him, and saw and heard of miracles that he did; for they neither knew him nor the Scriptures, being gone from his inward appearance in his own Light in their hearts, which would have discovered both him in the outward, and the Scriptures testimony concerning him. But, that the knowledge of him as in the outward is of necessity unto salvation, we grant not, save onely where it is revealed, and there it is very usefull and comfortable. Yea, our very adversaries do not affirme that all who ever were saved, had (or absolutly behoved to have) an express and distinct knowledge of his outward coming. For, they grant that children may besaved, who by reason of their in∣fancy cannot have that knowledge. Now, if so, why may not also some men (who are as it were but children & infants, even babes in Christ, as to Spirituall knowledg) be saved without that cleare distinct knowledge of his outward co∣ming, being borne of his Spirit and sucking in the sincere milk there∣of? Surely such can never perish: Yea, the very disciples them∣selvs,
were for a season ignorant of the mystery of his death, sufferings, Resurrection, and Ascention. Object. 22. The Divell or Sathan hath that in him which reprovs him of sin, but yet works not at all in him, any possibility of being saved. Therefore that which reproveh for sin is not universally saving. Answ. This is a fallacy called, transitio de genere in aliud genus i. e. a passing from one kind to another. As, to argue from the Devill or Devills to men. That because that which reprovs the Devills for sin, works not in them savingly, therefore that which reprovs men for sin, doth not work savingly in them, which followeth not at all. For Devills and men are of different kinds, and the way of the Lord towards them differing in kind. For though it be the same Spirit of God and Christ, which reproveth Divels and men, yet, in the way or manner thereof is great difference; For the Devills he reproveth onely in wrath, without any mixture of love and mercy; and there∣fore we never read that he calleth upon them to repent, and turn, as he doth upon men, or mankind. Nor do we affirm that which reproves men for sin to work for their salvation, Viz. onely because it reprovs them; but because it so re∣proves them, i. e. in a way of gentleness, tenderness, mercy & not onely reprovs, but calls, moves, draws, allures, strives with o leads them to repentance, as Peter saith, waiting with long-sufferance, as in the days of Noah; as is already largely proved. Object. 23 But mans own nature, as corrupt as it is, teacheth him some things, as the Apostle saith, doth, not even nature it self teach you? Na∣ture teaches a man not to defile himself with abeast or with man∣kind, so that bestiality, sodomy, &c. are sins against the very nature of man though corrupt. Answ. True it is, the nature of man, though corrupt, teacheth him some things, yet so as but naturally, and there are some things so bad, that the very nature of man abhorreth them, as bestiality, sodomy, &c. being against nature. But it is most certain both from Scripture, and universall experience, there is a more high and Noble principle in man, then that of his own Nature, even universally; which reproveth men; not onely for those grosse and abominable sins, but for other things, which mans corrupt nature, not onely reprovs him not for, but prompts and inclines him to.
And besides, though man in his own thoughts and reasonings may prove himself guilty in divers things, & after a sort convince & reprove himself therefore, in and by his own thoughts and reasonings; yet there is still a principle in man, which over and beyond all his own thoughts and reasonings doth convince him of evil and reprove him for it; and this most manifestly of all, in the deepest silence of a mans own thoughts and reasonings; neither is there any man living but may observ a manifest difference betwixt those convictions and re∣proofs, which proceed from the Light and Spirit of God and Christ in his own seed; and those that proceed onely from a mans owne naturall Spirit in his own thoughts and reasonings. For, when the Spirit of God and Christ reproveth and convinceth a man, he doth it livingly and in such power, that it pricketh the heart, and worketh in it as a fire, hammer or sword: whereas, the naturall Spirit of man, doth it but in a dead and cold manner. And though this be the way of many to work convictions upon themselvs, meerly by, and through, their own naturall Spirit, in their thoughts and reasonings, and hammerings there with upon their hearts, calling in the ayd and help of the Letter of the Scriptures for that effect, yet they do not proffit themselvs in so doing, but indeed, do greatly hurt themselvs; For, this is all but the sparks of their own kindling, and their own works, which they should cease from: which if they did, they would in that cessation and stilness find the Light and Spirit of Christ, as their minds are turned towards it, to work mightily in them the tru and reall convictions for sin, which tend to work tru contrition, and tender∣ness of heart towards God, and the tru and godly repentance never to be repented of. And so, if the Spirit of the Lord make use of the Scripture testimo∣nies in bearing in convictions of guilt upon the soule, they are very usefull, which otherwise, (as used meerly by mans own naturall Spirit) are but a killing letter. Object. 24. Its said the Lord gave his Laws unto Iacob and his sta∣tuts unto Israell, but that he had not dealt so with every nation, there∣fore every nation hath not that in them which would teach them his Laws and statuts. It is also said, in Iudah is God knowne, therefore not in other places.
Answ. I deny these wild consequences; For though the Lord dealt not so with other nations, as with Jacob, Israell, and Judah, as to the outward Laws, statutes, and outward occasions afforded them of knowledge, &c. Yet he left not the other nations destitute of the main and principall thing, even the manifestation of the light, and Spirit of his Son in their hearts, and consciences, which would have given them the knowledge of God and of all his Laws and statuts needfull to be known by them, had they improved the same aright. And those that did improve it did both know the Lord and his Laws, and were justified through faith in him, who outwardly were neither of Jacob, Israell nor Judah but Gentiles in other Nations as hath been shew∣ed, and seing it hath been so in times past, why may it not be so now? Object. 25. If the Light wherewith Christ hath inlightned every man be sufficient unto salvation, then the coming of Christ in the outward with his obedience, sufferings and death were in vaine. Answ. This is also a false and senceless consequence; grounded upon a meer mistake, as if the sufficiency of the Light and Grace of Christ within did make void the use and benefit of his outward co∣ming, obedience, death and sufferings, or were to be set in opposition thereunto, which is utterly false; for they are not to be set in opposi∣tion to each other, as if the one did hinder the sufficiency or usefullness of the other; both being sufficient and usefull, and necessary each in their own kind and way, consummating, and being consummated in, one another. Besides, this Objection lyes as much against the Scriptures. For, ei∣ther the manifestation of God, to the children of men, before the Scriptures or any part of them were written, was sufficient unto salva∣tion or it was not; If it were not, no man before the Scriptures living, could be saved. If it were, then was the giving of the Scriptures, (by this Argument) in vain, a superfluous and useless thing. Object. 26. But if the Light within be sufficient to teach and give the knowledge of God, unto salvation; then the Scriptures are in vain, and it is in vaine to make use of outward teachings by men, or books or any outward means what soever. Answ. The vanity and unreasonableness of this consequence I
have already shewn above, and so need say the less to it here. Indeed the plain contrary is the truest, and most ingenuous consequence. Viz, that because the Light within is sufficient, therefore the teach∣ings of men and books are proffitable; which can only proffit as in the Light they are received, and made use of, and from the Light do proceed: And therefore all men who teach not from the Light of God in them, & all books writ & not from the light are unprofitable & vaine. But though the outward teachings which proceed from the light are truly profitable, yet are they not of such absolute necessity as if God & Christ could not be knowne where the outward occasions of hear∣ing are wanting. Besides either this consequence is grossly false and impertinent or John was under a grosse mistake when he wrot to the Christians, even to the little children in Christ that they had received from the holy one an unction, which was so sufficient that it so taught them, of all things, that they needed not (as an absolute necessary thing) that any man should teach them. 1 Jo. 2. 27. And yet himself did frequently teach them by word and writing, as particularly in that Epistle, not onely in generall to abide in that unction, and learn of it in all things, but many other particular things he exhorts them to, and plainly tells them these things he writes not, because they had not light sufficient, or were in the dark, as to them, but v. 8. because the true light now shineth in them, and because they know the truth. v. 21. So far is he from imagining that this would render his writing or preaching vain, that he makes use of the consideration thereof, as an incoura∣gement why he should, and why he did write unto them. Object. 27. Men receive this Light but as a gift of nature, by their naturall birth-right or descent from Adam and our naturall parents. Therefore. &c. Answ. That is false: For it is not any gift of nature, but of the free grace, love and mercy of God; neither doth it come unto us by naturall birth right, from Adam, or our naturall, parents; but from Jesus Christ the second Adam by whose obedience and righteousness it is come upon all. Rom. 5. Object. 28. But if that which is sufficient be communicated, then it is needless or in vain to depend upon God, for the dayly and hourely
in comes, communications and influences of his Spirit, Light and life. Answ. What crooked consequence is this? who ever said that every measure of life, or light communicated, is so sufficient for all times, states and conditions, that there needs no ampliation for times to come? we onely say, and that truly, that there is a mea∣sure sufficient given to every man to begin with, which doth suffice for the present occasion, and the soule that improveth the same well, may warrantably expect more and more, new and renewed commu∣nications, and influences of Light and life from the fountain dayly and hourely, who is always to be depended upon for them, and will give them sufficiently in their season. Object. 29. This Doctrine that all men may be saved, say they, hinders Prayer. Which they indeavour to evince thus. Because David (and divers others) prayed that God would incline his heart to his Testimonies, and unite his heart unto him; which signifies that they prayed for such motions of the grace and Spirit of God, as should irresi∣stibly produce the very effect, and not for such as it might be in their power to resist and render ineffectuall. Which is just as if they should pray on this wise, Lord so move my heart as that I may be left to my own liberty, to chuse whether I will follow thy motion or not. Yea, according to this Doctrine, say some, it is in vain to pray at all; For what should a man pray for? for Grace? that's given him already, & that sufficient. For what then? for irresistible motions of the Grace of God? Such are utterly inconsistent with this Doctrine. Answ. Many words, as inconsequentiall and to as little purpose as all the rest! The Doctrine of truth is so far from being a hinderance to prayer that't is a great incouragement to it, and the contrary Doctrine no small impediment: For if God hath passed by the far greater part of mankind, and absolutely decreed to deny them the least measure of his Grace, doth not this discourage people in seeking his Grace? Seeing if they be of those that he hath so passed by, & decreed to deny his grace unto, prayers wil be to no purpose, the decree of God being unchangeable. And seeing they do not know but that they be of that great number, it is sufficient to make them doubt (yea a man cannot but doubt of that which he doth not certainly know) and doubting hindereth prayer.
But secondly, if all motions of the Spirit of God be irresistible, & come by an absolute decree of God, why should a man pray for them? seing they must and will come whether he pray, yea whether he will, or not. Again though we say grace, and that sufficient is given unto all, and the Spirit of God moves upon the hearts of all men, in a day of visitation, yet there is still roome left for prayer, that more grace may be given, and the motions thereof dayly more and more increased. But, as concerning praying for motions and drawings of the Spirit to incline and unite the heart to God, we are to pray for them as his own Spirit teacheth and moveth us, and in submission to his will, whether the motions and drawings, he is pleased to put forth in us, be more or less strong according to his good pleasure: Nor do I deny but the Lord can so move the hearts of men, as to leave no place for resistance, but all his motions are not after that manner. As for ex∣ample, a man is assaulted with a temptation, he prays to the Lord ei∣ther to remove it, or preserve him from yielding to it: And the Lord answereth him as he did Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee, ought not this man to acquiesce in this answer? And if he find grace suf∣ficient given to withstand the temptation, so that if he be on his part diligent to use it he shall certainly be preserved, it is a good return of his prayer. But again, we are to consider that't is one thing to pray that the Lord would give us such motions of his Spirit & Grace as we cannot resist, and would so preserve us from the temptations that we cannot yield unto them; And quite another thing to pray for the mo∣tions of the grace & Spirit of God that I doe not resist them, nor yield to the temptations. For actually not to resist, and not to be able to resist, are things very different from each other. And this we may very warrantably pray, that the Lord would so assist us by his grace and good Spirit, that we resist not the good, nor yield to the bad and so do not sin against the Lord: in which prayer, thre is an act of resignation in the soule, freely resigning up that propriety of its will, by which it might will any thing contrary to the will of God. And for as much as an unpeccable state is attainable we may pray for it, as we do for other good things that are to come, but we
must not limit the Lord, so as to have this accomplished in our time, but patiently wait the Lords season. Object. 30. If that Light which was in the Gentiles had been of an Evangelicall nature (as you say it is) then it would have taught them Evangelicall precepts, Viz. to love enemyes, bear injuries without re∣venge, overcome evill with good &c. which are things which no hu∣mane light, reason, or naturall faculty of man can teach, much less bring any man to the practice of. Answ. It doth appeare, that many of the Gentiles who had not the Scriptures, did not onely teach these Doctrines, but also in a large measure practise them, patiently suffering injuries, not onely without revenge, but shewing love, meekness, and rendring good for evill. Seing then, that this objection ingenuously grants that no naturall power of man could teach or lead to these practises, evident it is that that in them which taught and enabled them to obey the truth in these things, was supernaturall and Evangelicall. G. K.
POSTSCRIPT. AND because some through ignorance in History have presumed to affirm that none of the Heathens so (called) knew or practised such things, for the conviction of them, and a generall service to the truth, we shall here alledge some remarkable examples to evince the truth of what is affirmed in those particulars: which made Aristotle in his Ethicks lib. 10. chap. 4. 7. say, they that did these things did them, not as men, but as having some thing divine, or of God in them. Not then to quote at large the Noble Testimony given by Palla∣dius, Ambrosius and others, concerning Dindimus King of the Brachmans, as they are at large published in Latine and Greek and printed in London by T. Raicroft 1668. intituled Palladius de Gen∣tibus Indiae & Bragmanibus. S. Ambrosius de moribus Brachmanorum, & Anonymus de Brachmanibus. As also another in the high Dutch, language inittuled Historie von dem grossen Konig Alexander &c. Yerzo auffs new aus der alten Ceutschen sprache in druck ge∣bracht. Printed anno 1642. All which do relate the excellent and Christian Evangelicall lessons given by the said Dindimus to Alexander, who sent Ambassadors to him to require him to come to him, promising him great rewards if he did, & losse of his head if he did not, & this in the Name of Alexander the King of all men & Son of the great God Jupiter. But Dindimus smiling at this Vapour, and not moving his head from the leavs he lay upon, answered, God the great King never begot injury, but light, peace, life, the water, body and soules, which he also receivs when they have finished their course, nor was he ever the author of lust. This is my Lord, and onely God, who as he hates murther so he wageth not war &c.And a little further he saith. The things that I seek I easily attaine to, those things which I regard not I am not to be driven to. If therefore Alexander take my head he shall not destroy my soule which will return to the Lord, while the
body which was taken out of the earth shall therunto return. For I being made a Spirit, shall ascend unto my God, who included us in the flesh, and placed us upon this earth to try us whether we, being gone forth from him, would live unto him, as he hath commanded: who dem∣ands an account of those that depart; for he is a judge of all injuries: and the sighs of those that are injuriously treated, become the pains of those that injure them. Let Alexander then threaten those that love silver and gold, and feare death; neither of which hath place among the Brachmans, who do neither feare the one nor love the other. Go therefore, and tell Alexander, Dindimus wants him not and if he wants Dindimus, let him come to him. Which being re∣ported to Alexander, he was the more desirous to see that single old man that could conquer him after he had conquered so many Nations. And so coming to him said, I come to heare a word of wisedome from thee whom I hear dost converse with God. To whom Dindi∣mus replyed, Very willingly would I administer to thee the words of the wisedom of God, hadst thou but place in thy mind to receive the gift of god administred. But thy mind being filled with various lusts, insatiable avarice, and a devilish desire to rule, which fights against me, and my designe of drawing thee off from destroying Nations and shedding humane blood is in all things contrary to the wisedome by which I and the Brachmans are led, who worshipp God, love men, contemne gold, despise death, and slight pleasures: whereas Alexander and his, feare death, love gold, covet pleasure, hate men, and despise God. adding, how can I speak unto thee the words of the wisedome of God, whose cogitations are so filled with pomp, ostentation and inordinate lusts that a whole world is not able to satiate thee? how∣ever he refused not to give him that councell, which Alexander was (as he confessed) convinced in his heart was good, but could not follow; Viz. to cease warring against men without, & engage himself in ano∣ther warfare, against the enemies within himself, his lusts, his affections, his desires, if he desired to be rich indeed and to be a true Victor: assuring him that all his power, all his hosts, all his Riches, all his Pomp, would at last not availe him any thing; But (saith he) if thou wilt hearken to my words, thou shalt possess of my goods, who have God to my friend, & whose inspiration I injoy within me. Thus thou shalt overcome lust
the mother of penury, which never obtains what it seeks. Thus thou shalt, with us, honour thy self, by becoming such as God had created thee. Adding though thou slay me for telling thee these proffi∣table things I feare not. For (saith he) I shall return to my God which created all things, who knows my cause, and before whom nothing is hidden. I know not (saith he) whether thou shalt be so happy as to find thy self perswaded by my words, but I assure thee, if thou be not, when thou art departed hence I shall see thee punished for thy actions & heare thee lament with deep and sharp sighs, the misery thou hast put many to &c. Viz. when thou shalt have no other companion then the memory of the evills thou hast heaped up upon thy self. For (saith he) I know the pains justly inflicted by God upon unjust men. Then thou shalt say unto me, Dandamis, how good a counseller wert thou to me? &c. These things Alexander heard (as, tis said of Herod concerning John the Baptist) not onely without wroth, but with a placid coun∣tenance & replyed. O Dandamis thou true teacher of the Brachmans! I have found thee the most excellent amongst men, by reason of the Spirit that is in thee; I know all that thou hast spoken is true. God hath brought thee forth and sent thee into this place: in which thou art happy and rich, wanting nothing, all thy life long quiet, injoy∣ing much rest. But what shall I do who cohabit with continuall slaughters? &c. who if I would live in the desert, my Lievtenants would not suffer me, and though they would being in this state, it is not lawfull for me to quit them, for how shall I defend my selfe before God, who hath assigned me this Lott? But thou reverend old man and servant of God, for these words of wisedom where with thou hast helped, and rejoyced me, dehorting me from war, receiv thou my presents and despise me not: I am affected with kindness, honouring wisedom, & so commanded his servants to bring forth gold & severall sorts of array, bread and oyle. Which Dandamis beholding laughed, saying to Alexander Per∣swade (if thou canst) the birds about the woods to receive thy gold, and sing the better for it: but if thou canst not per∣swade
them, nor shalt thou ever perswade me, to be worse then they. I therefore receive no unprofitable present, which I can neither eat nor drink, nor do I serve soule-hurtfull riches &c. Heres nothing in this desert to be bought with gold; For God gives me all things freely &c. selling nothing for gold, but freely bestowing all good things, and even the mind on those that freely accept it &c. But the oyle he took; and walking about the wood gathered some sticks, and kind∣ling a fire, he said. The Brachmanns have all things, being fed by provi∣dence, & into the fire he powred the oyle, till it was all consumed & sang a hymne unto God. Oh God immortall I givethee, in all things thanks. For thou rulest in all things, giving all things abundantly unto thy creatures for their food. Thou creating this world dost preserve it, ex∣pecting the soules which thou hast sent into it, that thou mayst, as God, justify those that have lead a pious life, and condemn those that have not obeyed thy laws. For all righteous judgment is with thee & life eternall prepared by thee. Who with eternall goodness shewest mercy unto all. He that can doubt from whence these streames, and from what Spirit these Doctrines and exhortations slow. Whether from Nature or grace and that Evangelicall, seems to me to have little skill in things that differ: he that can ascribe it to Nature can surely not beleeve nature to be so vitiated and degenerate as it is in mankind, he that shall say it proceeds from the devill or enemy of mankind is certainly worse then blind. It were worth the while then to know where the Calvinists (that acknowledge the cortuption of nature, and deny the universality of grace) will place it. He that shall read Hermes Trismegistus his Divine Pimander tran∣slated out of Arabick by the famous Dr. Everard, printed in en∣glish 1657. and especially his booke, or secret sermon in the mount, of Regeneration, and the profession of silence, if he understand what he reads, shall without all hesitation say, the things there uttered tran∣scend the reach of naturall wisedome and proceed from a more pro∣found source. As also his Doctrine in his 12. Booke called Crater or Monas, where he doth not darkly preach the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the Spirit which he (in his dialect) calls the mind. Lieupang Emperor of China, taught that 'twas the part of a great
mind, to forgive injuries, and that the greatnesse of the mind nver shi∣nes cleare then where opportunityes of revenge are neglected. Demonax taught that we ought not to be wroth with offenders, but endeavour to be∣come their amenders: to sin, saith he, is humane, but to amend the faults of others is the part of God, or of men most near unto him. Claudianus taught that we ought to be ready to forgive offenders of our own accord, and more ready to lay aside anger then to stirr it up, and not refuse reconciliation with any that seek it. King the Emperor of China said, there is nothing that encreas∣eth vertue, more then the slighting of all sustained injuries. Now, that these things they taught not out of vain-glorious osten∣tation nor to be seen and admired of men, or for any self-end, but purely out of conscience, sincere love to God, and faith unfeigned may further appear by what follows. A certain Indian monk or secluse, an ancient man living in a chappell in the Island Calempluy which certain Portugals having robbed of no small treasure, they were by this old man sharply repro∣ved and advised, if they would escape the just iudgment of God, and find mercy and pardon of their sins, that their souls might not perish eternally, to restore the spoyl they had taken away, to pray with tears for forgive∣ness, and as freely to give almes as they would bestow any thing upon them∣selves. Which they promised to do, but fearing least their prey might be taken from them; they asked him whether there were no arms upon the Island: the old man replyed no, adding that all that would go to hea∣ven, stood more in need of patience to bear injuries, then arms to revenge themselves. See Ridderus his shamed Christian. The same author gives further an account of the doctrine of one Bertri Herrou an Indian Bramine whom he thus quotes, saying, when the wicked see a man live well, they say he doth it to be honoured of men; when they see one that is pure of heart they say it is nothing but deceit and hypocrisy, if a man be still and silent, these blasphemers say, he is mute and dumb, if he be but a litle retired from the multitude, they say, he is a varlet or villain; if he sustain injuries they call him coward; if he bear ill language, they say he is of a base offspring, thus turning all good into evil: Thus far concerning bearing injuries. Now, concerning riches, hear what he saith, if thou pursue not worldly things thou shalt
have much satisfaction, but if thou do hunt after them thou shalt have much trouble, why art thou, to no purpose, buried in the world? For∣sake thy love unto the things of this world and place thy love on God; if thou could get all that thou canst desire, what is it? it shall verily have an end. And in his soliloquy to his own heart, he saith, o my heart thou sometimes wanderest through the whole universe becaus thy will is not fixed, seeking every where, and whats the reason thou findest not that God that is in thy own heart, by which thou mayst attain to salvation? the world must have an end, what will then be mans life? the rich are never satisfied but alwayes covet more, and in time they wax old; thers nothing therfore better then to mind God. Though I should loose my honour, my money, my friends, my servants, my youth, and should have nothing to give any man, 't is no matter, best then it is for me to have my thoughts upon God alone. Thus also taught Seneca, saying, a great mind never revengeth an injury, becaus it is no more affected wh it then a rock with an arrow shot against it: Reason (i. e. the divine reason) forbids me all revenge, to which reason I have surrendred my self; anger would do me more harm then the injury sustained. But least ye should think that by a great mind, he means a haughty, exalted, scornfull mind pussed up with an imaginary greatness, void of goodness, which is indeed the only true greatnesse of the mind; hear what he further taught, if it be a bad man saith he, that wrongs thee, why wilt thou hate a sinner, who by going a stray is faln into transgression? such we must seek to convert and not be wroth with them, who would then be wroth with him that he ought to cure? he will meet with his re∣ward from another. And else where he saith, 't is an ugly thing and unseemly to reward one injury with another, becaus in such contests the victor is the worst, if any man strike thee, go thy way. Alexander the Grecian said, ther's nothing more sweet, pleasant and comely then to be able to bear with a man that reviles us, if any man speaks evil of thee, make as if thou heeded him not, so shall the rviler himself become sensible that his ill tongue turns to his own disadvantage: The comprehensive motto of Epictetus bear and forbear, is a brief and full demonstration of their doctrine in this point. And 't was one of the stoick laws. Bear all injuries with patience.
Object. But it may be some may say, they did so write indeed but they practised it not, thefor these sayings and doctrines were not the product of the Spirit of God in their minds. Answ. It follows not, for how frequent are the manifold examples of peoples acting contrary to the convictions of the Spirit of God in their consciences, seconded by the testimony of the Scriptures? who among you that bear the name of Christians do walk faithfull to the inward convictions of the light of Christ in your own bosomes? Yea, do you not generally glory in it as a piece of orthodoxy that yee beleeve it impossible to overcome the lusts of your minds, and root sin out ther? So 't is enough that we have shewed that men that have lived in ages and nations (not befriended with the glorious testimonies of the Scriptures) have had the knowledg of these most singularly excel∣lent things therin contained, although we could not give one single in∣stance of any man that had so practised. But ex abundanti we shall now give no mean examples of such as practised, upon occasion, these things, and that in such a degree, and measure, as, we fear, if we should search your cityes, yea and Churches too with candles, we should scarce find such pregnant proofs of the power of God, so far received, and suffer∣ed to rule in you and to bow your hearts to the practises of that which his light injoines and effects in those that are resigned therto. Of Socrates his patience we may suppose the world pretty well in∣formed by generall fame, but for the sake of such as perhaps have not heard, we shall give out of the book above mentioned this account that being once very much reviled, and by some, that admired at his pa∣tience, stirred up to revenge said, the man speaks not evil of me, for the evil he speaks against is not in me. I am no such manner of man, and to another upon another occasion, he said assault me, fall upon me, I shall by bearing overcome thee. Again being once told that some spake evil of him, said, 't is no wonder, they never learned to speak well. So also said Seneca in the like case, they speak evil of me, becaus they cannot speak well, they do not what I deserve, but what they are wont to do: 't is an honor to displease wicked men, and he that by his owne evil life is condemned hath no right to judge others: Thus also said the King Agesilaus of a certain man that in spight and contempt had poured water upon his head, who when his friends
endeavoured to move him to revenge, replyed, the man did not poure this water upon me, but upon the man he took me to be. In like manner said Lysander, to one that reviled him sore, speak my friend, speak on, disburthen thy mind which is full of evil. Remarkable is that passage of Augustus to Cynna who being taken prisoner by Augustus was by him pardoned, which favour Cynna sleighting, sought the Emperors life, for which being a second time ap∣prehended and doomed, as his sentence was framing, Livia the empe∣rors wife, came to her husband, advising him to do as the doctors some∣times do, who, when ordinary remedies will not do, use the quite con∣trary: So saith she, seing hardness will not prevail, forgive him. Wherupon Cynna being set upon a seat by the Emperor, the Empe∣ror said unto him in a friendly manner, I now the second time give thee thy life, first, when thou wert my open enemy, and now thou art become a scet traiter against me; let therefore our friendship begin again from this day, and made him Consul, and thus by kindnesse and favours overcame his evil mind; according to the advice of Seneca, say∣ing, if any man be wroth with thee do him good, secret hatred falls, when desertedy ts adversary. Not unlike to this is that passage of the Emperor Vespasian, who (contrary to the saying of one, that he had rather be spoiled then spoil) once hearing of two noble men, that aspired after his crown, and having therof good proof, said nothing to them, but that they should desist that enterprise, for dominion was given of God, but if they would ask any thing else he would give it them. As worthy our notice was that worthy passage of king Philip fa∣ther to Alexander the great, towards Nicanor and Arcadion speak∣ing evil of him, wherupon being prompted by his councill to punish them, yea being urged therunto as his duty, was of another mind, replying that Nicanor was none of the worst of men, adding, I must a noble saying and as noble a practise of a great Prine. see whether I have not been short of my duty towards him; and (upon examination, finding that he was poore) sent him a present, and went in person to Arcadion, carrying him presents: Whereupon hearing afterwards that they spake well of him, he said to his courtiers, do you now see how it depends upon our selves that people speak wel or evil of us; I am a better doctor, then you.
Nothing inferiour to this was that action of Lycurgus that famous Spartan Legislator, who, for making wholesom laws to reduce his people to good manners was hated and stoned, and, among many other insolencies sustained, had one of his eyes smot out, with a cudg∣ell, by a certain young man called Alexander, for which he being apprehended, and condemned to dye, Lycurgus redeemed him, tooke him as a friend into his owne house, and there taught him to live well so that its said he became a good man. If this be not to overcome evil with good; what is? That famous Athenian Generall Pericles haveing been upon a time, all the day long reviled by a certain man, who followed him even to his house at night railing at him, was by this noble man so meekly borne that he not only reviled him not again, but commanded his servant, with his lanterne to light him home. Phocion that noble Athenian being unjustly condemned to dye, by the drinking, (after the manner of that countrey) a cup of poyson, being asked what he would leave in charge to his son answered; No∣thing but this, that he should never so remember this cup, as to avenge his death. Aristides an Athenian noble and righteous man being banished out of Athens, and in order therunto, by the magistrats led out of towne, a certaine ill-nurtured person, ran after him, and spit in his face. Wherupon the meek man only desired the Magistrats to teach that man for the future to be more mannerly. And after he was, through envy, thus unjustly banished, seing his countrey in perill, secretly helped it against King Xerxes, being the chief occasion of that victory. Solon being by one abused who spit in his face, nothing moved ther∣at, said, If a fisher man, to catch a small fish, bear the sea-water, why should not I to catch a man, beare this. Just so Aristippus, when having reproved Dionysius, who for it spat in his face; said, If a fisher man be not afraid of being wet to catch a small fish, why should I to catch a whole salmon feare a little sprinkleing? The same Aristippus being railed at, held is tongue, and went his way; the Reviler following him said, What! Dost thou runn
away? Aristippus replyed, Thou hast power to speak evil, and I to forbeare hearing (or eding) it. Dion, going from a feast, was followed by one railing at him, to whom not replying any thing, this ill-bred man, said to him, Dost thou not answer me? No, quoth Dion, not one word. So Lentulus spitting in Cato's face, the patient man said nothing to him, but o Lentulus, I must aver to all that deny it, that thou hast a mouth. Crates, having rebuked Nicrodomus the Comaediant, he took it so ill, that he not only abused Crates, in word, but so smote him with his sist in the face, that he bore the signe of it. But Crates did nothing to him, onely hung this inscription upon his fore head: Nicrodomus made this. Euclides, being once got into contention with his brother, his brother said, in truth, I shall dye, if I doe thee not some mischief, or ill turn. And I, quoth Euclides, shall dy, if I be not reconiled to thee. Very noble, and savoury was that act of that noble commander Pisistrates towards certain drunken fellowes who once fell upon his wife, abusing her with Lascivious words and actions, who (they com∣ing next day to begg pardon of him for their mistake) was so far from avenging this brutish incivility acted towards his wife, that he pardoned and dismissed them onely with this sober piece of advice, that they should take heed they were no more so drunk. All these examples we find alledged by a Calvinist preacher in Rot∣terdam, to the shaming of his pretended Christians, by the vertuous examples of these pretended heathens, and meer naturall men, wher∣upon he intitles his book Den beschaamde Christen, For which the man, wee confesse, had a great deal of reason, for certainly these men shall rise up in judgment against the Christians of this age, and fill their faces with shame and confusion enough. But how to reconcile these things to their doctrine of natures being so corrupted, so defiled, that all naturall men are blind and darkened in their understandings, dead in trespasses and sin and unvisited by any new visitation of evangelicall grace, is past our skill. Surely, that do∣ctrine
is false, these things not good, the relations not true, or they must say, Christ was out, when he said, Men gather not grapes on thornes, nor figs on thistles, and that an evill tree can not bring forth good fruit nor corrupt fountain send forth sweet streames. G. KEITH. B. FURLY. Reader, IT was my intent to have given the at the end of this treatise the testi∣monies of severall, if not most of the Ancient Fathers of the church, so called, concerning the universality of the divine, spirituall, saving illumination imparted by Christ, as the eternall Word, wisedome and Image of the father to all mankind; with not a few testimonies out of many Authors of note of later ages, both before and since the Refor∣tion; And more especially to have shewed what many of them thought concerning that  spiraculum vitarum, breath of lives, said (2 Genes. 7.) to be breathed into man, by which he be∣came a living soule: viz, that it is not the soule, nor the naturall life thereof, but the divine life, something of God, even the Divine Spi∣rit which finally constituted man the image of God, and without par∣taking of which he could never properly, not truely be said to be the image of God; of which breath of life many have excellently writ, some stiling it the Spirit of God, others something of God in man, some the Divine soul in contradistinction to the vegetative, animall, and Rationall soules, others the pars or portio superior animae, others fundus animae; the supream part or portion, the fund, bottome or center of the soule, the guide and director thereof. I had also intend∣ed to have given here some account of many vitiously translated places of Scripture darkening the Doctrine of the inward light, grace Spirit and kingdome of God in the soule, so plentifully attested to by the holy penmen of Scripture, as also to the establishing the doctrine of
the necessity of sin, every day, houre and moment of this Naturall life which never entered into the soules of these holy men to thinke, or publish; but these being not at present so perfected as is requisit, and this work having layn long on hand, I was unwilling to detain it long∣er. So these may, upon some other occasion be communicated; meane while, if any shall please to read Ahanafius in his booke de Definitionibus; and in his 3 Dialogue de Trinitate, and 4 Oration against the Arrns. And Cyrillus Alexandrinus in his treatise upon John, lib. 2: cap. 3. & lib. 8. c. 47. And in his Thesaurus lib. 4: c. 1. Together with Procopius Gazeus in his Comment. on Genesis, he will see, that our Testimony in that point, of the breath of life, is no novell doctrine, and unheard of, but many hundred years since, zealously defended by as grave Authors among the Christians as any extant; which may serve as a sufficient check to that impudent cla∣mour of Novelty, so ordinarily objected by every Ignoramus that ne∣ver once looked into Antiquity. B. F. FINIS. Errors to be mended. Pag. 11. lin. 26. read Argument 1. p. 4. 4. l. 33. r. than. p. 45. l. 5. r. preaching. p. 49. l. 1. r. Argument 9. p. 71. l. 30. r. or. p. 75. l. 15. put out that. p. 77. l. 27. put out as. & l. 35. feeding. p. 78. l. 27 r. thy. p. 81. l. 28. r. beleev. p. 85. l. 30. r. though. p. 97. l. 2. r. principle. p. 108. l. 2. r. potter power. p. 109. l. 1. beleeved. p. 112. l. 3. till. p. 135. l. 10. r. Reformation.
