M1517 99826106 30498
Tutela Sanitatis. SIVE VITA PROTRACTA. THE Protection of long Life, and Detection of its brevity, from diaetetic Causes and common Customs. Hygiastic Praecautions and Rules appropriate to the Constitutions of bodyes; and various Discrasyes or Passions of Minde; dayly to be observed for the preservation of Health and Prolongation of Life. WITH A Treatise of Fontinells or Issues. Whereunto is Annexed BELLƲM NECESSARIƲM SIVE MEDICƲS BELLIGERANS THE Military or Practical Physitian Reveiwing his Armory: Furnished with Medicinal Weapons and Munition against the secret invaders of life; fitted for all per∣sons and assaults; with their safe and regular use, according to medical art and discipline By Everard Maynwaring Doctor in Physick. Toga conuenit armis ET Bellum gero, pro bono pub lico. LONDON Printed by Peter Lillicrap. And sold by S. Thompson Stationer at the Bi∣shops head in St. Pauls Church-yard: T. Basser Stationer under St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-Sreet. 1664.
To His Renowned Highness RUPERT, COUNT PALATINE of the Rhene, Duke of Cumberland, Kt. of the Garter, &c. Health, Happiness and long Life. AS it hath beene the Custome of past Ages to prefix some Emi∣nent Personage in the Front of their Works, partly to shew a respect to Dignity and Honour, and to reverence the Excellency and illu∣strious Eminency of the Person; as also their peculiar exemplary Merits
and Endowments suting with, and favo∣ring the Treatise: I am hence imboldened in this Dedication to set Your Highness a Patron, as you may be a Pattern of tempe∣rate and regular living. Health and long Life, two great desiderable Injoyments, the one a step to the other, and both acquired (by the course of Nature) in the methodi∣cal and regular observance of Diaetetic Customs. And since the Endowments and Faculties of the Mind, are much disposed and Biassed, heighthened and abated in their operations, by the Temperament and Constitutional Changes of the Body; and that also by a seminal power and vertue from Parents, the ill effects and products of irregular and a methodical living is implanted and cha∣ractarized in their off-spring; Therefore the regular tuition and government of the Body is of great concernment to all; but more especially to such, who more eminently
are serviceable in a Kingdom, and consti∣tuted as Pillars of Honour to support and bear up the spreading Fame and Renown of our Nation for Heroick Worthies: That we may not untimely be deprived of such, nor of our hopes in their Noble and Illustrious succeeding Progeny. And as a Duty com∣plying with my nature, the propagation of Honourable renowned Families, and pre∣servation from a degenerate Issue, by prae∣cautions and wholsom Rules, is much inten∣ded by these Endeavors. I now crave your Highness acceptance of this small Offering, the Fruit of my Study and Labor; which may serve as a Directory in the dayly use of those requisites necessary to being and well being: In the regular course of which by a Decree in Nature, is promised Sanity, length of dayes, and juvenile vigour; that as your Highness is eminently placed in Dig∣nity and Power, your natural Endowments
also and personal Abilities, may not be clouded with the untimely defects of Na∣ture, nor impedited in the full fruition and free injoyment of Temporal Happiness; which shall be the constant wishes and de∣sires, as hereby it is the endeavors of Your Highness most humble Servant Everard Maynwaringe.
Literato Philiatro Lectori Salutem. PYrrhus Rex, deorum in templo im∣molaturus, hoc unum  tan∣quam exoptatissimum à diis immor∣talibus petebat. Inter omnia namque hu∣mano generi chara ac utilia corporis sanitas post animae salutem, in praetio ab omnibus, prae omnibus bonis, maxime habenda est. Quippe quod ea vacillante ac labante, nec animae functiones, nec corporis membra, ad munia sua rite disponuntur, sed vel fractis viribus fatigata succumbunt, vel more indebito pravè & remissè operantur. Frons hilaris & Serenus in Severiorem mae∣stumque transit & indies deflorescit for∣mosa juventus: Honores porrò & divitiae, splendida illa fortunae bona (amissa sani∣tate) ingrata ac seposita parvi penduntur: Voluptates & deliciae qualesecun{que} solitae, injucundae & exoletae transeunt. Quae cum ita sint, omni studio & labore sedulò
incumbendum, utquantum naturae viribus detur, vel artis ingenio excogitari possit, hanc vitam in multos annos sartam tectam∣que tueamur. Et licet ex rei natura vitae perennitatem non expectamus eò quod potestates & causae vitales à principiis facile inuicem dissidentibus, Et sese mutuò de∣struentibus dependent; morborum saltem occasiones & incursiones saepius praecaueri, juventutis efflorescentiam, vigorem nati∣vum & viva citatem diutius conservari, & majori circulo vitae cursum peragi, nullis naturae legibus repugnat. Porrò cum vitae nostrae scintilla va∣riis obiciatur injuriis, adeò ut fa∣cili negotio praefocari & extingui possit; & cum nihil in toto terrarum orbe hac vita salubri suavius obtineamus; nullis nec impensis, nec curis, nec praecep∣tis parcendum, quantum in nobis, & na∣turae potestati concessum, à diminutione & extinctione quam diutissimè conservare & protahere valeamus. In hunc finem sanitatis hanc tutelam & vitae praesidium juxta nu∣turae normam & leges artis concinnatum, nulli non obtemperanti profuturum puto:
opus non minus utile sanis, quam aegris necessarium; viuere nam sanos docet, ae∣grotos valere. Prima pars benè vivendi re∣gulas tradit, quo sanitas praesens diu con∣servetur; altera autem tutò medendi, quo amissa citò, paucis, parvo recuperetur. Habes (lector benevole) instituti mei ra∣tionem, & operis divisionem: multa me reliquisse fateor studiis futuris, & me mihi satis nondum fecisse; in posterum verò, & politiora haec & plura edita fore curabo. Interea hiscefave & fruere, ut sanitatem si∣quando amissam quam primum restituas, presentem feliciter tuearis. Jnde proemium hoc maximum multis ut prosim, valdè quaero. vale. dat. Londini 6 calend. Octobr. An. Dom. 1663.
Imprimatur Sept. 25. 1663. M. Franck S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo P. ac Dno. Dno. Archi-Ep. Cant. à Sac. Dom.
The Introduction. THe scope and intention of the Me∣dicinal Art, at which every good Physitian collimes and aimes at, di∣rects to these two marks; Preservation of the sound, and Restoration of the Sick: and Janus-like he casts a double Aspect; to the healthy for their continuance; to the sick for their recovery: nor is he less con∣cern'd and rejoycing in natures prosperity and triumph, then subsidiary in her ad∣versity; but shews the highest friendship in her declensions and lowest ebb. And ha∣ving proposed such a Pattern for my imita∣tion, I have drawn the ensuing Work ac∣cording to this examplar; which is presen∣ted to you now as a rough draught from the first hand, and shews you only the linea∣ments and proportion of the intended piece; but coming over it again by a reveiw, with the second hand, as I purpose at my better leisure and vacation from disturbance; I
hope something of perfection may then be superadded, and the life appear, which these dark lines do now but shaddow forth; and what I have touched but lightly, and unbratically exhibited to your view, shall more clearly and fully be delineated in the next impression, in the interim take this as the earnest of what I intend. The present work is divided in two parts; The first adviseth and cautions the Sound; the latter directs and assists the Sick: That I may not seem less a friend to health, then an assistant in sickness. The former part is diaetetical, and prescribes lawes to govern the healthy; and rules out the pleasant paths of health for them to walk in, that in the darkness of unadvised precipitate ignorance, they rush not upon the ruine of a well tempored body, and dis∣compose the harmony, and integrity of natu∣ral, vital and animal faculties, which by natures course might continue much longer in their vigour then the common age, if not by folly and wilful erroneous practice, vio∣lently disordered, debilitated and brought to untimely periods.
And that you may knowingly the better suite all your actions most proper and con∣cordant with your own body and peculiar nature; your temperament and constitution by certaine characters and signs is discover∣ed, thereby you may so order and govern your self rationally and fitly, as each tem∣perament particularly requires, and di∣stinctly and plainely is prescribed. And by diligent observation you will finde, in the course of life, your body to change and va∣ry much; sometime to be Phlegmatick, sometime Cholerick, another part of your life Melancholy to he predominant; as your condition of life, Diaetetic customes, & progress in age, will dispose and alter your constitution; which the peculiar figns of each preuailing humor will demonstrate and evidently shew. Those duely marked and the Hygiastic Rules justly observed, the age of man would be extended to a third part longer, many diseases avoided, and scarce known which are now most obvious and frequent. But such is the folly and wilful error of the most, being prodigal of their lives and
incautelous▪ nothing regarding what con∣duceth to health and long life, but promis∣cuously follow and elect this or that, after the dictates of an irrational and sensitive desire, To gratifie the present appetite in trivial and vaine satisfactions; thereby purchasing shortness of dayes, accumulat∣ing and adding one distemper to another, debilitating one part after another by such irregular and intemperate practice, until the body become a Hospital of diseases, so complicated and contraindicating one ano∣ther, that a Colledge of Physitians is but sufficient to consult the restoration, if any for such a person; when perhaps as yet he hath scarce numbred half his daies of the usual age of man. But yet, the crime were less if onely to themselves the prejudice did extend, but also to posterity their di∣seases are propagated; the children ha∣ving impressed upon them, and radicated in the principles of their nature, the semi∣nal power and productive vertue of inordi∣nate, irregular, and intemperate living of their genitors and progenitors: that the children may bear witness to the following
age, the vice and folly of their parents and praedecessors, recorded and characte∣rized in them. But whosoever desires to live long, to see their Childrens children, to preserve their youth, strength & beauty, to be free from mo∣lesting pains & loathsome diseases, to pre∣serve their senses & enjoy the perfections of minde to the extremity of age; let them conforme and be obedient to the Higiastic lawes and rules herereafter prescribed; and they may expect what is here proposed for their reward. Nor shall I exact and re∣quire of you an irkesome strictness or Lessian preciseness to eate and drink by weight and measure: but a reasonable observance, sute∣able and well agreeing with a sober ratio∣nal person, not restraining convenient li∣berty and the lawful pleasure of life. Nor can a regular course of life be thought trou∣blesome as a difficult and hard restraint, but most pleasant and free, except to those ac∣customed to the contrary; and the leaving of those ill customes is the difficulty, but the rules injoyned be facile and easie to ob∣serve.
Non quia difficilia sunt, multa non ten∣tamus; Sed quia non tentamus, difficilia sunt. And having once acquired a good habit and constant use, to returne to an irregular intemperate living, would be a far greater burthen and irkesome, if enjoyned and imposed, then the declining and deserting a destructive course, for a laudable whole∣some practice, most consonat to a rational creature, experto Crede— Qui medicè vivit, sine medicis diu vi∣vet: Qui non medicè vivit, cum medicis saepe, sed non diu. The second or latter part of this Book is therapeutical, containing safe and whole∣some medicaments for the sick and infirme; breifly shewing their vertues, aproppriation use and doses, but reserving to my self their composition and ingredients, which al∣though
expected and desired by some yet for sufficient reasons I thought best to con∣ceal. First because they are the arcana's of the medicinal Art, and ought not to be di∣vulged to any but the sons of art, who make it their business and study after such inqui∣ries. Secondly, I write not to Physicians, but to those who stand in need of such, their advise and assistance; else my pen had run in another dialect, and the subject, mat∣ter some novelty's to present. Thirdly, I will not undertake to teach you to be Chy∣mists, or the Apothecaris art, and you must be knowing in both, or these medicines will availe you little. Fourthly, least the medicines should be abused, by ignorant pretenders to skill, endeavouring to make them, of which they are not capeable, and so defame good medicines, prejudice the author, and those that shall use them. And farther, medicines does not belong to you, of other employments, professions, trades, or who ever not authorized in the faculty; this belongs to the Physitian to know and appoint, as his propriety, and you to have the benefit and use of them, nor ought any
to challenge the making of medicines as his right, but as subordinate, a servant of Physitians, to do the toyling part and ser∣vile work that belongs to it. And here I much admire how the trade of medicines first came up,: that a Physitian should be so very strict and exact in knowing the state of his patient, not trusting to the fal∣lible insufficient relation of another, but must view and examine the patient himself: Yet the remedy which is the main, that conflicts with the disease, wherein if there be a fault, the Doctors learning is of no effect; this is committed to the care, skill, honesty of others, their servants and boyes, what reason is there for this? but when Physitians were few and scarce, practice very great and abundant, having not time e∣nough to visit all their patients & take their fees; Neglected medicines, threw off that care as a burthen, and relyed upon others, from whence hath sprung not a few incon∣veniences, and prejudice, to Physitians as well as the sick; Which I forbear to men∣tion. And since medicines is become a trade, it is a trade of the greatest and
most general concernment I know. And I must say, an error, mistake or abuse in the medicine is far greater and more dan∣gerous, then a deficiency or error of the Physitian in his judgement of the Patient. For a good medicine is not so tyed up and restrained to one disease, But it shall ope∣rate for good in many others, (seasonably given in due quantity) so that if a Physiti∣an do not so exactly determine a right con∣cerning the Patient; yet if the distemper he imagines, have but an affinity and propor∣tion with that which really afflicts the Pa∣tient, and he gives a proper medicine ac∣cording to his own determination, his medicine shall prevaile and succeed well. But an adulterate bad medicine, though given by the most skilful hand and delibe∣rate consultation, shall have bad effects: and therefore I may affirme, that a Physi∣tian of ordinary parts, with extraordina∣ry curious medicines, shall performe more and greater cures, and have less miscar∣riages, then the most knowing and learn∣ed, with ordinary, sophisticate medi∣cines. And I think it much more necessa∣ry,
that the Physitian should look into the medicine then the chamber-pot, as a thing of greater concernment, and he shall pra∣ctise with more security to his own reputa∣tion, and less hazard to his patients life. And that Phisitian who spends some time in Pharmacy- shall finde more satisfacti∣on in seeing a medicine duely prepared and compounded once, then in reading it a twelvemonth. From hence the true propor∣tion and quantity of each ingredient will exactly be known suting with the forme of the medicine, which incongrously I have seen prescribed for want of knowledge in the pharmacopoietical part. From hence the particular proper∣ties and differing qulities of each ingredient will more plainely and fully be discovered in their single preparati∣ons, corrections, defecations, exal∣tations and gradual mixtures, their conflict, discrepancy and rejection one of anothor in single applicati∣ons, and their mutual agreement em∣braces and union, in the whole composition by fit mediumes and artificial conjunction
the diversity of Tastes and Smells reduced into one by fermentation the true colour, taste, smell, consistence and due form of the Medicine, will be discerned from a sto∣venly inartificial sophisticate Medicine, and he that is not skilful practically in the arti∣ficial making of Medicines, shall never rightly discern a good Medicine from a bad. Not that I think fit a Physician should toyle in the drudgery of it; but a supervisor of his Servants, to prevent mistakes, abuses, and slovenly operation. In vain the Physi∣cian curiously inquires and strictly ex∣amines the state of his Patient, if he be not as well ascertained and fully satisfied in e∣very Ingredient of the Medicine. He that practiseth with unknown Medicines may be glad of his success; but if the contrary hap∣pen he shall not be satisfied where the fault was; whether in himself or the Medicine, the contumacy of the disease, or intervening accidents, nor can he note that an obser∣vation for the future. Infaeliciter aegrotat ubi plus est periculi à medicamento quam à morbo.
Of the Druggs imported into England, a fourth part is more fit for the Dunghil then to come into the body of man; and he that takes a Medicine of that needs no other disease. Another fourth, though not dam∣nified corrupt and naught; yet weak, of small vertue and efficacy, and a degenerate sort; as much differing from the best, as they are in price, and that is double; and what think you becomes of these? they are not thrown away, when they are made up in medicine they pass current. Beer that is made of Water, Hops and Mault three common things, and easie to be done after a common rule; and yet what variety of drinks, some good, some bad, differing in strength, taste, colour and con∣sistence: So many Brewers, almost so many kinds of drink. What think you then of making Medicines, having twenty, thirty, forty, and some fifty Ingredients in the composition; and of these, many requi∣ring a Single and several preparation and praevious ordering before they are fit for Composition; as correction, defaecation, di∣gestion, trituration, dissolution; coagula∣tion,
calcination, torrefaction, insolation, impregnation, &c. Many more tedious to relate. Do you think now there is not more variety in the goodness and excellency of a Medicine of the same species and kinde, from several mens ordering and their Ser∣vants (differing in Art, care and honesty) then in Beer or Ale made of two or three or∣dinary Ingredients, and easily discerned by the palate, smell or sight. But the other of many, various, exotick strange Druggs not known or heard of by the most in their age; producing a mixture, sometimes not to be detected nor determined of the good∣ness, (although an Artist) but by operati∣on and the effects. Sine certa notitia medicamenti virtutum, non tuto curabit medicus From hence may be collected the reasons and motives which first put me upon this work, and made me a Pharmacopoeian to my own practise. And being furnished with a large stock of Medicines peculiarly com∣posed and appointed for the most and principall occasions that might occur in
practise, and which I had often experi∣mented with success; and by due observa∣tion found to be efficacious for their appro∣priate uses; I was moved to communicate, and convert my private stock to a publick store, for the benefit of those who have not a fee ready, sutable for a Doctor but must apply themselves to bold professing Empiricks, and other pragmatical fellows that deserve to have their ears eut for their impudent ignorance in the practice of Phy∣sick, and saucie usurpation of so high and mysterious employment that the most learn∣ed men of the faculty in all ages have, and are still in the disquisition; the many abuses whereof in Medicines, and their improper use, is now the greatest and most dangerous Cheat in this age: And if an account of the dead could be rightly taken, a third part would be found to have died, by nox∣ious or deficient Medicines, an illiterate pretender to Physick, or the imprudent ad∣vice of a friend or relation to the Sick. And it is not a strange thing to Physitians who have observed, that Women sometimes kill their own husbands and children giv∣ing
them deadly draughts for sanative poti∣tions. The many sad consequents of this nature are so many, that it would take up more time and paper to relate then I can now spare, and therefore must wave the discourse. Quisque sibi caveat. For the Magazine of Medicines, which here I own as my munition for practice, I have formed and reformed by exemplars from the neatest inventions of the most ex∣pert renowned Doctors, Pharmacopoeians, Galenical and Chymical, both antient and modern. Pharmacy being the cheifest part of my Study and most delightful of late years. And having approved in practice what in reason they promised at the veiw, enticing to experiments, I may with con∣fidence commend to your use, being a wit∣ness to all that belongs to them; made choice of their Druggs, saw their due pre∣paration and Composition; and not only a spectator, but an agent sometimes, where the strictest care and nicest curiosity is re∣quired, being the best recreation I know or can desire: For my part, I desire no other weapons to oppose any Herculean disease
where the capacity of the subject will en∣dure the contest, and be conformable to the commands of such a discipline, I shall require to be observed. The Patient must bear a part, or no good to be expected, there must be a conspiration, consent and agree∣ment between the Physician, the Patient, and the Medicine against the disease, or the design will fail: The Physician cannot oure without a good Medicine, the Medi∣cine cannot cure, except prudently appoin∣ted by the Physitian in fit Doses, at due times, with the requisite circumstances; and yet neither shall prevaile, if the patient be disobedient, intemperate and careless: For if by good medicine you prevaile against your disease, get ground one day and lose it the next, or soon after, by an unfit impro∣per ordering your self, the labour is in vain; as by too often experience we finde it in practise, with peevish, unruly, imprudent patients, who thinke the taking of the phy∣sick is sufficient, let themselves live at the old rate and customes which first occasioned the disease. You must not therefore expect these medicines to take that effect as is promi∣sed
& declared in the enumeration of their vertues & appropriate use; if you by an irri∣gular course and daily common practise in eating, drinking, sleeping, passions of minde, rest and motion, or other customes whatever, improper and unfit for the condition of your body and distemper, act with a Coun∣ter motion and repugnancy to the efficacy and vertue of the Medicine, and also che∣rish, indulge, and strengthen the disease. Therefore remember that a duty is required, incumbent upon you, and impute not your miscarriages, improper, unseasonable, in∣sufficient use of the means, to the deficiency of the Medicine; and that you make a dif∣ference between a chronic, inveterate, radi∣cated disease, to which you are propense by hereditary nature, constitution, or constant bad customes; and a slight accidental in∣firmity. The former requiring a more se∣rious prosecution, continuance and repeti∣tion of Medicines; if you have been many moneths, perhaps years contracting a disease you may well allow some days for a parting. And that these Medicines may not re∣ceive a prejudice in their reputation unde∣servedly,
and for want of knowledge in the proper choice and use of them, especially in such cases and persons, where a subordinate use of Medicines is required, for the era∣dicating of a contumacious and chronic disease: such I say, who desire a metho∣dical and exact course in the use of these Medicines, more at large, and peculiar for their complicated diseases and condition of body, then what is exprest and provided for in this book; I shall up∣on their application to me whether by let∣ter, (if far distant) or otherwise; give them my advice and directions in the choice and use of any Medicine or Medi∣cines, as their particular case requires, ac∣cording to the true account and relation I shall receive of their infirmities, at my dwelling next to the Blew-Bore on Lud∣gate-hill, London.
OF Life, Health, and Sickness. AFter the praevious disposition of formation and effiguration of se∣minal matter in the wombe, by the innate spirits thereof, the chief actors in vegetation, ha∣ving prepared, fabricated and made ready for animation, the Soul then exerts her power, animates, and gives life; and as supreme moderator and governor disposeth and orders all for future conservation and perfection of operation. The seminal Spirits which before were chief and principal in preparation and fa∣brication of this mansion; are now after the souls assuming the Government, but instrumen∣tal and subordinate, immediately acting by ver∣tue and power from the soul received, neither can the one act without the other; the soul cannot act the body in its operations, but me∣diately by the intervening Spirits: there is so
great a distance between the spirituality of a soul, and the corporiety of bodies; but the Spirits being of the most refined, subtile, vo∣latized material substance, are the fittest Inter∣medium of conjunction, conveyance, and com∣merce between the Soul and body, nor can the spirits act their parts in any Vital operation, but by the energy, command and power derived from the soul. These spirits have their residence in every part of the body, as principal assistants and excitors to the performance of the office, and duty be∣longing to the several parts, and are the ap∣proximate immediate agents of the soul; and they are preserved, maintained and supplied by the additional spirits, extracted from the bodyly aliment daily received. There is also a ferment or transmutative qua∣lity peculiar to each part or office for concocti∣on resulting from the particular nature, pro∣perty and temper of each part; being the au∣thor of alteration and transmutation, by vertue whereof the food received is digested, volatized, and receiving various impressions according to the disposition of the ferment of each part by which it passeth, until it be fit for assimilati∣on into the substance of the body. In the vigour and rectitude of these ferments and the aforesaid spirits, consists the sanity and integrity of each member in its office; but the
diminution, alienation and depravation of ei∣ther, vitiates and imbecillitates the parts, indis∣poseth and incapacitates them to their office and duties, from whence various morbifick effects are produced, answerable to their several cau∣ses, and the variety of organical parts, in their principal or ministerial functions. These Spirits and ferments are preserved and maintained in their natural purity and vigour, by a temperate sweet Air; wholsom and regu∣lar dyet, seasonable sleeping and waking, mo∣derate and constant exercise, due evacuations and retentions, tranquillity and ease of minde. But these irregular, unnatural, disproportionate or unsutable, in matter, manner, times or order, destroyes the regular oeconomy and peaceable Government of the body, raiseth discords, in∣troduceth and begets morbifick causes, abbrevi∣ates and shortens life. Of which particularly hereafter. This I have premised as a ground work for the superstructure intended, and for your preparation and clearer apprehension of what shall be deli∣vered in the following discourse, knowing upon what bases it is founded. The life of man consists in the Conjunction of soul and body, mutually embracing each other with the bands of Love and desire of continued Union, until the incapacity and unfitness of the body by its ruinous and decayed condition,
or other impediments and deficiency enforceth the soul to desertion and departure. Spiritual and Corporeal substance are now knit and inter∣woven one with another, by an extraordinary curious artifice and contrivance, so that you can not say here is the soul & there the body, but soul and body are joyntly extended throughout the whole, & in every part there is both soul & body: life is the result of this connexion; as by the meet∣ing and attrition of flint & steel fire is produced, so by the reciprocal contact & conjunction of soul & body life is generated, being of a luminous influential nature diradiated through the body from whence vital motions and heat, as the product and concomitants thereof do give a testimony of its virtual presence and efficacious energy: and as the Ratio formalis of life is in lumine; so the vertue, power and emanations of life are manifested in actione, in operation & acti∣on: and although the soul cannot by a reflex act in this life, see the face of its own being, nor can we see it in another, being invisible a priori, en∣vironed, vailed and hid by the interposition of a dense opacous body, yet we may see the back parts and behold what it is in operation and ef∣fects: and as Operatio sequitur esse, according to the axiome; we may judge of the purity, radi∣cation and durability of life, by the integrity, strength and constancy of its actions and functions: and this integrity or perfection of
vital operations is that which we call health or sanity: and it is the free, indisturbed unani∣mous performance of all the faculties in the recti∣tude of their duties, being the prosperous sere∣nity, mutual enjoyment and happiness of soul and body in their conjunct state. The benefit and excellencies of this health is best known to those that have lost it, Carendo magis quam fruendo, quid valeat cognoscimus: you that have it and know not how to prize it, Ile tell you what it is both positively, and priva∣tively, that you may love it better, put a higher value upon it, and endeavour to preserve it with a more serious and, strict observance and tuition. Health is that which makes your meat and drink both savory and pleasant, else natures injunction of eating and drinking were a hard task and slavish custome. Health is that which makes your bed easie, and your sleep refreshing, that renews your strength with the rising Sun, and makes you chearful at the light of another day; tis that which fills up the hollow and uneven places of your Carkase, and makes your body plump and comely; tis that which dresseth you up in na∣tures richest attire, and adorns your face with her choicest colours. 'Tis that which makes exercise a sport, and walking abroad the enjoyment of your Li∣berty.
'Tis that which makes fertile and encreaseth the natural endowments of your minde and pre∣serves them long from decay; makes your wit acute, and your memory retentive. Tis that which supports the fragility of a cor∣ruptible body, and preserves the verdure, vi∣gour and beauty of youth. 'Tis that which makes the soul take delight in her mansion, sporting her self at the casements of your eyes. 'Tis that which makes pleasure to be pleasure, and delights delightful; without which you can solace your self in nothing of terrene felicityes and enjoyments. Having taken a breif survey of natural life in the best estate, graced and adorned with the society of health and its great attendants; the coucomitant benefits, priviledges and enjoy∣ments: now take a view of your self when health hath turn'd its back upon you, and deserts your company; see now how the Scene is chan∣ged; how you are robd and spoyled of your comforts and enjoyments; the want of health makes food to lose its wonted relish, and is be∣come disgustful and unsavory: the stomack now refuseth to receive its dayly charge, no longer able to perform the task, but desires a quietus est, from the office. Sleep that was stretcht out from evening to the fair bright day, is now broken into pee∣ces,
and subdivided not worth the accounting: the night that before seemed short is now too long; and the downy bed presseth hard against the bones. Exercise now is toyling, and walking abroad the carrying of a burthen. The body that moved so light, and readily obeyed the steerage of the Pilot; is now over ballac'd with its own weight, and slowly tugs as against the stream. Conjugal imbraces are now but the faint off∣ers of love, the shaddows, and representations of former kindeness. The body that had the magnetisme and se∣cret attraction of souls, may now be approach∣ed without loss, or danger of being snared and fettered as a bondslave: the lilly and the rose that nature planted in the highest mount to shew the world her pride and glory, is now blasted, and withered like long blown flowers. The eye that flasht as lightning, is now like the opacous body of a thick cloude; that rouled from East to West swifter then a Celestial orbe, is now tyred and weary but standing still; that penetrated the center of another microcosme, hath lost its Planetary influence and is become obtuse and dull: the hollow sounding breast that echoed to the chanting bird, and warbled forth delightful tunes, now runs divisions with coughing straines, and pauses with a deep fetch't
sigh for breath, to repeat those notes again. The Veins, those rivulets that ran with vital streams bedewing the adjacent parts with fruit∣full moisture, is now drunk up with parching heat, or muddied and defiled with an inunda∣tion of excremental humors. The want of health converts your house into a prison, and confines you to the narrow com∣passe of a chamber, tis that which sowers the sweetest and most beloved injoyments: tis that which disunites and breaks the league of copartnership between soul and body, alienates and makes them at jarrs, discomposeth their harmony, and weary of their wonted, sweet society. The Prolongation & Abbre∣viation of Life. MAn Consisting of soul and body, and this body compounded of heterogenious and dissimilar parts, destinated to various actions and offices, and not independent in being and conservation; will necessarily require variety of assistance and supply, proportionable and su∣ting to their several purposes, faculties, proprieties and temperatures; in matter, manner, times and order; for their maintenance and sustentation
in the integrity of their actions, offices and du∣ties, Constitutional dispositions and tempera∣ments, peculiarly conservative of themselves, respectively and consequently of the whole: And by the Law of nature, (being subject to corruption and dissolution, through the fragi∣lity of constitutive principles, connexion and fabrication) is bound to observe rules, orders and customes most consonant for preservation & continuance in being. Now if there be a dispro∣portion or unfitness, in the matter and quantum; or irregularity in the manner times or order of the auxiliary requisites and conservatives con∣trary to what the Law or necessity of his nature requires and commands, there ariseth distem∣pers, ataxjes and disorders, the praeludiums to ruine and dissolution. And this body being in a continual flux and reflux, conversant in vicissitudes and variati∣ons of opposites, dissimilars, contraries and pri∣vations, as heat and cold, siccity and humidi∣ty, filling and emptying, rest and motion, sleep∣ing and waking, inspiration and expiration, and the like; could not subsist amidst these oppo∣site subalter nations, if they were not bound∣ed and regulated by due order of succession to fit and convenient times, that they might not clash interfeere and encroach upon each others privi∣ledges, due times and proprieties. If heat exceeds, the radical moisture dryes up,
the spirits evaporate, and the body withers. If cold, the faculties are torpid and benum'd, the spirits being frozen up to a cessation from their duties. If moisture prevails, the spirits are cloged, suffocated and drowned in the chanels of the body. If siceity and dryness, the organical parts are stubborne, unpliable and uncapable of their regular motions and due actions, the vita∣streams being drank up that should irrigate, re∣fresh and supple them. Were the body alwaies taking in and sending nothing forth; it would either increase to a monstrous and vaste magnitude, or fill up, suffo∣cate and stifle the soul: were it alwaies in ex∣cretion and emission, the body would waste a∣way and be reduced to nothing. Nor is the receiving in of any thing, suffici∣ent and satisfactory to the body for its preser∣vation, but that which is appointed by nature proper and sutable: nor emission or ejection of any thing, but that which is superfluous and unnecessary to be retained. If sleep prevailes contrary to the Law of na∣ture, the body in a lethargic soporiferous in∣activity, stupefied and senseless lies at the gates of death. If watching exceeds the limits, transgresseth nd steals away the due time for sleep, the fa∣culties
are debilitated and enervated, the spirits tyred, worn out and impoverished. If inspiration were constant without inter∣mission, the body would puffe up and be blown like a bladder. If expiration were continual, the soul and spi∣rits would soon quit their habitation and come forth. If alwaies exercised in motion, the body would pine and weare away: if alwaies at rest, it would corrupt and stink. There is a rule therefore proportion, measure and season to be observed, in all the requisite supports and auxiliary helps, belonging to our preservation, and by how much or often, any of these necessary alternative successions are ex∣travagant and irregular, exceeding the bounds and limits prescribed by nature, justling out the successive appointed action duty or custom from its seasonable exercise and due execution; by so much is the harmony of nature disturbed, vigour abated and duration shortned, by those jarrs, discords and encroachments. The thwarting and crossing of nature in any thing she hath enjoyned, either in the substance or circumstance, is violence offered to nature, and is destructive more or less according to the dignity or quality of the thing appointed. For nature was not so indifferent in the insti∣tution of thse duties and customes, that they
might be done or not done; or so careless and irregular, to leave them at your pleasure, when and how, or to be used promiscuously and pre∣posterously without order, t the liberty of your will, fancy and occasions: for as you may see in all other creatures exactness of rule, me∣thod and constant order impressed upon and ra∣dicated in their natures, by which they act al∣waies sutable regular and constant: you may not imagine so choice and exquisite a peice as man, to be left without a law and rule to guide and steer him in the necessary actions concern∣ing life, and that he should rove in uncertain, inconstant, unlimited quantities, times, orders, manners and the like; but is bounded and re∣strained upon penalties and forfeitures of being, well being and long being, to the nice and strict observance of these lawes and customes necessary for the tuition of life and defence of humane frailty. As moral good actions are placed in a medio∣crity between two vitious extreams: so natural actions and auxiliary requisites conservative of life, have their golden meane; digression from which on either side leads to ruin and destructi∣on. Too much sleep or too little; too much meat and drink, or too little to much rest, or too much motion; too much air, or alwaies close pent up too great excretions or too long retentions too
much heat or too much cold; either of the ex∣treams lead to the gates of death. And as nature hath not appointed any thing, or every thing to be food, but this and that; so likewise not at any time to be received, not in any quantity, after any manner prepared, or in what order you please, but proportionable, su∣teable and convenient. As there is variety of dispositions and incli∣nations of minde agreeing with and liking one thing, but disagreeing resisting and disliking another: so is it in the variety of bodies and food: one body is of this constitution, temper and appetite; will sute and agree well with this meat, and disagree with another: for if all meats were convenient for all bodies to be used promiscuously without choice, how comes it to pass, the antipathy, resistance and abhorrency of some bodies against some particular meats and this not from a fancy and conceipt, but ra∣dicated in the constitution; that if it be eaten though unknown, shall produce Fluxes, vomit∣ings, swoonings and such like effects: here is manifested the opposition, disagreement and distance between this constitution and this kind of meat; which being so great, that the dislike and discordancy appears presently: other dis∣agreements which are in a lower degree of op∣position, do not manifest themselves immediat∣ly, yet they produce ill effects in the body, plus
minus, pro viribus, which discover themselves gradually, at times and seasons and occasions. If you acknowledge the former you must ad∣mit of the latter, the reason is, á majori ad mi∣nus. As sleep is appointed by nature, to refresh the spirits and repair lost strength: so the time for sleep is appointed and limited: not when you please: the Sun that glorious light was not made for you to sleep by, nor the night for sports and revells, but for rest. Nature does not only command what to be done; but when, how much, how long, after what manner, in what order; the modification, Circumstances and requisite qualifications, as well as the thing it self, are to be regarded. And therefore by a diligent inquisition and curious speculation into the workes of nature, you may as much admire the manner of preservation, go∣vernment, order, weight and measure, regular vicissitudes alternations and successions, as the excellency and contrivance of the things them∣selves, in their creation and generation. Whatever is appointed by nature as necessary for conservation and support of being though never so good, yet if it be unseasonable, out of course, immoderate in quantity, quality or duration; alters the property and Intention of nature, converts good purposes to bad effects.
We say every thing is best in its own kind; and of continuance in its own Element: and nature is most cheerful, vigorous and durable in the course and method of her own injuncti∣ons: but being put by, thrust out of her own way, is not of long duration: the birds cannot live in the Sea, nor the fish upon the land, nor your nature continue long in an unnatural way against her self. Are you composed of natural principles, and will you not live conformable to what you are? do you not live by natures assistance and natural means, and do you think to continue long in a Counter-motion against the nature of your Composition? they that invert na¦tures course, preposterously promiscuously & in congruously using the necessary conservatives of life; not onely are deprived of their benefit, but also receive a positive hurt, disordering the constant regular motions in the body, and dis∣composing the harmonious and sociable tempe∣raments of the parts. There is a rule therefore, method, measure and season, in all the requisite supports and auxiliary helps belonging and necessary unto life, or law∣ful actions and customes whatsoever; which duely observed, are of much advantage for the preservation of the body in its true natural state, vigour and prolongation of being: but other wise, a methodically and inordinately used, di∣sturbs natures course, uniformity and regularity-
of operations, raiseth unnatural motions, com∣motions and cessations; introduceth disorders and disjoynes the frame of nature, accelerates and hastens the dissolution of the body. The Impediments of long Life. AN infirme, and weak constitution from the Wombe derived from tender, imbecile and infirm parents. Irregular and unfit tractation of Infants, whose tender bodies are soon discom∣posed and disordered by bad Nurses, their erro∣nious customes, and the ill proprieties of their milk. Noxious and intemperate Aire. Irregular eating and drinking. Immoderate and unseasonable exercise, mo∣tion or labour. Too much, or unfit rest. Sleeping and waking in extreams. Immoderate Venus. Undue excretion, and retention of Excre∣ments Inordinate passions, and perturbations of mind. All unnecessary and bad customes.
Hygiastic Precautions, and Rules for the preservation of Health, and prolongation of life. Of Aire. AIre is so necessary to life, that without it we cannot subsist: which surrounding us about, and being continually suckt and drawn in, must needs affect the body with its conditions and properties, and by observation you may finde, the body, by the various constitutions and changes in the air, to be variously affected, well and ill disposed; of which, infirme parts are most sensible, that they prognosticate before an alteration come: the minde also by the me∣diation of the spirits is drawn into consent, and hath its dispositions and variations: when the Aire is close, thick and moist, the spirits are more dull heavy and indisposed; but at the appear∣ance of the Sun, and a serene sky, the spirits are unfettered, vigorous and active; the minde more cheerful, airy and pleasant. The Spirits are of an aetherial nature, and
therefore do much sympathize with the present constitution, and change of air: for of the air drawn in by the motion of the vital parts, are the vital spirits augmented & supplied continu∣ally, by the peculiar ferment and operation of the heart, therefore the pureness of the aire, makes much for the purity of the spirits. A gross impure and noisome aire, obtunds and deads the spirits, makes a slow pulse, ob∣structs the pores and hinders ventilation, gene∣rates superfluous humors and causeth putre∣faction. A serene sweet thin Aire perfumes and puri∣fies an unwholsome body; cherisheth the heart, makes a lively pulse, and much encreas∣eth the vital spirits; rarifies and volatizeth a gross coagulate blood, opens the pores for transpiration of putrid and offensive vapours, acuates and sharpens the appetite, and helps digestion. The best aire and most agreeable to temperate bodies is in temperate climates, for heat, cold wet and dry: not subject to sudden and violent changes, as in some parts of America and other Countries very frequent; not gross and turbu∣lent, infected with putrid vapours and noxious exhalations, from stinking ditches, Lakes, Boggs, Carrions, Dunghills, Sinks and Vaults, for which causes great Cities, and the adjacent places are not so healthful nor the people so long liv'd.
Change of Aire somtimes is very necessary for the conservation of health; the recovery of it declining and lost: for, temperate bodies by an intemperate aire, shall gradually and in time be∣come intemperate: intemperate bodies, by the contrary intemperate Aire shall be reduced to temperature; at least, shall conduce much and be very Auxiliary for the reduction. There∣fore bodies declining from exact temperature, are best preserved in that Aire opposite to their declensions: as Cholerick, hot and dry bodies, in a moist and coole aire; Phlegmatick, cold and moist bodies, in a dry and warme Aire. It is not therefore of small moment, in what place you live; and more especially such, who labour of, or are more subject to, any pecto∣ral infirmity: for the Lungs being of so tender a substance and porous, continually drinking in the aire, is most apt to receive impressions from it according to the qualities it is pregnant with and infested; and many diseases of the breast arise from this sole cause; and many exaspera∣ted by it and continued: hence it is Asthmatick Phthisical and Consumptive persons shall not be cured in some places, but may have cure in a∣nother. Be cloathed according to the Clemency, season and temperature of the Aire, your age, and ha∣bit of body: leane and thin bodies, pervious (corpora rarae texturae) and whose skin are loose
and lax; may wear thicker cloathing, because such are more perspirable, do magis emittere & transpirare; and are also more penetrable and subject to injury of the Aire. Fat and fleshy people, and whose bodies are solid, firm and hard, are more impenetrable and impervious, and may wear thinner Garments. Infants and children lately cherished in the stove of the wombe, being of tender, soft bodies and porous, are easily exposed to the prejudice of the Aire, Vigorous youth, and middle age being accusto∣med to all weathers, whose spirits abounding do strongly resist and keep out the assaults and injuries of an offensive Aire, may best indure hardship. Old age whose natural heate is abated, and spirits exhausted, stands in need of good defensatives against external cold, and to cherish internal heat. Observe the seasons and changes of the Aire, and be then most careful, for at such times you are in most danger to exchange health for sick∣ness: hence it is that Spring and Autumne a∣bounds most with diseases; the Air then assum∣ing new qualities opposite to its former constitu∣tion, sets new impressions upon our bodies, which occasions the various aestuations and tur∣gid fermenting of humours, producing di∣vers symptomes according to the variety of their nature, the organical difference, office and constitution of the several parts.
The Sun being risen, and the aire clear, o∣pen your Chamber-windowes, that the fresh Aire may perfume your Room, and the close Aire and inclosed vapours may go forth. Bad smells and putrid vapours being drawn in with the Aire are very injurious to the Lungs and vital parts; contaminating the spi∣rits, and impressing upon the ferment of those parts their tetrid nature, are oftentimes the o∣riginal of a Consumption; and if the Lungs be weak and infirme, are more apt to receive the prejudice then others. But fragrant smells re∣fresh and chear the vital Spirits, and are very wholsome, breathing forth the vertue of those things from whence they do proceed. Be not late abroad, nor very early; before Sun rising and after setting the Aire is not so good; being infested with noxious vapours, until the radient influence of the Sun dispells and puri∣fies: and those whose custome it is to be often a∣proad at such times, are most frequently molested with Rheumes, & Rheumatic diseases, which their declining years will more evidently mani∣fest the prejudice. Likewise in moist, foggy, dark weather, tis better being within then abroad; and if it be a cool season, good fires & fragrant fumes are then both pleasant & very wholesom. Be frequent abroad in the fields when a clear sky invites you forth, and let the fresh Aire fan you with its sweet breath; but more especially in
the morning; the Aire is softer and more plea∣sant then your bed, and sure I am, far more wholsome. Temperie Coeli corpusque Animusque juvatur Ovid Meat and Drink. Esteem temperance and regularity in eating and drinking as a great preservative of health, not a Lessian dyet to pine and enseeble the body, but moderate in quantity propor∣tionable to the stomack, agreeable in the first and second qualities, seasonable as to times and order. The contrary irregular practice hath de∣stroyed and shortned the lives of many. Plures gula quam gladius. For quantity, your own stomack must measure to you what is convenient; which is a certain rule of proportion, if you observe not to eat to a satiety and fullness, but desist with an appetite, being refreshed light and cheerfull, not dulled heavy and indisposed to operation and action, either of mind or body. A set quantity or measure of meat and drink, cannot be prescribed as a general rule and obser∣vation
for all to follow, in regard of the variety and great difference of persons, in Constitution, age, strength of nature, condition of life, and infirmities, that what is convenient for one, is too much for another, and too little for a third; the strong and healthy cannot conforme to the sickly weak and infirme in quantity, nor the labouring man to the sedentary and studious, or the idle: therefore every stomack is to be its own judge: and every one ought to moderate themselves by the cautions before mentioned. Indulge not to the cravings of an irrationall sensitive appetite, but allow such a supply of daily food, as will support and maintain bodi∣ly strength and not over-load it: thereby the spirits will be vigorous and active, humors at∣tenuated and abated, Crudities and obstructi∣ons prevented, many infirmities checkt and kept under, the senses long preserved in their integrity, the stomack clean, the appetite sharp; and digestion good. But by the surplusage and over-charge, the stomachical ferment is over∣laid and its incisive penetrative faculty obtun∣ded, the appetite and digestion abated, the stomack nauseating, fluctuating, and belching with crudities; from whence Gripes, Fluxes and Feavers: the spirits clogged, dull and somnolent; by their indisposition and inactivity humors sub∣side, degenerate, incrassate, obstructs; from whence various symptomes and depraved effects
throughout the body, debilitating and decaying the fenses, enervating and stealing away the strength of the body, by defrauding it of good nutriment, hastning old age, and shortning Life. In Winter you may eate more freely, the am∣bient external cold compresseth and unites the spirits, drives them to the center and fortifyes the stomack: but in Summer the spirits are dila∣ted, exhausted and drawn forth by the exter∣nal heat opening the pores; wherefore the ap∣petite is not so sharp, nor digestion so quick. And the Rule is true, though heate be not the principal cause of concoction, yet it is a ne∣cessary agent, excitor and cooperator. For the quality of dyet, make choice of such for the most part as is commended to you, con∣venient for that constitution you are of, as you will finde prescribed in the several tempera∣ments following. But withal observe, what is most agreeing and disagreeing to your peculiar nature and individual propriety; what is most desired by your stomack and best digested, is a good guide in the choice of meate and drink. Paulo peior sed suavior cibus & potus, meliori, at ingrato praferendus. Change your dyet according to the seasons of the year, the variation of your temperament, and inclination to this or that distemper: in Winter more meate and less drink; in summer less meate and more liquids:
in hot weather a cooling diet, in cold weather that which is warme and heating: in summer meats boiled, in winter rosted: a hot and dry body must have a cooling and moist diet; a cold and moist body, a hot and dry diet: tem∣perate bodies are preserved by temperate things and their like; distempered bodies are rectified and reduced by their contraries and dissimilar. The more simple and single your diet is, the better and more wholesome: but if your stomack must have variety, let it be at several meals, and so you may please your pallate with∣out prejudice: accustome not your self to deli∣cacies and compound dishes, the heterogenity of their nature, begets a discordant sermenta∣tion in the stomack, troubling concoction, from whence eructations, nauseous belchings, and offensive risings in the throat. Quo simplicior vict us ratio eo melior. Aphor. Of all meat, flesh affords the most nourish∣ment and the strongest. If your diet sometimes be not so good and proper for you in the quality, make amends n the quantity and eat the lesse. Of all sauces a good stomack is the best; but f you must have other, let it be acide sharp or biting. Accustome strong stomacks to strong meats; the weaker to lighter of digestion: very light meats in strong stomacks are soon digested, but
withall parched and corrupted, and turn to a bitter and cholerick juce; solid hard meats in weak stomacks lye long and heavy, and passe away crude and indigested. Meats in respect of their facility and difficulty in digestion are tearmed heavy and light. Heavy meats be such as are more dry, hard, solid and dense, grosse, course and tough, or over moist slimy and cold: requiring a longer time in fermentation, volatization and di∣gestion, before they be fit to passe off the stomack. And they are either so in their nature: as all old flesh, bull beef and oxe, brawn, pork, venison, hare, goose, duck, swan, crane, bit∣ter, heron and most water fowle: Eeles, lobster lampreys, tench, stockfish: beanes, pease when they be something old; brown bread, barly and Rye bread: also some parts are of harder di∣gestion then other; as brains, hearts, livers (except of tame fowl, birds, and some very young flesh) milts, kidneys, skin. Meat made heavy (or made worse then in their own nature) by preparation, keeping and dressing, as dryed, fryed and broiled meats; meats long salted and kept, as bacon, hangd beef, and long powdered, old ling, salt cod, haberdine, pickled herrings red herrings, pick∣led scallops; sturgion, salt salmon, old cheese, hard eggs, tosted cheese, tosted bread especi∣ally,
if it be scorched; crusts, pye crust, bread not well baked, unleavened: meats over baked, hard and dry; long kept, meats rosted dry, or scorched. Light meats and of quicker digestion, be such as are more soft and tender, rare as it is oppo∣sed to density, therefore sooner penetrated by the stomachicall ferment; succulent, volatile, soon fermenting and yeilding to digestion. As young tender flesh: veal, young mutton, lamb, kid, pullet, capon, chicken, conies, turky, pheasant, patridge, plover, woodcock snite, heath cocks, railes, small birds: whiting, smelt, bister, flownder, soles, plaise, thornback, maids, turbut, shrimps, prawnes, trout, carp, pike, bream, perch, roches, daces, loches: ere eggs, milk, wheat bread, white, light, and well baked; also oaten bread well made: and these may be divided into two sorts; that s, meats very light as rere eggs, sucking rab∣bits, chickens, whitings: and meats indifferent light, as mutton lambe, veale. Very light meats are soon digested, apt to be corrupted; breeds tender and effeminate bodies, soft and loose flesh easily lost: solid strong meats are slower in digestion, not easi∣ly corrupted, slow in distribution, makes strong bodies firm hard flesh and durable. Use not meats that hath any quality in ex∣treame; as very salt, very hot, sower, binding
or the like: but keep to those that are mode rate. Let your bread be of wheat, leavened, wel kneaded and baked, light and white; which you may eat new, but not hot; nor staler then two days old, and chuse the crumb, rather then the crust. Seasonings of meat are used either as pre∣servatives to keep them from putrefaction and decay; or as correctives, to alter and change some ill quality, and promote digestion; or for delight to gratify the pallate; as sugar, salt, vinegar, mustard, peper, cloves and other spices. Meat moderately salted, having time to di∣gest ferment, volatize, and aer the crude qualities, is better and wholesomer then fresh  but to eat salt at the table is not so good, if the condition of the meat be such as to allow  praevious digestion and seasoning. Salt is grateful to the pallate and stomack, excites the appe∣tite, concocts crude flegmatick matter that lies upon the stomack, hinders putrefaction and is abstersive: but immoderately used, corrodes and frets, causeth itching and breakings out▪ very bad for thin lean bodyes, it heats and dryes the blood and radical moisture, Sugar in a temperate clean body, moderately used nousheth and is good, but in a soul body is soon corrupted, degenerates and makes the
body more impure; turns to choler and inflames cholerick hot bodies. The freequent and immo∣derate use in any obtunds and abates the appe∣tite, causeth putrid humors and makes an un∣wholesome body. Vinegar and sower juces as of lemmon, ver∣juce and the like; procure appetite and help the stomack in digestion of grosser meats: but the immoderate and frequent use, cooles, dries, constringeth and bindes the body, hurtful to the nerves and nervous parts; very bad for women, and those that are subject to the Gout, Asthmaes and stoppings in the breast, or in other parts, and for lean dry bodies. Mustard quickens the appetite, warmes the stomack, dries up superfluous moisture, helps the stomack in digesting hard meats, opens stoppings in the breast and head. Mace, ginger, nutmeg, peper, and cloves, they help a cold stomack, comfort the heart and brain, refresh the spirits by their aroma∣tical odour, are grateful upon the pallate, and very acceptable to phlegmatick cold bodies. In the use of the forementioned, I shall give this caution: that young stomacks, and strong healthy bodies which need not a spur to their ap∣petite, nor a help to digestion, that they frequent not the use of these seasonings and sauces; but reserve them for age; deficiency of stomack and other infirmities; for if you accustome your
self to them in youth and strength, to please your pallate and intice your stomack there being no need; when the condition of your body does require them, you shall not finde that benefit and assistance from them, which other∣wise you might have expected and received, had you forborn the use of them when it was not necessary. When you come to Meate, leave your care and business, but bring in your friend, and be as merry as you can, mirth and good company is a great help to a dull stomack both for appe∣tite and digestion. Eate not presently after exercise, and when you are hot; but forbear until the spirits be re∣tired and setled in their stations. Eat not hastily but chew your meat well, tis a good preparation for concoction, and your stomack will more easily and sooner di∣gest it; but if it be half chewed the stomack musthave the labour to chew it over again with its incisive ferment. Liquid meats soluble and lighter of digestion eate first; the more solid last, and that which hath any astriction. Drink a little and oft at meat, to macerate and digest, especially if your meat be dry and solid, and to help distribution of aliment; but great draughts causeth fluctuations. To stand or walk softly after meat is good;
the stomack then being distended, is not com∣pressed of any part, which sitting does not so well avoid: but hasty motion opens the ori∣fice of the stomack, precipitates and vitiates digestion. Forbear reading, writing, study or serious cogitations for two hours after meat; else you draw off from the stomack, abate the strength of digestion, and injure the brain. Omit a meale sometimes, it acuates and sharpens the stomack, concocts crudities, and makes the next meale relish better, Eate no late suppers, nor variety at once; a good stomack may endure it for a while, but the weaker is more sensible of the injury, the best is prejudiced in time. Keep a sufficient distance between your times of eating, that you charge not the stomack with a new supply before the former be distri∣buted and passed away: and in keeping such a distance, your stomack will be very fit and rea∣dy to receive the next meale, the former being wrought off perfectly; no semidigested crude matter remaining to commix with the next food: and that is one cheif cause of crudities and a foule stomack, when a new load is cast in be∣fore the former be gon off, which begets much excrements, not much aliment, clogs the body and procures diseases. The stomack that is empty, receives, closeth
and embraceth food with delight, will be ea∣ger and sharp in digestion, and the body will attract and suck the aliment strongly, each part as it passeth along will perform its office readily and sufficiently; which they will not do if often cloyed with depraved and indigest∣ed aliment, but slowly and with reluctancy; for although they do not act by reason, yet they have a natural instinct or endowment, to discern their proper and fit object. Drink for necessity, not for bad fellowship, especially soon after meate, which hinders the due fermentation of the stomack and washeth down before digestion be finished: but after the first concoction, if you have a hot stomack, a dry or costive body, you may drink more free∣ly then others: or if thirst importunes you at any time, to satisfie with a moderate draught is better then to forbear. Accustome youth and strong stomacks to small drink, but stronger drink and wine to the infirm and aged: it cheers the spirits, quickens the appetite, and helps di∣gestion. For corpulent gross and fat bodies, thin hungry abstersive penetracting wines. For lean thin bodies, black, red and yellow wines, sweet full bodied and fragrant, are more fit and agreeable. For Drink whether it be wholesomer warmed then cold; is much controverted, some stifly
contending for the one, and some for the other: I shall rather chuse the middle way with li∣mitation and distinction; then impose it upon all as a rule to be observed under the penalty of forfeiting their health, the observation of the one or the other. There are three sorts of persons; one cannot drink cold Beer, the other cannot drink warm; the third, either: You that cannot drink cold Beer, to you it is hurtful, cools the stomack and checks it much: therefore keep to warm drink as a wholesome custome: you that cannot drink warm Beer, that is, findes no refreshment, nor thirst satisfied by it, you may drink it cold, nor is it injurious to you: you that are indiffe∣rent and can drink either; drink yours cold, when you cannot have it warmed. That warm Drink is no bad custome, but, agreeable to nature in the generalitie; first, be∣cause it comes the nearest to the natural temper of the body, and similia similibus con∣servantur; every thing is preserved by its like, and destroyed by its contrary: Secondly, heat though I do not hold it the principal agent in di∣gestion, yet it does excite, is auxiliary and a necessary concomitant of a good digestion, ut signum & causa. Thirdly, Omne frigus per se, & pro viribus distruit; Cold in its own na∣ture, and according to the graduation of its power, extinguisheth natural heat and is destru∣ctive;
but per accidens and as it is in gradu re∣misso, it may comtemperate, allay, and refresh, where heat abounds, and is exalted. Therefore as there is varietie of Pallates and Stomacks, likeing and agreeing best with such kind of meats and drinks, which to others are utterly disgustful, disagreeing and injurious though good in themselves: so is it in Drink warmed or cold, what one finds a benefit in, the other receives a prejudice; at least does not fnd that satisfaction and refreshment, un∣der such a quallification; because of the vari∣ous tempers, particular appetitions and idiosyn∣cratical proprieties of several bodies, one thing will not agree with all: Therefore he that can∣not drink warm, let him take it cold, and it is well to him; but he that drinks it warm does better. Which is to be understood in Winter, when the extremity of cold hath congelated and fixed the spirits of the Liquor in a torpid inactivitie; but by a gentle warmth are unfettered, volatile and brisk; whereby the drink is more agree∣able and grateful to the stomacks fermenting heat, being so prepared, then to be made so by it.
Motion and Rest. EXercise often, in the morning chiefly, with an emptie stomack alwayes; and after ex∣cremental evacuation if you can procure it. Exercise rowseth dull inactive spirits, gives ventilation, opens obstructions by the motion attenuation and penetration of the subtile spi∣rits, agitates and volatiseth feculent fixed sub∣siding humours, concocts and abates superflu∣ous moisture, increaseth natural heat, promotes concoction, distribution and conveyance of ali∣ment, through the narrow Channels and pas∣sages unto the several parts of the body; pro∣cures excremental evacuations, strengthens all the Members, and preserves Nature in her vigour. Vary exercise according to the condition of your body and season of the year: the stron∣ger, and Phlegmatic bodies, in cold weather, ad∣mit of stronger and swifter motions: Choleric bodies, weak, and the Summer season, more mild and gentle. Be not violent in exercise, nor continue it longer beyond a pleasure; but desist with re∣freshment, not a lassitude and weariness. Put on some loose garment, until your body be cool and setled in its natural heat and tem∣per,
the pores being opened by exercise, the cold is more apt to enter, from whence a greater prejudice then you could expect benefit from your labour. Fly idleness and a sedentarie life, for want of due action and motion, the body like standing waters, degenerates, corrupts and decayes. Ignavia corpus hebetat, labor firmat. Sleep and Watching. MOderate sleep refresheth the spirits, in∣creaseth natural heat, helps concoction, gives strength to the body, pacifies anger and calmes the spirits, gives a relaxation to a trou∣bled mind. Immoderate sleep dulls the spirits, injurious to a good wit and memory, fills the head with superfluous moisture and clouds the brain; re∣tains excrements beyond their due time to be voided, and infects the body with their noxious fumes and vapours, an enemy to beauty. Turpis qui alto sole semisomnis jacet, Cujus vigilia medio die incipit. Sen. Go early to sleep (not with a full stomack) and early from sleep; that you may rise re∣freshed
freshed lively and active, not dulled and stupid. When you lay by your Clothes, lay aside also your business care and thoughts, and let not a wandring phansie prevent your rest. Let your bed be soft, but not to sink in, which suckes from the body, exhausts and im∣paires strength: a Quile upon a Featherbed, is both easie and wholesome. Avoid day sleeps as a bad custome; chiefly fat and corpulent bodies: but if your spirits be tired with much business and care, or by reason of old age, debilitie of nature, extream hot wea∣ther, labour or the like that dissipates the spirits; then a moderate sleep restores the spi∣rits and is a good refreshment; but rather take it sitting then lying down. Night watching and late sitting up, tires and wastes the animal spirits, by keeping them too long upon duty, debilitates nature, changeth the fresh flower of youth, heats the body, dryes, and exasperates Choler; in time extinguisheth natural heat, breeds Rhumes and Crudities; most injurious to thin leane bodies. Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est.
Evacuation and Retention. UNder this Head is comprised excretions by Stool, Urine, monethly Purgations, Venus, by the Pores, pallate Nose and Ears: of which the former are of the greatest concernment, and special care to be had of them. Excremental evacuations are various pro∣ceeding from the several concoctions; conveyed out by several Channels and Vents: which duly evacuated are no small helps to the conser∣vation of health, and are the effects of a tempe∣rate and regular body. The retention of them beyond due time, argue distemperature of parts, or irregular li∣ving; and brings much detriment to the body, by their noxious Fumes and putrid Vapours, that might infect, corrupt, and disturb the body. Immoderate evacuations causeth weakness debilitie of nature by exhaustion, and procures several diseases, Cachexies, Consumptions, Dropsies, &c. To keep the body soluble is very good, that at least once a day you may not miss to have a stool; else the Faeces are hardned, the body heated, the stomack molested, the appetite not so good, the head heavy, dull and sometimes
pained; some grosser matter which should go away by seige, is brought by the Urinarie pas∣sage, occasioning obstructions, all which are very injurious and destructive to health. Seasonable and moderate Venus, alleviates na∣ture, and helps concoction. Immoderate, exhausts the strength by effu∣sion of spirits, exsiccates and dries the body, hurts the brain and nerves, causeth tremblings, dulls the sight, debilitates all the faculties, hastens old age, and shortens life. Cibovel potu repletis, superfluè evacuatis, five exercitatis coitus interdicitur. Tempus optimum est mane, & post dormias. Hyeme & vere frequentius permittitur, aestate parcissimè. Juvines sanguinei & pituitosi liberalius, par∣cius Melancholici, parcissimè biliosi, Senes, ema∣ciati. Mares plus quam faeminas laedit, & qui erecti solent.
Hygiastic Praecautions and Rules Appropriate to the several con∣stitutions of bodies, with their diag∣nostic signes. THE Sanguine is moderately hot and moist, hath a lively pulse, vigorous actions, of colour fresh or rosie, for habite of body soft, fleshy or moderately fat; of a pleasant mind and good disposition (except casualties and in∣firmities alter to the contrary. The Sanguine constitution being the best and most temperate, ought to be preserved in that state from degeneration and intemperate de∣clensions: which is performed by a due ob∣servance of diet, Air Exercise and Rest, Sleep and Watching, voiding and retaining of excre∣ments, and passions of the mind: for any of these, irregular unsutable, or unnatural of con∣tinuance, will alter and change the best tem∣pered body, into some other constitution of intemperature answerable to their causes as the intemperate Air of a hot climate, or season not regarded; violent exercise, nightwatchings, &c. Introduceth a depraved alteration and de∣generation of the blood. For the quality of your diet, let it be tem∣perate;
for temperate bodies must use tem∣perate meats, and distempered bodies their contraries: therefore keep within this la∣titude generally and for the most part, from meats temperate, to meats hot, cold, dry or moist in the first degree inclusive, those will sute well with your temperament: Such are Mutton, Cow-beife or Heifer, Pork, Veale, Lamb, Rabbit, Capon, Hen, Pullet, Tur∣ky, Phesant, Partridge, Carrots, Turnips, Skirrits, Sparagus. For quantity, times and order in eating and drinking; for Aire, Exercise and Sleep, consonant and most agreeable to this con∣stitution are to be sought in the general Hygi∣astick Rules before mentioned, which are most proper and applicable to this complexion; as being the common standard to measure o∣thers by; and how far others vary from this temperament, by so much are they to be ac∣counted intemperate, and do therefore require some particular Rules differing from the gene∣ral, because intemperate constitutions and temperate are not be governed by the same strictness of law, but must have some allow∣ance and exceptions, which shall be observed in the particular constitutions following.
Phlegmatick Constitution. THe Phlegmatick person is more cool and moist, not so lively, quick, sharp and acute as the sanguine: for habit of body corpu∣lent fat or fleshy; the Veines small and hid; a slow pulse; prone to sleep and ease, by cold things prejudiced, by hot things benefitted; incident to cold and Phlegmatick distempers, (which are to be understood, if customs casual∣ties or infirmities induce not the contrary. Meats agreeable and convenient for this tem∣perament, are such as be temperate and such as be hot in the first and second degree; not o∣ver moist, but potencially drying if heat be wanting: as young Beef powdered, Mutton, Venison, Hare, Turkey, Hen, Capon, Pidgeon, Turtle, Black-birds, Feldifars, small Birds, sow∣ced Puffins, Artichoaks, Parsnips, Potatoes, pickled Oysters, Anchovies. Also Bacon, Haberdine, old Ling, salt Cod, pickled Herrings or dryed, pickled scallops, and such like savory seasoned meats, this temperament will admit of, if the stomack be strong enough to digest them. And for the more security take a glass of Sack after. Refuse Lambe, Kid, fresh Pork, Pig, Goose
Duck, and water Fowl, being over moist and clogging a Phlegmatick stomack. But if your appetite much desires any of these, let them be down roasted: also Eeles, Lampreys, fresh Herrings, Makarel, Lobster fresh Salmon, Barbel, fresh Sturgeon, Tench, are injurious, and most fresh fish, yet less prejudicial if you drink wine with them. Let your dyet be warm meats, oftener roast, then boyled. Butter, Oyle and Honey is very wholsome. Mustard, Salt and Spices, are good for your use, especially with meats of slow digestion, and that abound with much moisture. Refuse Milk, and milk meats, Curds, new Cheese, Butter milk and Whey. Olives, Capers, Broom-buds, Sampire are good sauce, also Garlick, Onions, Leeks, in broths, seasonings or sawces, for a rellish, but not raw. Refrain cold hearbs and sallads, as Lettice, Purslan, Violet leaves; except Sorrel which although cold, yet a dryer and sharpner of the appetite: but use Mint, Sage, Rosmary, Time, Marjerome, Parsley, Pennyroyal and such hot hearbs. Abstain from raw fruits, Apples, Pears, Plumms, Cucumbers, Mellons, Pumpions, &c. But you may eat Walnuts, Filbirds, Almonds blanched, Chestnuts fiftick nuts, Dates, Figs, Raisins.
Drink strong bear more frequently then small and sometimes Sack. Not French wine if you be Rheumatick. Indulge not your self in lying long in bed, or afternoon sleeps, too much rest and ease, they dull the spirits, increase flegm and super∣fluous moisture. Frequent exercise and moderate abstinence in meat and drink, are great preservatives of your health. Chuse a warm air and dry soil remote from Waters the best place for your abode. Hot Baths are profitable, seasonable and mo∣derate Venus a friend: the former cherisheth the spirits opens obstructions and dryes up su∣perfluous moisture: the latter sufcitates and raiseth the spirits, alleviates and helps Concocti∣on. If the smoaking of Tobacco be good for any, the Phlegmatick may best challenge the use of it. Cholerick Constitution. THe Cholerick person is hot and dry, ea∣ger and precipitate in action; froward, hasty and angry; lean of body and slen∣der: the Veines bigg, a hard pulse, and quick: of
colour pale, swarthy or yellowish; the hair crisp or curled; propense to waking and short sleeps; subject to Tertain Fevers. Ad venerem proclivior, & cito satiatus. Use a cool and moistning diet, most fre∣quently boyled meats rather then rost or ba∣ked; but fryed or broiled meats never. Eat brothes often made with cooling hearbs; Rice-milk, Cock-broth, or Barly broths with Rasins Currants and Prunes. For flesh, chuse young tender and jucy, tem∣perate or cooling; as young Beef, Veal, Motton, Lamb, Kid, Pork, Conies, Green-geese, Turky, Capon, Chickens. Observe fish days as good dyet: and then you may eate fresh Salmon, Sturgeon, Lobster, fresh Herrings, Crabs, Prauns, fresh God, Con∣ger, Thornback, Soles, Plaise, Whiring, Smelt, Perwincle, Oisters, Pike, Trout, Tench, and all fresh fish, Eeles not excepted which are very unwholsome to others. Milk and milk meats are pleasant and good, as Custard, White-pots, new Cheese fresh Cheese and Cream. For your sauces use Verjuce, Vinegar, Sorrel Orange, Lemmon, Apples, Goosberies Currans: Prunes, pickled Cucumbers: as boiled Veale and Green-sauce, rost Veal and Orange, holled
Mutton, with Verjuce and its own juce; rost Mutton and Lemmon or Cucumbers; green Geese and Goosberries; Stubble goose and Ap∣ples, Pigg and Currants; Pork and Green-sauce; boiled Chickens with Goosberries or Sorrel∣sops; Calves feet stewed with Currans and Prunes: and your meat thus cook'd is both food and Physick. Take a lawful freedome and please your self with these fruits. Citrons, Pomegranats, Limes, Oranges, Lemmons, Quince, Pearmains, Pippins, red Cherries, Mulberies, Grapes, Damsins, Bul∣laces, Prunellaes, Respass, Currans, Barberies, Strawberries: they cool and quench thirst, con∣temperate and aswage Choler, and give a great refreshment to the parched spirits. Eat sallads of Lettuce, Sorrel, Purslane Spi∣nage and Violet leaves; they are medicamental aliment. Butter milk, Whey and Sider allays preterna∣tural heat, checks the effrenation of raging Choler, and are like water to fire. Refuse the fat and brown outside of meat: also the crust of bread: Butter and Oyle adds fuel to the fire: Sugar and Honey hath alliance and friendship with Choller, being soon assi∣milated and converted into its nature. Mustard Salt and Spices exasperates Cholet and makes it more fierce and biting; Vinegar checks it.
Avoid wine, spirits, and strong liquors; they agitate Choller, and rouzeth up a sleeping ene∣my. Fast not but satisfie the stomack when it vel∣licates and calls for meat; biting Choller must have something to feed on, or it will prey up∣on the body. Cherish and indulge sleep, it cools and moi∣stens, but let it not exceed in length, which puts nature by her due times for necessary eva∣cuations. Use little and gentle exercise; be not labori∣ous or toyling, but take your ease avoid violent motion, it fires the spirits and enrageth choler. Frequent Venus is most pernicious. Cold bathes is profitable and refresheth much, by cooling the blood allaying the spirits concentring them. Bannish anger immoderate care, peevishness and fretting which discomposeth the spirits heats and wasts them, angments Choller, dryes the body and hastens old age. Refrain Tobacco as an injurious custome, it exasperates Choler, by heating, drying, and eva∣tuating dulcid Phlegme which contemperates bridles and checks the fury of acrid, sharp bili∣ous humors.
Melancholy Complexion THe Melancholy person, naturally so from the first principles is cold and dry: but a Melancholy temperament, acquired by Educa∣tion, Customes and Accidents, by Degenera∣tion, and admixture of other humors adust, is hot and dry: which make the signs and symptoms of Melancholy to be different and various, and a difference is to be made in dyet and customs. The common symptoms are a pale, black, or high Sanguine colour; given to be watchful, sad, solitary, and suddain laughter; a flow pulse, troublesome sleeps and dreams. Cold Melancholy hath milde symptomes; if hot and adust, the effects are more churlish and furious. For cold Melancholly, let the dyet be hot and moist: for the hot Melancholy person, let dyet be cooling and moist: in both let their meats be of light digestion, affording good nu∣triment and not windy: as Mutton, Lamb, Veal, Capon, Chicken, Partridge, Phesant, &c. Abstain from Venison, Bull-beef or Ox, hang∣ed Beef or long salted, Goats-flesh, Hare, Bacon, Goose, Duck, Swan, Crane, Heron, Bittor and most water fowl: Peacock, Quaile, Blackbirds, Pidgeon; Red Herrings, salt Cod, Ling, Stur∣geon,
pickled Scallos and salt Fish: dryed Meats, fryed or broiled, old Cheese, Beanes, Pease, Cabbage, Coleworts, Rye Bread, and all meats hard of digestion or windy. Capers, Broom buds and Sampire are good sauce, they open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Mustard and Vinegar bad, and all sower sauces, they make Melancholy more contuma∣cious and fixed. Spices not good, if the person be hot, they cause adustion. Use Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, Baume Fumiterry, Lettuce, Marigold flowers, Violets, Clove-giliflowers, Saffron, they alter and qua∣lifie the humor, and chear the spirits. Use Barly brothes with Prunes, Raisins and Currans. If Melancholy be adust, and your body hot and costive, eat Pippins Permains, Cherries, Respass, Strawberries, and such like fruits, to cool and moisten. Drink Whey, Sider and small White-wines. Refuse black wines and stale Beer. Keep the body soluble, your head will be more free from pain, fumes and heaviness. Cherish sleep, it refresheth the spirits, paci∣fieth a troubled minde, and banisheth cares. Fly idleness, the Nurse of Melancholy, ex∣ercise often and follow business, or recreati∣ons.
Walk in the green fields, Orchard, Gardens, Parks, by Rivers and variety of places. Change of Air is very good. Avoid solitariness, and keep merry com∣pany. Frequent Musick, sports and Games. Recreate the spirits with sweet, fragrant and delightful smells. Moderate Venus good. Banish all passions as much as in you lies, fear greif, dispaire, revenge, desire, jealousie, emula∣tion and such like, Opus est te animo valere ut corpore possis. Cicer. Tobacco hurtful (espicially if Melancholy be adust and a hot body) it heats and exhausts humidity, makes Melancholly more contuma∣cious, Give not your self to much study, nor night watchings, they both dry the body, and make humors adust, two great enemies to a Melan∣choly person.
Hygistic Praecautions and Rules Appropriate to the various discrasyes or passions of Mind. THe Soul and Body are so linked and con∣joyned, as Partners of each others ill and wellfare, that the one is not affected, but the other is drawn into consent; mutually acting enjoying and suffering untill death sepe∣rates and breaks the bands of union assunder. Hence it is, a diseased body makes a heavy droo∣ping mind; and a wounded, disturbed or estless mind, makes a youthful healthy body to decay and languish. Who therefore desires the health and wellfare of the body must Pro∣cure ease, rest and tranquility of mind. Siue Animo Corpus, nec sine corpore, Animus, bene valere potest. SHun Melancholy and sadness as very dan∣gerous and destructive, occasioning and producing variety of diseases; suffocates and choaks the spirits, retards their motion and agility of operation, imprisons, and cloggs them in their Stations, darkens their purity and light debilitating all the faculties
of the body, their cheif operator being indis∣posed and disabled; fixeth humors incrassates and begets obstructions; and debilitates the Speen, alienates and subtracts its ferment from the stomack, which decayes both appetite and digestion, procures scorbute, Hypochondriac Melancholy, pains and tumors of the Spleen, Dropsies. Jaundice, &c. A great Enemy to beau∣ty, soon changeth florid blooming youth into a pale withering countenance, and makes the whole body to languish and decay. Mirth subtiliates, purifies and chears the spi∣rits, puts them upon activity that before were torpid dull and heavy, and excites them to o∣peration and duty in the several faculties: vo∣latizeth, rarifies and attenuates gross feculent ob∣structing humors: preserves youth vigour and beauty; makes the body plump and fat, by ex∣panding the spirits into the external parts and conveighing nutriment. Whose wholsome ef∣fects are much the same with those of ex∣ercise, and may well supply when that is want∣ing. — Dum fata sinunt Ʋivite laeti— Sen. ANger is the beginning of madness which fires the spirits, & raiseth an intestine tomult and disturbance; agitates and inrageth Choler
and exasperates Cholerick diseases: raiseth hy∣stericall apoplectic and epileptic fits in those subject to them; causeth tremblings of the nerves, palpitations of the heart; discomposeth and disorders the whole body: but more espe∣cially infirm parts are made sensible of the pre∣judice, and Cholerick lean bodies. Maximum remedium irae est dilatio. —Dis proximus ille est. Quem ratio non ira movet, qui facta rependet Consilio— Claud. FEar suddenly surprizing, enervates and cha∣seth the spirits to and fro from their residen∣cy and faculties sometimes compressing and dri∣ving them to the heart, causing violent palpita∣tions and suffocation: or scattring them from the fountain of life into the external parts, mak∣ing a dissolution even to exanimation. A long predmeditated and constant fear in a remisse de∣gree, produceth the same effects with Melan∣cholly. Plura sunt quae nos terrent quam quae Premunt; & saepius opinione quam re∣laboramus. LOve & desire being inordinate and impetu∣ous, seldom goes alone, but is attended with
fear, anger, Melancholy, dispaire, one or more for its consorts, with which the minde is rack∣ed and torn, and variously affected as the se∣veral passions acts their parts by turns: notwith∣standing difficulties and sufferings, the soul is led away with an ignis fatuus of fervent zeal, deserts her own mansion, and follows after with an eager prosecution of enjoying, never at home but as a prisoner, and prisoners are but bad house keepers: the body needs must lan∣guish and decay, when the soul thus delights and strives to run away. For a check to the impetuousness of this in∣ordinate effection and immoderate desire, take these considerations to calm, allay, and regu∣late your passion. First, that you cheat your self in setting too high a price upon the object of your affecti∣ons, and lay out more in expectation, then the income of your desire obtained can possibly make a return: that it is far greater in non ha∣bendo, then it will be in fruendo; it will be much less when you have, then it seems to be now you have it not. Secondly, that the Delirium and fervency of your desire, does not hasten the accompishment of your aymes, but rather retards or frustrates: for the extremity and strength of passion debi∣litates and suppresseth reason, the cheif contri∣ver and manager of your design; puts you up∣on
inconsiderate, immature and rash attempts, and makes you more unfit, incapable and un∣able to effect your purpose; for passion is alwayes spurring, but reason hath its stops and pauses, keeps due times for onsets and pro∣gress. Thirdly, that prudent and vigorous action, not innane hungry volition or thirsty desire though never so great, must or can acquire the satisfaction of your hopes. Fourthly, that the ardency and heighth of desire, will not imbetter, sweeten or add to the heighth of your injoyment when obtained; but rather abate and lessen it in your account and esteem: for what thing soever you pur∣chase, and are mistaken and deceived in, you will not vallue at that rate you first prized it, but at the worth you now finde it. Vehement & lofty desires screws you up to such a heighth of expectation, mountain high; but you must descend into fruition, thats in the valley; and when you find your self in a bottom, and your Sails not so filled and puft as formerly by the fresh gailes and blasts of a strong desire; your top-sails then begin to flap and flag when you come into the still calm of fruition, and your lofty spirits and high thoughts will lower amain when you Anchor in the Harbour of injoyment: for in appearance it was great when at a di∣stance seemingly, but now you are come nearer
it is much less and inconfiderable really; and what swelled you full in the prosecution of at∣taining, will not fill you now with satisfaction, but prove aery when you grasp it, and soon emptied in injoyment. Thirdly, that statutum est, it is appointed you must or you must not obtain the thing de∣sired, which to a rational creature, is sufficient without other arguments, to qualifie moderate and blunt the keen edge of desire, and curb the violence of an impetuous affection: but not to cowardise, daunt or stop a laudible active pro∣secution to attain a noble, vertuous and lawful end, with a moderate submissive desire. —quisquis in primo obstitit Repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor fuit. Sen. Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum Serò recusat ferre quod subiit jugum. CAre immoderate and constant denies the a∣nimal spirits their due times for refreshment, rest and ease; disables them from duty and the true performance of their Offices, being weary and tired for want of respite, heats the spirits and dryes the radical moisture; which changeth a fresh countenance into paleness, and pines the body: most injurious to thin, lean and Chole∣rick bodies.
Si diis Curae es, quid tua cura potest? Revenge, jealousie and envy are the Ulcers of the mind, continually lancinating, corroding or inflaming; introducing a secret consump∣tion, wasting the spirits and radical moisture, and infeebling all the faculties. Multis se injuriis objicit, —dum una dolet. Sen. That you may the better know and rightly un∣derstand how the passions of the mind redound and reflect upon the body to the decay and ru∣ne of it, and abbreviating life. First, consider that the body without the soul s dead and moves not at all: by vertue of the oules conjunction with it, informing and as∣suming it, the body acts with various motions and opperations, and according to the activity f the soul, organical aptitude and fitness of the ody is the exquisiteness and perfection of their perations: the Soul then is agent, the body assive, receiving the influx vertue and power rom the Soul, who is Rectrix and Gubernatrix o whom the rule and government belongs: it  evident therefore since the body cannot act ny thing of it self for its conservation with∣ut the energy and assistance from the Soul,
whose care is the regulating and moderating the body in all actions external and internal; then the distractions, inactivity, wandrings and neglects of the soul, does tend to the sub∣version of the due order and government, and consequently the ruine and dissolution of the body, which requires a constant supply of daily reparation and regular tuition for its support and maintenance. Now the Soul transported by passion from its genuine Crasis of placidness and tranquility, and reduced into a turbulent, unquiet and di∣stempered state, is that condition of incapa∣city and unfitness for the government for that time being, and many damages arise thereby as in each passion particularly is enume∣rated. In a threefold manner the Soul is put besides it self in the regularity of rectory, and is incurious of the welfare of the body. First, the Soul is either carried away by some delightful object, as for some thing vehemently desired, deserting as it were the body to follow after that thing desired and coveted, extending her power and strength out of the body, to lay hold, if possibly to obtain, and bring within the Sphere and Circle of her enjoy∣ment. Or secondly, the Soul is in fury and disquiete within, by the apprehension of some thing as∣saulting
and disturbing it, to which the Soul hath a contrarietie, and antipathy against: as in the passions of fear, hatred, revenge, anger; and the disquietude and disturbance is continued by representations of their Causes in the phan∣tasie, which still present themselves to the soul, by way of a fresh assault, which feeds the passi∣on and continues the distemper. Or thirdly, the Soul is languishing, heavy and inactive, altogether indisposed to the go∣vernment and tuition of the body; and per∣haps desirous to be discharged and shake it off, being weary of the burthen, taking no delight in their partnership and society, as in melan∣choly despair and grief. In all which cases you shall find the body to suffer great prejudice and detriment: But first, you must consider how, and by what means or instrument, the Soul does act in the body; the Soul acts not immediately, but mediately by the spirits, which are the Souls approximate and chief instruments in bodily actions and motions, and are appointed their several Sations, Offices and Duties peculiar to the several works, as Concoction, Separation, Distribution, Excre∣tion, Retention. Assimilation, Sensation, &c. Now it will manifestly appear how the body is damaged and consequently the life abbre∣viated. In the first Case: when the Soul alienates
her self, wanders away with a vehement desire to procure and obtain any thing most agreeable and delightful (at least so seeming) the Soul as it were contracts it self and unites all her force, stands at full bent after this beloved, dischargeth all her thoughts upon it, and spends her strength in desire and longing; untill at last she pines away with a tedious and starving expectation: In the interim the aeconomy and government of her own mansion the body is neglected; the spirits, at least a good part are enticed away and called of from their proper and peculiar works and duty, perhaps to en∣large and increase the vigour of some other fa∣culty, more immediately subservient and at∣tending the Souls new design and business; pre∣ferred far before a good concoction, due excre∣tion, nutrition, seasonable rest, or what else; and those spirits remaining which have the bur∣then of these duties incumbent on them, have so small and inconsiderable support and supply of influence from the Soul, to direct and back them in their performance, that the functions are executed so weakly and depravedly, to the great prejudice and damage of the body. Concoction now is not so good, nor the ap∣petite so quick; the Stomack calls not for a new supply, as yet not being well discharged and quit of yesterdayes provision: the Stomack now is weary of dressing and preparing long
Dinners for the body; Lenten and fasting dayes are its vacation from trouble, and best contented when least to do. Separation now is not so good, the excre∣mentitious and nutritious part walk hand in hand together, and pass without contradiction or due examination: the watch now is not so strict at the Ports and privy passages, to discern what is fit to pass this way, and what the other, and what to reject and keep out, but promiscu∣ously receives what presents it self. Distribution now is not so good, aliment tires by the way, wanting spirits to convey and bring it to its journeys end; and exercise to jog it on through the angust Meanders, and more difficult passages. Sanguification is now degenerate and vitiate, the preceding requisites and fit praevious dispo∣sition being wanting. Membrification or assimilation is now changed for Cachectic and a depraved habit. Excretion and evacuation of what is super∣fluous and and unfit longer to be retained in the body, is not sent away in due time, but stayes for a pass, the governess is now taken up with other matters, neglects due orders and commands to the expulsive faculty for their emission. Necessary and wholesome Customes are now neglected and disregarded: the Soul too oft is
wandring and gadding abroad, and best when she is from home; but neglects the airing of her Cottage, and perfuming it with fresh aetherian breath. The Soul is now alwayes restless and distur∣bed, nor shall the sences her attendants take their due repose, but keeps an unqiet house at midnight. In the second Case: the regular and due or∣der of government in the body is subverted and changed, when the Soul in the forementioned passions, of fear, anger, hatred or revenge, is disturbed and a arum'd by the assault, ap∣proach or appearance of some evill or injury; the Soul then summons the spirits together from thei common duties, and calls them to her aid and assistance, for security from danger, to re∣pulse the violence offered or revenge the injury; hurrying them here and there, from one part to another in a tumultuous manner, if the assault be suddain and surprizing; sometimes inward to support the heart, to give courage and resolu∣tion, which by their suddain concourse and con∣fluence to the Center; causeth great palpita∣tions, and sometimes suffocation: or else com∣manding them to the out-works, into the exter∣nal parts, to repell the invasion and violence of the evil presenting or approaching, or to re∣venge the quarrel: the hands and arms then receive a double or trebble strength, the Muscles
being full and distended with agile spirits for their activity and strength in motion: the eyes then are staring full and stretcht fourth with a croude of inflamed spirits, darting fourth their fury and spending their strength upon the ad∣versary and object of their trouble: the tongue then is swelled with spirits and bigg words, that wanting a larger room for vent, tumbles out broken and imperfect speeches, and scarce can utter whole words: The Leggs and Feet then have an Auxiliary supply, and double portion of spirits conveighed in to their sinews, to in∣crease their agility and strength, to come on or off: but in the mean time the heart perhaps is almost fainting, so long being deprived off, and deserted by, those lively vigorous spirits, which did inhabit and quarter there for its Life-guard, protection and support; are now called off their Guard and common duties, imployed in Forreign parts, commanded here and there as the emergent occasion presents it self to the go∣verness of this Microcosme. In the third Case mentioned: the due order, government, and necessary execution of offices and duties belonging to the welfare and main∣tenance of the body and preservation of life, is neglected and weakly performed. When the soul being darkned and overspread with a cloud of sadness, betakes her self to a sullen incurious recumbency and retiredness wil∣ling
to resign and cast off the government and tuition of the body; and as a burthen which she delights not now to bear about, begins to loose her hold, who before had embraced and clipt so close; suspending the vertue of her energy and vigorous emanations; but now acting faintly and coldly, those necessary mutual performan∣ces without regard to their former friend∣ship, or their future conjunct preservation. The body now begins to sinck with its own weight, and press towards the Earth the natural place from whence it came. That aetherian spi∣rit which before had boyed it up and took de∣light to sport it to and fro, is now ready to let it fall and groues downwards, to leave it whe∣ther it must goe. The wonted pleasures of their partnership and society, is now disgusted and rejected: food now hath lost its relish and is become unsavory: sleep which before was pleasant as a holy day in the fruition of rest and ease, is now composed of nothing but troublesome unquier dreams, linked together with some fighing intervals, to measure out the weary night by. Exercise and sporting re∣ereations is now accounted druggery and labo∣rious toyling: unwilling is the soul to move her yokfellow, farther then the enforcing law of nature and necessity commands and urgeth. their joynt operations which before were duly and unanimously performed, are now ceased, a∣bated
or depraved, by the retraction, relu∣ctance and indisposed sadness of the soul to act: the wonted vigorous emanations of the soul, and her radiant influence upon the spirits is now sus∣pended, subducted and called back. These mini∣string attending spirits and cheifest agents, which at a beck were alwaies ready agile and active in the execution of her commands now want commands to stir and warrants to act by: but in a torpid and somnolent disposition, unfit for action and the exquisite performance of their duties, and in a sympathizing compliance with the soul the excitrix and rectrix of their motions, are ready to resign their offices, and give over working, that what they now do is faintly and remissely performed, with much de∣ficiency & depravation. When the soul is pleas∣ed and merry, the spirits dance and are cheirfull at their work; but when she droops and mourns, the spirits are dull, heavy and tired, the functions weakly and insufficiently executed. From the preceeding discourse may easily be collected, that the distempers and alienations of the soul from her genuine crasis of serenity and quietude, is of great disadvantage, to health; impressing upon the body various preternatu∣ral effects, forming the Ideas and charracters of diseases upon the spirits, and by them commu∣nicated, conveighed and propagated in the bo∣dy: likewise the morbific seeds & secret chara∣cters
of diseases which lay dead and in∣active, are by the aeconomical disturbance and perturbations of minde, awakened, moved and stirred up to hostility and action which other∣wise would have layen dormant; as by greif, fear or anger; hysterical passions, swoonings, epilepsies, &c. Are often procured; and it is evident, and commonly observed by infirme and diseased people, how passion agravates and heighthens their distempers; and acccording to the temper of their mindes will their bodily in∣firmities be agravated or abated. I shall conclude this subject with three corollaryes being the Epitome of what hath been asserted and aimed at. 1. There is no perturbation or passion of mind, whether little or great, but it works a real effect in the body more or less, according to the nature and strength of the passion; and by how much the more suddain, great, often, and longer duration the passion is by so much are the impressions and effects worse, more dura∣ble and indeleable. You cannot be angry or en∣vious or Melancholly, or give way to any such passion, but you cherish and feeed an enemy that preys upon your life, and you may be as∣sured that passion makes as great nay greater alteration within the body; then the change of your countenance appears to outward view, which is not a little, although but the shadow
or reflections of the inward distemper and dis∣order: and were it possible by any perspective to see the alteration and discomposure within made by a passionate minde, the prospect would be strange, and much different from that pla∣cidness and tranquility of an indisturbed quiet soul. 2. Strong and vehement passions or affections of the mind to intent upon this or that object, whether desiderable, or formidable and to be a∣voided, alienates suspends & draws of the wont∣ed vigour influence and preservative power of the soul due to the body; whereby the functions and operations are not duly and sufficiently per∣formed, but intempestively remissly and weak∣ly: nor is the dammage onely privative, but also introduceth and impresseth upon the spirits a morbific idea, which is ens reale & seminale, producing this or that effect, according to the nature and property of the Idea received, and aptitude of the recipient subject. Phan∣sies and Idea's are let in naked, but they strait are invested and cloathed in the body, have a real existence, and are entia realia; though at first conception but entia rationis: as the longing of a pregnant woman, being but the Idea of a thing in her minde, begets various and real distempers in her body, if not soon satisfyed; and sometimes charactrized up∣on the Embryo in the Wombe. Likewise a
good stomack is taken off its meat suddenly, by the comming of some unwelcome bad news; the appetite is gone now the soul is disquieted, and the Body really affected and altered: let this sad tidings be contradicted, and the Soul satisfied of the truth to the contrary, it sets a new impression upon the spirits, they strait are cheered, lively and active; the stomack calls for meat and drink, and the faculties re∣stored to their wonted operations. Whereby it appears, the two passions of joy and grief, as they are opposite in their objects, so are their effects wrought in the body, as far distant and different. 3. A cogitative or contemplative person to intent, alwayes or unseasonably employing the mind seriously and eagerly either in real or ficti∣ous matters, fabricating Idea's upon the spirits, disturbs and hinders other necessary offices and opperations conservative of being, enervates and weakens their performance in duty, impares health, and hastens old age: but those that live most incurious, and void of studious thoughts and serious cogitations, preserve the strength of nature and integrity of all the facul∣ties, protract the verduce and beauty of youth, much longer from declensions and decay; for by how much the rational faculty is over busie and imtempestively exercised, drawing the full vi∣gour of the soul into the exercise of that fa∣culty,
and robbing other inferiour functions of their necessary influential supply, and emana∣tive power from the soul; by so much the other faculties are impoverished and abated, their ex∣ecutions more languid and depraved: and therefore it is, a close Students life, disposeth and inclines to many infirmities, enervates and debilitates nature, abbreviates and shortens its course. . Fieri non potest, ut animo malè affecto, Non etiam unà laboret corpus. parcè bibe, frugaliter ede utere exercitio rarò venere diluculo surge tranquillo sis animo tempestivè fac omnia immodice nihil. Ars brevis, vitam trahit longam.
Of Fontanels or issues. NAture having appointed the Body to be preserved and nourished by a continual supply of necessary food daily to be received in, which before it be assimilated and incorporated into the substance of the body, suffers several concoctions and transmutations by the digestive ferment of the parts, destinated for that office and work: in which praevious disposition and gradual preparation for nutrition there is a se∣paration made, the nutritive and necessary part from the excrementitious and unnecessary; the purest defaecated part ordained for aliment, is conveyed still farther from one digestion to an∣other, untill it hath received the compliment and full perfection intended by nature: the excrementitious and inutile part segregated, is received by sinks and channels peculiarly ap∣pointed and framed for their conveyance out of the Body as the lower guts, Urinary ductures, Nose, Pores, &c. Which passages if at any time obstructed and stopt up, the derriment and sen∣sible dammage soon confirms the necessity of their use & office. And as nature hath appointed and framed in the Body vents and out-lets for
the daily discharging of excrementious super∣fluities, which otherwise would putrifie, suffo∣cate and stifle, if not in some measure duly eva∣cuated. In imitation of natures contrivance, Art hath invented Issues as Ports and Vents to be placed here or there, as the variety of occa∣sions require, to supply natures insufficiency and inability to relieve and help her self in the dis∣charge and emission of superfluous extravasat∣ed humours and putrid vapours; which retain∣ed, produce various symptomes, according to the several proprieties of their nature, and degeneration, organicall difference, and pecu∣lier office of the parts they invade and infest. And having such a passe Port, by which na∣ture findes her self alleviated and disburthened, does daily amandate and send superfluous hu∣mours to this out let, as to other common pas∣sages and conveyances for the excretion and voiding of excrements, by her own instituti∣on and fabrication. And having found such an auxiliary conve∣niency, she does expect it to be continued, and relies upon the assistance, untill the occasion be otherwise prevented, the cause removed, or nature better able to discharge and free her self, by the channels and passages of her own ap∣pointment. Now if praematurely and unseasonably, this
artificial passage be denyed and stopt up, there being cause for the contrary; the confluence of humours meeting and gathering at the place, re∣gurgitates back again with a united force and greater current, at which nature being surprised unexpectedly, and having made no provision to secure her self from such a retrogradation or reflux, produceth the same preternatural symptoms and effects, for which the issue was first made or worse. For your better satisfaction and information in the use of issues: first I shall consider for whom and in what cases beneficial; Secondly, what it is that issues forth and is evacuated; Thirdly, the places and parts of the body pro∣per and conveniant for them; Lastly, the signes when to close them without dan∣ger. For corpulent and plethorick bodyes, that feed high and live a sedentary inactive life, whereby ventilation and transpiration is co∣hibited and restrained, issues may be used by way of Praecaution. In Cachectic bodies and diseases from putrid humours; issues makes evacuation and alle∣vates. For revulsion, derivation or interception of a humour inconveniently resorting to an emi∣nent, or infirm part, issues alters the course and current.
In Diseases from venenate and noxious va∣pours, appearing with uncertaine motions, and intervals; issues retards, and abates the strength of their paroxysmes. For Eiratic pains Cutany defaedations and extu∣berations from extravasated humors, & frustrane∣ous digestion; the use of issues may be beneficial. Issues are as Rivulets or Channels from a fountain to prevent inundation, and direct the streams: they do not destroy the Spring, but give vent and current this way, that it shall not overflow to do hurt otherwaies. They do not eradicate a disease, but they lessen and abate the swelling productions or growth, prevent or retard the frequent paroxysmes, and re∣turns of formidable and dolorous symptoms; give time and space for a Physician to use fit efficacious Medicines to extirpate, and take away the antecedent cause; and are but remedia a posteriori, & palliativa, to mitigate the effects, not curative and eradicative. For the nature and quality of humors issuing of , they are divers, according to the va∣rious disposition of bodyes, temperaments and morbific causes; such as the body abounds with and is superfluanous, such is transmitted thither for emission. That the humour evacuated is not usefull and necessary for the body: ap∣pears first by the concomitant figns mani∣festing
the nature of it: itching, pricking sharp pain about the place, inflamation and spongious flesh rising, in some more, in others less; which are not signs and ef∣fects of a natural good humor, but a hot corroding, sharp, unnatural humor flowing thither, degenerate and corrupt: beside, nature is not prodigal in the excretion and expence of humors, profitable and useful for the body, except by irritation. What is the reason that in cachectic foul bo∣dyes Ulcers in any part are difficult to cure? but by reason of a continual supply of bad humors, resorting thither for eva∣cuation, and will not let the sore heale up because they will have vent: and there∣fore a skilful Chirurgeon, does not only apply topical Medicaments, but also endeavours to remove the antecedent cause, by inter∣nal medicine and reduce the Cacochymical ill habit of body to a natural good state and condition by alteration and evacuatioy which being procured, the wonted flu humors to the ulcerated place is staied, and then nature heals the sore with a very little help. In placing of Issues rightly, three things is to be considered; First that they be com∣modious and properly scituate for the afflu∣ence and effiux of the morbific humor; for
humors have a tendency and an inclination to one part more then to another, according to the communication of parts, and rather down∣wards then upwards, from the propensity of their gravity: Secondly, whether Revulsi∣on or derivation of the morbific cause be most convenient and benificial, in the case for which an issue is appointed. Thirdly, That the position and motion of the Muscles be dili∣gently observed, else the Issue will not be so beneficial nor lye easy; for if it be set upon a Muscle the motion and attrition of the Mu∣scle will continually molest and disturb it, and the evacuation will be but little: There∣fore you must endeavour to place them in In∣terstitiis Musculorum, in the distances between the Muscles where the extravasated humors are most frequent in their motions and per∣ambulations. In the Closing up of an issue these are to be considered: the cause for which it was ap∣pointed, what effects alteration or abatement of infirmity; the age of the person, whe∣ther in youth, strength of nature, or decli∣ning years; as also the season and time of the year: which is to be adjudged and determined variously, as the particular case and circum∣stances collated do suggest; but generally the body is to be accounted in a better or worse state and condition, as the humor issuing is bet∣ter
better or worse; thin, sharp, bloody or fowle, smelling strong or stincking, much in quantity; declare the body to be cacochymical and foul, the humors depraved and degenerate, and re∣quire the issue to be continued: but the mat∣ter issuing white, resonable thick, sweet, little in quantity, and not sharp causing pain, nor inflamation about the place, are good signes and shew soundness of body, the humors to be in their natural condition, amicable and friendly to the body, and permit an Issue to be closed up: but let due purgation immedi∣ately succeed, and a spare dyet.
BELLUM NECESSARIUM. SIVE MEDICUS BELLIGERANS; The Military or Practical Physician re∣viewing his ARMORY. Furnished with Medicinal Armature and Weapons, offensive and defensive, Anatomically fitted and appropriate To the Head Capital Pills. Cephalic essence. Lungs Pectoral Electuary. Balsamic Extract.
Heart Cordial Tincture. Bezoardic Confection. Sto∣mack Stomack Pills. Digestive Elixir. Spleen Mesentery and Liver Cachectic Fills. Scorbute Tincture. Hydropic Pills. Hydropic Powder. Guts Aperitive Powder. Retentive Powdex. Reins and Bladder Nephritic Extract. Nephritic Powder. Dysuretic Powder.
Genital Parts Restaurative Essence. Hysterical Pills. Expulsive Powder. Restringent powder. Joynts Arthritic Pills. Skin Cosmetic Water. Powder of Saturn. Miscel∣laneous Italick Pills Neapolitan Pills. Haematic Powder. Febrific Elixir. Sarcotic Pills. Sudorific Pills. Sympathetic powder. Issue Cerecloth.
The Vertues use and Doses of each Medicine. For the Head. THE Capital Pills are appointed for infir∣mities of the brain and nerves, and eva∣cuates noxious humours that molest and hinder the exercise of the rational faculty; or obstruct and impedite the free operation of the sensitive; whereby the animal spirits are al∣leviated, the ventricles of the brain and or∣gans for sence freed from obstructions; Con∣ducing much to the cure of infirmities afflict∣ing the head and nerves as lethargies, apoplexy and soporiferous diseases; Convulsions epilep∣sy, palsies, vertigoes, tremors; pains of the head, rhumes, dul sight, or hearing, Take them after your first sleep; or halfe the dose when you go to bed, the rest at 5 or 6 of the clock next morning; in so doing you will not be called up before your due time to rise. When you are up, drink some warm posset-drink,
and walk about the house: Eat at noon; thus do 3 or 4 dayes together for they operate gently. The Dose for men and women is 5 or 6 Pills: for 14 years old, 4 Pills. The Cephalic essence, is specifickly appro∣priate to the head, effectually resisting the infirmities thereof, and strengthening the brain and nerves of special use for such as are catalep∣tick, epileptick, apoplectick, paralytick; that have a cold or moist bran, sunject to rhumes Con∣vulsions, remblings or weakness of the nerves, vertigoes, paines of the head: it strengthens a weak memory, weak eyes, amends dull hear∣ing if the defect be not organicall. It quick∣ens and raiseth the spirits in somnolent drowzy persons, makes them more acute and vigilant, and roborates the animal faculty. To be taken after the Capitall Pills, if both be used. Take it in the morning fasting, thus: Drop it upon fine powdered sugar, and take it upon a knifes point; then drink a draught of what liquor is most agreeable and proper for you: eat an hour after and go abroad. Also you may apply it to the nose profitably; Whereby the vertue is received into the head. The Dose for men and women is 2 drops, for children and infants so many drops as they
are years old. If under a year old, only apply it to the nose, as aforesaid, and also to the tem∣ples. Shake the bottle when you use it. For the Lungs THe infirmities most incident to the Lungs are. 1. A thin sharp rheum, irritating and provoking the Lungs to expulsion by coughing which oftentimes procures an exul∣ceration and spitting of bloud, and from hence a Consumption may insue. 2ly. A grosse indigested flegm, stopping the vessels of the Lungs and pipes for respiration, causing difficulty of breathing, wheezing and coughing, which is called an Asthma. 3ly. A Consumption or Ulcer of the Lungs, which in the beginning not so easy to be disco∣vered, but to be known by these signs. An ob∣tuse or heavy pain in the breast, short breath, frequent coughing, and destillation upon the Lungs. In time is made more manifest, by spitting of purulent matter, an ulcerous and more sharp pain in the breast, a putrid Feaver, the cough more vehement, imbecillity and weak∣nesse of all the faculties, &c. For the infirmities aforesaid the Medi∣cines
following are effectual and peculiarly appointed. The Pectoral electuary, stayes defluctions of sharp thin rheums that invade the Lungs, Mi∣tigates their acidity and saltness which in∣dangers Corrosion, spitting of bloud, and a Con∣sumption; checks the violence of coughing and easeth the breast: it helps a dry cough, loosens flegm, and helps expectoration, procures rest, and respite from coughing in the night. To be taken at any time, the quantity of a nut∣meg or more, but chiefly at night and morning in bed. The Balsamic extract, is most effectual in re∣storing weak, decayed Consumptive or ulcera∣ted Lungs; purifies and clenseth the breast from putrid matter that causeth the breath to stink or be ill savoured; defends the Lungs from te∣trid maligne vapours, internally generated or externally received, inducing a vitious depraved constitution of the Lungs, or promoting a Con∣sumption; roborates and strengthens the Lungs, firmly resisting an haereditary Phthisical consum∣ptive disposition subject to some families: Opens obstructions & stoppings in the breast, from Crude viscous phlegm stuffing the pipes of the Lungs and vessels for respiration; helps old coughs ast∣hmatic wheezings, difficult, short, and faint breathing, from indisposition decay or imbe∣cillity
of the vital parts, and restores their vi∣gour and natural ability. Attenuates, maturates and concocts tough raw flegm, and facilitates expectoration; retracts a confluence of crude humors flowing in upon the Lungs by the arteria venosa, causing oppila∣tious, short breath and Pertinacious coughing. Is both a preservative and curative medicine for persons Consumptive, inclining or disposed thereto, by any Pectoral infirmity. The Dose is half a dram for Man or Woman. For 14 years old, a scruple or 24 grains. Take it night and morning in bed: if it be for putrid or ulcerated Lungs you must conti∣nue the use of it 3 weeks or a month observing due order and dyet: if for lesser infirmities a shorter time will effect the intention. It con∣fines you not to the house, more then the ten∣dernesse of your own body, and the cold∣ness of weather prohibits you to go a∣broad. Rowl it in Sugar-Candy, or fine powdered sugar, and take it upon a knifes point and swallow it.
For the Heart. THe Cordial Tincture, is appointed for fainting fits, it cheers the heart, re∣leives the vital spirits opressed, cherish∣eth decayed nature in weak and antient per∣sons; comforts and warmes a cold stomack, helps digestion, expells winde and Melan∣cholly vapours from the Spleen; very good for palpitations of the heart, or oppression at the stomack through Crudities and indi∣gested matter. To be taken at any time night or day, when any the aforesaid occasions require. The full Dose is a spoonful; for twelve years old, half a spoonfull, and so proporti∣onably to younger. The Bezoardic Confection, is a Soveraign Antidote against the Plague and all contagi∣ous Feavers; it powerfully expells poysons, breaths out all putrid matter and malignity, received by unwholsome Airs, or otherwise generated in the body: effectuall in the Small-Pox, Measels, Spotted-feavers to bring forth their Malignity to the skinn, and to prevent returning inwards: removes oppressions at the
heart, and any surfeit or over-charging of the stomack, by intemperate eating or drinking; of excellent use in all suddaine Sicknesses in young or old, to defend the heart and vitalls, until the distemper manifest it self: Necessary to carry with you in Travel. Take it on a knifs point, or dissolve it in Posset-drink, as oft as occasion re∣quires. The full Dose is the quantity of a Ches∣nut, for fourteen years old, as much as a Nut∣meg; for seven years old, the bigness of a Hasel-nut. And so proportionably to youn∣ger. For the Stomack. THe Stomack not performing its office rightly in Chylification, either by its own weakness or otherwise impedited, layes the foundation of many diseases, and therefore is primely to be fortyfied and assist∣ed when any dificiency appears: for, error in the first concoction is not amended in the fol∣lowing digestions of other parts from whence various preternatural affects disseminated in
divers parts of the body owning their rise and spring from this fountain. The symptoms of an ill affected stomack are, fulness, heaviness or opression, loss of ap∣petite, slow digestion or depraved, nauseous∣ness or vomitting, hicket or belching, thirst, heat, or burning. For which the following Medicines are appointed. The Stomack Pills cleanseth the first region of the body downwards, from abounding Choller and Phlegm, evacuates and unloads an opressed stomack, from humors and indigested matter that corrupts good nutriment, dulls the appetite and hinders digestion; by their abster∣sive faculty, removes viscous Phlegm impacted in the tunicles of the stomack, a receptacle for inflation and wind. Prevents, diarrhaeas, li∣enterial and dysenterial Fluxes, gripings and pains in the stomack and bowels, from sharp biting Choller or flatulent crudity by taking away their causes. And leaving a greateful a∣striction upon the stomack which promotes concoction. Destroyes Worms, and prevents, their breeding by carrying away putrid mat∣ter whereof they are generated. Takes away bitter eructations and nauseous belchings, vellications and gripes in the sto∣mack from bilious acrid humors; makes the stomack clean and fit for the reception of
wholsome food, and then you may expect good nutriment. Take them after your first sleep, or eare∣ly in the morning: when you are up, Drink some warme Posset, eat at noon. You may go abroad if the weather be warm, and the condition of your body will safely permit; But otherwise keep house. You may take them three or four dayes to∣gether, they work gently. The Dose for Men and Women is five or six Pills; For the age fourteen, 4 Pills. The Digestive Elixir, By its incisive and attenuating quality is very auxiliary to the stomacks ferment deficient and decayed, or obtunded and overlayed with crudityes, cor∣rects the imbecillity and indisposition of the superior orifice of the stomack, and causeth the stomack to close with more delight and satisfaction upon its object. Prevents nause∣ousness, flarulent belchings, nidorous and un∣savory risings in the stomack from indigestion and putrid fermentation. Kills Worms in the stomack and Guts; And amends a strong offensive breath. By its saline quality, excites and quickens a dull appetite and procures good digestion. By its Balsamic amaritude, is heal∣ing and grateful to a watrish, crude raw sto∣mack.
By its aromatic vertue, cherisheth and re∣fresheth a weak tender stomack. But if the stomack be very foul, stuffed and clogged with gross Phlegmatick humors, then first clense downward with the stomack Pills, or upwards by vomit, if hot Cholerick adust humors fluctuate, heate and broyl up∣on the stomack: afterward strengthen with the use of this Elixir, and you will finde a great alteration both for appetite and digesti∣on, the stomack much alleviated, disburthen∣ed, and cheerful in the performance of its office. Drop it in a little fine powdred Sugar, and take it upon a knives point, in the morning fast∣ing; you may drink after it Wine, Beer, or o∣ther good Liquor most agreeable to your sto∣mack: eat an hour after and go abroad: you may take it likewise at four of Clock in the afternoon. The Dose for men and Women is sixteen drops: for the age fourteen ten drops; for eight years old six drops: and so proporti∣onably to younger. Continue the use of it a fortnight together. Shake the bottle when you use it,
Medicines appropriate to the Spleen, Mesentery and Liver. THe Cachectic Pills are effectuall a∣gainst the defects and infirmities of the Spleen, mesentery Liver and Gall, from whence arise a Cachectic or ill habit of body, Dropsies, Scurvy, Hypochon∣driac Melancholy, Jaundice black and yellow, obstructions and pains in the several parts na∣med, various praeternatural febrific aestuations and fermentations, crudityes and coagulations in those parts primarily affected, from thence dessused and disperced into the mass of blood, which being thereby vitiated and impure, pro∣duceth various external Symptomes, pallid and livid discolourations, scorbute spots and desaedations of the skin, Tumors and Ul∣cers. These Pills evacuate and clense gently, by which the fore named parts are exonerated, and notably restored to their pristine vigour and due performance of their office (but by strong purgatives debilitated.) They penetrate into the second and third digestion, removing ob∣structions, and attenuating viscous coagulations which obtund the spirits in their motion and
activity, stop the conveyance of nutriment and corrupting it, hindering the communica∣tion of parts, necessarily subordinate and sub∣servient one to the other in their offices and duties, and retaining excrements of the several digestions which ought duly to be se∣perated and sent forth, from whence the ill effects that ensue are numerous. They are pre∣valent in prevention, and composing unnatural fermentations and turgid ebullitions in the bloud and humors; from whence Erratic pains, and various disquietudes. They imbibe and drink up (by their alkalizate quality) sharp and acide humors which cause erosions and torsions of the bowells, stimulating and pro∣voking Fluxes, and sharp pricking pains in se∣veral parts. They depurate and renovate the bloud from scorbutic degeneration and exotic mixture by which the spirits recover strength and vigour which before were alienated torpid and inactive, the organs for nutrition disburthened and re∣leived and made fit to performe and execute their several offices and functions. The Dose for Men and Women, is 4 or 5 Pills: (According to the strength, and condion of their body to operate.) For the age 14, 3 Pills. Take them early in the morning, you may sleep 2 hours after; when you are up drink a
draught of posset drink; eat at noon: Thus do twice or thrice in the weak, continuing their use more or less, as the occassion and greatness of the cause re∣quires. After these Pills the following Tincture is very proper and beneficial. The Scorbute Tincture hath a specific vertue against the Scurvy, which discovers it self by certain symptomes attending it, as lassitude, heaviness and indisposition to motion or acti∣on; pains of the head, thighs, hips, knees, and other parts; putrefaction of the gums and loosness of teeth, inflation and distention of the Hypochonders; red purple or livid spots upon the skin, &c. Some of these signs are sufficient to declare the disease especially when remote causes concur, as a close Air, gross diet, studious, melancholy or sedentary life. This Tincture asists the spleen in the discharge of its office, from whose imbecillity and depraved operation chiefly, as an approximate cause, the bloud acquires a peculiar corruption and scorbutic malignity, detected by some sym∣ptomes declaring its specific nature, and accor∣ding to the degree or heigth arrived at, are the symptomes more in number, and more exaspe∣rate & worse in quality. The Tincture resolveth
and volatizeth coagulate and fixed tartareous matter; attenuates and rarenes gross subsiding humours, which obstruct the vessels of the Spleen and viscera of nutrition, causing turgid inflations, schirrous tumors and pains in those parts, concocts crude ichorous bloud, depurates and renovates it from scorbutick feculency, and maligne putrefaction, makes it more fit for nutrition, and amicable to the body. Take it in a glass of White-wine, or Rhe∣nish which is best; or in good strong beer, not new; or beer with the juce of Orange which is better; or whey if the body be hot. In the morning fasting, and at 4 of the clock in the af∣ter noon. The Dose for men and women is 24 drops: for the age 14 and under, so many drops as they are years old. Shake the Bottle then use it. The Hydropic Pills are appointed for the cure of Dropsies, and watery tumors of the body, whether universal or in particular parts: They are purgative, and attract serous and watery humors from any part of the body and Evacuates by seige. They excite the kidneys to attraction and expulsion, which before was fluggish, imbecile or impedited in their office, whereby superfluous serosity or water is accu∣mulated and retained in the body; they are
very aperitive resolutive and diuretical, open∣ing obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Ure∣ters, dissolving any coagulate matter and send∣ing forth the Morbific cause by Urine. The Dose for Men and Women is 5 Pills; or but 4 if a tender body; for 14 years old, 3 Pills. Take them in the morning fasting, and drink little until noon; then eat your dinner. Thus doe 2 or 3 days in a week intermitting a day be∣tween. Those dayes you purge not, drink a draught of Wormwood wine, and eat some white bisket every morning, and at 4 of the Clock after noon: keep a spare diet, let your meat be rosted rather then boyled. If your stomack be weak use the digestive Tincture. Be moderate in drinking. You may profitably use white-wine mingled with the decoction of sasaffras, two parts to one of wine. The Hydropic powder hath the same ver∣tues and operation with the Hydropic Pills. But because some are averse to Pills, that with facility can take a powder, they may chuse either. Take it in a draught of posset drink or white wine warmed. Observing the preceding direc∣tions. The full Dose is one Dram: for the age 14, 2 scruples or half a Dram. And so proportion∣ably to younger.
For the Guts. THe Retentive Powder, mittigates and stayes all Fluxes and violent excretions of the Guts, whether lienterial Dysenterial or diarrhaea's; not by an astrin∣gent or binding quality of the Medicine, that were injurious to nature and not subsidiary, to retaine what nature desires to expel; but by attracting and collecting the peccant humor that stimulates to expulsion and evacuating it, whereby one stoole that the Medicine pro∣cures, carryes with it more of the offending cause, then six other from the (oft times vain) irritations and struglings of nature with∣out assistance. By the anodynous vertue, it allayes & charms the turgid aestuation of stimulating humors, by degrees evacuates and sends them forth, with less disturbance and danger; whether they be sharp, bilious, or acide serous humors; a saline irritating Phleme, a stinking corrupt Colliquation, or acrid and adust Melancholy; having also and astringent vertue to bind after wards, and to roborate the retentve faculty, the offending cause being removed; this is the safest way to stop the flux of what nature soever, and in any person; women with
child, in child bed, children or infants, and to prevent the danger that may ensue. If the Flux be bloody drink Whey wherein gads of Steel hath been quenched, for your com∣mon drink. The Dose of the Powder for man or Wo∣man, is a dram or more: to a Child of twelve years old, half a dram. And so proportion∣ably to younger. Take it in Posset-drink, in the Morning in bed, and sleep after it if you can. Do likewise the next day, if the occasion continue. The Apperitive powder, is emollient ab∣sterfive and opening, appointed for costive, hot and dry bodys; whereby excrements be∣ing too long retained, are hardned and ba∣ked, sumes return up to the stomack, troub∣ling Concoction and offensive to the brain: it corrects the dry distemper of the Guts, or intemperate heat of the Liver (frequent cau∣ses of costiveness) humects and softens dry hard excrements, and procures two or three stools. It is a necessary preparative to Phy∣sick, making the body fuid and fit for pur∣gation; opening obstructions of the bowels, mesentery, Liver, Spleen Pancreas and Ma∣trix; whereby any Medicine hath access to those parts, with more facility and speed and less abatement of its strength, before it comes
to operate upon the part intended; the du∣ctures and passages being laid open, by its Apperitive vertue. The Dose for Man or Woman is a Dram: for fourteen years, two scruples. Take it in a wine-glass full of the Liquor of stewed Prunes, in the morning fasting; half an hour after drink a good draught of posset drink, or Whey if you have a hot costive body: an hour after this you may eat your breakfast; spoon meat is best. Thus you may do four or five mornings to∣gether. For the Reins and Bladder. THe Nephritic Extract, by a specific vir∣tue resists the lapidifactory disposition of the Reins, and petrifactive succus, pre∣vents coagulation and petrifaction: By the abstersive tartareous property, clen∣seth the Reins and Bladder from muci∣laginous slimy matter, sand or gravel that lodgeth in the urinary passages. By the unctuous quality, mollifies, relaxeth lubrifies and dilates the uriters and urinary ductures,
for the more facile and speedy exclusion of the stone-gravel or any viscous coagulated mat∣ter, which may cause a suppression of urine, or strangury. By the balsamic vertue. Heals ex∣coriations of the urinary passages, caused by attrition of the stone and gravel, or a∣crimony of Urine, and mitigates the pain. Very subtile and resolutive, powerful to dissolve the stone; diuretical & purging by urine. The Dose for Man or Woman is half a Dram, which is about the quantity of a hasel nut. Take it thus five or six mornings toge∣ther fasting: roll it in fine powdered Sugar or Hony and so swallow it; then drink a good draught of White-wine after, or mixed with Ale. And you may follow your business. The Nephritic Powder, clenseth the Reins and bladder from sand and gravel, opens the Uriters and Urinary passages, provokes Urine, cooles the reins and prevents the stone. Take it in a glasse of White-wine fasting, half a douzen mornings together. But let the Powder be put into the wine over night and stand close covered. The Dose is one Dram. The Dysuretic Powder, corrects the sharpness of Urine (having an Hostile quality and anti∣pathy
to acidityes) which causeth the Uriters to twitch and vellicate with a painful Convul∣sive motion and contraction in the small of the back and hips to the Region of the bladder and bottom of the Belly: helps incontinency of U∣rine or debility of holding water, strength∣ning the Sphincter Muscle of the bladder and taking away the acrimony of the Urine, which provokes the expulsive faculty: it checks the over strong attraction of the reines, causing immoderate making water, thereby wasting the body, exhausting the natural humidity and im∣poverishing the Masse of bloud: coagulates a saline and tartareous resolution in the body which comming into the ductures of the Vrine, stimulates and irritates to expulsion by its acri∣mony. Cooles the reins, mitigates the ardor and scalding heat of Vrine. The Dose for Man or Woman is a Dram, for the age 14. two scruples: 8 years old half a Dram. Take it in the morning an hour before you rise, in posset drink: you may eat or drink when you are up and go abroad. Vse it a fort∣night or three weeks together. Observe your diet; and let your drink be steeled.
For the Genital Parts. THE Restaurative essence, asists digestion in the Spermatic vessels, strengthens the generative faculty; effectual against sterility or barrennesse in the feminine sex, and deficiency in the masculine; if the causes be superfluous moisture, crudity and infaecundity of the seed, debility of the Genital parts, frigidity or im∣becillity of nature, and not organical impedi∣ments and defects. It strengthens a weak back, preserves the balsom of nature, and natural heat; restores consumptive weak persons, strengthens old age, and the declinings of na∣ture; refresheth the animal and vital spirits by its aromatical fragrancy; roborates the in∣ternal parts; asists the digestions, prevents crudityes and the superfluity of crude hu∣mors. Taketh away putrefaction in bodyes that have a ranke or strong favour, by reason of pu∣trid humors breathing forth through the pores of the body; it will depurate, clense and make such bodyes more sweet and wholesome, and more acceptable to their bed fellows. Shake the bottle, before you use it. Drop it into fine powdered sugar and take it upon a knifes point: then drink a glasse of
Tent, Muskadel, or Sack, after it. The Dose is 24 drops for Men or Women. You may take it night and morning in bed. In the use of strengthning Medicines, Take this observation: That if the body be soul, let gentle purgation precede; first clense, then strengthen, thats a regular course: for this pur∣pose, let women take the Hysterical Pills; Men may use the Stomack or Cachectic Pills: As the condition of their body most requires. The Hysterical Pills, have an abstersive, and purgative faculty, to clense and open obstructions of the veins leading to the Matrix, whereby the terms may have their due times, and co∣lour, according to the course of nature: they dissipate flatulent vapours, and evacuate nox∣ious humors collected in the womb, which having aquired maligne qualities by residence there, occasions various symptomes and di∣sturbance in several parts by consent from the Matrix: as Hypochondriac Melancholy, palpi∣tation of the heart, shortness of breath and compression about the stomack, pains of the head, deliriums, Convulsive motions, sadness, palenesse and unwonted Complection; they pre∣vent fits of the Mother, disperse the vapours, and corrects the malignant cause: They cure the Green Sicknesse, brings the termes into their right order, restores the Complexion,
and purgeth the lower Region of the body. The full Dose is 6 pills; for fifteen years old, 5 pills; or but four, if she be a tender body and easie to operate. Take them early in the Morning, you may lye an houre after: when you are up drink a good draught of warm Posset, and walk in the House. Eat at noon. Thus do two or three days together: in∣termit so many days, then take twice or thrice more. And you will finde the bene∣fit. The Expulsive Powder, Is appointed for a difficult and perilous Child birth; being ef∣fectual to expedite the delivery of Women in a slow hard labour: it procures travelling pains when nature is unable and weak, giveth strength to the woman and Child, and hastens the Birth; expells a dead child, and brings a∣way the after burden. You may give it twice in twelve hours, for the foresaid occasions, not oftner. The Dose is one paper of powder. Take it in a small spoonful of Cinnamon-Water Penyroyal-Water, or Mace Ale; or these mixed at the discretion of the Mid∣wife.
The Restringent Powder, helps the debility and weakness of the Spermatic Vessels, procu∣red by immoderate coition, or other acci∣dents: stayes a Gonorhaea or Running of the Reins, so called; corrects the heat and acri∣mony of the seed that stimulates to expulsion, and allays the pain: asswageth any sharp hu∣mor in the privities of either Sex, heals an exul∣ration or excoriation there; takes away itch∣ing or molesting heat; prevents the danger by immoderate copulation, cools, allayes and strengthens those parts, Use it thus: Take a quart of Smiths water, let it stand six hours to settle, then pour off a pinte cleer, in it put the Powder, shake it well in a Bottle; then with a Syringe inject it into the privy part morning and night, and you will receive much help and ease. But if the Gonorrhaea be virulent, proceeding from the Pox; then it is requisite also that you take the Medicines proper for that disease, as the italic and neapolitan Pills, to purifie and clense your body from that malignity and virulen∣cy where with the humors are tainted and vi∣tiated; And to prevent future danger.
For the joynts. THe Arthritick Pills, are peculiarly ap∣pointed for the Gout, whether heredita∣ry or acquired by diaetetic errors, or differing in the part affected; as the feet, knees hips, hands or other Joynts; yet owning the same approxi∣mate cause, and admit the same cure. They attract the serous acrid humor which pricks and lancinates the Periostium and nervous parts about the Joynt: and retract the conflu∣ence of humors (caused by pain) resorting to the part affected. They are very profitable and Auxiliary against a rheumatismus (com∣monly called the running Gout) which is an er∣ratic pricking pain wandring from part to part, caused by a flatulent acrimonious humor, af∣flicting not only the joynts but the periostia of the Bones between joynt and joynt, the Muscles of the body, and membranes of the internal viscera: they prevent fluxion and transition of turgid humors, evacuates biting Choler, Saline and sharp Serous humors. And checks the sero∣city of their nature. By their alkalisate quality, they destroy exotic acidities which are dolo∣rous and hostile to neru us and and membra∣nous parts, and are a singular prophylactic or preservative from the cruelty of arth∣ritick
arthritic or Gout pains. Use them Spring and Autume for prevention: or at other seasons if occasion require. The full Dose is 5 Pills: for feminine and tender bodyes easy to operate, 4 may be sufficient. Take them early in bed, lye an hour or two after; drink a little posset when they work, and eat at noon: Do so two or three days to∣gether; intermit 4 or 5 dayes, and take again. After Purgation the Sudorifio Pills are bene∣ficial. For the Skin. THE Cosmetick Water, is appointed for disco∣lourations and commaculations of the skin; native or adventitious, (accounted no small in∣firmity with the Ladyes) being symptomes de∣noting the constitution, & temperature of some principal parts, diseases present and imminent, or the vestigia and markes of preceding infir∣mities and external accidents, displayed in their proper distinguishing colours, citrine, li∣uid, brown, red, swarthy &c. According to the nature of their causes, as in both the jaun∣dice;
Scurvy, distempered Livers and Spleens, obstructions, and most Cachectic bodyes, small-Pox, Measels, Contusions, burns &c. This washing is no fucus that sayes an arti∣ficial colour upon the skin to palliate a bad complexion and deceive the sight. But to a∣mend and tiear a dark brown skin, of the face, neck, breast or bands: it takes away Sun-burn, roughness, swarthiness, Morphew, small Pox spots and pimplex hath an abstersive and at∣tenuating faculty to thin and purie a muddy thick skin which clouds the lustre of a lively peircing aspect. There is nothing more amiable then the life, which is presented to view with some in∣terposition, being vailed with the skin, which if dark and thick, eclipses and hides much of the lustre and penetration. But if thin, clear and more transparent, the glory and beauty of the life then streams forth with great attraction: And therefore the eye is the most lovely victorious part, for its dilucid clearness, in which the sparklings and vigour of life is most visible and naked. 'Tis not white and red that hath the magnetisme of love, but the life dressed in those perspicuous colours. You may use or leave this water when you will without prejudice, there is no Mercury not any thing to injure the tenderest skin.
Shake the Bottle, then wet a cloath with it and wash your face every morning. The Powder of Saturn is appointed for Cuta∣ny defaedations, venereous Scab & Vlcers, pustules knobs in the flesh and glandulous tumors From the venereous cause. Also Scabs and Vlcers from other causes; Tettars, Ringworms itch, pushes, pimples. Chilblanes, cooles all outward inflammations, represseth tumors and asswageth their pain, very profitable for Sores or Tumors of the Kings evil. Vse it thus: take a quart of Smiths water let it stand to settle; then pour of a pinte and halfe clear, in it put the pow∣der and let it boil gently to a pinte, in a glass bottle set in a Kettle of water; then let it stand 2 dayes to settle very clear; poure it off and keep it for use: and with this liquor bathe the places affected morning and night. For the Venereal Pox. THE Italic Pills, are a specific purgative Medicine for the Venereal Pox. They purge and clense the body by their appropriate vertue from the virulency and foulness of that
disease, which corrupts the whole masse of bloud, and breaks forth into pustul's, Scabs and Vicers, by time invading the solid parts; they mitigate pain, checkes and abates the rigour of other symptomes which attends this disease, and prevents the danger. The Dose for Man or Woman is 5 Pills. Take them early in bed, lye an hour after; and when they work, drink a little posset-drink: you may eat at noon. The Neapolitan Pills, are a Peculiar Sudori∣fic Medicine for the great Pox after the pre∣ceding purgation, to transpire and breath out by sweating the remaining malignity and con∣tagious infection wherewith the body is taint∣ed. They dispell the maligne vapours, and re∣leive the spirits oppressed, purifie the bloud, and eradicate the impurity and venenate quali∣ties of the disease, by their peculiar propriety and opposition. The Dose for Man or Woman is 4 Pills. Take them in bed eaily, or at night if more convenient for your occasions; half an hour af∣ter drink a draught of hot bear or posset drinke wherein Sage is boiled be covered warm and lye to sweat when you have sweat 2 hours, (not longer) let some cloaths be taken of and cool by degrees, and have a care you take not cold after sweating, the Pores being open.
A regular and easie cure for the Venereal Pox with the preceed∣ing Medicines. THis disease sometimes lyes obscure and di∣ficult to be dettcted, and puts on the dis∣guises of other infirmities, but those who are guilty of the danger, may conclude by some of the following symptoms, what it is that trou∣bles and alters them. Yet this foul disease is not alwaies got by impure copulation; But otherwise sometimes, Man with Man, and Wo∣man with Woman, lying together, and hav∣ing intimate Society. And although it be in∣fections, yet all bodies are not apt to receive it, as all catch not the Plague in an infected house. But I must shorten the discourse, and come to the symptomes which attend the disease, and they are various according to the degree and heigth arrived at. At first a lassitude, weari∣ness and indisposition to motion, heaviness and dulness, the Spirits being tainted and opressed with the infection: pain of the head, shoul∣ders and other parts, cheifly at night: heat and burning in the palmes of the hands and soles of
the feet: a Gonorrhae a or running of the Reins: afterwards breakings out upon the skin vene∣reous buboes, and Ulcers of the privy parts, &c. Which come not altogether, but successively by degrees, discovering the discase in its progress, and degree of malignity. The cure is performed thus; the first day take a Dose of the Ialic pills; the second day let a vein be opened, if you be Feavorish or of a hot constitution; take blood at the discreti∣on of your Chyrurgeon. The fourth day take the Italic pills again; rest the fifth, sixth, and seventh: the eight day take the Italic pills again: the tenth, eleventh, twelfth dayes take the Neapolitan Pills to sweat; then rest 2 or 3 dayes, and take the Italic pills again; and after that, the Neopolitan. As occasion requires continuance. This method you are to observe for a short or longer time, according to the greatness and inveterate contumacy of the disease. Inter∣chainging these Medicines and giving conveni∣ent respite: which course will not be hard for you to observe although your body be weak and brought low with the disease, for nature will strengthen and be much incouraged dayly, by the assistance of these Medicines and Methodi∣cal course, prevailing upon the disease. And you will be more cheerful and strong then at first when you began. In the interim during this course and me∣thod,
no day is prohibited but you may use the powder of Saturne, if there be any Ulcer, pustuls, Scabs, or tumors caused by this di∣sease: also the Restringent powder if there be a Gonorrhaea: and if your mouth be fore, or the gums swelled and tender by reason of the malignant humor spending it self that way by spitting, as sometimes it doth; then use to gar∣gle your mouth often with hot broth, or warm Beer sweetned with hony, and you need not fear any prejudice. Haematic Powder. THe Haematic Powder is appointed as a ne∣cessary help to rest ain an immoderate Flux of blood that is hurtful and weakning to nature; whether it be the overflowing of womens monthly purgations, vomiting or spit∣ing of blood, Haepatic Fluxes by Stool, by Vrine, or at the nose. It corrects the acrimony, te∣nuity or serosity, and heat of blood which stimulates to expulsion, and causeth transuda∣tion, apertion, or erosion of a vein It incras∣sates and thickens the blood; And makes it indisposed for fluxion, constringeth and bindes the Vessels and assists the dibility of the reten∣tive faculty.
Take it in a draught of Verjuice Posset cold, morning and night in bed. The full Dose is one Dram: for twelve years old, half a dram. Febrific Elixir. THe Febrific Elixir, is very auxiliary to mitigate and allay the burning heat of Fevers; it checks the fermenting ebulliti∣on and aestuation of the blood; resists febrific pu∣trefaction and disposeth to transpiration of hot putrid vapours, which causeth restlesness and unquiet watchings; asswageth immode∣rate thirst, irrigates and refresheth the parched spirits: excites decayed appetite by resto∣ring the stomachical ferment, and is grateful to the stomack. The full Dose is twenty drops: for young peo∣ple so many drops as they are years old. Shake the bottle when you use it. You may take it in a glass of White-wine: or mingled with fresh smalbeer equal parts, a good draught; twice in the day, or night. You may put Syrup of Oranges or Lemmons if you will to it, for the Pallate sake; you need not fear the heat of the wine to prejudice you.
Sarcotic Pills. THE Sarcotic Pills are appointed for Vi∣cers internal and external, they exsiccate clense and heal by their Balsamick vertue, excoriations and ulcers within the body, where there is a possibility of cure; taking away all corrosive and sharp fretting humors, which con∣tinues the ulceration: they are very advanta∣gious towards the cure of external ulcers and sores in any part of the body, subtracting the antecedent cause, evacuating serous acrid hu∣mors which feeds the sore and prohibites heal∣ing: they are proper and beneficial for wound∣ed persons, to expedite their cures: they are good for Scabbed persons, Leprous, or have any breakings out upon the skin. The Dose for Man or Woman is 5 or 6 Pills: for 14 years old. 4 Pills. Take them 3 or 4 mornings in a week; you may lie an hour or 2 after them in bed. 3 hours after taking them, you may drinke posset drink, or whey: Which also is best for your common drink, in the forementioned cases, and to have it steeled with gads of steel quenched there∣in.
Sudorific Pills THE Sudorific Pills are aperitive, resolutive and discussive; opens the pores and procures breathing sweats; removes Cold, Aches, and stiffness in the Muscles and joints; transpires and breaths out putrid vapours and superflui∣ty of crudy watery humors and rheumatic moisture; depurates and clenseth the bloud; and opens obructions: very profitable in con∣tusions or bruises, dissipates and scatters the Flux of humors resorting to the dolorous part affected, and prevents coagulation of the bloud, resolves it if already fixed and congealed; they prevent tumors, and internal apostumation, and disperseth a colleciton of humors. A general Medicine, and may fitly be used in all cases that require sweating, with facility and benefit. You may take them 2 or 3 mornings toge∣ther fasting, in bed covered warm; a quarter of an hour after, drink a draught of hot posset∣drink, then sweat will break forth, lye in it for 2 hours; then take off clothes by degrees, and cool with discretion. The full Dose is 4 Pills: for 14 years old, 3 Pills.
Sympathetic Powder. THE Sympathetic Powder, is of known ver∣tue in cureing green wounds, as also the Tooth-ach. Take a few drops of bloud from the wound, in a peice of linnen, & lay upon the bloud a little of this powder; then tye it up close, and put it in your bosome, and keep it warm day and night, for if cold or wet happen to it, the wounded person will be much disturbed and pained. If there be wounds in several parts, each wound must have a several cloth used in like manner, wash the wound with white-wine, or the parties urine; then binde up the wound with convenient linnen cloth that cold come not to it, and in such manner as the brims of the wound may draw towards each other: the third day open the wound and wash away the quittour or corruption, then bind it up again with fresh clothes, and you will have a spee∣dy cure, if the wound be in such a part of the body as is cureable. In like manner you may do to a beast wounded, with successe. For the Tooth-ach thus: cause your gum to bleed where the pain is, with a pen-knife or needle; then stain a cloth with it the breadth of a groat, without rheum; then lay a little pow∣der to it; tie it up and keep it as aforesaid, and it seldom fails to give present ease and cure.
Issue Cere-cloth THE Issue Cerecloth is very commodious for those who have Issues in any part of the body, it attracts and draws to the place for vent, extravafated, superfluous, erratic humors: causeth a dry Issue to run, and brings away fil∣thy matter; prevents inflammation and keeps an Issue coole: very necessary in journyes and voyages; one peice will serve a month in wear∣ing, then lay on a fresh one; wipe it and turn the other side to the place every dressing, and lay a paper upon it.
A Catalogue of the Diseases and Symp∣tomes for which the Medicines are peculiarly appointed. PAlsy, page 80. 81. Lethargy, page 80. 81. Convulsions, page 80. 81. Falling-Sickness, page 80. 81. Vertigoe page 80. 81. Head-ach, page 80. 81. Tremors, page 80. 81. Rheums, page 80. 81. 114. Bad hearing page 80. 81. Bad sight page 80, 81. Coughs, page 82. 83. Consumption, page 82. 83. 100. Spitting blood, page 82. 83. Short breath, page 82, 83. Ill savoured breath, page 82, 83, 88. Palpitation of the heart, page 85. Fainting. page 85. Oppression at heart and stomack, page 85. Melancholy vapours, page 85. Bad Stomack, page 87, 88. Surfets, page 85, 87. Pain at stomack, page 87. 88. Wind, page 85, Worms, page 87, 88. Cholick, page 87. Costiveness, page 96. Fluxes, page 87, 95. Jaundice, page 90. Gripings, page 87. Spleen, page 90, 91, 92. Scurvy, page 90, 91, 92. Obstructed Liver page 90. Dropsies, page 93, 94. Obstructed Mesentery, page 90, Stone and gravel page 98, 97. Infirmities of the Urine, page 98. 99. Gonorrhaea, page 103.
Green-Sickness. page 101. Them immoderate, page 111 Fits of the Mother page 101. Barrenness, page 100. Masculine Imbecillity, page 100. Hard-labour, page 102. Weak backs, page 100. Fevers, page 85. 112. Plague, page 85. Small-Pox, page 85. Measels page 58. French-Pox, page 170. 180. 109. Poysons, page 58. Gout. page 104. Rnkness of body, page 100. Inflamations, page 107. Tumors, page 107. Ʋlcers, page 107. 113. Bruises, page 114. Aches, page 114. Stiffness, page 114 Scabs, page 107, 103. Itch, page 107. 103. Tettes, page 108. Ring-worms, page 107. Swarthyness page 150. 160. Sun-burn, page 150. 160. Morphew, page 150. 160. Spots, page 105. 160. Chilblains, page 107. Initia Morborum quamvis levia serpunt, Venienti occurrite— FINIS.
The Medicines are appointed at these Rates; that none may give more; or expect them for less.   s. d CApital Pills 2 6 Cephalic Essence 5 0 Pectoral Electuary 2 0 Balsamic Extract 7 0 Cordial Tincture 2 6 Bezoardic Confection 3 0 Stomack Pills. 2 6 Digestive Elixir 5 0 Cachectic Pills 3 4 Scorbute Tincture 5 0 Hydropic Pills 4 0 Hydropic Powder 3 4 Aperitive Powder 2 6 Retentive Powder 2 6 Nephritic Extract 6 0 Nephritic Powder 4 0 Dysuretic Powder 4 0 Restaurative Essence 10 0 Hysterical Pills 3 4
Expulsive Powder 5 0 Restringent powder 3 0 Arthritic Pills 4 0 Cosmetic Water 6 0 Powder of Saturn 2 0 Italick Pills 3 4 Neapolitan Pills 4 0 Haematic Powder 3 0 Febrific Elixir 5 0 Sarcotic Pills 4 0 Sudorific Pills 2 6 Sympathetic Powder 3 0 Issue Cerecloth 1 6 WHat Medicines you intend to keep for emergent occasions, set them in dry places from moisture and they will remain in full vertue, the Electuaries a year and half; the Pills and powders two years: the Elixirs, Tinctures, Extracts and Essences many years, being close stopt. FINIS.
