M208 12350684 59978
THE TRYAL AND PROCESS OF High-Treason AND Doom of Forfaulture AGAINST Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood TRAITOR. By His Majesties special Command, As a further proof of the late Fanatical Conspiracy. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.
The Tryal and Process of High-Treason, and Doom of Forefaulture against Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood Traitor. CVria Justiciariae S. D. N. Regis tenta in praetorio bur∣gi de Edinburgh vigesmo tertio die mensis Decem∣bris 1684. Per nobilem & Potentem Comitem Georgi∣um Comitem de Linlithgow, Dominum Living∣stoun, &c. Justiciarium generalem totius Regni Sco∣tiae, & honorabiles viros, Domines Jacobum Foulis de Colintoun Justiciariae Clericum, Joannem Lock∣hart de Castlehill, Davidem Balfour de Forret, Ro∣gerum Hoge de Harcarss, Alexandrum Seaton de Pitmedden, & Patricium Lyon de Carss, Commissio∣narios Justiciariae dicti. S. D. N. Regis. Curia legitime affirmata. Intran Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood Prisoner INdited and accused, that where not∣withstanding by the Common Law of this, and all other well Governed Na∣tions, the Conspiring to overturn the Government of the Monarchy, or of the Established Government of this Kingdom, or the concealing, and not revealing of any Treasonable Design, Project, or Discourse tending thereto; Or the assisting, aiding, or abaiting such as have any such Designs, does in∣fer the Pains and Punishment of Treason. And by the third Act of the first Parliament of King James the First, The Rebelling open∣ly against the Kings Person: and by the thretty seventh Act of His second Parliament, The Resetting, Maintaining, or doing favours to open, or not our Rebellers against the Kings Majesty, is Declared Trea∣son, and punishable by Forefaulture. And by the hundred fourty and fourth▪ Act of the twelfth Parliament of King James the Sixth, It is Declared Treason to Reset, Supply, or Intercommune with Trai∣tors. And by the first Act of the first Session of His Majesties first Parliament, It is Declared, That it shall be High Treason for the Subjects of this Realm, or any number of them, less or more, upon any ground,
or pretext whatsomever, to rise, or continue in Arms, to make Peace or War, without His Majesties special Approbation. And by the se∣cond Act of the second Session of His Majesties said first Parliament, To Plot, Contrive, or intend Death, or Destruction, or to put any Re∣straint upon His Majesties Royal Person, or to Deprive, Depose, or Sus∣pend Him from the Exercise of His Royal Government, or to levy War, or take up Arms against His Majesty, or any Commissionated by Him, or to intice any Strangers, or others, to Invade any of His Majesties Dominions, or to Write, Print, or Speak any thing that may express or declare such their Treasonable Intentions, is declared Treason, and punishable as such. Likeas, by the second Act of His Majesties third Parliament▪ It is Declared High Treason in any of the Subjects of this Realm, by Writing, Speaking, or any other manner of way to endea∣vour the alteration, Suspension, or Diversion of the Right of Succession, or debarring the next lawful Successour. Nevertheless, it is of veri∣ty that the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, shaking of all fear of God, respect and regard to His Majesties Authority and Laws; and having conceived most unjustly, a great and extraordinary ma∣lice and hatred against His Majesties Person and Government, and having designed most Traiterously to debar His Royal Highness, His Majesties only Brother, from His due Right of Succession, did amongst many other Traiterous Acts, tending▪ to promove that wicked Design, endeavour to get himself Elected one of the Com∣missioners for Negotiating the settlement of a Colony of this Nati∣on in Carolina, in one or other of the dayes of the Moneths of Ja∣nuary, February, March, April, or May, One thousand six hun∣dred and eighty three years; and that he might thereby have the freer and better access to Treat with the Earls of Shaftsbury and Es∣sex, the Lord Russel and others, who had entered into a Conspira∣cy in England against His Majesties Person and Government, and with Colonel Rumsay, Walcot, West, and Ferguson, and others who had likewise Conspired the Murder of His Majesties Sacred Person, and of the Person of His Royal Highness; and finding that he could not get himself Elected one of the said Com∣missioners, he resolved to go to London upon his own expenses, and declared to severals (whom he took great pains to draw ino be his accomplices) that his Design was to push foreward the People of England, who did nothing but talk, that they might go on effectually; and after he had settled a Correspondency here, he did go up to London in one or other of the saids Moneths, with Sir John Cochran and Commissar Monro, and did then, and there, Transact with the saids Conspirators, or one or other of them, to get a sum of Money to the late Earl of Argile, a Declaired Traitor, for bringing home of Men and Arms, for raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, and invading this his Native Countrey; and so ear∣nest was he in the said Design, that he did chide those English Conspirators, for not sending the same timeously, and lamented the delayes used in it; and perswaded the late Earl of Argile and others in his name to accept of any sum, rather than not to engage: and amongst the many meetings that he had at London, for carrying on
the said Traiterous design, there was one at his own Chamber, where he did meet with the Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran, and the Cessnocks Elder and Younger, and amongst others, with Mr. Wil∣liam Veatch a declared Traitor, and there he did treat of the cary∣ing on of the said Rebellion, and of the money to be furnished by the English for Argyle, for buying of Armes. And that if the Scots would attempt any thing for their own relief, they would get assistance of Horse from England; and from that meeting, he or ane, or other of them did send down Mr. Robert Martin to pre∣vent any rysing, till it should be seasonable for carying on of their Designs, which Mr. Robert, after he came to Scotland, did treat with Polwart and others, for carying on of the said Rebellion; by securing His Majesties Officers of State, His Castles and Forces, and by putting his Correspondents here, and there Associats, in rea∣diness, to assist the late Earl of Argyle, and after the said Mr. Baillie had engadged many of his Countrey-men in England, and had assured his Correspondantts here, that the English were re∣solved to seclud his Royal-Highness from his due right of Succession, thereby to encourage them to concur in the said Rebellion, and Exclusion, he flew to that hight, that he did particularly and clos∣ly correspond with Mr. Robert Ferguson, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Collonel Rumsay, and Walcot, who were accessory to that horrid part of the Conspiracy, which was designed against the Sacred Life of His Majesty, and the Life of His Royal-Highness, and did sit up several nights with them, concerting that bloody Massacer: at least the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood was, and is guilty of having correspondence with the late Earl of Argyle, and Mr. William Veatch declared Traitors, and of being art and part of an Conspiracy, for assisting of these who were to rise in armes against His Sacred Majesty, and for exclusion of His Royal Brother, and of concealing and not revealing the accession and proposals of others for that effect. Wherethrow he has committed, and is guilty of the Crymes of High Treason, Rebellion, and o∣thers abovespecified, and is art and part of the samine, which be∣ing found by ane Assize, he ought to be punished with Forfaulture of Life, Land and Goods, to the terror of others to commit the like hereafter. HIS Majesties Advocat produced an Act, and Warrand from the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, for pursuing, and insisting against the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, whereof the Tenor follows: Edinburgh, The twenty two day of December, one thousand six hundred and eighty four years. The Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, do here∣by give Order and Warrand to His Majesties Advocat, to pur∣sue a Process of Treason and Forfaulture, before the Lords of His Majesties Justiciary, against Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, to morrow at two a clock in the afternoon preceisly, and the saids Lords do hereby Require and Command, Sr. George Lockhart of Carnwath, and Sr. John Lauder Advocats, to concur, and assist in the said Process
with His Majesties Advocat, from the intenting untill the end thereof, as they will be answerable upon their alledgance. Ex∣tract by me, sic subscribitur. Colin Mckenzie, Cls. Sti. Concilij. Pursuers. Sir George Mckenzie of Roshaugh Our Soveraign Lords Advo∣cat Sir George Lockhart Sir John Lauder. Advocats. Procurators in Defence. Sir Patrick Hume. Mr. Walter Pringle. Mr. James Graham. Mr. Welliam Fletcher. Mr. William Baillie. Advocats. THE Pannals Procurators produced ane Act of His Majesties Pri∣vy Council, in their favours, wherof the tenor follows: Edin∣burgh, the twenty third of December, one thousand six hundred eighty four years, The Lords of His Majesties Privy Council hav∣ing considered ane Address made to them, by Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, now indited at the instance of His Majesties Advocat, before the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, of Treason, do hereby Require and Command Sir Patrick Hume, Mr. Walter Pringle, Mr. James Graham, Mr. William Fletcher, Mr. James Fal∣coner, Mr. William Baillie Advocats, to Consult, Compear, and De∣bate for the Petitioner, in the Process of Treason, mentioned in his Address, without any hazard, as they will be answerable at their peril; Extract by me, sic Subscribitur. William Paterson, Cls. Sti. Concilij. AFter reading of the Inditement, the Lord Justice General re∣quired the Pannal to make answer thereto. The said Mr. Robert Baillie Pannal pleaded not Guilty. MR. Walter Pringle Advocat, as Procurator for the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood Pannal, alleadges that he ought not to passe to the knowledge of an Assize, because he had not got a Citation upon fyfteen days, or at least on a competent time, which is usual, and absolutely ne∣cessar in all Actions, and much more in Criminal Pursuits, especi∣ally, seing, if a competent time be not allowed to the Pannal, he is precludit of the benefit of ane exculpation, without which he cannot prove his Objections against Witnesses, or Assyzers, or any other Legal, or competent Defences; And by the late Act of Parliament concerning the Justice Court, all Pannalls are allowed to raise Precepts of Exculpation, and thereupon to cite Witnesses, for proving the Objections against Witnesses, and Assyzers, which necessarily pre-supposeth, that a competent time must be allowed to the Pannal to execut his diligence, or otherwise, how is it possible he can prove an Defence of alibi, or any other just Defence: and as this is most consonant to that clear Act of Parliament, and to ma∣terial
Justice, and to the Rules of Humanity, so this point has been already fully and often decided, and lately in the case of one Robertson in July 1673. The Instance whereof, is given by His Ma∣jesties Advocat in his Book of Criminals, and Title of Libels, where the Lords found, that albeit Robertson got his Inditement in Prison, yet he behoved to get it upon fifteen dayes. HIs Majesties Advocat oppons the constant Tract of Decisions, whereby it is found, that a person Incarcerated may be Try∣ed upon twenty four houres; and the late Act of Parliament is on∣ly in the case where a Summons or Libel is to be Raised; but here there is no Libel or Summons, but only an Inditement; nor was any Exculpation sought in this case, before the Tryal, which is the case provided for by the Act of Parliament. THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Com∣missioners of Justiciary, Repell the Defence, in re∣spect the Pannal is a Prisoner, and that it has been the constant Custom of the Court, and that the Pannal made no former application for an Exculpa∣tion. SIr Patrick Hume for the Pannal, alleadges (alwayes denying the Libel, and whole Members, and Qualifications thereof) that in so far as the Libel is founded upon Harbouring, maintaining, and Intercommuning with the persons mentioned in the Dittay, the Pan∣nal ought to be assoylzied; because it is res hactenus judicata, he ha∣ving been formerly pursued before the Lords of his Majesties Pri∣vy Council for the same Crimes, and Fined in an considerable Sum; and therefore that Crime cannot now be made use of as a ground of Treason against the Pannal. HIs Majesties Advocat answers, That he Restricts his Libel, to the Pannals entering in a Conspiracy; for raising Rebel∣lion, and for procuring Money to be sent to the late Earl of Ar∣gile, for carrying on the said Rebellion; and for concealing, and not revealing; neither of which is referred to his Oath; and con∣sequently was not res judicata, there being nothing referred to his Oath; but his Converse and Correspondence with some Ministers, and others within the Kingdom, and his own Gardiner, and his Writing Letters to my Lord Argile; and oppons the Decreet of Council it self, and restricts the Libel to all the Crimes not insisted on in the Decreet. SIr Patrick Hume Replyes, That as to the Corresponding with the late Earl of Argile, at any time since his Forefaul∣ture, was expresly proponed as an Interrogator to the Pannal in that Pursuit, at His Majesties Advocat's Instance against him, be∣fore the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, and that not only
his own Correspondence by himself; but also by Major Holms, Mr. Carstares, Robert West, Thomas Shepherd, Richard Rumbold, and Collonel Rumsay, as the Interrogator bears, as appears by a double of the Act of Council, written by the Clerk of Councils Servant, and is offered to be proven by my Lord Advocats Oath: And as to any Correspondency with Mr. Veitch, it is not Relevant, since he was not Declared Rebel. SIr John Lauder for His Majesties Interest, answers, That he oppons the Decreet of Privy Council, where no such Interro∣gator was put to the Pannal, and the Decreet must make more Faith than any pretended Scroll, and cannot be taken away by His Majesties Advocats Oath, to His Majesties prejudice; and for Mr. William Veitch, he stands expresly Forefault in anno 1667. and the Doom of Forefaulture, is Ratified in the Parliament 1669. SIr Patrick Hume oppons the Reply, That as to the Correspon∣ding with Mr. Veitch, it does not appear, that he is the person mentioned in the Act of Parliament; and albeit he were, as he is not, he having thereafter come home to Scoland, all the punish∣ment inflicted upon him was Banishment, not to return under the pain of Death, which did take off any former Punishment; and it was no Crime in any Person to Intercommune with him, especi∣ally in another Kingdom; and by the late Act of Council in anno 1683. Even the Conversing, and Intercommuning with declared Traitors, is restricted to an Arbitrary punishment. HIs Majesties Advocat oppons the standing Doom of Forefaulture against Veitch, and the Proclamation, or Act of Council it elf. THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary, having considered the Libel, pursued by His Majesties Advocat, against Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, with the Lord Advocats Declaration, whereby he Restricts the same to the Crimes not insisted on in the Decreet of Council formerly pro∣nunced against the Pannal. They find the same Relevant as it is restricted, to infer the pain of Treason, and remits the same to the knowledge of the Assize, and Repells the remnant Defences pro∣poned for the Pannal, in respect of the Decreet of Council produ∣ced, bearing no such thing as is alleadged, and of the answers made by His Majesties Advocat thereto.
Assisa. The Earl of Strathmore. The Earl of Belcarras. Sir George Skeen, Provost of Aberdene. Sir James Fleming, late Provest of Edinburgh. Sir John Ramsay of Whitehill. Adam Hepburn of Humby. Andrew Brue of Earleshall. John Stuart, Tutor of Alpin. Alexander Miln of Carrin. Mr. James Elies of Stenhops∣milns. Sir William Drummond of Halthornden. Major Andrew White, Lieutennent of Edinburgh Castle, Mr. David Grahame, Sheriff of Wigtoun. Colin Mckenzie, Collector of Ross. David Burnet Merchant. THe Assise lawfully Sworn, no Objection of the Law in the contrary. HIis Majesties Advocat for Probation adduced the Witnesses and Writs aftermentioned; and first, Walter Earl of Tarras. SIr Patrick Hume Procurator for the Pannal, objects against the Earl of Tarras, that he cannot be a Witness, because he is soci∣us & particeps criminis; and it is clear by the 34. Chap. Stat 2. Rob. 1. Concerning these that are excluded from bearing of Testimony that socij & participes ejusdem criminis, vel incarcerati & vinculati, cannot bear Testimony: As also, the Earl of Tarras being pre∣sently under an Inditement of High Treason, and under the Impres∣sions of Fear, and Death, no person in his Circumstances can be admitted a Witness, as is not only clear from the foresaid Statute, but from the Common Law. HIs Majesties Advocat answers, That it is an exception from that Rule, both by the Common Law, and ours, that in the Crime of lese Majestie, and especially, that Branch therof, which we call a Conspiracy, socius criminis may be a witnes, and which is introduced very reasonably by Lawyers, to secure the common interest of mankind, which is the chief of all Interests; and because Conspiracies cannot be otherwayes proved, and not to al∣low this manner of Probation, were to allow Treason, since no man can prove a Plot, but he that is upon it, and how can a man object against him as a Witness, whom himself trusted with his Life, his Fortune, and their common Plot, nor is the intenting of the lybel any stronger qualification, since every man that is socius cri∣minis, is under the same impression, and it would rather seem the
greater and nearer apprehensions a man has of death, he will be the more sincere and faithful; Nor has the Earl of Tarras, nor did he ever seek any security, in order to his deponing. And this has been constantly, and latlie, conform to the common Law, as may be seen in the hundreds of Citations set down by Mascard, de probationibus, vol. 4. conclus. 1318. num. 21. and the contrary citations prove only, that regularly socius criminis cannot be a Witnes. SIr Patrick Hume replyes, that the Statutes of Robert the first is opponed, and non est distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, and not only was he socius criminis, which is acknowledged, but he is incar∣ceratus, and lying under an Indytment of high Treason, and has thrown himself on the Kings Mercy, and it is not proper he should be a Wintess, seing he is in the Kings Mercy, who may give him his life or not, and there was never a Person in these circumstances, that ever was admitted a Witness. MR. Walter Pringle adds, That the Earl of Tarras, is not only in the case of a person who stands Indyted for High-Trea∣son; but must be look'd upon, as a person condemned for the said Cryme, seing he fully, and amply confest the Cryme: & con∣fessus habetur po convicto, and never any Lawyer asserted, That damnatus criminis lesa Majestatis could be admitted as a Witnes, and there is nothing more clear, then that by the common Law, and the Law of all Nations, this Objection ought to be sustained, for the Civil Law is clear, leg. 11. cod▪ de testibus, and Matheus in his title de probationibus, cap. de testibus, doth assert positivlie, that the Cryme of lese Majestie, Heresie, and generally all these Crymes quae sine sociis non possuut facile admitti, are not excepted. And he asserts, that the Lawyers, viz. Gomesius, & Decianus, who are of another Opinion, do acknowledge, nominatum a reo damnandum non esse, and that they contravert only, An nominatio rei sit indicium sufficiens ad torquendum nominatum. SIr George Lockhart Repeats, and oppons the Answer, and the Cryme lybelled, being a Conspiration of Treason, which of it's own nature is manadged, and caryed on by Secrecie and Contrivance; and which is only known to the Complices of the Treason, and which cannot be commited sine sociis, the Law of this Kingdom, and of all Nations, do allow socios criminis to be testes habiles, and not only are they admitted in the case of such Conjurations, but gene∣rally in omnibus criminibus exceptis, amongst which the Crime of Perduellion, and lese Majestie is the chief, and it is absolutly impos∣sible, that Plots, and Conspirations of Treason can be otherwayes proven, then per socios, and such as are participes criminis, and which is the common opinion of all Lawyers, as may appear by Farin. Quest: 45. And the Authorities cited by him, and which is the in∣violable practique of this Kingdom: and as to that pretence, that the Earl of Tarras is under a Process of Treason, and has submitted to His Majesties mercy, and that confessus habetur pro convicto, it im∣ports nothing, and infers no more then that he is socius criminis,
and is still a habil witnes, as to Conjuration of Treason socius cri∣minis hoc ipso, that it is acknowledged, or proven, being still under the hazard of Process, or condemnation, which Law regards not in regard of the secrecie involved in the nature of the Crime, that either witnesses neque actu neque habitu, can be present, so that the objection amounts to no less then that Conjurations of Treason can∣not at all be proven: And as to the Law cited from the Majestie, it imports no more then that the Objection regulariter proedit in Crimes, which of there own nature are not perdifficilis probationis, and are not inter crimina excepta such as the Cryme of Conspiracy and Treason is▪ MR. William Fleteher Oppons the Objection, and Reply, and further adds, that albeit crimen lesae Majestatis be reckoned inter crimina excepta, and so have some priviledge, as to the quali∣fication of Witnesses, yet it cannot be denyed, but there are some Objections competent against Witness adduced for proving Conspi∣racies, and Treason, verbi causa, that a Witnes is a Capital Enemy, or that he is sub potestate accusatoris, and the Objection new plead∣ed, being taken complexlie, viz. That the Earl of Tarras is not only socius criminis, but also, that he is publico judicio reus, upon the same Crime, and that as means to procure His Majesties favour, he has submitted himself, and come in His Majesties mercy, by an acknowledgment of the Cryme, before the Dyet of Citation, he is obnoxious to a most just Objection, viz. That he is sub pote∣state, and by the submissiou, and Confession, his Life and Estate is now in His Majesties hands, so that he is not only in the case of a reus confessus, but in the case of a Witnes, who does absolutely depend upon His Majesties Advocat the Pursuer; and as a privat accuser, could not adduce his own Servants to be Wit∣nesses, because they are testes domestici, and depend upon him, so far less ought a Witnes to be adduced, who not only depends, as to his Estate, but as to his Life, and the Law gives a very good reason, and which is mentioned by Paulus, lib. 1. receptarum sen∣tentiarum, cap. 12. parag. ult. In these words▪ de se confessus, non est auendus ut testis, ne alienam salutem in dubium deducat qui de sua desperavit; and as to the pretence that a Conjuration is a Cryme so occult, that it must either be proven by such Witnesses, or other∣wayes the guilty person will escape. It is answered▪ that in this case, His Majesties Advocat had an easie remedie, for he might have pursued the Pannal, before he pursued the Witnes, and the Terror and Apprehension of the event of a Process for Treason can∣not be constructed otherwayes, then to have influence upon the Deposition of the Witnes; and as to the Citation out of Farinacius, it is only in the case of socius criminis, but when he comes to treat de teste accusato vel carcerato. Quest. 56. articulo 4to. He sayes, Regula sit in accusato quod is pendente accusatione à testimonio repel∣litur▪ and be the 2d. Rule of the same Article, He sayes, it is a principle quod carceratus testimonium ferre prohibetur, and he gives this reason, quia praesumitur, quod falsum testimonium diceret pro aliquo qui ei promiserit se liberare a vinculo, and limits this Rule, that he must be carceratus propter crimen.
SIr Patrick Hume adds, that it is a certain principle, that any person that is guilty infamia juris, cannot be a Witness, no more than a person that is Convict, and Condemned of Treason; and if he were Convict, and Condemned of Treason, he could not be a Witness, even in the case of Treason: so neither can the Earl of Tarras in this case be received a VVitness, for he being ad∣duced a VVitness after he received his Inditement, and confessed the Crime, is equivalent, as if he had been actually Convict; and whatever may be pretended, that testes infames may be admitted; yet it was never asserted by any Lawyer, that a person Convict of Treason can be admitted a VVitness. THe Lords Repelled the Objection against the Earl of Tarras,Nota, That the arl of Tarras de∣on'd nothing a∣ainst Jerviswood ut what the other wo Witnesses de∣on'd against him∣elf before the Try∣l, and upon which hereafter they be∣ng renew'd, the Earl was forfault∣d; so that there ould be no ground f suspicion from is Circumstances. and ordains him to be received a Wit∣ness. WAlter Earl of Tarras, aged fourty years, married, purged, and sworn; being Interrogat, if about the time that Sir John Cochran, and Commissar Monro got their Commission from the Carolina Company for London, the Pannal Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood did not desire the Deponent to speak to Commissar Monro, to try if he could get him the said Pannal added to that Commission, Depones affirmative. Being Interrogat, if the said Jerviswood, the Pannal, did not tell the Deponent, that he was re∣solved to go to London however upon his own Expenses, and that his and their going about the Carolina Bussiness, was but a pre∣tence, and a blind; but that the true design was, to push fore∣ward the people of England, who could do nothing but talk, to go more effectually about their bussiness, Depones affirmative. Depones that the Pannal did settle a Correspondence with the De∣ponent, whereby he was to give an account to the Deponent of what should pass betwixt the Countrey Party in England, and the Scots men there: and on the other hand, the Deponent was to VVrite to him what occurred here; Depones that the Pannal did say to the Deponent, if the King would suffer the Parliament of England to sit, and pass the Bill of Seclusion, that that was the only way to secure the Protestant Religion. Depons that the Pannal said to him, that the King might be induced to do so, if the Parliament would take sharp, or brisk measures with Him, or the like. Depones these words were spoke to him by the Pannal, since the holding of the last Session of this current Parliament; and before the Pannal and Commissar Monro went for London. Depons that after the Pannal went to London, he did give the Deponent an ac∣count by Letters, that things were in great Disorder there, and that he hoped there would be effectual Courses taken to remeid them. De∣pones that Mr. Robert Martin did come to Mr. Pringle of Torwood∣lies House in May 1683. or thereby, and brought a Letter to the Deponents Lady unsubscribed, but the Deponent knows it
was Jerviswoods Hand-writing, who was then at London, and that Mr. Martin told the Deponent, that things in England were in great disorder, and like to come to a hight, and that the Countrey Par∣ty were considering on methods for securing the Protestant Reli∣gion. And that Archibald, sometime Earl of Argile, was to get ten thousand pounds Sterling, whereas thirty thousand pounds Ster∣ling was sought by the Scots-men at London, which was to be sent over to Holland to provide Arms; and that the late Earl of Argile was to Land with these Armes in the West-Highlands of Scotland, and that the Deponents Friend Jerviswood the Pannal, was to be sent over with the Money. Depones that Philiphaugh and he went to Gallowshiels House, where they met with Polwort and Gallowshiels, and that it was talked amongst them there, that in case those in England should rise in Arms, that it was necessary in that case, that so many as could be got on the Borders should be in readiness to deal with Straglers and seize upon Horses, and that thereafter they should joyn with those that were in Arms on the Borders of England. Depons, That in the case foresaid, it was said, it was convenient the Castle of Stirling, Berwick, and some other Strengths should be seiz'd upon; and it was likewise spoke amongst them, that some persons should be employed to inquire what Arms was in that Countrey. Depons, That it was spoke then, that the best time for Argyle was to land in the West when there was a stur in England, or Scotland, or words to that purpose. Depons, That every one desired another to speak to such particular persons as they could trust, by letting a word fall indirectly upon supposition, in case of the Rising in England concerning the Affair for preparing of them: And that he was told by Philiphaugh thereafter, that there was a Word and Sign to be used amongst them, viz. the Sign was by loosing a Button on the Breast, and that the Word was Harmony. Depons, the Pannal spoke to the Deponent to advertise Torwoodlie, that he might acquaint Mr. William Veitch a forfault Traitor, who was in Northumberland, that he might keep himself close, and be on his guard, lest he should be catch'd; which was since the Pannal was Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Tarras, Linlithgow. I. P. D. ALexander Monro of Bear-crofts, Aged fourty five Years, or thereby; solutus, solemnly sworn and purg'd. Depons, that the Earl of Tarras proposed to the Deponent, that Jerviswood might be made one of the Commissioners for the Affair of Carolina, for that he could not safely stay at Home; and that the Deponents answer was, that he had no interest in the Affair, and so could not be a Com∣missioner. Depons, that the Pannal did wait for the Deponent at Wooller, and did go alongst with him to London, and that by the way he heard him regrate his own hazard and others, because of Blackwoods Sentence; and that he heard him regrate the hazard our Laws, and Liberties, and the Protestant Religion were in. Depons, that the Pannal spoke to the Deponent and others, more then once
at London for getting of Money from the English to be sent to the late Earl of Argile, for bringing home Arms for the said Earls use, as he understood, for carrying on an Insurrection, and Rebellion in Scotland. Depons, that at the time libelled, in Jerviswoods Chamber in London, Mr. William Veitch a forfault Traitor was pre∣sent; and that Sir John Cochran did at that Meeting expressly speak of Money to be sent to Argile for bringing home Arms for invading the Kingdom of Scotland; And that at another occasion he heard some of them say, that there would be twenty Thousand Men in Scotland who would assist the Rebellion, and that he heard Sir John Cochran and Jerviswood speaking of it, but cannot be positive which of the two said it. Depons, that at that Meeting he heard Jerviswood speak, but did not hear him oppose that reasonable Proposal▪ or contradict the Overture proposed by Sir John Cochran. Depons, that Mr. Robert Martin was sent down from that Meeting which was at Jerviswoods Chamber, to Scotland, to try what the People of Scotland would do for their own safety: And that it was understood that the people of Scotland should not rise till there should be a rising in England, and that the Commission was granted to Mr. Robert Martin by all the persons present, whereof Jerviswood was one, and that there were present the Lord Melvill, Sir John Cochran, Cessnocks elder and younger, Mr. William Carstares, Mr. William Veitch, Jerviswood, and the Deponent; and depons they did contribute Money for Mr. Martins Journey: Depons, that at his return he meeting with the Deponent, told him, that Matters were in that condition in Scotland, and that the Countrey was in such a condition as little would kindle the Fire in order to the Rebellion. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Alexander Monro, Linlithgow, I. P. D. JAmes Murray of Philiphaugh, aged 30. Years, married, purged and sworn, produces four Leaves of Depositions, emitted by him be∣fore the Lords of the Secret Commitie, and all Written and Sub∣scribed with his own hand, which being publickly read, in presence of the Justices, and Assize, he adheres thereto, in all points, where∣of the Tenot follows. Upon the day of May, 1683. Upon a letter from Mr. Pringle of Torwoodlie, I came to his house in the morn∣ing, and he presently led me to a Chamber, where I found Mr. Robert Martin, who was lately come from London, with whom we stayed a little, and discoursed of the news▪ and about the present conditi∣on, and temper of England, and in particular of London, which Mr. Martin said, was much irritated through some attempts upon their Priviledges, either as to the concern of the Sheriffs, or their Charter, but that all honest men were of good heart▪ and very brisk, and after some general discourses to this purpose, Torwoodlie, and I left him, and walked out a little, and he told me, he was expect∣ing the E. of Tarras presently, for he had sent to him; and Mr. Martin had a Letter to him from Jerviswood, then he told me that there were great matters in agitation at London, and that Mr. Martin had come down with a Commission from our friends there, (I do not
remember he named any) but that I behoved not to expect, he would impart his Instructions to me, for he was to communicat them only to Polwart and himself, (at least for these Shyres) and they were to pitch on such as they thought fit to intrust with the affair, whereupon he assured me, that he had great confidence in me, and his kindness to me oblidged him to send for me, to acquaint me, that matters were now come to a crisis, and that he had reason to think England would shortly draw to Arms, and stand by them, till they were satisfied anent the Bill of Exclusion, and what other security they could propose for the protestant Religion, and their Liberties, and that it was no project of any inconsiderable party but a design through the Kingdom, and that many of the finest men, and of the greatest interest and credit there, had adjusted almost every thing necessar for the purpose, and had concerted matters with our Friends there, in order to concurrence from this, and had agreed to advance Money for furnishing Armes here, (I do not re∣member he told me more particulars at this time) but said, Polwart would be at Gallow-shiels that night, and it would be necessar that the E. of Tarras and I should confer with him fully, on the business, about this time the E. of Tarras lighted, and Torwoodlie having left us for a little time, being gone to bring Mr. Martin, the E. of Tarras asked me, what news, I told him of Mr. Martins being there, but that he had given me no account of the design of his down-coming, which perhaps he would acquaint him with, but by what I had heard from Torwoodlie, I understood it to be, to engadge us to rise in Arms shortly, whereat the E. of Tarras hummed, and said, he would look ere he leapt, such a leap, or some such expressions, presently Mr. Martin came, and the E. of Tarras and he retired a little, after the reading An Letter, he gave him, the Contents whereof was (as the E. of Tarras informed me) only an order from Jerviswood, to deliver some Money to the bearer, which he had left with him, and the E. of Tarras called for his Servant, and bad him bring up the Money; in the mean time, Torwoodlie asked me, if I had ac∣quainted the E. of Tarras with what he spoke to me, and I told him, I had let something of it fall to him, but it was not to be thought, that persons of sense & quality would engadge in such designs at random; so Torwoodlie said, that (though Mr. Martin would not commune with us upon his Commission directly) yet he thought it would be fit, we conferred, and without taking notice of his Commission, discoursed of things upon suppositions, and as our own privat notions, abstract from any prospect of a present design, so after din∣ner, we four went to a Chamber, and after some general discours∣es, of the discontents of both Kingdoms, these suppositions follow∣ing were discoursed (and as I remember) Mr. Martin started them all, or the most part) viz. What if the countrey party in England should have thoughts of going to Arms (whereof he knew nothing but only supposed such a thing, for discoursing a little freely, and to know our sentiments, what we thought could be expected here in such a case) would it not be expedient to have a settled Cor∣respondence betwixt that Party there and here, and might not mat∣ters be so adjusted, that both Kingdoms should draw out in one
day, and might not as many be expected to undertake in these Shires, and about Edinburgh, as would serve to surprize, and seize our Rulers (I do not remember any named, but the then Chancellour and Thesaurer) and some to joyn with these on the English borders, to assist them to surprize Berwick; and if for that effect, any Horse, or Dragoons, that should be in the bounds might not be surprized, that their Horse and Arms might be got∣ten to furnish the Countrey people, and Stirling Castle; and if Argile should at the same time Land in the West, and raise that Coun∣trey, would not these Measures contribute much to the advancement and security of the Interest of that Party here, since thereby the Go∣vernment would be disordered, and such steps would encourage all that had an inclination to the Countrey Party, to draw to them frankly, and scar many of the other side to act against them, and so they might have leasure to joyn from all places; and might it not be expected, there would be as many in this Kingdom, as would be able to deal with the Forces here, at least divert them from troub∣ling England. This is the sum, as I remember, of what was pro∣posed, and discourst of, though I cannot distinctly say, it was in this method, and expression, nor was all moved at once, but drop∣ed now and then, as the Discourse seem'd to give rise to it; and though I cannot fully Re-count all that was spoke on these Heads, and tell distinctly, what this and that man said; yet I remember these following Answers were giving, and (as I judged) acqui∣esced to by the whole Company; and they were certainly the E. of Tarras, his sentiments and mine, and every one that spoke, used this or some such Precaution, that if they were concerned, or to give coun∣sel in any such case, as they were not, &c.) 1. As to the settling a Correspondence, it was confest to be very convenient for those of a common Interest; but the present circumstances of Affairs were such (as was thought,) that none could be found here who was sit to mannage it, and would undertake it. 2. As to the trysting at the same time, it could not be done without the devulging the Design to all Ranks of people, which none would undertake, except these already in desperat Circumstances, and they could not have gene∣rally much influence. 3. The thing was not at all adviseable for this Kingdom, since if any of Englands own measures miscarried, they would not stur for any such Trust; and the spring of their motions being always at London, there might happen an interrup∣tion near the appointment, whereof these here could have no ti∣mous notice, and so might keep Tryst, whereby they would be ex∣posed a prey; and if they should subsist any time, or prevail (which was hardly possible) the multitude that must be imployed, are tainted with such wild and unruly Principles, that if once they got the Sword in their Hands, they would never be brought to Order without a greater force to over-awe them; neither would any ex∣pectation of Argiles Landing, be a just ground for such a Tryst, considering the uncertainty of Sea-Voyages; and if Argile were to be the Head, undoubtedly many people would conclude that he were to be suspected of private designs, and that restoring him, might
lay him aside: As also, that dispair might blind his usual prudence, and prompt him to unsolid, and undigested Methods; and so it was to be expected, that few of the Gentry (except such as he had special influence on, or such as were under hard Circumstan∣ces) could embarque with him. 4. As to the surprising Ru∣lers, &c. It was inveigh'd against, as an Action not to be thought of amongst Protestants (especially when the very design of it was pretended, to secure that Religion, which taught its Professors to abhor and detest such Principles as Popish, yea un-christian) since it could not be effectuat without Blood-shed of people, secure in Peace, which being by all approven, Divines and Casuists con∣demned as unlawful, and meer Assassination; it was not to be doubted, that as such a practice would cast a blot upon the whole Affair, and quite take off any pretence of Defensive Arms, so it would scar many from joyning. These things were reasoned again and again: But I do not remember there was any formal Con∣clusion made, but the Discourse was let fall; and Mr. Mar∣tin told us, if any of us had a mind for a suit of Armour, he could provide as many as we pleased, from one who had made a great ma∣ny lately, to honest men at London, of a new fashion, very light, and at an easie Rate; so Torwoodlie and I gave him our measures, E. of Tarras told he had a suit already; Then Torwoodlie said to the E. of Tarras and me, we would meet Polwort at Gallowsheils, and de∣sired we might Commun with him, anent what we had been Dis∣coursing, so we hasted away, that if possible, we might both get home that Night, it being Saturnday, and we unfurnished, for stay∣ing abroad, and Torwoodlie whispered me just as I was mounting (as I think) that he was not clear we should commun before Gallowshiels, for he was sometimes too much Good-fellow, or the like; so the E. of Tarras and I Rod away together, and up∣on the way we were both of Opinion, that the Suppositions we had discoursed of, were in effect Propositions, and resolv'd, if they were insisted on by Polwort, as we suspected, we would ad∣here to the former Answer, and would undertake nothing in these methods; When we came to Gallowsheils, the Laird was abroad, and Polwort was not come, so we had thoughts to go away, being both damped with what had passed, and inclining to be free of far∣der medling; but the Lady would by no means hear of our going till her Husband came; who, she assured us, was about the Doors, and she having sent to call him, he would be in presently; yet it was so late ere he came, that the E. of Tarras could hardly have day enough to go home with; so Gallowsheils would not let him go, and he would not stay, unless I stay'd, so we both stay∣ed; and not being resolv'd to Discourse with Gallowsheils on what passed, we went to the Tavern, on pretence I might call the Bail∣lie, and seek Horses for Lime, and stay'd there till Polwort came (which seemed unknown to Gallowsheils) then we returned to Gallowsheils House, and after Supper Polwort whispered the E. of Tarras and me, and enquired if we had seen Mr. Martin; and we having told him we had, he enquired, if we were free to com∣mun
on the Affair before Gallowsheils, we told, as he thought fit, for we could trust him; Then he whispered Gallowsheils, and (as I understood afterwards) asked if he was free to commune on matters of great Secrecy and importance with that Company, to which he assented, then we sat down closs together, and as I re∣member, Polwort began the Discourse; But since I am not able to follow exactly the method of our Conference, or keep the very expressions used, or repeat all that was spoke, or to tell distinctly what was every mans part of the Discourse; I shall set down the Heads, and most remarkable Passages thereof, that I remember in some Articles following; 1. Polwort signified that he was credib∣ly informed (but I do not remember he named his Informer) that the Countrey party in England would draw to the Fields shortly, as he heard before Lambass, wherewith Gallowsheils seem'd visibly surprized; and being asked, if his Heart fail'd him already, he said he did love it better truly to be walking in his own Parks in Peace, and quiet, than to be medling in such matters; however he assured the Company, that if there came any troublesome world, he would joyn with them firmly; and the F. of Tarras said, he wondred to hear of any such Resolution in England, for he took it for a Principle amongst that Party there, that they should make no stir in the Kings Life (which the whole Company owned to be their Opinion and desire) because that might strengthen the Dukes interest; and he suspected it was the project of the Common-wealths men, with whom he believed, few Scots Gentlemen would joyn; and he was almost perswaded the D. of Monmouth would not concur in any rising during the Kings Life, To which it was answered by Polwort, that he had indeed heard that principle had been generally agreed to, but it seem'd they found, they behoved either to do their business now, or lay aside hopes of doing it hereafter, which might be, that if the Charter of London were let fall, they would not only lose all safe opportunity of digesting Matters; but a great part of their strength, and he heard all things were con∣certed mutually, betwixt Monmouths Friends and the Heads of the Commonwealth Party; and tho he heard Monmouth was shy on that account, yet it was hop'd he would engage, for otherways he would be deserted by that Party. 2. Polwart told us the suppositions above-written as overtures concerted betwixt our friends at London, and the principal men of that Party there; so the E. of Tarras and I renewed our former answers also above-written, and maintained them with all our vigour, wherein Gallowshiels joyned forwardly with us; and Polwart asserted, we went on very good grounds, and he was fully of our opinion, if things were entire, but referr'd it to be considered, whether it were better to comply with some of these methods, tho not so proper and justifiable as were to be wish'd, then to disappoint the business totally, which might be of the best consequence to all the Party, yet we did not condescend as I remember to undertake any of these methods. And there was a further argument adduced against the trysting above-written, viz. That is was talked there was a day appointed in England lately in
Shaftsherry's time, which did not hold, so they were not to be re∣lyed upon. 3. It was proposed to be considered what methods were most proper in the Companies opinion for Scotland to follow in case of Englands rising, whereanent it was said, that all that could be expected or desired from Scotland, was, that upon the cer∣tain News of Englands being in the Fields, those in the Southern Shires who would own that Party, should presently rise, and (how soon they could get as many conveen'd as would be able to deal with stragling Parties, or any sudden rising in the Countrey) march to joyn them, and that it would be fit these in the Northern Shires of England waited near the Borders for such, and that they had Of∣ficers trysted there to command, and that then it would be season∣able for Argile to land in the West, and these Parties on the Borders might divert the Forces til he had time to put himself in a posture. These things seem'd to be the sentiments of the whole Company, but were not finally determined till the opinion of others who were to be communed with by Polwart were knowen: And it was represented, there behoved not to be any wilful and obstinate adhering to our own thoughts of things, (but an mutual condescendance to others concerned,) otherwise it were not possible to bring a publick De∣sign to any good issue. 4. All the Company seem'd to agree, that they should undertake nothing or move in that Affair, till they had a full and certain account what England proposed, what methods they resolved to follow there, who were to be their Heads, and that if they design'd any attempt on the Kings Person, or overturning Monarchy, they would not be forward or clear to joyn: And it be∣ing here insinuated, that the most they could do (at least for which there could be any plausible pretence to justifie) was to draw to∣gether, and without any act of Hostility, send Addresses to His Majesty for redress of the present abuses of the Government, and for obtaining sufficient security against the hazard they apprehended to their Religion and Liberties. It was said by Polwart that he was apt to think, that was their very design, for he had heard it was ge∣nerally believed by that Party in England, that if once they were in a Body, the King would be prevailed with to quite the Duke, to be tryed for Popery, correspondence with France, and accession to the Popish Plot, and then if the King were once free from the influence of the Dukes Counsels, they were confident he might be moved to reform their Abuses, and secure their Religion and Liber∣ties for the future to their contentment. 5. It was resolved, that till we got the foresaid account from England, and were satisfied thereanent, and knew others here (who were to be communed with) their Sentiments of what methods were most proper for us, in case we should undertake, we should not meddle further; only it was left to the Earl of Tarras and me, if we thought fit to acquaint Sir William Scot younger with some of the matter of this Confe∣rence overly, without taking notice of our Informers▪ or such an Conference; and it was recommended to all to be enquiring (at such as they had some trust in) indirectly about the affection of our Neighbours, and what Arms there was amongst them; that if we
should get an satisfying account, and resolve to joyn, we might know where to seek Men and Arms suddenly; here it was said by Polwart, as I think, that if the E. of Tarras, Torwoodlie, Gallow-shiels, and I once took Horse, he thought the most part of the West end of of Tiviotdale and Selkirk Shire would soon come to us, especially, when they heard England was risen, then we trysted to meet there against Mid-summer Fair, betwixt and which the forsaid account was expected, but in case it came to any of our hands sooner, we promised to advertise the rest, that we might meet presently, if the case required; this is the substance and sum of what passed at the forsaid conference, that I can now rememeber; but I remember, I was likewise told these following particulars in privat▪ by Polwart, or Torwoodlie, (which of them, I cannot distinctly tell) the day of the forsaid conference, or within a short time after. 1. That Polwart keeped the correspondence with our friends at London, I re∣member not positively of any of them that was named, to be on the entrigue there, except my Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran, Jervis∣wood, and Commissar Monro (for I hardly knew any of the rest) and as I think, Commissar Monro was call'd his correspondent there. 2. That the Money to be advanced by the English partie to Scot∣land was ready, when Mr. Martin came from London, and it was expected, that within few days after, it would be dispatched with some confident to Holland, (whither by Bills, or in Cash, I cannot say) it was call'd ten thousand pound Sterlin, and was to be im∣ployed (as I was told) by that confident, at Argyles sight, for buying Arms, providing Ships to transport them with Argyle, to the West here, and such other Charges. 3. That how soon our friends at London got notice of the safe arrival, of the confident forsaid, and all other things were finally concluded there (which was ex∣pected would be about the midle of June, as I remember) they would come home, and as they passed, would give them, or one of them, an particular account of all resolutions taken, to be com∣municat to the rest, that it was not to be expected by Letters, that be∣hoved to be under figures, and dark expressions, and as I remember, they were written as it were about the Carolina business, or some houshold Furniture, as I was told, for I never remember, I saw any Letter, either direct to London, or sent from it on that head. 4. I was told there was a Sign, and a Word agreed on by that party, so that men might know with whom they might use freedom, the Word, as I remember was Harmony, and the Sign, the opening two Buttons in the breast coat and shutting them presently; this I communicate to the Earl of Tarras, but does not mind I ever saw it used, except when I visited Park-Hay here in Town, about the end of June; we discoursing a little freely, he asked if I had the Word and Sign of the Carolina men, and I having given them, he said something to this purpose, that he was afraid that the Carolina business did not go well, for there had been some of the Managers expected here (as I think he named Jerviswood or Commissar Monro) these eight days past, but there was none come, nor could he learn that any of their Friends had heard from them for several Posts. Polwart, Torwoodlie, and I
met at Gallowshiels, on Midsummer Fair, but I mind nothing passed but private whisperings. Dated September 15. 1684. and subscrived thus, James Murray. Edinburgh, December 23. 1684. THe Deposition above-written being read to the said James Mur∣ray of Philiphaugh, in presence of the Justices and Assizers, he adheres thereto in all points upon Oath. Sic subscribitur, James Murray. Linlithgow, I. P. D. THe said James Murray further depons, That at their meeting at Gallowshiels, it was resolved, that they should keep up their Cess unpayed till their next meeting at Midsummer, which was to be at Gallowshiels, and should deal with all these they had influence upon to do the like, and that upon the supposition men∣tioned in his Oath given in. It was spoke amongst them that the Troupers Horses should be seized upon, when they were grasing. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, James Murray. Linlithgow, I. P. D. HVgh Scot of Gallowshiels, aged 36. Years, married, purged, &c. and sworn. Depons, That the Earl of Tarras and Philiphaugh did come to the Deponents House, in May, 1683. and Polwart came likewise there, where there were Discourses and Proposals, that if the English would rise in Arms, their Friends in the South Shires should rise with them; and that they should seize the Horses belonging to the Kings Troops where they grased, and the Town of Berwick, and the Castle of Stirling: And likewise it was there discoursed anent the late Earl of Argiles coming to invade Scotland, but because of the uncertainty of Sea Voyages, there was not much stress laid upon it. Depons, It was also proposed, that some of the South Countrey whom they trusted in should be acquainted with it, and that endeavours should be used to learn what Arms was in the Countrey. Depons, There was some such discourse there, as that the Earl of Tarras, Philiphaugh, Torwoodlie, Polwart, and some others should draw to Horse with the first when the rising should be in readiness, that it might be expected that the South parts of Teviot∣dale and Selkirk Shire would joyn with them. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur, Hugh Scot. Linlithgow, I. P. D. HIs Majesties Advocat produc'd other Depositions, emitted by Gallowshiels before the Lords of the Secret Committee, where∣of the Tenor follows.
Edinburgh, the 14 of September 1684. GAllowsheils Depons, that the E. of Tarras and Philiphaugh, be∣ing in his House in May 1683. Discoursed of an intended ri∣sing in England, and of Proposals made to Scots men, to rise with them, and of London in particular, and that Polwort was present at that Meeting, and told he was sure the Englishmen intended so, and that it was Discoursed at that Meeting amongst them, that it were fit to seize Berwick and Stirling; and that it was talked amongst them of bringing the Duke of York to Tryal, and that the King would abandon him. Sic Subscribitur, Hugh Scot. Perth, Cancel. Queensberry George Mckenzie. Jo. Drummond. George Mckenzie. Edinburgh, October 29. 1684. Sederunt. Lord Chancellour. Lord President. Lord Secretary. Lord Advocat. THe Laird of Gallowsheils, Prisoner in the Tolbuith of Edin∣burgh, being Call'd and Examin'd upon Oath, Depons, that in the Moneth of May 1683. The E. of Tarras, Hume of Pol∣wert Elder, and Laird of Philiphaugh, came to the Deponents House, himself being absent, at his coming home, they were speaking of the Security of the Protestant Religion; and of a Party in England, who would secure, or seize the King or Duke, and that if any should rise in Arms to Defend them, or to rescue the King and Duke: There was another Party who would rise in Arms against them, it was proposed, that some Countrey men should be spo∣ken to, to try their Resolutions, and that the Resolutions of Eng∣land should be told them, to see if they would concur. But the Deponent does not remember that this proposition was approven, or undertaken to be done by any present; nor does he remember who mannag'd the Discourse. It was likewise propos'd, to seize the Officers of State, especially the Chancellour and Thesaurer, and they said, Sir John Cochran was to come to the West from England, for advancement of the Design; and that the Earl of Argile was to Land in the West-Highlands, and to raise that Countrey. Of these matters, all these who were present Discoursed, as of an Affair that they were agitating, and wherein themselves were particularly con∣cerned, though at that time they did not conclude what their car∣riage should be; The reason why the Deponent cannot be more par∣ticulars is, because he was sometimes going out, and sometimes walking up and down the Room; and though the Deponent can∣not be positive of the very words; yet he is positive they were either these Words, or Words to that purpose. Sic subscribi∣tur, Hugh Scot. Perth Cancellarius.
Edinburgh, December 23. 1684. HVgh Scot of Gallowsheils being solemnly Sworn in presence of the Justices and Assize, adheres to the Depositions within, and above-written in all points, Sic subscribitur. Hugh Scot. Linlithgow, I. P. D. HIs Majesties Advocat in fortification of the former Probati∣on, adduces the Printed Copy of Mr. William Carstares Depositions, emitted before the Officers of State, and other Lords of Privy Council, and leaves the same to the Assise, and uses it as an Adminicle of Probation; for though it was capitulat, that he should not be made use of as a Witness; yet it was agreed, that the Deposition should be published: and likewise produces the Prin∣cipal Deposition signed by himself, and the saids Lords. THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary, admit the Paper produced as an Adminicle, and refers the import thereof to the Inquest, and ordains the Printed Paper as it is Col∣lationed, to be taken in, and considered by the Inquest. SIr William Paterson, and Mr. Colin Mckenzie, Clerks of His Ma∣jesties Privy Council being Interrogat, if they heard Mr. Wil∣liam Carstares own the Depositions Read, Depons they saw and heard him Swear, and own the same upon Oath, and they Collationed the Printed Copie with the Original formerly; and now they heard it Collationed, Sic subscribitur, Will. Paterson. Colin Mckenzie. THe Deposition of Mr. William Carstares, when he was Ex∣amined before the Lords of Secret Committee, given in by him, and renewed upon Oath; upon the 22. of Decem∣ber 1684. in presence of the Lords of His Majesties Pri∣vy Council. Edinburgh Castle, September 8. 1684. MR. William Carstares being Examined upon Oath, conform to the Condescention given in by him, and on the Terms there∣in-mentioned; Depons, That about November, or De∣cember 1682. James Stuart, Brother to the Laird of Cultness, wrot a Letter to him from Holland, importing, that if any considerable sum of Money could be procur'd from England,
that something of importance might be done in Scotland: The which Letter, the Deponent had an inclination to inform Shepherd in Abb-Church-lane, Merchant in London of; but before he could do it, he wrot to Mr. Stuart above-nam'd to know from him, if he might do it; and Mr. Stuart having consented, he communicat the said Letter to Mr. Shepherd, who told the Deponent that he would communicat the Contents of it to some persons in England; but did at that time name no body, as the Deponent thinks: Sometime thereafter, Mr. Shepherd told the Deponent, that he had communicat the Contents of the Letter above-named, to Colonel Sidney, and that Colonel Dunvers was present, and told the Deponent, that Colonel Sidney was averse from imploy∣ing the late Earl of Argile, or medling with him, judging him a man too much affected to the Royal Family, and inclin'd to the present Church-Government; yet Mr. Shepherd being put upon it by the Deponent, still urg'd, that one might be sent to the Earl of Argile; but as Mr. Shepherd told him, he was suspected upon the account of his urging so much; yet afterwards he press'd, without the Depo∣nents knowledge, that the Deponent being to go to Holland how∣ever, might have some Commission to the Earl of Argile, which he having inform'd the Deponent of, the Deponent told him, that he himself would not be concern'd, but if they would send ano∣ther, he would introduce him; but nothing of this was done: upon which the Deponent went over, without any Commission from any body, to Holland, never meeting with James Stuart a∣bove-nam'd: He was introduc'd to the Earl of Argile, with whom he had never before convers'd; and did there Discourse what had past betwixt Mr. Shepherd and him; and particularly, about remit∣ting of Money to the said Earl from England; of which the said Mr. Stuart had written to the Deponent, namely of 30000 pounds Sterling; and of the raising of 1000 Horse and Dragoons; and the securing the Castle of Edinburgh, as a matter of the greatest importance: The method of doing this was propos'd by the De∣ponent, to be one hour, or thereby, after the relieving of the Guards: But the Earl did not relish this Proposition, as dange∣rous; and that the Castles would fall of consequence, after the Work abroad was done. James Stuart was of the Deponents Opi∣nion for seizing the Castle; because it would secure Edinburgh; the Magazins and Arms, as to the 1000 Horse and Dragoons. My Lord Argile was of Opinion, that without them nothing was to be done; and that if that number were rais'd in England to the said Earl, he would come into Scotland with them; and that there being so few Horse and Dragoons to meet them, he judg'd he might get the Countrey without trouble, having such a standing Body for their Friends to Rendezvous to; and the said Earl said he could show the Deponent the conventient places for Landing, if he under∣stood; and as the Deponent remembers, where the Ships could attend. The Deponent remembers not the names of the places. The Deponent spoke to the Lord Stairs; but cannot be positive that he
nam'd the Affair to him, but found him shy: but the Earl of Argile told him, he thought Stairs might be gain'd to them: And that the Earl of Lowdoun being a man of good Reason, and disobliged, would have great influence upon the Countrey, and recommended the De∣ponent to Major Holms with whom the Deponent had some acquain∣tance before, and had brought over a Letter from him to the Earl of Ar∣gyle; but the Deponent had not then communicate any thing to the said Holms. James Steuart laid down a way of correspondence by Cyphers and false Names, and sent them over to Holms, and the Deponent, for their use (which Cyphers and Names, are now in the hands of His Majesties Officers, as the Deponent supposes,) and did desire the Deponent earnestly to propose the 30000. pound Sterling above-named to the party in England, and did not propose any less; for as the Earl told the Deponent, he had particularly calculate the Expence for Arms, Ammunition, &c. But James Steuart said, that if some less could be had, the Earl would content himself, if better might not be; but the Earl always said, that there was nothing to be done without the body of Horse and Dragoons above-men∣tioned. During the time of the Deponent his abode in Holland, tho he had several Letters from Shepard, yet there was no satisfactory account, till some time after the Deponent parted from the Earl of Argyle, and was making for a Ship at Rotterdam to transport him∣self to England. James Steuart wrot to him that there was hopes of the Money. The next day after the Deponent came to England, he met with Sir John Cochran, who, with Commissar Monro, and Jerviswood, was at London before he came over; and depons, that he knows not the account of their coming, more then for the per∣fecting the Transaction about Carolina: and having acquainted Sir John Cochran with the Earls demands of the 30000 pound Sterling and the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, Sir John carried him to the Lord Russel, to whom the Deponent proposed the affair, but being an absolute Stranger to the Deponent, had no return from him at that time; but afterwards having met him accidently at Mr. Shepards house, where he the Lord Bussel had come to speak to Shepard about the Money abovenamed, as Mr. Shepard told the Deponent. The Deponent (when they were done speaking) de∣sired to speak to the Lord Russel, which the Lord Russel did, and having reiterate the former Proposition for the 30000. pound Ster∣ling, and the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, he the Lord Russel told the Deponent, they could not get so much raised at the time, but if they had 10000. pound to begin, that would draw People in, and when they were once in, they would soon be brought to more; but as for the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, he could say nothing at the present, for that behoved to be concerted upon the Borders. The Deponent made the same proposal to Mr. Ferguson, who was much concerned in the Affair, and zealous for the promoving of it. This Mr. Ferguson had in October or November before, as the Deponent remembers in a Conversation with the Deponent in Cheap-fide, or the Street somewhere thereabout, said, that for the saving of innocent Blood, it would be necessary to cut off a few, insinuating the King and Duke, but cannot be positive whether he named them or not,
to which the Deponent said, that's work for our wild People in Scotland, my Conscience does not serve me for such things; after which the Deponent had never any particular discourse with Fergu∣son, as to that matter; but as to the other Affair, Ferguson told the Deponent that he was doing what he could to get it effectuate, as particularly that he spoke to one Major Wildman who is not of the Deponent his acquaintance. Ferguson blamed always Sidney, as driving designs of his own. The Deponent met twice or thrice with the Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran, Jerviswood, Commissar Monro, the two Cessnocks, Mongomery of Langshaw, and one Mr. Veitch, where they discoursed of Money to be sent to Argyle, in order to the carrying on the Affair, and tho he cannot be positive the Affair was named, yet it was understood by himself, and as he conceives by all present, to be for rising in Arms, for rectifying the Government. Commissary Monro, Lord Melvil, and the two Cessnocks were against medling with the English, because they judged them men that would talk, and would not do, but were more in∣clined to do something by themselves, if it could be done. The Lord Melvil thought every thing hazardous, and therefore the De∣ponent cannot say he was positive in any thing, but was most inclined to have the Duke of Monmouth to head them in Scotland, of which no particular method was laid down. Jerviswood, the Deponent, and Mr. Veitch, were for taking Money at one of these Meet∣ings. It was resolved, that Mr. Martin, late Clerk to the Justice Court should be sent to Scotland, to desire their Friends to hinder the Countrey from Rising, or taking rash Resolutions upon the account of the Council, till they should see how matters went in England. The said Martin did go at the Charges of the Gen∣tlemen of the Meeting, and was directed to the Laird of Polwart and Torwoodlie, who sent back word that it would not be found so easie a matter to get the Gentrie of Scotland to concur: But af∣terwards in a Letter to Commissar Monro, Polwart wrot that the Countrey was readier to concur than they had imagined, or some∣thing to that purpose. The Deponent, as above-said, having brought over a Key from Holland, to serve himself and Major Holms: he remembers not that ever he had an exact Copy of it, but that sometimes the one, sometimes the other keeped It, and so it chanced to be in his custody when a Letter from the Earl of Argyle came to Major Holms, intimating, that he would joyn with the Duke of Monmouth, and follow his measures, or obey his Directi∣ons. This Mr. Veitch thought fit to communicate to the Duke of Monmouth, and for the Understanding of it was brought to the Deponent, and he gave the Key to Mr. Veitch, who as the Depo∣nent was informed, was to give it and the Letter to Mr. Ferguson, and he to shew it to the Duke of Monmouth; but what was done in it, the Deponent knows not. The Deponent heard the Design of Killing the King and Duke, from Mr. Shepard, who told the De∣ponent some were full upon it. The Deponent heard that Aron Smith was sent by those in England to call Sir John Cochran, on the account of Carolina, but that he does not know Aron Smith,
or any more of that matter, not being concerned in it. Shepard named young Hamden frequently as concerned in these Matters. Signed at Edinburgh Castle, the 8. of September, 1684. and renewed the 18 of the same Moneth. William Carstares. PERTH CANCELL. I. P. D. Edinburgh Castle 18 September 1684. MR. William Carstares being again Examined, adheres to his former Deposition, in all the parts of it, and Depones he knows of no Correspondence betwixt Scotland and England, except by Martin before named; for those Gentlemen to whom he was sent, were left to follow their own Methods. Veitch sometimes, as the Deponent remembers, stayed sometimes at Nicolson, Stablers House, at London-wall; sometimes with one Widow Hardcastle in More-fields. The Deponent did Communicate the Design on foot to Doctor Owen, Mr. Griffil, and Mr. Meed, at Stepney, who all concur∣red in the promoting of it, and were desirous it should take effect; and to one Mr. Freth in the Temple, Councellor at Law, who said that he would see what he could do in reference to the Money, but there having gone a Report, that there was no Money to be raised, he did nothing in it; nor does the Deponent think him any more concerned in the Affair. Nelthrop frequently spoke to the Deponent of the Money to be sent to Argyle, whether it was got or not, but the Depo∣nent used no freedom with him in the Affair. Goodenough did in∣sinuate once, that the Lords were not inclined to the thing, and that before, they would see what they could do in the City. The Deponent saw Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Rumsay, lurking after the Plot broke out, before the Proclamation, having gone to Ferguson, in the back of Bishopsgate-street, at some new Building, whether he was directed by Jerviswood, who was desirous to know how things went. Rumsay was not of the Deponent his acquaintance before, but they knew as little of the matter as the Deponent. This is what the Deponent remembers, and if any thing come to his Me∣mory, he is to deliver it in betwixt▪ and the first of October. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. William Carstares PERTH, Cancell. I. P. D. At Edinburgh, the 22. of December, 1684. THese foregoing Depositions, Subscribed by Mr. William Car∣stares Deponent, and by the Lord Chancellor, were acknow∣ledged on Oath by the said Mr. William Carstares, to be his true Depositions; and that the Subscriptions were his, in presence of us Undersubscribers. William Carstares. PERTH Cancell. David Falconer. George Mckenzie, Queensberry. Athol.
HIs Majesties Advocat for further probation, adduces the Exa∣minations of Mr. Shepard, taken before Sir Leolin Jenkins Secretary of State for England, with the Information or Deposi∣tion of Mr. Zachary Bourn, relating to the Plot, sign'd by him and Secretary Jenkins, of which Depositions the tenors follow. THe Examination of Thomas Shepard of London Mer∣chant, taken upon Oath before the Right Honourable Sir Leolin Jenkins Knight, His Majesties Principal Secretary of State, the 23. day of December. 1683. THe Deponent saith, That Ferguson told him on, or about the Moneth of April last, that an Insurrection was intended both in England and in Scotland, and that for the settling that Af∣fair betwixt the two Nations, Mr. Baillie, Mr. Monro, Sir John Cochran, Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels, with some others (whose names this Deponent heard not) were come to London. That the Deponent had some acquaintance with Mr. Baillie, Mr. Monro, and Sir John Cochran, and none at all with Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels; that Mr. Baillie told the Deponent, that the Earl of Argile demanded Thirty Thousand Pounds of the English to capacitat him to begin the business effectually in Scotland, and that he the said Baillie likewise told the Deponent, that having con∣certed things with the Lord Russel and others, he the said Baillie found an impossibility of raising that Sum; After which the said Baillie had acquainted the Deponent, that they were certainly pro∣mised Ten Thousand Pounds, which Sum was agreed to be payed into the Deponents hands, in order to be remitted into Holland, for the providing of Arms; and that the said Baillie told the Deponent at divers times, that the said Sum, or at least one half of it would be payed such a day, and such a day; and sometimes asked the Deponent, if he had received any part of the said Money, to which the Deponent replyed that he had not, and that he the Deponent scarce thought any would be payed. And the Deponent also saith, that having had some little con∣versation with Sir John Cochran, he remembers well, that both of them did sometimes lament the delays in not paying in the Money, and said, that although the said Ten thousand Pounds were pay'd in, they, the said Sir John Cochran and Mr. Monro, fear'd it would be too little; and this Deponent further sayeth not, as to any new matter. But the Deponent being asked, to Explain what he thought was meant by the words above written, vis, to capacitat him (the Earl of Argile) to begin the business, he, this Depo∣nent sayeth, that he did understand by the Word business, an Insur∣rection in Scotland. Sic. subscribitur, Thomas Shepard. Jurat coram. L. Jenkins.
THe Information of Zachary Bourn of London, Brewer▪ taken upon Oath, the tenth day of Decem∣ber 1683. before the Right honourable Mr. Secreta∣ry Jenkins. THe Informant Deposeth, and sayeth, that Mr. Baillie sat up one Night, if not two, with Mr. Ferguson, and went seve∣ral times in the Evening with him to the Duke of Monmouth, and the chief mannagers of the Conspiracy; That Ferguson told the Deponent, that he the said Baillie was the chief man for the Scots, next to the Lord Argile; that the said, Baillie did sit up the greatest part of one night, with the said Ferguson; at which time this Deponent believeth they were busie in preparing the intended De∣claration, which the Deponent has the more reason to believe, in as much as the said Ferguson did go about to show him the Depo∣nent, such a Paper, wherein the said Ferguson was hindered by the coming up Stairs of some person, to speak with the said Ferguson, that the said Ferguson told the Deponent, that the main business of the said Baillie, in meeting the saids Conspirators, was in order to get from them the Ten thousand Pounds, promised for the buying of Arms; for the Insurrection intended in Scotland. That the Deponent saw Mr. William Carstares come often to the Lodgings of the said Ferguson; but that the said Ferguson never told the Deponent of any Discourse held by him with the said Car∣stares: and further this Deponent saith not. sic subscribitur, Zac. Bourn. Jurat coram. L. Jenkins. HIs Majesties Advocat likewise produced several Warrands, and Papers to prove, that those Depositions are sign'd by Sir Leo∣lin Jenkins. HIs Majesties Advocat also produced the Books of Adjour∣nal, bearing Mr. William Veitch to be a Forefault Traitor, and the Act of Parliament whereby the Forefaulture is Ratified. His Majesties Advocat's Speech to the Inquest. My Lords and Gentlemen, YOu have now a Conspiracy against His Majesties Sacred Per∣son, and Royal Government, so fully discover'd, that they must want Reason as well as Loyalty, who do not believe the Discovery; and they must be enemies to sincerity, as well as to the King, who do not acknowledge it. Beside, that the Councils of all the three Nations, thought the proof sufficient, for Indict∣ing
a General Thanksgiving through all these Nations; and that the Judges of England thought the same strong enough to infer Fore∣faulture of Life and Estate, against some of all Ranks there; you have a Discovery made here from the late E. of Argiles own Letters, and the Confession of his own Emissaries, the two surest proofs that Law ever invented, or the nature of Humane Affairs can allow; and I am this day to add to all this, a new Sett of Proofs in the Pro∣cess that I now lead against this Pannal, from the Confessions of Noblemen and Gentlemen, who have been engaged in this wicked Conspiracy; and who from a sense of their Guilt, are content free∣ly to Depose against their nearest Relation, and their most inti∣mate Friend, in which having thus cleared to you, that there was really such a Conspiracy, I shall, in the next place, proceed to prove this Pannals Accession to it. It cannot be imagined, that we would willingly involve our Countrey men in it, without a Conviction stronger then our kindness to Scotland; nor did His Majesties Servants accuse this Pannal, without the opinion of the ablest Lawyers of the Kingdom, who did▪ with them concur, to think that there was not the least occasi∣sion of doubting left, to the most indifferent Inqueist of his guilt, after they had seriously, and with reflection, read over, and pon∣dered the probation now laid before you: The Person accused of accession to this Cryme is the Ring-leader of all those, who in this Kingdom concurr'd with the English Conspi∣rators, as you may see by the Testimonies of all who have Deposed; and it was indeed sit and just to begin with the most guilty, so that if he be not convicted, there should no man be punished for this Conspi∣racie; all the noise we have heard of it, is but a Cheat, the Kings Judges have been Murderers, all the Witnesses have been Knaves, and such as dyed for it have been Martyrs. The Accession charged on this Pannal, is not an accidental escape, nor is it proved by Witnesses, who can be suspected of unkindnes to his Person, or his Cause, for it is a long tract of a continued design, gone about with the greatest deliberation and concern imaginable, and proved by his nearest Relations, and persons so deeply engadg∣ed in that Cause, (for which he Suffers,) that they were content with him to venture their Lives and Fortunes in that quarrel. He is not accused of a Crime that can amount only to a single Murder, though that be a dreadful Cryme, but a Rebellion, which was to draw up∣on us a Civil War, that Murder of Murders, in which hundreths of thousands were to fall; and to Crown all, he was to begin, and to be the chief promoter of a Rebellion, in which one of the first steps was to kill His Sacred Majestie, and his Royal Brother; and one of the chief Witnesses which I have led against him, is Bourn, which Bourn confessed that he was to kill the King, and who con∣fesses the Pannal sat up several nights with Ferguson, the other con∣triver of the Kings Murder, and so familiar was he with him, that
Bourn depons, that the said Pannal had been with Ferguson▪ at the drawing of the manifesto, whereby he was not only to be an Actor, but to be the Justifier of that horrid Villanie: and therefore Bourns depons, that Ferguson, (the best Judge in that case) looked upon him as the chief man, next to Argyle; But because no man is pre∣sumed to go to such a hight, without previous inclination and mo∣tives, I shall to convince you, that this Gentleman was very capable of all that was lybelled against him, remember you, that he is Ne∣phew, and Son in Law to the late Warstoun, bred up in his Family and under his Tutory; about the time of this Plot it was undeny∣ably known, and is now sufficiently proved, by two present Wit∣nesses, the Earl of Tarras and Commissar Monro, that he thought himself desperat, knowing himself to be guilty of Treason by Black∣woods Case; and as it's presumable, that a man that's guilty of one point of Treason, will commit another; so when a man is desperat as to his Life and Fortune, he is capable of any thing; he was like∣wise animated to commit this Cryme, by the intelligence he had that there was a Plot in England, carryed on by men of so great Parts, Fortune and Influence, and by the too probable hopes, that they would get all the Western Shires to joyn with them here, because of the common guilt, in which they had engadged themselves, by their late extravagances, they made and account of an assistance of twenty thousand men; and by Philiphaughs Deposition, that these Gentlemen expected the concurse of the Southern-Shires; and thus, I am to prove to you a Cryme, which is in it self, so probable and liklie, that it should need little probation, tho I have adduced for your conviction sufficient evidences, albeit the Cryme were in it self very unliklie. The Crymes which I hope I have proved, are, That Jerviswood the Pannal transacted for Money to the late Earl of Argyl, a declared Traitor. 2. That he designed to raise a Rebellion. 3. That he intercommun∣ed with the Earl of Argyle and Mr. Veitch declared Traitors. 4. That he was present, where it was treated, either that Argyle should have Money from the English and assistance from Scotland, or that a Rebellion should be raised, and that he did not reveal the samine; and all these being found relevant separatim, it is sufficient for me to have proved any one of them. And if a Gentleman was lately found guilty of High-Treason, by the opinion of all the Lords of Session, for not revealing, that Sir John Cochran sought fifty pound Sterling from him, though he refused the same, and tho he believed, it was sought for a charitable subsistance to preserve him from starving; what deserves this Pannal, who sought thirty thousand pound ster∣ling, to buy him Arms, to invade his Native Countrey? That Jerviswood was designing to carry on a Rebellion, or at least was accessory, or (as our Law terms it) was Art and Part thereof, is clearly prov'd; but that in this occult and hidden Crime, which uses not to be prov'd by clear witnesses; I may lead you thorow all the steps of the Probation, which like the links
of a Chain, hang upon one another. You will be pleased to con∣sider, that 1. It is proved that he desired a blind Commission to go to England, not to manage the affairs of the Carolina Company, as he confess'd, but to push the People of England to do something for themselves, because they did only talk and not do; and what he would have them to do, appears too clearly, because he tells the Earl of Tarras it was probable, that if the King were briskly put to it by the Parliament of England, he would consent to exclude the Duke from the Succession: here is not only a Treasonable Design, (though a design be sufficient in Treason) but here are express acts of Treason proved, viz. The treating with the Earl of Tarras upon this Design, the settling a Correspondence with him for the prose∣cution of it, and the writing Letters from London to him concern∣ing it, and the sending down Mr. Martin to compleat it by a general Rising: As he design'd to push on the English, so he prosecutes close∣ly this Design upon all occasions. On the Road he complains cun∣ningly and bitterly, that our Lives, Laws and Liberties, and the Protestant Religion were in danger, the stile and method of all such as design to Rebel; after he arrives at London, he engages the Conspirators there to assist the late Earl of Argile▪ a declar'd Traitor, with Money to buy Arms; this was indeed to push the English to do the most dangerous things by the most dangerous man▪ and in the most dangerous methods. He enters also in a strict Correspondence with Ferguson the Contriver▪ with Shepard the Thesaurer, and Car∣stares the Chaplain of the Conspiracy. Alexander Monro another present Witness, proves that he ar∣gued with him, that it was necessary to give Argile Money ex∣pressly for carrying on the Rebellion, and that they did meet at Jerviswoods Chamber where this was spoke of, and from which Mr. Robert Martin was sent to their Friends in Scotland to know what they would do; and though the silly caution was, that they sent him to prevent their rising, yet a man must renounce common sense, not to see that the design was to incite them to Rebellion, and to prevent only their doing any thing in this rebellious de∣sign, by which they might lose themselves in a too early and abortive Insurrection here, till things were ready in England. For, 1. This Comission was given him in a place, and by a Company who had been themselves treating immediatly before of sending Money to the late E. of Argile to buy Arms, and certainly those Arms were to be bought for Men, and not for a Magazine. 2. They were treating how many Men could be raised in Scotland. 3. Carstares Deposition bears, that Martin was sent to hinder rash Resolutions, till they saw how Matters went in England, and the return to their Embassy bore, that it would not be an easie matter to get the Gentry of Scotland to concur; but afterwards better hopes of their rising was given, which could not have been, if the true Commission had not been to raise Scotland. 4. That Sir John Cochran made a Speech to that pur∣pose, is expressly prov'd, and that Jerviswood spoke to the same purpose, is prov'd by a necessary consequence; for since it's prov'd that he spoke, and that he did not speak against it, it must necessa∣rily follow that he spoke for it, though the Witness is so cautious,
that he cannot condescend upon the words now after so long a time; and it is against Sense to think, that Jerviswood who in privat press'd the same so much upon Commissar Monro, and who was the Deacon-Conveener here, and who, as Mr. Martin their Envoy declared, was the person who was to be sent for the Arms, should not himself have been the most forward man in that Design, but above all exitus acta probat, this Commissioner, (who being a meer Servant, durst not have proposed any thing from himself, being a mean Person, and being one, who, as the Earl of Tarras deposes, would say nothing, but what was in his Paper:) does expresly declare, that he came from Jerviswood and others; and in the meeting with him, a Rebellion is actually formed, and it is resolved, they should seize the King's Officers of State, Garisons, and Forces, and that they should joyn with the late E. of Argyle, and put their own Forces in a condition to joyn with these Forces that were to come from England, and they gave a Sign, and a Word, which uses only to be done in actual War; So here is Treason clearly prov'd, by two present Witnesses, from the first Design to it's last perfection. Nor can it be objected, that they are not concurring Witnesses, but testes singulares upon separat Acts, for in reiterable Crimes, Witnesses deposing upon different Acts; do prove if the deeds tend to the same end; as for instance, if one Witnes should de∣pose, that they saw a Traitor sit in a Council of War, in one place, and in another place, they saw him in Arms, or that one saw him assist at a Proclamation in one place, and saw him in Arms in another; or that one saw him writ a Treasonable Paper, and another saw him use it; These Witnesses are still con∣sidered as contestes, or concurring Witnesses, and ten or twelve In∣queists have so found, and upon their Verdict, Rebells have been lately hang'd. The learn'd Judges of England being all met to∣gether did expresly find, that one Witnes proving, that A. B. said, that he was going to buy a Knife to kill the King, and another de∣posing, that he saw him buy a Knife, without telling for what, that these two Witnesses were contestes, and prov'd sufficiently the Cryme of Treason, yet there the one Witnes, prov'd only a remote Design, and the other an Act, which was indifferent of it's own nature, and became only Treasonable by the Connexion; But no VVitnesses ever Deposed upon things so coherent, and so connected together, as these do, for they depose still upon the same person, carrying on the same Design of a Rebellion; as to which, in one place, he is ex∣citing his own Nephew, and telling him his Resolutions, and settling a Correspondence with him, at another time, he presses Commissar Monro to the same Rebellion. At a third, He holds a meeting at his own Chamber, and speaks concerning it, and from that meeting, he sends a Trusty, who formes the Rebellion. Besides all this, tho two VVitnesses be sufficient, I have adduced Mr. William Carstares Chief Conspirator, and who choos'd rather to suffer violent Torture, than to disclose it, he likewise Deposes upon all these steps, and connects them together, and this his Deposition is twice reite∣rated, upon Oath, after much premeditation. And I likewise ad∣duce two Depositions taken upon Oath, by Sir Leolin Jenkins, who
was impower'd by the Law of England, and at the command of the King, and the Council of England, upon a Letter from His Majesties Officers of State here, In which Deposition, Shepard, one of the VVitnesses, deposes, that Baillie came frequently to him, and desired him to advance the Money, and lamented the delays, and that there was so little to be advanced; and who should be better be∣lieved then one who was his own Trustie, and a Person who was able to advance so great a Sum; Bourn, another of the VVitnesses, Deposes, that Ferguson told him, that the Pannal spoke frequently to him concerning the same Money, and that he sat up several nights with Ferguson upon the said Conspiracy; and who should be bet∣ter believed then Fergusons confident, and one who was so far trusted in the whole affair, that he was to take away that Sacred Life, which Heaven has preserv'd by so many Miracls. Against these three Depositions, you have heard it objected, that non testimonia sed testes probant, especially by our Law, in which, by an express Act of Parliament, no Probation is to be led, but in presence of the Assise and Pannal. To which it is answer∣ed, that these Depositions are not meer Testimonies; for I call a Testimony, a voluntar Declaration, emitted without an Oath, and a Judge; but these Depositions are taken un∣der the awe of an Oath, and by the direction of a Judge. Shepard was confronted with the Pannal himself, and he had nothing to say against him; whereas the great thing that can be ob∣jected against Testimonies (and by our Statute especially) is, that if the Party who emits the Testimony had been confronted with the Pannal; the impression of seeing a person that was to die, by his Deposition, would have made him afraid to Depose laxly; and the Pannal likewise might, by proposing Interrogators and Que∣stions, have cleared himself, and satisfi'd the Judges in many things Depos'd against him: But so it is that Mr. Shepard having been confronted with the Pannal, before the King Himself, who is as far above other Judges, in His Reason and Justice, as He is in His Power and Authority; He Deposes that the Pannal was the chief Mannager of this Conspiracy, next to Argile, and that he was so passionat to have this Money to buy Arms, that he lament∣ed the delays; and can it be imagined that Mr. Shepard whom he trusted with his Life and his Fortune, and whom all their Party trusted with their Cash, would have Depos'd any thing a∣gainst him that was not true, especially when he knew that what he was to Depose, was to take away his Life and his Fortune; or that if the Pannal had been innocent, he would not when he was confronted with Mr. Shepard, before the King Himself, have roar'd against Mr. Shepard, if he had not been conscious to his own Guilt. There is a surprise in innocence, which makes the in∣nocent exclaim, and it inspires men with a courage, which enables them to confound those who Depose falsly against them; and in what occasion could either of these have appear'd, more than in this, wherein this Gentleman was charg'd to have Conspir'd with
the greatest of Rascals, against the best of Princes; and that too in presence of the Prince himself, against whom he had Conspir'd, but Guilt stupifies indeed, and it did never more than in this Gentlemans Case, whose silence was a more convincing Witness than Mr. Shepard could be Mr. Carstares likewise knew when he was to Depone, that his Deposition was to be used against Jerviswood, and he stood more in awe of his love to his Friend, than of the fear of the Torture, and hazarded rather to die for Jerviswood, than that Jerviswood should die by him: How can it then be imagin'd, that if this man had seen Jerviswood in his Tryal, it would have al∣tered his Deposition; or that this kindness, which we all admir'd in him, would have suffer'd him to forget any thing in his Depo∣sition, which might have been advantageous in the least to his Friend: And they understand ill this hight of Friendship, who think that it would not have been more nice and careful, than any Advocat could have been: and if Carstares had forgot at one time, would he not have supplyed it at another; but especially at this last time, when he knew his Friend was already brought upon his Tryal: and that this renew'd Testimony was yet a further con∣firmation of what was said against him; and albeit the Kings Ser∣vants were forced to engage, that Carstares himself should not be made use of as a Witness against Jerviswood; yet I think this kind scrupulosity in Carstares for Jerviswood, should convince you more than twenty suspect, nay than even indifferent Witnesses; nor can it be imagined, that the one of these Witnesses would not have been as much afraid of God, and his Oath at London, as at Edinburgh; and the other in the Council-Chamber in the Forenoon, as in the Justice-Court in the Afternoon. 3. The Statute founded on, does not discharge the producing of Testimonies otherways than after the Jury is inclos'd; for then indeed they might be dangerous, because the party could not ob∣ject against them: But since the Statute only discharges to pro∣duce Writ, or Witnesses, after the Jury is inclos'd; it seems clear∣ly to insinuat, that they ought to prove when they are produc'd in presence of the Party himself, as now they are. And though the Civil Law did not allow their Judges to believe Testimonies, be∣cause they were confin'd to observe strict Law; yet it does not from that follow, that our Juries, whom the Law allows to be a Law to themselves, and to be confin'd by no Rule, but their Conscience, may not trust intirely to the Depositions of Witnesses, though not ta∣ken before themselves, when they know that the Witnesses, by whom, and the Judges, before whom these Depositions were emit∣ed, are persons beyond all suspition, as in our case. But yet for all this, I produce these Testimonies, as Adminicles here only to connect the Depositions of the present Witnesses, and not to be equivalent to Witnesses in this legal Process; albeit, as to the conviction of mankind, they are stronger than any ordinary Witnesses. When you, my Lords and Gentlemen, remember that it is not the revenge of a privat party, that accuses in this case; and that even in privat Crimes, such as Forgery, or the murder of
Children, &c. many Juries here have proceeded upon meer pre∣sumptions, and that even Solomon himself, founded his illustrious Decision, approv'd by God Almighty, upon the presum'd asser∣tion of a Mother; I hope ye will think two Friends Deposing, as present Witnesses, adminiculated and connected by the Depositions of others, though absent; should beget in you an intire belief, especially against a Pannal, who has been alwayes known to incline this way, and who, though he was desired in the Tolbooth to vindicat himself from those Crimes, would not say any thing in his own defence, and though he offers to clear himself of his accession to the Kings Murder, yet sayes nothing to clear himself from the Conspiracy entered into with the late Earl of Argile, for invading his Native Countrey, which is all that I here Charge upon him, and which he inclines to Justifie, as a necessary mean for redressing Grievances; I must therefore remember you, that an Inquest of very worthy Genlemen did find Rathillet guilty, tho there was but one Witness led against him, because when he was put to it, he did not deny his accession: And two Rogues were found guil∣ty in the late Circuit at Glasgow, for having murdered a Gentle∣man of the Guard, though no man saw them kill him; but the Mur∣derers having been pursued, they run to the place out of which the Pannals then accused were taken, none having seen the face of the Run-aways; and the Pannals being accus'd, and press'd to de∣ny the accession, shun'd to disown the Guilt, but desired it might he proved against them. This may convince you that there are Proofs which are stronger then Witnesses; and I am sure that there were never more proving Witnesses then in this case, nor were the Depositions of Witnesses ever more strongly adminiculated. Remember the danger likewise of emboldening Conspiracies against the Kings Sacred Life, and of encouraging a Civil War, wherein your selves and your Posterity may bleed, by making the least dif∣ficulty to find a man Guilty by the strongest Proofs that ever were adduced in so latent a Crime as a Conspiracy is. And I do justly conclude, that whoever denys that a Conspiracy can be thus prov'd, does let all the World see that he inclines that Conspiracies should be encouraged and allow'd. Our Age is so far from needing such Encouragements, that on the other hand▪ in this, as in all other Crimes, because the Guilt grows frequent and dangerous, the Pro∣bation should therefore be made the more easie, tho in this Case the King needs as little desire your Favour, as fear your Justice. And I have insisted so much upon this Probation, rather to con∣vince the World of the Conspiracy, than you that this Conspirator is Guilty. THereafter the Lords Ordained the Assize to inclose, and re∣turn their Verdict to morrow by Nine a Clock in the Morning.
Edinburgh, December 24. 1684 THe said day, The Persons who past upon the Assize of Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, return'd their Verdict in pre∣sence of the saids Lords; whereof the Tenor follows. The Assize, all in one Voice, finds the Crimes of Art and Part in the Conspiracy, and Plot Libelled; and of concealing, and not revealing the same, clearly proven against Mr. Robert Baillie the Pannal, in respect of the Depositions of Witnesses and Adminicles adduced. Sic subscribitur, Strathmore Chancellor. AFter opening and reading of the which verdict of Assyze, The Lords, Justice General, Justice Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary, therefore, by the mouth of James Johnstoun Dempster of Court, Decerned and Adjudged the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood to be taken to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, this twentie fourth day of December instant, betwixt two and four a clock in the afternoon, and there to be hanged on a Gibbet till he be dead, and his Head to be cut off, and his Body to be Quartered in four, and his head to be affixt on the Nether-bow of Edinburgh, and one of his Quarters to be affixt on the Tolbooth of Jedburgh, another on the Tolbooth of Lanerk, a third on the Tolbooth of Air, and a fourth on the Tolbooth of Glasgow; And ordains his Name, Fame, Memory, and Honours to be extinct, his Blood to be Tainted, and his Arms to be riven forth, and delate out of the Books of Arms, so that his Posterity may never have Place, nor be able here∣after to bruik, or joyse any Honours, Offices, Titles or Dignities, within this Realm in time coming; and to have Forfaulted, Ammit∣ted and Tint all and sundry his Lands, Heritages, Tacks, Steadings, Rooms, Possessions, Goods and Gear whatsoever, pertaining to him, to Our Soveraign Lords use, to remain perpetually with His Highness, in Property, which was pronunced for Doom. Sic subscribitur. LINLITHGOW. James Foulis, I. Lockhart, David Balfour, Roger Hog, Al. Seton, P. Lyon. Extracted forth of the Books of Adjournal, by me Mr. Thomas Gordon, Clerk to the Justice Court, sic subscribitur: THO. GORDON In pursuance of which Sentence, His Majesties Heraulds, and Pursevants, with their Coats display'd (after sound of Trumpets,) Did publickly, in face of the Court (conform to the custom, in the Sentences of Treason) in His Majesties Name and Authority, Can∣cel, Tear and Destroy the said Mr. Robert Baillie his Arms, threw them in his Face, trampl'd them under foot; And ordain'd his Arms to be expunged out of the Books of Herauldry, his Posterity to be ignoble, and never to injoy Honour and Dignity in time coming: And thereafter went to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and solemnly Tore and Cancelled the said Mr. Robert Baillie his Arms, and affixed the samine on the said Mercat-Cross Reversed, with this Inscription; The Arms of Mr. Robert Baillie late of Jer∣viswood Traitor. FINIS.
