m507 12639346 64995
A Short View Of the most Gracious PROVIDENCE OF GOD IN THE RESTORATION AND SUCCESSION. May 29. 1685. LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon, next Devereux Court, with∣out Temple-Bar, 1685.
PSAL. 2. Why do the Heathen rage and the peo∣ple Imagine a vain thing? THis Psalm, as well as many other which were compo∣sed by the Prophet David, hath a double meaning; both literal and mystical: The one relating to himself, and the History of his own life; the other relating to Christ, and the Prophesie of his Kingdom. As it relates to himself; we have the people of Israel, and the Heathen that were round them, conspiring a∣gainst his Government; The Taber∣nacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens; Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck; the Phi∣listins with the Inhabitants of Tyre;
Assur also and the Children of Lot, Psal. 83.6. &c. All these ten Nations were confe∣derate against the Lord, and against his anointed; they were so vain as to attempt the Alteration of the Decrees of Heaven; whilst he who sate there, laugh'd them to scorn and had them in derision. Their confusions did only make his Providence more conspicu∣ous; for notwithstanding all their u∣nited Counsels, and tumultuary rage, David was not only King in Hebron, but in Jerusalem too. Tho' they rage, tho' they medi∣tate, tho' they consult, tho' they conquer, and prosper for some time; yet have I set my King upon my Ho∣ly Hill of Sion, v 6. As 'tis a Prophesie, and relates to the Kingdom of Christ, we have the first Christians comforting themselves
with this Psalm, and by an extraor∣dinary Spirit applying it to their pre∣sent Concerns; Acts 4.25. Being as∣sur'd that as neither Herod, nor Pontius Pilate, so neither the Gentiles, nor the People of Israel could prevail against the Holy Child Jesus: And about three hundred years afterwards the whole prophesie of this Psalm was more eminently fulfill'd, when Chri∣stianity became the Religion of the Empire; when notwithstanding the malice of the Jews and Hereticks, and the ten Persecutions of the Heathen Emperors, like the ten Nations confe∣derate against David; the Kings and Judges of the Earth, became wise and instructed, kiss'd and Ador'd the Son of God, and the Holy Child Jesus prevail'd so far, till the extent of his Enemies, was turn'd into the largeness of his Inheritance.
From the opening of the Psalm, you your selves will be ready to make this Natual reflection, that no passions tho' never so furiously raging; and no Imaginations, tho' never so cun∣ningly contriv'd, are likely to prevail long against a Government and a Re∣ligion approv'd of, and establish'd by God. You cannot but apply this obser∣vation to the occasion of the day, and find the Truth of it most evi∣dently confirm'd by the great Revolu∣tion in this Kingdom, and by your own Experience. As this Psalm is a prophetical piece of Scripture, it holds infallibly true, of nothing but the Universal Church of Christ; but yet particular Chur∣ches and Nations may apply it as a Doctrine of Providence; and none more properly than we, who have
a Monarchy most Providentially Di∣vine, as Divine as can be made without an immediate designation from God; and a Religion as pure as Revelation it self: It being nothing but the Holy Scriptures with the best interpretati∣ons, and those guarded with some few prudential limits; which the ig∣norant have complain'd of, the mali∣cious have disturbed; but which the wisest have ever approv'd, and the humble love to practice. Could Men ever imagine, that things, so piously and so judiciously settled, should not be the care of Pro∣vidence one day, as they had been the long contrivance of it? Had our Government and Church always continued, according to their first establishment, without any altera∣tion or disturbance, we might have been fortunate and at Ease, have sacri∣fic'd
to our own Nets, and been proud of them, as if they had been our own Inventions; but we had never so well known their more remote and inward worth, or that the favour of God was so mingled with them: But now they have been try'd and search'd by the malice of Devils, and the subtil∣ty of men, and in all this winnowing there was found but little Chaff, they are return'd to us with their excellency more discover'd, and a second appro∣bation of Heaven. He who reads our Civil Wars may lay aside all the Histories of Greeks and Romans, Turks and Tartars, and not miss any one extravagance of humane Barbarity: For there he may find the utmost Force and guile of passion and hypocrisie; cruelty and Enthusiasm working together; and that not only in single instances, but
under a publick National manage∣ment; not as the product of several A∣ges, but of one small Circuit of years. There he may see with what noise and clamours the Laws were silenc'd: with what fury and ignorance the multitude decreed Justice. With what pretended Treaties and Pacifica∣tions the Armies were inflam'd, and the differences always widen'd: With what eager hostility, and open de∣struction, Rebellous Subjects were for preserving their King: With what zeal and fasting Religion was banish'd out of the Land: With what Ty∣ranny their precious liberty was se∣cur'd; and with what unheard of im∣positions they were eas'd of Taxes. There he may read of the most so∣lemn sanctity robbing of God: Of the devoutest eyes fix'd upon the Chur∣ches patrimony: Of Prayers offer'd up
to Heaven, worse than downright Blasphemy: Of the rankest perjury scrupling a lawful Oath: Of Atheists fighting for Religion; and Hea∣thens for the pure Gospel of Christ: Of Treachery undermining perfidi∣ousness; Of Hypocrisie groaning a∣gainst Lewdness: Of Sacriledge ab∣horring Idolatry; and of a Covenant made with Hell. Certainly that late Rebellion was the most busie Scene of the Devils Tragi-Comedy here on Earth, and he can hardly furnish out such ano∣ther: If greater Judgments are alloted for Posterity, some other Angels sure must fall from a higher Sphear, to add new malice unto Hell, and make that direful Polity more Intelligent in mischief. There were some good Persons in those times, who lookt upon this Na∣tion
as under a dreadful Anathe∣ma, as excommunicated by God, and deliver'd over to Satan: And that which made it manifest, that we were only to be severely disciplin'd, and not destroy'd, was this; that at the same time when there was the highest Villany in this Land; there was the highest virtue too: The re∣bellious party fought their King in∣to that glory, which they never de∣sign'd him: Every Victory they wan, plac'd a new Star in his Breast: They overcame his forces, and he their injustice: They were more pros∣perous, and he more patient: They got the Field, and he an everlasting Crown. Thus will our English Annals stand checquer'd to the end of Ages, with the blackest Degeneracy of the worst of Traitors, and the whitest
innocency of the best of Princes. Nay for all that we know, this Island may be always noted for its two contrary Rivers, viz. the fiercest torrent of Rebellion, and the No∣blest tide of Loyalty, which in the late VVars were most conspicuously seen together. And tho' the Loyal Stream ran under ground for some few years, yet it soon came up again and fill'd its Chanel with a silent and an even course; and may it for ever flow with equal peace and plenty; for ever keep within its known and certain Banks of ancient Monarchy, of primitive and old Christianity. If we except the people of Israel, who were Govein'd by a Theocrasie, never any Nation could boast of a more remarkable Theater of the Pro∣vidence of God, then what this day afforded.
The passions of men were worn out with their own Rage: Their i∣maginations were grown sick of new Models and experiments of Empire: Anarchy had chang'd thro' all its monstrous shapes: Ambition was ei∣ther divided into proportional parts; or lost its force in unweildy matter: The Spirit of usurpation by often shifting was become dead, and vapid; and there was no Novelty of Sect or Rebellion to captivate the Peo∣ple: No one pretender had strength enough to get uppermost, but only just so much as might keep another back. So perplex'd were the Civil af∣fairs with various and contrary mo∣tions, so dispos'd were the Hearts of many for their old Government: So stupify'd were the guilty Traitors, and amaz'd like discover'd Cheats:
so infatuated were the Councels of the publick, and the Rage of the multitude so becalm'd, that the Re∣stauration of the King seem'd at that juncture of time the only effect in the whole order of Providence ready to drop ripe from its causes by the least humane endeavour: That most happy Enterprise being unexpectedly beset with such close circumstances from a Divine hand, that for its accom∣plishment it seem'd to require not so much the experience and wisdom of an able Councel, and the ready com∣plyance of an honest mind, that wills as God would have it: 'Twas like the Rational Choice of an object appear∣ing every way true and Good, and highly eligible, where there is nothing to suspend or divert the consent, but the frowardness or obstinacy of free∣will. Why therefore did the Heathen
rage, or the people imagine a vain thing▪ For thus we see how vain the i∣maginations of those men are, who set themselves against establish'd Con∣stitutions, and the decrees of Hea∣ven; how their machinations unra∣vel into folly; and shame and disho∣nour are their last promotion. How God permits the wicked to build a large Pile upon the Sand, that the ruine may be great and conspicu∣ous: To erect a Tower of ambition, that he may mingle confusion with all such proud attempts: And that when such iudgments are in the earth the inhabitants thereof may learn Righteousness: May tremble to re∣peat that abominable sin, on which the Lord perhaps has executed but half of his Vengeance yet, even as to this Life.
The Almighty has been pleas'd to let this Nation see the utmost of Re∣bellious Projects, whither they tend, what they produce, and what is the fruit of the most prosperous sedition: That no well meaning Person can e∣ver be ingag'd on such a desperate design again, for which they is now no Colour, no Apology left; that henceforth, whosoever resists his King, must first remounce his God: I know not what reflections those sufferers might have, who died in the midnight of the late confusions, who savv the Viper fastned to the Govern∣ment, but did not live to see it shaken off: but vve have seen the operation. of the Lord, and by Events have read the main designs of Providence; that had God permitted the Pacifi∣cations and Treaties to have taken ef∣fect, the Monarchy had been divided
and destroyed, and the Protestant Religion had lain gasping in our land: We had lost an example of the high∣est Christian Virtues, and example worth all the desolation we under∣went, and which nothing but great Calamity could have perfected and fi∣nish'd. Many insurrections were made, many generous attempts to recover the Crown, but God would not pros∣per impatient Loyalty; He reserv'd the managment and the Honour to himself; and when all humane poli∣cy lay as it were dead, he came forth, made his Arm bare, and brought about the wonderful Event. He gave us a King, who, we are sure was his peculiar gift, because he came adorn'd with all those graci∣ous qualities, and all those soveraign Virtues, which this distemper'd King∣dom
so much wanted, and which our ruling Rebels had not to apply. They bred and countenanc'd a spawn of Sects, He practic'd and e∣stablish'd an uniform Religion: They were most Tyrannous He most merciful: They delighted in perfidi∣ousness, War, and Blood; He in truth, and peace, and Love: They promo∣ted ignorance, and hated learning; He cherish'd all ingenious Arts and usesul knowledge: They were impla∣cable and revengeful; He made good Nature the Character of his people, and the Ambition of his Court: He planted where they had puck'd up; He built, where they had demolish'd: He every way repair'd the Ruines of the Civil War: He was a gentle balm to heal our mutual wounds: The only Temper for a divided Kingdom to unite in:
He remain'd in banishment till the extreme misery of the Nation made him the choice of his very Enemies; and then the Mountebanks of State resign'd up to his Cure the desterate Disease. He was the delight of our Eyes, the breath of our Nostrils, the glad∣ness of our hearts. He was our won∣der and our love; our dearest King, our Father, and our Friend. It is not easie to determine whether we receiv'd him with greater Joy, or were depriv'd of him with greater grief: He came in with all the shouts and acclamations of his people: He departed with all their Sighs and Groans But has God forgotten to be gra∣cious? and with him has he shut up all his loving kindness; No: He is most propitious still; we may behold
him working a most plain and visible recompence to Charles the Martyr, in his extraordinary Providence to his Posterity here on earth; in that he or∣dain'd, and hath thro' many Oppo∣sitions now effected, that two of his Sons should sit in peace upon his Throne. In that he hath so eminently bless'd the Succession with a brave and a re∣solute Prince, who has a Soul adorn'd with all those regal qualities, which are adapted for the humours which he governs, and for the times in which he reigns. Whatever the perswasions of our gracious Sovereign are, in some par∣ticular Points of Faith, or modes of Worship different from us; yet when we deserve it, God will make him wholly ours. However, this is most evident to all that know him well; that the
goodness of his inclinations is too strict for the licentiousness of the, Roman Casuists; the mildness of his temper very con∣trary to the cruelty of their Zealots; and the greatness of his Spirit most opposite to the ambiti∣ous designs of the Court of Rome. He had been pleas'd to pro∣mise, to promise often, and to pass his Royal word, for the maintaining of our Religion, but he expects we should live up to it; for he has not engag'd to maintain our hypocrisie: If we truly value our Religion, let us show it by our diligence, by our zeal, by our proficiency in all solid Virtue, and by our emi∣nency in all good examples.
We have sufficiently confirm'd the Loyalty of our Principles by arguments and disputes, let us now especially adorn them with our practice, and add the last hand to their perfection by our humble actions and behaviour. God has now given us an Op∣portunity, let us manage it with that prudent simplicity, and holy VVisdom; with that humble, but yet immoveable integrity, as may give God his Glory, and put all our Enemies to confusion. Remember, that the perfect Subjection to Kings is the Glory of the Protestant Cause; and that he that is Seditious is an Apostate to the Religion of this Kingdom,
be his pretences never so devout. However God in his Mercy may over-rule Events, and turn the hearts of Kings as it seemeth good to him, yet sure 'tis no such glo∣ry to the Protestant Cause, and no great policy in a people, that they should so contrive to have a Suc∣cession of injur'd Princes, who must forgive before they govern: How can such Subjects ever think to merit of their King, when all their future Services can hardly expiate? when they make it so dif∣ficult a matter to distinguish, whe∣ther they are truly Loyal, or whether they are only willing in the Day of his Power. Surely our Republican Enemies
might be content to be quiet af∣ter so many, and so signal De∣monstrations, that God is with us of a truth; and hath not on∣ly given us our Gospel but our Law: Since he hath made it so evident, not only to all haughty Ʋsurpers, by the revolution of this Day; but to all the framers of New Politicks, by the perspicuous and undeniable reasons of our mul∣tiply'd Writings and Discourses; that the English Monarchy is not a model of the Brain, or a few consequences drawn from an af∣fected speculation of Humane Nature; but a form of Govern∣ment suited to the genius of a wise and Loyal People, founded on a Power deriv'd from God, politically guarded by a publick
successive Prudence, and pro∣nounc'd good by the experience of many Ages. And shall a Constitution of such hereditary wisdom and strength be made the sport of every Dema∣gogue, that dares be eloquent against the Laws, and loves to ride upon the passions of the Croud? The worst I wish all such is this, that it may ever be the peculiar Prero∣gative of this Government and Church to make even those happy that would destroy them both. What shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits; what re∣turns shall we make for his Conti∣nual protections, for our Redemp∣tion on this day.
Had we no revelation to guide our worship and to raise our grati∣tude, the very perusal of the Hi∣story of our late times might do it: We might repeat the Miracles which God hath wrought for us, to quicken our obedience and De∣votion, for he hath not dealt so with any of the Nations which are round us, neither have they had such Experience of his care. But not our Arm, not our po∣wer hath gotten these victories; nor for our Righteousness doth this Land flourish; the Lord himself hath wrought these wonders for his Name sake, that it might not be polluted among the Heathen; and if we our selves pollute it, where shall such Sinners appear?
If we would have him still to be our God, we must resolve to be his people; to be as peculiar in our duty as he is in his blessings: Otherwise, his mercies are our se∣verest Judgments; and our prospe∣rity only fits us for his final venge∣ance. FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon nigh Devereux: Court without Temple-Bar, 1685. 1. AN Institution of General History, or the Hi∣story of the world; the first and second Vo∣lum, in Folio 2. The Bucaniers of America, or an account of the most remarkable Assaults committed of late years on the Coasts of the West Indies, by the Bucaniers of Jamaica and Tortuga; both English French and Dutch; the first and second Volum in Quarto, price bound 10 s. 3. The Protestant Religion a Safe way to Salvation, together with the Apostolical Institution of Episco∣pacy, also nine Sermons, &c. by W. Chillingworth, the Fifth Edition, to which is now Added Mr. Chillingworths Arguments to his Friend Mr. Leiger to perswade him to return from the Church of Rome, to his Mother the Church of England, in Folio. 4. A Discourse about Conscience relating to the present differences among us, in opposition to both the extreams of Popery and Fanatism, in Quarto price 6 d. 5. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience in a Sermon preach'd Jan. 30. last by J. Ellesby, Vicar of Che∣swick in Quarto price 6 d. 1685. 6. A Sermon preach'd at the Spittle on Easter Tuesday last before the Lord Mayor, Court of Alder∣men, and Governours of the Hospital by Dr. Has∣card Dean of Windsor, 1685. 7. A Sermon preach'd at the Cathedral Church of Heresord on the 29 of May by Richard Buckely Pre∣bendary of that Church, 1685. price 6 d. 8. The grounds of Sovereignty and Greatness trans∣lated
out of French into English in Quarto, price 6 d. 1685. 9. A Discourse of Tangeir under the Government of the Earl of Teviot by Dr. Addison Dean of Lich∣field, price 6 d. 1685. 10. The manner of making, of Coffee, Tea, and Chocolate, as it is used in most parts of the VVorld, with the Virtues of them both as to Diet and Phy∣sick in Twelves, price bound 1 s. 1685. 11. Megalopsichy being a particular and exact ac∣count of the last seventeen years of Queen Elizabeths Reign both Millitary and Civil; written by Sir William Monson one of the Queens Admirals, and H. Townsend Esquire, a member of her last Parliament, wherein is an exact account of her seventeen years VVars with Spain; also the debates and Discourses of the greatest States men in that Queens Reign, being the most exact account, of the proceedings of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that is yet in print, in Folio, price 12 s. bound. 12. Compendium Geographicum being the most ex∣act and easie piece of Geography with two Alphabe∣tical Tables or Dictionaries, the one of the antient the other of the Modern Names of all Towns Ci∣ties, Countries, &c. in the world, in Twelves, price bound 1 s. 13. The Tracts of Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury being an exact account of the Civil wars of England from 1640. to 1660. and by what Councels and Artifices it was carried on, printed now from the Original Manuscript with three Tracts more of the same Au∣thors, in Octavo, price bound 5 s. 14. The Soules Communion with her Saviour: or the History of our Lord Jesus Christ, written by the four Evangelists in Devotional Meditations, in Twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d. FINIS
