N1397 12562850 63281
A COLLECTION OF Twenty-Three PROPHECIES AND Predictions Of the Famous MICHAEL NOSTRODAMƲS, the Learned Astrologer of France, as they Concern and Point at these Times. TOGETHER With their Explanations, foretelling many Strange and Won∣derful Things, about to happen in England, France, and Ireland; but more particularly the Success of Our Arms in the Later Revolution, and what we may farther expect, with the Miseries Threatning the Kingdom of France, Before the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety One be Over. This following Prophecy was writ by an English Bard. above One hundred Years since. 1691 In the year when the Figures turn'd shall be the same, Then bloody France look to't, beware your fame, For all your Cruelties, you then shall pay, And now Approaches fast the Reckoning Day. LONDON, Printed and Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, MDCXC.
ADVERTISEMENT. WHereas the Book of Songs in Folio, set by Signior Pietro Reggio, consisting of One hundred fourty and four Cop∣per Plates, curiously Printed upon Imperial Paper, was formerly sold for 16 s. it is now proposed to be sold for 7 s. by W. Whitwood, in Duck-lane, and Mrs Feltham in Westminster-hall. And at the same Places this Book following. The History of Justin, taken out of the four and forty Books of Trogus Pompeius, containing the Affairs of all Ages and Coun∣treys in Peace and War, from the beginning of the World, until the time of the Roman Emperours, treating of the abderites, for∣ced from their Countrey by Frogs and Mice: of the Aborigines, the Abrogation of the Law for Sacrificing Men Alive, the Wars and Policies of Alexander the Great, with the Account of his Death; of Hanibal, Antigonus, Cambyses, Scipio, and other Kings, Princes and Captains. Aristotle, Tutor to Alexander the Great. Ar∣taxerxes had 115 Sons; the Athenians, the Inventers of Oil, Wine, and the Manufacture of Wool, Babylon builded by Semiramis, the holy Misteries of Caeres. Cleopatria married her own Brother Pto∣lomy, and the Execrable Murthers committed by him. The Cy∣prian Virgins provide themselves Dowries, by prostitution of their Bodies. Darius bound by his own Men in Golden Chains. Naero defiles his own Mother. Joseph preserved in Aegypt from Famine, his Interpretation of Dreams: Micheus Crucified by his own Father, a Phaenix seen in Aegypt, and in what Place the Giants made War against Heaven, with variety of other Hi∣stories Translated into English by Rob. Codrington, Master of Arts. Sold by W. Whitwood in Duck-lane, Mrs. Feltham in West∣minster-Hall.
TO THE READER ƲPON THESE PROPHECIES. Reader, AT first view of the Title Page, you may ask, why we bring upon the Stage at this time, the Predictions, or Prophecies of one of an An∣cient Date, to which, for your better satisfaction, we Answer, that this famous Astrologer, esteemed the wisest and most experienced, did not limit them to the scanty space of a Year, nor to an Age, but gave his Judg∣ment as to what would in all probability fall out in succeeding Ages, and perhaps to the end of the World; wherefore we have collected what may be most suitable to the present times, with an explanation as free as is reason∣able or conjectural, in matters so dark and devious, the which for the better inlightning the understanding of Mankind, we have set down. Prophecy 1. TOurs, Orleance, Blois, Angers, Reus, and Nants City vexed by suddain change, by strange Languages, Tents shall be set up, Rivers, Darts, Revenues, Land and Seas shall quake. Annotation. This seems to threaten the Provinces of France with some extraordinary change, perhaps a Revolt, or the prevailing Arms of those that are at present in a War against it, the latter being most conjectural, by the hint of the two last Verses, or lines of the Prophecy. Pro. 2. Towars, Gascony, by English Assaults, by the same shall be mde great Incursions, Rains, Frosts shall Mazz the Ground▪ Port Selyn shall make strong Invasions. Explanation. Here the English are promised to make Incursions into the Province of Gascony, part of the French King's Territories,
but the weather in those Parts shall not be favourable, as also that the Turks about shall be flushed by Inroad, or Invasion of some Place or Countrey. Pro. 3. Bourdeaux, Rovan, and La-Rochelle Joints will Range About up∣on the Great Ocean, English Britains and Flemings joyn together, shall drive them away as far as Rouana. Explanation. This seems to hint at the present times, that the Dutch and English shall be successful, and obstruct the French, by overpowering them by Sea, and forcing them into the Rouana, or Rhoan, a City in Normaady, a City formerly subject to the Crown of England, and may in success of time be happily re∣gained, as it was wrongfully taken from us, during the York and Lancasterian War, together with the whole Province, in the Reign of Henry the sixth. Pro. 4. The English Prince Mars hath his heart from Heaven, will follow his prosperous fortune. Explanation. This without doubt points at the present Provi∣dence, in our Miraculous Deliverance, wherein God turned the hearts of the People, as of one Man, to his present Majesty, ma∣king him successful against our devoted Enemies, to establish him in the Throne, and forward his Undertakings in Victory and Renown. Pro. 5. The Roman power shall be quite put down, his great Neigh∣bour shall follow his steps, Secret and Civil hatred and quarrels shall stoop the Buffoon folly. Explanation. This denotes the Popish power in England to be overthrown, and that the same shall happen in a neighbouring Kingdom, perhaps in France, and that those who keep up fudes and animosities, may see their Errors, and stop the Buffoons folly, that is, by joyning against the common Enemy, and Uniting with the Interest of the Government. Pro. 6. The Change shall be very hard. The City and Country shall gain by the Change. A high prudent heart shall be put in, the unworthy expelled, Sea, Land and People shall change its conditions. Explanation. This may be thought plainly to hint at our Late
Revolution, but we leave further the Issue of Providence, and the Event of our Succeedings, good for time to time, which we cordially wish may ever be prosperous. Pro. 7. Peace and Plenty shall not be long praised in his Reign, the Flower-de-luce shall be deserted, Bodies shall dye, Death shall be brought, hoping there vanity to be buried. Expl. This may denote the shaking of the Kingdom of France in this King's Reign, by some Insurrections occasioned by Fa∣mine or Discontent; as likewise Inundations, which by a Rap∣pid overflowing, shall carry and hinder some of the opportuni∣ty of being buried in the Earth, though the contrary be desired by their Friends. Pro. 8. The great Army shall be rejected, in a moment shall be wan∣ted by the King, the faith promised a far off, shall be broken, so that he shall be left naked in a pitiful case. Expl. This may seem to hint at the late King's brave pro∣mise with the Church of England that rais'd him to the Throne, as to the first past, and the French King's not keeping his promise with him as to secret Intrigues, which frustrated his purposes, and left him naked in a pitiful case when he was rejected by his people. Pro. 9. Where all well, is all good, a Sun and Moon is Existent, his Ruin draweth near: The Heaven is making haste to change that fortune into the same case, as the seventh Rock is. Expl. This seems to hint at the too great Pride of France, thinking to crave other Nations, when its own Ruin is near at hand, Heaven in its Eternal decrees, perhaps having designed to Infatuate their councels or devices, which may be meant by the Rock, signifying a thing insensible, into which their projects and policies may be chang'd. Pro. 10. In great Regret shall the French Nation be, their vain and light Heart shall believe rashly; they shall have neither Bread, Salt, Wine nor Beer. Moreover they shall be Pisoners, and suffer hunger, cold and need. Expl. This no doubt threatens the French Nation with extraor∣dinary calamity, as appears by the plain words without the need
of any Interpretation than what the sense may reasonably bear to understanding of the meanest capacity. Pro. 11. Many shall come and take of Peace between Monarchs, and Lords very powerful; but it shall not be agreed too so soon, if they do not shew themselves more obedient than others. Expl. This may seem to point at the present affairs in publick discourses, and perhaps some negotiations, but the matter as to the Prophecy being plain, there wants nothing but time to give a further Light into the fulfilling it, and the Submission of those that stand out in Rebellion and Opposition, to Render us a peaceful Nation and People. Pro. 12. There shall be in Guynea an infinite number of English, who shall occupy it by the name Angle Acquitaine of Languedock I. by the Land of Bourdeaux, which afterwards they shall call Barboxitain. Expl. This gives the English hopes of receiving the antient Rights of this Kingdom now wrongfully detained by the French. Pro. 13. Against the Red Sex shall gather themselves Fire, Water, Iron, Rape, by peace it shall be destroy'd: Those that shall conspire shall not be put to death, except one, who above all shall undo the work. Expl. This demonstrates the Inveteracy of the Roman faction against the Protestants, but that in the end signified here of their error in cruelty, and turn their fury against the Disturber of Christendom, who may be truly said to endeavour the ruin of the Christian world. Pro. 14. Peace is coming on one side, and War on the other: There was never so great a pursuing Man, Woman shall bewail the in∣nocent blood that shall be spilt, it shall be in France, and on all sides▪ Expl. This seems to promise happiness to come on one side, and the miseries of war on the other, as Armies in Rout, &c. signified by the great pursuing, and the spilling of Blood in France, which which shall be lamented, but whether it shall be spilt in a Hostile way, or by Execution, the Author leaves doubtful. Pro. 15. Foot and Horse upon the second watch shall come in, destroy∣ing
all by Sea; they shall come into the harbour of Marseilles, Tears, Crys and Bloods, never was so bitter a time. Expl. This signifies some Invasion of France by Sea, Marseilles, being a chief Sea part of that Kingdom, and perhaps we in a short time happen to leave this Prophecy fulfilled. Pro. 16. Kidery against King, and Duke against Prince, hatred between them, and horrid dissention, rage and fury shall be in every Province, great war in France, and horrid changes Expl. This directly out points Wars, Miseries and Alterations to France, insomuch, that there shall be rage and fury in every Province. Pro. 17. Brooks and Rivers shall be a stopping to evil, the old flame of Anger being not yet ceased, shall run through France; take this as an Oracle, Houses, Mannors, Pallaces, Sects shall be raced. Expl. Here again are great calamities foretold, to arise from the fury of the People by Civil war in France, or by an in-aiding Enemy, wherein great spoil and waste shall be made. Pro. 18. He that the Principality Shall keep by great Cruelty; At last shall see a great Army, By Fire blow most dangerously; He shall do better by Agreement strange, Otherways he shall drink the juce of Orange. Expl. What can be more plain than this Relation to the late K. who shed so much Blood of his Subjects in the West, and other places by the hands of Hang-men; who at last had a great Army come against him, and not making any timely Agreement, he fled to France; and being Abdicated by his people, the Prince of Orange our present Soveraign, was first invested by the Go∣vernment by the way of Administration, and soon after pro∣claimed King. Pro. 19. The Purveyor shall put all in disorder, Leech and Wolf do the burthen to me, when Mars shall be in the sign of Aries, joyned with Saturn and Saturnith, the Moon then shall be thy greatest Misfortune, the Sun being then in its Exaltation. Expl. By the Purveyor, our Author has all along meant the
French King; by the Leech the Spaniard, and by the Wolf the Savoyard which are threatned with some Burnings or Ranage∣ments by the French, when Mars shall be in the sign of Aries, &c. but when this will happen, we must leave to the event of time. Pro. 20. The Fleet shall stand before the City, then shall go away for a little while, and then take a great troop of Citizens on Land; the Fleet shall come back again, and recover a great deal. Expl. This points at the last Expedition to Ireland, whereby the help of our Fleet, the City of Cork, and Town of Kingsale were reduced, and promises a further Success, and perhaps the Redu∣cing of Limerick by such another undertaking. Pro. 21. O great Rome, thy Ruin draweth near, not of thy Walls, of thy Blood and Substance. The sharp by Letters shall make so horrid a Notch, sharp Iron thrust in all to the haft. Expl. This threatens the confounding of the Romish Supersti∣tion by the ingenious and convincing Writings of some eminent Man, who shall press it so far, that the Papists themselves shall be convinced, and fall off; which may be signified by the Notch, and the sharp Iron thrust in to the haft. Pro. 22. Leutitia in Mars, Senators shall be in Credit. In a Night France shall be troubled. The Horoscope of the great Craesus foretelleth, That by Saturn his Power shall be put down. Explan. This seems to threaten Lewis the XIV. with sudden Trouble in the King∣dom, and that in the end his Power shall be put down, by which he has so long Ty∣ranniz'd over his own, and the Subjects of other Princes where he has made Inroads and Invasions. Pro. 23. In the Year when the Figures turn'd shall be the same, Then bloody France look to't, beware your Fame: For all your Cruelties you then shall pay, And now Approaches fast the Reckoning day. Expl. This is an ancient Prophecy by another hand, and points directly at the year 1691. which if you observe to turn the 6 downward, it is a 9, if the 9 upward, it is a 6, and for the two ones, turn them which way you please, they are the same, the like not to be done in many years before; and thus much for these famous Prophesies. FINIS.
