p1530 99832745 37219
A perfect true Copy OF THE ARTICLES Agreed on by the Commissioners on both sides, for the surrender of Oxford to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. Signed, Sealed, Ratified, and Con∣firmed by his Excellency, and the Lords and Commissioners for Oxford, Commanded to be forthwith printed and published by Order of Parliament for generall satisfaction of the Kingdome, and for the confutation of those imperfect and impertinent Copies, before published to abuse the Kingdome. LONDON, Printed for F. Coles in the Old-baily. 1646.
Agreed at Marston, Satturday June 20. 1646. Articles of agreement concluded and agreed by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Generall of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one party: And the Right Honourable Sir Richard Lane Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, Francis Lord Cottington, Lord high Treasurer of England, William Marquesse of Hertford, Edward Earle of Dorset, Lord Chamberlaine of His Majesties Honourable Houshold, Thomas Earle of Southampton, Francis Earle of Chiche∣ster, Francis Lord Seymour, Sir Edward Nicholas, one of His Majesties principall Secretaries of State, all of them of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Councell, and Sir Thomas Glemham Knight and Governour of Oxford, of the other party: for and concerning the ren∣dring the Garrison of Oxford, as followeth: 1.THat the Garrison of Oxford, with the Castle Forts, Mounts, and places of de∣fence whatsoever, with all the Ord∣nance, Armes, Ammunition, and Pro∣visions of warre, with all Magazines and Stores thereunto belonging; ex∣cepting what is allowed in the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint, without wilfull spoyle or imbezlement, upon Wednesday the 34 of this
instant Iune 1646. at ten of the clocke in the mor∣ning. 2. That his Highnesse the Duke of Yorke shall have an Honourable Convoy to London, where other of his Majesties children are, attended by his Officers and Servants, and fitting Accomodation for removall of his houshold and goods thither, and shall have an honourable provision befitting his Dignity appointed for him by the Parliament, and to remaine there untill His Majesties pleasure be knowne touching his setling there or elsewhere, and then to be disposed according∣ly, to any place within 80 miles of London, and shall have Officers and Servants to continue about him as the Parliament shall approve. 3. That their Highnesses Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice shall have liberty and Passes for themselves with their Servants, Horses, Armes, and Goods (the number of their Horses for them and their traine not exceeding 70) to repaire to any place within 50 miles of London (so it be not within 20 miles of London, without leave from the Parliament, nor in any Garri∣son) and there to abide for the space of six moneths after the rendring, free from any molestation by impo∣sition of Oathes, or otherwise, and shall have Passes to goe beyond the Seas at any time within the said six moneths, with their said Servants, Horses, Armes, and Goods, they engaging themselves upon their Ho∣nours, not to use the liberty hereby granted in the meane time to any Hostility against the Parliament of England sitting at Westminster, or any way wilfully to the prejudice of their affaires. And they are to have the benefit of such the ensuing Articles as may concerne them.
4 That the Seales cal'd, The Great Seale, Privy Seale, and the Signet, and the Seales of the Kings Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Dutchy, Seales of the Admiralty and prerogative as also the Sword of State, shall at such time and in the presence of two such persons as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint be lockt up in a Chest, and left in the publique Library; And if any of the aforenamed particulers shall not be then accordingly produced the default thereof shall not be charged upon any other person, then such as have the Custody thereof, and shall wilfully detaine or im∣beazle the same. 5 That Sir Tho. Glemham Knight, &c. Governour of Oxford with his Servants and all that to him belongs, and all Officers and Souldiers of Horse and Foot, and of the Traine of Artillery, (as well Reformed Officers and Souldiers as other) with their, Servants, and all that pertaines unto them, shall march out of the City of Oxon with their horses and compleat Armes, that properly be∣long unto them proportionable to their present or past commands; flying Colours, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet in their mouthes, and every Souldier to have 12. charges of Powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, and with bagge and baggage to any place within 15. miles of Oxford which the Governour shall choose, where such of the Common Souldiers as desire to goe to their own homes or friends, shall lay downe their Armes, which shall be delivered up to such as the Generall Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint to receive them; And all Officers and Souldiers, as well reformed as others, that shall desire to goe to their own homes or friends, shall have
the Generals passe and protection for their peaceable re∣paire to and abode at the severall place, they shall so desire to goe unto, and shall have free quarter allowed them in all their march from Oxford to these severall places; The Officers as well reformed as other to passe with Equipage of Horses, and Compleat Armes answe∣rable to their present, or past commands, and common Troopers with their Horses and Swords onely, and all to passe with bagge, and baggage as aforesaid; and that all other Officers and Souldiers (in case there be any such) that shall desire to take entertainement from any Forraigne Kingdome or State, shall have free quarter allowed them for 28. dayes from their march out of Oxford: And shall have passes for their Officers not ex∣ceeding ten, with their Horses and two servants a peece to goe to Lond n to Treat with any Forraigne Ambassa∣dor or Agent for entertainment, and all of them shall have liberty and passes to march; The Officer wih their compleat Armes and Horses proportionable to their present or past Commands, and the Common Souldiers witth their Armes, and all with Bagge and Bag∣gage, to the quarters neer to Harwich and Portesmouth, or to any Port between them, to be transported which Armes, (except Officers Compleat Armes, and Horses and Swords for the Common Souldiers which they may transport) they shall there lay downe, and deliver to such as the Generall shall appoint, or unto the Gover∣nour of the next Garrison belonging to the Parlia∣ment who shall take care for their safety, during their abode there, and untill shipping can be provi∣ded, and weather seasonable, they paying for their Quarters after the 28. dayes be expired, and shall assist them for procuring vessels and shipping for their trans∣portation
at the usuall Rates accustomed for Fraught; the Officers and Souldiers and others, before trans∣portation engaging themselves by promise not to re∣turne into this Kingdome in Hostility against the Par∣liament in bodies as they goe, or in conjunction with other forces, or in command of any forces invading this Kingdome. And no Oath nor any other engagement or this or the like nature, to be during their said stay, or at their transportation imposed upon them, saving an engagement by promise not to doe any Act of Hostility, or of willfull prejudice against the Parlia∣ment during their said stay in England. And it is De∣clared that those of the Three Auxiliary Regiments consisting of Gentlemen and their Servants, Scholllers, Citizens, and Inhabitants who are got properly of the Garison in pay; And such reformed Officers, and Souldiers who shall not bee willing to march forth, shall not bee forced to march out upon this Ariticle but shall have the benefit of the following Articles to remove or remaine in Oxford, and in all things else which may concerne them: And those also who shall march forth shall have the benefit of the en∣suing Articles in all things, except for remaining in Oxford. 6. That the Governour shall be allowed and assisted in procuring of a sufficient number of Carts, Teames and Boates, and other necessaries for the carrying a way of all goods allowed in these Articles belonging to any Of∣ficers or persons of quality now residing in this Garison, they paying the accustomed Rates, and that such per∣sons as cannot presently through want of Carriages, or otherwise convoy them away, shall be assisted with Carr∣iages
at any time within three moneths for the disposing thereof. 7. That no Officer or Souldier nor any person what∣soever comprized in this capitulation shall be reproach∣ed, or have any disgracefull speeches, or affronts of∣fered to them, or be stopped, plundred or injured in their March, Randezvouz, or Quarters, Journies, or places of abode, And if any such thing shall fall out, satisfacti∣on shall be given at the judgement of any two or more, of the Commissioners, they being equall in number of each party, nor shall the persons aforesaid nor any of them be inticed, or compelled to take up Armes against the King, nor be imprisoned, restrained, sued, or mo∣lested for any matter, or cause whatsoever before the rendring of the Garison, during six moneths after the rendring thereof: And if any Officer, Souldier, or per∣son be sick or wounded, That they cannot presently en∣joy the benefit of these Articles; That such persons shall have liberty to stay untill they be recovered, and fit accommodation, and subsistance shall be provided for them during their stay, and then to enjoy the benefit of these Articles. 8. That all Horses, Armes, Money, and others Goods whatsoever taken as lawfull prize of War before or du∣ring the siege, and now remaining in the City, be continu∣ed in the possession of the present possessors. 9. That these Articles shall extend to the use and be∣nefit of all strangers of any foragine Kingdome or State residing within this Garison, together with their Wives, Children, Servants, Horses, Armes, Goods, Money or Debts.
10. That all persons included in these Articles, with∣out exception, or any, other then the Souldiers that are to march out upon the fifth Article, shall have liberty, (during the space of three Moneths after the rendring of the Garrison) either to remaine in Oxford, or to re∣move themselves with their Families, Goods, Horses, and all things that properly belong unto them, or to their disposall; And all Noblemen, Gentlemen, per∣sons of quality, with their Arms and other Equipage to their houses or friends, without any prejudice to their friends for receiving them. 11. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Officers, Souldiers, and all other persons comprized in this Capi∣tulation, who have Estates reall or personall, under or liable to sequestrations, according to Ordinance of Par∣liament, and shall desire to compound for them, (ex∣cept persons by name excepted by Ordinance of Parlia∣ment from Pardon) shall at any time within six Months after the surrender of the Garrison of Oxford, be ad∣mitted to compound for their said Estates, which said Composition shall not exceed two yeers Revenue for Estates of inheritance: And for Estates for lives, years, and other reall and personall Estates, shall not exceed the proportion aforesaid for inheritances, according to the value of them: And that all persons aforesaid, whose dwelling Houses are sequestred, (except before except∣ed) may after the rendring of the Garrison, repaire to them, and there abide, convenient time being allowed to such as are placed there under the Sequestrations, (if any be) for their removall; And it is agreed, That all the Profits and Revenues arising out of their Estates, (after the day of entring their names as Compounds)
shall remaine in the hands of the Tenants or Occupiers, to be answered to the Compounders when they have perfected their Agreements for their Compositions, and that they shall have liberty, and the Generals Passe and Protection for their peaceable repair to their abode at their severall houses or friends, and to go to London to attend their Compositions, or elsewhere upon their necessary occasions, with freedome of their persons, from Oathes, Ingagements, or molestations, during the said space of six Months, and after so long as they pro∣secute their Compositions without wilfull default or neglect on their party, except an engagement by pro∣mise not to beare Armes against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudiciall to their affaires, so long as they remaine in their Quarters: And it is further agreed, That from and after their compositions made, they shall be forthwith restored to, and enjoy their Estates, and all other immunities, as other Subjects, to∣gether with the Rents and Profits from the time of en∣tring their names as aforesaid:, discharged of their Se∣questrations, and from fifth and twentieth parts, and other payments and impositions, except such as shall be generall and common to them with others. 12. That no Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Scol∣lers, Officers, Souldiers, Citizens, nor any other persons included in this Capitulation, (except the persons men∣tioned before to be excepted from pardon) shall be molested or questioned for anything said or done, in or concerning this Warre, or relating to the unhappy dif∣ference between his Majestie and the Parliament, they submitting to Compositions in the precedent Article; And that the persons aforementioned to be excepted
from pardon, shall have the Benefit of this Article du∣ring the space of six Moneths from the rendring of the Garrison, and after, if they be admitted to and agree for their Compositions. 13. That the persons mentioned before to be excep∣ted from pardon, shall have liberty and the Generals Passe and Protection for themselves, families, horses, goods, and all things that properly belong unto them now in Oxford, to go unto, and abide at their own hou∣ses, or their friends, for the space of six Months after the rendring of the Garrison, and within that time to repaire to London to endeavour Compositions for their Estates, and indempnity of their persons, and to make their peace; and if they cannot obtaine it, shall have Passes to go beyond the Seas at any time, within the said six Months; and that no other ingagement shall be put upon them, save by promise not to beare Armes against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any ad prejudi∣ciall to their affaires, so long as they remaine in their Quarters. 14 That the Chancellor, Masters, and Schollers, of the University of Oxon, and the Governours and Students of christs-Church, of King Hen. 8. his foundation, and all other Heads and Governours, Masters, Fellowes and Schollers of the Colledges, Halls, and Bodies Cor∣porate, and societies of the same University, and the pub∣like like Professors and Readers, and the Orator thereof, and all other persons belonging to the said University, or to any Colledges or Hals therein, shall and may, according to their Statutes, Charters and Customes, enjoy their ancient forme of Government, subordinate to the im∣mediate Authority and Power of Parliament; And that all the Rights, Priviledges, Franchises, Lands, Tene∣ments,
Houles, Possessions, Rents, Revenues, Heredi∣taments, Libraries, Debts, Goods and Chattels, belong∣ing to the said University, or to Christs Church, or to any Colledges or Hals in the said University, (except such Rents and Revenues as have been already taken and re∣ceived by Ordinance of Parliament) shall be enjoyed by them respectively, as aforesaid, free from Sequestra∣tions, Fines, Taxes, and all other molestations whatso∣ever, for or under colour of any thing whatsoever, re∣lating to this present warre, or to the unhappy differen∣ces between his Majestie and the Parliament; and that all Churches, Chappels, Colledges, Hals, Libraries, Schooles, and publike Buildings within or belonging to the City or University, or to Christ-Church, or the seve∣rall Colledges or Hals thereof, shall be preserved from defacing and spoile, and if any removall shall be made by the Parliament of any other Members of the University, Colledges, or Hals, that those so removed shall enjoy the profits during the space of six Months after the ren∣dring of Oxford, and shall have convenient time allowed them for removall of themselves and their goods from their lodgings; provided that this shall not extend to re∣tard any Reformation there intended by the Parliament, nor give them liberty to intercede any in the Govern∣ment. 15. That the Mayor, Bayliffe, and Commonalty and all Corporations within the City shall enjoy their ancient. Government, and their Charters, Cu∣stomes, Franchises, Liberties, Lands, Goods, and Debts, and all things else whatsoever which belong to them as Corporations, subordinate to the immediate authority and power of Parliament, and shall not be molested by colour of any thing (before the rendring
of this Garrison) done or ordered by them in the capa∣city of Corporations, relating to the differences be∣tween his Majesty and the Parliament. 16. That the Citizens and Inhabitants of the City shall not be charged with free quarter, nor billet of Souldiers other then for lodging (except in urgent time of necessity) and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of the Mayor, or his Deputy, and that in all pub∣like Taxes they shall be taxed proportionably with the County; and that no Schollar, Citizen, or other Inha∣bitant in the University and City of Oxon shall be trou∣bled, or questioned for taking; up Armes in the Garri∣son, by expresse command during the time it was a Gar∣rison for the defence thereof; and that the Schollars, Citizens, and Inhabitants shall have the benefit of this capitulation in all things that may concerne them. 17. That no Officer, Souldier, or other person, who by the Articles are to march out of the City or Suburbs, or to march in, shall plunder, spoile, or injure any Schollar, Citizen, or Inhabitant, or other person in Ox∣ford in their person?, goods, or estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging to any of them. 18. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other wo∣men now in Oxon, whose Husbands or friends are ab∣sent from thence may have Passes, and Protections for themselves, servants, and goods, to goe to and remaine at the houses of their Husbands, or at their friends as they shall desire; and to goe or send to London or else∣where, to obtaine the allowances out of their Hus∣bands or Parents estates allotted them by Ordinance of Parliament. 19 That such of his Majesties Houshold Servants,
who shall desire to goe to his Majesty, may, have free liberty, and Passes to goe accordingly at any time with∣in one moneth after the rendring of the Garrison; and that his Majesties Houshold-stuffe, and other his pecu∣liar goods which are now in Oxford may be carried to his Majesties House at Hampton Court, and his servants under whose charge and custody any of them are, shall be allowed and assisted in the procuring of Carts, Boates and Carriages for the removall of them thither, and there to remaine till his Majesty shall otherwise dispose of them, and then to be sent or disposed accordingly; and that such of his Majesties Servants who are not able for the present to goe to him shall have liberty, Passes, and Protections to goe to, and remaine at his Majesties said House at Hampton Court, and have liberty to at∣tend the Committee for his Majesties Revenues, to pro∣cure a competent allowance out of his Majesties Re∣venues for their subsistence, untill his Majesty shall otherwise provide for, or dispose of them. 20 That all Clergy-men now in Oxford, who shall not upon compositions or otherwise be restored to their Church Livings, shall have liberty to goe to London, to obtaine some fitting allowance for the livelihood of themselves and their families. 21 That it is intended, declared, and agreed, that all persons comprised within these Articles shall peaceably and quietly enjoy all their goods, debts, and moveables allowed by these Articles, during the space of six moneths after rendring the Garrison, and that they shal be free from all Oathe, ingagements and molestations except an ingagement by premise not to beare Arme against the Parliament, nor wilfully doe any act preju¦diciall
to their affaires so long as they remaine in their Quarters; and that they shall have liberty within the space of six moneths (in case they shall be resolved to goe beyond Seas) to dispose of their said goods, debts, and moveables allowed by these Articles, and depart the Kingdome if they shall think fit, and to have Passe for their transportation, or otherwise to stay in the Kingdome. 22 That if any of these Articles shall in any point be broken, or violated by any person or persons in Ox∣ford, or comprised within this capitulation, the fault and punishment shall be upon him or them only who made the breach or violation, and shall not be imputed or charged upon any other not assenting thereunto, or not an actor in it. 23 That the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Lindsey, and their servants that come forth with them shall en∣joy the benefit of these Articles in whatsoever may concerne them. 24 That the Garrison of Farringdon shall be rendred unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Go∣vernour, Gentlemen, Souldiers and all other of what quality soever within those Garrisons shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles in every particular that may concerne them, they rendring the said Garrisons accor∣dingly as Oxford. 25 That all persons comprised within these Articles shall have upon request a Certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the future Gover∣nour of the City, that such persons were in the City at the time of the surrender thereof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.
26 That the Generall Sir Thomas Fairfax shall give a Passe to one or two Messengers with their servants to goe unto the King, to give him an account of the pro∣ceedings upon this Treaty and conclusion thereof, and to returne and receive the benefit of these Articles. Signed at Water-Eaten June 20. by his Excel∣lencie Sir. Thomas Fairfax. Signed the same day at Oxford, by Richard Lane C. S. Cottington. Hertford Dorset. Chichester. Southamton. Seymor. Edw. Nicholas. Thomas Glemham. FINIS.
