P4252 17161896 106045
AN ABSTRACT OF Certain Depositions, By vertue of His MAJESTIES Commission, taken upon Oath, Concerning the Traiterous intention of the Rebels in Ireland, in rejecting the Government of His Majesty, in having a King of their own: And who that King should be. With an Extract of a Letter from Rome, 4. Jan. 1642. YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. 1642.
An Abstract of the Depositions, by vertue of His Majesties Commission, taken upon Oath, Concerning the traiterous in∣tention of the Rebels, in reject∣ing the Government of His Majestie, in having a King of their own: And who this King should be. GEorge Cook of Lissignie,Cavan. 71 Jan. 22. 1641. in∣ter caerera, deposeth, that one Tirlagh O Gowne, alias Smith, a Popish Priest, said, That the Papists would have their Chur∣ches, Lands, and Kingdom to themselves from the English, and be no more slaves to the English, as
they had been, or else they would lose their lives. Richard Colley,Ferma∣nagh 90. Febr. 2. 1641. of the Parish of Kinnallie, inter caet. deposeth, that Bryan O Cormacke of Dristernan, and other Rebels, said, They would ne∣ver submit to any English man. Thomas Magill,Lowth 4. Febr. 21. 1641. Clerk, inter caet. de∣poseth, that Collogh, Mac Brian, Mac Mahowne, and severall other Rebels, said, That they would not be sub∣ject to any Parliaments in England, and that they would have none to Govern over them, but a born I∣rish man. Matthew Browne of Clonisse,Monag∣han 36. March 24 1641. Gent. inter caet. deposeth, that he heard Pe∣ter Bath say, That they looked to have the King to put out the words Defender of the Faith, for none was supream of the Church, and Defen∣der of the Faith, but the Pope. Richard Whitton of Kilvane,VVickloe 8. Jan. 11. 1641. inter caet. deposeth, that Luke Birne of Kilvane said, He would have their Religion
flourish, no thanks to the King. Edward Deaselye, inter caet. deposeth,VVickloe 39. Feb. 5. 1641. That Luke Toole and Luke Birne offer∣ed a Passe to this Examinant, which they said, would be better then the Kings Passe. Thomas Taylor of Kilmore, inter caet.Cavan. 47 Jan. 12. 1641. deposeth, that he heard Mulmore O Kely say, That if the said Deponent would deny the King he should speed as they did. William Wright of Culmonyn, inter caet.Queenes 31. April 12. 1642. deposeth, that Iohn Good of Clonay-sawne, and Dermot Mac Phelmi said, That they hoped to have all Prote∣stants hanged within one fortnight, and he that did protect them to. Richard Knowles of Newtowne, inter caet.Ferma∣nagh 60. 10. Jan. 1641. deposeth, that Rory Magwire, Ri∣chard Nugent, Donogh Magwire, by whose means he was robbed, some of the said Robbers said, That they had a King of their own in Ireland. Nicholas Michaell of Farnam,Cavan. 57 15. Jan. inter caet. deposeth, that he heard the par∣ties
that robbed him say, They had an Irish King amongst them, and they regarded not King Charles, the King of England. Robert Barton of Newtowne,Ferma∣nagh 41. 5. Jan. inter caet. deposeth, that some of the Re∣bels said, They had a new King, and had Commission from him for what they did. Thomas Middlebrooke,Ferma∣nagh 18. 4. Jan. inter caet. de∣poseth, that about the 26. of Octo∣ber last past, he heard one Cahell Boy Mac-Demot of Killrout say, That within one fortnight they should have a new King of Ireland crown∣ed, one of the O Neales, or words to that effect. Avis Brashaw,Ferma∣nagh 19. 4. Jan. inter caet. deposeth, That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or words to that effect. Alice Tibbs,Ferma∣nagh 20. 4. Ian. inter caet. desposeth, That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or words to that effect.
Alice Champin,Ferma∣nagh 27. 14. April. the relict of Arthur Champin, inter caet. deposeth, that she heard the Rebellious Irish say, That Sir Phellomy Roe of Neale should be King of Ireland, and that they would give a great sum of Mo∣ney, on condition they had our gra∣cious King Charles his head. Elizabeth Gough, inter caet. deposeth,Cavan. 85 8. Feb. that Cahir O Kelay, and Thomas Mac-Encorr said, They purposed to have a King of their own, and that Sir Phelmi O Neale should be he. John Gregg of Clovenedan, inter caet.Ardmagh 3. 7. Ian. 1641. deposeth, that Captain Shane O Neale, stiled, Sir Phelmi O Neale His Ma∣jestie. Martha Culme, inter caet. deposeth,Monag∣han 21. 14. Febr. that one Art. Mac Patrick, Mac Toole Boy, Mac Mahowne, speaking to her in I∣rish, she desired him to deliver him∣self in English, for she understood not Irish: Who answered her in Eng∣lish, That such as spoke in English, should pay ten shillings to the King:
And the Deponent demanding of him, What King? He answered, What King but the Earl of Tyrone. Hugh Culme inter caet.Monag. han. 16. 25. Ian. deposeth, that he was credibly told that Art. Mac Mahowne said, That they that spoke English should pay ten shil∣lings to the King: The party to whom it was spoken, desiring to know what King, his answer was, What King but the Earle of Tyrone. Anne Gill inter caet.Ferma∣nagh 69. 29. Ian. deposeth, that Rory Magwire in the presence of this Deponent, and a great many of her Neighbours, gave forth, That it was to no purpose for them to flie to Dublin for succour, for Dublin was taken by the Lord Magwire, who was to be King of Ireland. Roger Puttock, John Sterne, Jo. Wat∣son, Wil. Aldrich, Henry Brereton, William Hitchcock, Randall Adams.
An Extract of a Letter written 4. Janu. 1641. From Isidores Colledge in Rome, by Bonaventure O Connye, to Feylmi Roe O Neill in Ireland. THe holy Father and his two Nephews, Cardinal Antho∣ny Barbarinus Protector of Ireland, and Cardinal Fran∣cis Barbarinus, who hath all the power here in such matters as concern the Pope, have heard of the Warre and Confederation which you make for your Religion and Libertie: And truly I cannot expresse the greatnesse of the Joy (no wonder) which they con∣ceive
thence in such manner, That if they had received Letters, or if you had sent an Agent unto them to expresse your Will or Designes, you should want no help for your better proceedings. Wherefore I would have you to send some able man, with a Declaration of your Grievances in form of Law. Be sure to have a great heart, and make some chief head among you, but reserve the Crown for Con his side the Neills. Re∣member the old slavery wherein you have lived of long time, and the destruction which will generally come upon you, ex∣cept you get the upper hand: You will prevail, if you joyn together as you ought, God send it. I would advize every chief Officer among you to have a Secretary along with him to write a Diurnall of your passages; and overthrows, which your Ene∣mies receive; which will redound much to your Glory. Spoil not the countrey for fear of Famine. I will not faile to write according as I shall hear from you. We
would send unto you a Bull, after the form of the Bull which Hugh Mac-Baron got, if we had received your Letters. If the Church do well, they will turn over the Election of Prelates there to the No∣bility, and will give them Authority in that point. FINIS.
