S2720 16412447 105379
A SUPPLEMENT TO THE NARRATIVE. In Reply to the Dulness and Malice Of two pretended ANSWERS To that PAMPHLET. Written by E. SETTLE. Carmine dum tali Sylvas Animosque Ferarum Threicius Vates & saxa sequentia traxit, Ecce Nurus Ciconum—Ovid. Metam. LONDON; Printed, and Sold by Thomas Graves for the Author. 1683.
A Supplement, &c. WEll, Lord have mercy upon us! What a crying Sin is turning Honest, and telling Truth, to those Red-letter'd Saints the Whiggs? How many Rogues, Dogs, Rascals and Villains, has poor Elkanah been call'd by them (for they raile as loud as they pray) and all alas, not for Libelling the Brother of a King, (for that was his Virtue) but for doing ill and being sorry for it. How many Reprobates, Monsters, and what not, has his Apostacy from that Heaven∣ly Whig-gift of Lying and Scandal transform'd him to: Whilst he raked up Dirt, and Falshood to throw in the Face of Princes, tho stoln from that sink of Forgery the HISTORY OF THE BLACK BOX, what Honesty and Oracles hung upon his Lips; and what an Angel of Light was such a Protestant Champion! But from that minute, that accursed minute, that he speaks Truth, and owns and repents of that Malice that animated him, tho into the very Unchristianity of Revenge, what a falling Lucifer have they made him? Besides, this is but the Crime of his Preface and Post-script; but oh for his Narrative! his lewd, his filthy, his abominable Narrative. Reprobate of Reprobates, and Monster of Monsters, having no fear of God before his Eyes, but led by the Instigation of the Devil, he has dasht their dear, their darling, their adored Dagon to pieces; and the disconsolate Saints want Power to joyn the poor stumps of it together again. But alas! where Reason cannot help them, Railing and Lying shall. And for an Essay of that Nature, we meet a harmless sucking Devil of theirs coming a∣broad, call'd REMARKS UPON E. SETTLES NARRATIVE, an Extraordinary piece for their Dagons Justification, being all Billings-gate and no Argument from the beginning to the end. That scurrilous sensless scribble that I should have an∣swer'd with Silence and Disdain, had not the Barbarous Impudence of some in∣tended personal Reflections in it, a Mass of as Brazen-faced Romance and For∣gery, as ever Ink and Letters brought forth, extorted this Vindication from the Rancour of Abuse and Villany. But truly there's a great deal of Cause for it. For where any thing comes in Print a little too unanswerable for them, and they cannot make their Attempt that way, the Authors Person must be attacqued, and an Assault made upon his Reputation is their old practised way, to baffle that Reason they cannot otherwise overthrow; whilst they Write as they Preach only to Ignorance and Fools, such as can be caught by Empty Noise, and Charm'd by Sounds. But before I convince the World, how Notorious a Lyer the Remarker is in those Rascally stories laid at poor Elkanahs Door. I shall endeavor to answer some few passages in his Book, which to the unwary at first sight may look a little like sense, tho God wot, but a little indeed: He puts the Narrative writer this Question. p. 11 Whether it were not more probable that the Papists a People of debaucht and murde∣rous Principles, that bear no Conscience towards Hereticks, persecuted by poenal Laws [not when the Plot was hatching sure] should be induced out o their Hatred of the Protestant Religion, and for the Advancement of ther own, to remove the Obstacles of their Freedom and Happiness by the Destruction of a Heretick Prince; then that a few inconsiderable Persons without any Support or Encouragement should dare to create such a Horrid and Bloody Plot of their own Heads, and then venture their Lives by daring to justifye it to the Face of King and Parliament. Now what a doubty Question has this Remarker made; and what an OEdipus must he be that answers it? That the Papists are those debaucht and Murderous Principled Men I acknow∣ledge; but that their Killing the King by those open day-light Assassinations sworn in the Plot, could have been an Advancement of their Religion, and a removing the Obstacles to their Freedom and Happiness I utterly deny. For the bare-faced shoot∣ing the King by Pickerings Gun, by such a hand, at such a place, and in such a Manner, as attested by the Plot-swearers, had been so remote a way from advan∣cing either the Papists or their Religion, that on the contrary it had been the direct means to have drawn down that Vengeance upon their Heads, from the Hundred
fold stronger Protestant hands in England, as might have almost blotted them from the Face of the Earth. And as the Narrative tells you, if that were the highest reach of an Intrigue of a Hundred Years hatching, much good may do them with their Politicks. But had the Discoverers no Support nor Encouragement from making their Disco∣veries, when from Infamy Jails and Beggary they stept up to Ten Pounds a week maintenance, and the honor of Whitehall Lodgings, Whitehall Guards to attend them, with the Pomp of bended Knees and up lifted Eyes from the adoring Crowd, and the continued Hosannas OF ALL HAYLE THE SAVIOURS OF THE NATI∣ON. Was it no Encouragement for such a poor Marshalsea Bird as Bedlox, newly releast from feeding on the Basket, to leap at the Kings Proclamation of 500l for the Discovery of Sir Edmond-bury Godfreys Murder? And tho several unhappy un∣forseen discouragements have befaln them since; Yet, they are not so despe∣rately unfortunate yet, but they have some Friends left. The Reverend Dr. the despised at the Profane: Whitehall, is still honored by the sanctifyed Citty Brotherhood. A large House well furnisht, with Servants, Attendants, and all good things at Com∣mand, and all to the Son of a Weaver with not one farthing worth of Patrimony or Preferment is a sign that Providence has not quite forsaken him? 'Tis true his dis∣heartened Plot has left him in a little Wilderness at present. Yet let me tell you ther's a sort of Birds of Prey, your kind fat Amsterdam Buntings, that like Elisha's Ra∣vens, take care to keep him well fed still. And the true blew Protestant Guinneys collected and raised for the late defeated City Feast, were yet very honorably dispo∣sed of, and the rewarded Dr. had a round Lump of that corroborating Gold to en∣liven his fainting Spirits, and strengthen his true Protestant Zeal. For I assure you 'tis but necessary; for great and long Causes require often Feeing; the Clients must be Bountiful to keep the Advocates safely retain'd. And tho some People may lay Poverty to his charge: to confute that error, the Dr. I assure them, does not pinch himself into a Jump for want of Cloth enough to make it up into a Gown. Besides why must it follow (suppose the Plot a piece of Subornation) that those inconsiderable Persons should create it of their Own heads. What if the Heads of some considerable TOWER Jail Birds should joyn with the Inconsiderable Mar∣shalsea Jail-Birds for the production of it. 'Tis not the first time that Quality and Rascality have club'd together, and like the spurious Off-spring of Nilus, there goes some Sun-beam not all mud to make up the Monster. Oh but the greatest and most damnable Crime in the Narrative is, it has ridicu∣led the whole Popish Plot, and consequently affronted the King Lords and Commons, that have so unanimously and so frequently asserted their Belief of the Popish Plot. Now to clear this Imputation from the Narrative and the Author, he hereby de∣clares, that no man in the World can pay a greater Reverence to the King, or his Parliaments then himself: But in the height of all that Veneration due to Heavns Vicegerent, both from a Subject and a Christian, I must say that the King Lords and Commons together are but Men, and as such not Infallible. And Inadverten∣cy and Surprize may sometimes deceive both Kings and Potentates. The King and his Parliament have declared there was a Plot against the Kings Life; and yet they have decreed no penalty or punishment to him that says, that Pickering was one of the worst Gunners in Christendom, and St. James's Park the worst spot of Ground for such an Assassination. The Plot Discoverers have been credited by the King and Parliament; and yet if any Man shall but ASSERT what the Discoverers SWEAR, as sacred as their Testimony has been, the Law will lay him by the heels for it. For he that shall aver that Wakeman was engaged to Poyson the King, or Kerney one of the four Ruffians was hired to stab him, is lyable to be punisht for it; for they have stood Tryal, and been acquitted by LAW, and as such they have their Action against him that asperses, and traduces the Innocent. 'Tis true, I neither do, nor dare say that poor Pickering and Groves were Innocent: and why because the Law has pronounced them Guilty. And yet I may safely say that had they had the good Fortune to have lived a Year and a half longer than they did, 'twas not impossible nor unlikely they might have dyed in their Beds, for all their Screwed Guns or Silver Bullets. Besides without Derogation to Kings or
their great Councels, not only their Votes have been several times Humane and Fraile; but even their Deliberate Acts and Statutes are not always Gospel? For In∣stance King Henry the 8th. and one of his Parliaments made an Act that illegitima∣ted both Mary and Elizabeth his Daughters; and decreed a punishment for any Man that should but assert their Right to the Crown, or so much as call them Legi∣timate [28th of Hen. 8th.] And the same Henry and another of his Parliaments [35th of Hen. 8th.] Legiti∣mated them Both again, by Virtue of which Legitimation they both successively wore the Crown of England. And all this Legally done by the King and the great Councel of the Nation. And yet in the Case of Legitimacy which relates to their Birth and Blood, which is unchangeable, either the pro or the con must be Erroneous. And what if in our case, in the same Nature, only vice versâ, the King Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament anno 78 and 79, should have declared the Popish Plot sworn by Titus, Bedlows, Dugdale, France, Dangerfield, Duffy, Murfey, Macna∣mar, Zeale, Lewis &c. was LEGITIMATE, and the King Lords and Commons in another Parliament in 83, (or when His Majesty pleases) should declare the afore∣said Plot to be ILLEGITIMATE, I know nothing to the contrary but it lyes in their Breasts and pleasures to do it. But however Elkanahs Narrative has scurrilously and basely arraigned the Ju∣stice, and Judges of the Nation:—And why so! Is there one passage through the whole Book that says or Hints that the Popish Conspirators had not their Legal Try∣als; and tho amongst so many Hundred Treasonable Letters, Commissions and what not, against them, their Accusers produced nothing but HEARTY SWEARING for their Conviction, yet do not the Lord Chief J. at Whitebreads Tryal say that 'tis by the Oaths of two Witnesses that our Lives and Fortunes stand or fall. And does the Narrative say or insinuate that they had not two or more Witnesses whose Oaths condemn'd them; for which the Jury brought them in Guilty, and the Judges ac∣cording to their Duties condemn'd them as such; and how then is the Justice or Judges of the Nation Impeached, when on the contrary they were so far from dying unjustly, that they dyed even summo jure, by the highest Justice in the Kingdom. Besides, suppose Pickering was never engaged to Pistol the King, and has yet dyed for it: So I have heard of some People that have been hang'd in Chains for a Mur∣der, when the supposed Murdered Person has some Years after been found alive, and all this while the Judge and the unfortunate Jury neither arraigned nor arraignable for their Sentence or Execution. Who then has the Narrative wronged, the Kings Evidence? No. That's Impossi∣ble; for to tell truth can wrong no body: and the Narrative is so far from belying them, that it recites not one passage but is recorded from their own Oaths. And why a Recital of what is sworn in the Plot should be a Burlesquing of the Plot I can∣not understand. Oh but telling Truth, says the Proverb, may sometimes do harm; and in this case the whole Book tho with never so much truth in it, tends to the lessening the Discoverers Testimony and a Stifling the whole Popish Plot. Now 'tis true indeed, why should Elkanah be such a Cudden as to endeavor the Stifling of the Popish Plot, when it saves him the labor, and Stifles it self. The Me∣teor wanted a Body to last, and so the short liv'd Exhalation has spent it self, and is expired. But for my part I pay such a profound respect to the Plot, that I hearti∣ly wish that it may have that preheminence above all Plots whatsoever, as to be the ONLY more than Phoenix of the Kind, and be never equalled from the begin∣ning to the end of the World; and that it may find its just Merit in deathless Re∣cords, Ide have it annexed to the History of AMBOYNA, and when the Turk comes farther into Christendom, have it presented him to bind up with the Alcoran. Be∣sides, I solemnly avow the Plot was a good Plot, especially whilst 'twas hot and fresh; and if it has been set by till 'tis cold and stinks, 'tis no fault of mine. I ac∣knowledge the Ingredients of the Plot are Rarities in their kind; but if the Plotters and Discoverers between them, have unfortunately made a Hotch Potch instead of an Oleo, and put them so fulsomly together till they nauseate, can I help it. If the Swearers have contradicted each others Testimony, and sometimes their own, is
Elkanah to answer for it. Besides as the Discoverers have sworn the Jesuits to be the greatest ROGUES in the World through the whole Popish Plot, so Elkanahs Narrative has proved them through the whole Plot to be the greatest IDEOTS in the World. And pray what Indignity is it to the Honor of King Lords and Com∣mons, or scandal to the Justice of the Nation to add one blot more to the Scutcheon of a Jesuit, and from a pack of Knaves to make them a pack of Fools too. If this be a Crime, Heaven mend all. I but Elkanah is criticising upon Dr. Oats his Commissions, and the Innumerable in∣visible Forreign Thousands all ready for Landing, upon the Kings Murder. However as Chimerical as Armyes of Pilgrims may appear, and the rest of the Popish Battalias designd for the Protestant Destruction, the Remarker gives you an assurance, that all those Forreign Forces are plainly demonstrated from Colemans Letters. What else means this signal passage, we have a mighty work upon our hands, the subduing of a pestilent Heresy which has domineerd over great part of the Nor∣thern world, a great while. There never was greater hopes of success, since the Death of Queen Mary, Till these our days. But the opposition we are like to meet with, is also like to be great, so that it imports us to get all the Ayde and Assistance we can. Now can I find nothing so signal in this passage as so plain∣ly to demonstrate the Popish forces, sworn into the Plot. I declare I have read over Colemans papers, attentively, and Time was if I could have found but the least hint of Popish Ruffians, Popish Poysons, Popish Screwd Guns, or Popish Armies, either from Spain, France, Jago, Messina, or any other Popish Country, in all his papers, the World should have had it through both Ears. But since no such thing occurs in all his Letters, give the Devil his due the Popedreaders of the World I am afraid, are mistaken in that Garagantua of a Conspiratour Coleman. If this passage in his Letters, to Father Le Chese, was for calling in of French Armies, how comes it we have no answer in all Le Chese's Letters to Coleman relateing to Arms and Men, or one proposition, how when or where his Master the King of France was to Land them If this Ayde and assistance was meant for Armies, and those to be Landed, upon the King's being kil'd, how happens it, there is not some relation too in the Letters to the Kings Death. These Conspirators wrote in Cy∣phers and Characters, and therefore I know no reason they had, but they might Treat upon that subject too upon occasion; especially when (if you'l beleive the Popish Plot) they wrote so many hundred Treasonable Letters seen read and carryed by Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale &c. and so many of them in such downright plain English Treason. I, but say those sort of People that see thro Milstones; T's evi∣dent that Coleman burnt all his Papers relateing to the more Dangerous part of the Plot; for example we find his Correspendence ending in the Year 76, and that of his two last Years 77 and 78 was never found to this day, In that no doubt we should have had the 4 Irish Cut throats, Wakemans Poyson, Connyers Dagger, Blundels Fireballs, and all the Mistery of Pilgrims and Black Bills as apparently made out, as Demonstration and Record could manifest. Now what a sort of credulous Latitudinarians, can Fear, and Jealousy make men. Because the Papers found in Colemans Closet were not evidential enough to prove the Kings Murder and the Protestants Massacre, we must charge him with Crimes of which there is not the least shadow to convict him of. For I appeal to any man of common Sense; wheither if Coleman had continued his Correspondence for the 2 following Years, and it were true, that upon the break∣ing out of the Plot he burnt those Letters relating to that Correspondence; how comes it upon his searching his Closet for some Papers he did not burn All. He must needs be sensible that those very Papers he left (to a Nation so Jealous of Popery as England,) were enough to hang him, and as certainly Life's dear, the same Pre∣servation that had prompted him to burn the one, had infallibly instructed him to burn the Other. No; as 'tis plain he was surpriz'd, he had no time to secure any of his Papers, and the want of the two last Years Correspondence, is a more evident signe, that the Treaty was broken off, and that either the subduing the Pes∣tilent northern Heresy, was given over as a Work impossible; or else that grand Intriguer Coleman had only dreind the French Confessours and the rest of his Bre∣threns Pockets (for Money Money thro all his Letters is the great Burden of the
song) and those wonderful Promises of converting of Nations and subduing of Heresies, were all but Ayr and Rhodomontado; till the poor cullyed Bigots at last had found out the Cheat, and so ended the Commerse. But before I could finish my Observations on the Remarks a new Whig Cham∣pion starts up with an other pamphlet calld Reflections on Settles Narrative. For that paw Book sets them all upon the Ferment, and Blood and Gall in the angry Saints, let me tell you, boyle high. And therefore if Rogue, Rascal, Villain, Traytor, &c. fly at random, you must consider the Nature of the Beasts, and therefore excuse whatever Grossness you meet, for the Sordidness of their writings is so essential to their Constitutions, that they cannot possibly auoy'd it. These two dead doing Adversaryes being much of an equal Prowess and their Arguments and Batteries much of the same strength, I shall not trouble my self to make two distinct Replyes to them, but give you my sence of their best, though weake Arguments promiscuously as Discourse or Occasion shall offer. This last Antagonist falls vehement foul too upon the Narrative for all the Absurdityes; Incohe∣cencyes, Clashing of Evidence, Contradictions, Improbabilitys, and Impossibilitys found in the Popish Plot, and in page 7th gives you this universal salvo for all the Blun∣ders in the whole Discovery. By Mr. Settles leave, Rome, in the several Attempts, it has made for the Perversion Re∣duction and Apostacy of great Brittain to the Popish Superstition and Power, having been still frustrated, notwithstanding its Designs were contrived with all the Art and skill that Humane Witt, and Devilish Policy could suggest, and therefore having incurred the Just Resentment, and Indignation of all those who have in detestation all its abominable prac∣tises; I say, the Frequent Disappointments of their Projects may be reasonably supposed to have made them use the Precaution that in case they should agen prove Abortive, and their Machinations be detected, that they might nevertheless appear in such Lights as to seem improbable to the World, and that, then let the Issue be what it will, it must turn to their Advantage; since if the Plot had taken Effect, they had gain'd their main Point. But the discover'd, and disappointed, yet the puzling Circumstances, and the Im∣probabilities of the means, as it might bring the Reality of it into question, so it might also the Truth of its former Conspiracies, how manyfest soever. And they from thence have an occasion of retorting them as Contrivances of their Enemies, and by that means purge them∣selves of the Scandal and Odium which they had justly brought upon their Church by such unchristian-like, nay inhumane Undertakings. Well; never was Nonsense more Nonsensically Defended. How far fetcht, and Sophistical is this feeble Crutch to help out the Lameness and Inconsistencies in the Plot. If the Reflecter had proved that the Plottets had amuzed their Agents such as Bedlows Dugdule Oats &c. with Interlarding Shams with Truth to invalidate and confound their Discoveries upon any Revolt from their cause, he had done some thing. But that's apparently false, for they never Doubted their Truth, for in∣stead of having their great April Consult, Subscribed by so many several Mens Hands, convey'd from Chamber to Chamber by any of their Head Conspirators, the very Underling Oats has that great Trust Imposed in him, and the Invincible Demonstration of the most monstrous Design against the Kings Life, expresly in plain English, put into his Power. Besides all the Treasonable Papers daily Trusted in Oats, Dugdale, and Bedlows Hands, upon the least falshood in the Messengers, had put them past all hopes of bringing the Reality of their present or former Guilt and Treasons into Question. So that, (tho truly I cannot make sense of what this hud∣dle of words means,) if the Plot be true, Rome was so far from being guilty of so much foresight as the Reflecter gives it, that Precaution is the least Crime it has to answer for. Thus far we have their Confirmation of Oats his Truth and Honor, and the Rea∣sonableness of the Plot in General; and now we shall give you their particular com∣ments, on the Narrative, at least those that so much as look like Reflections, or Arguments against it. The Reflecter very Heroically falls upon the First Line of the Narrative, viz. Narrat. In the Year 78. it pleased those Powers that inspired them to raise up Mr. Oats, Bedlows, Dugdale, Prance, &c.
Which says the Reflecter, I must own I do not understand. What does Mr. Settle mean? that it pleased those Powers that inspired those Powers? That's Grammar indeed, but no sense; but there's neither Grammar nor sense in these words, as Mr. Settle has set them down. You see Reader, what an Adversary Settle is like to encounter by this first At∣taque he gives him. When a School-boy in the under Form at Westminster would tell him that [THEM] only relates to Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale; and to have made it that Non-sense the Reflecter intends it, viz. those powers that inspired those powers, it must have been Those powers that inspired THEMSELVES. Just such another remarkable correction he gives to Elkanahs false Grammar page 15. says Elkanah, here the Reader is desired to take notice of the most matchless Example in Mr. Bedlow that ere HE met with, to which replies the Reflecter instead of [THEY have met with] if Mr. Settle will allow me to make it true Grammar for him. Now unless a Fellow had studyed to Print himself a Block-head, nothing besides stupidity Incorri∣gible could have made [Reader] a plural Number. This egregious stumble in the very first step into the Narrative, and this strength of his Syntax is a little ominous, and he shews you what a Grammarian he is, to let you expect what a Casuist you'le find him too. And as he says he understands no better, tis very likely he tells you true, by the Cudgels he takes up; for indeed Men of understanding begin to quit the Whig Cause so fast, that Grammar and Logick, and indeed Common sense will go a great way amongst them. But first for the Killing the King. After the Reflecter has repeated the Narratives comical Description of Pick∣crings puissance in King Killing, he says, Now I appeal to Mankind if they can find any thing of a jest in so sad and so serious a Theme, an Attempt the most execrable that was ever hatcht in Hell, the very thought whereof, tho suppose it but a FICTION, ca∣pable of creating a Terror and Trembling in the most unhumane Barbarians. This is the first, and last time he is in the Right. Truly such a FICTION, the most exe∣crable indeed that was ever hatcht in Hell, and the thought of so much Infernal Impudence and Diabolical Perjury that must attend that FICTION on one side, and so much Innocent LOUD TONGUED Blood on the other side, is enough indeed to create a Terror and Trembling in Barbarians and Infidels. But Settle tells you that the Loosness and Failure of Pickerings Gun in Oats his Narrative was in January as Whitebread send word to St. Omers, but at Pickerings Tryal expresly in March, being askt. Sir Ch. L. Do you know any thing of Pickerings doing Pennance and for what! Oats, Yes, my Lord, in the Month of March (for these Persons have followed the King several Years) but he at THAT TIME had not lookt to the Flint of his Pistol, but it was loose, and he durst not venture to give Fire, he had a fair opportunity and because he mist it through his own negligence he underwont Pennance, and had 20 strokes of Discipline. Upon this says Settle. Can any thing be more strange than that Whitebread should send the St. Omers Fathers in January a perfect Relation of a Crime not committed till the March following. Now (hereupon says the Refle∣cter) I cannot for the heart of me see an Elliotism in this whole matter; for might not Pickering commit the Crime in January or before, and not suffer the pennance till March following: For the Question is only to the doing pennance, and the Answer is in March. Now observe the damnable Trecherous Eye-sight of a Whig, that always sees too little or too much. Oats swears that Pickering suffered pennance in March because he at THAT TIME had not lookt to the Flint of his Pistol, and yet the Reflecter spight of the heart of him cannot see but that very THAT TIME must be January two Months before. Just such another fault spight of the heart of him cannot the Remarker forbear seeing too. says Settle. The Reader is humbly desired not to be puzled to imagine how Pickering should present a Gun (between a Pistol and Carbine,) twice at the King, which one time for want of Prime, and another time (as Bedlow swears) by being charged with all Bullets and no Powder would not go off, and yet not be ap∣prehended or so much as seen by any one of all the Kings Attendance, and that too
in so publick a place as St. James's Park, a place where there is not so much as a Bramble or Bryar, or any one Covert throughout it enough to shrowd a Pigmey, much less too Man-slayers, excepting the Osiers within the Canal (but those are moated round, and therefore inaccessible.) To which the Remarker by a certain old Game call'd cross purposes makes answer. The Devil's in Settle for putting shams upon the World. In the first place the Oath does not affirm that Pickering presented the Gun, but that finding the defect of the Flint he deferd the Action till another time. Besides he forgets that there was a very thick Grove at the end of the Pell-mell where His Majesty might have made his unfortunate Approaches. And the Reflecter upon the same passage wisely observes, the Traytor might sculk behind one of those great Trees, between which, he might have used his Hat or Cloak or Twenty other things, for the hindering a Discovery. But Settle with his Brambles and Bryars could not see Wood for Trees. That is to say, a Couple of fellows with each of them a Screwd-Gun could shelter themselves in a Grove without one Branch of Under∣wood, where the Trees stand three or four yards asunder, and the largest of those Trees have publick walks all round them, in a place too where no Man is suffered to wander out of the common walk, but the very Centries shall call him back. Oh but they concealed their Guns behind their Hats Cloaks or Twenty other things. But surely when the Gun miscarryed once for want of powder in the Bar∣rel and another time in the Pan, Was the Gun under the Hat, or the Cloak; or were the Silver Bullets to go through Hat Cloak Trees and all? But now for the Massacre. The Discoverers give you an account of Commissions given out, an Army to be raised; and Elkanahs Narrative makes it apparent, that Army could consist of none but Papists, it being impossible as they had managed it, to have drawn in any other Malecontents into the Conspiracy. Well, and where's the wonder of all this says the Reflecter, Is it not possible to list a Popish Army in a Protestant Country without being Discovered till they themselves think convenient, being Tongue-tyed, awed, and spirited by superstition. Oaths &c. All this granted, how will the Reflecter reconcile that Concession of his p. 19th. in which he yeilds that there were some of the Papists in the Old Kings Reign, (some Thousands he might have said) that ventured their Lives Estates and Freedoms in the Royal Cause; for in the most Barbarous Nations (continues he) there are some Persons found who are JUST, UPRIGHT, HONEST and LOYAL. Now if this Popish Army was listed in Eng∣land, as the Discoverers Swear, the blow being ready for striking, I wonder how the Conspirators did to single out and list only those Disloyal Papists fit for their turn, and not unluckily communicate their intended Rebellion to so much as one man of those Thousands of Just, Honest, Upright, and Loyal Men of that Religion, that consequently with all those good Principles would not have fordorn to have detected the Conspiracy. The Papists were not Gods, and 'tis not a little miracu∣lous that as but Men, they should have that assurance of all the Hands and Hearts they trusted, as not to be mistaken even in one false Brother through a whole Army. Besides the Reflecter is very unlucky in this point, for as Elkanah affirms, and the Reflecter does not deny, that the Papists by computation are not the 150th. part of the Nation, and therefore in the Heretick Massacre one Man must have Kill'd near a Brace of Hundreds for his share, if as there are so many Loyal Men amongst the Party that would have stood Neuter at least, if not resisted them, the Reflecter has unfortunately put them to the push of each mans Killing at least twice as many, and the Possibility of all this, the Reflecter does not at all doubt, it being as feazable an Archievement as the Knaves of Popeland ere contrived, or the Fools of Whigland ere believed. Nay to make the Motions of the Jesuits a little more wondrous, Bedlow Swears before the House of Lords, that the Papists had an Army of Forty Thousand strong all ready to rise in London at 24 hours warning, besides those that should have been posted at every Ale-house Door to have Kill'd the Soldiers as they come out of their Quarters, and Lord Petre and Powis were to have Marcht with another English Army through Pembroke-shire: and yet as the Devil and ill luck would have it, 'tis unde∣niably manifest that all the Papists in England are so far from forming so many ter∣rible Armies, that they are not 40000 in all, Men, Women and Children through
the whole Kingdom. Yet all this we are obliged to believe as true as the Evan∣gelists, and he that dares deny it, flies in the face of Kings, Lords and Commons, and arraigns the whole Justice of the Nation. Besides, to eternize the Memory of this glorious Preserver of the Nation, tho tis notoriously known he died Raving, yet the true blue Bristol Protestants could honour him with no less an Inscription on his Herse, than Testimonium quod vivens exhibuit, moriens constanter obfirmavit. But now to leave Mr. Bedlows Armies, and take a view of Dugdales Plot-Forces; the best Jest we have in all the Reflections, (for 'tis all but Farce) we meet in the 11th. Page. Settle gives an account how preposterous, nay how impossible an un∣dertaking 'twas for the Papists to have laid the Kings Murder upon the Presbyte∣rians, (as Dugdale Swears) and to have engaged the Episcopal party in the Massacre, upon the issue of Pickerings Gun, the said Pickering being too shallow a Headpiece for so great a Masterpiece of Cheat and Villany, as to lay it on the Dissenters, and too known a Popish Face to pass for a Presbyterian. To this the Reflecter answers (for there is nothing so Chimerical, but he finds an expedient for) Seeing the Papists were ever hovering about the Kings Person; upon the Blow given, might not they out of a pretended officious Zeal fall upon the Assassinate, mangle him in such a manner as to render him altogether unknown again, for the person he was, and then lay it at whose door they pleas'd, either by real or forged words (forged words I understand not) that execrable Murder, and upon this the Church of England-Men out of a just Resentment and Indignation for the loss of their All in so Divinely good a Prince, are reasonably to be supposed would revenge it with all the Heat, and all the vigour imaginable. Now one would think, we had had Popish Plots enough in all conscience; but this subtle Reflecter has wonderfully detected one Popish Plot more, and Heaven knows an Heroical one, being no less than a Plot of the great and mighty Popish Nobles, against the poor little Popish Pickering. Lord! what will not Popery do, and Reflections find out? But dear Mr. Little Plot, what if the Protestant Nobility about the King, which I fancy are always much stronger than his Popish Courti∣ers, had stopt these Lordly Popish Hands from Carbonading the poor desperado, and preserved him for a Gibbet, and if they could not have stept in time enough to have prevented a Popish stab, yet at least have snatch'd his Carcase from those bloody Popish Mince-meat-makers, and kept his Physnomy unmangled to have discovered the Assassinate; in what a condition had this Reflecters great and Lordly Plot been in, and Mr. Dugdales Presbyterian Sham-Murder. Nevertheless (says the Reflecter page 12th) Let Mr. Settle not think to render the matter Improbable by hinting the Majority of the Protestants thoughout the Kingdom, (though a 150 to one odds, and a great part even of that uery infinite minority of Papists Just Upright Honest and Loyal Men) to surpass by much the Papists seeing the Latter meant to decoy the Church of England Men into the fact, which though they should not have effected, yet so unexpected a Surprize upon People unprepared, and at Disseution and Distrust amongst themselves, by Persons MARTIALIZ'D and used to Arms, as is well known the Papists had been, and who for a long while before had been making all things ready for the well Managing of their undertakings, they might well enough promise themselves Success, each not needing to be an Almanzor or a Mars, or have the strength and Soul of a Hercules. Now hang me if I can find out how 'tis well known the Papists have been Mar∣tializ'd & Us'd to Arms more then the rest of their Country-men. I'm Sensible, Heavn be prais'd, they have had no Opportunity, nor occasion to improve their Martial Skill since the Kings Return, and if it consists in their former Experience, to our Na∣tions Eternal shame, we had too many Protestants, (such as they were) that had as much Martial Learning at that time, though in a worse cause, then the Papists. But, alas, the Refllecters meaning is, that they have practised Martial Discipline of a latter date, & in order to this great Work in hand, like the 25000 Messina Sol∣diers have had their Rendezvouz INVISIBLE. The Reflecter we consider, writes to
the Rabble, where nothing so monstrous or Impossible but must pass currant. How long was the Mobile possest, (nor are they yet undeceived) that the Papins had their places UNDERG ROUND to Discipline whole Bodyes of Men. Nor shall ye beat it out of the Heads of Ten Thousand English Foot to this day, but that Mr. Choqueux's innocent Squibs, and Rocket cases, desigped for his Master Prince Ruperts Diver∣tisement, were Fireballs, and Cartrages and other Romish Ammunition belonging to the great Devil the Plot. But all this while the Remarker and Reflecter never take care to answer that part of the Narrative that demonstrates the Protestants Throats were to have been cut by Spanish Armies, another while by French Armies, one time by English Armies, and another by NO ARMIES at all. One while the Protestants Throats were to have been ALL cut, another while but Half; one whle the Episcopals were to joyn in the Massacre with the Papists to Murder the Fanaticks, and another while the Fanaticks were to joyn with the Papists to Kill the Episcopals: and all these irrecon∣cileable contradictions expresly sworn to be the mature and deliberate Results of the Conspiratos. 'Tis true the Remarker, page 13. makes a feeble Essay to adjust the different Tales from the Bewkblwers jarring Testimonies, and tells you; Would we have had all the several Gangs and Clubs of Plotters have jumpt in one and the same Sense and Opinion? where several people are engaged, there will be several Sir POLITICK WOODBEE'S that will be putting their Oars in the Boat where they are concern'd; one will be proposing this, and tother that, and many a Fools Bolt will be shot, and this di∣scourse, though never so simple is Treason, and fit to be known by way of circumstance. And is the great and wonderful Popish Conspiracy, so dreadful as to require a two and forty days raising the whole Militia of England, come at last to an alarum but of so many Politick Woodbees? Is the Jesuits Treasou of a hundred years hatch∣ing, and at last in the fatal 78. run up into Consults, Resolves, and FINAL DECREES, dwindled into a Fools Bolt? Are their terrible Commissions Sealed by Johannes Paulus d' Oliva, and his Substitute Whitebread, with the whole Process of thoe Royal Con∣spirators the French and Spanish King's joyning in the confederacy; nay the very actual Landing of 25000, Messina Soldiers at Carlingford Haven, such notorious matter of Fact, but meer Tittle Tattle? Were the great and damnable Popish Gene∣rals immured in Tower Walls for this? Now certainly what higher affront could this Impudent Remarker put upon the whole NEMINE CONTRADICENTE of our late Parliaments, when by insinuating that the Results of so many Popish Con∣sults for the Subversion of our Religion, Lives, and Liberies, and the engagement of such Princes and Potentates against us, was only a simple discourse of so many Politick Woodbees, and consequently the many Sacred and Anful Committees of Secrecy in all their indefatigable Plot-mauling sat so long a Brooding only over a Nest Eg that was ADDLE. But now whereas Elkanah the Impertinent Plot-thrasher, as the Remarker calls him, has proved the work was to have been done by no Armies at all.: The gene∣rous complaisant Remarker makes answer, Why truly had he had any thing else in the World to do, he might have spared himself the labour, for so long as it was to be done, the cheaper they did it, the less it would have cost 'em; smartly replied, I prosess, and an Inference  ingenious as deserves Sugar-plumbs. Besides, what a pretty Turn of State is here made, Popery way to pop into the Throne, like the Kings of Brentford out of the CLOUDS, without either Noise or Tumult, and a Pox of all these unne∣cessary Tools call'd Armies to introduce it. In my opinion these two Scriblers are a Brace of such dull Rogues, and manage their Cause so Imptently, that the very answering of the Impertinents, is enough to uauseate any Man of sense, if but to think what Dirt and Rubbish he has to deal with. However the Remarker wheels about age, and to convince you there were Ar∣mies in the case, says, That Ireland one of the Executed Jesuits, was of opinion that there was no way to bring the business about, but by a considerable Force, which he mu∣stered up to fifty thousand, assirming a less number would not suffice. Neither did Lang∣horne absolutely deny at his Trial the having of Commissions, only he denied them to be seen upon his Desk. Was ever so much Impudence not to be matcht even in Eu∣stace Commins, to obtrude that Confession of Commissions and Armies upon those
very men, that to the last gasp attested their Innocence, even to the renouncing of God and Heaven, if they were Guilty, and that too with a full and perfect Abju∣ration of all Dispensations or Equivocations whatever. But truly, continues the Remarker, he will not dispute the Case any farther with E. Settle, for perhaps he might know more of the Plot than they that were hang'd for't. Not more my sweet friend, but possibly as much, and never the worse Man for't, it being a knowledge, I assure you, that would neither burden his Head nor his Heart. From this we come to the Plot in Ireland. Here the Remarker makes short work, and indeed as much as the Cause would bear, and tells you, He'll say no more to't, but that if the King of Spain was a Block-head in it, and the King of France a Lunatick, as the Irish Plot makes them, they ought to come to E. Settle to learn Politicks. And for his part because Settles Roman∣tick Objections depend upon, Plunkets Trial, upon which he was condemnd, he shall not troubl himself to make any further defence for Courts of Judicature. Tis true, the Re∣flecter is a little more Prolix upon this business, but so abominably lew'd is the ig∣norance or impudence of this nameless Wretoh, that he doubts not but the Spanish King had 30 thousand Pilgrims ready Mustered, and to be Landed at Brad∣lington , and Ten thousand Flandrians at Hull, tho when he wanted Hands to save his own Kingdoms, and another Army to joyn with the French King, tho to make his most mortal Enemy King of Ireland; nay, tho not one of these Martial Pilgrims were ever seen in the World from that day to this; yet all these Armies were rais'd, and this stupendious Alliance of France and Spain was undeniable truth, and why, as he says, because the Spanish King is Priest-ridden, and the Je∣suits rule his Ascendant; There he has hit it. Popery, Plot and Jesuites can do every thing; Incorporate even Fire and Water, and make confederacies between the great∣est and most implacable of Enemies; nay, it can unman Kings, and make the Wise and Politick French King be for bringing a Royal Navy into that very Port of Ireland where a Fisherboat can scarce live, and Maugre that foolish obstacle call'd impossibility; neither the King of France can forbear attempting all this, nor the Reflecter believing it. Nay the most Hellish, hideous Masterpiece of all Dr. Oats his Discovery, his In∣formation to the Parliament, that the French had already landed a great Army of 25000. Messina Soldiers in Ireland, goes as inoffensively down with the Reflecter, as the least puny exploit in the whole Plot. Nay to outdo the Doctor a Bow∣shoot, the Doctor only brings them on, but let the Devil bring them off again; but the Reflecter both lands and unlands them INVISIBLE. For page 14 he says, why might not their designs be disappointed upon the discovery of the Plots, and they RETIRE again, or forbear acting till better strengthen'd and prepared for bringing their Designs about? That is, why may not a Body of no less than 25000. men Land in a foreign Kingdom, and come, go, or stay from that day to this, without so much as one Mothers Son of 25000 being seen by Human Eye. Heaven! what a GORGE has the Reflecter to swallow such unprecedented PLOT-ROMANCE, or what Im∣pudence to vindicate such Execrable FORGERY? Quanta est ficti Constantia Vultus. The next thing we come to is Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Murder, and there the Reflecter to vindicate Mr. Bedlows wonderful Refusal of 4000 l. to be one of the six to Murder Sir Edmund, and afterwards 2000 l. to be one with them to carry off the Body, Makes answer that such is the generosity of some mens tempers, how meanly soever born, that they cannot be bribed nor wrought into an ill thing. [So generous a man was Bedlow, and so averse to any thing that's ill, that only the greatest part of his Life was spent in Horsestealing, Cheating and Pocketpicking,] or rather the pro∣vidence of God who had otherwise ordain'd, might make him make use of the Proposal of that very act to create a reluctance in him, and to work him to a Discovery of that and the rest. This last point indeed is unanswerable: but possibly, upon a review, His Discovery, to give Providence no trouble in it, might come a shorter Journy than from Heaven, only from the Prince of the Air by the way.
But Elkanah is a little Satyrical on the strange and different account of the whole continued contradiction in Bedlows and Prance's Testimony, Sir Edmund by Bedlows Evidence being stifled with a Pillow in a lower Room of the great Court in Somerset-house, between four and five in the Afternoon; and the Murderers Walsh Lephaire my Lord Bellasis 2 Gentlemen &c. but by Prance Evidence, he was strangled with a twi∣sted Handkerchief at 9 at Night, by the stablus in the outward Court of Somerset-house, by Green, Girald, Hill, Kelly, Berry and Prance, &c. To reconcile with contradi∣ction, the Reflecter tells you page 16th. that Miles Prance owns to have been pre∣sent, and to have had a hand in that Murder, Mr. Bedlow knows it only by a Rela∣tion, and by a Relation of a thing which he had already refused to have a hand in, and at a time he was so much suspected by that Party; as that they made him take the Sa∣crament twice a day for fear he should reveal. Now he being a suspected Person, and knowing the Murder to have been committed by Papists, they varyed in their Account of his Death from the Truth, to baulk his Evidence in case he should fail them. Now observe how Bedlow only swears to a Relation. In his Testimony before the House of Lords he swears, that Walsh and Lephairé two Jesuits proffer'd him 4000 l. to be one of the 4 or 6 that were to Kill Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, and that upon his taking the Sacrament to do it, he should have the Money before hand paid, where or to whom to himself or what Friend he thought fit: Thus far Mr. Bedlows I hope was not suspected by them, neither was this only a Relation, for he had the proffer of present payment; and of a swinging summ too; Besides suppo∣sing that the concern of Walsh Lephaire, and his Cut-throats was only a Sham, and that no such Persons were concern'd in the Murder, put the Supposition that Bed∣low had accepted the Money and Sacrament, as t'is stupendious he did not, how must Walsh and Lephaire have excused this Sham? must they have cryed peccavi, and said Sir, we beg your pardon, we are concern'd in no such Murder, and tho we have given you the Sacrament and 4000 to no purpose in the World, we have no ser∣vice to desire of you for it, 'tis an inconsiderable trisling sùmm, and it burnt in our Poc∣kets; and therefore much good may do you with it. Also that very Night that Sir Edmund was carryed out from Sommerset-house, Bedlow swears, that at the hour of 9 he was showed the Body, at which were present Walsh, Lephaire, my Lord Bellasis Gentleman, Mr. Atkins, Mr. Pepys Clerk and one Irish Man more: here was he offer'd half the 4000 l. to be one with these very numerical Men to help to carry off the Body, and this but two hours before it was carryed forth. And yet these very Men it seems were none of the Persons engaged, and upon Bedlows acceptance of the two Thousand pound; they must have still excused themselves by saying, Sir we have told you a notorious Lye, the Body is to be conveyed out by a pack of Mr. Prances Friends, to whom we are wholly strangers, and altogether uncon∣cern'd with. Nay and to make out the Oddness of this wondrous matter of Fact sworn by Bedlows, we have Mr. Prances crew of Cut-throats Sir Edmonds REAL Murderers; and those Cut-throats are expresly sworn by him to have had the keeping of the Dead Body all along, and to have carryed it up and down from Room to Room, upon every Shadow of danger. Nay their fears and terror was so great, that on Wednesday night being removing the Body back to the first Room it lay in, Mr. Prance happening to come upon them at that instant they all ran away, and left the Body in the Entry, till he call'd to them and made them come back again &c. And yet but two hours before they carryed out the Body, 'twas left in a Room, exposed to the view of Bedlows, Lephaire and the rest of his Bre∣thren to the number of half a dozen Men all strangers to Prance, with neither Prance nor one of his Comerades upon the Spot tho all so apprehensive of a discovery. But next, says the Reflecter, Let us see Mr. Settles most remarkable Observation, viz. That few or none of those numerous Letters and Packets, seen, read, carried and intercepted by the several Discoverers should be couch'd in Ciphers, seeing they contain'd no less than all the proposals for Regicides, Massacres, Assassinati∣ons, and all the rest of their Villanies whatsoever. Now might not all those Letters, (says the Reflecter) that had no Cipher be conveyed by such hands and means as they might rely on for the safety of the Delivery, and be couch'd in such Terms, tho
not in Cipher, as to seem to an unprepossess'd Reader to contain nothing but indifferent matters, tho they were stuft up with rank Treason? Now nothing but Impudence unparallel'd would pretend to answer a Book at this rate; Does not the Narrative in that very place prove all Dugdales Letters received by him tho directed all to other men, to be all conveyed by the Common Post, and that there was so far from any Caution used in the conveyance, that he swears he broke them all open, to above a hundred in number, and those that he could not hansomely sal again, he threw by, and never delivered, and all without the least Outery or Uproar from the Discoverers at the miscarriage, though for the loss of Treason in Grain. Nay were not the contents of those Letters of such a Treason∣able nature, that Dugdale at Corkers Trial, swears he received a Letter with [KIL∣LING THE KING] in express words in it. Just such another Reply the Reflecter makes to the Narratives other as re∣markable Observation, viz. why Coleman should spend so much labour and waste paper in Ciphers and Characters, and Foreign Correspondence, sometimes pushing on a TOLERATION, and otherwhile labouring for Prorogations and Dissolutions of Parliament, upon their every least motion in disfavour of the Roman Catholicks, if at the same time they had that vaster Machine a working, that would have Crown'd their utmost wishes without it, when upon killing the King, and murde∣ring the Protestants, they had not only dissolved the Parliament, but likewise in∣volved the Members in the Common Ruin, and by the Entry of Popery by the Sword they had put an end to the very Being and Constitution of Parliaments. To which answers the Reflecter, Well, might not these Proroguings and Toleration Pro∣jects be managed in the interim, in case an, Obstacle should happen to the putting their main Plot in Execution. Does it not appear throughout the whole course of the Conspi∣racy, that the Jesuits would leave no stone unturn'd for the bringing about their ends, and play at small games rather than stand out. A small game indeed, and the dul∣lest Gamesters in Christendom; for had the Papists intended such an Universal Massacre; in my Judgment nothing so convenient for their purpose, as to have done it in the very Sitting of a Parliament. How much more easie had it been out of Mr. Bedlows three English Armies, to have planted some few Popish Cham∣pions at the Parliament house Door, or the Parliament mens Lodgings, to have killed Them too as well as the Soldiers as they came out; then to begin a Massa∣cre in a Prorogation time, when so many great Men as those of the two Houses, diperst most of them in their Country Seats, ad had the opportunity to Arm both themselves and Tenants, and encourage all those numerous Hands that would immediately have laid down their Lives and Fortunes in such a Cause, and under such Leaders, especially to make head against so hated a Party as the Papists, and that too after no less than the Murder of the KING, and the approach of their own threatned Destruction. Well! but Pickering and Coleman did not confer notes, and his Gun with Bullets or no Bullets, Powder or no Powder, might have kill'd the King, and not one sllable of this convenience thought on. And thn for Mr. Oats not seizing any of those Letters, Pacquets, Memorials, Proposal, and Commssions that might have corroborated his Discovery; the Refle∣cter answers, As some he had only the sight of, so it would be madness to think he would take 'em away by force; as to those others he carried, he does not say but that he was accompanied by some of the Conspiracy; or if he was not, so manifest a proof of his Tre∣chery, if one may call it so, to his party, would cut off all means of his diving farther into their Resolutions; and yet might be of little use, since perhaps he could not have PROVED THE HANDS. And as for that courage of Mr. Oats which our Narrative Hero is pleas'd so to Droll upon, it shows that Mr. Oats whole care was even AFTER the Discovery not to give the Jesuits the least cause to suspect his being fallen off, that so by a fair appearance he might insinuate and grow so well acquainted with the Results of all their debates, even concerning the Discovery, as to reveal and prevent any HASTY and FATAL Resolutions, they might have taken thereupon, &c. Was ever such a Blind Excuse sound out for so damnable a piece of VIL∣LANY in the Doctor, viz. That the Doctor should discover the Plot to the King on the 13th of August, and upon the Kings disbehef of it, return to the Jesuits to
trapan and betray 'em, and yet not so much as surprize one Treasonable consult after it, nor seize one Paper of theirs, amongst so many trusted in his hands, (and why? in the name of Dulness, possibly he could not have proved their hands.) And that too not only for so eminent a service to the King, and three Protestant Kingdoms; but likewise for his own Interest and Glory: when so plain a proof of the Popish Plot, had for ever gain'd him the universal love of a whole Protestant Kingdom, and consequently all the encouragement that he could wish or ask. Where∣as on the contrary, the lameness of his Narrative, and the inconsistency of all his E∣vidence, has markt him like CAIN, and to all impartial men of sense, has given him the brand both of Cain's GUILT and Cain's INFAMY. Oh! but he staid for diving FARTHER into the Papists Resolutions says the Reflections. Now what FARTHER treasonable Resolutions the Papists could have after killing the King, and cutting all the Protestants Throats, and setting up Popery as already design'd, I profess I cannot comprehend; unless they had had a mind to have used the King as unmercifully as they did Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and have kill'd him twice over, stifled him with a Pillow at the Banquetinghouse, and strangled him with a twisted Handkerchief at the Stone-Gallery. Well, but Mr. Oats his courage in trusting himself to come alone to Whitebreads Chamber, after the receving three blows with a Cane from him, and a Box on the Ear for his Discovery, and Dr. Tongue his Confederate no less than being threat∣ned to be murder'd, might be to prevent the Papists hasty and fatal resolutions taken thereupon. Nothing more likely sweet Mr. Impertinence: but for a taste of Dr. Oats his prevention of the Papists fatal Resolutions, I'le refer the Reader but to the LXVI. Paragraph in his Narrative. Item, That on the 22th of August, Money was sent from the Society by a Servant of theirs to supply the Expences of the four Irish Ruffians above-mentioned, who were gotten to Winsor on the 21st at Night, and the sum so sent was Eighty pound, which the De∣ponent saw told, and they were bidden not to be frequent in one anothers Company, and always to profess but small acquaintance one with the other, &c. Now mark the UNEXAMPLED VILLANY of the SAVIOUR OF THE NATION he had discover'd the Plot (as his Preface tells you) on the 13th. of August, for the Preservation of the King and the Protestant Religion, and yet after that very day, after his Return and Conversion, from Treason and Plots to Honesty and Loy∣alty, He is privy to four Bravoes, Men of Quality and Resolution, being from the 21st of August to the 7th of September at Winsor, upon no less an expedition than cutting the Kings Throat, without giving the King the least notice or hint of his Danger. Well, let the Remarker and the Reflecter fall down and Worship our Salamanca Deliverer; for hang me if I can. And tho some Fools in the World are pleased to mistake him for a King-saving Mordecái; I profess I think the Cha∣racter of a Haman and his preferment too would much better suit him.
I Am afraid, Reader, I have already tired you with a Subject I my self am weary of, a Reply to two such ridiculous Adversaries, being a Quarrel not worth engaging in, but only that the Whigs, right or wrong, are those Opiniated Fools both of their Scriblers and their Cause, that to have kept silent had being giving them an occasion of Triumph: and the necessi∣ty of allaying that Vanity has given you this trouble. Thus far I have shewed you the extent of their little Reason, and now I care not if I give you the Latitude of their larger CONSCIENCES. Amongst the numerous repeated Ras∣scals and Traitours they call me, the Reflecter more particularly in (page the 1st) tells you that in my Epistle, I have shew'd my self the greatest Villain that perhaps has been upon the face of the Earth, in that spight and revenge, and those accumulated wrongs against a Prince of such Honor and Virtue. But (page 2d) he proceeds, and says, when I wrote the Popish Character, did not that sad Juncture threaten the Na∣tion with a direful Revolution, and what I now mask under my private Resentments and Revenge, was it not making my Court to a party whom I consider'd as the Moneyd part of the Nation, and ready inclined to reward and succor all those who had suffici∣ency and probity. But now that the TIDE is turned, that all the Efforts of ZEA∣LOUS PATRIOTS for settling the Peace, and procuring the HAPPINES of their Country have been diverted, and that an Inundation of TORISME seems to threaten the whole Land; is it not to be suspected that my Recantation and Repentance are only to save my Bacon, &c. And again, page 4. When WHIGGISM and PROTESTAN∣TISM began to be a barrener soil than Pernassus, when all Evidence and proceedings against Popery began to be discredited, and the Papists began to appear again in such shoals, that the crafty Trimmers of the party thought it prudence no longer to oppose the Torrent, then Sir Politick Elkanah thought fit to wheel about. Here do but mark the Cloven-foot of my Accuser, and see how impudently Vice corrects Sin; For I desire but any honest unprejudiced Reader to scan but these Lines, and find if they bear any other sense, then that the very King is here maliciously and venomously accused for diverting the settlement of his Kingdoms peace and happiness, and that by his Conduct of late years he has obstructed that Zeal, and those very Patriots that were labouring to establish them, and downright en∣couraged and promoted that INUNDATION that no less than THREATENS the Land. And now as I am so over and over accused for ridiculing the Justice of the Nation, how much more visibly does this Impudent Scribler arraign both Judge and Jurors, and by the Evidence against Popery being so discredited insinuate that Wak man, Corker, Kerney, and the rest acquitted by Law, had not Justice; and that the Testimonies of their Accusers, though made up of nothing but malice, scandal, Combination and Trechery, was Oracle and Gospel. Nay, he strikes at the very Government it self, and by the Barrenness of the Protestant Soil, and the Shoals and Torrents of Papists, would make the world believe that the Church of England is undermining, and Rome a setting up. Now what this nameless fellow is, that dares write this, I know not, but the Soul of a Ferguzon could have said no more. And if a Man would learn who this Scribler is, 'tis ten to one the unknown Au∣thors name may never come to light, 'till we see it in a Proclamation. And now to shew you that these two Authors, like the unclean Beasts in the Ark, go paird, they are as well matcht in their principles as Satan could wish. For instance, the Remarker (page the 6th.) tells you, That I was the Author of that damnable Lampoon call'd a Game at Cards, presented inconsiderately by Jo∣shuah Bows to Mr. Duboys, which brought him to the Pillory and Banishment: and no doubt 'twas the hard Fate of my Friend that frighted me into my Conversion. And yet this very Remarker with all the Bitterness and Gall that Rage and Malice can infuse, brands and stigmatizes my begging of pardon for all my faults whatever, with no milder terms than a villanous Rascally Recantation, a Recantati∣on
in the Devil's name, &c. And what's all this, put it together, (supposing me the Author of that Damnable Libel,) but that I am a Villain, a Rascal, a Devil for repenting and Recanting even from Crimes of so black a Dye, from those ve∣ry Lyes and Libels, the dispersing but of which Imprisoned, Fined, Pilloryed and Transported the very publisher, (much more the Author deserved.) Good Heaven! How Black a Sin is Repentance in a true Blue Protestant: and how heavy a Guilt is such a Recantation in the scales of a Remarkers Conscience? But having started that unfortunate Fellow Bows his Case; I care not if I give the World the odd but true story of his hard Fortune. The Man in the first place, was one of the most vehement Whiggs in his little capacity that perhaps was in England, and as little for Succession or Gospel in the Right Line, as the Brotherhood could desire him; nay has as often and as devoutly paid his Orizons and Adora∣tions SO-HO-Wards, as any Man I know: Insomuch that whatever his sufferings have been in their Cause, maugre his particular Resentments against Mr. Duboys, the whole party are still his Demi-gods, (unless the NEW-MARKET EXPEDITI∣ON when it shall reach his ears may convert him.) This poor Man having Poe∣try enough to reach to a Sonnet, or an Epithalamium, and being likewise possibly one of the best Scribes in the Kingdom, in Gold, Silver, Vermillion Letters, with Flowers, Birds, Beasts, and other ornamental flourishes of the Pen, fit to please Women; he got his Bread by presenting Ladies and Persons of Quality with gay Copies of Verses in this kind. But one time above the rest, (as he did not al∣ways traffick in his own Manufacture) it happened he pickt up a Whiggish Lam∣poon, a little too rank as it fell out, of which possibly twenty Copies had been disperst without noise or danger at Peters and Dicks, and that quarter of the Town. These (as thinking them acceptable) he sent to the worthy Mr. Duboys, and a day or two after, went to ask if he had received them, in hopes of a gratuity of five or ten shillings for them. But instead of that, he was immediately seiz'd for a Jesuit. A new Meal-tub Plot was discover'd; Treasonable POPISH Papers were shamm'd into Mr. Duboys his Hand, some say into his Sleeve, and others into his Pocket; and all (God wot) to betray him, and bring him into a Plot. Besides a Copy or two of his own harmless Rhimes, beautified with the forementioned Or∣naments, and the Verses Damnd unfortunately writ in Red Ink, design'd for some City present, were found about him: and those were no sooner spied, but all was confirm'd: The Conspiracy was made as apparent as the Sun: He was an Emissary from the POPE, that is plain, for he had Papers found writ in BLOOD, and Contracts with the DEVIL. This Alarum ran through the City immediatly; Cap∣tain Toms Plot for Burning of Rumps and Listing of Apprentices was not half so FORMIDABLE. The poor Man used his utmost Endeavor to pacifye and convince his Accuser both of his Innocence and his Principles: but Faith was strong, and Dudgeen was high, and All would not do. The Papers were Popish, the Messenger Popish, the Deli∣very Popish, and Plot Plot, nothing but Plot at the bottom of it; whilst Truth and Sense were either not understood or not believed. And tho he made a shift to get off at present by Bail, yet he was retaken again, stood thrice in the Pillory, and though his Papers deserved all this, and worse; yet see the Oddness of the Thing; to one half of the City he was himself viz. a rank Whig; to the other, a notorious Priest and Jesuit: in one place his Papers were Fanatick in another Po∣pish; insomuch that he came to his Wooden Casement unpittyed by All Men, and stood the Battery of Rotten Eggs; and other Flying Artillery even from All Hands. Nay, the Delivery of his Lampoons came with such a Plot Thunder-clap upon the Brethren, that it has addled their understandings ever since, and the rumbling of it is not out of their Heads yet. But alas, Popery and Jesuites do all things; and poor little Joshuah by the true blew Protestant Opticks, like a Flea in a Magnifying-glass, was instantly transform'd into that Huge, Black Popish Devil, as nothing more terrible: Nay, had this business happened in 79. I fancy the Lobby, and all the great Buildings round it, would have been scarce able to have held it.
But to return from this Digression, nothing gives my Antagonists so great a Disgust, as that my Aldersgate-street Patron should make some correction in the Character of a Popish Successor, and for amendment bid the Author speak more favorably of Rebellion, to which says the Reflecter, how can Mr. Settle think to im∣pose, and make the World believe that ever the Patron he mentions should make such a blunder in Politicks as to send this Worshipful Author a Message of this Nature, and that too to a Poet and a professd one, People not much admired in this Age for Conti∣nency, or Fidelity, &c. That this very Patron did make this Correction, and in these very Words, the Friend I intrusted to carry it to him is ready to Attest, (tho indeed he did not then know the Author, for that I conceal'd till the Book was publisht) and upon that very Correction of his, I alter'd the latter end of the Character and wrote all those Paragraphs in it, against PASSIVE OBEDIENCE and in Justification of taking up Arms against a Popish Successor, which when I had finisht I sent him the Copy again, and he approved of the Amendments. I know not why the Adorers of that great Man should so extravagantly Deifye him, as to make him guilty of no one humane failing, not one Lapsus Linguae in so many Years of Gall and Bit∣terness. Surely one bold Word or two, might now and then drop from so bold a Patriot, and so angry a state Pilot. I remember a good Friend of mine. Mr. Coke Barrister, the Translator of Magna Charta, told me that once upon discourse between him and the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, he asked the said No∣ble Peer, why he advised the King to shut up the Exchequer, to which the Wor∣thy Earl made Answer to make him Odious to his People. So that as I said be∣fore, a bold Word has now and then fallen from the Lips of that true Protestant Oracle. Now, I hope my good Friend Mr. Coke has so much Honor and Honesty as not to deny his own words: But if he wronged the Honorable Lord in this story of him, it behoves him to do Justice to his Memory, and publickly own his Repentance for so black an Aspersion against so great a Personage. I, but I am a very Impudent Fellow says the Remarker, for saving in my Preface that the Plot writ the Association, for (continues he) if I mean the pretended Association 'twas a Bastard &c. Faith, I'll not say much to that, but if 'twas a Bastard 'twas so much the nearer of Complexion to the great Son of Thunder that was to head it. But says the Reflecter, Settle tells us in his Preface, that he now dares look Sense and Quality in the Face, intimating at the same time that it is what the Whigs dare not: whereas 'tis well known, there be those who are call'd Whigs, who dare nose both Sense and Quality, and defye the Courage as well as the Arts and Machinations of their Enemies. Now if this Fellow would make his words true, he might do himself and the Nation no small kindness, nay, in∣stead of their nosing of Quality, could he make them but Face Day-light, that WHIGGISM and TREASON might receive their Reward, and the Ungratefullest of Subjects and most Unnatural of ons, the late Head of a most Infamous Band of Raiacs might be exposed to the Abhorring World, and show the Misled and De∣luded Rabble what IDOL 'tis they have so long Adored. These two Insipid Animals, after the greatest Efforts against my Narrative, that two such Champions in such a Cause could make, being concious no doubt of the weak Batteries they have rais'd against it, have endeavored to help out their stingless Remarks, and Reflections, by blasting my Reputation by the most Audacious Abominable Lyes, that ever the Devil the Father of Lyes could have forged. An Instance of which we have in the 6th page of the Remarks as follows. This is not the first Recantation that Settle has made sometimes out of fear and sometimes out of necessity. He has twice given it under his hand, that his Mother was a Whore; once to Mr.  as finding himself not prepared to dye. Another time there was a certain Gentle-woman that he would have Marryed, but she well understanding that four naked Legs in a Bed, are not sufficient to maintain a Family, rejected his Suit, which so provoked his Lust of Revenge, that he came and brke her Windows, resolving to set a Bowdy-house Mark on her Lodgings. Presently the Gentlewoman complained of his ill Usage to a Friend, who soon called the Valiant Window-breaker to an account, and gave him so severe a Cane Correction, that Mr. Set∣tle
fell immediatly into his never failing way of Recantation, and amongst the rest of the Conditions proposed to him, readily, patiently, and willingly condescended to acknow∣ledge himself the n of a Whore. The first of ese Villanous Forgeries is taken out of a certain inveterate Fil∣thy Libel against me, called the Character of a true Blue Protestant Poet, where amongst the Impudent Lyes and Detraction that fills that Paper, I was accused of being the Author of a Scandalous Copy of Verses call'd the Sessions of the Poets, an ill-natured scurrilous Lampoon, written some years since, and now laid as be∣lieved at the Fathers Door, being Printed amongst the Lord Rs.—Poems. Amongst the other Extravagancies in that Base and Malicious Libel against me. It was said that I gave it under my Hand to Mr. O—a Gentleman highly wronged and af∣fronted in that Paper of Verses, that I was the Author of that Sessions of Poets, and that for which I was the Son of a Whore. Which is so damnable a Falshood, and so publickly known to be so too, that on the quite contrary I disown'd and abjured the writing so much as one Syllable of it: and to vindicate my self from the scandal of such a Lampoon, at that time so unjustly and so universally laid at my Door, and so much to my disreputati∣on, if to clear my self by no less a Potestation then that I was the Son of a Whore if I wrote one word of it, when indeed I did not write one word of it, be calling a Mothers Honesty into Question, let the World Judge. But for the Gentlewoman, the Window breaking, and the Cane Correction story, and the second part of Son of Whore, that, all such pure Invention, such unparrallell'd Romance as was scarce ever matcht. But to confute the Brazen Impudence of this Villanous Libeller: I make this Challenge to the World if ever I broke a Window in my whole Life, and as my good Fortune would have it, was ever so much as in that Company that broke Windows, (as Debaucht as the Remarks or Reflections have render'd me;) or if any Body can prove there is or has been that Man in the World that ever corrected me as he calls it or strook me with Cane Staff or Cudgel for above two Seaven Years last past, (for my School-Boys days Ile not answer) I do here submit to own my self the burner of London, the Murderer of Sir Edmond, or the greatest Criminal or Traytor in Europe wit∣ness my hand, Elkanah Settle. Another as Lying a story I meet in the Reflections pag. 5th. Reflect: To show you that Interest is the main Spring of this Mans Affections, that he hates and Loves only according to its Dictates, that he squares Mens Virtues and Vices according to its Measures, and can be fond of, and detest in a Moment the same Persons sutably as they contribute to, and jump with his Designs. This Man having a Book to present to one of his Patrons, he prevailed with his Book-seller to go with it, dawbing this Patron to him at a high rate, extolling his Wisdom, Benignity of Temper, and Generosity, &c. Whereupon the Book-seller trooped with the offering to the Lord; but coming back with Disappointments in his Countenance, and telling Mr. Settle that he had delivered his Book, but that the Lord had return'd no other thanks than what consisted in words, he began to curse and damn the Sordidness of his Patron, wished he had been in Hell, when the thought came into his Head of making him that Oblation, Vomiting out all the Im∣precations &c. until the Book-seller to direct this Torrent of Rage, shewed him some few Guinneys, which his Patron had sent him as a present: and then to see the wonderful Effect, that that Metal has upon Mr. Settles Intellectuals, he immediatly saw that good Lord again through quite different Opticks, and found in him a 1000 more fine Qualities then he had ever done before. Just such another piece of Forgery is this with the former; and to prove so: All the Books I ever wrote, except the Popish Character, were Printed by one Book-seller, who is ready to make Oath, that there is not one Syllable of Truth in all this story, and that he never delivered any such Book or Books for me, or ever received Guinneys or Guinney for me from any Patron or Lord whatever. But truly, of all Mankind I have the lest Reason to admire or complain at this Usage, when I consider that nothing but Malice makes a Whig, and nothing but
Lyes and Rancor are the Spawn of Malice. And when I reflect on my own past Sins, I acknowledge I am but punisht in my kind; and all this, and ten times worse I have justly deserved; and tho with all the deepest sense and hum Contrition for my Offences, I shall never think I have made any part of an Expiation till the whole Study of my Life and the Endeavors of my Pen are entirely employed in the Service of those Royal Brothers, whose least Beam of their so highly forfeited Mercy can ne∣ver be recovered under a less Attonement Sacrifice. There is one Pen more drawn against me, call'd a Letter to E. Settle; Printed by Nat. Thompson. The Writer whereof has no Quarrel against my Narrative, but the Author; and seems to suspect not only the Truth of my Penitence, but also of my Con∣fession, and that there still lyes some undiscovered Anguis in Herbâ in the Breast of so high an Offender. He very much doubts whether those Motives exprest in my Preface were the true Incendiaries to so inveterate a Pen as mine; and believing that an Au∣thor so eminently serviceable to those false Patriots, that always make Religion and Liberty the specious pretences to mask the Blackest and Foulest Purposes, he seems to be very confident I must be trusted in their Intrigues and Cabals: and thereupon has put me a whole Roll of Quaraees to Answer. To which Book I can only make this short Reply. In that Confession made in my Preface, I have given the World the whole Truth of my Soul. And tho my unhappy Resentments for having a Play re∣manded to the Dukes Theatre, may appear a very idle Provocation for so implaca∣ble a spight and revenge as mine; yet as that Command was occasionally the Ruine of my well being in the World, the Circumstances of which are too tedious to recite, from that very Cause (tho never so unjust and unchristian a one) I drew in that Poy∣son and Virulence against the Son of a King and a Martyr, the Greatest of Heroes, and the best of Friends and Brothers. But as my soul, too much loaded already, has no farther Sins to answer for; I am so wholy uncapable of solving this Gentlemans Que∣ries; that Ignorance and Innocence is all the Plea I can make, I being so far from a Confident, Caballer, or indeed Company-keeper with those Antimonarchical Mat∣chevils, that I can safely Swear, I never so much as drank at the Kings-head Club; excepting on a publick Queen Elizabeths Night: Perhaps the Voluntary Tribute I brought them made me esteemd a Profitable Servant enough, without exacting any far∣ther Task from my Hands; or otherwise, they might be those skillful Physiognomists that they could read Souls, and found me so uncapable even of a Thought against my King, that in Prudence and Safety, they made their Machinations against the Crown, those Secrets that were to be laid out of my reach; for I declare in the presence of God, I know no more by them, then that the Bill of Exclusion, and the other Par∣liamentary Projections for Liberty and Religion were the utmost end they drove at. And if I have belyed my Conscience in this Protestation, and am any wise Guilty of those Crimes, that the Letter-writer suspects, there is now that Justice wakened, that would soon o'retake me. For thanks be to Heaven, the Great Mystery of Ini∣quity begins to be unfolded, and the detection of this last TRULY Damnable and Hel∣lish Plot, begins to set the Staggering World upright again: a Plot not discovered by the Rakings of Jails, and Scumm of Mankind; but by Clouds of Witnesss of Substance and Quality: A Plot, not universally denyed with Vows, Oaths, and Imprecations even at Gibbets and Death; but confest in Jails with Horror and Trembling. A Plot, that I hope will so fully restore those Senses that Delusion and Frenzy have so long set a wandring, that Union and Loyalty shall so perfectly Flourish again, till the Hearts of his People and Parliaments so intirely return to the best of Men & Kings, that they shall meet him with no less Caresses and Endearments then those at his Restoration. ADVERTISEMENT. Whereas Mr. Care in one of his Courants, has said that Mr. Cademan durst not Print my Narrative till it had Mr. L'Estranges Blessing, these are to signifye 'tis wholy False, for tho 'tis true, Mr. L'Estrange read some part of it, yet on the other-side he advised and Councelled Mr. Cademan by no means to venture to Print it. FINIS.
