t1097 18149167 106857
THREE LETTERS OF Publick Concernment as to the Present Affairs: The I. To a Friend in London. II. To the Lord General Monck in behalf of Mo∣narchy and Episcopacy. III. Concerning the just placing of the Legisla∣tive Power, and its influence upon Eccle∣siasticall Laws and Persons. AS ALSO Concerning the late Publication OF THE COVENANT in all Churches. By a Person of Quality and of a Publick Spirit. London, Printed, 1660.
THE FIRST LETTER from a Person of Quality, TO HIS Friend in the City OF LONDON. London, Printed, 1660.
The First Letter from a Person of Quality to his friend in the Ci∣ty of London. Worthy Friend, §. I. SInce my last (in a concurrence with the Generall, if not unanimous Vote of this Na∣tion) this County hath sent up a DECLA∣RATION (being awaked out of that dull Lethargick stupifaction, that had long seized their Spirits to a quick resentment of their own condition:) To solem∣nize the approaching Funerals of the glory and hap∣pinesse of this Nation, with their sad Complaints, if timely remedies be not applied, which I shall not dis∣paire of (since as Physitians tell me, the sense and knowledge of the disease is a great advance towards, health;) And that those hidden charms, that lay wrapt up in the prostitute name of Parliament, to be∣witch us, hath lost its force; even with me and others▪ that once adored that great Diana, the Craftsmen or
Mechanicks of our times, set up even to the pulling down of Scepters, Laws, Religion, nay Parliaments them∣selves, considered in their original Rights and Constitu∣tions; though my designe was no more at the taking up of Arms, then their pretences, even a pruning off of luxurious excrescencies in Church and State, not a digging up of the Vine; and in so much I am still the same, though not in my Actings any longer, in coun∣tenance of those that departed from themselves, Du∣ties and Oaths; yet am I resolved ever to oppose all exorbitances in State, Innovation in the Church, and invasion of our Liberties I first engaged against; and in it agree, I think, with all truly wise and honest En∣giishmen. §. II. And I conceive, these Considerations, and the like, have animated these parts into generous Reso∣lutions, if they cannot Vindicate their Rights, no longer to betray them by their silence and Compliances, daring to die their Counrries Martyrs, rather then not attempt their Duties, Resolving with the Canta∣brian to AƲOƲSTƲS, though their goods of fortune may by Tyranny and Ʋsurpation be taken from them, they will be their own and Gods; and (having dis∣covered the great Impostures of the Mountebanks at Westminster) will no longer be Cheated out of their dearest Interests; seeing their pretences, how specious so ever, are but a painted Flower upon a withered Stalk, a Devill in Samuels mantle: When under pretence of RELIGION, they let in Athiesm; and by abuse of our LIBERTY, lay snares to enslave us, turning our LAWS and Charters into Arbitrary Voies (The Negative voices and ballancing Interests of KING and LORDS being forced from us) yet by it they give us a holy advan∣tage,
in shewing us that in our present Condition, we enjoy rather an Acry than reall being; when by a vapour, a breath, those Senators may take away ours, (our Lives, Liberties and Religion at once.) And yet by it, they undermine those pillars that should sup∣port their own Houses to Posterity; and make Shack∣les for their Children to wear. §. III. Nay so highly insolent is their Cruelty, as they force us to be instrumental to our own ruines (by payments to support their Usurpation, and to twist a Cord to hang our selves) and are not onely acting, but enacting mischief as Law, which ought to make Crimes not Virtue the object of its punish∣ment; and to stand (as the Pin in the Ballance;) a middle thing between Supream power and Common Right, which they yet deny us, in obstructing our enjoyment of a FREE PARLIAMENT, the onely prudentiall Remedy (under God) to compose our di∣stractions, unite our Affections, and concenter all In∣terests in a Consciencious submission and obedience to lawfull Authority, the very Nerves, and Sinews, and Li∣gaments that can keep the body Politick in a happy combination at home, and make it both reverenced and feared abroad, open Trade and secure (under God) all other blessings. §. IV. And therefore as your CITIES Declarati∣on gave the first Invitation to other Counties to De∣clare; I hope you will still continue fixt (as the Cen∣ter in the Circumference; however things move in their vicissitudes about you) in your Resolves to stand for a FREE and FULL PARLIAMENT. §. V. Which implies Freedom in Sitting from all force: Freedome in Elections to sit (where the
known ancient Laws restrain not;) and Freedome from all previous Oathes and Engagements, as the Essen∣tials and Elements, out of which it is Constituted; the Legislative Power (however it may regulate it self, in its Actings) being never to be bound with humane Cords; Nay, not by it self, in that it may (nay ought) to unloose the knots it ties; when publick In∣terest and utility requires it: And therefore should not be confined by any more high and sacred bands; nor admit of discriminations of Persons in law eligi∣ble, which are but the breasts, that feed and nouris;h Divisions, Distractions and Animosities amongst us. §. VI. However since all humane law obliges Con∣science onely in things, which in their nature are in∣different and Arbitrary, and that by our Fundamental Constitution, every mans Consent is therefore presu∣med to concur actually (or virtually in his Proxies) in those laws he is to be submitted to (as may ap∣pear by the Petition of Right.) We all unanimously Resolve no more Taxes, Excises, Customs ought by the present Dictators to be laid upon us; and there∣fore not to pay them, unlesse charged by a FRFE PARLIAMENT, which we desire may be insinua∣ted to your Common Councel; who have yet, carried themselves with great shew of Gallantry, Prudence, and publick affection to the KINGDOMES Settlenent and peace. That as we aim at one Port, we may steer by one Compasse. And the better to take in all In∣terests. 1. We shall desire INDEMNITY to all that op∣pose not a FULL and FREE PARLIAMENT. 2. INDULGENCE to all TENDER CONSCI∣ENCES, that seek Peace not Faction, with the Vindi∣cation
of our ESTABLISHED RELIGION from all its Opposers. 3. The Souldiers SATISFACTION in relation to their Arreares, and for the present, the Counties will resolve (if your City concurre) voluntarily to raise 60000 l, a month, and to pay it into the hands of their several Treasurers; by them immediately to be paid to such Regiments as the GENERAL and AR∣MY shall assigne to each County; (and this to conti∣nue till a FREE PARLIAMENT take further care for them,) which will pay them fully for the future, and advance something towards the Arreares, of those that shall in this way witnesse their good affecti∣on to the Nation, & redeem the prey out of the hands of those Land-Pirates at Westminster. Who all this while have made a gain of them and us; §. VII. In which we cannot doubt of my Lord Ge∣neral MONCKS concurrence, he is in all opinions, a person of so intire a worth (though yet abused by the specious pretences of a ruling faction) when he findes the greatest part by much (if not all) of the Kingdome desire it as the onely means to compose us at home, and secure us from many, now united and powerfull e∣nemies abroad; especially, if he will but consider, how often this pretended RUMP of a Parliament, that poysons all with their Hellish Fumes hath been dis∣solved, as 1. By the Kings death (as all great Lawyers will a∣gree) who was the most essentiall part of it; his Assent onely giving a being and animation to all Laws. 2. As the BILL it self (by which they pretend to disinherit the Primo-Geniture of the Trienniall Act,) Refers to the Parliament, as then composed of three
Estates, when one dissenting, no Act could pass. 3. By their several Dissolutions and Submissions to other called Parliaments, and by most of their sittings as members in them. 4. By the Counties new Elections, which was an act∣uall revocation of their Trust and Power. 5. By the forfeiture of their rights to sit as a HOUSE OF COMMONS in the forcible expulsion of the best part of their members. 6. By their breach of Trust, their Commissions (as de∣legated by their Elections) being onely to advise with the KING in (rebus arduis) weighty affairs (not to destroy him) as appears by the Writs of Summons; And all this, with the violation of their faith both to God and man; wilfull breaches of their Declarations, Oaths and Covenants; So as a person of General MONCKS worth and honour can never, upon digest∣ed thoughts, espouse their Cause and Crimes by his protecting them; however, he is a person of too much piety and prudence; to engage us in a Civil and for∣reign War at once (where so faire and just an expedi∣ent, as a FREE and FULL PARLIAMENT to be called by the Triennial Act is proposed) for the skirts and rag of an expired Parliament, which would botch up a garment, onely for their own wearing, leaving us stript and naked by depriving us of all our Rights, and all this for the maintaining their guilt and Inte∣rest, who care not to prevent, the rack of our Ship of State, wherein all are imbarked, if they may but stand upon land themselves; And therefore be not discour∣aged by what hath yet appeared, but let us do our duties, and leave the event to God; which is the re∣solution of, Your lately converted Servant
The Second LETTER to the Lord Generall MONCK In behalf of MONARCHY AND EPISCOPACY: Upon the Readmission of the (formerly) Secluded MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT. London, Printed, 1660.
The second Letter to the Lord Ge∣neral Monck, upon the readmis∣sion of the (formerly) Secluded Members. My HONOƲRED LORD; THough vertuous inclinations in their Infancy, & Cradle are best Nursed up with the Milk of Flat∣tery and seeming Courtships; your full grown vir∣tues (which like Saul amongst the people, make you more eminent than others; and the eyes of our Israel to look upon you, as their Deliverer) will bear a more ingenious freedome; which makes me presume (though none more truly honours your Prudence, Piety and PERSON than my self) as I am here intrust∣ed to receive the corresponding intelligence from most Counties that have concentred their Hopes and Addresses in your LORDSHIP, you will Pardon me, if (as the burning-glasse that collects the scattered and loose beams of the Sun, to give them a more power∣full and vigorous operation) I reflect the united sense of ALL to you; in relation to your Words and Actings.
The last of which, have been so prudent in Conduct, so daring (yet modest) in the approaches to your proposed ends; and so successfull in the great late changes, we look upon, as in lets to a settlement of the peace and happinesse of this KINGDOME; as you stand yet unequalled by any in the opinions and affections of the people, even above men; and onely below GOD himself (& OUR rightfull KING) who hath wrought so great wonders by you: And we hope will set fast the bars of our gates, and establish peace in our bor∣ders by so glorious an Instrument, and in it record your memory to all posterity, as the deliverer of this Nation from the high Ʋsurpation and severe Tyranny we have long laboured under. But my LORD in relation to your words, and De∣clared desires to the late restored Members of PAR∣LIAMENT, there are few satisfied, but such as hope that with Frederick Duke of Austria, you went abroad in a disguise to hear what others judments were; by them and their reasons (if convincing yours) to shape your future proceedings; or (if it were your judgement) that you did declare and enforce it with all the ad∣vantage Oratory or Arguments could contribute to its support; that in the confutation of them all persons of those mistaken principles might be reduced by your example; who espouses no interest but in order to Gods glory and the publick good; nor impose your o∣pinion upon, but submit it to the dispassionate De∣bates and Resolutions of a FREE PARLIAMENT; which humility and self denial is the crown and glo∣ry of all your other noble Actions, and that which sets you up a Scepter in the hearts of ALL (but Fa∣ctions and Fanatick people, and gives you a Com∣mand
of our Persons and Purses. Yet give me leave, as the Eccho of the KING∣DOMES voice, to tell your Lordship, it neither is, or ever was, for the alteration of our MONAR∣CHICALL GOVERNMENT into Common-wealth foundations, which are inconsistent with our ancient FUNDAMENTALL LAWS, and the humour of the people of this Nation; who comparing the long happy and flourishing condition it hath for many hun∣dred years enjoyed under their KINGS, and Reve∣rent Episcopacy, with the tragicall effects of our late changes; cannot be in love with their Irons and shac∣kles; nor be willing to submit to Papall-Presbyterial Tyranny (for such is rigid Presbytery) that have been acquainted with the gentler Yoke the Fathers of our Church laid upon us. And though I might make it appear to your Lord∣ship by clear proofs, and undisputed authorities from Reason, Nature, Scripture, and Authority. First, That as all power is GODS, so there is no exer∣cise of it from divine Commission, but (paternal) what is seated in the person of one man originally; and deri∣vatively onely from him (as the spring and source) in∣to the lesser streames of subordinate administrations (which Adam was vested in the state of innocency;) and that all men are borne to this naturall subordination; for the orderly support of humane societies, (families be∣ing the epitomes of Kingdomes) wherein the person to whome the SUPREAME POWER belongs, is onely accountable to God for his Actions (KINGS being sub∣ject onely to the direction not coaction of humane Laws. Secondly, That our KINGS had this right justly con∣veyed
to them by the grace of God (not gift of man) and by it have a just title to our allegiance and obedi∣ence, both by divine and civill right, as all our Laws and PARLIAMENTS have declared. Thirdly, That King CHARLES the son (of his late glorious Father and our Soveraign) hath de jure, the same, and cannot without Rebellion (a sin as high as that of witch craft) be denied him. Fourthly, That EPISCOPACY is of divine insti∣tution, an order deduced through all ages of Christs Church; and continued to us by lawfull and undoub∣ted ordination. Fifthly, That Bishops have in all ages had Reve∣rence payed them as the Pillers & supporters of Chri∣stianity; by their pious learned and painfull labours, when living; and propagating it when dead, by their bloud shed in Martyrdome; when one dying man made many living Saints. Sixthly, That it was not the Calling, but exorbitan∣cies in it; not the Tree, but the Luxurious branches these times at first complained of; and desired to prune, not dig up. Seventhly, That it was a Government admired and approved by all the Reformed Churches abroad, as essen∣tial to the bene esse of a Church; and by many learned Divines (ancient and modern) to the esse, the very be∣ing of a Church. Eighthly, That Presbytery as propounded by our Sy∣nod of Divines is of a bastard extraction, and a late birth; being a stranger to antiquity, and an alien late∣ly legitimated amongst us; a thing so far from being countenanced, as it was never known in the Christian Church.
Yet waving all these and infinite more considerati∣ons, I could offer (humbly casting my self upon your mercy for a pardon of this deviation) I shall not so much reflect upon your LORD-SHIPS reasons a∣gainst introducing MONARCHY and EPISCOPA∣CY; as to shew you they were never taken away by any just power; admit it were in the late PARLIA∣MENT, when Full and Free, for untill severall forces and violences were acted upon them, and the Secluded Members denied their Votes; There was no Regicide, (no murthering of the Heirs, that the Vineyard might be ours) no Votes for altering our ancient (and BEST FABRICATED Government in the world) but on the contrary, ALL the PARLIAMENTS Protesta∣tions, Declarations, Actions and Covenants were for KING and PARLIAMENT, Conjunctim not divi∣sim; and were so intended to be adhered to by our Confessours (though not Martyrs) the lately restored Members; and onely surviving honourable mention of that expired Parliament. Nor did the people of this Nation ever voluntarily contribute, either of their persons or purses to other ends then the Parliament had declared, even a confi∣ning of arbitrary power, and keeping all things in their own bounds and channels, a reforming, a mending the the Watch, not the taking it in pieces So as the peoples Interests in this are safe, but can∣not be entituled to the endeavours of the changes you mention, without a just forfeiture of all they en∣joy; a maintaining of perpetuall divisions at home, and inviting War from the injured persons, and their now powerfull united confederates abroad; ha∣ving no Free nor Full Parliament to countenance them in such actings.
And that this was the sense, the Covenant was ta∣ken in, and of the Kingdome now in General; I desire may be submitted to their Votes in the FREE RE∣PRESENTATIVE to be called, or that they may have a Ballut for it, and then they will appear a hun∣dred for one to make it good. Nor is the glory of the City, and opening of Trade at home and abroad, to be boyed up by any other En∣gine than what the name of KING actuates: It being the splendor of Courts, encrease of Nobility, Amities a∣broad, and Peace at home, that loads the Vine with Clusters, and makes the Wine-presse to overflow; as Londons experience evincingly may prove, if we compare their now withering and formerly sprouting and flourishing condition together; so as a COM∣MON-WEALTH in those and many other respects, would rather prove a heightning to the disease, than a remedy. And for the Government of the Church, so far as it is prudential, it ought to be submitted to the Parlia∣ment and a Convocation of Divines (justly called) but what is of Divine Right in it, ought to be preserved and preferred before our Lives and Liberties. And therefore I most humbly contend for EPI∣SCOPACY, as an order at least (if not to maintain it in its primitive glory;) and in that none can be sure there is a good Ordination without it (unlesse in case extraordinary) and that all doe agree the Ordination by BISHOPS lawfull; we ought to chuse a safe be∣fore a doubtfull way, as all Casuists agree. However, having fully, as I conceive, undermin'd the grounds and satisfied the reasons, your LORD∣SHIP
laid and urged for a Common-wealth; I shall proceed no further upon this head, since you have made my Conclusion; That EPISCOPACY holds best proportion and symmetry to MONARCHICALL GOVERNMENT; and that I have made it appear, there neither is, nor can be any other form justly intro∣duced into this Nation. Yet to take in all Interests, and concenter them in a consciencious obedience (the sinew of Govern∣ment) I wish both may be so moderated in their ex∣ercise of power, as there may be no more leading into captivity, nor complaining in our streets; But that the KING with his PARLIAMENT, and the BI∣SHOPS with their Presbyters may joyn to make the close of our Harmony most melodious. For thus our KING will have an inexhaustible treasure in the affections of his People; and they best secure their Liberties in becoming their SOVE∣RAIGNES Favourites; which happy Espousalls, I will yet hope to see YOU solemnize in a Concur∣rence with the whole nation, whose desire it is; as well as the prayers of Your EXCELLENCIES most humble Servant
The third Letter, Concerning the just placing of the Legislative Power, and its Influ∣ence upon Ecclesiastical Laws and Persons. Sir, MƲch is due to you for your many repeated favours, but more for your Freedome in com∣municating your judgment upon the late actings of the men of these times, which seem to be troubled with the vertigo in the brain, by their giddy and suddain turnings of the man (his reason) out of himself; and us out of all our dearest Liber∣ties and rights: Yet the Obligation swells highest by your humble descent in desiring from me any thing that might either convince or confirme you in your opinion concerning the Just placing of the Legis∣lative Power, and its influence upon Ecclesiasticall laws and Persons, when I can but bring a Spark to your Flame. However since your commands are to be submiited to by me, not disputed, I shall reflect my apprehen∣sion of it to you in a very contracted way in this sur∣prise of time, and be ready to support both by rea∣son,
divine and humane Authority (if it be required) what I shall positively assert. And to the first I affirme. First, That as God is the Spring and Fountain of all power. (it being essentiall in him and derivative only to us) none can have any just propriety in the Legisla∣tive, but such who are Commissioned for it, according to Gods revealed Will by a Divine as well as Civill right. Secondly, That who otherwise takes or uses the sword invades both God and man in their rights; And in an unlawfull posture of subordination no just power can be derived, no more then a sulphurous spring can send forth a sweet stream; in that Quod deest in causa, deest in effectu. Thirdly, That the Delegation of the supreme power from God is either immediate as to Moses, who was pla∣ced by him as King in Jeshurun, Deut. 33.3, 5. or me∣diate, by the people (as in Elective Kingdoms) who chuse the person, but never collate the power; or by both concurring, as in Saul, David, &c. And that no other Government then what is Paternal and founded in a sin∣gle Person, is either of divine institution, approbation, or imitation, (but That as the most perfect draws nea∣rest to unitie, and a conformity to God himself) as I can make clearly appear from the light of Scripture, (the Christians compasse to steer by) that of nature (the can∣dle of the Lord set up and burning in sockets amongst the heathen) and by the instinct and impression the very bruit and irrationall creatures forme themselves by, into a kinde of Monarchicall government, yet I know In∣terpreters (now) divide upon this subject, and runne in two Channells.
1. Some in a concurrence with all anssqility and the most eminent more moclora divines, resolving that no Government is of divine origination and setled by commission from God, but what is Faternal, where the habit of power is seated in one person, though the exercise of it may be regulated (through the indul∣gence of good Princes) by Nationall and positive laws as well as divine; to the directive power of which the King ought to be as subject as his subjects, though not to the coactive, as being in that way onely answer∣able to God for his actions. Which made our Government by King, Lords and Commons the best temperd constitution in the world, in that (as in the Naturall body an equall mix∣ture of Elements) a just proportion and distribution of power in regard of exercise in the Civill and poli∣tique best Fabricates it for a prosperous continuance, which the experience of this Nation did happlly e∣vidence, till our having no King in Israel let in (as to the Jews) all Barbarity and impiety amongst us. 2. Others of a more late stamp (that carries the im∣pression of Jesuitisme upon it) as Buchanan and Knox for the reformed; Ballarmine and Stapleton for the Romish Church, resolve all power from God into the people and Community of men, and to be derived from them either by their Individuall or representative suffrages into any posture of government they shall chuse, whether Monarchicall, Ariftocraticall, Dema∣craticall, or the like; in it (and the conse quences of it) laying the Foundation of most of the Civill Wars and Commotions that have happened in Christendom since their time. But however these stremns divide, and these sines
are drawn Counter to one another, they both meet and concenter in that truth you desire a consirmati∣on in, which is. That there is a conscientious obedience, at least submission due to the Legislative Power whereever we own it to be, and that by Gods command whe∣ther to the King as supreme, Pet. 2.13. or higher Pow∣ers in the other notion, in that they are of God, and they that resist the power, resist God, and purchase damnation to themselves, Rom. 13.12. Other wayes there would be a progression ad infinitum, no Center to unite in, no binding up of broken and divided interests, no common principles to meet in, nothing to resolve our selves into, but Anarchy & consusion: Wherein all law would be reduced from the boad to the hand, from prudence to power, the Arbitration of the Sword, the Will and lusts of men. Upon which ground all the sober part of the king∣dom, as if one Soul had animated so many bodies, have agreed in desiring that one and onely expedient of a FREE PARLIAMENT, and both Armies have de∣clared for it, so as I hope we shall all acquiesce in what ONE, so Freely called, shall declare and settle. Yet there want not Emissaries and boutefeus that to gratifie their passions and private interests, Foment our distractions, and in stead of closing, strive to wi∣den our Soars, and make our disease mortall, by op∣posing the remedie of a FULL and FREE PAR∣LIAMENT killing us with their cordialls of specious pertences, glorious nothings, and feeding us with Aire and Shadows instead of solid food (to bring us to a consumptive death) the name and picture of Par∣liament, onely to Idolize when they would destroy
the very being of it, with our Religion, Liberties, and Freedome at once. But the pit is discovered though strewed over with Flowers, and I hope we are escaped the snare, by the prudence and publick spirit, our never to be enough honoured GENERALL hath shewed in the manage∣ment and conduct of our greatest and dearest interests. Yet the better to secure the blessings of a happy settlement, (a pregnant and comprehensive mercy, the Wombe of all other Felicities) Let us still with the wary Pilot have Oculos ad coelum, manus ad clavum: our eyes upon heaven, our hands at the sterne, that we prevent the storme, or saile safe in a rough sea. 1. By our prayers to God, the ascention of our spi∣rits, the wing and weight of our soules by which we mount in our desires and six in our dependencies up∣on him for a blessing. 2. By endeavouring to advance the settling of that Government we most approve, by all Just, Open, he∣nourable, and Faire wayes, being as zealous and active for GOD and the KING as others are for their too much adored IDOLL of PRESBYTERY & a FREE STATE, till we see what a FREE PARLIAMENT will produce, but then to acquiesce in its resolutions, as the onely suprem power now asserted, that can oblige us to a conscientious submission (though per∣haps not obedince) to their Lawes; the Legistator being above the Tribunall of men and onely accoun∣table to God for his actions And therefore if any shall be guilty of so daring a presumption as to impose upon their Judgments, or so high a rebellion as by force to oppose their com∣mands, though Connter to their own Interests and opinions, or so Irreligiously bold with God, as not
to submit to them for his sake, we are here resolved (we hope with LONDON and ALL other Counties) to maintain with our lives and fortunes the unlimi∣ted power in regard of humane restraints and Confine∣ments which we assert as due to a FULL FREE and legally called PARLIAMENT; having as good hearts, as good Swords, and a better cause to Fight for, then any can have to oppose us, in the vindication of the Parliaments undoubted Rights to an usufructuary in∣terest in the gubernative power. The Invasion of whose Freedome in any kind ei∣ther in Electing, sitting, or voting is the destroying of its essence and being, a turning our antidotes into poyson, And a taking from us all humane meanes of calming the raging of our Waters and madnesse of our people, who will otherwayes make this nation a great Bedlam, a Wildernesse Inhabited by beasts not men, a Chaos, that nothing but an Almighty Power can work upon, to produce beauty out of such disorder and confusion, from which GOOD LORD DELI∣VER US. Of the Influence of the Legislative Power upon Ecclesia∣stical Laws and Persons. AS to your second Question, how far the legislative power hath influence upon the Ecclesiastical, I think there can be no doubt, but that in the intention of our ancient laws, the Judgment of the Primitive Catho∣lick Church, the suffrages and practices of all the re∣formed ones and the rule of Scripture, they are as two great orbs in one Firmament, both moving from the Primum Mobile, in a motion orderly and Independing upon one another, acting accord∣ing to their several powers and functions; although
subordinate, as members of one Community and Ci∣vil body, so as the Civil Magistrate is supreme over their persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical, in regard of their Animation to the Exercise of their powers; but not over them; For as the Miter is to obey the Scepter in all things prudential in Government, and to submit to the regulation of their outward actings to their Commands: So the Scepter is not to inter∣pose in Cases meerly Ecclesiastical, as in matters of Faith, making of Canons &c. Onely in the inforcing of them, for the Regulation of the Church in Decency any Order (which S. Paul places in Church-men alone) nor did ever any age countenance the invasion of the Clergies rights in it, which were to make an as∣sault upon God himself, and sacrilegiously to force from his Spouse, not onely her Jewells and Ornaments, but the richest dowry she is invested with on earth. Nor can the disorderly and excentrick motions and actings of the Clergy themselves, in their unlawfull assemblies, lay a foundation for the Civil powers, im∣posing any thing upon us, in order to the change either of Doctrine or Discipline from what our anti∣ent Laws or Canons prescribe, Especially when theirs in themselves are so raw and undigested, as they do rather nauseate then nourish. And therefore I hope it will be the prudence of the PARLIAMENT to work after God's patterne, doing all things in number, weight and measure, Or∣der and proportion, being that alone that gives beauty and permanency to any being; and after so many wheelings, and revolutions returne to our antient, glorious and happy Government, by the KING, LORDS and COMMONS in Parliaments, Bi∣shops
and Presbyters in their lawfully called nationall Synods; which ballancing of the Interests, cannot but unite the sober, wise and moderate men of all parties, as I have expressed in my Letter to my Lord General Monck. For thus the Church can onely speak in her repre∣sentatives, as we do in our Conventions, by our proxies, and the spirit of the prophets be subject to the prophets, as the Scripture commands; so as Ʋzzah's hands must not uphold the Ark, nor Corah's conspi∣racy usurp upon Moses and Aaron, without engaging God as a party to revenge his owne cause and servants Interests. But when all things are done in a Just and orderly subordination, Laws carry reverence, honour and au∣thority in them; and Religion is as the Bases and Pil∣lars of Civil power, That as the Roof and Covering of the Church, to defend her against all the stormes of persecution; so as it is the happy union and combi∣nation of both that makes the building durable and glorious, the well tuning of them to one another that makes the Harmony, when the one obeys all Civil In∣junctions, the other actuates and enforces all Ecclesia∣stical constitutions, for they onely bring the Bullion prepared for the Legislators Mint, he gives the Stamp that makes it currant, so as all Church-laws to oblige the inward & outward man, ought to derive to us from the Clergy in a lawfull posture, as their spring (by the Magistrate, as the stream;) the promise of the holy Ghost in regard of ministerial function and govern∣ment, being onely to them, as hath been fully proved by many, scarce ever denyed by any solid and sober Christian. Which is all I have now to say in relation to what you propose.
The Third Leeter Of the late Publication of the Co∣venant in all Churches. BUt there is an exile lately returned, with what designe; I know not (the publication of the CO∣VENANT in all Churches) though it makes way for many conjectures, which I am not willing to publish, least with the Schoolmen, in their unclean Speculati∣ons, I should teach men many vices they are yet Inno∣cently ignorant of; Therefore I shall look upon it only as a well meant errour (being willing to extract virtue out of a Venemous and unwholsome plant) and put this interpretation upon it. 1. That it is onely meant to insinuare into mens minds, that naturall duty they owe their. Soveraign both by divine and humane Laws; and bring them to that Allegiance due to their KING by a sacred tye, so universally taken to support not enervate their for∣mer OATHS of FEALTY and obedience; Which my charity inclines me to, for it were too daring a sinne for any Christian to own the espousing of any other sence, and a suing out of a divorce from God, as done in opposition to his ordinances. 2. That in swearing to alter the Government of the Church (as it was, and is yet legally established)
by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Officials, &c. It cannot be interpreted to intend the extirpation of reverent, antient and APOSTOLICAL EPISCOPA∣CY, because the Oath Limits the intended reformati∣on to the rule of Scripture, in which Episcopacy is most clearly established and undoubtedly to be of the well being (if not being and Essence) of the Church, but only to designe (I hope in an Orderly Way of subordinati∣on with the KINGS Concurrence) a breaking of the Chain, a dissolving of that Hierarchy, and taking out such links only as were of humane Authority, and per∣haps superfluous at this time, as they drew in a train of unnecessary charges with them, and increase of Fees in Ecclesiasticall Courts (though prudentially retai∣ned in the reformation) but if any shall be so Igno∣rantly bold, as to attempt more, it is to undermine, under a pretence of building, and to benight us by ob∣scuring the great Lights of the Church and damming up the Fountain of it; when Episcopacy (as the Sun) is the receptacle of all Light, and placed by God in the Church to transmit it to the Presbyters and Dea∣cons (Stars of a lesser Magnitude) by a due Ordination which in the consequences, will let in an Egyptian blacknesse; and even Eclips God himself, in the glo¦ry of his outward Courts here on Earth, which he wishes may be restored to its former lustre, that is Your Humble Servant FINIS.
