T2499 13550941 100184
A TRUE and IMPARTIAL RELATION OF A Wonderful Apparition That Happen'd in the ROYAL CAMP in FLANDERS, The Beginning of this Instant SEPTEMBER, 1692. Concerning King WILLIAM. In a LETTER to a Gentleman in London, from his Friend, a Captain in the KING's Camp. LICENSED, September 27. 1692. E. B. IT is not (I presume) unknown to most, of the Dismal Earthquake that happen'd at Brussels, and other places in Flanders, much about the same time there was one universally felt here: And having received a Letter lately from thence, from a very worthy Friend of mine, (whose Name, not having his permission to reveal, I hope you will not think the worse of the Truth of the mat∣ter here related, for my concealing it), who is a Captain in Collonel Stapleton's Regiment, and himself at his return, will, I durst say, avouch the same: He not on∣ly gives some Account of that Earth∣quake, but of things that seem as strange as (I believe, you will find at His Maje∣sty's Return, to be) true; which is con∣cerning his Sacred Majesty King William: And, Gentle Reader, I will no longer de∣tain your patience, but take it as it came to me in the true Copy thereof, viz. SIR, ABout Ten days since, one Hussey, a Solder in my Company, stand∣ing Centry about One of the Clock in the Morning, at my Colonel Stapleton's Tent∣door, there appeared a Spirit to him, viz. A tall Gentleman-like Person, in a Cam∣let Coat, and short Dark Peruke, mounted upon a fine Dapple-gray Horse; he rushed by Hussey, who bid him stand; the Spi∣rit reply'd several times in a shrill Tone, The King, the King is to be made away, if care be not speedily taken; or to that purpose: Hussey asked by whom? upon which another Spirit appeared to him on Foot, having the appearance of a stern Black man, full grown, and pretty tall,
having on a Blew Campaign Coat, with a Cape, and Black Campaign Peruke, and a Black Hat laced with Silver Lace, and a Silver-hilted Sword; the first Spi∣rit said, That is the Man, take good notice of him, which he did; and then the last Spirit vanished: And Hussey askt the first Spirit, who still was on Horseback, Whe∣ther that Person did belong to the Army? the Spirit replied, He was daily busling about the Court, and then the first Spirit vanished. Hussey writ a Relation of this under his hand (being seemingly very well in his Senses), and offered to me, upon his revealing it to me, to swear to the truth of it. After which he saw the real Person riding with the King, which appeared to him on foot; and Hussey would have seized on him, but could not come near enough to him at that time, Hussey being on foot; but waited an opportunity to do it, some other time, and revealed it at the same time. But at One of the Clock the very next Morn∣ing after, standing Centry near the same place again, the first Spirit that ap∣peared to him on Horseback before, ap∣peared to him on foot, and with an An∣gry Countenance said, Now the Business is prevented, no thanks to you; why did not you do your Duty yesterday? and with that the Spirit hit him a blow on the back, which hath confined him to the Trench three or four days; and the Spi∣rit said, He is gone back to the French, but was last night shot in the Guts by an Out-Centry of theirs: And it is asserted by a Deserter that came over to us that Night, That such a Man so habited, and as re∣lated by the Spirit, was so shot by them, and hath asserted it: Believe it as you please, Hussey is positive in the matter, and I think good to give you a Character of him my self, who I have often sounded about this Business, and neither Threats of Punishment, or Promises of Reward, can make him recant; but he stands to the Truth of what I have here written from his own mouth; And I think fit to add so much of my own knowledge of him, That ever since I have known him under my Command, he hath behaved himself with a great deal of Faithfulness, Courage, and Loyalty, diligent in His Du∣ties, observing the Commands of his Offi∣cers, and chearfully obeying them as a good Soldier ought to do, and a Fellow gi∣ven neither to Malencholly, nor to much mirth, but a harmless good-natured Fel∣low as any I have in my Company. So I leave you to judge of the matter, which to me is worth the taking notice of; and to you I question not but it will be the same. From the Camp of the 12th Instant, English Stile. This hapned at the Im∣perial Camp, a League beyond Valkoway. I am Your Loving Friend. POSTSCRIPT. Sir, WE have had a great Earthquake here at Brussel, last week, and some Houses are overthrown thereby: There was little harm occasioned by it in our Camp; but the shake being great at his Majesty's Lodgings, they run so fast out of the Door, that they run over the Centries; and one of them had three of his Teeth beat out, and some more bruised. London: Printed for RANDALL TAYLOR, near Amen-Corner. 1692.
