T938 12270481 58228
VVhitehall, August 19. 1695. This Morning came in an Express from my Lord Berkeley, with an Account of the Bombarding of CALAIS. Published by Authority. MY Lord Berkeley anchored with the Fleet be∣fore Calais the 16th of this month, but it proving too calm, nothing was done till next day, when about 11 in the morning Colonel Richards, with the Bomb Vessels, stood in to the Eastward of the Town, and Anchoring in 3 Fathom Water, began to Bombard it with such good Success, that by one a Clock the Town was seen on Fire in se∣veral places; at which time the Enemies half Gal∣lies came out, and stood to the Eastward under their own Shore, thinking thereby to annoy the Bomb Ships; but our Brigantines, and several Men of War standing in to them, Commanded by Captain Greenaway, gave them such a Reception, as put them in great Confusion, and with much ado they regained the Peer-heads; After which we received no other disturbance than the usual Salutes of their Cannon and Mortars from their several Batteries. Our Bomb Vessels continued firing till towards 5 at Night, during which time we Shot into the Town about 600 Shells, which by the several Fires we saw, we judge to have done very considerable Execution. We have received little Damage, either as to Men killed, or Damage done to our Vessels. Captain Osborne of the Al∣borough Ketch was killed. Falmouth, August 15. On the 12th came into this Port two Zealand Privateers, called the King William, and the Middleburg, of 26 and 24 Guns; They have been out two Months, and taken three French Privateers, and one Pink laden with Wine and Brandy. The same Evening came in sight of this place about 14 Sail of Hamburg∣hers, under Convoy of a Man of War of 50 Guns; They came from Milford Haven with the Streights Fleet, but could not keep way with them; And on the 12th a Dutch Vessel was taken out of their Company by 3 French Privateers, but the Litchfield Frigat coming in, gave Chace to them. Plimouth, Aug. 16. The 14th came into this Port His Majesty's Ship the Litchfield, and brought in a Ship of 140 Tuns, called the Justice of Am∣sterdam, which she retook the 12th instant off Fal∣mouth. Yesterday came in the Rupert from Bristol, with a small French Privateer that was lately taken near Milford. The Dutch Mail of Friday last is come in, and brings the following Advices. From the Kings Camp before the Castle of Namur, August 15/25. 1695. THese three last nights we carried on our Trenches about 500 Paces, 80 Yards distant one behind the other, and we are come within 200 Paces of the Enemies Redoubt. The Enemy made a Review of their Troops on Monday at Soignies, but did not march to Senef as was said. Yesterday they came to Felluy, be∣tween Nivelle and Seneff, where they still continue. The Forces of Lunenburg and Hesse are come up to us: The Foot encamp'd last night within half a League of the Town, and passed the Maese this day at Noon, being about 7000 men, who have taken Post in order to assist at the Siege. The Horse and Dragoons, making 22 Squadrons, joined last night the main Army, under the Command of Prince Vaudemont, at Mazy. This Evening all things were prepared to At∣tack a Stone Redoubt at the Foot of the Cohorne, near the Sambre; but upon the approach of our Men, a Lieutenant and 15 of the Enemy that were in it, Surrendred. Our Batteries continue to play upon the Castle and Coehorne with very good Effect, and in 2 or 3 days we hope our Breaches will be ready for a ge∣neral Assault. Hague, Aug. 26. The Letters from Paris say, the French King was ill of the Gout, accompanied with a Fever. Paris, Aug. 22. The 20th instant arrived at Versailles Monsieur de Puisequr, Major General of the French Army in Flanders, being dispatched by the Marefchal de Villeroy to lay before the French King the different Opinions of the General Officers concerning the relief of Namur, where∣upon a Council was held the next day, and presently after he returned Post with further Orders to the Mareschal de Villeroy. The French Detachement from the Rhine arri∣ved the 17th at Rocroy, and from thence would continue their march to Flanders. They continue to work at Toulon on the fitting out of several Men of War; which they think to have ready by the middle of the next mouth. Monsieur de Noailles, Bishop of Chalons, is named to be Archbishop of Paris; he is Brother of the Marefchal of that Name. From Prince Lewis of Baden's Camp at Ravens∣berg, Aug. 19. The 16th Prince Lewis received Advice, That the French had detached 10 or 12000 men towards Hagenbach, wiith Orders to pass the Rhine there; Whereupon a Council of War was held, and the next day our Army mar∣ched and encamp'd on the Gensberg, our Right near Wiseloch, and our Left towards Malsch. Prince Lewis has sent Lieutenant General Swartz, with 4 Battalions and 7 Squadrons towards Mentz, with orders to joyn the Hussars and Dragoons that are there under Count Palfi, and to pass the Rhine in order to give the Enemy a Diversion. Francfort, Aug. 20. The Forces of Munster are, 'tis said, ordered to follow the Hessiens and Lunenburgers to Flanders; they lie at present at Pungstat near Darmstat, where the Foot will be shipt to morrow, and so pass by water to Mentz and Coblentz. Vienna, Aug. 13. The Imperial Army was still encamp'd the 6th instant at Buckin, where the Elector of Saxony would arrive in few days. The Grand Visier was expected at Belgrade about the middle of this month, near which place there lay encamp'd about 20000 Turks. 'Tis reported, that the Cham of Tartary is returning home again upon the News of Azof's being taken by the Mos∣covites. Turin, Aug. 13. The Imperial Infantry, that was at Casal, marched last Tuesday to Rivoli. And the Troops of his Royal Highness about the same time to Buriasque; Our Horse is encamped at Oquette and la Veillane. In the mean time they continue to work on the demolishing of Casal, in which the French make all the delay they can. The Governor of Milan is expected here in a day or two to consult with his Royal Highness con∣cerning some farther Enterprise. Venice, Aug. 12. The late Captain General Zeno and Signior Pisani, having performed their Quarantaine, desire a Trial concerning their Pro∣ceedings in the Battle of Scio. Our Fleet was by our last Advice off Andros; and the Enemy avoid∣ed meeting them. Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy. 1695.
