W288 R219291 99830781 35235
ΠΑΛΙΝΟΔΙΑ. Sive Fama Vapulans: Occasioned by her Retractation of her precipitate censure of Mrs ANNE GIBBS, By her real Convert and Re-admirer, R. W. An. Mar. a Schur. in Apol. Nec viclasse tuas leges Astraea putabor; Quippe suum tribui cuilibet ipsae jubes. Let me not seem, Astraea, to dethrone Thy Laws, thou bid'st that all should have their own. Printed, Anno Virginis parturientis, 1662.
Ex spelunca Juxta tumescentis Laugherni ripas 9bris 26, 1662.
Fama Vapulans. PROTASIS, Ad Musam. PIsh, pre'thee sleep, my Muse, do not molest The Thespian Vestalls, let them take their rest. Alas! this purblind world will never see, Do what thou can'st, their own stupidity: Perhaps some civilized men may daign To look upon this issue of thy brain With candor, but the vulgar are a rude, Malignant, head-strong, hare-brain'd multitude. A Carnaval to them presents more sport Then the elaborate Opera's o'th' Court; And in their Dances they had rather follow Pan's rustick reeds, then th'harp of god Apollo. Well, if thou wilt not, I can say no more, Then let thy Sonnets rant, thy Satyrs rore. Belch Io-paeans on this pond'rous theme, And thunder execrations against them. I've spoke to Sabrine, and she will inspire, And let her Nymphs bring fuel to, thy fire: That 'spite of all opponents every page May be replete with true poetick rage,
And swell with holy fury 'gainst all those That dare the chast Panaletha oppose. EPITASIS. REcta in curiam, we here present LƲCRETIA adjudg'd incontinent By a pretended court proclaim'd of late In Fame's great name, which we seek to abate. In that Tribunal it was shew'd how she Had forfeited her claim to chastity. The reason urg'd was this. How else could those, For she had Camrades you must know, expose Themselves upon a Stage, or to the life Personate Annabell', or Harebrain's wife? But see the fallacy, my Author vows A man may act those things he never knows. Think you that none can persenate a sin But that which he himself hath wallowed in? You may as well averre Players are made Apprentices to every manual Trade. Or, 'cause you know they act and speak such things That appertain to Princes, say they're Kings. Alss poor Dramaticks, striving to shun One gulf, ye full into another run. Histrio-mastix carp'd at ye because He thought your men before broke Natur's Laws In using Women's cloaths, but Cynthius aurem Vellit, and we've got a Quiescas for him.
Yet now that they perform their parts themselves, Your Scenes are threatend by as dangerous shelves. The cursed Hydra Mome assaults their names, Mistaking what's their glory for their shames: They're impudent Sluts crys one, for otherwise How could they thus surfeit Spectators eyes With their lascivious gestures? 'nother swears If they be honest he will forfeit's ears. Nay Lais too will say, as I hear tell, Can they be chaste? it is impossible. Thinking perhaps that she, although she can Within her chamber boldly treat a man, Yet could not on a Theatre obtrude Her confidence before a multitude. And therefore by her Logick doth infer They needs must be as errand Whores as her. So Clodius Maechos too, but wise men know They'r ne'r th' more honest for pretending so. If seeming sanctity be all thou hast Whereby to judge these Sodom Apples chast, Those that have found some rotten at the core, May well conclude each woman is a whore. Reader, we've been defendant hitherto, But now we mean to speak as Plaintiff too. CATASTASIS. PEace shameless Trumpetress, do not delude With Phantasms the too credulous multitude.
Silence thy brazen Trumpet, that no further It calumnize the innocent Recorder. Recant those false Alarms of thy rude blast Which have the fair LUCRETIA's shrine defac'd. Let Albion that rich Caskanet inhance. And not reject it out of ignorance. Let not Exoticks, who already doe For Horses, 'count her th' Hell for actors too. Oh how can she, whose face long since confuted The Divine Heathen'sArtifices Scenici qui imitantur affectus &c. hoc Jn∣dicio imitantur verecundiam, Dejiciunt vultum, verba sub∣mittunt, &c. Ruborem sibi exprimere non pessunt. Sen. ad Luc. Ep. 11.maxim, be reputed Unchast? when't is the first Lucretia's glory That we by this do now believe her Story. When had it not been sensibly to us Demonstrated, 't had still seem'd fabulous. Who saw those rosy blushes that did deck The intervals of her inamell'd cheek At sight of Sextus, or th' complacency Wherewith she acted her self-butchery? But would conclude she his vile act abhorr'd As much in deed as most do now in word. Who saw with what reluctance and disgust She yeelded but in shew to Brothwel's lust. But must assert her chastity, or sweare There is not one deserves a Stla here.
CATASTROPHE. ANd now thou swift'st of Fama malum quo non aliud velocius ullum, Mebilitate viget, vires{que} acquirit eundo. Virg. Aen. 4.evils which dost gain By motion strength, in flying force obtain; Say not my Muse was secretly suborn'd I'd have thee know such offices she scorn'd Quite from her infancy, and doth detest To plead for prejudice or interest. 'Twas love to Truth which made me to incur The vulgar hate, which over-ruled her. 'Would Pantemimick Teletes had liv'd In these depraved times, how'd he have griev'd And wrung his hands, to see his Art abus'd And his beloved Pupil's name misus'd. 'Tis not that Dionysia, whose fame Long since gave greatWho for his action was called Gesticulatoriam Dio∣nysiam, from a she Chironomer of that name.Hortensius his name; She joyns not Esau's hands to Jacob's voice, Nor doth she perpetrate the sinallest vice 'Gainst his hand-law, but won the Palm in spite Of famous RosciusDelicias suas, so he used to call him.Cicero's delight. Who, had he liv'd until this last worst age Had lack'd a Patron to repel the rage Of th' Rabble; Tully would have chang'd his cause, And rescu'd chast LƲCRETIA from the jawes
Of envious obloquy, making each one Lay's hand on's mouth and act Sigalion. But why do I expatiate abroad? 'Twas mean't for an Abridgement, not a Code. May'st thou inherit base Cassandra's fate, As the demerit of thy vilder hate. Thereby supporting her now totterring State, Whom many envy, few can emulate. FINIS LUCRETIAE SACRUM. Auctariolum. Anne Gibbs Ἀναγραμματικῶσ. Sing Ben-ab Your pardon, Fairest, that, into the quire Of your Adorers, my discordant Lyre Hath thus far ventur'd, strucken to the same By th' Cabalistick accents of your name.
To which she thought her self oblig'd in duty For to submit as vassal of your beauty. And by her President Each Fathers Son, She hopes, will modul forth an Ʋnison. That to your glory this versatile round May still with Eccho'd Diapasons sound. Votivum. Mrisay all those Constellations, we allow A happy geniture, still smile on you, Never let ought Malignant once molest Natures Aenigma lodging such a guest. Excel in pow'r as goodness, to defend you, Good and propitious Stars always attend you. Intrinsick and externe formositie Beatify your Gordian nuptial tie. But when the Fates conclude that you must dy, Survive in bliss to all Eternity. Cui non datur. FINIS
