W3190 12931258 95674
Sigh for the Pitchers: Breathed out in a Personal Contribution TO THE NATIONAL HUMILIATION the last of May, 1666. In the Cities of London and Westminster, UPON The near approaching ENGAGEMENT Then expected, Between the English and Dutch Navies. Wherewith are complicated such Musings as were oc∣casioned by a Report of their Actual Engagement; and by observing the Publike Rejoycing whilst this was preparing by the Author GEORGE WITHER. Hold, If ye knock, ye are broke. Hold. Unless God prevent. Imprinted in the sad year expressed in this seasonable CHRONOGRAM LorD haVe MerCIe Vpon Vs. MDCLXVI.
To the English Nation, and to every Individual Person within these Brittish Isles, Geo. Wither, wishes that Grace, Peace, and Love in CHRIST JESUS, which by an unfeigned Humiliation, may reconcile us all to GOD; Vnite us by an indissolvable Band of Charity, to each other; and in a Christian Amity, withall Nations through the world. MY Sighs concern you all, throughout this Nati∣on Who are this day, in true Humiliation To seek the face of GOD; For, we make One Of those two Pitchers whom I do bemone: And, unto whom (then fearing much their breaking, When first I saw War preparations making) I sent a Trumpet, both with an Intent And hope, that which was feared, to prevent; Which, failing my good purpose to produce, I send this now, to mediate a Truce; For, who can tell, but that my words may have Such ssue now, as heretofore GOD gave Unto a private-womans when she spoke For Abel, what effect in season took? So may it prosper as I am sincere In that, Which I have Superscribed here; And, let my Foes on earth, be still as many As there are men, if I wish ill to any; Or, am not pleasd that all should live and die As happy, both in Life and Death as I Who shall not, by a final Wilfulness, Deprive themselves of what they might possess; And slander GOD, as cause Original Of that, which doth amiss to them befal. For, though, not few, my Adversaries be Or such, as, yet, bear no good will to me,
I, ev'n for that cause, am in love, their debter; For, him, who loves his Foes, GOD, loves the better: Yea, having partly been, in my distress Relievd by some few who, do naytheless Seem still my Enemies; it, makes me more, Love GOD, and all Mankinde, then heretofore. A time is come, in which, it is our turn Both altogether, and apart to mourn: Those General Calamities befal Which, for a general Repentance call, And, for particular Humiliation, In order to a publick Reformation, From which, at present, are excepted none; No, not the King, who sitteth on the Throne: For, that which is in Cottages begun Will seize the Pallace, ere the Round is run, If GOD in mercy, answer not our hope, And, to our sins and fears, vouchsafe a Stop. To that end, though this be not what I would Or, should contribute, it is what I could And, may now, be as usefully exprest, As what more artificially is drest: Yea, (though it be, that onely) in effect, Which I have ost preferd without respect, This, seems a very seasonable time, To greet you, with a Reasonable Rime. Accept it therefore, and be not offended With what is conscientiously intended. GOD, who from us doth Trifles oft receive, Requires of none, more then he hath to give; And, if you shall accept what's in my powr He, will of that accept, which is in your; For, all that is contributed, by this, Worth your acceptance, is not mine, but his.
Sighs for the Pitchers. Breathd out, in a Personal Contribution to the National Humiliation, formally begun in the Cities or London and Westminster, the last of May, 1666. 'Such is GODS gratiousness, that, wheresoever 'He finds a Willingness joynd with endeavour To please or to appease him, though bat small, (And in it self worth no respect at all) He doth accept it: But, it is not so With men, what er'e we mean, or say, or do. For, most so pettish are; that ev'n with that Which to their own well-being doth relate, They quarrel; and as much offended are With what, unto their own particular Hath no relation, as to any thing Which may to them a disadvantage bring. Yea, so inclind are, to be discontent With Actions, and with words indifferent, That how to fit all humors no man knows What ere he writes, be it in Verse or Prose. Some, are best pleasd with this, and some with that, With nothing some; or, with we know not what, Except with that, (and in their own mode drest) Whereby their Single Fancies are exprest. If, I may freely, Truth declare in either, To me, it is indifferent in whether: Verse cannot be so justly termd unholy As they, who think so, may be chargd with folly. The Libertie, I therefore, at this time, Resume, to vent my mind in Verse and Rime
As heretofore without an affectation Of what, is this day, with most men in fashion; And, what I purpose to contribute now, Shall be such private Sighings as I owe To Publick sorrowings; not such, as may, Without true sense thereof, be puft away. I offer not, now Cures are to be done, That, which will prove no better then Herb-John Or Chipps in broth; nor, when provide I should Apparel to preserve my Friend from cold, Bring them such thin sleight Garments, as are neither Good Silk or Cloth, but Bawbles patcht together, Lace, Points and Ribbands: Nor, to feed them, set A platter full of Sawces without meat, Or, with so little, and so trimd about With Kickshawes, that they cannot pick it out: Nor give the Sick, when they for health endeavor, Such Trash, as may beget a mortal Feaver; Nor Healing Plasters, when I do perceive The Patient rather needs a Corrosive: Nor, if there ought improper to that end, For which, Humiliations we pretend In that, which I in words have added here: Either peruse it therefore, or, give ear. BEfore a Storm is actually begun, Or, Symptoms of it, in the Skies appear; Both Birds and Beasts, for shelter fly and run, To scape the Dangers, then approaching near. To what these are by Sense inclind, in season, Men are assisted (for their preservations) By Strong Impulses, both of Grace and Reason, Till they neglect, or sleight those Inclinations.
And to the Publick safety, every one Owes what may possibly by him be done: For, there's a Portion due from him that's poor, Though from the Rich, there is expected more. 2. I had some education in the, Schools, But my best Teachings, came another way, And, neither to the wisest, or meer Fools, Is that intended which I have to say. My Muse is to a midling-temper fitted, What suits with their capacities to write Who, (not much under or much over witted) More in the Matter, then the Words delight. By that means, when with Trifles I begin, Things useful, are oft, thereby Skrewed in, Which peradventure, had not else been sought, Where, they appeard more likely to be taught: What I but to one end, at first intended, Occasions many Cautions, ere 'tis ended. So, sometimes, twenty businesses are done, By him, who went from home, to do but one. 3. Sometimes too, by what in this mode is hinted, (On sleight occasions in a Vulgar Strain) Such Notions have been in the heart imprinted As were more plausibly exprest in vain: Yea, otherwhile, a few plain words, in season, Experimentally in private spoke, More operate with Sanctified Reason, (And of what they import, more heed is took) Then is (although more gloriously arayd) Of what's but formally, in publick said. Now therefore, I contribue thus, alone, To what was this day, publickly begun. But, stay! what Pannick fear hath seizd this Nation That, they who Triumphd but one day ago,
Assume the Postures of Humiliation, And Fast and Pray, at least, pretend thereto? Their Jollitie is at a suddain pause, And to the Temples, they begin to flock; God make th' effect, as real as the cause, That, him with formal showes we do not mock, Lest Plagues increase, and when of what is better, We are in hope, our fears grow dayly greater: For, till our sins are heartily repented, By Fasts and Prayers, Plagues are not prevented. 5. Most, dedicated this moneths first Aurora To their own fleshly Lusts; and spent the day In sacrificing to the Strumpet Flora, Which was by some employd another way, Perhaps though not Prophane, more superstitious Then holy: for, all is not sanctifide That is not vulgarly reputed vitious; Nor all unholy, which will not abide A Sanctuary-Test: But, somwhat hath Doubtless, been acted which provokes Gods wrath Against our Nation, since this Month begun, That brings us on our knees, before 'tis done. 6. Our Safety, Peace and Glory lie at stake; And, we are forced such a Game to play, As makes us tremble, and our hearts to ake Twixt hope and fear of that which follow may: Ev'n they, who lately foolishly did boast, And with proud Vaunts and scorns contemn their Foes, Do find, that Recknings made without their hoast, Arise to more then they did presuppose. Of Foes without them, their regard was small; Of those within them, less, or none at all: But, now, to be assaulted, they begin With outward perils, and with fears within.
7. Beyond reteating we ingaged are With forraign enemies; and not quite free From Factions, threatning an intestine War, If our Presumings unsuccessfull be. As foes do multiply, so, friends grow fewer; And, in those few, there is but little trust: For, none can in another be secure Who, to himself is neither kind nor just. War is begun; the Pestilence doth spread; And, though of Dearth we feel but little dread, They, by whose Labours, plenty was increast, Are by a wasting Poverty opprest. 8. The Rich are discontent, the Poor much grievd: The first have small hope to be better pleasd; The last as little hope to be relievd, And most men are grown stupidly diseasd. Men with Ill tidings in all places meet, Bewailing loss of Goods, or want of Trade: All day they hear complainings in the street; All night, they and their Families are sad. Hereof, they upon others lay the blame Who have been chief deservers of the same: Most, apprehend a general Distress, But, no man knows which way to make it less. 2. They, who should act, or mediate at least, Some course to stop the fury of the Current, Finde, it will most advance their Interest, To be at this time Fishing in the Torrent. They, who have now most cause, least frighted be: Those few alone, who with a filial fear And Christian hope, Gods purposes foresee, Submissive to his Dispensations are: The rest are active still, in their own mode, As if in their own power their safety stood;
Or, that it might be wrought, by their own hand, If (as twas once said) GOD would Neuter stand. 16. For our defence, a Naval preparation Is made, as strong, as ever heretofore In any Age, was modeld by this Nation; Yea, stronger much, though not in number more. And, if they who thereof have management, Shall not thereon (as if it could not fail) Or, in themselves, be over-confident, It may against our ablest Foes prevail: But, not unless, we timely lay aside Our malice, our profaness, and our pride, Which by the Lord of hosts, are so abhord, That, they destroy more, then both fire and sword. 11. In mournings, we so little do delight, That, whatsoever sad event befals, Which to humiliation doth invite, It seldom supersedes our Festivals. A Fast therefore, so near a Feast begins, To moderate our Mirth, and make us minde A true and speedy mourning for those sins Whereto we have been, and are still inclinde. A change of Feasts to fastings threatned was, Which is within a little come to pass; And, that, may peradventure be effected Which we most fear, when it is least expected. 12. Hereof the Civil powers having sense, And, fearing what might probably befal, Unless, we strengthned are by Providence Much more, then by their moving wooden-wall; They lately summond us by Proclamations To meet, and on the last of May begin In our head-Cities, such Humiliations As may declare a true Remorse for sin.
Early that morning, likewise, lest we might Their summons, either then forget, or slight, GOD, seconded their Act, and from our beds With Peals of Thunders, raisd our drowzie heads. 13 If I was not deceivd, five hours together That Summons lasted, (with few Intervals) Made signal by Rain, Lightning, Stormy weather, And Thunderbolts, which pierced through stone-wals. It brake and melted Bells; consumd a Steeple; Scard Fowls and Beasts, yea, and afraid did make Even them, among those unrelenting People, Who, heed of nought but smart and noise will take; And in security again sleep on Assoon as ere the pain or noise is gone. Alas! what horrours will such men confound, When they shall hear the seventh Trumpet sound? 14. I did obey this Call; and knowing too, That in the common peace, mine doth consist, In meekness, I prepard my heart, to do What might secure the common Interest. The best have failings, and the worst have more; Though therefore they oft erre, who are in powre, With their defects, we must our own deplore: For oftentimes their faults take root from our. King Davids crime sprung from the Peoples sin; For his offence, a Plague on them broke in: Thus, to each other, men of each degree, A mutual cause, of sins and suffrings be. 15. This makes me the more cautious, to take heed Wherein, I personally give offence; And, ere I censure that which others did, Bewail mine own misdeeds with penitence. All of us have offended, (if not more) As much as our forefathers have transgrest:
Some, with more Impudence, then heretofore; And, my sins, have the common guilt increast: My self, to humble therefore, I went thither Where good and bad men congregate together; And, where, the worst are, or (before they die) May be, for ought I know, more just then I. 16. He seems to me, unlikely to appease The wrath of GOD, or mortifide to be, Who, offers Prayers like that Pharisees, Who judg'd the Publican less just then he. There is no sign of true Humiliations, But, of a proud self-overweening rather In those, who judge unclean whole Congregations Who with them, serve one Spirit, Son and Father; And (although members of another Colledge) Adore one GOD according to their knowledge. According unto mine, therefore, with them I joynd in Love, and left their doom to him. 17. I dare not such a separation make Twixt persons, things or places, as may bar A freedom in those Duties to partake Which necessary or expedient are. When sins and Plagues grow Epidemical, It such Humiliations then requires, As may in that respect, be general: For, private tears quench not the publike Fires. In all Fraternities and Constitutions, Among men, are both errours and pollutions; Yet safe converse, for pious men hath bin With such, (even then) in all things, but their sin. 18. With others, I preferred those petitions VVhich with Christs prayr assentially agree; VVith them, I joyned in all those confessions That seemed proper both to them and me.
Their persons I did much commiserate, Who were in hazard by the War now wag'd: With GOD, I meekly did expostulate Concerning that wherein we are engag'd. For others sakes, those fears my fears I made, Whereof, no sense, for self-respects I had; And wished all their hopes might be enjoyd Whereby, their true bliss might not be destroyd. 19. Although particulars inclusive are In Vniversals; yet, they who neglect Their single Duties, justly loose their share In what the general Devoirs effect. I have contributed my best endeavour, To what I think is publickly intended, And in that duty purpose to persever Which is to my performance recommended. For all things, and all men (so far as they Are objects of our Prayers) I do pray; And, when I doubt, what to insist upon, Conclude my prayer thus: GODS will be done. 20. Their welfare seeking, who would me enslave, The person I distinguish from his Crime; And rather would a wicked people save, Then let the Righteous be destroyd with them. To their proceeds in wickedness, I say GOOD speed to none; and whensoere, therefore I pray against their sins, for them I pray: Yea, when they seem worst, pray for them the more. When LOT was prisner among Sodomites, Against their Foes, to free him, Abram fights. When universal Plagues on us befal, Not knowing good from bad, I pray for all. 21. I have a long time taken so much heed Both of GODS righteous, and our crooked ways,
That, whatsoere doth outwardly succeed, I finde just cause to give him hearty praise. So oft, experience I have likewise had, My losses, wants, and those things which I feard, To have been unto me more gainful made, Then such, as more desirable appeard; That, whensoere GOD granteth or denies, My soul is pleasd, and on his love relies. For, when they seemed most severe to be, His Judgements have been Mercies unto me. 22. Such they were, such they are, such will be still, Not unto me, and to some few alone; But, if they be submissive to his will, Such likewise, at all times, to every one: And, though he grants not always that Request, Which is preferred, he doth condescend To what is better; yea, to what may best Conduce to what we chiefly should intend. If, what we pray for, he denies to grant, Humility, or Faith, or Love we want; Or else, there are some other great defects, In those Petitioners, whom GOD rejects. 23. Sins National, so far forth as they were Confest in Publike, I with those confest To whom I joynd; and in particular, If possible, they ought to be exprest. I know we are obliged at this time (Considering why together we did come) To mention such, (or part at least of them) As brought what we would be deliverd from. I hope such were acknowledged by many; But, since I heard it not performd by any, I will enumerate some few of those Provoking sins, from whence most danger flows.
For, GOD, at this time over all the Land Hath in displeasure stretched forth his hand; And for our sins, doth strike us, here and there With every Judgement, yea, and every where. 24. We are a Nation to whom God hath given As many priviledges, as bestown On any people that is under Heaven: But, therewithal more proud, then thankful grown. VVe overween, as if we thought none were Our equals; and with so much impudence Our selves before our Neighbours do prefer, That, more Disgrace then Honor springs from thence. Some vaunt as if none ought to be compar'd VVith them, in what is by their valour dar'd; And, some, as if none went or knew the way VVhereby, men shall ascend to heavn, but they. 25. If what GOD hath conferd, or for us done VVere mentioned, to stir up thankfulness In us; or to advance his praise alone, Thence would spring many great advantages. But that which most men rather do pursue, Is but before mens eyes a Blinde to raise, And, hide their shameful nakedness from view; Or, blow the Bubbles of an empty praise. And, (as if we were not befoold enough, VVith such ridiculous and frothy stuff) In Ballads, which are for such objects meet, VVe sing out our own shame, in every street. 26 Perhaps in suchlike things the neighbring Nations Opposing us, as guilty are as we: But, our own sins, in our Humiliations Is that, which to confess, oblig'd we be. Our sins, our sins, are horrid, great and many, Those Plagues too, which they bring on us, are great;
VVhereof, there is not so much fense in any, As ought to be, nor such confessions, yet. So loth we are that other men should see (Or, we ourselves) in what sad case we be, That, we our scabs and sores had rather hide VVith any Clouts, then let them be espide. 27. So loth we are, in that course to proceed, VVhich GOD and Reason offers to our heed; So apt, to take the clean contrary way; To heed, what every Mountebanck doth say; So ventrous, any hazard to endure, VVhich our enjoyments present may secure; So prone with Bugbears to be frighted from VVhat may secure a happiness to come; And, are so wilful in pursuing things VVhich every day, more mischiefs on us brings, That, very seldom we approve of that VVhich may be for our good, till tis too late. 28. And then, surprised with a sudden, dread, To any God, to any Idol run; Move every way, like Dors without a Head; Do every thing save that which should be done: Catch hold on sticks, and reeds, and chips & straws, To save our selves; descend, to sawn on those VVhom we contemn'd; and to support our cause, Against old Friends, confederate with Foes; Yea, with the greatest enemy of Christ; And, rather hazard all our Interest In him, then here to be deprivd of that Which we enjoyed, and have aimed at. 29. VVe are so much inclined to rely Upon the trustless and bewitching Charms Of State-designs and humane policie, On Armies, Fleets, and strength of our own Arms,
That we are deafer then th'inchanted Adder, To those who shew to us the way of peace; Good counsel maketh us to be the madder, And, doth but raging violence increase. Yet, they who know they shall not be excusd From doing their endeavour, though abusd, Must speak what on their Consciences doth lie, Whatere thereby befals; and so will I. 30. Such times have ben, and such are come agen, Wherein, the Sluggard to the Ant was sent; The Wise instructed were by simple men How to reform their wayes when they miswent. GOD, by them, Kings reprovd, ev'n for their sake Whom they had then inslav'd; and they were heard. Yea, unto Balaam, by his Ass he spake, And, at that present he escapd the Sword: But they who to their words gave no regard, Receivd their obstinacies due Reward. They, who were penitent escapd the blow Which then was threatned; so shall all such now. 31. Ore them a very dreadful Plague impends Whom to the will of men, GOD, doth expose, Though such they be whom they suppose their friends And, have thereof made fair external shows. A greater Plague it is, when known foes are Impowred upon them to excercise All cruelties, and outrages of War Which rage will act, and malice can devise. But, when so terrible a doom as this, And mercie too, much and oft sleighted is, It will be then more horrible then all That can be thought, into Gods hands to fall. 32. Alas! how shall this horrour be prevented, If none in such a time should silence break?
VVhen should what is misacted be repented, Unless, to that intent the stones could speak? And, what may they speak likely to prevail Upon a Generation grown so giddy? The Stars to do their duty did not fail; The Elements have often spoke already, And acted in their place, as well as spoken What might our duties, and Gods minde betoken; Yea, so much, and so oft, that what they heard Or saw, few men did credit or regard. 33. Hereby are blessings turnd into a curse; Those hardned, whom it should have softned more; They who were bad before, grow to be worse; Some wicked, who seemd good men, heretofore. Our sins are as immoveable as Rocks; Our Guides and Leaders, either lame or blinde; The Shepherds as great straglers as the Flocks, And both alike, to wickedness inclinde. That, which we thought should make us, doth un∣do us, All things do seem to cry VVo wo unto us: And, that which should have movd men to repent Doth but their Rage and Blasphemies augment. 34. Most, against those by whom they were offended Are so imbitterd, that although in them They see performances to be commended, Such, naytheless, they totally condemn: Yea, those who have ingenuously confest What seems to be in these worth approbation, They judge to be Time-pleasers, not the best; VVhich is a bar to Reconciliation. Our Proverb bids us give the devil his due; And, they the ways to peace, do not pursue VVho are unwilling, in their Foes, to see Good things, as well as those that evil be.
35. The Knowledge men have gotten hath destroyd That Love, which ought thereby to be increast. The Publick peace, that might have been enjoyd, Is vitiated by Self-interest. The Gospel is abusd, Law made a snare, Or, of Unrighteousness a confirmation: The Consciences of men inslaved are, To nothing left so free as Prophanation. The Rich do quarrel, and the Poor must fight, To serve their Lusts, who do them little right; And they whose Lives to pawn for them are laid, With Deaths or VVounds, or with neglect are paid. 36. Religion is to Policy become A servile Handmaid; and few persons are Conceivd to be so dangerous as some, VVho are in Christian Piety sincere. Now, not to be like others Superstitious, Or to be strict in moral Righteousness, Gives cause of more suspect then to be vitious; Or else, at least, it them ingratiates less. Foundations are so overthrown, that few Are safe in whatsoever they pursue: For, liberty, life, credit, and estate, In hazzard are by all that aim thereat. 37. Pickt Juries, and suborned VVitnesses May, if assisted then with partial udges, Bring quickly to destruction, whom they pleases; Frustrate all Laws, and all our priviledges: And (what was never heretofore in Reason Thought probable) charge falsly upon some The plotting and pursuing Plots of Treason At open meetings whither all may come. In likelihood, they have nor wit, nor fear, Nor need be feared, who so foolish are:
And, I might of my fear be much ashamed If I should fear such Plots, as then were framed. 38 VVho erre in malice, or to get reward, Shall forge an Accusation, though it be Improbable, with favour shall be heard, VVhen none seems guilty of the Plot but he. They, who of all men do least conscience make Of Perjury, at pleasure may destroy An Innocent. They who false Oathes dare take May rob rich men of all they do enjoy. The Lyar is not out of danger ever; But, he that speaks truth boldly, is safe never Until his death, unless by God protected From what may be by wicked men projected. 39. This also, doth increasing Plagues pretoken, (Unless we to repair it speedy are) The Bond of Christian Charity is broken, And brotherly affection lost well-near. Both Persons and Societies seek more Their several new Structures to uphold, Then Disciplines and Doctrines to restore Unto that purity which was of old. From hence doth spring impair of peace and health In minde and body, Church and Commonwealth, For, though few heed it, thence our private Jars At first proceeded, and then, open VVars. 40. All Constitutions both in Church and State Are, for the most part, made but properties To add a grandeur, and repute to that VVhich pride and avarice did first devise. Not those alone, which may essential seem Unto the Civil powre; but also, some Which have among Divine Rites most esteem, Are serviceable to the flesh become.
Prophand is every holy Ordinance, Self-profit or self-honour to advance: Yea, ev'n the Lords day and the Sacraments Are made expedients for the same intents. 41. Judgements & Mercies have not in their course Wrought that on us, which they were sent to do: For, what should make us better, makes us worse, And others by our ill examples, too. Good counsels timely given we have slighted, Scoft and derided seasnable forewarnings, Neglecting that, whereto we were invited Both by our own and other mens discernings: And, if these failings be not heeded more Now, and in time to come, then heretofore, The Consequents, will not much better be Whether the Dutch are Conquerours, or we. 42. Those Animosities we must repent Which are pretended to be laid aside; Else pride and malice will so much augment Those Practices which more and more divide, That, as the ruine of Jerusalem Had been compleated when the time was come By those three, Factions, which then wasted them, Although it had not been destroyd by Rome: So, though we should subdue French, Dutch & Dane, Our own distempers would become our bane; And, that which others are inclind unto, Our follies and our wilfulness will do. 43. The breach of Covenants, of Faith and Oathes We must lament, and from that falshood turn: For, GOD that capital transgression loathes; Oathes, (now, if ever) make the land to mourn, We must confess our sin of bloudshed too, The Blood of Innocents much more bewail,
And our oppressing them, then yet we do; Else, of our expectations we shall fail. For, to no more a bare confession tends, Then to increase our guilt, without amends. He that neglects performing what he knows To be his duty, merits nought out blows. 44. We have moreover, failings by omissions Which it concerns us to be humbled for No less then for those actual transgressions Which we are now engaged to abhor: Not one day, no not one year will suffice To recollect them. And yet if we would Our selves but so much humble as it lies In us, GOD, would accept of what we could. Hereof apparent evidences are In Nineveh and Nebuchadnezzar: For by these Paterns, King and People too Instructed are, what in our case to do. 45. When that King, for his sins had been bereaven Of understanding, and for sevn years space, To live with Beasts, was from his Kingdom driven, And re-inthroned, when unlikely twas; Himself he did abase, Gods powre confess Acknowledge him, to be in chief ador'd; Declare that powre extol his righteousness And that Free grace, by which he was restor'd: Yea, praised him for their deiverance Whom he himself opprest; them did advance Who suffred; and reverst that Law whereby He had compeld them to Idolatry. 46. This signal Patern of Humiliation Was Royal; but, by one both popular And Regal, unto what beseems a Nation In our condition, we directed are.
At Nineveh, there was not in a day, Like this, some in the Temples GOD adoring, Some there, inclined more to sleep then pray, Some, in an Alehouse, or a Tavern roaring; Some, who did of their duties Conscience make, Some who perform'd it, but for fashion sake: But I believe, that with more Veneration They testified their Humiliation. 47. Both King and People joyned there as One In penitence, net being less fincere Then formal in pursuing what was done. Strict their commands and executions were. The King, his rich Apparel from him cast (By good Examples, precepts are made strong) He, and his Nobles did proclaim a Fast, VVith all the Rites, that to a Fast belong. The Prophet was believd, in what he said; The Royal Proclamation was obeyd. God, thereto had so gratious a regard That, King and People thereupon he spard. 48. Alas! how comes it that now Christian men, Are deaf to what GODS Messengers do say? Not so meek-hearted as those Heathens then? More dead in Sins and Trespasses then they. Imperfect was their Penitence, no doubt, Yet God accepted what they did endever, And (though perhaps, their zeal did soon burn out,) He, in vouchsafing mercy did presever. So might it be with us, if we would heed His judgements, and perform what Ethnicks did: For, GOD, upon a Formal penitence, Did with a part of Ahabs doom dispence. 49. But, though we have as much cause to bewail Our sad condition, we have much less fear.
And little or no sence of what we all Until with mischief overwhelmd well-near. Then, likewise, we endeavour all we can To hide what cannot cured be till known, Dissembling grosly, both with GOD and Man, And will not see what's evidently shown. Yea, so presumptuous are, that, now GOD sends His Judgements, and his Arm in wrath extends, VVe labour to obscure it, lest the heeding Of his Proceeds, may hinder our proceeding. 50. And as among the Jews in former ages There were false Prophets and corrupted Priests, VVho prophecid and preachd for Balaams wages, And to promote their carnal Interests, Then Flatterd them into Security: So we have some among us, who as much Do magnifie this Nations Piety As if it never had till now been such. They boast of our prosperities encrease, And promise us both Victories and Peace, As if vain words believd should rather be Then what we feel, as well, as hear and see. 15. Though sensible enough of sin we are not To humble us; or though Plagues yet deferd (How near at hand soever) we much fear not, Nor thereby for this duty are prepard: Methinks the loss of so much blood and Treasure As hath been spent; At home, decay of Trade And Manufactures in so large a measure; Abroad in Colonies, the havock made Should humble us, or that at least, which hath More cause of dread then War, or sudden Death, To wit, a PRESS, whereby some grieved are, More then by all the worst events of War.
2. For, War is pleasing to those Voluntaries, Who, Wealth or Honor, hope thereby to gaine; Through every difficulty them it carries With very little sense of dread or pain. By Suddain Death likewie all Plagues are ended Which Sin, or Folly on our bodies bring; Yea, thereby finished ere apprehended, In which respect, no very dreadful thing. But, to be snatcht at unawares away, From all Relations by a Suddain PRESS, And, from all our Affairs, as at this day, Is more injurious, then words can express. Whole Families, thereby destroyd become; In soul and body, it tormenteth some; And, thereby greater Griefs occasiond are Then do befal, by life or death, in War. 54. I know well that, the Civil powrs intend The prosecution of those Services Which to their Substitutes they recommend, Should be pursu'd without just Grievances: And, to inform us in this very case, (Of taking men to serve them in the Wars) A Law among the Jews establisht was To be our Guide in some particulars: Let it observed be, lest that Oppression Which is occasioned by indiscretion, Those persons to our damage may inrage, Whom we think, for our safety to ingage. 55. With others I did publickly be mone Those things which we ought joyntly to deplore; And, in my Spirit, I lament alone That for mine own Sins, I can sigh no more. I sigh for those two Pitchers, which are knocking Against each other, when they mind not me;
Yea, when some are, perhaps, my sighings mocking, Or, not well pleasd with my good meanings be. I sigh to see their Charity decrease Who are pretenders to Religiousness; Not for my self, though I perceive tis grown Less then it was, five shillings in a Crown. 56. I have now, somwhat more then fifty years, Been oft mine own and your Remembrancer; And whilst I live, as oft (as cause appears) Resolved am such Cautions to prefer. For since GOD hath so long preservd me from A total Ruine in such Services, I will continue during life to come Whilst I see need, in services like these, Not doubting but his Mercy shall outlast The Time to come as well as what is past; And, still, as comfortably be enjoyd, Though life in their pursute should be destroyd. 57. This, I have therefore, now contributed In private to what publickly was done. With hopefulness, that when it shall be read It will to good effect be thought upon: For in the common Lot, I shall have part, To whatsoever the success may tend, And dare to arrogate no self-desart, More then they justly may, who most offend. From Publick sins my self I count not free; What is in others bad, is worse in me, Since, he whom GOD so many years hath taught, If bad, is worse then others who are naught. 58. Yet, as there is no Righteousness in me, That, may with safety be confided in; So, whatsoere the Common Plagues may be, In me there is no slavish fear of sin:
For, in Gods Promise, and his Mediation Who hath Redeemed me, I, so confide, That, I despair not of a Soul-salvation, Whatever to my Body shall betide, And, know, that, whilst to live, more then to die, Shall tend to what GODS name may glorifie, My life shall comfortably be enjoyd When thousands round about me are destroyd; And that all, who are firm in this belief, Shall see a glad end of their present Grief. Lord in that patience keep me alway strong, Which, to the Saints probation doth belong. 50. There was a Promise made long time ago, To some, who then in our condition were, (And, in what they were to believe, and do, As much as they, we now concerned are.) To them, it by GODS Prophet was declard That, from their wickedness if they returned, One with a Writers Inkhorn was prepard To set a Mark on all who truely mourned, Assuring all who had his Mark upon them That when the common Judgements seized on them It should not harm them, as to that, at least, In which a real safety, doth consist. 60. That Mark is set on thousands at this day, And many Writers hither have been sent To shew it, and inform us how we may The Mischiefs threatned, seasonably prevent. Prophets rise early, and do sit up late, To mind us of our duties, yea, there are Some thousands ev'n this day, declaring that Which they are bound to speak, and we to hear. To that end also, GOO, hath now and then, Employed me, and my Despised Pen,
As at this time: and, at his feet I lay Wha I have writ, and what I have to say. I might— BUt, hark! methinks, some Whisperings I hear, As it both Navies now ingaged were: And, Lo, the suddain Rumour of that Storm Startles my Muse into another form Before I am aware, and makes me stop, To heed, what it contributes to my hope. Fame speaks it louder, and th' increasing sound On every side, my person doth surround. If what we fear succeeds, let them speed worst At last, who of this War gave just cause first; And, by both Parties, let all be amended Wherein they joyntly, or apart offended. More blood! more fury still! are bruitish passions No whit abated by Humiliations? No marvel then, no good effects yet spring To peace conducting, by my Trumpeting, When I first saw a likelihood of breaking Our Pitchers, by the Preparations making; For, that, wherein divine expedients faile Humane endeavours little can prevaile. My heart is pinched betwixt hope and fear, By musing upon what I see and hear, With that whereto our Actings may amount When we of all events have had account. Fame tells us that the English and the Dutch Have fought five days together. This is much, And I think so implacable a Rage, Was rarely paralleld in any Age, If (as it is reported) neither side Gave Quarter, whatsoever did betide.
How that with Christian charity may be Consistent, it appeareth not to me; Or, how it quadrats with the tender nature That's proer to a reasonable Creature: Nor do I know infallibly how far It is permissive in an actual War; Nor is it known to any, till e tries The justness of it in extremities. To censure that, I therefore, will forbear Which lies without the compass of my Sphear. King David in some cases, such things did As Natural compassion doth forbid. This I dare say, no man can see that end Whereto, a bruitish fury, will extend, When both provoked, and let loose, to do Whatever it shall then be prone unto. I clearly gather from our contestations, What may be truely judged of both Nations As to their daring, and Couragiousness; Which, I in few words, fully will express, Ev'n thus: (for nothing parallels it fitter) Two English Mastive Dogs never fought better; Nor hath ought oft been acted heretofore, Which evidenced humane courage more, If all be truely said which we have heard This day, of these Antagonists averd: For, though some Cowards upon either side, Were so amazd they knew not what they did, And some (when blinded by the fires and smoke Slaughtred those Friends, whom they for Foes In that long combate, neither of the two (mistook; The other, did in any thing outdo. And (which deserveth heed) no wind yet wags That brings us tidings of such Fears, or Brags
As usually are published abroad, When Rivals are ingaged in this mode; And, that, to me presageth a success Which may to both contribute happiness, If meekly, they and we, submit unto What GOD vouchsafeth to permit, or do, Who, did a Mercy unto both begin When he withheld the French from coming in; Which Mercy, though yet hidden, will be seen VVhen time removes that artificial Skreen, VVhich, an abusive Policy invents To interpose twixt actions and intents. Heed, therefore, let both take when this fight ends, How it concerns both, quickly to be Friends; VVhat may be quite lost; what may yet be saved: How both may by their Discord, be inslaved: VVhat great Plagues they now feel; what may betide More grievous, if they further should divide; VVhat great advantages it might bring thither Where, they their Strength & Courage joyn together, Not thereupon as heretofore presuming, Neither that glory to themselves assuming, VVhich appertaineth unto God alone; Nor vaunting of what their own hands have done; Nor la'bring, Breaches to repair with Lies, Nor putting upon Truths a false disguise, (A fault now so habitual become That, tis not easily refrained from) Nor sacrificing what GOD doth abhor, Or that, which at the best, he cares not for; But, giving what he still takes in good part, (Though meritless) an Humble contrite heart. Then, that the Mercies daignd may be prolongd, Let not his Saints in any wise be wrongd;
(Among whom many will be found at last, On whom the world reproachful terms hath cast) For, when, or wheresoever, Peace he makes, It is at their Requests, and for their Sakes; Whereas, no Peace is true, or long possest, Where Innocents are causlesly opprest; Especially, where they oppressed are Who serve GOD, with a conscientious fear According to their knowledge: of this Crime, Neither the Dutch, nor they who now with them Associate, so guilty are as we Do at this present day appear to be. And, I believe 'twas therefore that GODS hand Enabled them our Forces to withstand; And still preserves both, that both might more heed, What they have done, and how they should proceed. Among those things by them and us misdone Provoking GODS displeasure, this alone Next mentiond, is enough without one moe, Us, in all our Plantations to undo: For, to advance our carnal Interest We parallel the Practice of the BEAST In merchandizing Souls; Yea, more then so, Have set to sale, both Souls and Bodies too, In many Colonies: our Avarice (Which is one root of evry other Vice) Gave partly an occasion of that Jar, From whence first sprung, this present bloody War, And, which at last, will totally destroy, Both that which we in Forraign Lands enjoy And here at Home, unless we shall with speed, Repent that course wherein we do proceed. We do not only there, both sell and wast Mens Bodies whilst their lives and strength do last,
(In bondage and in labour like a Beast, From which they have no hope to be releast,) But, miserably, keep them, too, inslavd Without the means, whereby the Soul is savd: Whereas, a blessing both to them and us Might be procured by endeav'ring thus: Ev'n by providing Conscientious Preachers, To be one day in every week their Teachers. This would in part at least, excuse the Crime, Whereby Guilt lies on many at this time. I, seriously have heeded with compassion What them concerns, who have to God relation, And, in particular what I beheld Or, heard concerning those of late Exild For Consciencesake. How much ado there was; How much time spent, to send them to the place Of their Confinement; what, within short time, Befel thereby to others; what to them Worth observation; and how they were cast Into the powre of our Dutch Foes at last, To whom their Ship and Goods are made a prey, Who undertook to carry them away. Whence I collect, that, we shall nothing win, Whilst we are guilty of so great a Sin; And, that by long continuance in this guilt, Much blood that might besaved will be spilt. Of this sin, therefore let an Expiation Be constantly endeavourd through the Nation, And henceforth, twixt the English and the Dutch, Let nothing be contended for so much As, whether shall the other most excel In Love, in Piety, and doing well Let both petition for, Grace, Truth and Peace, And, for their mutual Amities increase,
Let them not Fast to be protected in Their quarrellings, but, fast from Strife and sin, And when Humiliations they pretend Begin them with beginning to amend; Withhold their hands from Lawless Violences, Not cloke Hypocrisie with fair pretences, Nor think, when God vouchsafes Deliverance, It is, their Pride and Selfness to advance, Or, that, when they a Victory have won, Twas got, that they might do as they have done, This, (though Humiliation, we pretend) I fear, by very many is designd. For, Providence hath brought me to behold What I should not have credited if told. The dreadful hazzards which we now are in, So little moves to penitence for Sin, That I have heard of one this day, who from The last Ingagement came sore wounded home Who, ere those wounds were cur'd, did by another Endeavour, how he might corrupt the Mother To be her daughters Baud, and to contrive The means, how they might in uncleanness live. This I have heard, and (whether yea or no) See probability it may be so. Alas! what will insue thereon in fine If this should be the general designe? Oh! let each individual Soul beware Of such presumptions, lest they spread so far That, GOD, in his provoked indignation Wholly destroy this wicked Generation. In chief, let those Grand Parties whose escapes Yet, give them time, beware of a Relapse And hear him; For, assured then I am, That, he, (according to the Chronogram
Upon my Title page,) us will so bear, That, this will prove to be a happy year. Let us for bear to vaunt, as we have done, Of Conquests, whilst our Arms are putting on: For, an example of that folly have I In their invincible (so called) Navie Which was in Eighty eight, upon our Coasts Destroyed after many shameless Boasts. God grant that Sixty six, be not to us For such like Vauntings as unprosperous. I hope the best, and I as much do fear The worst, according as our Actings are. If possible it be, let an Accord Be made by Christian Prudence, not the Sword. For that Cure, usually doth leave a Skar From whence at last, breaks forth another War. If to no end, our Quarrels can be brought Till we have to the utmost fought it out; Let them, whom GOD shall pleased be to crown With Signal Victory, themselves bow down, In true Humility, as low as they Who, then, have lost the glory of the day; Such Mercy showing, as they would have shown U themselves, if that case were their own; And, mind what Plagues, GOD threatens to inflict On them, who add grief, where he doth correct: Else to avenge their Cruelty and Pride, A greater Foe, shall rise up in his stead Who was destroyed, and they shall then have That Measure to them given, which they gave. When all this, and much more then this is done, We may, as far be, as when we begun From being truly humbled. For, with leaving Gross sins, there enters often a deceiving
Whereby, the Soul may be polluted more And, in more danger then it was before; Unless we shall together with a loathing Of all sins, Value our ownselves at nothing. For, we have nought good, but by imputation, Which to confess, is true Humiliation If done sincerely. It will then abide The Test, when thus it shall be qualifide; And, we soon after, shall behold, or hear What will compleat our Hope and banish Fear, For, GOD in Mercy always doth return To all, who for offending him, so mourn. WHilst this was writing, Tidings we receivd (Which very willingly we then believd) That we were Victors. God vouchsafe thereto A blessed consequnce, if it prove so: Make us, whatever otherwise befel, Sincerely thankful that we speed so well, Still mindful of the hazzards we were in, Before that Doubtful Trial did begin; And be henceforth, obedient to his calls Lest else a worse thing suddainly befals: For, most to fear him, we have then most cause When an impending Judgement he withdraws, Since, in our Duties, if we then grow slack; Vengeance, with double Rigour it brings back; But, much more, when instead of Penitence Those Faults renewd are, which first gave offence. That News, came whilst the People were in prayr, Some, hopeful, some afraid, some in despair, Such Medlies making of Words, Thoughts and Passions As oft befal in suddain Alterations; And peradventure, causd some to forget To what end, they that day together met: For, many had expressed signs of Gladness Before, they gave one sign of Sober sadness, Days of Thanks giving and Humiliation Being by them, observd still in one fashion;
And, by their various Postures, those Digressions Occasiond were, which vary my Expressions. We were nor like Jews-harps on Willows hung, But, like those, which are always tun'd and strung For Jiggs; and we, a Triumph-song begun Before our Lamentation-song was done. From laying, by, our vain Desires and Boasts, From Sanctifying of the Lord of Hosts With filial awe! and Praise to him returning (For joyful Tidings on our Day of mourning) We were so far, that, evn before we knew, Or could hear certainly, the News was true, We skipt abruptly, from Humiliation Into our Antick mode of Exultation, Joyning our selves to throngs of Fools and Boys, In Triumphs, which consist of Squibs and Noise, Of Healths, and Bells, and Fires, and Tunes, and Smoak (Thanksgiving Tools, in which delight we took) Objects of Scorn, to wisemen rendring us; To grave Spectators, more ridiculous Then pleasing: And, instead of some Relief To sufferers an increasing of their Grief, Chiefly to those poor Orphans and sad Wives, Whose Husbands, and whose Fathers limbs and lives Were lost in that Ingagement, whereof they Had little Sense, or drank the same away, (Whilst they who hardly scaping it, lay grieving, Their safety, rather doubting then believing) And, these too, when grown sober, found they had Not so much cause of Mirth, as to be sad. An outward Joy, exprest with moderation, And Triumphs, are not without Approbation, When they shall be exhibited in season, And for ends justified by sound Reason; Yet, for all Victories, they are not so; Nor the same things, fit at all times to do. King David knew it did not him become To triumph when he conquerd Absolom, And I have seen, for Victories, of late, (Much less to be rejoyced in than that) Great Joy exprest: yea, for a Conquest won (Thanksgivings also rendred) where was none.
At all times, by all men, are Praises due, And thanks to God, for all things that ensue On our Endeavours: for, in all he doth Inclusively, are comprehended both Justice, and Mercy: yet, our thanks to GOD Is not on all occasions, in one mode To be exprest; nor ought we to pretend His Glory, when tis for another end; Lest, he in our Destruction or our shame, Provoked be to glorifie his Name. In both our late Ingagements GOD hath done That, which both Nations ought to think upon With much more heed, and much more thankfulness, Then either we or they do yet express. This month last year when we did glorifie Our selves, for a supposed Victory, I did contribute then, as I do now My single Mite,(as well as I knew how) To praise GOD for his Mercy, making none With him, a sharer in what he had done; Then offring also to consideration Such things as tended to Humiliation, Much to the same effect, with that which here, I tender in another mode this year. But, GOD who times, and Orders all we do, My purpose knowing, put a Stop thereto; Perhaps lest if it had been publishd then, It had exasperated more, some men, Both to their own, and to my detriment, Then was consistent with my good intent. For, (by my Printers death) what, I then did In some unknown hand, till this day lies hid; And possibly may come again to light, By that time, this is brought to open sight. Meanwhile, I will proceed, with what, this day A New Occasion prompteth me to say. The said Ingagements, now already past (Which if GOD please, I wish might be the last) By Providential means, have made their swords Speak more, then else with so much power in words, Could have been spoken, to perswade us to What, it, will most concern us both, to do.
For, whatsoever, Policy and Pride Have published abroad on either side, Tis evident; (or, may be so to either) Our Earthen Pitchers, are so knockt together That one or two more such like knocks will break them So small, that useless Posherds it will make them; Except to patch up the Designs of those Who seem their Friends, to whom they will be Foes. This would be better heeded, if it were Propounded by a Private Counseller, A Bishop or a Judge: Thus I suppose, Till I remember, that the best of those Have writ, and spoke in vain: yet, then, were they Obligd to speak their conscience, so am I. But, many, who to be my Friends would seem, (And, not me, or my words to disesteem) Perswade me, in thes: matters to be mute: Tell me, that my Attempts produce no fruit Save mischiefs to my self: and, other some Affirm this Medling doth no me become. I thank their wisdoms; but, am not so wise As to believe they prudently advise. A Fool may to good purpose speak somtimes, And, they have found sound Reason in my Rimes, Who were not so adverse to words in season, That, they lovd neither Truth, nor Rime, nor Reason. Th' effects to other men will be the same, Whether, to them I speak, or silent am; Yet, since with profit, I have heretofore Spoke somwhat, I will speak a little more, Because, I know the damage will not be So great, then, in relation unto me, As unto those men, who shall be offended With what is conscientiously intended. Successes, good and bad, are shard so even Between them (by his Justice, who from heav'n Beholds both what they did in every place With whatsoere by them intended was) That, if on both sides, Truth might be exprest It would by them and others, be confest, The Sword hath spoke a loud, and plainly too, That, which both Nations speedily should do:
That, it speaks also, what they do intend On whose Assistances they much depend: And hints, that both, in their proceeds, (at length) May be devourd by their own Wealth and Strength. For, whereunto amounts all we have heard Three days together, to and fro, averd, But certainty of Ruine, on both sides, To which soever best success betides? What have we heard, by that which pro and con Hath been reported of what's lost and won, But contradictions, intermixt with sounds Of Lamentations, Losses, Deaths and Wounds, And with relation of a Victory, Which with infeebled and lame wings doth fly: None certainly informed of what's done, Or of that which may follow thereupon. We hear sad News one day, as bad next morrow, Or worse perhaps: and shall have dayly sorrow, Till of their sorrows, we more sense have got, Whose Suffings, we do know and pitty not: And till our Nation shall discharge that better, Wheren to GOD and Man it is a Debter. I have with heedfulness, perused that, Sea-Gibbersh, which is publishd to relate What passed in the Naval fight between Both Fleets; with what, to some a ground hath been To think, the Victory is on our side And, that we stll victorious do abide. If so it were (because, it might prevent The Foes proud brags, our Friends discouragement; Or, superfede their Fears) I should be glad, And thankful, for the good success we had: But, nothing therein mention'd found I out, Whence, I could pick forth, what to find, I sought. All I could thence collect, was but thus much, That, We were heaten, and did beat the Dutch, Till they were glad, at last, to sail away, And, we as glad, they did no longer stay. He, that was otherwise informd thereby Doth understand much more, or less, then I, And, for ourselves, I know no reason why We should, if, we for GOD, ought not to Lie;
For, though it is imprudence to reveal All Truths at all times (and not to conceal, What may occasion mischiefs) never should The Truth be falsesaid, or Untruths be told: And, more advantage would to us, ensue If our Intelligence were always true: Indeed, I found, in that Express, much wit In such terms, as that Subject, did befit; As also, very much, related there To magnifie those who then active were For our defence. And, I well pleased am With what may add to their deserved Fame. To them I grudge no meed, or honour due, Who prudently, and valiantly pursue Their undertakings: But, Gods praise alone, Is my chief Aim. To praise what men have done, Is, to my proper work impertinent, And, also, at this time, to my intent. If, by omitting that, I shall offend In prosecutions to a better end; Or, if that any shall maligne me more, For this, who di not love me heretofore, I shall not think it strange: For, I of late Meerly, for Speaking, and for Writing that, Which both to Gods prdise, and Mans welfare are tends, Loose daily, very many seeming Friends; Whereby, if they no whit indamagd are, I shall not, for what haps to me, much care; Especially, whilst that, which I designe Tends to Gods praise (without selfends of mine.) To which intention, that which now is read (In these few pages,) is contributed. And though, like Jeremiahs Lamentation, Or Davids humblings, this Humiliation Is not besprinkled with corporeal tears, Or, worded with Hyberbolies like theirs; Nor strowd with Ashes, nor in Haircloth drest; Or, with such formal-complements exprest, (As may be, and ofttimes assumed are As well by Hypocrites, as Men sincere Or, though it may want what affects the Sense, I hope, that, which affects th' Intelligence
It shall not want, nor ought, which to that end Is needfull, whereto, I, the same intend; And, tis exhibited in such a mode, I hope too, as will pleasing be to GOD. What, he hath done, at this time, seems to me Not so much heeded as it ought to be, To make us thankful; nor do we express What we pretend, in way of thinkfulness As it becomes us; neither do we show it As doth beseem him, unto whom we ow it: But, act it with such vain appurtenances (And break out into such Extravagances) As, to our Sins, are rather an addition Then signes of Thankfulness, or true Contrition. For, though, at full, informd I have not bin What streights, and what great hazzards they were in; Or, of what might have hapned, unless then Assisted more by Providence, then Men; Thus much is likely, we were so intrapt, That, by our own powre, we had not escapt A total Rout, if Providentially There came not in, a seasonable supply. For, had not GOD, sent Rupert timely back, The Fleet with Albemarl, had gone to wrack; Or, both perhaps, then, been destroyd together, Had not GOD sent the French, we know not whither: Yea, somewhat, in that Providence I see, Which our Foes ought to heed, as much as We. GOD, grace vouchsafe both unto us, and them, To heed, whereto it tends, whilst there is time; And, unto me, and every person living, Timely Repentance, and sincere Thanksgiving. Ere these few Cautionary exhortations, (Which I think proper to Humiliations) I do conclude; Lle add this Corollary In hope, that some, the same in mind will carry. Though very great our Streighrs and Hazzards are, (And, those may be much greater which we fear) Seek Remedies, by no dishonest course; Lest, thereby, we still make the mischief worse. That, were to do like them, who, when an Evil Befals, run to a Witch, or to the Devil,
Who, such Cures, onely, for his Patints hath As their, who kill themselves, through fear of Death. It hath been thought, ye,  have oft been told, That, I, in my Attempts, have been too bold; Yet I think no man standeth in more dread Of doing ought which is not warranten By common Justice; For, I dare not act To save my life, in any such like fct. Nor would my Conscience let me step in peace Should I but wink at an Unrigh eousness, Which might by me be hundred, (though to gain That, which I do most covet to obtain) Till I repented it: nay, I should dread A Vengeance were impending ore my head, If I in secret, wishd advance unto My hopes, by what another might misdo Without my knowledge; or, by ought not right Both in GODS eye, and evry good mans sight. Which, I profess, that others might beware Of such Ill consequents, as I now fear. If we believe there is a GOD, that heeds The Patience of the Sains, and our Procreeds, Let us not still persist, as we have done, Within mans corscience, to usurp GODS Throne As many do, in most presumptaous wise, Ev'n whilst his heavy hand upon us lies: For, he will shortly make it to appear, None ought, but he, to sit in Judgment there; As also, what thy merir, who offend So highly, when an humbling they pretend. At Hore, from persecuting of them cease Who do not interrupt the civil peace; Let for bear in an inhumane mode, More to divide us, and our foes abrode; Let us leave off those Railings at each other, VVhich hinder the uniting us together. Tll GOD shall judge the cause that is depending Between the Nations which are now contending, Let none of us who in ou private Stations, Are called to sincere Humiliations, Presume to judge them further then he knows Their Actings, and what Judgements GOD allows
In doubtful Tria s; But with Humbleness, At end on  ose of the success; as tears and prayers, VVhat leh Immergencies of our Affairs require; lest, we betray ves, and thm we should obey. private share, is part of that VVhich s the Joint Stock of the Publick State, Ad, ought propoition ably o b shard, As  shall b, to make a Publick Gard. others, are thereby invited to Is , which conscientions I do: For,  this end, (though I am so bereft Of  I hd, that, o hing now is left But Almes to live on) I, have ever since and Txes, out of that B nevolnce; And, will not grudg to do ir, whilst GOD shall That way,  any way, give wherewithal: hat he Publick strength, may not decline VVill take hed that it be no Fault of mine, By not contributing, what I think may Be thereto needful, in an evil day. If well it be employed, GOD, will bless Their prudent Management, and Faithfulness, VVho therewith are intrusted: f, unjust Therein thy prove, and shall deceive our trust, Twill be dest uctive onely to th' Abusers, And, faithful men, will be at last no Loosers: For, when the Kingdome which we look for, comes, All men, shall have their just deserved Dooms. Hereof, to me, GOD hath oft Earnest given By aids vouchsfed, as it were, from Heav'n, At every need. By him, I have been fed VVith Manna, Quail s, and with my dayly bread, (I know not else, either by whom or how) For some years lately pnst; and so am now, VVithout suspect, of ought which may be fal VVhether, my gathering shall be much or small. Yea, now, while I behold dspairing fear In most mens faces, almost evry where; Although the day, now very gloomy be; Though falling off, our Chariot-wheels I see;
Their Drivers with much difficulty driving; Against Waves, Rocks and Sands, our Leaders striving, And, GOD, in this day of our great distress, Within a Black Cloud, hiding yet his Face; A Glummering, I naytheless perceive Of Mercy, shining on all who believe; With Sympoms, of the like aspect to them Who, yet believe not, if they turn to him. Turn therefore, oh return unto him, now; Hear him, and he will give an ear to you. But I fear most men so corrupt are grown, That, my words, are on them in vain bestown: Lest, therefore what I write, they heed the less, I, at this present, will no more express; And, since, in our case, there's no help in Man, His aid, I will implore, who help us can. LEt GOD arise! Arise LORD, I implore thee; And, let all those who hate thee, fly before thee; Rebuke them who thy Adversaries are, The Bulls and Calves who take delight in War; Aswel the Common People, as their Kings, Till all the world, to thee, due tribute brings. Lee those destroying Angels, which are sent To chastise us, make a distinguishment Between them, who through Humne frailty sin, Without persisting wilfully therein, And, such, as have been unto thee and Thine, Malitious Foes, a long time, by Designe; Or, who, not onely, against us, now be Confederates, but likewise against Thee. In Mercy, look again, on us, and those, Who are, at this day, our professed Foes; Lest, the pursuit of what is yet intended Consumes both Nations, ere the war be ended. Now, so unclose the Eyes of evry Nation, Which hath pretended to a Reformation, That, they may see how much, they have been blinded; How they depraved are, and howself-minded: So prudent make all Governours and Kings, So qualify the Peoples murmurings;
So, let thy holy Spirit sanctifie Each Congregational Societie; So shew, to evry Individual one, What ought to be believd, and to be done Together and Apart, which may improve That, Principle of Vniversal Love, In which, the Being of the world begun; Whereby, preserved while Time wheeleth on, And, by which, that perfection shall be gaind Which was by thy Eternal Love ordaind; That we regenerated may become, And not continue, till the day of Doome, So stupified in our sins, as they Who were, at last, with Water, washd away; Or, Sodom-like, in sinning persevere Until with Fire consumed as they were: But, let what thou haft done, sufficient be To turn thee unto us, and us to Thee. I do confess, shouldst thou be so severe, As, but to heed how bad, the best men are; Among us all, there could be found out none Who might be called Righteous; no, not one Of whatsoever Calling, or Degree, Whether, Priest, Prophet, a King it be, Or of the common Rank; Lord, naytheless In Mercy, and in thy Sons Rigteousness Vouchlafe to look upon us; and, to cure Our single, and our joynt distemp'rature. At this time, to those Lustings put an end, Which makes us more then brutishly contend For trifles; and to brawl, curse, lye and swear; Like Dogs, for bones, to scramble, scratch and tear; Fight, wound and kill each other, without heed Of what we do, or of what may succeed. Yea, so inhumanely, as if, now, here The Devils, clothd with Humane bodies were; Hell, as it were, broke loose, and, they come hither With purpose, to bring Hell and Earth together. That, which this may portend, secure us from: Hallow thy Name, and let thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on Earth, as tis in Heaven: Give us the bread of Life; and, that forgiven
Our sins may be, let us forgive each other, And, henceforth, live in Amity together, On us, let not temptations, then prevail, When then permittest any to. ssail Our persons; that, we may in our Probations Be constant, and enjoy our expectations. Let neither presnt, past, or future evil, (The temptings of the World, the First or Devil) Hive powre to harm, or fright us any more, With Plagues and Wars, as now, and heretofore; Especially, let them not us, insnare With those sins, whereof these the wages are. Wholly, to thee, our selves let us resigne; Consels the Kingdom, Powre and Glory thine Without a partner; and henceforth, forbear To seek our Kingdom, Powre and Glory here. Whilst that time lasts, wherein in things yet remain Undone, which to thy Glory appertain And, wherein we must further be imployd, Before the Man of Sin shall be destroyd, (Who very oft, usurps a lodging, where Thy Kingdom is, although he Reigns not there) Him to resist, vouchsafe Assisting Grace To every one of us, in his own place: Preserve us blameless, in that Dispensation Whereto, a Conscentious inclination (Without self-ends) hath joynd us; so to use Our Liberty, that, we do not abuse The Christian Freerdom by including on Thy Right; or, by imposing that upon Anothers conscience, by usurped powr, Which, we would not should be imposd on our. And, so incline those also, to do thus To whom thou givest power over us, That none, may to obey them forced be, By being disobedient unto thee; But, let our Duties be performd in Peace To thee, and, to all men, in Righteousness. And, that both We, and our Superiours too, May be the more kept heedful what to do; Make them to know; that if in what relates To Thee, the humane Laws, or Magistrates
Must be obeyd in all they shall command, However they, or we shall understnd Thy  reveald; then, if the Kingdom be The Turks or-Popes, we mast believe, as he; And, thy will and thy Deity, thenceforth, Stand for a Cyther, or, for what's less worth: For tha, will be the consequence thereof, Though Politians, at his Truth will skoff: Me therefore, unto what thou callst me to, Keep firm, in spight of all the world shall do. The single, and the joynt Humiliation of King and People, bless with acceptation, Although, what hath been done, prayd, or consest, Will not abide thy Sanctuery Test; For, hope of an acceptance, none there is, If thou shouldst mark all things that are am'ss: And, sav'd from what's deserved, here, would neither Be Good or Bad men, but, sink altogether. Let, in one Duty, none be so mployd, That, all the rest be sleighted, or made void. So let us Hear, that, we as aswel may Do As Hea ken, what thy word perswades unto. So let us strive to Do, that having done The best wee can, wee trust not thereupon; And, so Believe too, that wee may improve Our Faith still more, both by Good works and Love; Remembring, it is Love, that doth fulfil The Law, the Gaspel, and thy total will. Let thin own Spirit help urs so to pray, That, wee may minde Thee, more then what we say. Since to Speak words, less needful is to thee, Then telling our own hearts, what our thoughts be; And, chiefly used, that we might discern Or, hd, the better those things which concern Our selves, and Brethren; because, none can show That unto thee, which thou didst not foreknow Words, oft are sooke to others, with intent To counterfeit that which was never ment. To such ends, as we ought to make Addressings To thee, are all my Prayers and Confessings; To such ends, I now offer here in words, Those Musings, which my narrow heart affords;
And, which drawn, and prest out of it, have been By those great streights, we still continue in. To such ends, 1 implore thee in this mode; Accept of this Oblation, my dear GOD: Give us his Righteousness, who took our Guilt; Love us, and then, do with us, what thou wilt. These MusingS, mee, did waking keep When other men were fast asleep: And, may, when I a nap am taking, Keep others, peradventure, waking. GOD, grant we may so help each other To watch, by turns, or, altogether, That, when the Bridegroom, doth appear (Although at midnight) we may hear. And, keep our Lamps, in such a Trim That, we may entrance have within. Written June 17. this sad year, MDCLX VI. That which is mentioned in the thirty fifth page aforegoing, being imprinted in or about June 1665, and ever since concealed by reason of the Printers death, is now come to light, and hereto added in the three next following sheets. There are many faults escaped in the Printing by reason of the Authors ab∣sences, which the Reader must correct where he finds them. FINIS.
