w677a 99830994 35456
WIGORNIA, (Worcester.) A POEM. portrait of a woman By HERBERT WALWYN. LONDON, Printed, and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall, 1697.
WIGORNIA A POEM. NIgh whereA Royal Lady of that Name thrown into the River, and from whom it had its deno∣mination. Sabrina sweeps her Silver Trai And wears her liquid Path along aA large Meadow call'd Pitchcraft. Plain, Stands WIGORN; hast'ning unto whose Embrace She forwards with a Willing Lover's pace: Swelling her Breasts, her spacious Bosom fair, Full fraught with Love she spends enjoying there. The NobleA Hill, whence vast quantities of Coals are brought down the Severn to Worcester, and supplies all the County at cheapest Rates. Clee her breast with Passion fires, Which here breaks out, and in bright Flames expires; But her exhaustless Vigor still returns, For ever kindles, and for ever burns: For here the Goddess leaves her Houshold Streams, To come ashore, and puts on all her beams: Then with Maternal look surveys the Shire, And where she sees it wanting, Blazes there. Meadows with Grass she cloaths, with Wool the Fold, And with both Cloath and Fire expels the Cold:
Cloath which the Ambitious Sultan begs to wear, And his best part of Majesty has here; And Fire, which had Prometheus but knew, He had forbore his Theft, and 'scap'd the Vengeance too. Rocks have oblig'd theExod. 17.6. Good with Streams before, But here a Stream with Rocks obliges more: 'Tis the same Hand is working for them Yet, He fromA Hill in Montgomery-shire, where the River Severn has its rise. Plinlimon Mount the River fet, Then tam'd its unback'd force with loads of Jet. Peter, that on a Floor of Water trodMatth. 14.29, 30., And kneeling on the Mercy, thank'd his God, Might here with Steps more sure, but Thanks as due, Trust his own Feet, and Praise his Saviour too. Dolphins, who as the Ship-wreck'd Sea-men say, On their kind Backs them to safe Land convey, Are here by better Natur'dSalmons. Fish outdone, That Danger to prevent, ashore do run. That harmless Other, whose mischievous make Excites Revenge, by being like a Snake, Strips off his slime, and comes a willing Prey, With him his elder Brother Lampery; These, and innumerable other Fish, Sing in their Pans, for Joy they have their Wish. Thrice happy Worster, thy Felicity Is perfected by added Constancy;
Yoaked by thy Bridge flung o're her spreading Tyde, Thou hast her ever fasten'd by thy side. But Thou as conscious of thyBuilt by the Romans. Ancient Birth, And recollecting Yet thy Native Worth, Think'st still of Caesar, not as dead but come, With his Transported Empire here from Rome: William is Caesar with a Christian Name, So thou besides a Christian art the same: Therefore receivest Tribute in his right, Won by his Sword in the fam'dWhich they fortify'd, and made their Frontier against the Welch. British Fight. But thou hast doft the sullen looks of War, And left the MercianHeretofore a distinct Kingdom, by that Name, with Princes of its own. Realm to Caesar's Care: Thy Armor's needless now thy Master's here, Thy Master that does the OldVeni, Vidi, Vici. Motto wear. Churches are all the Forts thou usest now, And those well lin'd with mounted Cannon too: Terrors of Vice, if mannag'd but aright, And not turn'd back upon thee in the Fight. This is the talk'd of Heavenly Temper'd Shield, Which thy divine Achilles knows to weild. SexuulphusFirst Bishop of Worster, and Founder of the Cathedral. Piety does here appear, Like his Mind great, his Judgment regular;
No Novice; Colleges my thinks should be, Like1 Timothy 3, & 6. Bishops from that Imputation free. Th' Apostle's Rule at least is follow'd here, Altho' neglected by himselfAlluding to St. Pauls in London, new Building. elsewhere. What time (and Time do's much to Words, and Works, To English Preachers, and to English Kirks) Did raze and alter, fresher times took care, And (Piety renew'd) did new repair. Not but the Holy Man was sometimes blam'd, That it was not to please all Humours fram'd; Like Nezer's Statue, Gold, and Brass, and Clay; But then alas 't had Headless been, some day The trait'rous Head would 'a look'd the wrong way. Remember'd Years have seen an Hostile Rout Pull of her Roof, and tear herIn the last Civil War, its Leads and Organs were took away. Bowels out: As if 'twere not enough the World should see, And senseless of God's Omnipresency, Let in Wide Heav'n th' Impiety to View, Defieing both th' One and th' Other too. The Churchs Leads they into Bullets form'd, And vainly thought they then had God disarm'd: In Magazines of Life they chose out Death, So some Men suck the Plague in with their Breath;
Heaven saw the Challenge, and the Church to skreen, The whilst his Vengeance heated, stood between Ruin and it; then Pour'd his Vials forth, And Force repaid with Force, andAlluding to the violent Deaths of the Chief Fomenters of that War on both sides. Wrath with Wrath: Instructed Ire the Seeds of Discord swep From every Party to one common heap; Then burnt it up, the Ashes cur'd the Wound, By divine Art apply'd the Church made sound. Here Arthur [wisestKing Henry the 7th, Henry's wiser Son] Did from a Crown to Sanctuary run, And tired with State-noise here laid him down, And was in Life and Death the next aKing John there also Buryed. Crown. The Palace next, the Bishops long abode, Stands with an humble Boldness near its God: A Place 'twas sure by Providence design'd For the just Medium of a Prelate's Mind: Between the Col∣ledge and the Severn.Between the two extreams of Cold, and Heat, The Atheists chillness, and the Zealots sweat. One side, the Palace looks into the flood, The other is by the Cathedral view'd: That side, the Severn stands as 'twere at Bay, Viewing the Place, unmindfull of its way, Holding her Mirrour for who dares to look, And read the impartial Story of her Book.
I did, and to my thinking plain was seen Th' impression where the Palace had been in. The Stream was deep, and the House safe on Ground, I Chid my Sight, and said it would 'a drown'd Had it been there; at which Sabrina smil'd, And after Invocation answer'd mild: "What thou seest [Son] ingrav'd upon my Breast, "Is Figure, and as such is there express'd. I answer'd not the Oracle, but bow'd, And the fair Shape sunk down beneath her flood; Yet as she went, my thought she would have said, "Put up thy Pious Anger, spare the Dead. This Prohibition seal'd up all but thought, And a deep Sigh or two I strait-way fetcht; And then I thank'd my God, and thank'd the King, That took the one, and did the other bring. More to the Left, in the same Neighbourhood, Stands the round Mount whereon theBuilt by a Sheriff or Governour of the City, in despite of, and to Command and Terrifie the Clergy, oft times burnt down, and Ages ago utterly ruin'd. Castle stood, That with stern disregard did there intrude. But as the Giants felt the dreadful Odds, When their Height thought to overtop the Gods, This greater Son of Earth with the same Hope, Making the Church his Foe, and not his Prop, Lower'd to destruction his presuming Top.
The City.Here every Virtue has her several Seat, Each to her Quality becoming great: Religion Temples, Justice has her Hall, And1 Cor. 13.13. Charity the biggest of them all. The Streets are wide and open as their Hearts, Breathing out Kindness to the Neighb'ring Parts, In all the Forms of Industry and Arts. Oh would but Fate proportion to their Loom The Threds of Life, then Death would never come, And Worster would adjourn the Day of Doom. The plyant Wool drawn by ten thousand Hands, To length scarce finite, would out-reach the Spans Of Life, tho' tyed in one throughout all Times and Lands. But since the Sisters will use their own make, Purposely brittle, and so apt to break; So cautious and wary is the Town, They piece it up, and Weave it with theirAlluding to their great Cloathing Trade. own; That Fate to come at one, must break thro' both, And e're it takes their Lives must Spoyl their Cloath. This Natural as their Skins the English wear, And all true Sterling Cloath is minted here.
What Wonders should be spoke, that do reside Within the circuit of thy Province wide: Nature with varied hand does draw Delight To all Perception; Smell, and Tast, and Sight; Sinks into Rivers, rises up in Height: And then agen lays down her self in Plains, Painted with Flowers, and Squar'd with different Grains, Hemm'd in with Hedges; Pleasure mixt with Use, And the well tasted Orchard's Cheering Juice; Potable Fruit it bears, Wine in the Ore, The Trees themselves for Drink have scarce the Power To stand, 'till like a Fountain from the Boughs The ruptur'd Fruit their Chrystal Liquor throws; These having once their proper Season bled, Agen the reeling Tree erects his Nodding Head. Here Fleecy People grazeing common Herbs, Yonder Pied Goats on Cliffs a browzing Shrubs; There goes the Bull, the Regent of the Mead, Thwart his Dominion, with Dictating Head; The' Obsequious Herd to make him way divide, Then joyn in the Procession of his Pride. The ApostolickFishing. Art here's perfected, And their days toyl would here have better sped.
The Severn, Avon, Salwerp, Teame, and Stour, And silent Lorn, with all their Watry Store, Would not have broke their Netts, but fill'd them more. Catchers of Fish, or Men, they had had Sport, And might to Burroughs, or to Streams resort; Or both at once, or Either found in Both, Fish took in Towns, or Men from Rivers forth: These swim like Fish the Navigated Stream, And in the Market those do Trade like them. Bewdley for Beauty, Kidderminster Trade, Bromsgrove a place of endlessSeat of the Duke of Shrewsbury. Honour made; Tenbury, and much esteemed Ham, A Castle once, but now a betterSeat of the Jefferys. Name: Ʋpton, then Evisham, the CountysThe Vale of Esom serves the whole Town and Shire with Corn, being Coveted both for Seed and present Use. Loaf, Which every Hand is daily cutting of, But cann't diminish, Wonder joyns to which, As next in Usefulness, all seasoningDroitwich. Wich. Here springs of Liquid Salt to Dust they Boyl, There the Neat Dames are sifting Flow'r the while: At Wick the Damsels ply the froathing Cream, With quick repeated strokes, then bring to them
Their well made Pounds; then mingled in a Trough, Soon comes to Life the kind fermenting Dough, That Travels on Lifes errand too and fro. Powick, on a rising Ground overlooking Worcester and Wickfield [Fight.] Powick made famous by a King's defeat, That Purchas'd there a just Surname of Great, But after such a Way that PowickCover'd with Cherry Orchards. blushes Yet. Hence Charles was sent toThe Royal Oak. Roost, the Scots to Death, For Gabbleing wrong our English Shibboleth: On the fought Field aA Wind-Mill. Monument there stands, They say of Him, with ever-flying Fanes, Yet tho' it always runs, it always stands. Newland, if thou art by my Song forgot, Let my Voice cease, and Death disperse my Thought: Thy Solemn Prospect, and thy Widow'd House, Can I forget? could Judah's People choose But think on Jebus by Ʋphrates Tide? They could not; of Lov'd Jebus still they sigh'd. Grief does conduct me hence to Aldwin'sThe Abby of great Malvern, built by one Aldwin a Hermit. Cell, Under the Amazing Structure of aMalvern-hill. Hill,
Which Nature did with through paced Labor rear, And for Materials level'd half the Shire, As if she meant it for the World's Frontier: For so It seems, and so the Hermit thought, When weary to the Foot of it he got; Farewel Mankind, and Farewel World, he said, Then up the Hill to Heaven he lift his Head, With thanks that by Its guidance he had now Pass'd the dull Journey of a Mortal through. Which heard (for grateful Prayers run up a pace, And the Hill-top is very near the Place) With Pity all the hearty Words he spake, And took him e're he found out his Mistake. Here Aldwin, and thy almost Name-sake, rest: Sometime I'll tell ye that your Choyce was best. And now of Worster, Muse, break off thy Song, Its Argument's too heavy for my Tongue, To weild in Words, and legible its Fame, In Characters too bigg for thee to Name. Of Sommers what canst say, and Stillingfleet, Where is thy Parallel, thy Epithet?
Infer'st thou ought fromLd Somers, Baron of Evisham, Lord High Chancellor, and one of the Lords Justices of England. Esom's Coronet? A fruitful Chaplet 'tis, compos'd of Wheat, The Staff of Life, is He the same of State? He is thou say'st, th' Inscription shall be that. This was the Bishop'sThe Bishops tryed in the late Reign, for whom his Lordship was Council. Blessing on his Head, The Holy Oyl could not in vain be shed; Saul did Storm high, but God restrain'd his Power, Th' outragious Billows did himself devour, But the same Waves brought David to the Shore. Between the Principles of Corporal things Is Enmity, whence Agitation Springs: For Nature with her self contending force, Gives all her compound Births their destin'd course. Hence Planetary Bodies know their Stage; Brutes take up Instincts, Men run on to Age, Where Cold and Earth prevailing, ends their Rage. Of the Place in general. Thine sure's the Nice Punctillio where they Fight In their Originals. Fate took delight To temper thee, and held his Scales aright:
So pure thy Soyl, so moderate thy Clime, Thy Nature seems but in her Youth and Prime, Nor moans (as elsewhere) of th' Abuse of Time: Nor in the Circle of his Antient Arms Withers, but leads him on by force of Charms Round all his Seasons: Hence thy Men so Free, So Upright, and so turn on Curtesie: Thou 'rt influenc'd by Heaven, and They by Thee. FINIS.
