W753B R27054 9626688 43860
THE School of Politicks: OR, THE HUMOURS OF A COFFEE-HOUSE. A POEM. Tantumne ab re tua otii est, aliena ut cures? Terent. The Second Edition Corrected and much Enlar∣ged by the Author. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane, 1691.
THE School of Politicks: OR, THE HUMOURS OF A COFFEE-HOUSE. ODES. I. 'TWAS Claret that we drank, and 'twas as fine, As ever yet deserv'd the name of Wine; Each Man his Flask we thought a mod'rate Dose, When just as we were giving o'er, Comes in our honest Landlord in the Close, Protesting we should drink his Bottle more: Which done, and all our Reck'ning paid, Each did a sev'ral way repair; Some went to walk, and some to bed: But I, who had an hour to spare, Went to a neighb'ring Coffee-House, and there With sober Liquor to refine my Head.
II. What e'er th' occasion was I cannot tell, Whether the Wine had discompos'd my Mind, Or some false Medium did my Reason blind, But so it was, I took the Place for Hell; The Master of the House with fiery Face, Did like insulting Pluto seem, Whilst all his Guests he did condemn To drink a Liquor of infernal Race, Black, scalding, and of most offensive smell: Trembling and pale, I cross'd my self all o'er, And mumbled Ave-Maries by the score. At length, by strange insensible degrees, My fears all vanish'd, and my Mind found ease, My scatter'd Reason re-assum'd its place, And I perceiv'd with whom, and where I was. III. The murmuring Buzz which through the Room was sent, Did Bee-hives noise exactly represent; And like a Bee-hive too 'twas fill'd, and thick, All tasting of the Honey Politick, Call'd News, which they as greedily suck'd in, As Nurses Milk young Babes were ever seen. The various Tones and different noise of Tongues, From lofty sounding Dutch and German Lungs, Together with the soft melodious Notes, Of Spaniards, Frenchmen, and Italian Throats, Who met in this State-Conventicle, Compos'd a kind of Harmony,
Which did in Concord disagree; Nay, even Babel's fatal Overthrow, More sorts of Languages did never know, Nor were they half so various, and so fickle. IV. The place no manner of distinction knew, 'Twixt Christian, Heathen, Turk, or Jew, The Fool and the Philospher Sate close by one another here, And Quality no more was understood Than Mathematicks were before the Floud. Here sate a Knight, by him a rugged Sailer; Next him a Son of Mars, Adorn'd with honourable Scars; By them a Courtier, and a Woman's Taylor: A Barber and a Barister at Law, Who ne'er before each other saw, Were hotly prating I assure ye Of Kings de facto and de jure. A Tradesman and a grave Divine, Sate talking of Affairs beyond the Line; Whilst in a Corner of the Room Sate a fat Quack, the fam'd Poetick Tom, Pleas'd to hear Advertisements read, Where 'mongst lost Dogs, and other fav'rite Breed, His famous Pills were chronicled: The half Box eighteen Pills for eighteen Pence, Though 'tis too cheap in any Man's own Sense. Lawyers and Clients, Sharpers and their Cullies, Quakers, Pimps, Atheists, Mountebanks and Bullies,
Clean or unclean, if here they call, The place, like Noah's Ark, receives 'em all. V. Had Lilbourn been alive to see This Hotch-potch of Society, Some other measures he had ta'en, When he the Work of Levelling began; For All here stand on equal ground. As I have seen in Storms at Sea, For common safety all are willing found To hawl a Cable, guide an Oar, To stem the Tide, and bring the Ship to Shoar; So in this School of Polity, Each thinks himself as much concern'd as they Who sit in Council Chamber ev'ry day; And all their Maxims have a share Of the Professions which their Masters are. The quick-eye'd Sectary pretends to see Under Lawn Sleeves the growth of Popery. The Smith upon the Anvil of his Brain Forms a new Commonwealth again. The Carpenter in his projecting Pate Makes Props t'uphold the tott'ring State: The Quack too, with his Close-stool Face, Does with his senseless Reasons urge, The British Islands want a Purge: And Ah! — Were he but once in Place, He'd — but there stops, and thinks the Age not fit To know the Wonders of his mighty Wit.
VI. But the chief Scene was yet to come, Which was to hear the various Argument Which fill'd all corners of the Room, Concerning the Affairs of Christendom. I being seated to content List'ned with most profound attention to One of the loudest of the prating Crew, Who after spitting thrice began, Stroaking his Beard,— Quoth he, Here sits the Man Who Thirty several Compaigns has seen, At five and forty Sieges been, And in both foreign and domestick Wars Receiv'd as many Scars, As I upon my Head have Hairs. You prate, continued he, to make you merry, Of Sligo, and of Bellishannon, Of Carickfergus and Dundalk, And of the thund'ring Bombs and Cannon, Were us'd as Siege of London-derry; Mere stuff, and nothing else but Talk. Now if the Wars you would delight in, And see the very Soul of Fighting, Go but this Spring to Flanders, Flanders the Scene of Action, where Death keeps his Revels all the Year: There are no Petticoat Commanders, Things clad in red, which have no braver Souls Than Parrots, Apes, or Owls;
But hardy Youths,— so us'd to lye ruff, That their own Skins become a nat'ral Buff: These are the Lads,—and I was one, Although I say't my self,— have often gone, Through thickest Squadrons of the Horse, And with my single force, Made a whole Troop retire in haste: This good old Blade which by my Side I wear, Assisted by my Arm, I swear, Has kill'd a dozen Men before I broke my fast; Nor living is that daring He, Who but provokes this trusty Sword, But shall— — At speaking of which word, Two Serjeants came and laid Their Paws upon this daring Blade; Upon an Action of poor Hostess (Living not far from where Blew-Post is,) For fowling Linnen half a Year, Then sneaking off and never pay'r. But so submissive, and so tame, Was this courageous Son of Fame! The Company with Laughter let him pass To Prison, for a most vainglorious Ass. VII. Scarce was this Son of Thunder gone, Who tir'd the Ears of every one, Yet with his blust'ring Language warm, But new Discourse began,
Talk understood by every one Concerning the late dreadful Storm. Lord! Neighbour, did you ever hear (Says one) so terrible a Wind? I that have liv'd this threescore Years, The like could never find, How Sir, (replied his Friend,) —have you forgot That blust'ring Night that Noll th'Usurper died? When all the Winds in order tried, Who should blow hardest on the Spot, A Storm so dreadful that 'twas thought About by Witchcraft brought; When trembling Atheists went to Prayer, Thinking the Day of Judgment near; And Fear appear'd in ev'ry Face. Pish, (cries his Friend,) —what that time was, I well remember, but, alas! To the late Wind it was no more, Than farting of a Cloud, or shrieking of a Door. I'll tell you: There was lately sent To me a Letter out of Kent, Which says, it blew the Devil's Drop (A Rock by Dover seen) Along the Shoar, as if't had been A School-boy's Gig or Top, And plac'd it on this side the Hope, And that was strange.— — But not by half, So wonderful (another speaks,) as that I now am going to relate: Grazing it to an Essex Calf,
Near to the Shoar, and blew him cross the River. Quite into Kent, where the poor thing remains As sound and well as ever. This caus'd the Company to laugh out-right: Which Mirth t'increase a jolly Sailer swore, That on that ne'er to be forgotten Night, (Though to preserve-her they had spar'd no pains,) Their goodly Ship was stranded near the Shoar, Laden with Claret from Bourdeaux she came; The Vessel dash'd to pieces, every Man Nimbly to save himself began; I, for my part, seeing a Hogshead float, Quickly astride upon it got, And, Faith, I think I was not much to blame, My drunken Friend and I got safe to Land, Where in requital of the good He did me, caus'd his dearest Bloud To issue from him upon my command, My Friends and I were merry at his death, And I shall ne'er forget him while I've breath. Finding this dull Romantick strain, Amongst that Company to reign, Whose Talk was nothing else but Fable, I, leaving them, went to another Table. VIII. At which by accident (no doubt) were got Demurely grave of Citizens a knot, With shaking Heads and lift up Eyes, Discoursing upon Prodigies.
Ah Friends! the Times (says one) are very sad, Although the Wicked still remain as bad As if all things were setled—T'other Night, As very late by Westminster I came, Methought the Element was all on flame, And one of th' Heads upon the Iron Spire Over the Hall, distinctly cried out Fire: Nay, I a while ago was told, That, at Noon, day, the Horse which stands In the Stocks-Market neigh'd aloud For Provender, while the affrighted Croud Stood shivering both with Fear and Cold: Now when Vice grows so strong, and Faith so weak, No wonder 'tis the very Stones should speak: What these unlucky Signs portend I must confess I cannot comprehend; Let God (and then he'd'off his Hat) In his good time discover that. Why, Neighbour, (says his Elbow-Friend,) For certain 'tis, you cannot be So blind as not to see, The Head which cried out Fire denotes A disagreement in the Senate's Votes; But Heav'n avert the Prodigy; And th' Horses Neighing speaks as plain This Summer's scarcity of Grain: But I'm no Prophet, if I were, Events more wonderful I'd shew, Than ever Gadbury or Lilly knew, Events should make the Nation stare;
What pity 'tis that Prophecy is ceas'd! What pity 'tis, (thought I) thou are not plac'd In Bedlam, where there cannot be One half so Lunatick as thee: Darkness, fresh Straw, and slender Diet, And shaving th' Hair from thy thick Skull, May make thy Brains and Tongue more quiet; But leaving this so very dull, Most whimsical, and senseless Crew, I foftly to another place withdrew. IX. Where six raw Country Fellows sate To hear an empty Wittal prate: They to no Sermon in their Lives Did ever such attention lend, And each one by his grinning strives Who most shall his Discourse commend: One whisp'ring t'other in the Ear, E'fack, Ned, did you ever hear (Says he) such Stories from our silly Vicar, O'er Whitson Ale, or Christmass Liquor? No, Vaith, Tom, (answers he,) in all my born I ne'er heard sike an ean, who does not scorn To tell us all the News; he should, I'm zhure, By's head-piece, be a Countseller. By this time our admired Wit Had drank his Dish of Tea, and then Begins with— —Look ye, Gentlemen,
'Tis plain, the Emperour intends To make a strict Alliance with his Friends, To pull down the Unchristian Turk; E'gad you'll see some curious Summers Work, And if things do but hit, (And I may live to see it,) That Haughty Tyrant tumble from his Throne, And no his humble Marrow-bones, Beg to b'admitted Groom of th' Stable, And eat Scraps from the Servants Table: When this is done, they will, I hope, Have at his Holiness the Pope, With all his Scarlet Cardinals, Who wait upon St. Peter's Chair; A Chair has held this Sixteen hundred Year Without being mended, as I hear. The great Mogul next to their Fury falls, And when they've overcome the Cannibals The Work is done, and we may live at peace, Enjoy our Friends, and always be at ease. Boy, bring the Gazette.— Sir, 'tis not come in. Pox take you, fetch it, for it has been seen At Jonathan's two hours ago—But, Sir,— But, Puppy, What do I come hither for, To spend my time in this dull smoaky Room? Pray be not angry, Sir, the Gazette's come. Here, Lad, let's see't—So, so, here's tickling News, Lost Dogs, lost Horses, Soldiers run away Without their Wits, and to avoid their Pay.
Books sold at Tom's by Auction—once, twice, thrice, The Hammer's down—he has you in a trice. But, Sir, (says one,) what kind of News is this? For let me dye if I know what it is. Oh, Sir, (replies the Spark) I always read Gazettes as Witches pray; for they, 'tis said, Do backwards mumble out their Pater Noster; But now for News, i'th' twinkling of an Oyster. Reads. Francfort, March 29. Several Boats arrive daily with Provisions that are ordered to be laid up here for the use of the Imperial Forces, which will now very quickly be in motion. The late Flouds have broke the Bridge of Boats at Philipsburg. 'Ditto, April. 2.— Hold, Sir, (says one) e'er farther you go on Pray tell us where abouts does stand that Town Call'd Ditto.— —Why, Sir, (answers he,) it lies Ʋpon the barb'rous Coast of Africa, Snatch'd from the Moors by mere surprize; For on a very memorable day, Or rather Night, as they were all employ'd In gazing on the then Eclipsed Moon, The Emp'rours Vessels, cruising near the Shoar, Took the advantage of their busied sense, And gain'd the Town:—Not many were destroy'd; Fear bound the Hands of many, Wonder more; So with small Bloudshed they were Captives soon. The City's neatly built, and 'twas from thence
The German Balls, so fam'd for cleaning Shoes, First came.— I'd read some other News, But I'm oblig'd by such an hour To be at— Gentlemen, I am your Most humble Servant.— Boy, here's for my Tea. Then leaves the Room.-But, Lord! to hear the Praise These Blockheads did to his bold Nonsense raise, Would almost make a witty Man forswear All Claim to Modesty and Sense, Since the Accomplishments which bear A Man through Life, are Ignorance and Impudence. X. The Lechery of talking what Is meerly understood by rote, Had to another Table drawn A Club of Whigs and Tory Spawn. Things which like Puppets only squeak, What they sometimes hear great ones speak: One would affirm that no pretence Could Salus Populi make Sense; T'other affirm'd the Royal Line, Could never be of Right Divine; And that it was an Imposition, Almost as bad as th' Inquisition, To tell the People that a King May by's own Power do any thing, And that to God he is alone Accountable for what he's done:
Think you (continued he) that Subjects come Bridled and Sadled to the State, And Kings with Boots and Spurs come down To ride them all at any rate? And do you think, reply'd the other That any Prince on Earth can be Safe on his Throne while zealous Brother Whose quick Eye-sight pretends to see Some Blemishes in's Rule, shall think it fit To instigate the Mobile To force that Prince his Throne to quit, And then cry out he—But 'tis late: Good Night For should we talk till day of Doom In hopes each other to 'orecome You'd think me still i'th' wrong, as I you not i'th' right. XI. Loud Laughter heard, I went to know The reason of that sudden Mirth, And what it was that gave it Birth; Which was a Sot would needs pretend to show With Ale-drops spilt upon the Bench, A New Invention to intrench; Make a Quart-pot to represent a Town, And then with Cannon of Tobacco-pipe, Which shews he was invention-ripe, The Pewter Cittadell beat down. Then two large Streams together joyn To represent the River Boyne; With broken Pipes then represent How over it our Army went.
Then make both Armies to ingage While Pipes still falling from the Table Did shew the Flight of beaten Rabble: And all this done with seeming rage, So serious in his trifling was the Fool; Pity to France he is not sent, Where he Preferment cannot want, Or else be whipt and sent again to School. XII. In close Cabal were in a Corner met; A Knot of Men, whose Faces wore The Livery of Discontent, Sighs from their Breasts incessantly were sent, One by their Looks might see their Hearts did fret, Like murmur'ing Israelites of yore, They frown'd, they stamp'd, they bit their Thumbs, They wink'd, they nodded, nay, would sometimes smil When something did their airy hopes beguile, Yet not a Word between their Lips there comes. What this dumb Scene did represent, Or what by Signs and Nods was meant, Conjecture only gives us leave to guess: They were no Friends to th' Government, But there they met their Thoughts to ease, Which Thoughts by Words if they should dare t'express, Their Necks, or Purses at the least, Might pay for th' Tongue's untimely Jest. Self Preservation's first of Nature's Laws: To be Well-wishers they're content, But care not to be Martyrs for the Cause.
XIII. From this most unintelligible Crew I went, another Scene to view, If the forementioned were reserv'd and close, These were more open, and more free, For Wine no secret ever knows, And that these Sparks had drank t'a large degree. You Sirrah Boy, (says one,) go fetch m'a Whore, A lusty strapping Bona Roba, E'gad, I shall so jerk her Toby, I'd make her—But I'll say no more At present.—Pox this Coffee scalds my Throat, (Another cries,) 'tis in all Sense too hot; Prithee go fetch a Pair of Bellows hither, And make my Dish know cooler weather: That ever Man should be so great an Ass, To suffer Wine (that plaguy Thief) to pass Between his Lips, that slily did convey His Sense, his Reason, and his Brains away: How happy those dull Nations are, That know no other Liquor but Small-Beer! You, Harry, (then there bawls a third,) If of Sobriety you speak one word, By Jupiter, and all the Heathen Gods Your Sword and mine shall be at mortal odds; I for my part, without Reflections, Against Small-Beer have forty Actions; They're to be tried next Term, and if I cast it, I'll make't High Treason for my Friends to tast it,
Boy, bring m'a Glass of Usquebaugh, By People nicknam'd Lill' bullero, 'Tis good against the Gripes, they say, My Humour's this—Dum spiro spero: Come here's a Health to th' King of Poland; Well, here sit I, who though I've no Land, Suppose my self as great as he, Nay, as th' great Cham of Tartary; My Crown's a fuddling Cap, a Pipe my Sceptre; My Bottle represents my Globe, And any Cloaths serve for a Regal Robe; My Queen my Mistress, when I kept her. Drawers (or else 'tis very hard) Will serve me for my Corps du Guard; But when Incognito I reel, A Link-boy serves the turn as well; And, Gentlemen, to shew I'm yours, Know you're my Privy Counsellours. Well, we advise thee to go home, (Says one,) and try by Sleep to overcome This Humour.— —Well, for once it shall be said, (Says he,) That Counsel I obey'd; Here, Boy, your Money,—Gentlemen let's go, E'gad methinks I tread on Wool, or Snow, My head's so light,—well, when I come again I'll make new Orders in my drinking Reign.
XIV. This merry-Farce diverted all the Room: These you may know had no design The Quiet of the State to undermine; He thinks no Treason that's top-full of Wine: Men that sit brooding o'er their Fears at home, Or else abroad in private Corners meet, And there with secret Whispers sit, Are those disturb the Peace of Christendom: The Juice o'th' Grape may nurse an ill design, But certain 't never was begot by VVine. XV. Had any this new Figure seen, Him Madman must have thought him been, Who stroking up Mustachio's swore, The King of France his Master was, The greatest Prince the Earth e're bore. What glorious Conquests has he won? What mighty Actions left undone, To crown his Fame, and eternise his Race? Rides he not Master of the British Seas? Have not— Pray Sir, says one, take up a little, Your Arguments so very brittle, Indeed of Nonsense 'tis a finisht Piece. What glorious Conquests has he won? Yes, by Pistoles he much has done: Did he at th' Head of Armies e're appear?
No, while they dealt in Blood and Wounds, He lulls his Senses and his Soul confounds, In the fair Lap of Madam Maintenon. His mighty Actions what are they, But burning Towns and laying wast Whole Provinces? and what I pray Has his invincible Armado done Upon our Coast, but burnt a little Town? Which Action in your Gazette not long past, Is magnified as much or more, As Portsmouth Platform Castle were in's Power: For shame leave off these State Romantick Lies, And seem at least, if you will ne'er be wise. XVI. Th' Athenian Itch of hearing News, Which does our Faith so oft abuse, Made me inquisitive to know, How matters did in Piedmont go: Piedmont the Place where not long since, By order from th' most Christian Prince, Whole Seas of Blood were spilt; but now By a strange turn of Providence, Become a shade to persecuted Innocence; But what we most desire to know, Does often cheat us with a show.— The Opticks with which foreign News we view, Are sometimes false and sometimes true.
One while the Duke of Savoy has the better, Then Cattinat prevails with his Dragoons, Then all's refuted in another Letter; The Circling year has not so many Moons, As from beyond the Seas to us they send Their weekly Lies,— We hope the best, but must our Faith suspend. XVII. Hearing loud Talk and warm Dispute, I sate me down to listen to't: A Cluster were ingag'd, but chiefly Two Unsheath'd their Arguments, and drew In Controversie's open Field; He who did the defensive Weapon yield Was both to Wit and Sense allied, Nay, more, the Truth was on his side; His Habit rich, but modest,— t'other, Yea plainly, a dissenting Brother, Who confidently would maintain, The Papists first the War began, In those sad Times when Jealousies and Fears Set Folks together by the Ears; Nay, more, that they the Persons were Who brought the King into the Snare, And when they had him safely there, Did, in the sight of all Beholders, Take off his Head from off his Shoulders. (A Lye so very gross like this, What Hearer would not take amiss?)
This caus'd the Gentleman to storm, Already with his Canting warm; How, Sir, (says he,) can you with any Face Transfer the Guilt, most justly yours, (I mean your Party's,) on the Papists? They, 'Tis own'd, are bad enough; but can you, 'pray, Inform us who amongst those ruling Powers That sate at Westminster that fatal Day, When Charles (the Good, the Pious, and the Just, Being from Kingdoms three most basely thrust,) Was tried, which of them all went to Mass? What Roman Catholick to sign was known The Warrant for his Execution? Hold, Sir, (replies the other,) not too fast: Ʋpon the Stage they did not much appear, 'Tis own'd, but they behind the Curtain stood, and what, Was ordered to be done was then effected. Good Counsel ought not, Sir, to be rejected, (Replies the other,) but 'tis plain and clear, The Guilt should only at your Doors be cast.— At mine, Sir? Pray excuse me, I comply With evry Government.—That's upper most you mean. But, Sir, since you and I have been Disputing thus, let me one Secret tell.— A Secret, (said I;) no, 'tis known too well, No Government your Party ever pleas'd; And if that Miracles had not been ceas'd, Should Heaven to humour you create A Kingdom, Commonwealth, or State,
Together with such wise and wholesome Laws, Wherein sharp Criticks could discern no flaws, Yet you'd be still uneasie.— —Sir, too far You stretch your Argument; for are We not as quiet in the present Reign, As those who stiffly Monarchy maintain? Yes, doubtless, you (replies the other) can Conform to all the Modes which e'er The Government are ready to prepare; But your Compliance is but Masquerade, Your Loyalty s forc'd, your Faith a Trade; T'enjoy your Liberty the State thinks sit, Pray Heav'n you make good use of it; Forbear your Canting, VVhining, idle Style, VVith no amusements see you do beguile You Hearers; strive but to be true; Against the Laws do you forget to rail, And let but Sense 'gainst Bigotry prevail; And then— —Oh! Sir, we know what best to do, VVe come not here to be inform'd by you.— But Counsel's cheap, Sir, I demand no Fees.— But you may counsel others if you please.— Nay, if you're angry, Sir, I'm gone; This 'tis when good advice is thrown Away on Men; but e'er your Company I leave, Remember this, while vainly you believe Others to cheat, you don't your selves deceive.
XVIII. Great News from Ireland, is heard at Door; Which puts the Audience to a stand, To fetch it in there is command, And one attempts to read it o'er But interrupted by a prating Fop. You talk, (says he,) I mean you hope That Ireland will this Summer be reduc'd; You may as well suppose The Bay of Biscay will be froze; No, no, with Stories you're amus'd, K. J—'s in Men and Money's not so poor, And I pronounce him Son of 'Whore, VVho wishes Him or's Army were confus'd. This made the Company to stare: At last one takes him up with—Sir, I dare, Though not to's Person, yet to's Cause VVish ruin; and if any here Do not the self-same thing aver, He is without much Complement an Ass. An Ass, Sir, (cries the other,) Faith, I don't Much use to pocket up such an Affront; You wear no Sword, I see, and 'twould be base To draw upon a naked Man, But here's my Dish of Coffee in your Face. T'other, though scalded, would not be Behind-hand with him in Civility, But flung a Glass of Mum so pat, It spoil'd both Perriwig and Point Cravat:
On this a Quarrel soon began, Till Constable with pacifying Staff, Appeas'd the Fray, and the Contenders have Some respite, one his Face to cure, And t'other to refresh his Garniture. XIX. The lately mention'd Sparks are hardly gone, But out of Breath more Hawkers run, With the good News of the intire defeat, Perform'd by th' Arms and Conduct of the Great Illustrious William at the Famous Boyne, Where he like Caesar crost the Rubicon. The trembling Irish ran away like Hares, And none to look behind him dares; It might in every Face be read, How each ones Heart affected stood; And tho' Distinction's Politick I hate, Yet by the Chearfulness which sate, Upon the Brow of one while t'other shew'd, A forc'd Complacence, nay, perhaps a Smile, At reading of the News it was not hard, To guess whose Interest was lov'd and fear'd. XX. Mean while the Tax Collectors enter in, Demanding Money for the King, At sight of which one who began to grin, Did thus his most judicious Censures fling.
Cries on, I think the Parliament are mad To tax us thus; we shall e'er long Not know to whom our Souls belong; Nay 'tis reported they prepare A Bill to regulate our Fare: And none without accustom'd Fees Shall eat of Licens'd Bread and Cheese; For— —Hold, Sir, cries another Man, E'er farther in your Nonsense you go on; What to the Taxes have you paid, Or given to the Royal Aid? If I mistake not, you're no more Than Journeyman t'a Shoe-maker, And yet your Little Worship must complain, But 'twould, alas! be but in vain To preach Sense to thy cloudy Brain; Or else, 't might be evinc'd that none In Europe's large Dominions are so free From griping Taxes of the Purse as we; Besides, what in that Nature's done, Is the effect of meer Necessity, Shall th' King his Person for our sakes expose, And we our little Aids refuse? They're worse than Infidels and Jews, Who out of Complaisance to Purse, Their future Happiness will lose, And on Posterity entail a Curse.
XXI. Quite out of Breath comes bouncing to the Room A Spark, as if for Mid wife sent, Bawling aloud—His Majesty is come; The King our Royal Master is at home: Shall we not drink his health to night, Tho' some may pledge it out of spight; E'gad I care not,—You Rogue, Sirrah, Boy, Fetch me a Double Mug of Potent Beer To make my Ʋnderstanding clear, Or I shall else be drunk with Joy? Are you all ready?—Gentlemen present, Come here's the Brave King William's Health, A Thing I wish above all Earthly Wealth, All at one pull on rep—so—Boy, another; This Mug has got a younger Brother. We must not sure forget the Queen, No, no, my Lads, that were a Mortal Sin; Nor must the Prince and Princess be forgot, Boy, bring each man Mugs half a Dozen, I'll no Man of his Liquor Cozen. Now healths to the Nobility, E'gad I'll drink while I can see, You Zarrah—Boy—but now the Sot With frequent Healths so drunk was got, That leaving of the Publick Room, Went very Loyal, very Tipsie home.
XXII. The Company he left behind, Wanted not twenty of the Game, Some Loyalty, and some Beer inflame; Nor were they always in a Mind: One drank the King's Health, but without a Name. Which his next Neighbour could not bear; Sir, you're a Jacobite I fear; And were I sure to find one here To shew how much I could be Civil, I'd kick him headlong to the Devil. A Mighty Hero (cries the t'other) You're surely Garagantua's Brother, Your Valour, or I miss my part, Lies in your Tongue more than your heart. You Scoundrel don't provoke me more, For if you do, you Son of a Whore, I'll make my Mug which now's so full, Acquainted with thy Paper Skull; This Language t'other could not bear, But gives him a round box o'th' Ear; That was with Interest paid agen: Thus both provok'd and soundly vext, Mugs, Dishes, or what e'er comes next, Serv'd 'em wherewith to vent their Spleen, But more than's us'd by Men of Worth; Each had his second, third, and fourth, And to't they fall with fighting Fury, As if they'd been at pass of Newry,
But parted, each to shew his spight, Curses, instead of saying,—Good Night. XXIII. I having seen this furious Quarrel, But too much influenc'd by the Barrel; Thought that this vast Excess of Joy, Did even the Soul of Loyalty destroy: That Vertue lies not in an idle Vain, Of drinking till my Reason stands A Tiptoe in my Brain, When so I may obey some rash Commands. But calm and quiet always in the Breast, Wherein true Loyalty does rest. And sure we must it madness call, Whilst in some Tavern of the Town, Prostrate upon our Knees we'll fall, And drinking others Healths to lose our own. XXIV. More various Scenes of Humour I might tell, Which in my little stay befel; Such as grave Citts, who spending Farthings four, Sit, smoke, and warm themselves an hour, Of modish Town-sparks, drinking Chocolate, With Bevir cockt, and laughing loud, To be thought Wits amongst the Crow'd, Or sipping Tea, while they relate
Their Ev'ning's Frolick at the Rose. But now I think 'tis time to close, Lest to my Reader I should give offence, And he be tir'd with mine, As I was with their dull Impertinence. My Reck'ning paid, I left the Room, And in my passage Home, Reflected thus—Is this the much desir'd Blessing of Life, which most unjustly we Call Regular Society? Well, to my Closet I'll repair, Past Times with present to compare, My self to strictest Study I'll condemn, And 'mongst some Authours wise and good, Who Mankind best have understood, My Weeks, Months, Years, endeavour to redeem. Which vainly foolish, and unthinking I Have spent in what we falsely call Good Company. THE END.
Books lately Printed and Sold, at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. PLutarch's Morals, Translated from the Greek by several Hands, in 8vo. 5. Vol. The Female Advocate, or an Answer to a late Satyr against the Pride, Lust, and Inconstancy of Women, in 4to. Moral Essays and Discourses upon several Subjects, chiefly relating to the Present Times. By a Person of Honour, 8vo. A New Method of Curing the French Pox, written by an Eminent French Author; Together with the Practice and Method of Mon∣sieur Blanchard, as also, Dr. Sydenham's Judgment on the same: To which is added Annotations and Observations, by William Salmon Professor of Physick, in 12ves. The Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant, containing the most secret Transactions and Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV, till the beginning of the Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu, to which is added a particular Relation of the Archbishop of Enbrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negociation for the Advancement of the Roman Catholick Religion here, together with the Duke of Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair, which happened the last Year of King James I. His Reign. Faithfully Translated out of the French Original, in 12ves. A New and Easie Method to the Art of Dialling, containing 1. All Horizontal Dials, all Upright Dials, Reflecting Dials, Dials without Centre, Nocturnal Dials, upright Declining Dials, without knowing the Declination of the Place. 2. The most natural and easie Way of describing the Curious Lines of the Sun's Declination on any Place, by Thomas Strode Esq in 4to.
