B1096aA R175505 45097527 171146
Eminent CURES aa perform in several Dieaes, by Baemans SPIRITS of SCURVEY-GRASS. TIS well known throughout the Nation, that I first of all Publisht these Excellent Spirits for a general Good, above Eight y ars ago; and ave ever since continued them, to the great benefit of many Thousands that have made use of them. And such acceptation and esteem have they obtain'd, especially from persons of Quality and Judgment; and their Ver∣tues in the Scurvey, Dropsies, Worms, Aches, Stone, Consumptions, and several other Di∣seases, are so well-known, and their safe and effectual way of working so Universally proved in and upon persons of all Ages, different Complexions, and various Distempers, that I did not intend any further Advertisements, in this kind, had not several ill men (observing the Quantities I daily vended) gone a∣bout to Ape and Counterfeit them, to the great abuse of the Publick. Which bad Practises of theirs having occasion'd much prejudice to many honest people, whereof I daily hear lamentable Complaints, I am thereupon in justice to my self and my Countrey, forc'd to continue this way of general Notice, lest any should be drawn in to mistake those Counterfeits for my Spirits, and so not only be defrauded of their Money, but injured in their Health. For my own part, Hundreds in this Honorable City, of good quality, can testifie, That as I was bred up to Pharmacy, to for above Twenty years I have been diligently vers'd in Preparing, Trying, and Improving of the choicest Medicines; but these Ʋpstart Pretenders are generally inconsiderable fellows, that have kept Ale-houses, or followed other Mecha∣rick Trades as long as they were able; and having been in Goals, and reduced to necessity. For a last shift, they of late boldly ventur'd to turn Quacks, and bubble the world with their pretended Spirits, though they not at all understand the true Preparation. For how can it be supposed they know it seeing I never imparted my Method to any person living? But because there is no proof like that of Fact, I appeal to Experience, which daily demonstrates as well the admirable Vertues of my approved Spirits in themselves, as their Incomparable Excellency above and beyond all the Counterfeit Merchandize of these impudent Physick Hucksters. And for the Readers satisfaction therein, I shall here (besides those mentioned formerly) publish some few Remarkable Cures that have lately been wrought by my spirits, which I shall give you in the words of persons of unquestionable Credit in divers arts, who commni∣  same unto The  ecite is a Letter from Chice  Suffex, dated March the 12th, 1680. Sir, I am desired to return you the hearty thanks of many that have taken of your Spirits, for the  benefit they have thereby received; particularly one Richard Goly a young man of this City, having been long afflicted with the Dropsie and Scurvey, and brought very low, after the taking of many other Medi∣cines without success, by using one of your Bottles, is perfectly cured. Likewise my Mother having for many years been lamentably troubled with the Stone, after taking some of your Plain Spirit, found a sensible benefit, and has been at ease ever since. Many it hath helped of the Tooth-ach, and divers have by them been cured of tedious Agues, when, all other Remedies proved ineffectual, and many more of several other Distempers, which desire to return thanks to God and you, (as an Instrument under him by these your excellent Spirits) for restoring their Health. Yours Francis Fleshmonger. The next shall be the following Extract out of a Letter from Hull. Sir, These serve to give you a remarkable instance of the Vertues of your Spirits of Scurvey-grass much admired in these parts, upon one Elizabeth Thompson, Wife of Bernard Thompson of Barton over a∣gainst this Town of Hull, who having for a considerable time been troubled with a great pain and gnawing at her heart or stomach, one Mr. Foy that had a Bottle of your Golden Spirit, gave her an hundred drops of it, upon which she voided a worm three yards, and three quarters long, as it was measured by the said Mr. oy in the presence of several persons. And the woman is since freed of her pain; but hath sent for more of the Spirit, and much applauds it. Your Servant to command, Hull, June 15th, 1681. John Goodrick. No is the following Account less considerable from Aishburton. Sir, This at present acquaints you of a great Cure wrought through the blessing of God by your Bottles of Plain Spirits upon a Child of a Neighbour of mine, by name Mr. Matthew Whitehair, the Child being abot hree year old, had a Salt humour fell into her eyes, by reason whereof she was in a manner deprived
par  had taken the cure in hand, but could not perform it. After which her Father sent for a Bottle of your Spirits, by which finding some good, they had another, upon the taking of which the childs eyes grew better, and still the cure went on with the use of e∣very Bottle, and the fifth bottle hath perfected the cure, and the childs Eyes are as well as over they were, to the great admiration of all that knew her. Another Cure was also lately effected thereby on a Maid of this Town of Aishburton, Mrs. Martha Tydball of about 24 years of age, who was a long time extreamly tortur'd with the Tooth-ach, the pain whereof was taken away by the use of one bottle of your Plain spirit without drawing her Tooth. Likewise Mr. Truelock of Abingdon told me lately, That there was a young Gentleman his Neighbour that was troubled with the Scurvey, to that great degree, that it had overspread his body in most places in manner of a White Scurff, and that he had used variety of Physick, but to no purpose, till he was perswaded to take some of your Spirits, whereupon he grew better, and after the taking of some Bottles was perfectly cured. Several other notable Cures might be specified, for there is scarce a week passes, but I have an Ac∣count of some, besides abundance done in remote pares, which I never hear of. And divers Learned Do∣ctors do both make use of, and recommend my Spirits beyond any others extant, particularly Dr. Thomas Dyke of Tetten in the Parish of Kingstone within three miles of Taunton in Sommersetshire, as eminent a Physitian as any in the West of England, having made use of them, gives them an high commendation; he also tryed Clarks Spirits, and others that are sent abroad, but declares they are none of them any ways comparable to Batemans; and for a general good gave his consent to Mr. John Smith Bookseller in Taunton (one of the disposers of my Spirits) that his Name and Approbation of them might be used in Print, to prevent peoples being deceived by those that sell Clarks, &c. who that they might have the quicker sale, are apt to make use of that Judicious Doctors Name, and pretended that he had approved of theirs, which in reality he never did. So that upon the whole, if long Experience, and Extraordinary Cures daily wrought before your eyes, and the Approbation of the most Learned Doctors may be sufficient proofs of the Excellency of a Medicine, Batemans Spirits have all these to vouch for them. Therefore certainly they must be foolish∣ly mad that shall neglect such approved helps when they may be had; and will rather hazard their lives by tampering with the counterfeit stops of ignorant Imposters, that care not what mischief they do, so they may but put off thir stuff, and any way suy their own pinching Necessities nd Debauche Th ncomparable pirits, both Golden an  are to be had at these pl  Print  Directions for the use of them. The Bttles being all Sealed with my Coa of Arms, The Half-Moon and Ermins, to prevent Counterfeits. M. Will. Atkins Bookseller in Leicester, Mr. Amphlet barber chyrurgion in Bewdly. Mr. Adams barber chyrurgion in Tichfield. Mr. Arnold barber-chirurgion in Epsom. Mr. John Butler in Shaftsbury. Mr. Rich. Bower at his Coffee house in Yarmouth Mr. Bayley bookseller in Lichfield. Mr. Bayley Grocer in Bedford. Mr. Elias Basset grocer in Hyth. Mr. Rich. Bott barber chyrurgion in Leominster. Mr. Edw. Bridges barber chyrurgion in Ross. Mr. Rich. Black at the White Hart in Grantham. Mr. Brisenden barber near the chequer in Ashford. Mr. Baker joyner near the Whie Hart in Milton. Mr. Belton at the holy Lamb in Gravesend. Mr. Jacob Belton Barber chyrurgion in Hastings. Mr. Browning barber in Cogshal. Mr. Bullock at the Crown Inn in Billericay. Mr. Will Belthar at the George Inn in Torrington M. Bateman of Narberth in the County of Penbrook Mr. Cadwell bookseller in Darby. Mr. William Clark Bookseller in Winchester. Mr. John Smith bookseller in Taunto. Mr. Will. Cutlow Draper in Beccles. Mr. Camper at Mr. Edw. Taylors a Butcher in Rochester. Mr. Cockeram bookseller in Northampton. Mr. John Cook at the Bull Inn in St. Needs. Mr. Tho. Crouch barber-chyrurgeon in Rye. Mr. Cocking barber chyrurgion in Ashburton. Mr. Cooksley barber chyrurgion in Myneead! Mr. Rich. Davies bookseller in Oxford. Mr. Robert Ducker grocer in gainesborough. M. Dagnal bookseller in Alisbury, & at his shop in Laton. Mr. Reeve Schoolmaster in Dovet Mr. Ja. Edwards Glover at Mildenhall. Mr. Fleshmonger barber in Chichester. Mr. Field at the Red Lyon in Weathersfield Mr. Fenton Bookseller in Burlington. Mr. Foster mercer in Binbrook. M. Goodwrick Bookseller in Hull. Mr. Goodwin at his Coffee house in Ipswich, Mr. Gillam mercer in Guilford. Mr. Tho. Hart bookseller in Chelmforn. And at my own House in Pauls Chain near Doctors Commons. LONDON.
