E3750 E112_20 99862644 114810
EXCEEDING JOYFULL NEWS FROM LINCOLN-SHIRE. OR The Resolution of the Gentry and Com∣monalty, inhabiting in the County of Lincoln, con∣cerning the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the High Court of Parliament. ALSO JOYFVLL NEVVES FROM LEICESTER Declaring how Mr Henry Hastings was taken prisoner by the High-Sheriffe of the said County, on Sun∣day, August 14. 1642. Whereunto is annexed the Resolution of the Lords and Commons assembled in this present Parliament, concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty. Ordered that this be printed and published. Joh. Browne, Cler. Parl. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Aug. 17. 1642.
Joyfull Newes FROM Lincolne-shire. THe Inhabitants of the Coun∣tie of Lincolne, having by their Petitions to the high Court of Parliament, declared their hearty affections to them, de∣siring them to goe on with confidence, promising them that their Lives, estates, and all they could com∣mand, should be laid downe at their Feet. Likewise their Petition presented to his Ma∣jestie at Yorke, wherein they humbly intreated his Majesty to returne to his Parliament, declaring the great misery, & apparent troubles that were like to ensue, and fall upon this Kingdome, if his Majesty should any longer deny his gratious pre∣sence and Royall assent to his high Court of Par∣liament, wherein they declared the depth of their affections to the Parliament, and their earnest de∣sire
preserve the peace of the Kingdome. Neverthelesse they having received an Answer to their Petition, were reviled by the Cavaliers, and called Round-heads, with other abuses not fit to be mentioned. At their returne from Yorke they by order of the Committee of Parliament assembled to put the Ordinance of Militia in exe∣cution, where there were assembled many thou∣sands to the great admiration and not little satis∣faction of the Lieutenants of the Shire that were appointed by the Parliament to see the said Ordi∣nance put in execution. Likewise they then gave such large testimonies of his love and obedience to the Parliament, that the Committee thought it necessary to give im∣formation thereof to the House, who returned them thankes for the same, animating them on to a continuance in the same duty. Which they had great reason to do, there be∣ing at that very instant Officers appointed by His Majesty to put the commission of Aray in execu∣tion: Neverthelesse, though His Majesties Offi∣cers had put up the Proclamation concerning His Majesties disavowing the ordinance of the Militia, withall giving strict command in His Majesties name, that they should not yeeld obedience to the said Ordinance, they still with chearfulnesse pursued in the due execution of the same. His Majesty finding that his expectation was made frustrate and that he could not prevail with
his officers (being councelled thereto by the Lord Mowbray) was resolved to goe in person to put the commission of Aray in execution. Where being arived, he by his speciall com∣mand caused the gentry and cominalty of the said Countie to be summoned, who according to their Loyalty and Allegiance obeyed His Maje∣sties command. By reason of which they have undergone ma∣ny censures, some calling them Turne-coats, and many other ignominious names. For which cause they thought it convenient to declare their Resolution concerning their obe∣dience to His Majesty, and their duty to the Par∣liament. For their obedience to His Majesties com∣mands, they declare that it stood not with their loyalties to stand in flat opposition to His Maje∣sties commands, (His Majesty commanding nothing which intrenched upon the Peace of the Kingdome, or the priviledge of Par∣liament) Withall they doe declare, that if His Majesty shall command them, they will march with him, and obey his just commands, as loyall and obedient Subjects. But likewise they are resolved so farre to pre∣serve their duty to the Parliament, that if his Majesty, in his owne person, or by his ministers, shall command them to put any thing in executi∣on against the Parliament, or imploy any others
of His Majesties Forces in any such design; that then they will not onely forbeare the perfor∣mance of any such act themselves, but also ha∣zard then lives in opposing of all such as shall any way indeavour the same. Promising that they shall no longer wish a godly neace, a freedome in Religion, nor the sweet enjoyment of ought that is good or deare unto them, then they shall continue faithfull to the commands of the high Court of Parlia∣ment. This is the Resolution of the Gentry and Commonalty of Lincolneshire, which I have pub∣lished for the satisfaction of the world, it being related to me by a Gentleman of good worth of the same County. Likewise a Letter was sent from Leicester to a Merchant of this City, declaring how Master Hastings with a Troop of Cavaliers went up against the High Sheriffe of the said County, with an intent to have burnt his house; but the High Sheriffe having notice thereof, summoned some Troops of Horse, which were raised since these troubles began in the Kingdome; and three miles from Langborough, fell upon him, kil∣led eight of his men, and tooke him, and some other of his Cavaliers: which he having done, sent him to the City of Leicester. But on the way Colonel Lunsford met with him, having a strong party, and worsted them, taking the said Hastings
away before the Countrey could come in to their rescue. Neverthelesse they were forced to fly as fast as their legs could carry them. Likewise it is resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, that in case any Force be brought out of one County into another County of this King∣dome, to disturbe the peace of the Kingdome, that the Lord Lieutenants and the Deputy Lieu∣tenants of the Counties adjoyning, be required to give aid and assistance to the said Lord Lieu∣tenants or Deputy Lieutenants requiring the same, &c. The Parliaments RESOLƲTION, Concerning the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY. THE Lords and Commons to witnesse their constant and unshaken loyalty and affection to his Majesty, do solemnly de∣clare that if his Majesty shall immediately disband
all his Forces; and be pleased to abandon all those wicked Counsells, and leave them to condigne punishment and returne and hearken to the whol∣some advice of his great Counsell, they will real∣ly endeavour to make both his Majesty and his Posterity, as great, rich, and potent, as much be∣loved at home and feared abroad, as any Prince that ever swayed this Scepter, which is their firm and constant Resolution. August the 17th. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration be forthwith Prin∣ted and published. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. Do. Com. FINIS.
