E71 E355_29 99861682 159909
The Earle of Carberyes PEDEGREE: WITH Their Titles, and honourable Endowments. ALSO, A copie of a Letter, with the Charge and Articles, sent from the Committee of Pembroke, to the Committee for Compositions at Gold-Smiths Hall, against the said Earl, and other grand Delinquents of the County of Carmarthen. printer's or publisher's device Octob: 3 London. Printed in the Yeer 1646.
The Earl of Carberery his Pedigree. THe said Earle was created Baron of Em∣lim at Oxford, and sate there in the Junto (the better to distinguish him, because hee hath beene by many taken for the Earl of Cherbery) he is nephew to the late Walter Vaughan, (Plod-all) brother to Sir Henry (Act-all, now prisoner in the Tower for all) brother to the late Sir John (Counte∣nance-all) father to the said Carbery, and brother to honest Richard (Tell-all) who hath beene grievously persecuted, imprisoned and plundered by them all, for his affection to the Parliament. And yet for all these alls, the said Earle is about London, making all the friends he can to get him off of these alls; it seemes they are so sharp, and prick so sore, that hee cannot rest long in one place; yet hee keeps his brazen face, and brags that hee hath got a pardon for all, and like to bee in as great command as ever he was: which if it should be true (as God for∣bid it should) then woe be to poore Carmarthenshire, especially those who exhibited these Articles to the Committee there; for they are like to pay for all: but I hope the Parliament will be better advised, and pre∣vent that, by disabling him and all his compliances for bearing any office or authority in the Countrey; hee may very well pay a large Composition, for hee hah
extorted large summes of money of the Country since these Wars began, besides two or 3000. l. of Ship∣money, and other moneyes which he had of the Countreys in his hands before. The copie of a Letter from the Committee of Pembroke, to the Committee for Compositions at Goldsmiths Hall. Honourable, SInce our accesses into this County of Carmarthen, we finde here an insolent tyrannicall Gentry, con∣sisting of one intolerable trunk, the branches disper∣sing over the face of the Countrey, and a servile op∣pressed Commons, holding their fortunes (yea their lives) at will of their Grand Seigniour. Ease and li∣berty they would gladly enjoy, but think it capitall to open their mouths, and professe so much. Authority we have to minister some remedy, and fidelity, incli∣nation, and spirit enough, to put it in execution. But the brave designes and joyfull successe of our Major-Generall requiring his whole power in the bordering Counties, leaves us unable to encounter with these sons of Anak, their very countenance proclaiming no∣thing but Malignancie and opposition. The happy Issue of our Major Generals endeavours, the totall reduce∣ment of Cardigan, Radnor and Brecknock shieres to King and Parliaments obedience, rounding this Coun∣try with our friends trusty and faithfull, is become the security to hold us together without danger of life so long in this place, though we dare onley receive char∣ges and examine witnesses against principall Malig∣nants,
and not offer to make assay of sequestrations without a strong power to second us. We send herein the copy of a Charge brought into us against some few of them which though it be short & much vented in generals, yet the witnesses & Records testifie parti∣culars so horrid as we never imagined could be practi∣sed by Christians, hence flowed the violent streams of misery that overwhelmed Pembrokeshiere, and all the Parliaments friends in this part of Wales, there is no∣thing but abhorring the Nationall Covenant, and a generall desire of power to revolt. We humbly offer these intimations to prevent mi∣stakes if any of them sew for composition, and if the destroyed County of Pembroke should be designed to receive any recovery for spoiles, the chiefe agents in the ruine might be descried, and be made proportio∣nably sharers in the repaire, we crave pardon for this our boldnesse, and devote our selves Carmarthen 29. Novrm. 1645. Your humble servants Tho: Powell. Sam. Lort. John Lloyd. Griff. White. T. Rowen. Iohn Lort. Georg. Will. Griffith. Iohn Mathins.
Articles exhibited the 10. day of November 1645. to the right Worshipful the Committee established for the King and Parliament within the three Associated Counties of Pembroke, Carmarthen, and Cardigan, for discovery of the malignancy (against the authority of Parliament) of Rich: Earl of Carbery, Rice Rudd Baronet, Sir Henry Vaughan, Sir Edward Vaughan, Knights, John Vaughan of Llanely, Lodowicke Lewis, Hen∣ry Middleton, Tho. Philips, Esquires, and Edward Lloyd Gent. 1. THe said Earle of Carbery was in time of peace a mercilesse oppressor of the Commons with∣in the said Counties, made advantage of the beginning of these present Wars cherished the troubles to make commoditie thereof, undertook the illegall Commis∣sion of Array, in opposition to the Parliament, and suppressing their friends and adherents, usurped the command in chiefe and sole power of those Counties to his own hands, introduced additionall forces out of other parts of the Kingdom to his assistance, made these Counties the constant seat of war for 3 years past, to the utter undoing of the well-affected Inhabitants, and dammage of the Country of 500000. l. at the least, and all the other Delinquents in times both of peace and war have been the principall and constant instruments for acting the said Earles design, diligently subservient to his ambition, and avarice, his abettors in ruining the Country, and proportionable sharers in the spoiles. 2. The Delinquents and their faction to disinable the Country of opposition to their purposes, did in the
months of October and November, 1642. disarme all the Trained Bands of the County of Carmarthen, and possessed themselves of all the Arms there in the com∣mon store, with the Trained Bands Arms, amounting in al to 3000. Arms, and raised a Regiment of foot sol∣diers to serve in them against the Parliament, and in pretence of the Souldiers present maintenance, extor∣ted xl. s. a peece at least, of every the Trained Band men, of some more, when they were stripped of their Armes, amounting to 2000. and above, the like course they held as far as they could prevaile in the other two Counties. 3. For further exhausting the wealth of the Coun∣try to convert to their own private commodity, the Delinquents in January following, pact a Grand Jury of men, observant of their countenances, and of speci∣all relation and dependancy upon the said Earle and Baronet Rudd, to serve in the quarter Sessions then hol∣den in Carmarthen shiere, and prepared a presentment and had it ingrossed before hand, to serve their turne for raising money and suppressing the Parliaments friends, and overawed the Jury to deliver the same to the Court without oath or any examination or evi∣dence, as the act of the Jurors upon their oathes that presentment, designed 2600. I. of the Countries mo∣ny to be sequestred to the Earle of Carbery. 4. In levying that unjust imposition by the Earle and some others of the Delinquents warrants upon pretence that Walter Grundy, persons known to affect the Parliament, and thereby come to be the object of the Delinquents fury, withstood the paiment of about 9. sh. imposed upon Hugh Grundy their father; the said
Thomas Philips, Edward Lloyd, with one hundred other persons in their company the 25. of June, 1643. be∣ing the Lords day in the morning, forced an entrance into the house, murthered Walter, dangerously woun∣ded Ralph, carried him prisoner to Carmarthen, indi∣cted, arraigned and condemned him of high Treason at the great Sessions in August following, the house plundered to the value of 200. I. and Mary Grundy their sister in house with them imprisoned, and Thomas Phi∣lips by warrant of the Delinquents immediate after the presentment, and by colour thereof seized the reall e∣state of 100. l. value per annum, and personall estate of 500. l. of Evan Thomas mentioned by the presentment to be ill-affected to the then government of the Coun∣try, and made strict search for his body to have murde∣red or proceeded against him as a Traitor, but that hee escaped by flight to the Parliaments forces in Pem∣brookeshire. The said Earle by the advice of the other Delinquents constantly since the increase of the troubles, procures persons servilly obsequious to his commands, be they never so inhumane, to authorize Sheriffs and other of∣ficers in Carmarthenshiere, for better establishing and support of his tyrannie and supplement of meanes to feed the profusenesse and luxury of all the Delin∣quents, by undoing of some, and exposing of many hundreds of innocent persons to perish for want of food. Praying the persons of the Delinquents may be secured to receive their triall by Parliament, the injuried by them re∣compensed out of their estates, and the residue sequeste∣red according to Ordinance of Parliament. FINIS.
