F174 E396_23 99862159 160354
A LETTER FROM His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, In Answer to the Petition of the Eleven Members, and the Votes of the House, for bringing in a particular Charge against them. An ORDER by His Excellency, for appointing a Com∣mittee of the Army to hold a Treaty with the Com∣missioners of PARLIAMENT. AND A PROCLAMATION By His EXCELLENCY, Forbidding any Abuse or Obstruction to the Levying the Excize or other Assessments. BY the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Councel of War. Wickam, July 1. 1647. Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH. LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, JULY 5. 1547,
A PROCLAMATION From His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, Forbidding any abuse or obstru∣ction to be offered to any Officers of the Parliament, in levying Excise or other Assess∣ments. WHereas it hath pleased the Hono∣rable House of Commons, by their Order of the 28 of June last past to recommend unto me. That an effectual course may be taken, that no dis∣couragement or obstruction may be given by the Soldiers, to the due levying and bringing in the Excise, and other Assessments and pay∣ments to the Parliament: And to the end that such Obstruction may be prevented,
I do hereby require all Officers and Soldiers of the Army under my Command, That they do not in any kinde discourage or ob∣struct the due levying and bringing in of the Excise, and other Assessments and payments to the Parliament: And if any Officer or Soldier shall notwithstanding go about to hinder or obstruct the same, I do hereby re∣quire the Officer commanding in chief, at present the Troop, Company or Regiment in those parts where such obstruction shall be given, to send the Officers or Soldiers so offending in custody to the Head-quarter, That they may be proceeded against for the contempt of this Order: And in case of any tumultuous carriage by any persons, tending to the obstructing the due levying of Excize and payments as aforesaid, the said Officers and Soldiers are to be aiding and assisting for the suppressing of the same. Given under my Hand and Seal at Wickham the First day of July, 1647. Tho: Fairfax.
Thursday, July 1. His Excellency ap∣pointed these Officers of the Army to Treat. I Do hereby appoint Lieutenant General Cromwel, Commissary General Ireton, Colonel Fleetwood, Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonel Harrison, Colo∣nel Sir Hardres Waller, Colonel Rich, Colonel Lam∣bert, Colonel Hamond, and Major Disborough; These ten or any five of them (of which the major part to be of the five last) to Treat and Debate with the Right Honorable, The Commissioners of Parlia∣ment residing with the Army, upon the Papers and Desires sent from the Army to both Houses, and the Votes sent to the Army, according to the effect of the Order of both Houses, dated the 26 of June, 1647. And for that purpose to attend the said Com∣missioners at their lodging at the Katherine wheel to morrow morning by eight of the clock, and so from time to time, and place to place as shall be mutually agreed on. Given under my Hand and Seal at Wick∣ham, the first day of July, 1647. T: Fairfax.
To the Right Honorable, The Commissioners of Parliament now residing with the Army. My Lords and Gentlemen, HAving with my Councel of War con∣sidered of the Votes of the House of Commons of the 29 of June, 1647. which you sent me, for the bringing in the particu∣lar Charge and proofs against the Members charged by the Army, by Friday next at far∣thest: As I finde a great willingness in them to answer the expectation of the House in all things, so in this particular; but the things being of that importance to the Kingdom, and the persons charged so many in number, hath taken up more time then was expected; We desire therefore, That it may be respited until Tuesday next, at which time we shall
fail to bring it in; although we could wish that no time might be lost therein which might be improved for the present settlement of the Affairs of this Kingdom, and that the Kingdom shall then see, we have not impea∣ched the Gentlemen out of any private re∣spects, but in affection and duty to the Pub∣lique. I remain Wickam, July 1. 1647. Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, Tho: Fairfax. FINIS.
