F2044A E549_7 99864946 117179
M. Speaker, I Humbly Desire you to discharge your Publike Trust to the Nation, and tender this to the Trustees in Parlia∣ment, Sir, I am in so doing Your Servant VVilliam Bray.
THE FOXES Craft Discouered; in destroying the PEOPLES best Friends, who stand in their Prerogative way for Perfect Peace and Freedom. As it will appeare by their usage, not onely of Captaine Bray, but also of his Troop, that raised themselves at their owne cost, and have con∣tinued in many hazards, but now must be disperst with the reward of thrats or Imprisonment, or be prest to serve under one of the Foxes new Creatures. Whereunto i anexed, A Congratulatory LETTER▪ To the Promotrs of a Large PETITION of the 11th September, for discovering their Apprehentions to prevent our New Slavery. By John Naylier Quartermaster, Richard Ellgood, and John Marshall, appointed by the Troop for the ing thee things. Aprill 2 Printed in the first yeer of the Peoples pretended Freedom,but intended Slavery, 1649.
Certaine PASSAGES BETWEEN Some Members of Parliament, and the Presenters of the following Petition. OF all the expectations of men, the most Justifiable expe∣ctation of Justice is the greatest misery to men, when frustrate; but we whose Names are here subscribed, have most wickedly, partially and unjustly been frustrate of our Ex∣pectations, as we expected Justice to our selves, and the Nation in generall, being without reason shewed us, dismissed of the Conduct of those our Officers, which we are all of us, with many more, certaine of their Integrity, but with Resolution to address our selves to the Parliament, as the onely helpe, under God, that we knew of to do us Justice, we were discouraged severall ways, which made us desist from any further hoping to get any Justice done us. First, when we had sent some of our men to London with our Desires, which was the Seventeenth of this instant March. 1648. with resolution to have delivered this Petition to the Parliament the 19. comming to the Parliament door, we found our Captaine committed to Windsor Castle, for appealing to the House, against some dealings with him by one that was inferiour to that Su∣pream Authority, which was the amazement of our Spirits to see that just right of the People so trampled upon, and gave us (as we thought) great cause of feare, lest we should be served the same sawce with our Petition, we knowing the honesty and integrity of our Captaine; but yet howsoever, on the 21. of this present, one of those which we intrusted, went into the House upon the r sing of the House, and delivered our Petition to the Speaker, who looking upon it, and finding Captain Brays name in the Title of
the Petition, he began to make slight of it, asking the Party that delivered it, whether it were in behalf of Captaine Bray, or not? Who answered, It was in behalf of the Troop, and Captaine Bray beside; when he heard it was in the Troops name, and saw the sub∣scriptions of our hands, he did vouchsafe to read some part of it, and commended some of the former part of it to be very honest, Collonel Harrison standing by in the House, did alone seem to be the most pittifull to us, in relation to the hard measure that was cited in it, measured to us, but Commissary Generall Ireton told our Souldier, That whereas it touched upon an Ordinance for no deduction for Free-quarter for those raysed for this summers ser∣vice, he told the Souldier againe, That that Ordinance did not extend to Forces of the County of Kent, which was very strange to us, but the Comissary Generall told the Souldier, That there was care taken for us to serve in the Army under a new Captaine, but the Souldier told him againe, That we would serve under no other Captaine then Captaine Bray; but Alderman Permington then replyed, That it seemed we would not obey the Generall; the Souldier asked him, when we ever disobeyed any of the Generalls just Commands? whereupon the Alderman seemed to catch some advantage of the Souldier, and asked him, Whether he thought the Generall would command any unjust things? who made him answer, That he should not catch him, for he did not say he did; but in fine of all, we finding that we had beard the sense of so many eminent men in the House, we were discouraged to trou∣ble them any more with our Petition; for the Speaker told our Souldier, That he look'd for some such stuffe in the tayle of the Petition, as he look'd upon in the end of it, which you may here see; but yet having read as much of our Petition as he thought fit, he thrust it into the hands of our Souldier again, and so left him, but yet these our intrusted men waighted at their door that af∣ternoon againe, but could not get our Petition into the House to the Speaker, although the Seargeant courteously went and asked the Speaker. Whether he should bring it in, or not. Now we desire all honest Censciencious unbyassed men to judge, Whether we are not unworthily dealt withall, for all our integrity to the Nation, as our Petition, (which we have made publick here will shew) for we must either at last all of us leave our imployment in the Army, or at least break this Troope,
which is one of the most Unanimousest Troopes in the ARMY, (as it stood under Captaine Bray; for the setting up or purify of Iustice in the Nation. To the SUPREAM AUTHORITY of the Nation, the PEOPLES Representatives, assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of Captaine William Brays Troop, of the Regiment of Colonell John Reynolls. Sheweth, THat whereas your petitioners, having through the sad ap∣prehensions of the power of a prevailing party, both a∣mongst you, and in all the Councells of the Nation, Ma∣ny of us laid down Arms, in the latter end of Fourty Se∣ven, & in the beginning of Fourty Eight, being about their perticu∣lar Imployments, but seeing with grief of heart, the Nation, and our selves immediately brought to Slavery by the aforesaid prevailing party, insomuch, that when we saw them appearing in the Field in Armes, then we and others thought it high time to begin to gird our Swords to us againe, and in a way, without pre∣sident, to raise you a Regiment, consisting of Seven Troopes of Horse, at our, and their propper Costs and Charges, which is such a thing, that we cannot tell that ever you had the like done for you before; But yet we did cheerfully, notwithstanding the present Charge, and danger thereof, because we found an Inclination in those of greatest power in Marshall Affaires, to imploy such men in Commission over us, which we knew had ventered very hard, even almost to blood for the attainment of that which now this honorable House hath declared;
Viz. That the People under God, are the Original of all just Po∣wer, but when we had ingaged under the afore said Officers, seve∣rall times God still giving Victory, insomuch that those, ours and the Nations enemies were subdued, and then began our old Machiavellian Adversaries to set to worke againe, and abomina∣bly to Apestatize and back-slide from Principles of Righteousness, peace, and settlement of this Nation, and to endanger it so, as to bring a flood of misery and Injustice upon it; whereupon, we, when we were di missed from the County of Kent, we have stood upon the accompt of Justice. Righteousnesse and Safety to this Honorable House, and the people that intrusted them, but now finding that the Generall hath given our Troop away from Cap∣taine Bray, to another Man which we know not, nor never had any experience or ground of confidence in, and by these actings, your Petitioner, are meerly discouraged to act as Souldiers in this Regiment any longer, we having just cause to suspect that our Captaine is slighted meerly for his integrity to the Justice of this Honorable House, and the people that intrusted them, and because he will not prostrate his Conscience to the lust and will of men without reason. THerefore our request to this Honorable House is, that since you have Voted that there should be no deductons for Free-quarter for those that ingaged for the late Summers service, but it is so with us; May it please this Honorable House, notwith∣standing our good affections and security that we had full deducti∣on of halfe our pay, while we served in the County for Free-quar∣ter, therefore we desire this Honorable House to Order the payment of the said Deduction from the Committee of Kent, according to the former Vote of this Honorable House; And further, that you will be pleased to weigh the premisses, and consider us with righ∣teous and just satisfaction toward our great expence, danger, haz∣ard & losse of time, which we have undergone for the peoples just satisfaction, we having not had one penny of pay neer upon sixe Moneths, to the utterimpoverishing of us, and the sad Oppression of the Country, and besides many horses lost amongst us, whilst we stood upon the account of Juctice, that so we may not be made the onely object of misery in this first yeer of freedom, which will but open the mouthes of men to asperse and dishonor you, for we are very willing at these unrighteous discouragements to
lay down our Arms, at this casting out of our Captaine; onely we desire this Honorable House to consider us likewise in some mea∣sure toward all this neer upon six Moneths time; And we desire also that this Honorable House will put us in a way of satisfacti∣on for former Arrears, before we dismiss or disperse. Also we de∣sire you seriously to weigh and consider an Address presented to this Honorable House the 26. of Febr. 1648. by the hand of Lieu. Col. Iohn Lilburne, & many others of the Nations and our friends, that were Presenters, promoters, and approvers of the large Peti∣tion of Septem. the 11. 1648. the aforesaid Address being the lively portrature of our apprehensions, it being high time to insist upon Laws of settlement, Peace & Justice, before we shall be willing to ingage in any other Nation, in the warre of Ireland; the unsettle∣ment in Justice, Apostacy, Deceipt, and neglect, here having been the cause of the Misery to the Souldery and People there; Further we desire this Honorable House to consider of a late Sentence passed against a Member of our Regiment, with severall other men of severall other Regiments by the Counsell of War; and to consider whether the said SENTENCE be con∣sistent to the just Rights, which we have spent our bloods for, or not, we conceiving all our selves sentenced in their sentence; And we further desire this honorable House, so to regulate the Articles of War, that they may be suitable to free-born English men, and that likewise the same principles & laws may govern our Officers (both Superiors & Inferiors) which shall govern us; which way of Or∣der we account to be most consistent to the pe ple s dear purcha∣sed Rights. We hope this Honorable House will take these ruffe and unpollished lines in the charitablest construction, it being no part of our Principles to speake any other language then the plainness of our hearts. And your Petitioners shall daily pray, &c. Wiliam Haslup, Lieutenant, Christ. Chesman, Cornet, Iohn Nay∣lier Quartermaster, Corporalls: Austin VVhitney, Rob. Harbison, Joh. VVright, Rob. Painter. Fran. Hasllup, Wil. Bastin. Iohn Lathe, Tho. Grimos, Iohn Hardey, Gilbert Games, Rich. Hill. Rich. Sanders, Rob. Harrison, Tho. Richards, Val. Stephenson, Ed. Avery, Hen. Bug∣bey, Io. Bastin, Ant. Bastin. Ioseph Pepitt, Io. Marshall. Ed. Bastin, Will. Scott, Sam. Gaer, Sam. Howlt, Fran. Lee, Dan. King. Tho. Satchell,
Tob. Robbinson, Rich. Robbins, George Betten, George Spoo∣ner, Tho. Anderton, Ioh. Franon, Ioh. Allin, Rob. Abbit. Will. B, Christo. Booth. Iames Trigg, Wil. Smith, Hum. Budds, Rob. Patridge, Sam. Mowbray, Will. Howell, Iohn Parr, Io. Lasey. Ios. Rastall, Thomas Liell. Tho. Flafer, Ioh. Washburne, Ioh. Cornelius, David Chemi, Wil. Sidwel. Tho. Roe, Rich. Ellegood, Nicho. Westwood, Haball Dawson, Jer. Stephenson, Hen. Philpott, Ed. Taylor. Will. Haddock, Bence, Will. Gilbert. John Ellington, Att. Boothe, Wi. Morden, Jo. Mutlow, Rob. Bagey, Joh. Price, Ralph Phillips Joh. Eluins, Ioh. Bg. To our much honored and trusty Friends, the Petitioners of the Eleventh of Septem. This present. in London. DEear Friends, you are the reviving of our Spirits, to see that you have not yet made shipwrack of your Integrity in these times of Apostacy, we acknowledge that you have given grat incouragement to us, to act something against the new Chai of the Nation; and we desire likewise, that you will accept of so small incouragement from us, viz. That we have seen your late Address of Febr. the 26. 1648. and doe readily and cheerfully, comply with it in every Circumstance thereof, and have likewise so farre taken notice of it to the supreame Authority of the Nation, the People Assembled in Parliament; Therefore▪ Dear Friende, We desire that you will likwise weigh and consider our Freinds, that have presented our Apprehensions in a Letter to the Generall, and to joyne with us in our endeavors for their inlargement (if you account that which they did just) and full and ample, reparation of their injuries suffered in the publick Cause of the people, and that further both you and we doe continue faithfull one to another, i our old just principles; for be you assured that we are ready to lay downe our lives, (if God shall call for them in our) Capassitie for the Nations just and full Rights, and therein rest satisfied, knowing that you are involved in the same common Cause of the English People, with your Faithfull Friends for Iustice. FINIS.
