L1564 E983_19 R3007 99872249 168580
A LETTER OF ADDRESSE FROM THE OFFICERS of the ARMY IN SCOTLAND, DIRECTED To the Honourable, the Speaker of the Parliament of the Common∣wealth of England sitting at Westminster. Wednesday the 18th of May 1659. ORdered by the Parliament that this Letter be forthwith Prin∣ted and Published. Tho. St Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament. London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.
For the Honorable the Speaker of the Parliament of the Common∣wealth of England, Sitting at Westminster. Right Honorable, THat a Nation may be born in a day, is a Truth which this days experience wit∣nesseth unto us against all the Dictates of humane Reason; and that a glorious Cause, whose Interest was laid low (even in the Dust) should be in one day restored to its life and lustre; when almost all the Assertors of it had so mani∣festly declin'd it, by a defection of many years, cannot be imputed to less then the greatest and most powerfull manifestation of the Arm of God, that ever this, or former Generations saw
or heard of. In the sence of this (the greatest of our Temporal Mercies) we now come to Ad∣dress to your Honors, as those whose presence we have so long wanted, that had you staid but a little longer, it might have been left to be in∣quired what England was; we mean, what was become of that People, by whom God for so many years fill'd the World with so much Ad∣miration and Terror. But though this great Work be (as most justly it ought to be) won∣derfull in our eyes; yet when we consider its Author, who calls things that are not, as if they were, bringeth down to the Pit, and raiseth up again; we see that nothing is difficult to Faith, and the promises of God are sure and stable, e∣ven then, when in the eye of man no less then impossible. We cannot but acknowledge to our exceeding great sorrow and shame, that our selves, though we hope most of us, through weakness and frailty, (not out of Design) have very much contributed to those provoca∣tions, which have caused God to depart from our Israel; and we could heartily wish that even amongst those that help to make up your own number, there had not been an helping hand to this sad and deplorable work. But we see when Gods hour is come, and the time of his Peoples deliverance, (even the set time at hand) he co∣meth skipping over all the mountains of sin and
unworthiness that we daily cast in his way. We are not willing to detain your Honors too long upon this Subject, and therefore beseeching the God of all our Mercies, to heal the backslidings of his People, and not to charge unto their ac∣count, in this his day of their deliverance, their miscarriages, whilest they were wandring in dark and slippery places, after the imaginations of their own hearts; We with all humility and af∣fection in the first place congratulate you in this your happy Restauration to the Government of these Nations, which God was once pleased so to own in your hands, as to make you both the Praise and Wonder of the Earth, the Glory and Rejoycing of his People, and the Terrour of your adversaries; and we acknowledge it a sin∣gular condiscention in you, in this day of so great difficulties, to take upon you so heavy a bur∣then. And seeing his late Highness hath been pleased to manifest so much self-denial and love to his Countrey, in appearing for the Interest thereof against his own: We humbly intreat, That some speedy care may be taken for Him and His Family, (together with Her Highness Dowager) That there may be such an honorable provision setled upon them, and such other Dig∣nities as are sutable to the former great Services of that Family to these Nations. And in the next place, we cannot but hum∣bly
beseech you, now you have an opportuni∣ty, then which a fitter your hearts did never pray for, to finish the work of Reformation that hath been so long upon the wheel, and met with so great obstuctions, that you would not heal the wound of the Daughter of Gods people slightly, but make so sure & lasting provision for both their Christian and Civil Rights, as that both this and future Generations may have cause to rise up, and call you blessed; and the black∣est of Designs may never be able to cast dirt in your faces any more, and as helpfull to these two great concernments, Religion, and Liberty, we humby propose unto your mature Conside∣ration these two desires, First, That you would be pleased to counte∣nance Godliness and all the sincere professors thereof, encourage an able and laborious Mini∣stery, and suffer no other yoak to be imposed up∣on the Consciences of Gods people, then what may be agreeable to the word of God; and that you would be a terrour to all impious, prophane and licentious people whatsoever. Secondly, That you would so vindicate and assert the native Rights and Liberties of these Nations, in and by the Government of a Free State, that there may not be the voice of an oppressed one in our Land, but that all may en∣joy the blessed fruits of your Righteous and
Peaceable Government. And for the prevention of all possibility for Ambitious spirits ever to work their ends against you, we humbly desire you to be very careful, as well what persons you intrust with the management of the Armies and Navies of this Commowealth, as of the measure of that Power and Authority you depart with to them, or substitute in them. Touching the Qua∣lifications of the persons, we desire they may be truly Godly and Consciencious. Touching the measure of their Authority, that it may be ade∣quate to the nature and being of a Common∣wealth. And whilest you are thus pleading and asser∣ting the interest of God and his People, you may rest assured, with greatest confidence, that we shall appear in your defence, and the vindica∣tion of your Authority, against the opposition of all Arbitrary Powers whatsoever. And to that blessed and All-powerful God, who is able to spirit you for this Great Work, you are and shall daily be recommended in the the Prayers of, Your most Loyal and most obedient Servants,
George Monck. Thomas Reade. Ralph Cobbet. Timothy Wilks. Robert Reade. John Cloberrey. Abraham Holmes. Henry Dorney. Daniel Davison. Richard Heath. Mi. Richardson. John Hubbelthorn. Thomas Johnson. P. Crisp. Henry Brightman. Philip Watson. Thomas Dean. Jeremiah Smith. William Davis. James Wright. Joseph Wallington. William Helling. Ethelbert Morgan. Robert Winter. John Paddon. Anthony Nowers. FINIS.
