L487 E669_12 R207029 99866104 118366
The last great and BLOUDY FIGHT BETWEEN The English and the Dutch, on Thursday morning last neer the Downs: With the particulars thereof, the number of men killed and wounded on the Parliaments side; and the taking, burning, sinking, and dispiersing of five and forty Sayl of the Hollanders by Sir George Ayscue: With his pursuing of Van-Trump to the Coast of France; and 24 of his Men of War shipwrackt neer St. Mallows; Also, a gra Victory obtained by G. Blake; the number of ships taken; and a general Rising of the Dutch-men; their choosing of a new Admiral; and all persons to die without mercy that will not en∣gage. SEnt in a Letter to the Parliament of England, and the Councell of State, on Sabbath-day last; and printed according to order. depiction of a ship or galleon with many guns or cannons, flying a flag with a cross London, Printed for G. Horton, 1652.
Another bloudy Fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch upon the Coast of Holland: With the desperate en∣gagement of the English Redcoats; the boarding of the Flemmins; the dispersing of the Navy; and the re-inforcing of di∣vers gallant ships into their Harbors. SIR, HIs Excellency Gen. Blake having divided the Navy into two Squa∣drons, resolved with the one to strike sayl for the North Coast, to fight & attend the motion of 300 sail of the Dutch, in those parts, leaving sir G. Ascue to com∣mand the rest of the shiping in the Downs,
which consisted of 30 gallant Men of War; Vantrump having received intelligence thereof, drew forth 40 select & choice ships, and on Thursday about five of the clock in the morning, our Scouts made a discovery of his approach neer the Channel, who giv∣ing notice thereof to the Navy, great was the preparation made to receive them; and in pursuance thereof, sir Geo. Ayscue, with the Fairfax and Tryumph, bore up to them, before the head of the Fleet, and gave them 50 Guns, but was answer'd with the like sa∣lute from Vantrump, and Vice-admiral Witte, who upon hanging forth their blou∣dy flags, was the signal for the rest of their Captains to fall on; insomuch, that a blou∣dy fight began, and after 700 broad sides exchang'd, they came to grapling, with a re∣solution to board each other; but it prov'd a work of extreme difficulty; for no sooner had we assailed each other decks, but imme∣diatly the small shot flew so thick from the
murthering pieces, that both parties were often repelled and beaten off; and the victo∣ry for a long time seemed dubious, til at last sir George & Cap. Lawson with the Rain∣bow and Fairfax, bore up to the head of the Vantrump, and his vice-admiral; and after several desperate Onsets on both sides, van∣trump declined dispute, and with much dif∣ficulty hailed off; the viceadmiral was sunk with two more; after which, the Redcoats of Col. Goffs Regiment, that were aboard the Speaker, being engaged with four of the Hol∣landers, seeing no ways possible to free themselves, resolved to purchase their liberty, with the price of their blouds, otherwise to sink by their sides; in or∣der whereunto, they plaid their Granadoes and fire∣works, which did great execution, and at last fir'd one of their ships; the other three perceiving this sad disaster, declined engagement; and soon after the whole Navy began to be in a Chaos of Confusi∣on; for divers of the English Frigats bearing up close to their great ships, gave them three shot for one, in which action they performed singular ser∣vice; and amongst the rest, the Rubey came up,
and gave them a broad side with ten Guns: the Dutch-men answer'd him with the like salute: No sooner had they exchanged four broad sides, but im∣mediatly came up the Star-Frigat, presenting m with seven broad sides one after another: and com∣ing to grapling, the musketiers on both sides, main∣tained the Dispute with great gallantry and resolu∣tion; till at last, the English Red-coats, consisting of Col. Ingoldsbys Regiment of Foot, plaid so fast up∣on them with small shot and hand-granadoes, that they soon cleered the Decks, fired the Misle and Main-sail; and afterwards boarded two of the Hol∣landers, killing 47, and surprized about one hundred and twenty: Many there were that leapt out of the Port-holes into the Sea, and drowned themselves, by reason that they bid defiance to the English, and chose rather to sacrifice their lives in the merciless Ocean, then yield obedience unto them. The rest of the Hollanders, being eleven in number, after a sharp fight ran themselves on ground neer Newport, and are since ship-wrackt. Our whole Fleet was engaged for the space of 7 hours, during which time Sir George Ayscue per∣formed singular service; and at last sunk their Vice-Admiral, carrying 40 Guns, but not without loss; the Tryumph, Speaker, Victory, Garland, Fairfax, Ty∣ger,
have been deeply engaged in the Commonwealths service; and have deport∣ed themselves with singular dexterity a∣gainst Van-Trump, who, after a bloudy & great engagement, was enforced to decline, and get off, to the protection of their Forts and Sconces; but not without great loss, for we have received advertisements, that Gen. Blake hath taken seven, sunk two, and fired three, with the loss of one ship. Van∣trump is preparing for another engagement and shipping from several Ports and towns are coming to him: He hath also double man'd his ships, both with Sea-men and Land-men, who hath taken an Oath and Protestation to live and die together, and to fight it out to the last man. The General hath sent for six more fire∣ships out of the Downs, and is resolved to fire and destroy the Enemy in their Har∣bors.
Since which time his Excellency hath taken two Merchants ships, richly laden, and two men of War; Sir George Ayscue hath likewise taken se∣ven, sunk three, burned one, and dispersed 45; a∣bout 24 took a desperate Resolution, and ran them∣selves a ground on the Coast of France, and are said to be shipwrackt and sunk between St. Mallows, St. Quintin, and Porto Rieux, Port-Towns upon the Coast of Britaign. The rek that escaped, are sailed towards Cortoy and St. Valerii, in Picardy, and Caen in Normandy; but Sir George is in pursuit of them with 20 sail; and hath taken five gallant merchant∣men. We hear that there is a general Rising from 16 to 60; and those that do refuse to to engage, are to die without mercy. They are setting forth another great Fleet of 200 sail, and the Zealanders have cho∣sen a new Admiral. In our last engagement, our loss is esteemed killed and wounded about 300. The E∣nemies far greater. From aboard the Assurance, in the Downs, July 3. 1652. The Parl. are setting forth more shipping; and 700 foot souldiers are boarded. FINIS.
