M1751 99900036 133295
MERCURIUS ANGLICUS: OR, ENGLANDS MERLIN. Prophetically fore-telling, The Admirable Events, and Wonderful Effects, that shall befall the King of Scots, the States of Holland, and the Parliament of England, in all their Consultations, Warlike Actions, and Naval Designes, both by Sea and Land, for the Year of our Lord, 1653. WITH The most exact Predictions, and Monthly Obser∣vations, touching the great Rising of the European Na∣tions against England; and the success that will attend them in all their Motions, Enterprises, and Attempts; As also, the Causes of these strange Reolutions, Mutations, Inclinations, and Eversions of Em∣pires, Kingdoms, and Common-wealths. LIKEWISE, The Astromical Calculations of the Eclipses, Lu∣nations, and conjunctions; portending a great Change of Government, Religion, and Law, in England, Scotland, and Ireland; together with the taking off all Taxes, Assesments, Burdens, and Oppressions; and cal∣ling to a severe Account all Committees and Treasurers; with the executing of many great Ones. COllected out of the most elaborate Works of Captai-George Wharton, Esquire, Mr. William Eille, Mr. John Booker, Mr. Vincent Wing, and Mr. Nicholas Culpeper, Students in Astrology and physick. London, Printed by R. WOOD, 1653.
Merlinus Anglicus, &c. Januaries Observations. THe year seems to begin pleasantly; our States promise fairly; and long-look's for comes at last; for the heavy burden of the people is removing; the honours of many great Ones are eclipsing; and the souldiery begin to be highly elevated, whilest the poor Countrey Farmer (whose condition I pity) complains and sads his heart, in regard his Cattle are like in many places to prish for want of fodder and meat. A great change threatens the Lawyer: Sad∣ness seems to possesse the spirits of many great Ones. The year initiates fair, but seasonably cold and frosty; and so continues for the most part, until the 15 day, from whence (especially about the 18, 19, 20, & 21 dayes) look for abundance of snow or rain, and dark unwholesome weather. Observations on Feb. GReat are the Designs now in Consults, and such as may (by Gods blessing) make us happy for some succeeding years; Angels of Gold please the saints on earth, else why are some zealous spirits now calmed? Remiss cold fair wea∣ther for the most part till the 10 day; from whence expect cold winds, Rain or snow, until the 14. The 15 and 16 days fair and seasonable. About the 17, 18, & 19 dayes look for more rain and snow. The latter end of this month (especially the 26 day) will produce impetuous storms of Rain and Hail. Full moon the 2d day. New moon the 17 day. Observations on March. THe Hollander is as busie as a fly in the hony-pot, and great preparations are making against us; but alas! I could wish Noah's Dove might appear with glad tydings of peace, after these late, lon, and terrible wars, which are stil like to be for some years universal. Some small snow the first three days. Much Rain or snow about the full Moon, and so for the most part till after the 6 day; and thence the Air will be more serene (though very cold and frosty mornings] un∣till the 15 day. The rest of the month will be fair but windy. The 4 day full Moon, but she's totally eclipsed all England over. The 19 day full Moon. A word in season to the Lawyer: Gentlemen, to deal ingeniously, the divine Aspects of heaven promiseth fair; ballance your Wisdom in the Skales of Equi∣ty, and do justice to all men; for there are a people that will swell with invec∣tives against Thee neer these Times. The Term commences with the Lawyer's grief [Curt Fees, and they deserve as Curt relief:] Lawyers prefer the sharpest Lawes, as best To keep a Common-wealth in peace and rest: If so; why should the Gown-men frown and puff To see the Courts of Justice lynd with Buff? No Plea e're moved as a Sword can do; For that ore-ruleth Judge and Jury too.
Observations on April. FOur times shall the Inhabitants of the earth behold the Luminaries eclipsed this yeer, twice the Sun, and as oft the Moon; but we in England, as also Ire∣land, France, Spain, and Scotland, shall not see any of them, except one, & that total of the Moon, which will happen on the 4. of March; it will begin at one of the clock, 48 min. past, in the morning; the beginning will be at one min. before 3 of the clock, the greatest obscurity at 53 min. past 3 a clock; the end of it at 17 min. past 4, and at 57 min. past 5 the Moon will have fully recovered her bor∣rowed light: the whole duration will be 4 ho: 9 min. the colour of the Eclipse at the greatest darkness will be black, with a greenish ash-colour. The effects wil operate about the 26 of Octob. about which time, up goes some great Ones in Authority Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, most part of the month. Full Moon the 2d day. New Moon the 16 day. Observations on May. O Save all, save all, save all; never more need; for the month seems to begin with bloud; and some eminen: Gentlemen are expos'd to the mercy of the merciless. Heavens defend the City and Country from Oppression and Tyranny; for violent seavers, the small pox, and a great sickness or pestilence threatens the people. Violent and bloudy sea-fights all along our Coasts, and great prepara∣tions in Scotland to invade us. The month begins with storms, but ends fairly, with a full Moon the 2d day, and a new Moon the 16. day. Whither an Army now? well! I could say Who 'tis will get, or who shall lose the day, Thasillus like inform you, who shall prove Victorioas in's Ambition, who in's Love: But I am silent, nay, I must be dumb, 'Tis Treason, now, to pray, Thy Kingdom come. Observations on June. SAd news from several parts; & our Grandees begin to be somwhat amused, by reason of the vehemency of an extreme pstilence that threatens to remove them from their Judicature at Westminster: Gods will be done; but my ardent desire is, That Divine providence may divert this sore and heavy judgment; and that hunger and sickness may not afflict the poor: Few Kings and Princes in Exrope but shall raste of the fury of the Eclipse before cited; and those that do∣mineer like little Lords ought to look about them: but mum! I dare say no more. July's Observations. A Sad time! All Europe are up in arms, and the people stretch their wits, even till they break them, to fight against the Decrees of Heaven. The Common∣wealth in general is foreseen to be in a good condition, and the States receive good news from their servants at sea; Which produceth an attonement from the poor Hgens of Holland, but without a miracle no peace proceeds; so that they swarm like Locusts in our seas, yet return home handsomly beaten. Here is much snarling and tugging again about the Laws and Tyth by discontented souls, whilst our superiors are also amongst themselves divided in their consul∣tations, how to appease the demands of Thousands wh nothing will serve or se but a new Election. Oh Heavens! the  are slighted, and their
to say, England, Scotland, France, Germany, Zealand, Spain, Portugal, &c. The present King of Spain hath the Sun in the 18 deg. of Aries, with the Dragons Tayl, and the Moon in the 28 of Sagittary, in conjunction with Saturn, the Sun in the 5th, and the Moon in the 2d house of the Radix; and therefore let him expect some harm or loss to befall him either in his body, children, or revenew, if not all. Another King I know (and truly honour) which Horoscope is within 3 deg. of the point eclipsed, Mar. 3. 1653. which bods him some infirmity of bo∣dy, what, I say not: because I suppose the progression of the Horoscope to the Terms of Jupiter, may frustrate the evil thereby signified. But I wish we may find it otherwise then is here premonished; I desire peace and not war; but I fear it much, though I hope the contrary; for I see mens hearts more obdurate then ever, every man in these iron days looking after his own by-ends, and not at the common good; but what need I ment on this? Doth not every man that hath eyes see how miserably this Nation hath already been wrackt and poled by a company of beggerly cheats? Sub Treasurers and Sequestrators look about you, & all you, that have unjustly converted the Trea∣sure of the Commonwealth to your own uses; of what place and condition so∣ever you are of, you are sore threatned, the time will come, and is neer approch∣ing, when you must render an account of your actions; your riches may prove your ruine, if you make not a timely account to the Common-weal. I pray God make the Parliament wise, the Body of this Fabrick standing upon a very totte∣ring foundation: for if this Authority under which we mun, after this Op∣position of Saturn and Jupiter, shall inforce us to some new and illegal assesment, or by way of raising money upon any pretence whatsoever (except against the Dutch) I am confident, we of the Commonalty joyning with the souldier, shall assume so much liberty to our selves, as to choose and elect such Members as hereafter shall be more tender of our purses, and more liberal of their own; and we shall indeavor so strictly to call unto account each member of this Parl. who hath fingured our Treasure, that we shall leave many of them as naked as when they came out of their mothers words, or when first to be members of Parlia∣ment. Thus Changes came, thus Changes will ensue (Till these corrupted Bodies change for new And put on Incorruption) Men and Things, Whole Countreyes, Cities, Beggers, Princes, Kings; He who but lately were a Crown of Goid, Crown'd now with thorns, exil'd, or base sld: He clad in Rags and fed with scraps befo, Now throan'd in's stead and surseing with store: A glorious Church and Kingdom, but today, To morrow both the Wolfe and Foxs prey: All, all to change, and Dissolution tend, Poor Almanacks, ev'n they! must have AN END.
