N510 E590_10 99863120 115302
Newes from the New EXCHANGE, OR THE COMMONVVEALTH OF LADIES, Drawn to the Life, in their severall Characters and Concernments. Martialis. lib. 4. Epig. 71. Quaero diu, totam gressus agitando per urbem, Si qua puella negat, nulla puella negat. Tamquàm fas non sit, tamquam sit turpe negare; Tanquàm non liceat, nulla puella negat. Casta igitur nulla est? castae sunt mille. Quid ergo Casta facit? non dat; non tamen illa negat. Ovidius. —Casta est quam nemo rogavit. London, Printed in the year, of Women without Grace, 1650.
Newes from the New-EXCHANGE, or the Commonwealth of Ladies, drawn to the Life, in their severall Characters and Concernments. THere was a time in England, when men wore the Breeches, and debar'd women of their Liberty; which brought many grievances and op∣pressions upon the weaker vessels; for, they were constrained to converse only with their homes and closets, and now and then with the Gen∣tleman-usher, or the Foot-man (when thy could catch him) for variety: So that in thse dayes, there was no such thing as the SERVANT, the FRIEND, or the INTIMATE in ordinary; nor durst they be acquainted with the mode of Drinke, Dice, and Tobacco; nor role and convert their smoks into Colanders, to strain healths
of Sack into Beer-glasses, and take them off astride upon mens shoulders. In consideration whereof, and divers other inconveniences, by the tyranny of men, the Ladies Rampant of the times, in their last Parliament, knowing themselves to be a part of the free people of this Nation, unanimously re∣solved to assert their own freedoms; and casting off the intolerable yoke of their Lords and Hus∣bands, have voted themselves the Supreme Au∣thority both at home and abroad, and setled them∣selves in the posture of a Free-State, as may appeare by their Practices. In the first place, for the well ordering of their Militia, they have listed themselves under the conduct of the Right Honorable the Countesse of Kent, and the old Countesse of Exceter; who ought to lead the Van, being experienced Souldi∣ers, that have passed through all Offices in Venus Warrs, from a Corporall to a Colonell. These two are the only pillars of Nobility and Hospitality; who, to breed up the young Fry in the Misteries of the Sexe, have erected an Academy, which is o∣pened every Sunday night at the Countesse of Kent's and every Thursday at my Lady of Exceter's. There Suppers are reckoned most convenient, because the Bed follows, and it is judged the best way of disgestion after the Lectures, they never being up∣on any other Subject, but WHO with WHO, Mistresses and Servants, and the Act of well-doing, which must needs breake the Academy of well spea∣king,
and soon make the Italian Knight lose all his Custome, for going the wrong way to worke with our English Ladies. And if he dare dispute the matter, wee will re∣fer it to my Lady Carlisle. This is a Lady indeed, that seven years since took saile with Presbytery, being charged in the Fore-deck by Master Hollis, in the Poop by Master Pym, whilst she clapt my Lord of Holland under hatches. And this was a lucky Supply at that time, because Toby Matthewes and Wat. Mountague were both fled for Religion. About 3 years since, being weary with that facti∣on, she revived a correspondence upon the Royall accompt; among the rest with divers foreine Am∣bassadors; especially Mons. Believerey, till she was put in the Tower, where she now pines away for want of fresh-Cod, and knoweth not which way to lead her Nags to water, since the State hath cut off all her pipes of intelligence. After her comes the old Lady Peterburgh, who would faine be yong. A Presbyterian Lady too, that casts a fad looke with her eies for the downfall of her Faction, and sings the lamentation of a sinner for the losse of Mr. Hollis, but above all for the Irre∣parable losse she had in Tom. Gell, when my Lady Rutland got him from her. 'Twere pitty my old Lady Devonshire and these two should be parted, for, the Presbyterie was set∣led first in her house by the Scots Commissioners; where my L. Louden, Lauderdale, and Dumferling,
were clapt in her hole of Repentante, to forward the work of Reformation. And now we talk of Reformation, God help my Lady Salisbury, whose Sinnes are as big as her Bo∣dy, and whose faults are better known at home than, abroad, since the death of the old Duke of Buckingham and my Lord of Holland. A very charitable Mother she is to all her Children; but especially to her daughter my Lady Sands, having helpt her to a Touch, with her Son in Law my Lord Lisle, though my Lord of Salisbury himself, like a crosse Father,My La∣die Sands was war∣ming her Brother Lisles drawers by the fire Side. came in and took her airing his Drawers. This Lady Sands continues her Clack going ever since, to draw grists to the Mill, and is at this time one of the greatest Coursers upon the New Exchange; She out-drinks a Dutch man, out∣vies a Courtesan, and is good at all Games, but loves none like In and In, and sometimes she is for Pos∣sage. In league with her are all the Hat-and-fea∣ther-Gallants, the feather being the proper Hie∣roglyphick of her Condition, and the Badge of her faction. As for her good Sister, the yong Lady Devon∣shire, She hath been a very sad woman ever since the death of my Lord Iohn; but since that, She hath been rid of her Qualm by Tom Killegrew, who is now gon Ambassador from Iersey into Italy, on purpose to fetch her a Musk-cod to perfect the Cure. This Family is both large and godly, and there∣fore
we must not forget my Lady Cranborn; who lives in a Scotish mist betwixt light and darknesse so that groping often for Truth, She now and then layes hold upon the Preacher, and puts him beside the Text, in an error. She playes above-board with Mr. Sackvile, under-board with Mr. Sterry, and severall other Captains that usually preach before her and the Councell of State. She hath preferred one Lee Lecturer at St. Martin's, to read lectures on Sunday nights to the whole Family, concerning due Benevolence; which gave occasion to Mistris Peele (an Intimate of theirs) to commend his do∣ctrine above all others. And now, nor forgetting an over-thwart neigh∣bor of theirs we must think of my Lady Forster; an old Mistresse and a yong Saint; one whose propor∣tion puts us in mind of her Excellencies, and he that meanes to board her, must put off his doublet and swim, it being of the same size with a Fish-Pond: yet it is ten to one if he scape sinking, since she is somewhat of kin to Goodwin Sands, having swallowed up many Families, many Blew Garters, Georges, Earls, and Baronies innumerable. Among them, as the latest (though of a long continuance) is the Lord Willoughby of Parham; who hath now taken a journey to the Barbado's and means to pipe her one way since he cannot another; In Order whereunto he hath provided her a whole plantati∣on of Tobacco, it being her proper Element; so that since my Lord finds Smoak, Sir Humphry may in
time have Bacon. I would have this Lady well pre∣ferr'd in the Commonwealth, she being now a great Retailer of Courtesies. And truly her Daughter my Lady Prat (for ought I see) is resolved to keep up the Trade, ha∣ving an Husband for the purpose. This is that doughty Knight Sir George Prat, once celebrated in Comedy, and pawned upon the Stage (as well as at the Tavern) in a Ioynt-Stool for a Reckoning. Hee, Sir Samuel Luke, Ieffery, and little Trott, may help to make up the Nine Worthies amoug the Pig∣mies, and might passe for rare Champions in Ame∣rica, to erect a new Common wealtb among the Monkies. Indeed, take Sir George, hornes and all, and he is a very formidable Monster; so that 'tis no wonder if his Lady be reprehended by her Mo∣ther, for being Bull'd by an Urchin: She is a great wit, and playes with an old Sophister (Dr. Smell∣smock, alias Mr. Osbaston) who jerks her both be∣hind, and before; therefore Mr. Lenthall, though he have playd Truant a great while, may the rather scape a whipping. Come, take your Turn Mrs. Gamlyn; for, you have had many a one by that excellent Squire of the Body yong Lenthall, who hath the art to love if the Women love him. They say, Northamptoc makes love one hour to you, and he beats the brains of it out in a quarter. This Gentleman broaches maxims very dangerous to the Common-wealth of Wo∣men, viz. That there is no woman honest. That wo∣men
would become unnecessary in the world, if that damnable principle of honesty should be professed. That originally there was no such quality as honesty, only it was insinuated by the perswasions of the first mother, to keep women from being debauched in their nurses arms. All which hath been applauded, and seal'd to, by the same Gentleman, over and over. Now, as a braveSuppo∣sed a Het∣maphro∣dite. Woman-man-of-mettle, heigh for my Lady Hungerford. Since Sir Edward is in Heaven, the fittest mate for her upon Earth, must needs be Annis-water Robbin, For they may fit one another by turns, and be beholding to no bo∣dy. This Lady over-rid and excarnated, no lesse than three of her women in her husbands life-time; and hath left no part of foure Gentlemen-ushers vi∣sible in the world, but their periwigs; but the fifth scapes yet, and may perhaps for a twelve-month. Room next for my Lady Kingsmell; who having been lately in France, hath brought over some I∣talian tricks with her. The only wit in that house is new lechery, and her Daughter is vostre Serviteur. The Mother should have been married to my Lord of Norwich, at his coming out of prison, but that of late he is become as dry as his jests, and the talke of the town diverted the humor. But my Lady Rutland (God wot) is a more re∣solute Lover; for, now that her Lord is out of Town, nothing can stave her off from Tom. Gell. This fellow the world suspected to be Eunuch to
my Lord of Newcastle; but now she commends him for the swetest man in the world though of late she hath a great stroke too with Harry Martyn. And now we talk of a stroak, I can tell you of a notable Striker one Mrs. Luson, who hath blowne up and broke so many French, Dutch, and Spanish Merchants, that none of late durst deal with her but Hugh Peters; who (I hear) hath pawned halfe the fleet at Milford-haven to provide her a new yeares gift; and this in imitation of his Masters at West∣minster, who ever put the Charges of their Leche∣ry upon the accompts of the Publique. This policy of Hugh Peters, puts us in mind of godly Gravener, he that is Commissary to my Lady Fairfax; who hath pawned his Commission for a∣nother couple of Flanders horses, to make sure of Mistris Luson: And she I think hath paid him pret∣ty well; for the poor Gent. hath spit himselfe into a Night cap, and the next Remove may be into a Coffin. If ever the new Common weal be routed, it must be by this Lady; for, put a little Gunpowder to her Mercury, and you may soon blow up my Lord Bradshaw. He (they say) hath audited her Phisicke Bill, and the Councell of State finds many faults in it As Inprimis, one purge for a clap she had from Sir Harry Mildmay, which was much invenom'd by one he caught the morning before from Besse the Begger wench. Item a Plaister for the swelling in her Groin, that
Mr. Marten gave her from a Shanker of his, which he caught from the Wench he stole from his Bro∣ther-Member Sir Roger North. Item, an Astringent for a Gonorrhaea, given her by Mr. Scot, which hath been entailed upon him and his Family, ever since he strain'd at the Brewers daughter behind the Ale-fat. Item, for a Pimple, which my Lord of Denbigh entailed on the Top of her Belly from the Tip of his Nose. The Pothecary pleaded this cure was extra∣ordinary, because the Rubyes in my Lords nose, might have caused a Carbuncle in her Cabinet, had it not been prevented (according to my Lord's owne direction) with an emollient Clyster over night, a Dose of Pills in the morning, and an electuary from the same Lord the night following. Item for fluxing, fuming, soking, and Tubbing of Heveningham, a worthy Member; yet all will do no good; For, this Lady and he have been so long of the same humor, that he cannot be cured of a Rhume, that hangs on both sides his mouth, so that ere long he may be Chapfall'n. This Malady hath been much exasperated by an ill prepared flux, which hath left him more of Mercury than Venus in his Body. Ask my Lady Lake else, who did what wo∣man could for him, plyed him with Cordials and warm Plaisters: but broke his head when she said, She wondred hir Cozen Heveningham would have to do with so rotten a woman. As she wounds some, so she shaves others; for she has made Mr. Love a
wofull Example, who never wore any beard since her first acquaintance. Oh, let us not now forget Mistris Duns, a Lady every jot as Independent as the former, she hath payed Tribute to all the Deputies of Ireland, and will not now forbear her Cosen Cromwell. Shee keeps mighty Intelligence too with his wife, and she with Hugh Peters, and Peters with Mistris Ire∣ton, she with Bradshaw, he with Madam Castlehaven, as Cromwell with Mrs. Lambert. Now enter my Lady Craven, at a conference over her Cups. Fie sister fie; never a Beer-glasse of Sack to Sir William Sidley's health? yes, my Lady Craven, here's one, fill a Brimmer, to that part of my Sister Craven which Sir William loves best. Tis well fill'd, and fairely drunke. Now to do you right, my Lady Mary, here is to you; to the finishing of Sir Williams desires, let it be how, where, and when he pleases. Come, my Lady Mary Howard, take courage; though thy fortune be but small, yet having a good stroke, thou shalt drinke Dormer into Matri∣mony. Tis the wonder of the world, Why Sir Kenelm Digby, should be so mad for my Lady Middlesex, since he boarded her and the Gallies at Scanderoon much about the same time, and hath rid at Anchor ever since. Tis a very hard matter to know whe∣ther she be, a Lady or Leviathan. Sure, none but Goliahs weapon can fit her Scabbard, nor can any hand but his with the six fingers sufficiently seele her;
and he that will please her (which she abundant∣ly loves) must convert a Weavers beam into a dildo. If she and Sir Kenelme go on with the Match, then let the Saints beware; for, I beleeeve Gog and Ma∣gog will come of the Progeny. But what thinke you of my Lady Marchionesse of Winchester and Colonell Warren? Though my Lord be her Husband, yet the Colonell is the man. Though my Lord have a good Bable by descent, and may play well, yet the Col. hits the blot oftner in his Ladie's Tables. She is often sick, and as often swels, and, by the opinion of all Doctors, no cure is like that in private with her Colonell. Boles was an able fellow too once, before he came to be my Lady of Bath's Gentleman usher: But you may guesse how the VVorld goes with him now; for he dwindles every day, and (some say) the Calves of his legs are left in his Ladies Belly; so that when my Lord expected a Son, God knows it proved a Moon Calfe; and had it grown up to have horns, my Lord might then have hoped it was of his own begetting. Poor Jack Young! my Lady Monmouth bites hard too; for, she hath drawn him so low, that he will never make Mummy; and therefore in∣tends to prefer him for a living Skeleton to Surgeon's hall, as a very neat Subject for an Anatomy lecture. And indeed, it is high time he were some way disposed of, for, his fore-man is so flag, and his hams so feeble, that my Lady is constrained still to
cry out [Thy finger againe, Jack.] I beleeve the Parson too is puzled, to interpret the barrennesse of my Lady Stanhope, she gives him the opening of many a hard Text, so that he will have much ado to resolve the Tithe, of her Doctrine into Use and Applycation; for (tis known) she is much given to Hunting, and hath run down a whole kennell at a time for recreation. Her mouth is (like mopsaes) O Heavenly wide, so that her Taile being of the same size in dimension, 'tis possible Stamford may passe throngh her, booted and spur'd to seek new fortunes in America. There is another notable Lady too, newly come out of France, and knowes all the feats of that coun∣try, and is now set up in England, by name my Lady Mountague; all spirit of Sulphur: for, she takes fire immediatly, and evaporates without con∣ception; so that we must leave her to the skill of Ben. Weston, to provide a Son for my Lord Monta∣gue, as the Prince Elector did for my Lord Moul∣grave. And if ever Ben. mean to effect it, let him keepher Ladiship only to himselfe, and recall her Ambassadors, which lie Leiger for strong backs, in City and Country. She trades not so openly, but others are as close; yet Murther will out: for, 'tis known well enough (though carried in private) how often Mr. Villiers hath come the Back way over a wall, to the fore way of my Lady Savile, alias Sussex; and she usually helps him down in her armes, for feare of a strai∣ning.
Newes, newes, The Dutchesse hath a Son and heir, in the absence of Prince Rupert. But—&c. If Madam Newport should not be link't with these Ladyes, the chain would never hold; for, she is Sister to the famous Mrs. Porter (who of late plaies the Macquerela in the behalf of her owne Son;) and to the more famous Lady Marlborough (whose Paint is her Pander.) This Lady Newport leads the Lord Bellasis in one hand, and Iack Rus∣sell in the other, and cuts a kindnes so equally be-between them, that Sir Kenelm Digby needed not have come in to decide the controversie. Yet ha∣ving beat the Bush so often, there's no reason but he should catch the Bird, and these two Gentlemen, when he comes, be turned loose to ruminate the Favor. And that this Lady may not go without her fel∣low, if you are coloured, my Lady Elizabeth Darcy, appeare as Stanhope, alias Chesterfields Daughter. Take confidence, such as your Sister Stanhope did, when she met Hatton Rich upon the stairs, whilst her Husband (good man!) was making his Will. Manage your designe well; there is no feare but you may trail both Sir Andrew, and Mr. Glascock, as long as they can crawle, and you smile. These are very tractable Gent. and hot-mettal'd; the har∣der you stave them off, the fiercer they come on; the longer you hold them in play, the more will the prize be valued. This Madam is like a Politique Merchant, in our Commonwealth, and (if she be
not taken off by Preferment) may chance to spoile the Trade of all Stallions in Pension, by teaching the rest of the Ladies how to prize their Commo∣dities. My right hand would forget it's cunning should the example of all women be left out, my Lady Cullen, who in my Lord Riche's time was called my Lady Mary Cokaine, but varied her name when she began to teach Souldirs how to order the Pike. This silken-Granado hath blown up ma∣ny a Garrison; for she ever fired well, wounded one Captain so that he lies in still, fell furiously on many others; and she hath one Trick, that if you will not charge her, she'll charge you. Upon these tearms she met with a Colonell, one Stam∣ford, whom when she had worn out one way as well as the other, she cashired him for want of pay, and took over his head George Porter, whose de∣signe is to Levell her even with his owne principles. On the other side, she, having smelt his Plot, be∣gins to grow weary of him, and plies the Counter∣mine, but knowes not how to admit another, be∣cause his Mother and his Wife stand Sentinell at her elbow.—It is intended, the life of this Lady shall ere long come out in Folio. But 'tis an old Proverb, there can be no Play with∣out a Foole in it. Alas poore Master Pembroke, who twelve months since was an Earl, but now being made a poore Commoner of England, hath rallied his forces, and finds it necessary to cashire
my Lady May, my Lady Banbury, and my Lady Crompton, having been very angry with her, and desired her to resolve him of this Question,She dun'd him beyond reason for Money. Whe∣ther he shit Gold? This poor over-ridden Gentle∣man lies now at Rack and Manger, with a Cham∣bermaid of my Lady Herbert's. 'Zounds, we are now in a Godly Family; and they that are the only people in the world, that know to order Women: for, the Father keeps two wives and a Concubine, as prisoners. The Lord his son (a poore Commoner too) rid his hands of one wife, and keeps this very close, though Jack Griffith be in France; and so doth James his too, though my Lord of Oxford be in Holland. As for Jack, with his Spider's shanks, his Mistresse is not arived to fourteene yet, or else he would take the same course as his Brothers, for feare she should suck of the same Teat with her Mother. VVee cannot name my Lady Crompton too often. VVhen Tom. Temples stock could hold no longer, neither in Wit nor Money, she laid him aside like a ridiculous Foole, and jump't in with my Lord Molineux, who whipt up her Belly here in England, and then she got a Passe to go to her husband in France, that he might father the Bantling. My Lord and she are parted since, but how, it is not known; only we heare of great resolutions against Teeming, professing shee will venture no more for Children: but we fear she must have one more to please my Lord Broncker.
Heigh, now for the nine Worthies, who above all deserve the Breeches, to ride astride to the De∣vill. And to lead the Van, march couragious yong Madam Peterborough, whose Earl is a Wittoll, and her father was a cuckold, gramercy old Peterbo∣rough. This Ladie makes nothing of 3. Gallons of Usquebagh to Mr. Staffords health, and whatsoe∣ver the Gentleman lends her, his wife payes him again in the same coyn at home, according to my Ladies maxim, which sayes, Shee's too much Phlegme, a husbands faults can smother; If he take one, tis fit you take another. Next, enter Madam Peter, who was tried by the Prince Elector, and Harry Compton was his Taster. This will neither settle Mr. Vowell's eyes, nor his Conscience; for, he hath liquored her with many a Pot, and tosted her, and she promises much in her cups. Besides her faculty in drink, she is good at all games, but especially at cogging the Die, and the Cod-peece. [Though we cannot rank her Aunt (my Lady Mary Sheldon) among the Nine, yet it being pitty they should be parted, she may passe for an Appendix, being so fast hung to my Lord Peter, that his Lady rambles without suspition, and sets down this for a maxim of our Commonweale;] That Ladies when their Lords new loves do mind, Should, in revenge, like Cats unto their kind. 'Twere pitty the Third should be left out who ought to have been first in order. Shew as confi∣dent, as you speak, Mrs. Phil. Mohun, whose
Rhetorick is Ribaldry, whose Element is Drinke, whose wit is in Baudery, and whose Beauty is bla∣sted with her own Breath, it being a damp that will kill a Spider. She swears with a bon-grace, makes offensive and defensive War; offensive with Sher∣wood, whose Lordship is an Asse, defensive with Lenthall, whose courage is wit. This Lady will be sure to match the man, if she knows the length of his weapon. She is often purged, but vowes drink is the best Physick, and delivers this maxim; If any thing make women more divine Than men, it must be quick and mighty wine. Make room for the Fourth, (with the new-elect∣ed Colonel Corbet) by name Mistris Harris, sister to the forementioned Lady, who neither in quanti∣ty, quality, action, Passion, nor any other Predica∣ment, is any whit lesse remarkable. She hath lived these 30. years in the same extremes that the rest of her Sisters now begin with. Tom. Temple, had never been arrested for the 200 l. if he could have plied her busines in earnest, as well as laugh at his own Jests, Let old gouty Ash of the Parliament take heed; for, that in the nose is not so easily cured as that in the Toe, and the Cavalier Corbet, & his Mistresse may chance to make him crosse Pothe∣caries Bills, and baudy reckonings, instead of the ac∣compts of the Kingdom. For, after a full beer-glasse, she set down this too for a Maxim. The Members ought, now Cavaliers are poore, If they will share a Mistresse, pay the score.
The third of the Sisters makes up the fifth of our VVorthies. Enter Mistris Cambell, with a piss-pot on her head, a pipe in her mouth, & a pintle in her Tail. Ash runs through this Family, as his brother-commoner Howard (known heretofore by the name of Lord Howard) runs through the Family of the Murray's, and hath made most of their Issue free Denisons, being more English then Scotish. We understand by Master Cook's books at the Bear at the Bridg-foot (who must needs be an exact accomp∣tant, having been a Committee-man) that from Midsummer to Michaelmas, 100 pound sterl. hath been bestowed by Master Ash upon this Lady, in VVine and Tobacco, to cherish her in the mainte∣nance of her most rare Maxims; of which the chiefe is, She that with pure Tobacco will not prime Her Nose, can be no Lady of the time. Now for a Worthy in good earnest, my Lady Wildgoose (alias Velledicus, alias Mistris Salkeld) who reckons continency either to husband or Ser∣vant, the worst of the seven Deadly Sins; having lately resolved to try all that will try her, though she pass the most fiery tryall. Many a sad journey hath she made; but of late two into Scotland, to fit her English measure, according to the Italian with S. Bernard Gascoign. She finds VVine of a rare quality; for it saves the charge of Vermilion for her Beake, being at great expence upon her cheeks. This Lady playes as well at Best as the Beast; drinks
well; swears enough for six of the nine, and hath been often a Caterwauling with Sir Iohn Morley. Her Maxim is. 'Tis not enough that Ladies drink, whiff, whore, Except they swear God-dammees by the score. And now since the widdowes weare the buskins, let them tread the stage boldly; and so enter two more of our Worthies at once, Aunt and Niece, my Presbyterian Lady Stapleton and my Lady Campi∣on the Cavalier, the one Being drunk at the receit of the newes of her husband's death out of France; the other very jolly, with Master Howard of Bark∣shire in her arms, at the newes of her Husbands death at Colchester; and since that, she hath a Rub∣bers every weeke with no lesse then five, for varie∣ty. The controversie betwixt these two is, who can drink most, and then they quarrell for the con∣quest. Tom Temple and Col. Iephson are their Se∣conds; the first of whom lost his haire and the o∣ther had like to have lost his one eie, in deciding the busines. But what care these Ladies? Their maxim is, She is no Mistresse though she rants, drinks, Swears, That doth not set her Servants by the ears. To bring up the Rear of the nine, enter the incom∣parable Lady of an old Low-country Colonell, by name Cromwell; who hath run through most of the Regiment, both Officers and Souldiers. Since her coming to England, she hath traded never a jot the lesse in the low-countries; loves Wine, and of all Wine, Sack in Glasses; and of all Glasses, Beer-Glasses. She keeps a free Port for all Mer∣chants,
and trucks with all Languages and Nati∣ons. Shee is controller of the Club among the La∣dies; is excellent at the beginning of halths, viz. To the best—in Christendome, and at the ending of stories, for, she fits them all with a baudy Comment. She is Honored with the title of Lady-Governesse to the three illustrious Sister VVorthies, Mistris Mohun, Mistris Harris, and Mistris Cam∣bell, her chiefe designe is to reconcile and compose all differences betwixt the two former, and then when these foure are together, there will be a soci∣ety for theThe De∣vil Ta∣vern. DEVILL, their Maxim being this; They're fooles that will not these examples follow, And once a week meet at the great APOLLO. If any of these Ladies want a pouder'd and patch't old fool to wait upon Them, let them send to my L. North, whose Coach and himself will be ready at a Call; especially if it be upon a visit to my Lady Kent's about supper time, where they are all upon Free-Quarter. By way of conclusion we are in the last place to give notice of certain Ladies, called Coursers, whose Recreation lies very much upon the New Exchange about 6. a clock at night; where you may fit your self with ware of all sorts and sizes. But take heed of my Lady Sandy's; for, she sweeps the Exchange, like a Chain'd Bullet, with Mr. Howard in one hand and Fitz Iames in the other. There is my Lady Katherine Scot with Mr. Salkeld. The new widdow Sandys with Col. Bredridge. The Lady Montague with Mr. Brown.
The 2. Mrs. Skipwiths, with Sir Iohn Morley. Mrs. Wintour in contemplation of David Walter. Mrs. Kirk with Col. Rainsford. The Lady Mary Sheldon with Mr. Vowell. Mrs. Luson and Sir Thomas Sandys. The Lord Blaney and Mrs. Roper, The Lord Middlesex and the Lady Thimblebee. Mrs. Wild and Mr. Touchet. The Lady Crompton and Mr. Cranfield. Mrs. Wenman and my Lord Denbigh. The Lady Cary and Dudly Sonds. Mrs. Crew and Mr. Broncker. Mrs. Finch for a VVhiffler. Mrs. Jones and George Colt, and sometimes Mr. Coghill. Mrs. Kingsmell all alone. The Corbet Family with who they can get. The Lady Fulgeum with the Lord Northampton. The Lady Peter and the Lord North. The Lady Downs and the Lord Sherwood. The 7. Sisters of the Lord Sandys, and the foure Mistris Somes's, very fleet Coursers. The Lady Norton and Mr. Edwards. Sir Thomas Longevile hopping before twenty wo∣men, and the Lord VVindsor, Cum multis aliis, quas nunc perscribere longum est. These, and many more you may buy; but beware you repent not your Bargain. In our next Annals (if the humor hold) we will give you a more parti∣cular Relation. In the mean time, God bless the Authors from the Blades that swagger; From Poyson, Pistoll, from the sword and dagger.
A Post-script to the intelligent Readers. Martialis lib. 6. Epig. 45. Lusistis, satis est; lascivi cedite Cunni: Permissa est vobis non nisi casta Venus. Lib. 5. Epig. 6. Crispulus iste quis est, uxori semper adhaeret Qui Mariane, tuae? Crispulus iste quis est? Nescio quid dominae teneram qui garrit inaurem, Et Sellam cubito dexteriore premit? Nil mihi respondes? uxoris res agit, inquis, Iste meae.— Res uxoris agit? res nullas Crispulus iste: Res non uxoris, res agit iste tuas. Lib. 7. Epig. 9..ad Olum. Centenis futuit Matho millibus: Ole, quid ad te? Illud dissimulas ad te quod pertinet, Ole, Quod{que} magis curae convenit esse tuae. Uxor Maecha tibi est: hoc, ad te pertinet. Ole. Sed quid agas, ad me pertinet, Ole, nihil. Lib. 9. Epig. 42. Pontice, quòd nunquàm futuis, sed pellice laevâ Uteris, & veneri servit amica manus: Hoc nihil esse putas? scelus est, mihi crede, sed ingens, Quantum vix animo concipis ipse tuo. Ipsam, crede mihi, naturam dicere rerum; I stud quod digitis, Pontice, perdis, homo est. Lib. 11. Epig. 23. Divisit natura mares; pars una puellis, Una viris genita est: ut ere parte tuâ. FINIS.
