q30 e1641_3 99867976 170196
THE QUAKERS QUAKING. OR, The most just and deserved punishment inflicted on the person of JAMES NAYLOR for his most horrid blasphemies. Together with the confession of his Associates, who were Timothy Wedlock. Thomas Symons. John Stranger. Hannah Stranger. Martha Symons. Dorcas Erbury. As also the reasons why the further pu∣nishment of the said James Naylor was suspended on Saturday, Decemb. 20. and deferred by order of Parliament untill Saturday, Decemb. 27. He remains still a prisoner to Newgate, where many of his Associates do daily resort to him. To which is added, The severall damnable Opinions of the said QUAKERS. ondon, Printed for W. Gilbertson at the Bible in Giltspurstreet, without Newgate. 1657.
depiction of James Naylor in the pillory The manner of James Naylors standing in the Pillory in the Pallace-yard at Westminster.
The Quakers quaking. WE live now in the Evening of the World; and what our Sa∣vior did prophesie should then come to passe, and did advise us to take héed of, is fulfiilled in our dayes: Take heed (saith our Saviour Iesus Christ) in Luke 13. verse 5. lest any man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. And in Matth. 24. verse 20. our Saviour foretel∣ling the strong delusions to come, doth ad∣vise us in these words: Therefore if any man shall say unto you, loe here is Christ, or there, believe it not, for there shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew signs and wonders, in so much that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect. The generation of Quakers, who had their originall in the North, have béen so fruitfull in a short time, that they have in∣fected a great part of the West, and thou∣sands
in this populous City stand affected to them, being deluded by their pretended simplicity and zeale. You shall finde them masters of so confident a spirit, as if the Oracles of truth did procéed onely out of their mouthes, and they must be cast out to partake both of the shame and punish∣ment of liars whoever shall endeavour to contradict them. The names of George Fox and James Naylor have béen famous with many de∣luded people in this City, and they have made a mouth of many at the Mouth at Al∣dersgate At the last they began to quarrel among themselves, and did in their way endeavour to excommunicate one another from their Congregations. It is said that the latter of them, who both for his con∣fession and his punishments shall be the subject of this discourse, hath béen accoun∣ted to have béen bewitched by the same creature, who having brought him to her will, did afterwards adore him; for it is manifest by the confession of Martha Sy∣mons before the Mayor and Aldermen of Bristol that she had struck the said James Naylor into a trance for thrée daies toge∣ther, which although the said James Naylor did deny, yet being informed that the con∣fession
of Martha Symons did extend so far he was possessed with an amazing silence that so much should be discovered of her strength and his weakness. But before I proceed to give you a Narrative of his blasphemies, and how he was and would be adored as a new Iesus. I will in the first place give you a chara∣cter of his person, which is, that he is of about four and thirty years of age, a man of a good complexion brown hair, which he wears of an indisterent length, but his beard was short; he is of a melancho∣ly aspect, and he wears his hat hanging over his brows, his cloathes very plain; he wears a little band close to his coller, without any band-strings, as doth the other great Quaker George Fox; he doth strive in his looks and posture to imitate the Picture of our Saviour, as it was sent up to Rome in the dayes of Tiberius Caesar; and therefore he strives to wear his hair as it were with a seam on the crown of his head, and so flowing down on each side of it. His parentage is of the meanest ranke, his father being said to be a Sowgilder in Yorkshire, in which County he himself was born, at a place called An∣derslow, and hath a Wife still living at
Wakefield. In the time of the late wars he was a Souldier, and served under the command of the Lord Fairfax, and after∣wards under the command of Generall Lambert in Scotland, where he was a Quarter-master, and falling sick he retur∣ned to his own Countrey, where he had not long continued but he was entred into the number of the Quakers, and coming to Lon∣don grew acquainted with many women, with some of whom he was too familiar, and were instruments of his going down into the West, where what horrid blasphe∣mies were broached by him in counterfeit∣ing himself to be Iesus the Saviour of mankind, the following Narration will advertise you. The comming of James Naylor into Bristol, and the antick manner of Martha Symons waving her handker∣chief, and singing, Holy, holy, holy, before him: and of Hannah stranger singing in the same manner, and of Dorcas Erbury pulling off his stockings, and laying her own cloathes beneath his féet, hath alrea∣dy béen discoursed by several Pens. I shall in this place give you the most mate∣rial passages of all their examinations: and in the first place I will begin with
James Naylor, who being demanded whe∣ther he was the onely son of God, confessed that he was the son of God, but must ac∣knowledge that he had many brethren. The Examination of James Naylor. Q. Have any called thee by the Name of Jesus? A. Not as the visible Iesus, but as to Iesus the Christ within me? Q. Darest thou to own the name of the King of Israel? A. Not as I am a creature, but if they give it Christ within me, I then doe own it, and I have a Kingdom, but not of this world, my kingdom is of another world, of which thou wists not. Q. Art thou the Prophet of the most high? A. Thou hast said that I am a prophet. Q. Is not the written Word of God the guide? A. It declares of it, and what is not ac∣cording to that is not true. Q. Wert thou ever called the Lamb of God? A. There might be some such thing in some Letter sent, but I am a Lamb, and
have sought it long before I could wit∣ness it. Q. Art thou the everlasting Son of God? A. I doe witness God in the flesh I am the Son of God, and the Son of God is but one. Q. Art thou the Prince of peace? A. The Prince of everlasting peace is begotten in me. Q. Art thou the everlasting Son of God? A. I am and the everlasting righteous∣nesse is wrought in me: if ye were ac∣quainted with the Father, ye would also be acquainted with me. Q. Dost thou live without bread? A. As long as it shal please my heaven∣ly Father, I have tasted of that bread of which he that eateth shall never die. Q. How long hast thou lived without corporall sustenance? A. Some fiftéen of sixtéen daies, féeding on nothing but the Word of God. Q. Was Dorcas Erbury dead two daies in Exeter, and didst thou raise her from the dead? A I can do nothing of my self, the Scri∣pture beareth witnesse to the power in me which is everlasting: It is the same power I have which w read in Scripture.
Q. Art thou the unspotted Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world? A. Were I not a Lamb, Wolves would not séek to devoure me. Q. Art not thou guilty of horrid blas∣phemy by thy words? A. Who made me a judge over them? Q. Why camest thou in such an unusuall posture riding into this City, with two women leading thy horse, and singing, holy holy, holy; and another before thee bare headed, and knee deep in the mud, at such a time that it raining most extreamly thy companions received it at their necks, and vented it at their hose and breeches. A. It tended to my fathers praise and glory, and I ought not to slight any thing which the Spirit of the Lord moves. Q. Dost thou think that the Spirit of the Lord moved them? A. Yes. Q. These books thou hast written, wilt thou affirm what is therein. A. Yea, with my dearest blood.
The most material passages in the Exa∣mination of Martha Symons. Q. Doest thou owne James Naylor to be the Prince of peace? A. He is a perfect man, and he that is a perfect man is the Prince of peace. Q. What made thee to leave thy husband to follow James Naylor? A. It is our life to praise the Lord. Q. Oughtest thou to worship him upon thy knees? A. I ought to do it. Q. And wherefore so? A. He is the Lord of righteousnesse, and the new man within him is the everlasting Son of righteousnesse, and James Naylor will be Iesus when the new man is born in him? Q. By what name dost thou call him? A. Lord. Q And why Lord? A. Because he is prince of peace, and Lord of righteousness. Q. Why dost thou call him King of Is∣rael? A. He is anointed. Q. Who anointed him?
A. A Prophet. Q. Who was that Prophet? A. I will not tell thée. Q. Doth that spirit of Jesus which thou sayest is in him make a sufficient Jesus unto others? A. There is a séed born in him which I and every one ought to honour. Q. Is he King of Israel, as thy Husband saith? A. If he sath so, thy testimony is double. The most material passages in the Exa∣mination of Hannah Stranger. Q. DOst thou own Iames Naylor for the Prince of peace? A. Yea, he is so. Q. What dost thou call his name? A. It hath béen said, I, and others have already told it. Q. Dost thou not know it to be blasphe∣my to give him such and such attributes? A. If I have offended the Law, &c. Q. Didst not thou send him that Letter wherein he is called the son of God? A. Yes, I do own that Letter. Being demanded why she called him Ie∣sus, she would return no answer at all.
The Examination of Timothy Wedlock. Q. Dost thou own Iames Naylor to be the only son of God? A. I do own him to be the son of God. Q. Wherefore didst thou sing before him Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Israel? A. I do own the songs of Sion. Q. Wherefore didst thou go bare headed before him, when thou wilt not be unco∣vered before a Magistrate? A. What I did was as the Lord com∣manded me. Q. Wherefore didst thou kneel before him? A.The truth made me. The most material passages in the Exa∣mination of Dorcas Erbury the Relict of William Erbury, some∣time a Minister, but now a Quaker. Q. Dost thou own him who rode on the Horse to be the holy one of Israel? A. Yea, I do, and with my bloud I will maintain it.
Q Dost thou own him for the son of God? A. He is the onely begotten son of God. Q. Wherefore didst thou pull off his stockings, and lay thy cloathes at his feet? A. He is worthy of it, for the is the holy one of Israel. Q. Knowest thou no other Jesus, the only begotten son of God? A. I know no other Saviour. Q. Dost thou believe in Iames Naylor? A. Yea, I do. Q. By what name dost thou call him? A. The son of God, but I am to serve him, and to call him Lord and Master. Q. Jesus was crucified, but this man is alive? A. He hath shoke off his carnal body. Q. What body hath he then? A. Say not the Scriptures, the natural body I will change, and it shall be spiri∣tual. Q. But Christ raised those who are dead, so hath not he? A. He raised me. Q. In what manner? A. He laid his hand on my head when I had been dead two dayes, and said unto me Dorcas arise, and I arose and live as thou seest.
Q. What witnesse hast thou for this? A. My mother who was present. Q. Jesus Christ doth sit at the right hand of the Father, when the world shall be judged by him? A. He whom thou callest Naylor, shall sit at the right hand of the Father, and shall judge the world with equity. The Substance of several Letters sent to the said James Naylor. HAnnah Stranger in her Letter to him calls him The everlasting Son of righ∣teousness, and Prince of Peace. And in another place writing to the said Naylor, she hath these words, The Lord shall not suffer his holy one to see corruption, nor his soul to lie in Hell; but will cause the mountains to melt at his presence, and the little hills to bring him Peace. And in another Letter, she calls him the fairest of ten thousand, the onely begotten Son of God; her heart panteth after him. Her Husband in his Letter to him, telleth
him that his name, is no more to be called James but Jesus: and this he owned at his Examination. The Opinions of the Quakers are these. 1. They deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God. 2. They esteem their own speakings to be of as much Authority. 3. They hold it lawful to expound, or to interpret the Scriptures. 4. They say, He that preacheth by a Text of Scripture is a Conjurer. 5. They affirm that the holy letter is carnal. 6. That the Bible ought to be burned. 7. That Jesus Christ inhabiteth in the flesh of Man. 8. Some of them have said, that Christ never ascended into Heaven. 9. That to pray that their sins may be pardoned is needless. 10. That they believe not that there is a∣nother World.
11. Some of them deny the Resurrection. 12. They affirm they cannot sin, but are perfect. 13. They make no distinction of Persons. According to the Sentence passed upon him, the said Iames Naylor stood in the Pillory, was whipped on Thursday last being December 18. from the Palace-yard in Westminster to the Royal-Ex∣change: and the further prosecution of his Sentence had been put in Execution on Saturday December 20, but by an Or∣der from the Parliament, the said Naylor pretending sickness, it is deferred until Saturday December twenty Seven, at which time he is to receive his just Re∣ward, according to his desert. FINIS.
