R1211 E392_31 99862084 160293
A NARRATION Of severall passages betwixt His MAIESTY AND Master B. REYMES, at NEWMARKET, Concerning the ARMY. Communicated to the Committee of the Militia of London. And to the Right Honourable the House of Peeres, upon Thurday the seventeenth of June. 1647. Die Jovis, 17 Jnnii. 1647. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Narration be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.
A Narration of severall Passages betwixt his Majesty and Master B. Reymes, &c. IN Obedience to this Right Honourable House their Command, I shall here give an Account of my admission into his Ma∣jesties presence, and Commission of de∣livering this Message to the Militia of London, who have thought fit it should be communicated to both Houses of Parliament; For the first, partly my occasions, partly my desire of seeing his Majesty drew me to Sir William Russels, where he was then playing at Bowles with some of the Commissioners; a∣mong the rest, Major Generall Browne espying me, proffered me the honour of his Majesties hand, which I readily ac∣cepted of, so it might be without incon∣venience; and comming neare his Roy∣all
Majesty, he was graciously pleased to grant me that favour; withall asking my name, and something else of Major Generall Browne, which I heard not; but he soone after came to me, and de∣sired my attendance at Court, where at my entrance I was received by him ac∣cording to his promise, and carried into the presence Roome, where he acquain∣ted me with severall passages betwixt his Majesty, the Generall, Lievtenant-Generall, and Colonell Whaley, whom the King had that day struck, for being so presumptuous as to listen while his Majesty was in conference with one whom they suspected to become from London; From this he fell to a relation of his Majesties aversenesse, and un∣willingnesse to comply at all with the Armies proceedings; saying, That all their actions, for ought he saw, were both in∣equitable in themselves, and disproportio∣nable to their pretences: To this the Ma∣jor Generall added, That it did highly concerne both the Parliament and City
to be carefull of their safeties, he being an eare witnesse daily of their threats, and how much they are animated with the hopes of spoile, and inraged with hatred to the Parliament; this he desi∣red me to deliver, and so led me into the Privie Chamber, and his Majesty pre∣sently came out of his Bed-chamber, He came towards me, who was standing with the Commissioners; then Major Ge∣nerall Browne anticipated his Majesties Discourse by an humble intreaty, That he would be pleased to confirme the Relation he had given me of his Maje∣sties unwillingnesse to come from Hol∣denby, and how much against his will he stayed here: In answer to which his Majesty clapping his hand on his breast, said; Ʋpon my life I came against my will, which he told me, I might well conjecture my selfe by the relation he was pleased to afford me of his being ta∣ken from Holdendy: But (said hee) rather then to be carried by neck and heeles (that I may use his owne expression)
I went along: Nor am I so in love with their proceedings that I should be willing to continue here, for I finde my selfe an ab∣solute Prisoner. As concerning my refusall of returning to Holdenby, which by some of my Subjects may be mis-understood, for all the reason I had was, that I chose golden fetters, and a lightsome roome before a darke Dungeon, for I conceive this to be the better Ayre, knowing that my restraint there should not be lesse then here. Then appealing to the Commissioners, he said, Have I not told the Generall himselfe, and others, That I admired by what Authority he dust thus resist him and his Parliament: To which he an∣swered, There was necessity. He told them, They did more then are the King, though in the height of his power, durst, to inforce Justice, either in criminall or Civill affaires; Indeed I have many times hastened it, but never inforc't it, as they have done, in saying, Give us Justice, or— Yet for my part (proceeded his Majesty) I know not what they do, or in∣tend,
but what I heare from these Gen∣tlemen, pointing to the Commissioners, for they have not sent legally to me since my comming; therefore tell all those whom you thinke fit Communicants of this businesse, that I desire nothing more passionately, then to be with my Parliament. After this I assum'd the boldnesse to tell his Maje∣sty, that I thought him then politically absent, when his affection, though not his Person, was alienated from them: To which he answered, It was very right. Next I told him, I thought it would be no small comfort to those whom he was pleased to make partakers of this his intention, that his Majesties pro∣pension and inclination towards them was so great; which he bid me assure them, whatsoever other illusive perswasi∣on would possesse them to the contrary. And moreover, That if he were at the head of their Army, he would declare and protest against all their proceedings; And whatsoever they heard to the contrary, de∣sired them not to beleeve, no, though under
his hand, unlesse they spake with one who had it: from his owne mouth. Last of all, at my demand of some Letter, one of the Commissioners, Major Generall Browne, answered, That that was not so safe, and this would be as effectuall. This is all my memory supplyes me withall; the incompactednesse of this Narration shall, I hope, obtaine your Honours pardons, being penned with∣out the least premeditation, and with∣out affecting the least methodicall stile; onely in obedience to Your Honour Commands, that I might testifie my self to be Your Lordships most devoted Servant, B. REYMES. FINIS.
