R1536 45097923 171499
A MESSAGE FROM THE KING OF SCOTLAND; TO The PARLIAMENT Convened at EDENBOROƲGH. AND Lieutenant Gen: Lesley's preparation to receive him, upon his landing at Frith; and to conduct him to Edenborough, with a Convoy of 3000 Horse. ALSO, A List of the Earls, Lords, and Knights, that are expelled the Kingdom of Scotland, and not to come within the Verge of the Court. Together, with the raising of every fourth man in Scotland; the number of the Horse and foot, and their advance nearer to the Borders of England: With Col. Hackers Regiment, and some other of the Parl. of Englands forces, marching into Northumberland. LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1650.
A MESSAGE from the KING of SCOT∣LAND, to the PARLIAMENT conve∣ned at EDENBOROUGH. Honoured Sir, YOU were once the Object, whom I much honour'd and esteem'd for the Truths sake, that formerly remain'd in You, and was so faithfully promoted by you; which makes me admire, that so great an Alchymist, as to extract honey out of the Rock, should now suck poyson out of a flower; by chang∣ing your former principles of truth, and adhering to erroneous opinions, and new inventions of men: I cannot compare you to a Bee (unlesse for your sting) but to a Spider; for sucking poyson from that savou∣ry doctrine of Reformation in Religion (against which you spit so much of your venom:) However, I shall not return you railing for railing, but in a spirit of meekness endeavour to convince you, that so you may no longer be ensnared, by being wrapt up in those clouds of darkness, but that you may (after so great a change) once more shine forth in your native Coun∣try
(as a bright Star from the highest Canopy) with splendour and beauty; for the giving light to those, who are so wilfully blinded in the ways of Truth and purity; for assuredly, all those who profess that dis∣cipline, are such whom God doth both honour and love; therefore be no more a Changeling from Truth, but a stable pattern in the ways of holiness; that so you may remain in safety under the present power and constitution, and likewise to rest your self satis∣fied and obedient to those, who sit at the Helm of Ma∣gistracy. Thus having given you a hint of your back∣sliding or falling off, I shall (at present) insist no fur∣ther on those circumstances; but acquaint you with such Occurrences and Overtures, which daily run in the current of the great stream, now ebbing and flow∣ing between the titular King of Scots, and the Parlia∣ment convened at Edenborough, viz. The Parliament sit close, debate high, and great things are in consultation among them, which for the most part seem (as yet) abortive; onely their King is daily expected (if intervenings at Sea retard not their expectation) from whom they have received a Message, directed to the Lord Chancellour, intima∣ting: That he is resolved, wholly to cast himself upon them, and to signe and subscribe to such things, as in honour and safe∣ty may be granted and assented to; that he is very well sa∣tisfied in Conscience, of the lawfulness of the Presbyterian Government, and taking of the solemn League and Cove∣nant, being resolved to give a toleration thereof to all those who have, or shall adhere thereto; and that those obstacles which did most retard his good opinion thereof, are now re∣moved from him, and that he hath given his Chaplains a
free discharge; being resolved to embrace such a retinue, as shall be acceptable and approved of by them, &c. and there∣fore desireth a blessing upon their undertakings, in Ʋnity, and Peace. This Letter is very well resented by divers, great in power both in Kirk and State, and great provisions are making for his arrivall; but others again, are not very well satisfied therewith, and desire ra∣ther a fair correspondency with the Parliament of England, than an inthroning of the said King; but ma∣ny conjecture, that those thoughts arise more from fear than love, by reason of the alarm of the English Armies advance; some give out there is preparation made to meet them, which many the rather believe, by reason the Scots continue on their great great Levy, and (as we hear) have raised every fourth man, from 16 to 60, and that divers regiments have already exer∣cised and mustered. Lieutenant General Lesley with 3000 horse & foot, have taken up their quarters at the Sea-port towns beyond Fryth, to attend the landing of their young King, that they may conduct him safe∣ly to Edenborough; The rest of the Army being about 5000, are advanced from Sterling, more nearer towards the borders of England, to encourage their new levied forces (who seem very unwilling to engage against England) to march Southward; where they List, Exercise, and Train up their young soldiers daily. Yet notwithstanding these warlike preparations, great are the discontents which daily arise amongst them, and many of the commoners cry out, That a Scotch purse will not do the deed, and therefore they pray hard, that their Covenanting-brethren in London, may appear visible for their assistance.
The Ministers are very zealous for propagating the present work in hand, stirring up the people, and bidding them not to doubt but that their endeavours and undertakings, will be victoriously crowned from heaven; and as they have seen the extirpation of ma∣lignancy, so they shall likewise behold the finall de∣struction of Heresie; but the truth is, Jockey is in a Scotch Myst, and begins to lament the losse of their for∣mer interest in Berwick and Carlisle. There was on the sixt instant, great stir about passing a Vote in Parliament, the question was, whe∣ther they should make any further addresses to the King? Thirty of the Members present, cryed, No King, No King; but all the rest (being about sixty) were for it, uttering great acclamations, for King and Covenant, for King and Covenant; and thereupon ad∣journed till the next day, where the first thing they insisted on, was another Letter to be sent to their King: Wherein they desire his speedy coming to E∣denbourgh, to sit in Councel with them, assuring him, that they will endeavour to the utmost of their pow∣er, to settle him in his Throne, and restore him to his rights, &c. Yet notwithstanding the passing of this Vote, they resolved that these ensuing persons hereafter named, should be expelled that Kingdom, and be made uncapable of bearing any Office for the future, and not to come within the Verge of the Court, without speciall warrant from the Parlia∣men, by reason of their great actings in the last war.
A List of the Earls, Lords, and Knights, that are expelled the Kingdom of Scotland, or not to come within the Verge of the Court at Edenbourgh, without Warrant from the Parliament there convened. William Duke of Hamilton. George Earl of Seaforth. George Earl of Landerdale. William Earl of Dumfress. John Earl of Traquire. James Earl of Kalendar. Patrick Earl of Forth. John Lord Sinclare. John Lord Carnegy. Lord Napier. James Lord Fitham. Sir George Monro. Sir John Charles. Sir John Lodhart. Col. Thomas Daliel. Col. John Cockram. These persons are forthwith to desert their King, and not to be admitted personally with him into Scot∣land, till further Orders from the Parliament, and sa∣tisfaction given to the Kirk and Councel; This Vote of banishment is branded with the title of Tyranny, by divers sorts of persons, which causeth great murmur∣ings from many, and especially upon the executing of Colonel Dalgely, and Sibbet, who being brought to the place of execution, where their heads were to be severed from their bodies; when they came upon the Scaffold, by their deportment they seemed undanted, and Colonel Dalgely made a short speech to the people, touching the lawfulnesse of his engagement for the King, that he died faithfull lover of his Country, and that he endeavoured to gain righteousnesse, and preserve loyalty; and having ended his Oration, he went to the Block, saluted the Axe, and laying down his head, was presently beheaded: Colonel Sibbet
made also a Speech, setting forth the justness of his cause, and that he died for loyalty, and being a friend to righteousness, &c. Which being ended, he took his leave of some friends, and bade the Executioner do his Office; which was accordingly performed. Colonel Hackers Regiment is march'd into Northum∣berland, and some others into Westmerland, and Cum∣brland; a vigilant eye is kept fixed towards Scotland, by the English Officers, who daily implore a blessing from heaven, upon their undertakings; which will assuredly attend them in all their enterprizes, accord∣ing to that sweet promise of Jeremiah; That God will answer those who sincerely call upon him, and shew great things to come; and own them, and the justness of their cause, and strengthen both their hands and hearts: Which is the unfeigned desire of Carlisle, June 10. 1650. Your Christian friend, A. Rishton. FINIS.
