R1677 E613_10 99863339 115534
The Office of ADRESSES AND ENCOVNTERS: Where all people of each Rancke and Quality may receive direction and ad∣vice for the most cheap and speedy way of attaining whatsoever they can lawfully desire. OR, The only Course for poor people to get speedy employment, and to keep o∣thers from approaching poverty, for want of EMPLOIMENT. To the multiplying of Trade, the advancement of Navigation, and establish∣ing this famous City of LONDON in a more plentifull and flourishing Condition than ever, as is earnestly desired, and shall be diligently endeavou∣red by a Wel-willer of Hers HENRY ROBINSON. London, printed by Matthew Simmons next doore to the Golden Lyon in Aldersgate street, 1650.
To all such as sincerely desire the Reliefe of the Poor, with the accomodation of the wealthy, and are truly cordiall to the prosperity and wel-fare of the City of London in particular, as no little condu∣cing to the Security, Plenty, and Glory of this Na∣tion in Generall. IT is easily apprehended what great advantage accures, and what multitudes of businesses are daily dispatched by Mer∣chants, and others, meeting upon the Exchange; and spea∣king to one another about some particular businesses on∣ly: but of how much more accommodation and dispatch, it would yet amount to, if not only every one of those Merchants, but all others besides might know whether to goe to be satisfied concerning all manner of their Affairs, hath not as yet entered into our thoughts; much lesse been seriously considered on, other∣wise, it would never have been kept so long from being put in Execution; our own exceeding benefit would have taught us the practice of it. And yet all this is to be compassed by such a Register of Addresses as wee speak of; Oh the stupidity of this Nation, if not of Man-kind, that boasts it selfe to be Constituted an absolute Tyrant over the whole Creation: Certainly it must be notoriously degenerated, if not besotted, that is be∣come so unable to help it selfe: The very bruit beasts in many respects ap∣prehend better their owne Advantages, and are more dextrous at the pra∣ctise of them. How many rare discoveries have beene long▪ since made unto this Nation, for better ordering the Churches, and Government of the Common-wealth, which yet by most men are held Hereticall, and for the most part obstructed because so few are at leisure to search into the depth and glory of them: But I will leave these high Concernments unto such Persons for whose Sphear they are more proper, and fall upon Considerations lesse troublesome, and more parallel to my owne private Condition. We find by Experience that Multitudes of people, of all sorts, both Han∣dicrafts, Artificers, Manufactors, and others, are brought to poverty and beggery, because they doe not timely meet with any one to Set and con∣tinue
them at Worke; And yet at the very same time, we like wise meete with multitudes of others, both Merchants and Shop-keepers af all Cal∣lings, that cannot furnish their Customers so cheape and speedily as were to be desired, because either they cannot presently get Work-folk, or else not at such cheap rates as to make a benefit thereof. Now if such as have occasion or desire to set poor people on work: and poore people that desire continually to be kept at work; knew where to find one another at all times, they should never be necessitated to be idle; And being all the week long set at work, they would earn more at a low rate, then in working 3. or 4. or 5. dayes in a weeke only, at a higher rate, and so might afford their work-manship cheaper unto the Merchants and Shop-keepers, and they unto their Customers consequently, which would be the life of Trade. And this great reliefe unto the poore, and advantage to the encrease of Trade, is infallibly secured by this Register of Adresses, this common Center of Intelligence, from whence all persons may forth with be dire∣cted, and receive satisfaction, and encounter in whatsoever they can law∣fully desire; For although so many severall Arts, Trades, and Callings as are requisite to the Constitution of Cities, and Common-wealths, as so many parts and members of so great a Corporation, are purposely intro∣duced, to be of mutual succour and assistance to each others occurrences; Yet, since most of them are scituate some distance from one another, often∣times unknown, & in number infinite; There is more than a seeming want unto the perfection of humane society, that as yet there never was any publique place appointed which might have served as a Treasury, or A∣bridgment of all Accommodations desireable. And although severall great Politicians of former ages, have touched hereon as a thing they deemed necessary for compleating their Common∣wealths: yet it is no where more necessary than in this of ours, so aboun∣ding in People, and so aptly Scituated for Trade and Negotiation; espe∣cially, in that the multitude of Persons with whom our Affaires oblige us to deale, renders our dealing more difficult, and confused, than in Coun∣treys or Cities lesse populous, and of smaller Traffique; much of our time, for want whereof, being spent in making search, through an in∣digested multitude both of Persons, and things, which for the most part doe least present themselves, when most sought after; even like two men, who in seeking after, happen to follow each other, and so can never meete, though at other times they meet often unexpectedly, when their bufinesse requires it not: and all this comes to passe onely for want of Order.
Thus we see how man, the onely helplesse creature of the whole Cre∣ation, stands in need of so many severall perquisites, in Order to his well-being, whether in point of Security, Food, or Rayment, as that he is compelled unto a Co-habitation with others. He cannot make himselfe happy alone; he can neither protect, feede, nor cloath himselfe alone; but must be beholding to others for each of these Accommodations: And out of this respect, Man-kind found it absolutely necessary to live together in Cities, and other populous places, where each one might be conduceable, and subservient unto an others necessities. Now that Man-kind, might not be longer thought constituted, in a more unhappy Condition, than the Irrational and Bruitish Creatures, after a Revolution of so many Ages and thousands of yeares; It hath pleased God, in these later times, to make some men Instruments of very great discoveries, whereby the state of Man-kind hath already, and may be much more meliorated; Amongst which, the Invention of an Office, or Register of Adresses and Encounters, wil not be found one of the least; neither in relation to particular men, who thereby may with the greatest expedition that this world affords, be satisfied concerning whatsoever they desire. Nor as it regards the publique Magistrate, the Powers, who, I will be bold to say, may make thereof such an In∣strument or Engine, both for the securing of themselves, and the hap∣py estating of a Nation in Peace, Plenty, and Contentation, to per∣petuity, as hitherto was never known to be enjoyed by any: But this is Arcanum Imperij: It may yet a while rest in reserve, and for the present, I shall only insist upon more inferiour Advantages, and those branched out but into some few Particulars, which this Register of Adresses will undenyably gratifie withall, both the poore and weal∣thier sort, to the great encrease of Trade, and facilitating all peoples Negotiations. The only way to prevent the multiplying of poor people, is forth∣with to give all opportunities, and improve all Advantages, that may be, unto all manner of people, to relieve themselves by their own labour and industry, without losse of time, or expence of mo∣ney; the rather, in that wee finde a great cause of beating down the price of poore mens labour, is, because such poore people are not acquainted with other peoples wants, besides their own; they have hitherto had no meanes to come to the speedy know∣ledge of such persons as stand as much in neede of poore mens labours, as the poor people doe of rich mens moneyes; and there∣fore
the poore mens seeking is rather a begging, than a bargain∣ing for employment; which rich men take advantage of, to the daily more and more undervaluing poore mens paines, and la∣bours: But when the rich, as well as the poore mens occasions, and necessities, are equally knowne to one another, the poor will be able to treat with more reputation, and get more indifferent and advantagious prices, both for their worke-manship and la∣bour. And whereas at present, poore people, and others, spend much time, in running up and down, from one place to another to seeke employment, and sell their worke; If they repaire unto this Office, they shall either be directed forthwith to one that wants such Artificers, Manufactors, Labourers, and others, or their Worke-manship; Or if they but leave their names, with the place of their abode, what employment they desire, and up∣on what termes, in a Ticket at this Office, so soone as their turne comes they shall have notice of it; and till then they may keepe at home, and employ themselves in such manner, as may be most for their own benefit and improvement. And to this purpose, in Threed-needle-street, over against the Castle Tavern, close to the Old Exchange, in London, shall be kept particular Registers, of all manner of Adresses, to which all persons are invited to repair, who desire, either 1. To buy or sell out-right; to mortgage, take or let out to Farme, by Lease for terme of yeares, or Lives, or otherwise, Lands, or Hou∣ses, in any part of England. 2. To buy, or sell any kind of Wares or Merchandize. 3. To take or deliver moneyes at Interest, upon security of Bond, Land, or Pawnes. 4. To take or deliver moneyes by Exchange, for any part of England, or Forreign Countreyes, 5. To take or let out Ships to Fraight, by the whole, or in part; or to lade peece Goods on them, for any Port or Ports of England, or Forraign Countries. 6. To entertaine, or to be entertained, Professors of the Liberall Scien∣ces, and Languages, Chaplains, Secretaries, Tutors, Schoolmasters, Gentlemen-Ʋshers, Stewards, Butlers, Cookes, Barbers, Serving∣men, or as Factors, Agents, or as Journeymen of any manner of occupations.
7. To entertaine, or to be entertained, waiting Gentlewomen, School∣mistrisses, Nurse-keepers, Nurses, Chamber-maids, Darie-maids, Cooke-maids, or for any other kinde of lawfull services. 8. To buy or sell Bonds, or Bills of debt upon rebate. 9. To buy, or sell Publique-faith money, of what sort soever. 10. To buy, or sell Leases, or Annuities, whether in possession, or Reversion. 11. To bee sent, or send others abroad, into any of our Plantations. 12. To employ, or be employed as Captaines, Masters of Ships, Ma∣sters mates, Factors, Pursers, Boat swains, Surgeons, Gunners, Cookes, Pilots, or common Marriners. 13. To buy, sell, or hire Houshold stuffe, Apparell, or any manner of Goods, at the secondhand. 14. To take, or let out to hire, by Lease, or yearely Rent, Houses, Lodgings, Ware houses, or Sellers, within the Cities of Lon∣don, and Westminster, as also Countrey-Houses, neere adjoyning. 15. To take, or deliver moneyes at Bottomarie, or upon returne of the Voyage, or Shipp, for any Port of England, or Forreigne Countreyes. 16. Here likewise, may every one enquire after any thing that is lost; and whosoever shall give notice of any thing that is found, will not onely discharge a good conscience, but bee rewarded for his paines, and in the mean time, shall see it Registred in a Booke for that purpose, and if hee please, have a receipt thereof: and whensoever he will call at this Office, be made acquainted what is be∣come of it, whether still remaining, or returned to the Proprietor thereof, and know who he is, &c. 17. Here, whosoever desires to travell, or make a Journey, may give in his name before hand, and have notice what other company there is, for any of the Principall Roades, or Townes of England, or any Forreign parts. 18. Here you may know what Ships arrived lately from, and when any de∣part for any port of England, or any Forreign parts, and with what goods they are laden. 19. Hither may resort such poore people as desire reliefe, and to know what meanes and Legacies are given to pious uses; and such as would wil∣lingly meete with fit objects of their charity and Bounty. 20. Such as desire to dispose of themselves, or friends in Marriage, may here likewise be informed, what encounters there are to be had, both of Per∣sons and Portions.
21. If any person, have any manner of Wares, or Merchandize to sell, let him direct them to this Office, and they shall be taken care of, and forth-with put to sale, either for ready money, or at time, according as the Owner shall give order for his most advantage; and in the meane time, if hee please, be furnishd with moneyes to serve his other occasions, at a reasonable rate: Finally, 22. If any person, living in any part of England, desire to have a∣ny Merchandize, or necessaries bought fo him in London, any Law-suit solicited, or any other honest bunese looked after, and ta∣ken care of in the said City of Lndon, or Countrey adjoyn∣ing, let him onely send the Particul, of his desires, in a letter directed to the said Office of Adresses, on Threed-needle-street, over against the Castle Tavern, close to the Old Exchange in London, with promise to pay the chargs, his businesse shall be dispatched; and a speedy accompt thereof returned him to his owne dwelling, or according to his direction without his comming up to London, troubling, or being beholding to any of his friends. The poore, together with all others, will likewise reape this benefit, by this Office, in that it will much prevent retailing, which is but a higling of Commodities, to a greater quantity and value; whereas, if the Buyer buyes for his use, and to serve his petty Customers onely, and the Seller sels to put himselfe into money: both the buyer payes lesse than hee should get the same Commodity for, from a Retailer; And the Seller also, sels for more than a Retailer would likely give him. In briefe, the use of this Register may extend as far as humane ne∣cessity, which is little lesse than infinite; and therefore, If any person, sollicitous of publique good, shall suggest any thing else, which this Office may particularly undertake, either for re∣liefe of the Poore, or accommodation of the Rich, it shall be gladly entertained, and the Propounder reckoned amongst the Benefactors of this Office. The Poore shall have all these services done for them in charity, and all others for six pence a time, or entry, so often as their turn is served. And for this purpose, the said Office shall be kept open every day (except the Lords day) from 8. of the Clock till 12. at Noone, and from 2. to 6. in the Evening, for entertaining all such as shall have recourse thereto. FINIS.
