T970 E1790_1 99868548 170373
TWO ASSIZE SERMONS Preached at Bridgnorth for the County of Salop in the year 1657. The first, upon Psalm 58. verse 1. Doe you indeed speak Righteousnesse, O Congregation? Doe ye judge uprightly, O ye sonnes of men? The second, upon Psalm 37. verse 37. Marke the perfect man, and behold the upright: For the end of that man is peace? By MICH. THOMAS; Rector of Stockton in the same COUNTY. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Humphrey Moseley, and are to bee sold at his Shop, at the Prince's Armes in S. Paul's Church-yard. 1659.
A SERMON, Preached at the ASSIZES Held at BRIDGNORTH For the County of Salop in the year, 1657. On the First day of the Assizes, By Mich: Thomas, Rector of Sockton in the same COUNTY. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1659.
TO MY WORTHY FRIEND MAJOR EDMUND WARING. SIR, WHen the Command of the Power of this County, both Civill and Military, was committed to your care and ma∣nagement; you were pleased to ex∣ercise a little of that power you had over me, in desiring me (and your desires are commands) accor∣ding to my Function, to attend upon the Judges. You cannot but say, you found
me both willing & obedient. And I undertook the work, upon a threefold encouragement. First, as it was a Service to your Selfe. Secondly, as it was a Service to my Country. Thirdly, as it was a Service to the Lord. For your selfe; I am glad that I have occasion to make this pub∣like profession, that I am very sen∣sible of those great Civilities, I have received from you. I know, that, by the laws of Friendship, where there are receits, there should be returnes; which though they do not answer in proportion, are yet compleated by their inten∣tion. I have alwayes thought, That to be the truest love, which projects
and works to the good of Souls. It is strange, that men should de∣light in the society, and neigh∣bourhood of each other in this; and not desire to meet, and live together, in Another world: That they should study the Comfort, and Welfare of each other, in respect of their Persons and Estates, and not bestow a thought on their Sal∣vation. Devout Bernard complain'd of old; Omnes amici, et omnes inimici: omnes necessarii, et omnes adversarii; pax à pa∣ganis, sed non à filiis: and we are fallen into such times. There is a generall pretence of amity, yet a generall emnity: we are all neigh∣bours, yet all adversaries; we have peace with the heathen, and we Christians differ among our
selves: Our divisions are the sparks of that fire, which our blessed Saviour came to kindle, namely about the purity and pow∣er of Evangelicall doctrines and ordinances. We agree about the substance of divine worship, and contest about the circumstances. It is our sinne, and our shame, that we out-doe the Jewes in our malice against Christ: They cruci∣fied his body, but kept his gar∣ment whole: we teare both his bo∣dy and his garment. We dispute, and wrangle about those reverend solemnities, wherewith the Chri∣stian religion in all ages, and a∣mong all nations, hath bin appa∣relled and adorned. But we should all sit downe, and consider, what St. James sayes; The wrath of man worketh
not the righteousnesse of God, Jam. 1. 20. When all's done, when all is written and spoken that can be, on either side; The work of righteousnesse must be minded and regarded. That's soul-work. That will be the businesse of inqeust at the last day: The question then will not be, Who hath bin the best Souldier, nor who the best Scholler, but who hath bin the best Chri∣stian. Sir, Upon this meditation, I thought no argument more proper for such a solemne Convention, than this of Righteousnesse. It is a doctrine of universall concern∣ment, and since you were pleased to call me to preach these two Ser∣mons, I conceived it the best ex∣pression of a reall affection, to present them to You, as a testi∣mony,
that I am an hearty wisher both of your present and future happinesse: That as you have bin a man of Warre, so by the study and acquest of that righ∣teousnesse which is taught and re∣commended in these discourses, your end may be Peace. The second encouragement was the Service of my Country: for which (though not my native) I have a great observance and re∣spect. I came a poor stranger in∣to it, yet have received many, and great favours from some eminent members of it; and no small ones, from the generality. Their candid censures, and acceptance of my weake labours in this kind, was not the least motive to undertake this service. And they are able to testifie for me, that so often as I
have appear'd in it, my discourse hath had a tendency this way, to instruct in some point of righte∣ousnesse, that, through the blessing of God upon his Ordinance, I might redeem the reputation of this County from an unhappy obloquie it lay under. The Third Encouragement, which was the highest and the greatest, was the Service of the Lord; whose honour and glory we should all study and endeavour to promote and advance, and which we can do in no better, or more ac∣ceptable way, than by speaking and doing righteousnesse. Sir, I humbly present these plain Discourses to your, and my Countrie's; service but more espe∣cially I devote them to the Glory of our God, whose unprofitable
servant I am, but desire to im∣prove. And as I have cast forth this holy seed of righteousnesse into the world, so I shall not cease to be∣seech the Lord to water it with the dew of his grace, that it may bring forth the wished fruits of it: Peace and quietnesse and assurance for ever. This is the desire, and shall be the prayer of Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, MICH. THOMAS.
A SERMON Preached at the Assizes holden at Bridgenorth for the County of Salop, in the year, 1657. . Psalm 58. verse 1. Doe ye indeed speak righteous∣nesse, O Congregation? Doe ye judge uprightly, O ye sonnes of men? IF we inquire into the Argument, or Oc∣casion of this Psalm, and guesse aright at that; It will give us some light, to the proper Applica∣tion of the Text. And I shall
neither waste the time, nor your patience in unnecessary quotations, or comparing the opinions of Expositors. I shall present that conjecture which I humbly conceive the most pro∣bable, and so proceed upon it. Lorinus, who with great industry hath collected the o∣pinions of the Greek and La∣tine Fathers; And Marlorate, who, with the like diligence, hath summed up the Judge∣ments of the Divines of the Reformed Churches, do both agree in this, that this Psalm was written by David, and in∣tended as an admonition to all the Officers of Justice in the Court of Saul; that when Saul shall call them to Councell, and they shall be sitting in
Judgment upon Him; that they vvould speak righteous∣esse, and judge uprightly; that they would not hearken to the malicious informations of his Enemies, nor forme their Judgements according to the humour or the Designes of Saul, whose Counsellours and Officers they were; but pru∣dently, and equally to consi∣der both his Cause, and his Conversation, and to give sen∣tence accordingly. And allowing this to be the Argument or Occasion of the Psalm (as truly it is groun∣ded upon very fair probabili∣ties) you will easily perceive, that the Text, in the proper Application of it, will have an influence upon this Con∣gregation,
and prove a word in season, in respect of the occasion of this solemn Con∣vention. We are met at this time in the Name and fear of God, a∣bout the work of Justice: the Persons, and Causes of men, are to be weighed and examined; And as I cannot say that there are any Davids to be tryed at this Assizes, men of such emi∣nent Pietie and Integrity as He was: So I hope there are none of Saul's Officers here, neither Men of such prostitute and mercenary consciences as they were: Omnia Dicta Do∣mini, omnibus posita sunt, sayes Tertullian. The words of God have a generall prospect; and though they may seem a par∣ticular
Admonition to some few men, yet they intend a ge∣nerall Instruction to all men who may be concerned in the like case. This Psalm was written about a matter of Ju∣stice, and Judgement: and that is the businesse wee are all met upon: And forasmuch as the Administration of Justice in this Nation, is by the Prudence and Wisedome of our fore-fa∣thers, cast into that forme that in all judiciall proceedings there are many Parties; The sentence upon any cause, issues not from the bosome of any Judge alone, seeing he is tyed up to Proofs and Allegations: So that the miscarriage in the worke of Justice, may proceed from the corruption of those
parties which prepare a Cause for Sentence. If the Counsellors shall be corrupt and Covetous, and by their flourishing Eloquence shall guild over a rotten Cause. If the Witnesses shall be false and malicious, and seek rather their private revenge, than Publick Justice. If the Jury shall be pack'd and partiall, or instructed to sweare according to the pri∣vate interest of a Friend or a Landlord; there may prove sad obstructions in the vvork of Justice: this (as the Prophet Amos speaks) may turn judge∣ment into gall, and the fruit of righteousnesse into hem∣lock. And therefore I shall not
addresse my discourse to any particular Party, or Officer, in this great work of Justice; but to all, who are in any respect concerned in it, and enforce Holy David's admonition in the Text, That they would speak righteousnesse, and judge uprightly in all causes, and be∣tween all parties: that so Wickednesse and Impiety may have its condign punishment; and Innocence, and Honesty, their due protection and re∣ward. And this is the design and project of the ensuing dis∣course; for which I humbly en∣treat your Christian patience and the Lord's assistance. The Text, you see, is presen∣ted in the form of a Questi∣on,
but it appears by the Con∣text, that it is such a Question, which (as Divines observe) hath vim Negationis; it implyes a denyal, like that of St. Paul, Doe we provoke the Lord to Jealousie? are we stronger then He? No, wee are not. So here in the Text: Doe yee speake righteousnesse? doe ye Judge Uprightly? No, ye do not: for, their conviction followes in the second verse; Yea, in heart yee worke wickednesse, and weigh the violence of your hands in the earth. So that the Text becomes (as Musculus hath it) an invective, or a reproofe of the iniquity and injustice of Saul's Officers, and Counsellours, that when according to that place and
power which they had with Saul, they should have defend∣ed and protected Him as an innocent person; they on the contrary prosecuted, and sen∣tenc'd him as a seditious con∣spiratour. And this reproofe is imbitter'd with terrible threatnings and imprecations, as we find in the body of the Psalm. And these David, in the Spirit of prophesie, breathes out, and denounces against them, as knowing that the Lord in his due time would plead his Cause, and by the glorious effects of his Power and Justice would give men occasion to say: Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous? Doubtlesse, there is a God that judgeth in the earth.
It well became the majesty of that Spirit by which David wrote, to convey his admoni∣tion in that form, by way of reproof or invective: But it will become me, to observe a greater distance. And I humbly crave leave to present that in∣struction, which I conceive due to this Auditory, and Occasion, by way of Exhortation. Let me exhort you (I say) justitiam loqui, & recta judicare, to speak righteousnesse, and to judge uprightly. And when I have opened the Duty to you, and shewn you what it is, and how it may be done; we shall find, in the other words of the Text, weight enough to press it by way of motive or consi∣deration. And this I shall do
(by Gods assistance,) with all respect to your Patience and Imployment. For the Duty it selfe, to de∣clare unto you what Righte∣ousnesse, and Upright Judge∣ment is; I shall not perplexe your attention with the vari∣ety of definitions, and distin∣ctions which might be offer'd out of the School-men and Casuists. In this first part, I in∣tend onely the edification of the common sort of people, who now are, or hereafter may be concerned as parties in the Administration of Justice. To them I say this; Righteousnesse is a constant purpose and re∣solution, of giving to every one their own.
And you may very easily perceive how this Definition agrees with the Case in the Text. David complaines of the Corruption, and Iniquity of those that were Judges in his cause. Doeg was a false wit∣ness, and gave in a malicious in∣formation against him. Saul was too apt of himselfe to believe it; and yet he wanted not some flattering Courtiers, some per∣chance of his privy Councell, who blew the Fire, and by their evill suggestions, turn'd Sauls hatred and jealousie into a flame; that David was a sus∣pitious, discontented person; and the Crown would not sit fast upon his head, while David lived: and with this unrighte∣ous dealing, David charges them. Now,
Had these men been endu∣ed with the grace of Justice, and Righteousnesse; had they had a constant purpose and resolution of giving to every one their owne, that is, their due, then they had given Da∣vid that Character and com∣mendation which vvas due to him, namely this: That Da∣vid was mis-represented to Saul; that he had given large testimonyes of a peaceable and quiet Spirit; that he had spared the Life of Saul, when it was in his power twice to have slaine him: Thus they should have spoken righteous∣nesse; and defended an inno∣cent person: But they did not. They wrought wickednesse in their hearts, as David speaks
here; they complied with Saul's humour in his bloody intenti∣ons, and persecutions against David; and did not care though he perished, so long as they might secure their owne persons and fortunes. But this case, this tryall of righteousnesse, doth not often happen, yet sometimes it doth: And then, those that are in power and authority in any State, cannot better improve their greatnesse, than by coun∣tenancing and supporting op∣pressed Innocence. Holy Job in his own just vindication, re∣lates this, as one evidence of his righteousnesse; I delivered the poor that cryed, and the Fa∣therlesse, and him that had none to help him. The blessing
of him that was ready to pe∣rish, came upon me; and I made the Widdows heart to sing for joy. I brake the jaws of the Wicked, and pluckt the spoyle out of his teeth, Chap. 29. Even the heathens by the light of nature, did discern this to be the duty of a Magi∣strate. Sudandum est his, qui Ma∣gistratum gerunt, pro communi∣bus commodis, sayes Cicero: Such as undertake the office of Ma∣gistracy, must sweat and lay out themselves for the com∣mon good, must endure storms and emnityes, and contest; not only with unjust and audaci∣ous, but even with potent ad∣versaries, in the defence of In∣nocence. And Seneca reports it
in the commendation of Caesar, Omnium domos illius vigilia defendit: He was a man of such a publicke Spirit, that his watchfullnesse defended all mens houses; his labour and in∣dustry secured all men in their ease, and pleasures, and vocati∣ons. A precedent, not unwor∣thy of the knowledge and imi∣tation of those, who shine as Starrs of the first magnitude in the Orbe of Honour: and let them know, that they are then truly glorious, when their Goodnesse sends forth as bright a beame, as their Great∣nesse; when they use their power, as well to defend the oppressed, as to punish the transgressour. But I must not restraine the
worke of righteousness to this case only; the duty is of a grea∣ter latitude, and yet St. Augu∣stine in his Enarration of this fifty eighth Psalme, hath redu∣ced that great variety of cases, to that one Head which our blessed Saviour in his Sermon layes down before us: What∣soever yee would that men should doe unto you, even so doe ye unto them. This is the grand rule of Equity. He that observes this rule, shall thinke and speak, and do righteously, and be of an holy and blame∣lesse conversation: This (sayes that Father) was the first law which God wrote in the heart of Mankind. In matters of civill righteousnesse and mora∣lity, in all those dutyes which
we owe to our Neighbour, a man need but knock at his own heart, and ask, What shall I do in such or such a tempta∣tion? and he shall hear this answer Ecchoing and sound∣ing thence: Do as thou would'st be done by. Would'st thou, not have thy Children, or thy Servants dis∣obedient or undutifull to thee? Honour thy Parents. Would'st thou prolong thy Life to a good old Age? Do no Murder. Would'st thou have thine owne Marriage-bed honoura∣ble, and undefiled? Do not commit Adultery. Wouldst thou possesse thy goods and estate in peace and safety? Do not Steal.
Would'st thou not be over∣born in thy righteous cause by indirect proceedings? Do not bear false witnesse against thy neighbour. Would'st thou enjoy thy own house, and vvife, and ser∣vants, and cattle, entire and without dammage to thy self? Covet nothing of thy Neighbours: Do as thou wouldst be done by. This rule (sayes St Hierom) is Compendiosum commonitori∣um. A breviate of the whole duty of man to his neighbour: If he would neither do evill to, nor suffer evill from, his neighbour; let him remember This. Lorinus tells us, and Beza affirmes as much, that, in some Antient Greek Copyes,
This rule of our blessed Savi∣our was inserted by the Apo∣stles into their canons, in their first Councell at Antioch. Having decreed, that they should abstaine from meats offered to Idolls, and from bloud, and from things strang∣led, and from fornication, then it was added: And what∣soever yee would that men should doe unto you, doe so unto them. As if this were the most perfect rule for a Christi∣an to walk by. Lampridius tells us also, that the Emperour Alexander Se∣verus, did so highly prize this Rule, that He caused it to be written in his Palace, and in many publike places; and that in his Military discipline,
he was wont to punish his Souldiers in this manner; If upon their march they had plundered any thing, and were taken with it, they were brought back to the owner, and there in his fight and pre∣sence were beaten either with clubs, or with rods; and up∣brayded in this manner. Would you be content that that should have been done to you, which you have done to him? You have robbed and spoyled this man of his goods would you be robbed and spoyl'd of your own? And be∣ing thus upbrayded for trans∣gressing this evident law of nature, he was dismiss'd with shame and sorrow. And (my Christian Bre∣thren)
let us all with shame and sorrow, consider our de∣linquency in this case, How contrary we have walked to this rule of Equity; either in an utter contempt, or forgetfull∣nesse of it. How many poore Soules are there now in the Jayle, and to be tryed for their lives, who with a deep sorrow and remorse of conscience wish they had alwayes walked according to this rule. Such as are to be arraigned for Mur∣der, or Felony, how passionate∣ly do they wish, they could gather up that bloud which they have spilt, and that they had kept their hands cleer from all acts of Violence and Robbery. But alass, it is too late, and 'tis to be feared that
some of them must yield up their lives, to satisfie those righteous and equall lawes, which they have transgres∣sed. And although our piety and our prayers are in a great mea∣sure due to Them, let us not forget Our selves. Let us look into, and examine our owne hearts, whether we stand not guilty before the Judge of all the World of many acts of unrighteousnesse. Alass, it is but little, that our finns, are not written on our foreheads as theirs are; that they are not legible to the World in a pub∣like inditement. The time will come, when we shall be ar∣raign'd in the Court of Con∣science, and groan under the
gnawings of that greedy worm, which nothing can sa∣tisfie but a broken heart. Oh (my Bretheren) lets think up∣on it. We know not how neer the day of the Lord, is. 'Tis 1600 years ago and upward, since St. James told us: The judge standeth at the doore. 'Tis his infinite patience and long-suffering; that he doth not en∣ter into Judgement with us. 'Twere wise and safe, by a speedy and unfeigned repen∣tance to prepare to meet Him, and by faith to get on the Brest-plate of Righteousnesse, by which only we shall be able to stand in that evill day. But although we must make mention of the righteousnesse of CHRIST onely, in the
point of justification, yet there is a stock of morall righteous∣nesse we must lay in too, to de∣clare the truth and life of our faith, of which we have a preg∣nant intimation in the Text. And having shewn you the Quid, what this duty is that David enquires after: It fol∣lowes now that I shew you the Quomodo, How it is to be per∣formed; which appeares in the words of the question, Do ye indeed speak righteousness? do ye judge uprightly? I shall observe in this part but two branches; for we may well conceive, that those phra∣ses, Speaking righteousnesse, and judging uprightly; are but Synonyma, important of the same thing, and under that
joynt-notion, I shall consider them. And then a second thing will be: This speaking righte∣ousnesse (indeed); we shall per∣ceive some weight in that word, when I come to open it. For the first of these: How are we to speak righteousness, or to judge uprightly? Mollerus tells, that some Ex∣positours render the words thus; An certè mutam justitiam loquimini? It seemes to be an improper speech: but they thus explaine it, that David charges the counsellours of Saul with an unjust silence. Do ye speak righteousnesse? that is, Ye do not speak righte∣ousnesse: ye do not declare that innocence and integrity,
which in your owne conscien∣ces ye believe to be in me. I touch'd upon this before, and shewed you, what reflecti∣on it might have upon the great Officers and Counsel∣lours of State; let me in a word or two bring it a little lower. As it may be a fault in a Wit∣nesse to depose more then the truth; so it may be a fault to conceal any materiall circum∣stance, which may make for the discovery of the truth. They had a proverb among the Antients, when a man would not speak freely what he thought or knew in any cause, they would say: Bovem habet in lingua: He hath a bull in his tongue; the Atnenian money having the figure of a Bull,
stamp'd upon it: and by that proverb they would taxe him with bribery, that he had ta∣ken money to hold his peace. And the like scoff was put up∣on Demosthenes, when, upon a gift received he would not plead, as he did against the Melesian Embassadours: , He had swallowed a bribe, and that made his throat sore: I have heard complaints in this kind. Poor men, when with great cost and trouble, they have prepared their Cause for a hearing, have yet lost it; their witnesses have bin cor∣rupted to say lesse then they knew; and their Counsell ta∣ken off to attend other causes in other Courts; and so all hath miscarried for not spea∣king
righteousnesse: unrighte∣ousnesse hath prevailed against him. But ile carry this note no further. Let me now take up that terme in the Text (indeed), and weigh it to you, and you may receive some farther light and instruction from it. The Lxx render it, , that is, Do ye truly speak righte∣ousnesse? Apollinarius thus: ; that is, do ye un∣dauntedly speak righteousness? So now we may guesse at holy Davids meaning. Do ye speak righteousnesse without feare, without favour, from the truth and sincerity of your hearts? And now that I have clear'd the words, let all the Officers and Ministers of Justice from
the highest to the lowest, be pleased to suffer a word of Ex∣hortation. There is no one thing, Re∣ligion onely excepted, that more secureth and adorneth a State then justice doth; It is both Columna & Corona Rei∣pub: A prop to make it subsist firme in it selfe, and a crown to make it glorious in the eyes of others. Jus et Aequitas vin∣cula Civitatum, saies Cicero; As the Cement is to the Building: so is Justice to the Body-poli∣tick; it holds all together. Bodies politick owe both their strength, and their height to Justice. So Solomon tells us: Righteousness establisheth the Throne, and exalteth the Na∣tion.
It was the Lords command to the officers of justice in the 16 of Deuter: That which is altogether just shalt thou follow. Justissimam Justitiam sectare, Tremelius renders it: The old Vulgar, Justum justè persequere. According to the originall, we should read it, Justice Justice shalt thou follow. The Charge you see from the great Law-giver, is very strict, pressing all his under-officers to the execution of Justice. We of this Nation are happy in an excellent body of Lawes, and we want but one Law more, to enforce Magistrates to the execution of those Lawes. Execution in Polity, is like Elocution in Oratory. Primum, Secundum, Tertium:
The prime, and the maine, the all in all of it. The Lord by his Prophet Isaiah commands, Keep ye judg∣ment, and execute Justice. Now it were a sad thing if we should keep judgment as a Prisoner, or execute it as a Malefactour. The Apostle Paul complain'd of some such, that did with∣hold the truth in unrighteous∣nesse: but God forbid there should be any such found a∣mongst us, who by any base arts should obstruct the course of judgment, or award a pu∣nishment to any one, who hath walked according to antient and known Lawes. The purpose of the Lord by his Prophet was this: keep Judgment: that is, declare it,
lay open the Law in the grounds and reasons of it, and execute justice, that is, ad∣minister it impartially, indif∣ferently, and without respect of persons. The Jewes had a proverb; Transgressours need a Sessions house. It is not enough that good Lawes are enacted by pious Princes and their Councell. It is not enough that they are rightly understood by the Reverend and learned Judges. Nor enough, that they are diligently enquired into by the Grand or petty Juries. The maine thing, is, the ex∣ecution of the Lawes, that un∣righteousnesse should not dare to out-face Justice, that the Magistrate do not withhold
his hand from seizing upon im∣pudent iniquity. Remember the importance of this word in the Text [Indeed]: that ye speake and doe righteousnesse , truly, without any by, or base respects, and , with∣out fear or care. Self-respects are too often obstructions in the course of Justice. Viderit Utilitas, is no good motto for a Magistrate. Favour may blear his eyes, but gifts will blind them: He that is  will easily be∣come , and that undoes all. Consider the case in the Text, between SAUL and DAVID, and you will wonder the lesse at the Cor∣ruption of his Officers, when you hear the argument he ur∣ged
to them. He had intelli∣gence that his Son Jonathan was in league with David, and, suspecting the revolt of other great Officers, he speaks thus to them: Hear now ye Benja∣mites: Will David give every one of you Fields and Vine∣yards, and make you Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds? 1 Sam. 22. 7. Here was an hook cunningly bai∣ted, to draw them to his own party; and it is hard to say, in whom the Corruption was greater: In Saul to offer, or in his Officers to accept? in Him to suggest a temptation, or in them to yeeld to it; but be∣tween both, we know that David a man after Gods owne heart, was pursued and perse∣cuted.
So David tells Saul: I have not sinned against thee, yet thou huntest my Soul to take it, 1 Samuel. 24. 11. I perswade my selfe, you ne∣ver readd the History of David but it begat sad thoughts in you, that a man so innocent, should be so violently prose∣cuted: but see, what self res∣pects will doe, when once a man layes-by all care of piety and religion, and designes no∣thing but the advancement of his own private interest, Hee cannot say at what sinne he will stop. It is a great truth that of Solomon, Hee that re∣ceiveth gifts over-throweth a land. Vir Oblationum according to
the Original, A man that is rea∣dy to receive any motion that shall be offer'd him, if it come with a gift; A man that comes to an Assizes, as Plutarch said of Stratocles, tanquam ad messem auream as to a golden Harvest, and brings a mercenary tongue and conscience with him; what man though never so innocent can be secure of his life or for∣tune? VVhen Judas opened his heart to the High Priest with that indication Quid da∣bitis? What will ye give me? They knew they had an agent for their turne. He betrayes his Master, and sells his bloud, though he knew it was inno∣cent. That most Christian duty of Selfe-denyall, runnes through
all the offices of a mans life. It is the greatest preserver of Peace and Unity, and righte∣ousnesse: He that hath learnt to deny Himselfe, will never envy the happinesse of his neighbour; much lesse invade his rights or possessions, and with a violent hand seize up∣on them. He hath learnt with St. Paul, in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content; and to such as are in a better condition then him∣selfe, he can say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: I blesse you in the name of the LORD. Againe to speak Righteous∣nesse truely, is to speak it with∣out favour. Favour in a Magi∣strate, when misdemeanours
are grosse and palpable, is the nurse of Vice. St. Chrysostome calls it, the mother of all sin. It is not seldome seene, that when a man hath spent his youth, and his strength in the service of some great One, he is at length rewarded with a Li∣cence to hang up a Signe: and that proves perchance a Sign of drunkennesse, a sign of un∣thriftynesse, a sign of wanton∣nesse, a sign of prophannesse, and all kind of wickedness. The Spirits of Godly men are vex∣ed, to see such a confluence of all sorts to that Sign of sinne: and they doe not only grieve that that house of sinne is sometimes as full as the house of God, but complaine of it; yet that Sign must not be
pull'd down: Why? He was my old Servant, and I must winke at him. And this favour hath an evill influence upon his fellow Commissioners: If he will winke, they must not see. They must shew favour to his Servant, that their owne may find the like. But what will be the end of this? He that will winke at the trespass of the Lawes in his servant, how pore-blind would he be toward a Friend, or a Kinsman? Yea, starke blinde, if a Sonne should be a trespas∣ser. Such was the Justice of the Heathens that they did not stumble at greater stones then these. Torquatus a Romane, and Zaleucus a Grecian, spa∣red
not to give sentence even upon their own Sonnes. You know the old word, Amicus Plato &c. Sed magis amica Veri∣tas. Truth and Righteousnesse should be dearer to us then all the World beside; We may have a fair respect for servants, and friends, and kindred, and Children: but the peace of our Country, and the honour of Religion, and the glory of God should over-weigh all. Let the Christian Magistrate hear the Heathen Oratour Exuat perso∣nam Judicis, qui induit Amici. The affection of a friend fits not the function of a magi∣strate. He may say to his Ac∣quaintance, In all matters of civility I am yours, but in mat∣ters of Justice I am God's, and
my Country's servant. Let me note but one thing more in this part, If yee would speake Righteousnesse indeed, speake it according to Apolli∣narius Metaphrase : with∣out feare. It was fear, no doubt that made Saul's Officers so corrupt as they were. When selfe-interest brought them to serve him in his unrighte∣ous designes, selfe-preservation continued them in his service: Their worldly wisedome made them consider that, He that could give them fields and vineyards, and those great commands, could as easily take them away. And such as yeeld themselves servants unto sinne for gaine; 'tis some question, whether they would yeeld
themselves servants unto righ∣teousnesse, upon apparant dis∣advantage. The Kingdome of Israel was in a sad state; when Naboth must dye, rather than Jesabel be displeased: and Christ must be Crucified, ra∣ther than Pilate offend Caesar. And it will grow as sad with us, if the portion of the Wid∣dow, and the Fatherless may be swallowed up; and neither Witness, nor Jury-man dare speake his Conscience, for feare of the mighty Oppres∣sour. 'Twas a noble courage in those Antient Bishops, who be∣ing charged by the Arrian Em∣perour, to condemne Athanasius without witness, and unheard, onely propter Me, on the Em∣perour's
word, refused to do it; and would rather hazzard their estates, then do such an act of unjustice. And let the feare of the Lord so rule in all our hearts as not to feare the faces or frownes of men, by them to be over-awed or per∣swaded to any act whereby the Glory of Christ, or his Gospel may be disparaged; or the right of our neighbour in any mea∣sure diminished. And now that I have shewn you What Righteousness is, and how yee may speake it in∣deed, Let me begg but two minutes more of your Christi∣an patience for those two Mo∣tives or Considerations in the Text, that may press you to them; and I have done.
And these Motives will rise out of the Text, like a Party laid in ambush, and surprize your Spirits, while you thinke not of them. There are two motives to speake righteousness, in those two Compellations, with which David bespeaks these Officers of Saul. O yee Congregation! O yee Sons of Men! Calvin conceives that David expresses himself thus by way of contempt. q. d: O yee servants of Saul! albeit when ye are met in Councell, ye seem to be a Congregation, such a number of men, whose power and policy, I, a poor fugitive, am not able to resist; yet know, that yee are but the Sonnes of
men. Ye, by your Counsels, seek to take away my life, and when ye have taken it, ye are but the Sons of men, Ye must dye your selves. Man that is born of a Woman (sayes Job) is but of few dayes. The greater should our care be to spend them well. And I suppose that learned man, took the ground of this gloss from the signification of the originall terme, Elem: which signifies Manipulus spicarum, a sheaffe of Straw or a bundle of Reeds: and in that sense it is found in the thirty seventh of Genesis, verse seventh, Where Joseph relating his dream, tells his brethren: that their sheaves bowed to his sheafe. There's the word Elem.
And now you may perceive the weight of this Motive. That a Congregation of men, conspiring in an act of unrigh∣teousnesse, are but a sheafe of straw, and a sheafe of straw is nothing in the hand of God. God is a consuming fire, sayes the Apostle: and when God shall come in flaming fire to render ven∣geance to those who obey not the Gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ, what will become of this sheafe of straw? And it is considerable to this purpose, what David speaks in the 82 Psalm, God standeth in the Congregation of the mighty, He judgeth among the Gods, vers. 1. Magistrates are called Gods, because they are advanced to
do the work of God, for such is the work of Justice. And so Hezekiah told his Judges; See what ye do, For ye execute not the judgment of men, but of God. Well, but yet God stands in their Congregation. He is present at their Counsells, and He judges among them. He sees, and knowes all their de∣signes, how they are laid, and how they must be carried on: and then, as it is in the second Psalm, When the Rulers took Counsell against the Lord and a∣gainst his annointed, The Lord sat in Heaven and laughed at them, and had them in derisi∣on. But be pleased to reflect upon this passage in this 82. Psalm, God standeth in the Con∣gregation
of the Mighty. The meaning is, as I said, He is pre∣sent. It is not enough that He looks down from Heaven, and sees all Congregations afarre off, but he comes, and stands in them. And some Exposi∣tors conceive, that God is presented in that posture of standing, to denote His atten∣tion. As you know it is with us, when we sit and heare a discourse, which we would listen better to, we stand up. And so here. God is said to stand: that is, he is so present, as that also he is attentive. Nothing passes but Deo astante, & attestante, He is an eare-wit∣ness, and an eye-witness, yea and an heart-witnesse of all that is said, or thought, or
done in any Congregation. And this notion David did conceive very proper to inti∣midate the hearts of his ene∣mies, to re-mind them, that God stands in their Congrega∣tion, that He is present at all their meetings, and attentive to all their debates: that they are but a sheafe of straw, he can break their band, and scat∣ter them as the chaffe before the wind. And that is the first motive to incline us to speak righteously. And the second is this. Let us consider that we are but the sonnes of Men. And upon this theme, Holy David in another Psalm, prea∣ches to us a Lecture of Morta∣lity. Surely (sayes He) every
man living is altogether vani∣ty. In the 62 Psalm, He wraps up all mankind in that sheet of corruption: Men of low de∣gree are vanity. True: there's but little doubt or dispute of that: but what are men of an high degree? They are a lye. That is: There is no safe de∣pending on them, their breath is in their nostrills as well as other mens, and dye they must; and dye they may, assoon as o∣thers. So that, take the whole race of mankind together; High and low, Rich and poor, the meane and the Mighty, and lay them upon a ballance, and they are altogether lighter then vanity. And this was that which David intended in that 82 Psalm, when he said, He
judgeth among the gods. If God did onely stand in the Congre∣gations of unrighteous men, and heard, and would do no∣thing, the care were the less; yea (but saies David here,) He stands to judge. It is acutely observed by a late reverend Author; that God's standing in the first vers. hath reference to the fall of those mighty ones in the sixth and seventh verses. I have said ye are Gods, and all children of the most high, but ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes. God is a standing God; He onely doth and will stand, when all unrighteous men, how great soever shall fall, and fall to dust. Their greatness cannot exempt them
from the first statute, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, It is ap∣pointed for all men once to dye; Nor from the second sta∣tute; et post mortem Judicium, and after death to come to Judgment. Magistrates, though they are called Gods, yet they are Dii sub Judice; when they have judged others, they must be judged themselves. They are Dii caduci, & Dii judicandi: Gods that shall fall, and Gods that must come to Judgment. Now then for the Conclu∣sion of all. Let me recommend this one Meditation to you. I may call it an occasionall Me∣ditation, because you may have frequent occasions to remem∣ber you of it. You know a
sheafe of Corne when it is in the band, will stand by it selfe, and endure an indifferent blast of wind, ere it fall: but, undoe the band, and you cannot make a single straw to stand. I inferre this. When unrighteous men as∣semble, and sit in Counsell to∣gether, then they are as a sheafe in the band: their strength may be considerable and for∣midable, and the upright man may be over-born in Judge∣ment. A pack▪d jury (as I said before,) and a few suborned witnesses, may carry any cause; and it lies not in the power of the most prudent upright Judge, to prevent it. Where∣as when the band is once bro∣ken, (as God will break such
bands), when such men return to their single capacities, their weakenesse will not onely be visible but despicable. Al∣though considered in their united capacities, in their grea∣test strength, compared with God, they are but as a sheafe of straw laid upon a flaming fire, which leaves onely the poor revenge of its ashes to hide the embers of that fire which consum'd it. Yet it pleases God sometimes to break the band, and to single those unrighteous men out, and in their solitude to pursue them with horrour of Consci∣ence, and the distracting re∣membrance of their perjuries and forgeries, their frivolous delayes, and demurres, their
frauds and subornations, and those irreparable injuries they have done; and they shall be no more able to stand, and look either God or good men in the face, than a single straw is to resist a whirlewind. I shall shew you this in one example. Doeg the Edomite was an instrument of much e∣vill to David, and to all that favour'd his righteous cause; by his malicious information, A∣bimelech the Priest and eighty four more of the Priests of the Lord were put to the Sword. What became of him? Lori∣nus tells us out of Rabbi Solo∣mon, that it was a received tra∣dition among the Jewes, that he and his only Sonne dyed in this manner: That Doeg him∣self
was armour-bearer to Saul in that battle with the Phi∣listines, at which he dyed. There, when Saul had fallen upon his own Sword, and slain himselfe; Doeg calls his Son, and sends him with Saul's Crown and bracelet to David, thinking thereby to engrati∣ate himselfe; and then Doeg falls upon his owne Sword, as Saul had done, and kills him∣selfe; and his Son instead of a reward from David, is com∣manded to be slain. And there was an end of Saul, and Doeg his informer, and their family. The Lord by that army of the Philistines brake up the Congregation, and made them know they were but the Sons of men, and that they were not
able to stand, when he came to judge them. Now the Lord help us to consider of these things and dispose our hearts to love the work of righteousnesse, and in all our dealings with men to behave our selves justly and uprightly, that when we shall come to dye like men, we may finde the fruit of righ∣teousnesse, which is peace: even Peace with God, and peace with our owne consci∣ences, that we may commend our spirits into the hands of the God of our righteousness, with joy and not with fear.
The Prayer after Sermon. GReat and Glorious Lord God, who art righteous in all thy wayes, and holy in all thy works: be good and gracious unto us thy poor Creatures, who here stand guilt, before thee of many acts of unrighteousnesse, for having re∣jected and despised thy most pure and holy lawes, and have chosen rather to walke after the lusts and imaginations of our owne hearts. We have defaced that perfect Image of righteousnesse and Holy∣nesse, in which we were created, we have defiled our selves with the pollutions of sinne; so that all our righteousnesse is but as a fil∣thy ragge, and we cannot but loath and abhorre our selves for all our abhominations. Blessed God, we desire to return
unto Thee, and to seek thy face; not only for thy mercy and pardon for the sins we have cōmitted, but for thy Spirit and thy grace, that we may be renewed & restored to that state of holines whence we are faln. And forasmuch as the Ministry of thy Word is the means which thou hast ordained, & promised to san∣ctifie to that end; We humbly call upon thee for a blessing upon that portion of thy Word which hath bin dispensed unto us at this time. Great God! our hearts are in thy hand, we beseech Thee mould and fashion them according to thine own holy will. Beget in us a constant purpose and resolution of giving to every one their owne, and re-imprint in our hearts that excellent rule of righteousnesse, Not to do any thing to our neigh∣bour
which we would not be content that he should doe to us. We are met at this time, O Lord, about thine own worke, The Exe∣cution of Justice and Judgement; we beseech thee assist us in it. As we begin this worke in thy Name, give us grace to continue in it in thy Fear. Touch the hearts of all those who are in any respects interested as parties in the administration of Justice, that they may all speak righteousnesse and judge upright∣ly, without respect to themselves or respect to their friends, and with∣out feare of the face of any man And give us all grace to consider that a congregation of men, conspi∣ring in an act of unrighteousnesse, are but as a sheafe of straw, not able to contest with thee who art a
consuming fire. Oh help us to con∣sider, that how great or mighty so∣ever we be in this World, we are yet but the sonnes of men, fraile and mortall, and know not how soon we may be called to thy Judg∣ment Seat: And let these medita∣tions quicken us to an holy care to prepare our accounts, and to be∣have ourselves so righteously to∣ward all men here on earth, as that we may cheerefully commend our Spirits to the God of Heaven. Hear us O God, and answer us according to thy wonted grace & goodnesse; supply all our defects out of the fullnesse of Christ Jesus, who is the Lord our Righteous∣nesse: to whom with thee, O Fa∣ther, and thy blessed Spirit, we de∣sire to ascribe all honour and pow∣er, and prayse, now and for ever∣more. Amen, Amen.
A SERMON, Preached at the ASSIZES Held at BRIDGNORTH For the County of Salop in the year, 1657. On the Lord's Day. By Mich: Thomas, Rector of Sockton in the same COUNTY. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Armes in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1659.
. Psalme 37. verse 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: For the end of that man is peace. IT may perchance raise your attention to the Doctrine of this Text, when you shall consider, that it is a branch of that Psalme, which hath alwayes bin in very high esteem both among the An∣tients, and our Moderne Di∣vines. Origen calls it Humanae ani∣mae Medicinam. It is Physick for the soul of man, forasmuch as
it reproves sinne, and teaches us to live according to the lawes of God. Athanasius recommends it to be readd by all those who are scandalized at the prosperity of the wicked, and find them∣selves tempted to go along with them in their wayes; and to think this world to be go∣verned by chance or fortune, that God is not a God of Judg∣ment; that he makes no dif∣ference between the righteous and the wicked. Calvin and Mollerus meet both in this censure of it, that it containes doctrinam apprimè utilem, exceeding profitable doctrine; and Lorinus tells us, that Fulgentius (that great light of the Church in Africa,)
by reading St. Augustines com∣mentary upon it, was conver∣ted by it. The tree then being so good, you may fairely presume the Text, which is a branch of it, may yield you the like fruit. I may not unfitly call the Text, Totius Psalmi Epitomen. The summary or abridgement of the whole Psalm. The doct∣rine which is dispersed in the other verses of it, is collected and united in this. All the defect will lye on my part, by reason of my weake∣nesse, I shall not be able to shake this so full laden branch, that all the fruit of it may fall amongst you. So farre as the Lord hath enabled me to un∣derstand the doctrine of it, I
shall humbly present it to your religious consideration, and shall hope, that that sleight tast of it, which you will receive at this time by my service, will provoke your holy appetites to make a farther enquiry in your private meditations. But not to waste more, either of the time, or your patience, be pleased to take the Text divided into these three parts. Here is an Act, and an Ob∣ject; and they are both two∣fold. The Act is, to Mark and to Behold. The Object of this Act is the Perfect and the Upright man. And in the third place here is the reason of the Act which
is very weighty and considera∣ble; For the end of that man is Peace. But I must crave leave to in∣vert the order of these parts, and consider the Object first, Who this perfect and upright man is. And then passe to the Act, what it is to Mark and to behold Him. To which act, we shall be the better disposed, by the weight of the reason which enforces it; Mark the per∣fect man, and behold the upright: For the end of that man is peace. The first part: The Object. I confesse, I find much varie∣ty in the severall Translations concerning the reading of the Text. The LXX render it
, and according to the old vulgate, Custodi innocentiam, & vide ae∣quitatem: and then we should read the Text, Keep inno∣cency and take heed to the thing that is right. And al∣though Lorinus follow these translations, yet we acknow∣ledge that other grave Au∣thors, Concretè interpretantur ex Hebraeo, render it out of the Hebrew by the Concrete. Ob∣serva perfectum, & aspice rec∣tum; and so Junius, and Treme∣lius have translated it; and so also those Divines of the re∣formed Churches, whose opi∣nions Marlorate hath collected. And truly the difference is not great, whether we read it in the Abstract, or in the Concrete,
the one will be the Expositi∣on of the other: and so the perfect man will be, He that keepeth innocency; and the Upright man, He that ta∣keth heed to the thing that is right. But we must behold this Object at a neerer distance; and let us look upon this per∣fection and uprightnesse in the Root, and in the Branches of it; and then, according to our English word, we shall have three Marks by which we may know who this perfect and up∣right man is; and so the better judge of our selves, whether we are such or no. The Root of this Perfection and Uprightnesse, I place in the Heart; and the branches of it,
in the Words and Actions of men. And this method answers that Distinction so common a∣mong Divines; Integritas Cordis, Oris, Operis: The Uprightnesse of the Heart, of the Mouth, and of the Hand; and upon the con∣sideration of these Marks, we shall have the fuller and the cleerer prospect of Him. And I was put into this me∣thod, not so much by the com∣mon distinction, as by the pro∣priety of the termes in the O∣riginal. We read of Noah, that he was a perfect man, Gen. 6. 9. of Jacob, that he was a plain man, Gen. 25. 27. of Job, that He was a perfect and an up∣right man; and in all these pla∣ces there is the same word in the originall, Tamim: and Mer∣cerus
upon those places in Ge∣nesis, and Pineda upon that place in Job, interpret this per∣fection to be the simplicity, the integrity, the sincerity which was in the Hearts of Noah, and Jacob, and Job. For the farther clearing of the word, you know well, there is a twofold perfection: Impu∣tata, & Impertita. A perfection which is imputed to us: and a perfection which is bestowed upon us; the one is called the Perfection of Justification, the other of Sanctification. The former of these, in a strict sense, is a compleat per∣fection. The Saints are com∣pleat in Christ, they are per∣fectly justified, there is not any sinne left uncovered, nor any
guilt left unwashed in the bloud of Christ, not the least spot but is taken away. By one offering, Christ hath perfected for ever them that are Sancti∣fied, sayes St. Paul. Heb. 10. 14. And then there is a Perfection of Sanctification; and that is called so, either in regard of the beginnings of it, or in re∣gard of our desires or aimes at it. The Saints even in this life, have a perfect beginning of ho∣linesse, as being sanctified in every part; they are Sanctified throughout, in soul, and body, and spirit. And then their desires are high and reall towards perfecti∣on; they pray, and strive to sub∣due every corruption, to aban∣don
every known sinne, to per∣forme every duty. And this is the utmost degree of perfecti∣on that any sonne of man can attaine to, in this life. And in this respect it was that Job had the character of a perfect man. Not that he thought himselfe so, in respect of an exact obe∣dience to the whole law of God; so he professes, If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse, Job. 9. 20. but in respect of his desires, and en∣deavours towards this perfecti∣on. Job was sincere, he was sound at heart, He did not personate religion, but was re∣ally a religious person. He was , as the Lxx render that place, A simple man, that is: plaine hearted, single minded.
He was not a compound, spea∣king one thing, and meaning another. Job's heart might be known by his tongue, and his spirit by his actions. And this is the first and chiefest mark of the perfect man, whom Da∣vid, in the Text, advises us to observe and behold. And truly, this perfection in the root, as I have called it, this foundnesse of heart, is that perfection, which is only valu∣able and considerable; 'tis that which the Lord so often calls for in the Scripture, to love Him, and serve Him with all our hearts, that we would not suffer our hearts to be divided, and carried away from God, and laid out upon the vanities of the world, while we pretend
to be the servants of God in a more strict and purer way then others are. In the second of the Kings, ch. 17. v. 33. we read of the Sama∣ritans, that they feared the Lord, yet served gods of their own. And the prophet Zephany reports it as one of the sins of Judah, that they sware by the Lord, and by Malcham the idol of the Ammonites. And I would to God we that call our selves, and would be thought, Christians, could purge our hearts from this guilt, that our hearts were per∣fect, and sincere, and intirely devoted to the service of God. Beata servitus (sayes St. Am∣brose) si nihil possit adversarius de tuo sibi servitio vendicare,
That's a blessed way of ser∣ving God, when Satan can challenge no part in it. How few are there of us that can come to God with Davids argument, and may press Him as he did, I am thine, oh save me. The worldly-man can∣not say so to God, because he hath many Masters: Lust comes and sayes, Thou art mine, for thou makest pro∣vision for the Flesh, to fulfill the desires thereof. Covetousnesse comes and sayes, Thou art mine, thou ser∣vest not Christ, but thy selfe. The Gold and Silver which lyes rusting in thy coffers, is the portion of the Widdow and the Fatherlesse. The stone in the wall of thine house cryes
out, and the beame out of the timber doth answer it, and the furrowes in the field joyn in the out-cry, and say, We were gotten by oppression, and bribery. Luxury comes and sayes, Thou art mine, thy conscience can tell thee, thou hast spent more at a feast in one day, then thy charity to the poor hath cost thee in a whole year; that thou hast striven to pay most at a Reckoning in a Taverne, but hast pretended excuses to give nothing to a Briefe in a Church. Ambition comes and sayes, Thou art mine; thou hast af∣fected greatnesse and power, that thou mightest sinne with∣out question or controul; and
then Christ will put in his charge too, and say; Thou considerest not, that I gave thee a command over men, that thou shouldst obey Me; I honoured thee, that thou shouldst honour Me. Now, Quem tam multi competunt, quàm vile mancipium est? sayes that Father St. Ambrose, What a vassall, what a slave is that man, whose heart is challen∣ged by so many masters? Such an one cannot pretend to Ja∣cob's title, to be Homo Simplex, a perfect single-hearted man: He is rather Homo Multiplex; St. James his , doth not reach Him, He is more then a double-minded man, He hath an heart for every lust, a new God, and a new Religion, when
soever the sway and humour of the times shall require it of him. Upon those words of the Lord by his prophet Joel; Turn unto me with all your heart; devout Bernard hath noted thus: Corporis conversio, si sola fuerit, nulla erit, If the body on∣ly turn to God, and not the heart, there is no conversion. It is but the form of Conversi∣on, there is nothing of truth in it; when there are pretensi∣ons to godlynesse, but no pow∣er. He is a miserable man that contents himselfe in the outward formalities of religi∣on, and neither knows, nor re∣gards his heart. Bernard apply∣ed this Note to his monks up∣on a Fast-day, and took occasi∣on
to reprove them for their hypocrisie. Manet tonsura, (as he goes on) yee continue your shavings, yee change not your garment, yee observe your rules for fasting, and your hours for prayer; and yet the Lord cryes from heaven, Cor vestrum longè est à Me, Your heart not∣withstanding all this, is far from me. The best discovery we can make of the integrity and sin∣cerity of our hearts, is to observe the bent and sway of those foure chiefe affections, Love, Feare, Joy, and Griefe; and see whether God or the World have most of these, and accordingly we may judge our selves, whether we are true Converts, or Perfect men.
But because the nature of the root, is best discerned by the fruit which appears on the branches; be pleased, that the discourse may passe from the first mark of perfection, which I call'd perfection in the root, the perfection of the heart, to the second, which is Integritas Oris, the Integrity of the Mouth or words; and no mark can be more proper then this, or more naturally consequent. Our blessed Saviour hath given us the rule, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. In the 32d. Psalm David pro∣nounces a blessednesse upon that man, in whose Spirit there is no guile. And there are good Expositours conceive, this guile to consist in and about
the duty of Repentance, and es∣pecially in the covering of sinne; as when men shall cover their extortions and oppressi∣ons by building an Hospitall, and when they shall cover all the Week-sins, with a Sabbaths solemnity. Such is sometimes the folly of Hypocrisy, that it will strive to cover sin though with a Net, which every man sees thorow: they will have such mean and pittifull pre∣tences for their unjust actions: whereas a perfect-hearted man, is serious in the search of his conscience; and he will take knowledge of his sins, before they discover themselves; he will acknowledge his riot and voluptuousnesse before he burn in a Feaver, occasioned
by his surfeits. He will acknow∣ledge his wantonnesse and li∣centiousnesse, before he comes under the anguish and smart of corrosives. He will acknow∣ledge his pride and wastfull∣nesse, before he lye in prison for debt. The perfect man doth not seek his sins in his belly, nor in his bones, but in his consci∣ence. He unfolds that, ripps up that, and enters into the privatest and remotest corners thereof. And he that doth not thus, there is dolus in Spiritu, There is guile in his Spirit; and he hath no title to that bles∣sednesse, which David was pro∣nouncing. So that if there be Veritas in Corde, Truth in the heart; there will be also Veritas in Ore, Truth in the mouth:
which being the second mark of a perfect man, give me leave to lay it open to you. The perfection of the Mouth hath a double prospect; it looks towards God, and towards man. God shall have His glory, in the Confession of his sinne, and man shall have his right, in speaking the truth. Among those marks which David gives of that happy man, who shall dwell in the holy hill of the Lord, this is one: He speaketh the truth in his heart. And so in the 14 of the Revel. v. 5. those blessed persons who are said to follow the Lamb, are thus described: In their mouth was found no guile. Truth, as it is a most excel∣lent vertue; so it is
saies Philo: the most sacred possession, pretious and neces∣sary as the Sunne to the world. When the question was put to Pythagoras, What that was, in the doing whereof, men might be like unto God, he an∣swered, , If they speak the truth. It will be a good in∣terpretation of that command of our blessed Saviour: Be ye therefore perfect, as your Fa∣ther which is in heaven is per∣fect: when, as He is truth, so we be alwayes carefull to speak the truth from our hearts,  even the Hea∣then, by the light of nature could conclude, that it was a servile un-ingenuous humour, to lye, and to speak falsely. And we have some impression of it
still remaining in us, of all re∣proaches we can least brook that: Thou liest. How many quarrells hath it occasion'd? How much blood hath bin spilt about it? But truly, 'tis sad and strange, that men will not endure to be charged with lying, and yet make no consci∣ence of lying; that they should take up that part of the Hea∣thens morality, , To speak the truth, is an evidence of a noble, constant, well com∣posed spirit; and desert the o∣ther part of it, by a deficiency in their practice, in yielding themselves up to tell lies for advantage. Some Divines have moved and debated these two Cases: Whether if a man be examined
before a Competent Judge, he may not lye to preserve himselfe or his Friend from the penalty of the Law. And 'tis answer'd in the negative: He may not lye. There can no case be put, in which it may be lawfull for any man to lye to any man: not to a mid∣night, not to a noon-thiefe, that assaults his house, or his person, he may not lye. And although many have put names of disguise upon such practises, and call them Equivocations and Reservations, yet they are all children of the same Father the Devill, who is the father of lies. The other Case is: Whether if a man be examined before an incompetent Judge, he may
not equivocate and prevaricate with Him? And 'tis answer'd thus: that if he do speak, he must speak the truth. They al∣low, that to an incompetent Judge, that hath no legall power to examine him, he may be silent without sinne: but to a competent Judge, 'tis an in∣defensible sinne either to be silent, or to depose an untruth. And upon this account, since it is so clearly sinfull in a wit∣nesse, either to prevaricate or to depose an untruth; I sub∣mit it to your grave Judge∣ments, whether it be not high∣ly considerable, for an Advo∣cate to plead an untruth; by the advantage of his Rheto∣rick and Eloquence to palliate such a cause, which, in his owne
conscience and opinion, de∣serves rather a punishment then a defence; whether in pleading such causes, they do not take part with evill doers, and en∣courage men to venture upon unjust actions, since they may be assured, that for a fee, they may have a subtle and ingeni∣ous Advocate, to maintain their cause. But in this case, since I speak to such, whose piety and integrity, I have no reason either to question or suspect, I shall proceed no fur∣ther. Indeed, my designe lyes mainely against that sort of men, who inure their tongues, to speak malitiously and defa∣matorily, and blast the fair re∣putation of their neighbour,
by false suggestions and insi∣nuations. It may be sometimes unlaw∣full, to speak all that a man knowes to be true of his neigh∣bour; but it is alwayes unlaw∣full to speak that which he knows to be false. This is , calumnia, such a practice whence the Devill takes his name, Diabolus, an accuser: 'tis a devilish practice by false informations and slanders to represent a man worse then he is, and to expose Him either to the hatred of the common people, or the censure of the Magistrate, for crimes whereof he was never guilty. Like the Heathens of old, who put the Christians into the skinnes of beasts, and then brought them
forth to be torn and worried, such an artifice hath Satan used all along, by suborning foul tongues, to sully and staine the fame and reputation of men, thereby to prepare them for destruction. When Paul and Silas were misreported to the Romane Magistrates, as trou∣blers of the City, and teachers of customes, which were not lawfull to be observed; we may wonder the lesse, that they were beaten and imprisoned: yea, we see it in a greater ex∣ample, in our blessed Saviour Himselfe; when He was slan∣der'd to be a deceiver of the people, a wine-bibber, a com∣panion of publicans and sin∣ners, and one that had a Devill, these aspersions rais'd the ha∣tred
of the common people, and the malice of the Jewes was lesse discernable, when they cryed away with Him, cru∣cifie Him: and you know what the issue was, the murder of the Lord of life. I shall not need to urge any arguments to prove how farre distant a back-biter or a slan∣derer is from a perfect man. That grave Authour Parisiensis calls him, Dentem Diaboli, The tooth of the Divell, which he fastens in an innocent person, and tears his good name, and perchance his estate too, cruel∣ly, and unmercifully, and irrepa∣rably. We may easily conclude the sin is great when the Judg∣ment is so heavy, when both St. Paul and St. John tell us,
that whosoever are revilers, and makers of lyes, shall not enter into the new Jerusalem, the Kingdome of God. There remaines yet the third mark of this perfect man to be considered, and that is, Integritas Operis, His Equity and Uprightnesse in all his Actions. Pineda tells us that the ori∣ginall term, Jasar; which, in that place of Job, is rendered upright; signisies sometimes Jucundum esse: and then the up∣right man will be such an one, as is of a complacent humour, of a mild and soft temper. And probably Apollinarius had respect to this sense of the word, when he metaphras'd our text, , Keep
meeknesse, and then it may mean, Be neither sowre not bitter in looks or language; be not harsh or cruell in thy dea∣lings or actions with men. I observe in most Latine Translations, that they retain the word Rectum. In an old Ma∣nuscript I read it, Custodi sim∣plicitatem & vitae rectum: and Pineda by many instances clears it, that Jasar signifies Planiti∣em viae, the smoothnesse and evennesse of a way. And then by a fair allusion it may import that Justice and Equity which men ought to use in all their dealings and commerce. There is no trouble in walking in a plain way. When there are hills to strain the nerves, or valleys to endanger a precipice; hence
arises the trouble of a Jour∣ney. And so it is in civill com∣merce: when we are to deal with a plain man, whose words and actions are both of the same piece, who lyes not upon the catch, and hath not his subtle reserves, of false weights, or lights, or measures; there is neither feare nor danger in conversing with such a man. If we look into the body of this 37 Psalm, we shall find David instancing in some actions, which seem to be contrary to this uprightnesse, which I am to present to you. In the 12 verse, he speaks of plotting against the Just. In the 14 verse, of drawing the sword, and bending the bow
against the poore and needy: In the 21 verse, of borrowing and not paying againe. And so farre forth as any man is plung'd in the guilt of those practises, he is so farre distant from true uprightnesse. Will you please to review these in∣stances. First, What is it to plot a∣gainst the Just man? I rest in Lorinus his opinion upon the place: It is to pick a quarrell with him about his Religion, and the worship of his God: such enemies we find the Pro∣phet Daniel met with. They said among themselves, We shall not find any occasion a∣gainst this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God. So we
read, Luke the sixth, That the Pharisees watched our Saviour, that they might have an accu∣sation against him. So true is that of Solomon, He that is up∣right in the way, is an abomina∣tion to the wicked, Prov. 29. 27. But this is certainely an abo∣minable kind of wickednesse, when the worship of God shall be made the occasion of envie. When, like Cain, they shall hate, and rise up against their brother, because he offers to God a better sacrifice then themselves. It was a pious wish that of Bucolcerus: Mortuus est Cain: sed utinam non viveret in filiis suis. Cain is dead: but would to God he did not live still in his sonnes; who carry still his bloody club, wreaking
in the gore of Christians, and seeking the destruction of those, that are more holy then themselves. It is a sad thing, when men shall come into the house of God, as Doeg did into the ta∣bernacle; and to returne an in∣former against the Minister, as he did against Abimelech. Any plot against a just man, argues rather pride then perfection: He is an ill subject to Christ, who envies Him the glory of a populous Kingdome. Consider the second instance: The drawing the sword, and bending the bow against the poore and needy. Expositours conceive that David in this in∣stance, points at Saul, and those severall acts of injustice,
whereby he oppressed him. It is no new thing to see Right overcome by Might, and Ahab solacing himselfe in Naboth's vineyard Notwithstanding Holy Job, and the Prophets Jeremy and Habaccuck have expostulated the case with God, concerning the prosperity of the wicked; yet in his infinite wisedome he sees it fit to continue it, and still we see the poor and needy, become a prey to the rich and mighty. But these permissive acts of Providence are no war∣rant, or security for such acts of Injustice. He is far from a perfect man, who seeks to slay the upright, or, as Solomon speaks, Robs the poor because he is poor, and unable to help himselfe.
The third instance is: The wicked borroweeh and payeth not againe. In which is noted an high act of injustice, and contrary to that Evangelicall precept delivered by St. Paul, Owe nothing to any man but love; provided alwayes, there be sufficiency and ability to pay. Whosoever shall pretend poverty to his creditour, and make a fraudulent compositi∣on, contracts upon his owne soul the guilt of theft in an high degree. And some have been so curious to make the observation, That estates com∣pounded for, seldome prosper: there is for the most part some∣thing of fraud and conceal∣ment; and that constitutes the wicked man, whom David here
points at, He borroweth and pay∣eth not again. You see in common experi∣ence, how the Courts of Ju∣stice are troubled and pestered with suits and causes in these cases; with actions in regard of conspiracy, The wicked plotting against the Just; with actions of trespasse and battery, The drawing his sword against the poor, and by might oppressing Him; and with actions of debt, The wicked borroweth and paying not again. And no doubt, David de∣siring to winne, and work up the souls of men, to this per∣fection and uprightnesse, hath proceeded in that Method throughout this Psalme, as it were Antiphonically, and by
way of contra-position, to set down the Characters of the upright and the wicked man, and describe them by their in∣tentions, by their words, and by their actions. Of so much concernment did David con∣ceive it to be, exactly to know the perfect and the upright man. And in all this discourse, I have pursued the same method: as contraries are best discern'd when they are placed together; so in every mark of this perfect man, you have had something positively, something negative∣ly delivered. And now that I have presented the Object be∣fore you, in which the great part of my businesse lay, I am now to invite you to the Act:
To mark and to behold him, which was the second part I proposed to observe. The second part: The Act. But I need not detaine you long in this Act. I do not find any Expositour whom I have consulted, that stops upon it. Mollerus conceives, that David onely calls upon us to observe the passages of Divine Provi∣dence, and the various issues of his Dispensations, concerning the wayes and the ends of the wicked, and the perfect man. It is the humour, or rather the weaknesse, of most men to judge outward appearances, and to conclude a man either Happy or Miserable, according
to his successes in this world So Job's friends passed their censures upon Him, and he must needs be a dissembling Hypocrite, because He was so grievously afflicted. But this, according to that saying of our Saviour, was un∣righteous Judgement. And as David had made his obser∣vation concerning the righte∣ous man, I have been young but now am old: yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread, so he calls upon all others to make the like observation con∣cerning the perfect man. Mark and behold Him (sayes He) And although ye may see the wicked flourishing like a bay tree, and the upright man
withering like a shrub; the one in honour and flowing with all temporall abundancies, the other vile and despised, and lacking necessaries, yet judge not: They are yet upon their way; they are not yet come to their journeys end; they are now busied in their severall works, and have not received their wages: but when the day of our life shall begin to close, and the shaddowes of death shall spread themselves; and the grave begin to open her mouth; and the Arch-angell's trumpet, in a passing bell, shall summon the sonnes of men to Judgement, then will be fulfilled that of the Prophet Malachi: At that time God will make up his Jewells, and
men shall discern between the righteous and the wicked, be∣tween him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not, Chap. 3. vers. 17, 18. The third part: The reason of the Act. And now, here, enters our third part, for the conclusion of all. Marke and behold the perfect man, for he is worthy of your observation. The end of that man is peace. Our bles∣sed Saviour speaking of John the Baptist: What (saith He) went yee out into the wilder∣nesse to see? A reed shaken with the wind? It may be in the eyes of some that saw him, he seemed not much more
considerable: but I tell you; He is a Prophet, and more then a Prophet. And if any prophane spirit should say; What do you call us to mark and behold? bro∣ken reeds? and smoaking flax? persons that have lived in trou∣ble, and are dying in dishon∣our? such as have been the subject of wanton wits to make Songs of, and the object of mens hatred and scorn? Such indeed is the lot and portion of the upright man: yet let me tell you, he is somewhat more, yea very much more then he is conceived to be. Though the Wicked raise warre against him, yet He is the Son of peace; though he sayle through a rough Sea, yet he hath a calm
haven, though he meet with crosses on his way, yet he shall find comforts in his end. And herein lyes the weight of the reason, and upon which the state of the perfect man be∣comes so worthy of all obser∣vation. Man as he is a rational crea∣ture, proposes to himself some end in all his actions. That's the great wheel that moves him, and sets him to work; and whatsoever he proposes to himself as his end, that in his present sense and opinion, hath an appearance of Good. Those two maxims in Philosophy consist well together. Omnia agunt propter finem, and Omnia appetunt Bonum. But now it oft-times comes
to passe, that there is a sad mis∣carriage; men project one thing, and another falls out. There is Finis Operis, & Finis Operantis. The end which is properly consequent to the Work: And the end which is in the design of the Workman. And these doe oftentimes differ: Men engage themselves into sinfull actions, and propose to them∣selves as their End, pleasures, or profits, or preferments: this is Finis Operantis, the end of the workman; but this is not Finis Operis, the end of the worke: For, the wages of sinne is death, In the eighth of the prophecy of Amos, the Lord threatens his people Israel for their op∣pression and prophannesse: Hear this ye that swallow up the
needy. I will turn your feasts into mourning, I will make it as the mourning for an only Son: and the end thereof as a bitter day, at the 10 verse. This bitter day was the end properly consequent to the worke of sinne, though they projected and design'd ano∣ther, namely their private gain and advantage. Let us remember then what the prophet Isay hath taught us. The worke of righteous∣nesse shall be peace, and the ef∣fect of righteousnesse, quiet∣nesse, and assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17. But we must not understand this word, Peace, in that lati∣tude as it was usually taken a∣mong the Jewes, for a conflu∣ence
of all temporall blessings, as it happened in the case of Job, whose latter end the Lord made better then his begin∣ning, that is, in respect of tem∣porall abundances, having his estate doubled to him. We must take it in that sense, as it means peace of conscience, and an as∣surance of the favour of God in Christ, that however mat∣ters goe with him in respect of his person, or estate, or his life, or his posterity, he rests secure as for the state of his Soul; and can with cheerfulnesse com∣mend it into the hands of his faithfull Creatour. Whereas the same prophet Isaiah tells us, There is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. Such as do not walke in the wayes of
peace, shall never find peace at their End. I deny not but a Wicked man may dye pos∣sess'd of all the comforts this world can afford him; he may dye (as it was said of David) full of dayes, riches, and hon∣our, and yet his death-bed pil∣low may be uneasie to him, when it shall come to that of the Poet Linquenda domus & tellus, &c. when he shall look upon those things, which we call worldly comforts, but find no comfort in them. When he shall look upon his estate, and not only grieve that he must part from it himselfe, but he must leave it to a Son, whom, as Solomon speaks, he doth not know whether he shall be a fool.
When he shall look upon his Wife and Children, and take his last farewell, and out of the horrour of his consci∣ence shall be forced to declare himselfe thus. I leave a great Estate amongst you, but I fear, you will finde it encumbred with the curse and vengeance of God. When he shall look upon his friends, that stand weeping and mourning over him, and shall breathe out Socrates com∣plaint in that sense, , Oh Friends, ye cannot help me, your counsel, nor your power cannot enlarge the terme of my life a minute, nor give a ransome unto God for mee. When he shall look upon
his body wasted, and confu∣med by his Luxuries, and, it may be, so diseased, as to be loath∣some to himselfe and his atten∣dants; and from a sad reflecti∣on upon the vanities of his life past, shall sigh and groan out this as his own Epitaph; I have lived in sinne, and now I lye down in sorrow. But above all, when he shall consider the state of his poor Soul, whose immortall nature delivers him up to an Eternity either of bliss or misery. When this poor Soul, poor I say as not being rich in faith, or any other spirituall grace, shall sit upon his lips, as the Emperour A∣drian's did, with a Quò nunc ibo? whither shall I go? what shall become of me? How shall I ap∣pear
before God, whose Name and Sabbaths I have blas∣phem'd and prophan'd? How shall I stand before Christ, whose Ministers and Ordinan∣ces I have persecuted and des∣pised? What comfort can I expect, or hope for, from the holy Ghost, whose private mo∣tions and workings in my heart I have sleighted and resisted? I never look'd upon, nor ex∣amin'd my heart or wayes, by saying, What have I done? And now, miserable man that I am, I know not what to do. Oh my Christian brethren, let us think upon these things; this will be the certaine Fate of a dying wicked man. The Lord will be just and righte∣ous though we are not, and
every secure sinner shall feel in his conscience Futuri Judi∣cii praejudicium, as Tertullian ex∣presses it, a taste of that eternal Judgment and Horrour, which he must endure irremediably and everlastingly. Think upon the sad state of Cain. We cannot tell by the Hebrew, whether he said; My iniquity, or, my punishment, is greater then I can bear. Think upon the sad state of Antiochus: when he lay dying, he calls to his friends, and sayes, My heart faileth me, into what floods of misery am I fallen? and now I remember the evills that I have done at Jerusalem. Think upon the sad state of Saul: when he was discomfited by the Philistines, he calls to
his servant; Stand upon me I pray thee, and kill me, for anguish is come upon me. And let these terrours of the Lord convince us, that this perfection and uprightnesse in our hearts, and words, and acti∣ons, is a considerable quality. Let us with all possible speed and care provide for our death∣bed comfort, and purge our consciences by Confession, and Faith, and Repentance and Re∣stitution; that we may stop their Mouths, and still their Clamour, and not become, as Job complained, a burden to our selves. Job 7. 20. It was a good Caution that Bernard gave Eugenius; Nullus molestior oculus suo cujusque. Through the guilt of sinne, it
will so come to passe, that no eye will be so dreadfull and terrible to us, as our owne; there will not be a face either in Heaven or Earth, which a troubled conscience would ra∣ther fly from than his owne, and can lesse do it. The Lawes of God are the rules of that perfection and up∣rightnesse, which in St. Pauls phrase we should follow and presse after. And Holy David tells us that their peace will be great that love, and are not offen∣ded at the lawes of God. This peace in our last sicknesse will prove our best Cordiall. It was so to King Hezekiah, when the Prophet Isaiah brought to him that sad message: Thou shalt
dye, and not live: He betakes himselfe to prayer: Remem∣ber now, Oh Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a per∣fect heart, Isa. 38. 3. It was not his Crown, or his King∣dome, nor those vast Treasures he stood possess'd of, that then administred any comfort to him, onely the testimony of a good conscience, that he had walked before the Lord in truth and uprightnesse. Wherefore it is a sad thing, so many men should seek after Science, so few after Consci∣ence; that men should hunger and thirst after Riches, and not after Righteousnesse: whereas did we bestow as much paines in seeking Morall and Theolo∣gicall
Vertues and Graces, as we do for Arts and Sciences, we might attaine them sooner, and retaine them longer. Longer, did I say? I need not recall the word: Spirituall graces are truly called a trea∣sure, because as they supply to all purposes, so they continue to all times. Grace carries us through all duties, and through all tryalls. It makes the yoak of Christ easie, and his burden light; it weakens the strength of sinne, and takes out the sting of death; it stusses our pillows with the Feathers of a Dove, and fills us with those joyes that are so unspeakeable and glorious. St. Augustine spea∣king of the primitive Christi∣ans: Quidam patienter vivunt,
& delectabiliter moriuntur: They live with patience, and they dye with joy. Their Life it seemes was a trouble, Death an advantage: they endured the one, and desired the other. That blessed Martyr Vincentius, had doubtlesse a great measure of this blessed peace in his end, when he could say to his exe∣cutioner Dacianus; Nunquam aliquis adeò benè servivit mihi, ut tu; No man ever did me so good service as you are about to do: your torments will ha∣sten me to my triumphs, your sword will but let out that corruption of flesh and blood, which cannot inherit the King∣dome of God. I shall conclude and dismisse you in the comfort of that pro∣mise
recorded by Holy David in the 64. Psalme. All the up∣right in heart shall glory, at the 10 verse. The subject of the promise you see, is Glory: and the persons to whom it is due, are the Upright in heart. And we may admire the wisdome and goodnesse of the Holy Ghost in that expression: (upright in heart.) A man may be upright in the desires of his heart, when through the suddainesse or vio∣lence of a temptation, he may be over-borne into a sinne. The Lord help us, we cannot maintaine a perfect rectitude in the wayes of this world. In every calling there are some in-evitable temptations: but yet let us strive and beare up,
though the stream of corrup∣tion runne strong against us, let us put off all disguises in re∣ligion, and lay down the love of craft, and false-hood, and circumvention in Civill actions; and then we shall secure our title to the promise. Of what? Of glory. So we read it; but translations differ: some have it, Laudabuntur, they shall be prai∣sed. Uprightnesse is such a grace as creates an Holy and Reverentiall admiration in all that behold it. Even wicked Balaam could wish, Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like the Isra∣el of God. But I rest not in that. Take the word in another translation; Laetabuntur, they
shall rejoyce. If we could crowd Heaven into a Map, we might find two Hemi-sphears; the one would be Joy, the o∣ther would be Glory: And as of those two Hemisphears of the world, the first hath been known long before: The o∣ther (that of America which is the richer in treasure) God re∣served for latter discoveries: so though he reserve that He∣misphear of heaven, which is the Glory thereof, to the resur∣rection; yet the other Hemi∣sphear, the Joy of heaven, God opens to our discovery, and de∣livers for our habitation, even whilst we dwell in this world. That which Christ shall say to our souls at the last Judgment;
Enter into your Master's joy; He sayes to our Conscience now, Enter in your Master's joy. The everlastingnesse of the Joy, is the blessednesse of the next Life; but the entring, the in∣choation is afforded to the up∣right in this. Those words of Christ, Come ye blessed, are words intended to them that are comming to Him, that are upon their way. And as here he bids us, Come; herafter, he will bid us, Welcome. Let it not trouble you then, what I told you out of Solomon, that the upright is an abhomi∣nation to the wicked, and so, tribulations are to be expect∣ed. But you know, as a man must have some land, or he
cannot be in wardship: so a man must have some of the love of God, or else he could not fall under Gods correction. And when the hand of God lies upon him, either in a dis∣ease, or in a persecution, and presses him, so that even life it selfe is expiring, then he shall feel the comfort of this pro∣mise: Laetabitur, he shall Re∣joyce. And as the Lord said concerning the reducing of his people Israel out of Babylon: Sibilabo populum meum, I will hisse for them, Zech. 10. 8. so when the upright man shall lye panting, and languishing upon his bed of sicknesse. The Lord shal then come to his bed-side, and hisse for him, and whisper
gently to his departing soul: Feare not Sin, I am thy Righte∣ousnesse: Feare not Death, I am the Resurrection: Feare not the day of Judgment, I am thy Advocate now, and shall be thy Judge then. And by these flashes of joy, shall so in∣lighten his soul, as to overcome all the cares and the feares of Nature, all the Horrour of the passing Bell, all the cryes, and teares of a distracted and scat∣tering family. Like blessed Ste∣phen, he shall, by the eye of Faith, see Heaven open, and his Saviour standing at the right hand of God. And his joy then shall be so strong, as that it shall no more extin∣guish, or evaporate than his
soul shall. And it shall become a Joy that shall passe up, and put on a more glorious garment above, and be a Joy super-in∣vested in Glory. FINIS.
