W2240A R230884 99896062 153756
TWO TREATISES CONCERNING I. GOD's All-Sufficiency, AND II. CHRIST's Preciousness. BEING The Substance of some SERMONS long since Preached in the University of Oxford. By Henry Wilkinson, D. D. Then Principal of Magdalen-Hall, Oxon. ECCLES. ix. ver. x. Whatsoever thy Hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither thou goest. 2 COR. v. ver. xiv. The Love of Christ Constraineth us. Domine Jesu, Te plus diligo, quam mea, meos, Me. Bern. LONDON Printed by Thomas Milbourn, for John Kidgel, at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Roy∣al-Exchange, 1681.
The Epistle Dedicatory. TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, HIS MUCH Honoured Friend, Iohn Clarke, OF St. Edmund-Bury, Esquire. Sir, THat I may not Live and Dye Ʋngrate∣ful, I presume to prefix Your Name to these Ensuing Treatises, as a Testimony of my Grateful Acknowledgment
of those many Signal Fa∣vours, which you have con∣ferr'd upon Mee. The First Treatise opens and applyes the Doctrine of God's All-Sufficiency. The deliberate Meditation and Ap∣plication thereof, amidst vari∣ous Dispensations, and Vicissi∣tudes of Providence, will be a Divine Cordial to Relieve a fainting Spirit; and will swallow up, and overcome all Outward Troubles, as Aaron's Rod swallow'd up all the Rods of the Aegyptian Magi∣cians. That Pious Aphorisme, which the Noble, and truly
religious Lady Vere, chose for her Motto, namely, GOD WILL PROVIDE, doth the Faith of every true Belie∣ver fully assent unto; by which he is enabled to Rely upon the All-Sufficiency of a Faithful God, both for a Supply of what∣ever he wants, and for a San∣ctifyed Improvement of all that he enjoys. The other Treatise endea∣voureth to unfold the Precious Excellency of Christ, in or∣der to the rendring of him the most Desirable Object to the Believers Faith. As all Light at God's Com∣mand, in the First Creation,
did fix, and terminate in the Body of the Sun; so it hath pleased the Father, that thereCol. 1. 19. should be a Perfect and Com∣pleat Fullness of all Divine and Heavenly Graces, dwelling in the Person, as well as in the Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus; and He it is, in whom all Ex∣cellencies do Concenter: In Him, there is a Fulness of Me∣rit to Justify and Save us, a Fulness of Grace to Sanctify and Cleanse us, a Fulness of Wisdom to Guide and Direct us, a Fulness of Power to Su∣stain and Ʋphold us; and, in a word, a Fulness of Mercy, Pity, and Compassion to Relieve and Succour us. How truly
then did the Spouse call her Beloved, The Chiefest amongCant. 5. 10. Ten Thousand? I have taken Liberty to be∣come Your Remembrancer of these Things, though You know them already, and have been fully Instructed in them. My daily Prayer to God for You is, and shall be, That Your Last Dayes may be Your Best Dayes; Your Last Fruit, Your Fullest and Fairest Fruit: That, as a Plant of Righteousness in God's Garden, (which hath no Wi∣thered Trees, Over-grown, andPsal. 92. 13. 4. past Bearing) You may bring forth more Fruit in Old Age; and, like the Almond-Tree,
Tree, be even Blossoming, and always Flourishing. So pray∣eth, Cornard-Magna, near Sudbury in Suffolk, Nov. 2. 1680. Honoured Sir, Your most Obli∣ged, & Humble Servant, Henry Wilkinson.
GOD's All-Sufficiency Plainly Opened, and practically Ap∣plyed, in a Treatise upon 2 CHRON. Cap. XXV. Ver. ix. And Amaziah said to the Man of God,Trea∣tise 1. of God's All-Suf∣ficiency. But, What shall we do for the Hun∣dred Talents, which I have given to the Army of Israel? And the Man of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. CHAP. I. Containing the Coherence, Exposition, and Division of the Word; with the Deducti∣on of a Doctrine insisted on, as the Foun∣dation of the whole Discourse. WHich Words contain a Que∣stion,The Co∣haerence. and an Answer. The Person propounding the Question, is, Amaziah King of Judah: The Person re∣turning the Answer, is, A Man of God. i. e. a Prophet Inspir'd by God; and sent on a great and weigh∣ty
Errand to the King, as afterwards will appear. It will be worth our while, First, to make inquiry concerning Amaziah, and then concerning the Man of God, both mentioned in the Text, that so my Pas∣sage may be made more clear. First, for Amaziah, we Read how he  was Described, vers. 1. and what his Conversation was, vers. 2. compare this with 2 King. 14. 3. and one Text will2 King. 14. 3. give more Light to the other; There it's said of Amaziah, that He did that which was Right in the Sight of the Lord, yet not like David his Father: he did ac∣cording to all things, as Joash his Father did. Joash began well, and afterwards Apostatized: So did Amaziah Tread in his Fathers Steps; and to Evidence, what Amaziah did, was not Sincere; it's said, vers. 2. He did that which was Right in the Sight of the Lord, (i. e.) What for the Substance or Matter of the Action was approved of God: But not with a per∣fect Heart. This But, makes a wide dif∣ference between a Hollow, Formal, Hy∣pocritical, and a Sincere Professor. Amaziah was defective in his Walk∣ings, and a Back-slider like his Father: As his Father was, so was he; Good at first, Nought at last. Grotius gives an
Observation on 2 King. 15. 3.—Egre∣giamGrotius in 2 Kin. 15. 3. laudem fine turpi macularet.—It's true, that Amaziah restored the True Worship of God, much decayed in his Fathers time, after the Death of Jehoja∣da; yet what Amaziah did, was but a Partial, not a Total Reformation: All he did, was but to halves; and how could it be otherwise, as long as there was a naughty Principle, a rotten Core, and Heart rotten at the bottom? The. 70. in v. 2. Version of the Seventy Runs, Not with a full Heart: He went not thorough with his Work, but to Halves only. For 2 King. 14. 4. It's there said, Quod etsi dictum sit etiam an∣tea de aliis tamen iterum atque iterum repetitur, nimirum ut quanta quamque pestifera S∣perstitionis vis sit, observemus Haec enim ubi in animis homi∣num radices alius egerit, a∣gre velles potest. Wlphius in loc. Howbeit the High Places were not taken away; as yet, the People did Sa∣crifice, and Burnt Incense on the High Places. Those High Places, What were they, but devised Wayes, humane inventions, superstitions, no better than additional Will-Worships, and such are Homi∣num in∣venta in Dei cultu impurae sunt cor∣ruptelae, Calv. In∣stit. L. 4. c. 10. Corruptions of Worship. People would not be tyed to one place of Gods Appointment; but according to their own Fancies and Humours; they would add, and set up others of their own Divising: Against which, there is an express Prohibition, Deut. 12. 4,
5. 6. And further to set forth the in∣sincerity, and rotten heartedness of A∣maziah, the 14. vers. of this Chapter gives a full Evidence. For it's said, Now it came to pass, after that Amaziahver. 14. was come from the Slaughter of the Edo∣mites, that he brought the Gods of the Children of Seir, and set them up to be his Gods, & bowed down himself before them, and burned Incense unto them. And such cursed Fruit, doth a rotten heart Bear. A Heart that's Deceitful and Hypocri∣tical, marrs all our Services, Quod cor non Facit, non fit. All's as undone, and quite lost; if the Heart be not the Doer thereof. If the Heart be Good, all's Good; if the Heart be Nought, all's Nought. The Priest under the Law, in all Sacrifices, chiefly lookt at the Heart of the Beast, that was to be Offered, A∣mongst the Heathen Augurs, there was spe∣cial Notice took of the Heart of the Sacri∣fice. If the Heart was Tainted and Cor∣rupted, that Beast was rejected, and not to be made a Sacrifice. Now that, which God principally required (i. e. a perfect Heart) was wanting in Ama∣ziah. An imperfect, partial, hollow Heart, was odious and abominable unto God; and for a full determination let's have recourse to the Judgment of Solo∣mon,
Prov. 10. 20. The Tongue of theProv. 10. 20. 15. 8. Just, is as choice Silver; the Heart of the Wicked is little worth: and Prov. 15. 8. The Sacrifice of the Wicked, is an abomi∣nation to the Lord; but the Prayer of the Upright is His Delight. These Scriptures gives a full and evident Satisfaction. Yet notwithstanding the great Evil in Amaziah, we may not pass by in Si∣lence somewhat in him, which was both very Remarkable, and highly Commen∣dable; and that was his Execution of Ju∣stice upon those who were his Fathers Mur∣therers, ver. 3. How his Father was Mur∣thered, is upon Record, 2 Chron. 24. 25. Although (as they thought) a fair Pre∣tence might be pleaded, as if what they did, was only to Revenge one Murther with another; yet their Treason was Abominable, and their Murther Execra∣ble; wherefore the Hand of Justice o∣vertook those horrid Regicides: yet Ju∣stice, and Mercy contend together; this to spare the guiltless Children, the otherEzek. 18. 20. to slay the guilty Father, ver. 3, 4. A Scripture Rule is the Kings Warrant, Deut. 24. 16. The Fathers shall not be put to Death for the Children, nei∣ther shall the Children be put to Death for the Fathers; every Man shall be put to Death for his own Sin. To come nearer
to my Text, let's consider Amaziah as a Warrior, and his Military Preparations,ver. 5. 6. ver. 5, 6. Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them Captains over Thousands, and Captains over Hun∣dreds, according to the Houses of their Fa∣thers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin, and-he Numbred them from Twenty Years Old & above, & found them Three Hundred Thousand choice Men, able to go forth to War, that could handle Spear and Shield. He hired also, an Hundred Thousand mighty Men of Valour out of Israel, for an Hundred Talents of Silver. And thus far of Amaziah. In the Second place, let's take Notice of the Man of God. What his Name was, and what was his Place, whence he came, are not mentioned. But his Message is Recorded to be a strict Pro∣hibition, ver. 7. There came a Man ofAn Amos Pater Isa∣iae ut sen∣tiunt He∣braej? Grot. God to him, Saying, O King, Let not the Army of Israel go with Thee, for the Lord is not with Israel, to wit, with all the Children of Ephraim. By Ephraim, is to be understood the Ten Tribes; Penes familiam illam Prin∣cipatus Erat. Pisc. Ephraim est totum regnum Israelis. Plus quam viginti vicibus ita acci∣pitur Tarnor, in Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim was the chiefest of them. In Jacobs Blessing, E∣phraim had made over to him the Priviledge of Primogeniture, Gen. 48. 19. So that  Ephraim
alone passeth in the name of all the Tribes of. Israel, Isa. 17. 3. Isa. 28. 1. Now Ephraim were Apostates from God, and incorrigible Idolaters, Hos. 4. 17. However, if Amaziah would not hear∣ken to Counel, but take that Army with him, he should surely fall before the Enemy: It's an Ironical Speech, which vertually contains a vehement Check and Inhibition, ver. 8. But if thou wilt , do it, be Strong for the Bat∣tle; God shall make thee fall before the Enemy, for God hath Power to help, and to cast down. And having praemised thus much as a necessary Introduction▪ I shall now consider the Words of the Text, which fall into a Question, and an Answer. First. For the Question (which is fullThe Text di∣vided 1. Quest. of King A∣maziah. of Trouble, Perplexity, Diffidence, and Self-Interest.) What shall we do for the Hundred Talents, which I have given to the Army of Israel? As if I should say, It's difficult and no way probable, to get any Restitution of an Hundred Ta∣lents, from an Army of an Hundred Thousand Men, whom if we Cashier, we shall so enrage them, as there will be no hope at all left of recovering our Money out of their Hands. To attempt this Enterprize, would be as Successless,
as to venture, to pluck the Prey out of the Mouths of so many Lyons. And on the other side, if we should sit down by so great a Loss, as are an Hundred Ta∣lents, it would be very sad and irksome, not quickly to be recovered, and made up again. Here's a Dilemma, which on either side perplexeth the King. He is not willing to run the hazard of Fighting, with those Hundred Thousand valiant Souldiers, for the Restitution of the Money; And no likelihood there was of getting that Money from them with∣out Blows: Neither was he willing to let them go away with the Money. To this Question full of doubts and per∣plexity, the Prophet Answers. You have in the Second place, the2 The Man of God's Answer. Man of God's Answer abundantly satis∣factory, and every ways sufficient to quiet, content, and satisfy the King. And the Man of God Answered. The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. As if he should say, God hath much more to give thee, and what Losses thou Sustainest, He can abundantly make up unto thee: If thou trustest and depen∣dest on God, thou need'st not fear Sup∣plies from Him. God is both able, and willing to supply, sustain, and provide for all those who Trust and Rely upon
Him. The Seventy render the Words,  And Ju∣nius renders them accordingly, Est Jehovae dare tibi amplius eo (i. e.) It is in the power of God to give thee much more. The Vulgar Latin renders it, Ha∣bet Dominus unde dare possit tibi multo his plura (i. e.) God hath enough to supply thee, and give thee much more than thou hast Lost. Est in potestate Jehovae dare tibi vatab. Vatablus renders them according to the same Sense. Hugo Grotius observes from hence, Satis dives est qui Dei causâ, pau∣peratur. He is Rich enough, who is madeHugo Grotius in loc. Poor for the Cause of God. This holy Prophet was couragious in the Cause of God, and delivered his Message with all courage and fidelity: And a convincing Argument he presseth from God's All-Sufficiency. The Lord (saith he to the King) is able to give thee much more than this. And this Answer obtains that suc∣cess which was desired, ver. 10. Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the Ar∣my that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go Home again: Wherefore, their Anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned Home in great Anger. But ob∣serve what might be soon feared came to pass, from the incensed eashiered Sol∣diers, ver. 13. But the Soldiers of the Army which Amaziah sent back, that they
should not go with him to Battle; fell up∣on the Cities of Judah from Samaria, e∣ven unto Beth-horon, and smote Three Thousand of them, and took much Spoile. However such mischievous Consequen∣es might easily be foreseen; yet Ama∣ziah Disputes no farther, makes no more Questions nor Demurrs, but obeys the Command of God, from the Mouth of His Prophet. The Answer of the Man of God, isProv. 25. 11. a Word fitly Spoken, which is (in Solo∣mons Estimation) Like Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver. The Text, is a Word of singular Sup∣port and Incouragement: It's Tabula post naufragium; An Anchor of Hope, A strong Prop to uphold a tottering Buil∣ding, A high Rock, strong and impreg∣nable, When Troubles come thick and threefold, and Losses, Crosses, Impri∣sonments, Persecutions, and Exile fol∣low one upon another: here's Matter of Support, and Ground of Incourage∣ment, to be drawn from God's All-Suffi∣ciency. This is a shadow from the Heat, and aIsa. 25. 4. shelter from the Storm, when the blast of the Terrible one, is as a Storm against the Wall. Here's the Rock, Fortress, Buck∣ler,Psal. 18. 2. Deliverer, Horn of Salvation, and
high-Tower, &c. If amidst our greatestHis va∣riis Ephi∣thetis os∣tendit David Deum non uno Mo∣do servare suos sed sicut sunt varia ge∣nera peri∣culorum & diffi∣cultatum quibus o∣bijciuntur ita Deum variâ vir∣tute pre∣ditum esse ad salvan∣dum suos. Molleri. in loc. Rom. 12. 2. Pressures, Sufferings, Straits, and Exi∣gencies; we can stay, acquiesce, and qui∣etly rely upon God's All-Sufficiency, and cast our selves upon his Wisdom, and wait for his Salvation. O! What sweet and comfortable Lives should we lead! If amidst all Losses, we could believe assuredly this great Truth; That the Lord is able to give as much more than this; we should be Gainers by our Losses, and Rejoyce in our Tribulations, and in every thing, submissively, and pati∣ently resign our wills, to the Will of God, which is a good, acceptable, and per∣fect will. From the Words thus Expounded, I shall Collect one Fundamental point of Doctrine, or choice Lesson, for our In∣struction, viz. That the serious, and deliberate conside∣ration of God's All-Sufficiency, should  ingage us silently, contentedly, and quietly to submit unto God, to stay and depend upon His All-Sufficiency, even then, when the greatest Losses, and Afflictions are incombenon us.
CHAP. II. Contains the Method of Proceeding, and  therein the first Argument drawn from God's Attributes. FOr Inlargement of this needful, andMethod pro∣poun∣ded. excellent Point, I shall fix on Four Heads of Meditation. (1.) To give in a plain Proof of my Assertion, That God is All-Sufficient; wherein I shall pro∣pound some convincing Arguments. (2.) I shall demonstrate the Truth, That this Consideration, That God is All-Suf∣ficient, should ingage us quietly and si∣lently, to submit unto God, and stay, and depend upon his All-Sufficiency a∣midst our greatest Losses and Afflicti∣ons. (3.) I shall endeavour to Resolve Two or Three Cases emergent from the premises. (4thly. and lastly) I shall Con∣clude with some particular, and usefull Application. I resume these Heads according to my propounded Order.The Doctrine proved by Four Argu∣ments. 1. I am to prove That God is All-Suf∣ficient: Though the Doctrine be most un∣doubtedly true, and God's Children have abundantly experimented the Truth
thereof; yet, I shall endeavour to give you more abundant proof, even good Measure full prest, and runing over, which I shall propound in these Four ensuing convincing Arguments. The First, whereof is drawn from Gods  drawn from Gods At∣tributes. Attributes. Now although we diversly Ap∣prehend them, as one way we understand God's Justice, another way his Mercy, &c. Yet all these are but one in God. He is one pure uncompounded simple Act: And he manifests himself by his Attri∣butes of Omnipotency, Power, Mercy, Goodness, Wisdom, and Truth; that he is able to Relieve, Support, Supply, and Extricate us out of all our Straits, Dif∣ficulties, and Exigencies whatsoever. Let's more particularly; for the clea∣ring of the Truth, produce Instances in five Attributes (viz.) God's Wisdom, Power, Mercy, Truth, and Unchange∣ableness, from all which will Evidently appear, the Truth of the first Branch of the Doctrine. That God is All-Suffici∣ent. First, Let's consider the Wisdom of1. The A∣tribute of Wis∣dom. God. As God in the Beginning, by Wis∣dom, made Heaven and Earth: So by Wisdom, He Ordereth, Guideth, and Governeth all the Things therein con∣tained; This Wisdom is infinite. God
understandeth all things, and knowethPsal. 147. 5. the Reason of them: He cannot be de∣ceived in any thing. And who can or dare reprove him in any thing He doeth, or question why he hath so done? But as for worldly Wisdom, God will De∣stroy1 Cor. 1. 19. 20. it, and make Foolish the Wisdom of the World: The Foolishness of God (as the1 Cor. 1. 25. Apostle saith) is Wiser than Men. (i. e.) That which the Men of the World count Foolishness, hath more Wisdom in it,Nemini obscurum est, quam improprie stultitia, vel infir∣mitas Deo adscri∣batur sed necesse fuit talibus Ironiis insanam carnis arrogantiam refutare, quâ De∣um omni suâ gloriâ spoliare non dubitat. Calv. in loc. than all their Worldly Wisdom. Folly or Weakness (saith judicious Calvin) is im∣properly ascribed to God: But it was neces∣sary by such Ironies, to confute the mad Ar∣rogance of the Flesh, which would rob God of his Glory. God can infatuate the Wisdom of the Wise, and turn the Counsels of Achito∣phel into Foolishness. Be Men as great Politicians, as Machiavel was reputed to be, yet God can Blast all their Coun∣sels▪ He taketh the Wise in their own craf∣tinessJob 5. 13. (i. e.) such as thinkQui sibi sapientes videban∣tur Eo▪ ipso quod astute cogi∣tarant capantur & irretian∣tur. Merc. in loc. themselves Wise: in that self-same thing, which they craftily contrived, they are taken, and intangled (as Learned Mercer
observeth on the place) Saint Paul seems to have Quoted this Scripture out of 1 Cor. 3. 19. There's an Emphatical Word in the Original  veteratoria versutia, (i. e.) a jug∣ling craft; A proclivity, and readiness to all Cheating Tricks whatsoever. How∣ever (as Beza notes) Though they be Sub∣tileƲt cun∣que sunt vafri, Eos tamen D∣minus ca∣piet, cum eorum ar∣tes reipsa declara∣bit, illud ipsum esse quo sese in volve rint. Beza in Loc. and Crafty, yet God will catch them, and discover them, to be what they are. Now from this instance of the Wis∣dom of God, we may give an abundant proof of his All-Sufficiency: For when we are Intangled, and be wildred with world∣ly Cares and Fears, and know not how to get out; when we are involv'd in Mazes, Perplexities, and Labyrinths, and know not how to extricate our selves, and we are at our Wits end; then Wis∣dom from heaven makes a Way, for our Evasion, & sets us at Liberty. When Isaac was bound on the Altar, and A∣braham Stretcht forth his Hand to give the Deaths Stroke, all the Wisdom of the wisest Men on Earth, would have been Non-plust, not knowing how to contrive a Deliverance: But the Wis∣dom of God exerteth it self, and inter∣poseth in that needful instant, between the lifting up the Hand, and the Strik∣ing of the Blow, and a Voice speaks
from Heaven, Lay not thine Hand uponGen. 22. 12. the Lad. However, Isaac was unex∣pectedly delivered; yet, Abraham would gladly Offer a Sacrifice, and he knew not where, upon such a sudden to make Provision: Behold further, How the Wisdom of God contrives, and provides a Ram for a Burnt Offering. What thenvers. 13. must we do in all our doubts and dif∣ficulties, but make our Addresses and Supplications unto God? God is a GodJam. 1. 5. of Wisdom, of Him, we must ask Wis∣dom. Christ is the great Counsellor, The Wisdom of God, He hath the Spi∣ritIsa. 9. 6. of Wisdom and Understanding. When1 Cor. 1. 24. Isa. 11. 2. Troubles befall us, we wander up and down like Noahs Dove, finding no rest for the Sole of her Foot, till Noah took her into the Ark. We in our Afflicti∣ons use to go from Creature to Crea∣ture, and Consult with Flesh and Blood; like Squirrils, we leap from Bough to Bough, or like curious Palates, Tast of all Waters, and try all manner of Pro∣jects; hence it comes to pass, that we miscarry by many sad Disapointments and Frustrations. How dreadful a Woe is threatned against them, who take not Counsel of God, Isa. 30. 1. Woe to the Rebellious Children (saith the Lord) that take Counsel, but not of Me, and that co∣ver
with a covering, but not of my Spi∣rit, that they may add Sin to Sin. There's a grand Curse also threatned in Ezekiel, That the Law shall Perish from the Priest,Ezek. 7. 26. and Counsel from the Ancients. Here then consists our great Duty, amidst Trou∣bles and Sufferings, to learn to deny our own Wisdome, our own Reason and Counsel, and whatsoever is selfish in us, neither any more to sacrifice to our own Net and Drag; but to rely, depend, and wholly lean, and stay our selves up∣on the Wisdom of God. Solomon fullyProv. 3. 5. 6, 7, 8. prescribes our Duty in several choice, and excellent Lessons: Trust in the Lord with all thine Heart, and lean not unto thine own Understanding: In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths: Ne in tua teip∣sum sapi∣entia con∣templari velis. E∣am elige discipli∣nam in quam cum inspicias non ta teipsum quam De∣um ipsum intuearis. Be not Wise in thine own Eyes: Fear the Lord, and depart from Evil. It shall be Health to thy Navel, and Marrow to thy Bones. I proceed to another Instance, drawn from the Power of God. The Power and Omnipotency of God, abundantly prove His All-Sufficiency. This Attribute of Power, & Omnipotency is the Strong∣hold of all Gods Children: This is their2. Attri∣bute, viz. The Power of God. Shield, Buckler, Deliverer, what not! It's all in all: And the Power, and Om∣nipotency of God, is a Terror to the
Wicked, to crush them to peices, and to destroy them utterly. God is the U∣niversal, Omnipotent Soveraign Lord, and Commander over the whole World. Bildad speaks a great Deal in so shortJob 25. 2. a Chapter. Dominion and Fear are with him, &c. God hath all Power in his Hand, and can put it forth, more or less, when, and where he pleaseth. All the Granaries, Treasures, Magazines, and Fortifications; All the Cattle on a Thou∣sand Mountains, are at the sole com∣mand, & disposing of the Soveraign Lord, and Governour of Heaven and Earth. God gives one Creature, a Commission to help another; God knows such an one to be in sore distress; and he saith, go Creature, Relieve, Refresh, and Comfort such a One; he is my Servant. Another is in great danger, of being Rob'd, Murthered, or Drowned, as he is a Travelling: God sends his Angel to preserve him: Ingens Bonitas Dei & cura paterna erga Ecclesiam descri∣bitur, quod tales nobis Presi∣des adjungit Molles. Angeli sunt Domestici Dei caeli cives. Bern. And how much we ought to give God thanks for the Ministry of Angels; how few of us are sen∣sible! Likewise the Hearts of all Men are at Gods Command, even the Hearts of the greatest Kings are at Gods Com∣mand:Prov. 21. 1. As the Rivers of Water, he turn∣eth
them whithersoever he will. The Hearts of inveterate and implacable Enemies, are new Molded, and Wrought on ef∣fectually by the Power of God. Amongst others, that's a pregnant instance in Esau, in whose Heart lodged an old grudg of Twenty Years standing, against his Bro∣ther Jacob. And it seems very proba∣ble, that when he came to meet Jacob with Four Hundred Men, that he had in his Heart Rancor and Malice; and his Intentions were as Mischiveous, as Jacob feared, to destroy The Mother andGen. 32. 11. the Children. Yet God, who hath the Hearts of the worst of Enemies in his Hand, affected the Heart of Esau, and melted it into Tears; we Read Gen. 33. 4. And Esau ran to meet Him, and em∣brac'd Him, and fell on his Neck, and kissed Him, and they Wept. Hence that Proverb of Solomon is an Experimental Truth, that, When a Mans ways pleaseProv. 16. 7. the Lord, he maketh even his Enemies to be at Peace with him. The best way to obtain Friendship with Men, is first to make God our Friend. The Duty main∣ly incumbent on us all, is to believe Gods Omnipotency, and stay, and de∣pend thereupon. Thus let's argue from what hath been done by the AlmightyGen. 1. 3, 4. Power of God. In the Creation, God
brought Light out of Darkness, Order out of a Chaos of Confusion. God madeExod. 14. 22. the Red-Sea to become Dry-land, and passable for the Israelites, but the Sea re∣turned to his strength, and overthrew the Egyptians in the midst thereof. Godver. 27▪ caused the Flinty-Rock, to become a Springing-Well, to quench the Thirst of the Israelites. God fed them by aNumb. 20. 11. Exod. 16. 13, 14. Deut. 25. 9. Judg. 15. 19. Josh. 10. 13. 2 King. 20. 11. 2 King. 7. 16. Miracle, with Quailes and Manna: God Cloathed them by a Miracle, in that the same Cloaths lasted Forty Years together. God caus'd the Jaw-bone of an Ass to pour out Water, to quench the Thirst of Samson. God caus'd the Sun to stand still at Joshuas prayer, and return back upon Hezekiahs Prayer. God caus'd plen∣ty in Samaria (beyond all expectation of Man) after a sore and grievous Famine. From all these InstancesPotens Deus est causam suam libenter servare, lapsam erige∣re: si nos digni non erimus, fi∣at per alios. Melct. Adam in vita Luther. we may certainly con∣clude, that the same Om∣nipotent Lord God Reign∣eth. His power is no whit diminished; he hath helped, and is able to help. This Instance of the Power of God abundantly proves his All-Sufficiency, and should be a ground3 At∣tribute of Mer∣cy. of singular Support, and Comfort unto all the Children of God. I proceed to a Third Instance drawn
from the Attribute of Mercy. God is a∣bundant in Goodness and Mercy: He is Merciful, Gracious, Long-Suffering. Mer∣cyMicah 7. 18. Psal. 25. 10. ▪ sal. 103. 8. Eph. 2. 4. Psal. 145. 9. Isa. 16. 11. Psal. 68. 5. Psal. 103. 13. Isa. 63. 9. is Gods Delight. All his Paths are Mercy. He is slow to Anger, and plente∣ous in Mercy. His Mercies are rich Mer∣cies, tender Mercies, they are over all his Works. They are so many as they ex∣ceed all Number for Multitude: They are so great, as they exceed all Dimen∣sions for Magnitude. The Lord by an  declares the Sounding of his Bowels; His Fatherly pitty and compas∣sion, and a sympathy, and fellow-fee∣ling with us in our Afflictions, Isa. 63. 9. In all their Afflictions, he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them: in his Love, and in his Pitty he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the Days of Old. And who this was, see ver. 1. O! How did the Bowels of Christ Yearn over those that were in Affliction! He had Compassion towards a fainting Multitude, and Fed them. He had Compassion on the DiseasedJoh. 11. 35. Luke 19. 41. Heb. 4. 15. People, he Healed them. He Wept for Lazarus; he Wept over Jerusalem; And now he is in Heaven, he is Tou∣ched with the feeling of our infirmities. From what hath been mentioned, we may conclude, That Gods Mercy moves
him to afford seasonable Helps, Sup∣plies, and Succours, unto his People, when they are involved in the greatest Straits and Difficulties: God is a Pre∣sentPsal. 46. 1. Gen. 22. 14. help in the needful time of Trou∣ble. In the Mount the Lord will be seen: The Proverb is no more common than true, That Mans Extremity is Gods Op∣portunity. When Hagars Bottle of Wa∣ter was spent, and she, and her Son likeGen. 21. 19. to have perished with Thirst; then the Lord opened her Eyes, and shewed her a Well of Water. When Egypts Flo∣werJosh. 5. 12. was spent, and when Manna cea∣sed, then the Children of Israel did Eat of the Fruit of the Land of Canaan. When the Widdow of Zaraphath had left only for her self and Son, to keep them a little while alive, a handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oyl in a Cruse; then the Lord sent the Prophet Elijah with a comfortable Message, 1 King. 17. 14, 15, 16. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The Barrel of Meal shall not wast, neither shall the Cruse of Oyl fail, until the Day that the Lord sendeth Rain upon the Earth. And she went, and did accor∣ding to the saying of Elijah; and▪ she, and he, and her House did Eat many Days. And the Barrel of Meal wasted not, nei∣ther did the Cruse of Oyl fail, according
to the Word of the Lord, which he spake by Elijah. When Gods People have been in such great Straits, as not knowing where to turn, or how to help them∣selves out of them; then some signal Mercy hath appeared for their Delive∣rance. In Deut. 32. 36. there's a gra∣cious Promise, and there's a real per∣formance thereof, 2 King. 14. 26, 27. For the Lord saw the Affliction of Israel, that it was very Bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel. And the Lord said, not that he would blot out the Name of Israel from under Heaven: But he Saved them by the Hand of Jereboam the Son of Joash. Add hereunto another promise, suita∣ble to the former, Isa. 33. 9, 10. The Earth Mourneth and Languisheth: Leba∣non is ashamed, and hewn down: Sharon is ike a Wilderness, and Bashan, and Car∣mel shake off their Fruits. Now will I rise saith the Lord; now will I be exal∣ted; now will I lift up my self. And David experimentally acknowledges the truth of God's Promises, Psal. 136. 23. Ista ob id com∣memora∣vit admo∣neamur quam non obliviscatur suorum Deus, qui tribulationibus o∣primuntur, sed ubi tempestivum est e, manibus illos inimicorum suorm afferat & eripiat. Musc. in loc. who remembred us in our low Estate. For his Mercy endureth for Ever.
Let's then stand admiring, and ado∣ring the riches of Mercy, the multitude of tender Mercies, the Bowels wide o∣pened of a gracious and compassionate Father. God stands by his People in their Swooning Fits, and gives them his sweet Cordials and Restoratives. He is with them in Prison, and gives them inlargement of Spirit. Sancto∣rum pr∣ces caelum & terram concutiunt Beza. Hinc col∣ligimus quam con∣stanter animati fuerint ad crucem ferendam Calv. in Loc. Dan. 3. 25. The Apostles,Act. 16. 25. Paul and Silas Prayed, and sang Praises in a Prison. Communion with God, reviv'd and rais'd their Spirits, even when their Feet were made fast in the Stocks. God was with the Three Chil∣dren in the hot fiery Furnace; Three were only cast into the Furnace, but the King saw Four, and he acknowledged that the Form of the Fourth, was like the Son of God. Daniel had an Angel in the Lyons Den for his Companion; and he was sent from God, to shut the Lyons Mouth. What shall I add fur∣ther? We live upon Mercies every Mo∣ment, and have fresh experiences of re∣newed loving Kindnesses. Each Step we Tread, whether at home or abroad▪ each Work we go about, each bit of Bread we Eat, each Bed we Lie on, each Journey we Travel: All these cry aloud, and proclaim the Mercies of God. And so wonderful is the Mercy of God, as he condescends to our Infirmities,
and applieth himself with all gentleness to our respective Conditions: Two pla∣ces I shall only mention as a full proof thereof; one is Isa. 40. 11. He shall Feed his Flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry the in his Bosome, and shall gently lead those that are with Young. The other is Mat. 12. 20. Donec rectam & veram E∣vangelii doctrinam docuerit ad vin∣cendum hostes, ut expugnet eos-Va∣tabl. 4. At∣tribute of Truth A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoaking Flax shall he not quench, till he send forth Judgment unto Victory. By what hath been said of the Mercy of God; we should be perswaded to rely, and depend on God's All-Sufficiency. A Fourth Instance I shall produce, is the Attribute of God's Truth, and this is ingaged for the Assistance of his Ser∣vants, and for the Destruction of his, and their Adversaries. Although no∣thing is impossible to God, and he can do all things; yet it no whit detracts1 Tit. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 13. from Gods Omnipotency, to say, He can∣not Lie, he cannot deny himself. God ne∣ver was, and never will be one tittle worse than his Word; not an  of his Word shall fail. God Gloryeth inExod. 34. 6. Psal. 146. 6. Psal. 111. 5. Heb. 10. 23. this, that he is Abundant in Goodness and Truth, that he keepeth Truth for ever; that he will be ever mindful of his Cove∣nant: And that he is faithful that hath Promised. Balaam, though a mercenary
Prophet, gives herein a faithful Testi∣mony, Numb. 23. 19. God is not a Man that he should Lye, neither the Son of Man, that he should Repent; hath he said, and shall he not do it; or hath he poken, and shall he not make it Good? After Nebuchadnezzer was restored to his understanding, and former dignity, he of his own accord made this Con∣fession, Dan. 4. 37. That all the Works of God are Truth. Here then consists our great Du∣ty, to rely and stay upon the Truth of God. Hath not God said in his holyIsa. 3. 10. 11. Word, Say ye to the Righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall Eat the Fruit of their Doings. Woe to the Wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his Hands shall be given him. Is it not likewise a part of the same Truth of God, Recorded by the Wise Man? Though (saith he) a Sinner do Evil anEccles. 8. 12. 13. Hundred times, and his Days be prolonged; yet surely, I know it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him. But it shall not be well with the Wicked, nei∣ther shall he prolong his Days, which are as a Shadow; because he feareth not before God. Add hereunto, that which is mentioned by the last (but not the least) of the Prophets Malachi. For behold theMal. 4. 1, 2, 3. Day cometh, that shall Burn as an Oven,
and all the Proud; yea, and all that do Wickedly shall be Stubble, and the Day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, It shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with Healing in his Wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Signi∣ficat pro∣prie mul∣tiplicari, augeri. L. de. Dieu.  verterunt 70. Calves of the Stall. And ye shall Tread down the Wicked; for they shall be Ashes under the Soles of your Feet, in the Day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of Hosts. The God of Truth, even God who is Truth it self, hath said it; wherefore we must not be curiously inquisitive after the precise time when, no Dispute how these things shall be Accomplished. Without question, all these things shall be punctually fulfulled in their Season: Wherefore let us Be∣lieve, Rely, and Acquiesce upon the word of a faithful Covenant keeping God. He will bring his own work to pass in his own Way, and Time, to his own Glory. A Fifth (and the last Attribute I shall5. At∣tribute of Un∣change ableness. Instance in) is the Unchangeableness of God. It's Evident that Men change, Times and Customes change: There's a Vicissitude, and Revolution of all Su∣blunaryQuis no diversa preseti∣bus, contrariaque expectatis aut speret aut timeat. Vell. Paterz. things: Most true is that of So∣lomon,
One Generation passeth away,Eccles. 1. 4. Omnis subita Mutatio rerum non sine quo∣dam quasi fluctu contingit animo∣rum. Bo∣eth. l. de consol. Phil. l. and another Generation cometh. Archi∣medes, that great Mathematician glori∣ed that he would move the whole Earth, if he might have a place assigned him, where he might fix his Engine. His saying was  Give me where I may stand. Where some Men now a days will go, and how far (whose Principle is Self-interest) when, and where they will fix and stand, neither can we, nor they themselves Determine. They ring Changes, and comply with all times and humors; Yet notwithstanding, all. Damasc. Psal. 102. 27. Mal. 3. 6. Heb. 13. 8. Heb. 9. 4. James 1. 4. . the changes of Creatures have no influ∣ence upon the Creator, as to change him with their Changes. Damascene ob∣serves that Whatsoever is Created, is sub∣ject to Changes; But the uncreated, E∣ternal God is Unchangeable. He is the same, and his Years shall have no end. He changeth not, Christ is unchange∣able, and the Holy Ghost is unchange∣able. Therefore, amongst the change∣able fluctuating conditions of the pre∣sent World; We should found our Comfort upon this Principle, That we serve an unchangeable God, with whom there is no Meta∣phora est a Sole qui est variis nubium obumbrationibus obnoxius, Nihil hujus in Deo est. Pareus. variableness, nor shadow of
turning. Heavenly Bodies have Paral∣laxes, but there is no such thing  God. Friends, such in whom we have put greatJob. 6. 15. confidence, prove perfidious, and are like that deceitful Brook, mentioned by Job. Riches, they fail, and are on theProv. 23. 5. Wing, as swift as an Eagle: And no Man of Understanding, will reckon up∣on his great Riches, because he seeth so many Eagles flying in the Air. There's a Story which I have Read in Aelian:Aelian var. hist. That there was a Fool in Athens, who laughed, and expressed great Joy, when any Ship came into the Harbor, because he was possest with a Fancy, that eve∣ry Ship that Arrived there, was his own. Is it not as great folly and madness, for a Man to account himself the Richer, because he seeth the Landing of many Ships richly Laden with variety of Merchandize, when as he hath no Share nor Interest in any one of them? Riches are things which are not, and to set ones Heart upon nothing, even that, which oft times proves worse than nothing, by reason of many frustrations and vexations, must needs be an ex∣ceeding great madness and folly. Ri∣ches are not in our power to get them. It's Gods Blessing that maketh Rich, nei∣ther is it in our power (when they are
got) to keep them. Quid sunt res humanae? Cinis, pulvis, fu∣mus, um∣bra, folia cadenta, flos, Som∣nium, fa∣bula, ven∣tus, aer, penna mobilis, da de∣urrens, & fi quid istis infe∣rius. Chrisost. Hom. 9. ad Heb. No Man can hold the Te when it comes, nor stop an Arrow shot out of a Bow; nor hinder the Motion of the Sun; no more can any Man hold fast these sublunary things: None can keep Riches sure and stable, and make them last to Eternity: For under the Sun is nothing of a durable Substance: If we desire that which is durable, and never fading, we must seek for it in Heaven; it's not to be had here below. Further to instance in honours, pro∣motions, and the preferments of the World: They that have most of them, are oft times by the revolutious of times made sensible that they possess a very slippery standing; So that Nun∣quid in honore si∣ne dolore, in praela∣tione sine turbatio∣ne, in Su∣blimitate sine vani∣tate quis esse potest. Bern. in Test. Ni∣cholai. Serm. Honours are oft times burthens, and objects of envy and malice, and many are the machi∣nations, for supplanting, and undermi∣ning the possessours of them. Have we not frequently seen many great Perso∣nages degraded, and devested of their Robes? have not their Honours lain in the dust? Haman in sacred Story, is a signal example of Honours uncertainty. And forraign Historys of Andronicus, Ba∣jazet, Bellizarius, our own English History of Wolsey and others, give abundant testi∣mony of this Truth, That Honours are
transient fading uncertain things. And what are promotions and high places, (though many are so eager, and greedy in the pursuit after them, and often times for the attaining of them, make Ship∣wrack of Faith, and a good Conscience) What are they better (I say) than aFicta omnia ce∣leriter decidunt, nec Simu∣latum po∣test quic∣quam ess diutur∣num. Cic. L. 2. Off. vid. Bp. Morton of Eze∣kiels Wheels. Mushrome, or a Jonah's Gourd, which in one Night had its Original, and Pe∣riod? Sesostris Wheels turning that spoke lowermost, which was erst while up∣permost, are an embleme of the fre∣quent revolutions of all things in the Universe. I shall conclude this parti∣cular with that infallible Testimony of the Psalmist, Psal. 75. 6, 7, 8. For pro∣motion cometh neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South. But God is the Judge, he putteth down one, and setteh up another. For in the Hand of the Lord is a Cup, and the Wine is Red, it is full of Mixture, and he poureth out of the same: but the Dregs thereof, all the Wicked of the Earth shall wring them out, and drink them. And to secure, support, and preserve us safe, amidst the worst of Changes, I shall mention two or three establishing Scriptures: one is Psal. 73. 26. My Flesh, and my Heart, faileth; but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever: Another is Psal. 89.
43. I will not suffer my Faithfulness to fail. A third, is Heb. 13. 5. . I will ne∣ver leave thee, nor forsake thee. Here then we may be preserved from danger, by relying on these promises: And ifFive ne∣gatives which more ve∣hement∣ly deny. Fieri non potest ut te ab∣jiciam plane, aut etiam ad tempus deseram Grot. any danger come, then here is a Shield to ward of Blows, Here's a cordial, a stay, and a staff, a restorative and sup∣porter; when we seriously consider, that notwithstanding changes, failings, disappointments, and treacheries, which we meet with from Creatures, yet our Creator is unchangeable: And his im∣mutability is a Fort-Royal, an invinci∣ble Bulwark, and a Rock impregnable, unto all true Believers. CHAP. III. Containing a Second Argument drawn from God's Promises. I Proceed to a Second Argument drawn  drawn from God's promi∣ses. Isa. 12. 3. Isa. 66. 11. Judg. 16. 17. from God's Promises; And they are as so many Wells of Salvation, and Breasts of Consolation. Divine Promises are the Magna Charta, or Title and Interest, whereby the Saints make a claim to Heaven. It was said of Samson, that his great Strength, lay in his Hair; So
a believers great strength lies in the di∣vine Promises. All the Promises attest the truth of the Doctrine, That God is All-Sufficient. And if we make a survey of particular Promises, we shall by an Induction of particular cases, and particular promises suitably apply∣ed, clear our assertion, or point of Do∣ctrine. For Instance, one Man is in great want and necessity, hunger-bit, and by rea∣son of extream poverty, afflicted with great cares and troubles, and is still a carking and projecting, and contriving, which way to go about; what means to use for supply of his pressing wants and exigencies. Let such study the Pro∣mises, and they will speak to them a∣bundance of Incouragement, viz. Psal. 34. 9, 10. Psal. 37. 19. Psal. 84. 11.. Phil. 4. 19. It's said there, My God shall supply all your need (i. e.) shall fill up all your necessities; we have a Pro∣mise for supply of necessities, not for superfluities. Deus cui servio abunde sufficiet, quicquid vobis opus erit. Calv. in loc. Calvin observes on the place, That God whom I serve, will abun∣dantly suffice you, what ever you have need of. Another is much perplexed with va∣riety of Fears, as of loss of Life, Lively∣hood,
Liberty, &c. He's oftentimes a∣fraid of the fury of malitious and vio∣lent Adversaries: To such the Promise speaks Comfort and Counsel, Isa. 8. 13. But it will be further replied, that the ondition is dangerous, and the hazards are apparent. To such replies, I'le re∣joyn, Isa. 43, 1, 2. Yet further, some will complain. O! We are a despised, a shiftless, and helpless People, weak, distressed, impotent, and apt to be trod down, and trampled upon, by every Foot. Let such Read, Isa. 44. 10, 14. 15. Isa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28. What shall I add further? Read also, Isa. 33. 23. Jer. 37. 10. Nay, more than all this, even Dry Bones shall become an Army of Men, Haec visio pro∣phetica imago quodam modo fuit futur Resurrec∣tionis, li∣cet ad li∣teram, re∣stitutio Is∣raelis in ierram su∣am per e∣am signi∣fitur. Clrius inter cri∣tic. sacr. Ezek. 37. 3, 10. Some under∣stand this, concerning the deliverance from Babylon. Others hence allude to the conversion of the Jews, in the days of the Gospel. The Church may be in a dying condition; yet it shall revive, Isa. 26. 19. There will be a Resurrecti∣on of the Church, a Resurrection of the Names, and Reputations of the Peo∣ple of God, however blasted and defa∣med. There will be a Resurrection of the Cause of the Church, against An∣ti-Christ that Man of Sin. And although the Witnesses, and Professors thereof,
may be Dead for a time, yet they shall Rise again; and their Resurrection will be Glorious and Astonishing, even in the sight of their Persecutors. These things shall certainly be fulfilled in their Season, although the punctual instant▪ when this shall be, is not within our cognizance to Determine: We can re∣solve no otherwise than according to Psal. 74. 9. We see not our Signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there among us, any that knoweth how long.Eligat op∣portuni∣tatem, qui libere dat misericor∣diam. Aug. However, it is a grand Duty incumbent on us, to be earnest in Prayers and Sup∣plications, in the behalf of the Church, as Psal. 14. v. ult. Psal. 126. 4. Isa. 62. 1, 7, 8. Some others there are, who are in∣wardly Wounded, and that Wound must needs be more full of dolour andProv. 18. 14. anguish. A wounded Spirit, Who can bear? God withdrawsDeus unus animum fractum & quassatum erigere & restau∣rare potest, idque verbo suo, u innitentes e naufragio emerge∣mus, & caput attollemus. Carthw. the Light of his graci∣ous. Countenance from them; and this is their greatest affliction. They complain frequently of their Troubles, by reason of Gods hiding his Face from them: The Terrours of the Almighty affright them, and Sorrow drinks up their Spirits. To such are many suita∣ble
Promises to be applyed; and the Application of them, to themselves in particular, is matter of singular Conso∣lation. Particularly, let them Read, and Meditate on what they Read, viz. Psal. 94. 11. Psal. 112. 5. Isa. 50. 10. He that Woundeth, can only Heal, Hos. 6. 1. Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. Whether the Wound be outward on the Body, or Estate, or in∣ward on the Soul and Spirit, we must make our Adresses, and Applications to that one only Healer, the great God of Heaven and Earth, Exod. 15. 26. For I am the Lord that healeth thee. And our Duty is, to make use of Gods hea∣ling Medicines, Jer. 8. 22. What then is our great Duty, but to hearken what God speaks in his Word, and beware of Relapses? Corporal Relapses are dange∣rous▪ but Spiritual much more, Psal. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will Speak: For he will Speak Peace unto his People, and to his Saints: But let them not turn again to Folly.
CHAP. IV. Contains a Third Argument drawn from God's Providences. A Third Argument shall be drawn  from di∣vine Pro∣viden¦ces. from divine Providences. God's Providences fulfil his Promises. As God promiseth help, supplies, and succours unto his People: so by his good Hand of Providence, he performs what he hath Promised. God Promised great things to Abraham, Gen. 17. 1, 2. And when A∣braham was Ninety Years Old and Nine; the Lord appeared to Abraham, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, Walk before Me, and be thou Perfect. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and will Multiply thee exceedingly. And God made his Word good to a tittle to him: For God gave him Riches in abun∣dance, and a numerous Posterity, and in him were all the Families of the Earth blessed. At God's Command, AbrahamHeb. 11. 8. left the Land of his Nativity; he dis∣putedValde commen∣dat Abra∣hamum credulitas promissionis, quoniam immediate credidit Deo, re∣linquendo presentia dulci & chara; ut obediret Deo propter absen∣tia quae non videbat. Tena. not the Command, but yeilded
Obedience thereunto. And where ever he went, he had abundant experience of God's gracious Providence. He and his Wife, though exposed to great Temp∣tations, were safely preserved in the Court of Abimelech. As soon as he wentGen. 12. 10. into Canaan, there was a Famine in the Land; yet God made Provision for him, and Preserved him, whither ever he went, and he obtained Favour, both in the Eyes of God and Man. Not to multiply many more Instan∣ces. In Joseph, there was a Concate∣nation of several signal Acts of Provi∣dence. Although he was envyed by his Brethren, cast into the Pit, sold to the Ishmaelites, and by them to Potiphar; Yet God was with him. And whenAct. 7. 9. through the false accusations of his Mi∣stress, he was cast into Prison; yet GodGen. 39. 29. was with him in Prison, and gave him favour in the Eyes of the Keeper of the Prison. It's very probable, that there were several Prisons in Egypt; but Jo∣seph was cast into that very Prison, where the King's Servants, the chief Butler, and Baker were Prisoners. And it came to pass, that each of the King's Servants Dreamed; and Joseph Interpreted their Dreams, and the Interpretation accor∣dingly was Fulfilled; for the chief But∣ler
was restored unto his Place, and theGen. 40. 21, 22. chief Baker was Hanged. Joseph might hope, that he had now purchased a good Friend at Court; he reckoned upon the chief Butlers Friendship; but he, as soon as restored to his Place, forgot Joseph:Gen. 40. 23. He ungratefully past an act of oblivion of his Ingagements to Joseph. But God's time is not yet come, for Joseph's Deli∣verance: Wherefore Pharaoh himself Dreams, and then the chief Butler re∣members his faults, and becomes a Re∣membrancer of Joseph's Skill in Inter∣preting Dreams. Hereupon Joseph is sent for, and Interpreteth Pharaoh's Dreams, and for his great Wisdom and Understanding, is preferred by Pharaoh to be Ruler over all the Land of Egypt. And here's a further Remark of Provi∣dence, that Joseph hath a Price put in∣to his Hand, to be not only (under God) a Saviour of all Egypt; but likewise of his Father and Brethren: For when the Famine was in Egypt, Cannan, and other Places, Joseph supplyed their Wants, and through God's Blessing up∣on his wife and provident care, preser∣ved multitudes of Families from Peri∣shing. Joseph himself acknowledgedAct. 7. 9. Non es sine ex∣mplo, quod Deus benefacit iis, quibus vos nocetis maxime. Grot. God's Hand in all things. And St. Ste∣phen
making an Historical Narration, of the several signal Providences exerci∣sed towards Joseph, ascribes all to the Hand of God remarkable in Joseph's Pre∣servation, notwithstanding the envy, hatred, and malice of his Brethren. To this History of Joseph, we may add a series of divine Providences fast∣ned together, concerning the deliverance of the Jews from the bloody Designs of Haman. Although Haman was highly advanced by Ahassuerus, and obtained the King's Seal, and Pur was cast, even a day design'd by Lot, for a barbarous Massacre; yet Esther, by a wonderful Pro∣vidence (though she was a Jew) was advanced to be Queen instead of Vasthi. She certified the King of Mordecai's faith∣fulness, in discovering a Treason, and Mordecai's Loyalty was Chronicled In perpetuam rei memoriam. Esther Invited the King to a Banquet, and Haman was Invited likewise: She then interceded for the People of the Jews, and Haman's intended Mischief was seasonably pre∣vented, and his horrid Design'd Wicked∣ness fell upon his own Pate. The Ta∣ble proved a snare, and the Banquet a forerunner of Hamans Destruction. Mor∣decai was a Loyal, and true hearted Sub∣ject to the King; but Haman hated him,
for not doing Non solum con∣suetudo, sed etiam lex dome∣stica Iu∣daeorum diserte vetat ho∣norem deo debitum, ulli mor∣talium exhibere. Drus. in Est. 3. 2. that reverence, which he expected from him. Some are of Opinion, that Haman expected more then civil Reverence: Others think, that Ha∣man being a Persian, had the Sun pictu∣red on his Breast, and therefore Morde∣cai would not bow the Knee (because the Persians Worshiped the rising Sun.) O∣thers (and I conceive their Opinion is most probable) suppose, that Mordecai would not do Reverence to Haman, be∣cause he was an Agagite (i. e.) of the Family of Agag King of the Amalekites, and the Lord had a Controversy with that wicked Nation, Exod. 17. 14. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a Book, and Rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua: I will utterly put out the Remembrance of Amalek from under Hea∣ven. However Mordecai would neither bow, nor bend to prophane proud Ha∣man, an inveterate, and a cursed Ene∣my; Yet notwithstanding, there's a sig∣nal Testimony upon Record of the Loy∣alty of Mordecai Esth. 2. 22, 23. And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the Queen; and Esther certified the King thereof, in Mordecai's name. And when Inquisition was made of the Matter, it was found out; therefore they were both Hanged on a Tree: and it
was Written in the Book of the Chroni∣cles before the King. But Haman was resolved to leave no means unattempted, to Revenge himself on Mordecai; where∣fore he built a Gallows, and went on pur∣pose to Petition for the King's Consent, to Hang Mordecai thereon. But observe Est. 6. 1. On that Night could not the King sleep, and he comman∣ded to bring the Book of Records of the Chronicles; and they were Read before the King. Even that self-same Night be∣fore Haman came to beg Mordecai for the Gallows, the King could not Sleep: And upon inquisition made after Mor∣decai's fidelity, the King put exceeding great Honour upon Mordecai, and im∣ployed Haman, his implacable Adversa∣ry, to see all that Grandeur done. AndLex non est justo ulla.  Quam necis ar∣tifices ar∣te perire suâ. Esth. 7. 10. Mat. 7. 2. Prover ium est apud He∣bros: Mensura pro mensur, & apud latis: par pari referre. Beza. what became of Haman at last, but that he was Punished, by way of Retaliati∣on, and caught in the same Pit, which he made for another; for he was Han∣ged on the same Gallows, which he had prepared for Mordecai: He was paid in his own Coyn, and serv'd as Adoni∣bezek was, even Punished by way of Retaliation, Judg. 1. 6. I cannot pass by Two or Three more Instances of a special Remark and Observation. When
the Prophet Elijah, was preserved from the bloody Intentions of Jezabel, and constrained to fly for his Life; he had Angels for his Purveyors, a Brook to quench his Thrist, Ravens to bring him Flesh, a Widdow Woman in a Famine, to make him Cakes: When by reason of Jezabels Persecution, many Prophets were put to Death: God raised Obadi∣ah to be a Friend to those that Surviv'd; he hid them by Fifty in a Cave, and fed them with Bread and Water. When Jeremy was cast into a Dungeon, and his feet stuck fast in the Mire, then E∣bedmelech the Ethiopian became the Pro∣phets Advocate, and he spake a seaso∣nable and effectual Word, for the Pro∣phets inlargement. And if there were any need, to light a Candle to the Sun; variety of Exam∣ples might be produced, discovering wonderful Providences, for the Preser∣vation of the People of God. To men∣tion a few instead of many. When that horrible devilish Massacre of the Pro∣testants in France, was acted on Bartho∣lomew day, being the Sabbath day, and the Lord Admiral Gasper Collinius was barbarously Butchered (notwithstandingSee Mr. Clarks Marty∣rology. many fair flattering Words promised unto him) Thousands of Protestants were
Murthered, insomuch that the▪ Channel in the Streets ran down with Blood; yet then some were miraculously Pre∣served. Dr. Peter De-Moulin that emi∣nent Light in the Church, was preser∣ved from the Murtherers, being hid un∣der a Kneading Trough. Merlin was preserved for a Week or more in a Hay-Mough, where an Hen came every day, and laid an Egg, by the Nourishment whereof, he was kept alive. Another for Shelter, hid himself in a Coal-House, which being without a Door, was the more unlikely for a place of Security: But (as God ordered it for the best,) a Spider came thither, and wove a Web over the place where he entered in; so that, the Murtherers went away, saying, there could be none there. At the Siege of Rochel, there was a po∣tent Enemy Fighting without, and a sharper Enemy Conflicting within, viz. a dreadful Famine. And the City was almost famisht when the Lord wonder∣fully relieved them, by causing the Tyde to bring to the Shore, abundance of Shell-Fish, the like whereof, never came there before, nor since, by which means, many Thousands were preserved Alive. To all these, let's each one in parti∣cular,
take a Survey of particular pro∣vidences and make a Catalogue of Gods gracious Acts of Providences, and ac∣knowledge thus in particular. Such a time I knew A pinching Famine, where∣in I was in great straits and perplexities; and I knew not where to have Bread, to put into my Mouth; then God fed me, and kept me alive. Such a time, I was in great danger of Fire and Wa∣ters; then God preserved me from the violence of both. Such a time, I was beset with Thieves and Robbers, then God delivered me. Such a time, I was Sick of a long and dangerous Disease, and was even at the brink of the Grave, ready to fall into it; yet then, the Lord raised me up, and added more days to my Life. Such a time, Enemies made long furrows on my Back, and bereft me of my Goods, and dispossest me of my Freehold, and depriv'd me of my visible Livelyhood; yet maugre all the malice and fury of the worst of Ene∣mies, God hath kept me alive amidst these Sufferings, and made supplies, and dayly Provisions for me. Thus then I argue, What God hath done, he can do. He is one and the same Omnipotent, and All-Sufficient Lord God. I'le there∣fore hold the Conclusion unalterable,
viz. That God is able to relieve me now, as formerly: His Hand is not shortned, that it cannot help, his Ear is not hea∣vy, that it cannot hear; What God pro∣miseth, his providences perform to the utmost. From all these instances, we have strong ground, for conviction and confidence in the truth of our Assertion, That God is All-Sufficient. I appeal to the Experiences of believing and obser∣ving Christians, who when they were invironed with Troubles and Difficul∣ties, and even almost at their Wits end, not knowing which way to wind out themselves, being destitute, or altoge∣ther frustrated of all outward visible Relief; yet, then they have retir'd them∣selves, shut themselves in their Closets, and faln upon their Knees, and have been earnest and importunate Solicitors, at the Throne of Grace, and so have received a gracious Answer of their Pray∣ers. There is a remarkable Story or two, wherewith I have been much affected, and I should be glad to Affect others accordingly. There was a poor Schol∣lar, in the University of Oxford, who was very Learned, and Well-deserving; but for want of Means, was like to have been put by his Degree; the loss where∣of
would have been much prejudicial to his Preferment in that Colledge where he Lived: Being much perplexed, he repairs to his Study, and falls upon his Knees, praying and begging Help from Heaven; before he had done Praying▪ one knockt at his Study-Door, and told him, that the Vice-Chancellor sent to speak with him: He went to him presently, and he gave him a considerable Sum of Money, whereby his Wants were sup∣plyed. Dr. Barnaby Potter, Provost of Queens Colledge, and af∣terward Bishop of Car∣lile. This Man, afterwards became the Head of that Colledge, and from thence, was prefer'd to greater Promo∣tion: This Story, he told to a person of good Credit, from whom I had it; And he spoke it in a way of Thank∣fulness, Communicating his Experience, for the Incouragement of others. ToDr. Pri∣deaux Rector of Exe∣ter-Col∣ledge, and Bi∣shop of Worce∣ster. this I'le add another Story, concerning an Eminent Learned Professor of the same University, who would in an hum∣ble, and thankful way, frequently make mention of his low Condition, when he came to the University: Much I my self have heard him speak to this pur∣pose. And after he became Head of a Colledge, and Regius Professor, he would keep in his Study, his skin Breeches, which he brought with him to the University, as a Remembrancer of his
former Poverty. One Story more I'leDr. Chadder∣ton Ma∣ster of Emanu∣el-Col∣ledge. tell of a Learned, and Eminently Godly Doctor of the University of Cambridge: He was Converted to be a sound Pro∣testant in the beginning of Queen Eliza∣beths Days; which when his Father (be∣ing a Papist) heard thereof, he sent him a Groat, and withal a Message, that he should never have any more from him, unless he would change his Religion. This Message did not alter his Resoluti∣on; but he followed his Studies, and God raised him Friends; insomuch, though he lived, after his Father so threat∣ned him, above Eighty Years; yet he never wanted Supplies elsewhere, though he received not a Penny from his Father. He proved so Eminent for his Parts and Piety, that he was Chosen the first Ma∣ster of Emanuel-Colledge. When that Preferment was first offered him, he made a modest refusal, being Consci∣ous to himself of his own unworthiness (For the best Men think meanliest of them∣selves). But the Founder had such a great Esteem of him, insomuch as he told him, if he would be no Master,Sir Wal∣ter Mild∣may. he would be no Founder of that Col∣ledge. How wonderfully did the Lord Provide for this good Man! Hereunto, we may apply that of the Psalmist,
Psal. 27. 10. When my Father and Mo∣ther forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. This gracious Man found this truth experimentally made good to him, in particular: It's further reported, that he kept that very Groat, which his Fa∣ther sent him, till his dying day. He lived long, even till above an Hundred Years Old, and so Dyed in a good Old Age; He Lived desired, and Dyed Lamented. What shall I say further for the il∣lustration of the Doctrine of my Text? Time would fail me sooner than mat∣ter of History, or experimental Narra∣tives of God's gracious provisions for his Children. Doth not God take care for Sparrows and Ravens, and take notice how many Young Ones are in every Nest? Doth not God provide for Worms, and the meanest creeping Creatures? And will not God take much more care for his own Children? If a Master of a Family take care for his Horse, he willMr. Sa∣muel Hie∣ron Mini∣ster of Modbury in the County of Devon. take much more care for his Child. Mr. Hieron that excellent Divine (whose Works praise him in the Gate): When he was Dying, he uttered these Words, God (said he) that takes care for young Ra∣vens, will take care for the young Hierons. And so it came to pass, for after his
Death, some noble Persons sent for his Children, and Maintained them very comfortably. I was well acquainted with two Precious Ministers, lately gone to Heaven: One on his death Bed, said,Mr. John Feniby of▪ Thoydon-Garnon in Essex. Mr. Gif∣for of Geyton in North∣ampton∣shire. He would leave to his Wife and Children, a gracious God and his Promises. Ano∣ther said concerning his Children, That he was assured that his Children, if they feared God, they should not want, and if they did not fear God, he wisht, that they might want, till they did fear him. Luther on his death Bed, said, That Lands and Riches he had none; but he commendeth his Relations to the Providence of his gra∣cious Father, who taketh care of his Chil∣dren. Suppose the extremity be so great, as outward Provisions may be took a∣way; yet God's All-Sufficiency, Wisdom, and Mercifulness, may not in the least be called into question: For what said the Martyr, when she was threatned to be Famished: If (said she) they take a∣way my Meat, God will take away my Sto∣mach. But all these things must be un∣derstood with Caution. Here is not in the least a Door open to Idleness, and Sloth∣fulness, in the particular Callings and Stations wherein God hath placed us, whilst we live upon Earth: For any one upon presumption of God's All-Suf∣ficiency,
to lye in a Ditch, and cry God help me: For any one to neglect his Calling, and Eat the Bread of Idleness; this is in an high manner to tempt God, and to abuse Divine Providence. Where∣fore let's be all earnestly Exhorted, to be faithful and industrious in the parti∣cular callings and capacities, wherein God hath set us in this present World. The Labourer, not the Loyterer is wor∣thy of his Hire. The Hand of the Dili∣gentProv. 10. 4. maketh Rich. The diligent and in∣dustrious Man is most capable, and de∣serving of Preferment, Prov. 22. 29. Seest thou a Man diligent in his Business? He shall stand before Kings he shall not stand be∣fore mean Men. There are two Rocks like those of Scylla and Charybdis, which must be carefully avoided; One is a distrust∣ful, carking, immoderate care; The o∣ther is a Supine carelessness and sloth∣fulness of Spirit: There's a middle way to Sail safely betwixt these two Rocks, and so to escape Splitting, Medio tutissi∣mus ibis. 'Tis true, we ought not to be careless, nor immoderately careful; We must use these outward things with mo∣deration, and so regard them, as they may be subservient, and subordinate un∣to Heavenly. The Body must be a servant to the Soul: it should be a hel∣per
and furtherer, not a hinderer. The things of this World must be made use of in Subordination, to those great things of Eternity; Wherefore Christ's Order must be observed, Mat. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. An  is a∣bominable. Let's then bottom all our Strength, Supports, and Comforts, up∣on God's All-Sufficiency; let's continue watching and praying, relying on God's Word, and staying our Hearts upon his Promises; let's be diligent and consci∣entious in the discharge of the duties of our calling, and questionless, God will provide, and supply, and sustain us, by his gracious Providence; let's do our du∣ty, and leave all successes unto God. CHAP. V. Containing a Fourth Argument from the Saints Experiences. THe Fourth and last Argument shall  from Saints Experi∣ences. be drawn from the Saints par∣ticular Experiences. Their Experiences are grounds of singular consolation and incouragement. So Hezekiah, after a signal deliverance from a great Sickness, makes a grateful acknowledgment,
Isa. 38. 16. O Lord, by these things Men live, and in all these things is the Life of my Spirit, so wilt thou recover me, and make me to Live. The Seventy render the words . Per promissa tua & facta, So Grotius. Men live by pro∣mises and providences. The experience of these things keeps the Children of God alive and revives their Spirits in the midst of their sorest Afflictions. Now Hezekiah had singular experience of God▪s Faithfulness, in recovering him from Sickness (which was, as is thought the Cum ficus a medicis etiam nostris adhibeantur ad pestem ma∣turandam, fieri potest ut dominus mediciam promissione adjuva∣ret. Calv. in Is. 38. 21. Pestilence) and granting him a Lease of Fifteen Years for his Life, he makes a Poem of Gratitude, and communicates his expe∣rience to Posterity. * It'sQuia celebris etiam erit futu∣rae atati & semper vigebit in omnium memoria. Calv. a strong Reason which Calvin gives on the Place. Because this History will be Fa∣mous to future Ages, and be kept fresh upon Record. And as Hezekiah, so Da∣vid draws grounds of support and com∣fort from former Experiences. When David was to Encounter with Goliah Saul lookt for one as much Higher than himself, as he was Taller than the rest, he expected some austere Face and brawny Arm; young rudly David is so far below his thoughts, that he receives rather contempt than thanks. B. Hall's Contemplat. (Impar congressus, a most unequal En∣counter
in humane Conjecture) yet Da∣vid hath recourse to Faith and Experi∣ence, which were Armour of Proof: He had given his probatum est, as you may Read, how strongly he urgeth an Ar∣gument from 1 Sam. 17. 34, 35, 36. And David said unto Saul, thy Servant kept his Fathers Sheep, and there came a Lion and a Bear, &c. After David had escaped out of Abimelech's Court (that was his appellative name) or Achish King of Gath, you Read, what good use David made of this Experimental deli∣verance Psal. 34. 6. This poor Man cryed and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles. David himself, was that poor distressed Man, that re∣ceived such a signal Deliverance, where∣upon he calls others to joyn with him in Praising of God, v. 3, 4. By this Exam∣pleExem∣plo suo persuade∣re conatur reliquis, pollicens illis si properent ad Domi∣num certe fore ex∣audiendos. he perswades others, Promising them, that if they make hast to God, certainly they shall be heard. So Musculus on the place. And as this Holy Man tells his own Experiences, and how Graciously God dealt with himself; so he Musters up admirable Experiences of God's Deal∣ings with others, as so many Incen∣tives, for his faith and recumbency up∣on God. There's an eminent Instance, which I shall mention, of great Con∣sequence,
as the Psalmist expresseth it, Psal. 74. 13. Thou didst divide the Sea by thy Strengh, thou brakest the Heads of the Dragons in the Waters. How the Sea was divided, is mentioned, Exod. 14. 21, 22. God caused the Sea to go back▪ by a strong East Wind all that Night, and made the Sea Dry Land, and the Waters were Divided. And the Children of Israel went into the midst of the Sea, upon the Dry Ground; and the Waters were a Wall unto them, on their Right Hand, and on their Left. Here's one great Experi∣ence, that the Sea was dried up, and be∣came passable for the Israelites; Another is, that the Heads of the Dragons wereNomi∣nat Prin∣cipes & proceres exercitus pharao∣nis Dra∣cones, hos∣que ita a truculen∣tia, & sae∣vitia quam exercue∣runt in s∣raelitas, appellat. Moll. broken in the Waters. What were these Dragons? Answ. They were Princes▪ and Captains in Pharaohs Army, who for their fierceness, and cruelty against Israel, were like Dragons. What be∣came of these Dragons, and furious E∣nemies? See Exod. 15. 4. These were Pharaohs chosen Captains, that were Drowned in the Sea. The Psalmist go∣eth on in the same Psalm, 74. 14. Thou brakest the Heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be Meat to the People, Inhabiting the Wilderness. Hence arise Three Questions. (1.) What's meant by this Leviathan? (2.) How his Heads
were broken in pieces? (3.) How he came to be Meat to the People, Inhabi∣ting the Wilderness? Quest. What's meant by this Levia∣than? Answ. By Leviathan, we understand Pharaoh. Calvin observes upon the Place, Leviathan non abs re vocatur Pharao, prop∣ter commoditates maris, quia illic regnum suum quasi Balaena exerceat. Quest. 2. What's meant by breaking of the Heads of Leviathan? Answ. The Forces, Strength, and Po∣wer of Pharaoh, were all broken to pie∣ces; not one of the Egyptians Escaped, Exod. 14. 28. Exod. 15. 19. Now that the great, Proud Leviathan Pharaoh was Destroyed, and his Captains, Horse∣men, and all his Host; these were great Deliverances. Quest. But 3ly. How did this Levia∣than become Meat to the People, Inha∣biting the Wilderness? Answ. Some understand it of the Spoils, and Prey which these Israelites got from the Dead Bodies, and that these Dead Bodies were Meat to Wild Beasts and Fowls. But I conceive there's yet a fur∣ther meaning of these Words: God gave the Leviathan to be Meat to the Israelites, for their Faith, Security, and
Dependence, and in the exercise of their experience and recumbence upon God; to this purpose, Calvin gives the Sense of the Words, Victuals were then laid inAnnon fuit tunc reposita, qu ves∣ceretur populus; quia extinctis hostibus, securitas non aliter ac cibus vitam protraxit. Calv. for their Food, because when the Enemies were Destroyed, Security as well as Food protracted their Life. A few parallel Instances I shall Select. St. Peter was delivered from the Fury of Herod, Act. 12. 11. And hence he took a ground of Incouragement, to go on resolvedly in the Work of the Ministry. St. Paul makes a Catalogue of his Sufferings, 2 Cor. 11. How of∣ten was he delivered from perils of Rob∣bers, perils of Waters, perils among false Brethren? He was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, i. e. Nero, that cruel Man. And by all deliverances he was a Gainer, and lays down his Ex∣perience, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Who comforteth us in all our Tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any Trouble, by the Comfort wherewith we our selves are Comforted of God. For as the Sufferings of Christ abound in us; so our Consolati∣on also aboundeth by Christ. It would be a large Work (though it may be worth
the while) to reckon up the comforta∣ble Experiences of the Children of God. I shall only Instance in some choice Ser∣vants of God, who Experimentally rea∣ped much benefit by Afflictions. Da∣vid joyns the Rod and Staff together, for his Comfort, Psal. 23. 1. and Psal. 119. 67. he confesseth, Before I was af∣flicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy Word. Luther profest, that Afflicti∣ons taught him to understand the Scrip∣tures. How many have been brought home by Afflictions, who in their Pro∣sperity went astray? Isiodor. saith, Ad∣versa corporis, remedia sunt animae. Ae∣gritudo carnem vulnerat, mentem curat, i. e. Corporal Adversities are Spiritual Remedies; Sickness woundeth the Flesh, but healeth the Mind. Beza, one of the most pious, learned, and orthodox Cri∣ticks (that I know of) speaks of a great Sickness, wherewith he was Visited, Mor∣bus iste (inquit) verae fuit sanitatis princi∣pium, i. e. That Sickness was the begin∣ning of true Spiritual Health. It is notDr. Ar∣rowsmith chains of Princi∣ples. vid. melch. Adam in vit. Ex∣terorum. (as a reverend Divine observes) more u∣sual for Children to shoot up in length, than with Christians to wax taller in Grace, in, or after Sickness. Rolloc said upon his Death Bed, I am not ashamed to pro∣fess, that I never reached to so high a pitch
of the Knowledge of God, as I have at∣tained in this Sickness. Olevian said up∣on his Death Bed, In this Disease, I have learned to know aright what Sin is, and what the Majesty of God is. I shall men∣tionId in vit. Ger∣man. but one Example more, and that is of Learned Rivet, who said upon his Death Bed, In the space of Ten Days,Dauber. 9. in o∣rat. fu∣neb. since I kept my Bed, I have learned more, and made greater progress in Divinity, than in the whole course of my Life before. What further inlargement may be re∣quired, I leave to the Saints particular Experiences, and shall add no more con∣cerning this particular Head. CHAP. VI. For Demonstration of the Doctrine by Rea∣sons, and first from necessity of Pre∣cept. HAving dispatch't the First Head ofHead 2. for De∣monstr. by Rea∣son. my Discourse, wherein I have proved the Doctrine, That God is, All-Sufficient, by Four convincing, and weighty Arguments; I come now in the Second place, to demonstrate this Truth infer'd from the Doctrine, viz. That this Consideration, that God is All-Sufficient,
should ingage us silently and qui∣etly to submit unto God, and stay, and de∣pend upon his All-Sufficiency, amidst our greatest Losses and Afflictions. The Truth of the Doctrine, I shall endeavour to demonstrate by a Four∣fold Reason drawn from the necessity, excellency and utility of the Duty, in quietly submitting to God's Hand, and lastly from the mischievous Consequen∣ces of repining, murmuring, and strug∣ling against God. The First Reason drawn from the  from necessity of pre∣cept. Necessity of this Duty; and that's to be considered, as Necessitas praecepti vel medii. 1. For the Necessity of Precept. We are frequently commanded in the Word of God, to Exercise these great Duties of Waiting, Believing, and Sub∣mitting unto the Will of God. David's Faith was an Excellent Cordial to keep him from Fainting. Psal. 27. 13. I had Fainted, unless I had believed to see the Goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the Living. And, What's the Duty, which he prescribes? see Vers. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen thine Heart: Wait I say, on th Lord. He was much troubled about t Prosperity of Wicked Mn: He pre∣scribes the same Duty of waiting on the
Lord. Psal. 37. 34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, and he shall Exalt thee to Inherit the Land: When the Wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it. When he was troubled with treacherous, hypocritical, false-hearted Men, he prescribed a Reme∣dy, Psal. 55. 22. Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. And his Resolution is fixed, Vers. 23. But I will Trust in thee. David chargeth this Duty of Waiting, upon his own Soul, Psal. 62. 5. My Soul, wait thou only upon God; for my Expectation is from him. And this Duty of Trusting, he frequent∣ly presseth upon himself and others, Psal. 37. 3. 5. And he layeth down strong En∣couragements to trust in God; for there is Security in the Practice of this Du∣ty. Psal 18. 30. He is a Buckler to allPsal. 18. 30. those that trust in him. Psal. 37. 5. Com∣mit thy Way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Prov. 29. 25. The Fear of Man bringeth a Snare;Isa. 7. 9. but who so putteth his Trust in the Lord, shall be safe. And there's Stability in Trusting in God. Psal. 125. 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever. There's happiness, Prov. 16. 20. Who so Trusteth in the Lord, Happy is he. A Blessing is their Portion, that
Trust in God, Psal. 34. 8. Blessed is the Man that Trusteth in him. And what can be desired more? Read further, Isa. 26. 9. Isa. 40. 31. And I need name no more Scriptures for Comfirmation of so clear a Truth. But if Men will be so Mad, as to venture elsewhere, they shall smart for it; If Men will forsake a Fountian, and betake themselves to Cisterns: If Men will forsake God, and try Creatures, and put their Confidence in them, they shall pay dear for their Madness and Folly, and they shall never find what they expect from the Creatures. They put Trust in them, but they shall find them Deceitful, as Jacob found Laban, Gen. 31. David's familiar Friends dealt Perfidiously with him, Psal. 41. 9. wherefore he Communicates his Ex∣perience, not to Trust the great Ones of the Earth, Psal. 146. 3. And in∣joyns us to put our Trust in God, Psal. 118. 8, 9. It is better to Trust in the Lord, than to put Confidence in Man. It is better to Trust in the Lord, than to put Confidence in Princes. Quest. But some will complain of their own Weakness, and their Ene∣mies Strength, and Combinations. For Answ. We must have recourse to that
strengthening Promise, Isa. 41. 14, 15, 16. Fear not thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel, I will help thee, saith the Lord and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. Behold I will make thee a new sharp Threshing-Instrument having Teeth: thou shalt Thresh the Mountains, and beat them Small, and shall make the Hills as Chaff. Thou shalt Fan them, and the Wind shall carry them away, and the Whirle-Wind shall Scatter them: and thou shalt rejoyce in the Lord, and shalt Glory in the Holy One of Israel. And against all Associations, and Combinations of Adversaries, we have abundantly enough to Arm, and Incou∣rage us against them, from Isa. 8. 12. 13. 14. Say ye not a Confederacy, to all them, to whom this People shall say a Con∣federacy: neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread. And he shall be for a Sanctuary, &c. Others will complain of heavy Bur∣thens, and the insupportable Pressures, Cares and Troubles inevitable; and they are so puzled and perplexed, as they know not how to get Rid of them: It's usual with such Male-contents to know more, what makes against them, than what makes for them. Wherefore let them be advised to take Counsel from
the Word of God. Particularly we are Commanded To cast our Burthen upon the Lord; to be careful in nothing, butPsal. 55. 22. Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 7. to make our Requests known with Prayers and Supplications; and to cast our Care up∣on him, for he careth for us. If God makes us drink the Wine of Astonish∣ment, and Eat the Bread of Affliction; If we drink Water and Gall, and have a bitter Cup of Affliction mingled for us; let's not revile Instruments, let's not murmur against second Causes; but let us imitate Job, who neither railed a∣gainst the Sabeans, nor the Chaldeans, nor at Satan; but he acknowledged God in all, and quietly submitted unto him, Job 1. 21. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, . vers. 70. Isa. 30. 5. Blessed be the Name of the Lord. In times of great Affliction, we are Exhorted, to a silent and quiet Behaviour, Jer. 8. 14. Let us be Silent, for the Lord God hath put us to Silence. And Zach. 2. 13. Be Silent, O all Flesh before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his Holy Habitation. And Amos 5. 13. Therefore the Prudent shall keep Si∣lence in that time for it is an Evil time. That time was a time of Persecution, for we Read in the 12. v. They afflict the Just, and they turn aside the Poor in the Gate from their Right. What's the Duty in∣cumbent
now, but to be Silent (i. e.)Taciti perferent injurias quicun∣que laesi fuerint & orabunt intus suos gemitus, quia non audebu conquaeri. Calv. not to murmur, rage, and fret, and fume against Evil Instruments. And it's a great Point of Prudence, to exercise such a quiet Behaviour, in such Evil times. The meaning of that place, is not, that Men should be Tongue-ty'd in God's Cause; but that they should forbear all callumniations, and reproaches, which are usually belcht forth, by way of per∣sonal Revenge. Christ, in a special manner Commends the Practice of Pa∣tience, Luk. 21. 19. In your Patience, Possess ye your Souls. It's the more Re∣markable, that this Charge was given by Christ, by way of a Preparative, to fit and prepare them, for those great Calamities, which should befall Jerusa∣lem. Christ foretold Jerusalems▪ Destructi∣on, and he Commends this excellent Grace of Patience, which, at such a time, will be of singular use and benefit. Thus you see Evidently, that there is a ne∣cessity of Precept.
CHAP. VII. Proving the Doctrine from the necessity of Means in Four Particulars. NOw Secondly Consider, there is Ne∣cessitas2. From necessity of Means Medii. For a quiet, con∣tented, submissive Spirit, which patient∣ly yields, and resigns all to God, is ei∣ther a means to remove the Trouble, or else, to Alleviate and Mitigate it, or 3dly. To have it Sanctified, and made Profitable, or 4thly. To make Compen∣sation for all Losses. Let's warily un∣derstand all these Particulars, not as if they were efficient or meritorious Cau∣ses; but only as instrumental Means, Subservient, and Subordinate to God's Assistance: And so understanding them, we will inlarge them particularly, as fol∣loweth. First, I say a submissive, quiet, yield∣ingA Sub∣missive Spirit is a Means to re∣move the Bur∣then. Spirit, oftentimes gets the Burthen and Trouble removed. Thus it fared with Jehoshaphat, 2 Cron. 20. 12. We know not what to do, but our Eyes are up∣on Thee. And see the Blessed Success, vers. 22, 23. And Hanani the Seer tells Asa, 2 Chron. 16. 8. Were not the Ae∣thiopians
and Lubims an huge Host, with many Chariots and Horse-men? Yet because thou didst rely on the Lord, he deliveredTantum in nobis fidei sta∣bilitate Dominus esse desi∣derat, ut certius es∣se, quod credimus, quam quod patimur judicemus, & verius habeamus sperando, quam sensi∣biliter. Hieron. them into thine Hand. When we can Believe, and cast our selves upon God, and wait with Patience, then are we in a capacity of receiving Mercy. Faith establisheth and quieteth the Heart, and prepares it for reception of Mer∣cies. Secondly, If the Trouble yet remain,2. A sub∣missive Spirit, is a meaus to ease the Bur∣then. and still grieve us; however, if the Heart can trust in God, and quietly sub∣mit unto him, the Burthen is alleviated and facilitated, and the smart much Mi∣tigated. It was a hard Tryal for Aaron to submit so quietly, when two of his Children were struck Dead before his Eyes; yet questionless his Grief was much abated, and his Affliction les∣sened, by his silent and patient Deport∣ment, under that heavy Stroke of God, Lev. 10. 3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, this is that which the Lord spake, saying, I will be Sanctified in them that come nighSilet au∣dita vo∣luntate Dei, Ca∣jetan. me, and before all the People I will be Glo∣rified: And | Aaron held his peace. It was an unwelcome, & an astonishing
Message, which Samuel told Eli from the Lord, of the Destruction of his Sons, and utter Extirpation of his Family: Yet Eli discovered such an excellent temper of Spirit, in resigning his Will to Gods Will, as thereby his Burthen was made far Lighter, 1 Sam. 3. 18. And Eli said, it is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him Good. How dreadful was that Prophecy of Isaiah to Hezeki∣ah, that all his Treasures should be car∣ried to Babylon, and that his Children should be Eunuchs in the Palace at Baby∣lon! Yet Hezekiah acknowledged all Good, that came from God, 2 King. 20. 19. Good is the Word of the Lord, which thou hast Spoken. In all Job's Sufferings, he acknowledged that the Hand of God had Touched him, Job 19. 21. He re∣ceived message after message of sad Ty∣dings, and each Messenger worse than the former. One brings the News ofJob. 1. the Sabeans carrying away his Oxen and Asses. Another tells him of the Bur∣ning of his Sheep and Servants: A Third tells him of the Chaldeans taking a∣way his Camels, and Slaying his Ser∣vants: A Fourth brings the Saddest News of all, that the House fell upon his Chil∣dren, and Slew them. The Messengers of Afflictions were so swift in running
to meet with Job, as if the Second Messen∣ger made hast to Tread upon the Heels of the First, and the Third upon the Se∣cond, and the Fourth upon the Third:Velut unda su∣perve undae. All these came upon Job, like Tempestu∣ous Waves of the Sea, dashing one up∣on another, with renewed Violence▪ Now though Job could not remove these heavy Afflictions; yet he found the Sense of them much abated, and his Spirit much quieted, by Praising God for all, and acknowledging the Hand of God in all, as appears, Job 1. 21. Third, However though Afflictions3. Af∣flictions are San∣ctified. continue very great and painful, and nei∣ther removeable, nor sense of Mitigation appears at present, yet the worst of Af∣flictions are (through Mercy) Sanctified to the Children of God. Affliction in it self is not Bonum, yet it's turn'd in Bonum, to the Good of all true Belie∣vers. The Good Figgs were carried away Captive for their Good, Jer. 24. 5. The Tribe of Judah resembled by those Good Figgs, was carried away Captive into Babylon; but God wrought Good for them, out of their Captivity. Men would be apt to pass Censures, because of the Suf∣ferings of Judah in their Captivity: but the Lord Corrects their Censures, in pro∣mising
that all shall be for their Good.Quasi diceret, prepostere fieri ju∣dicium de calamita∣te pauco∣rum anno∣rum, sed expectan∣dum esse finem. Calvin in Jer. 24. 5. Luther in Gen. 6. As if he should say, That a Judgment of the Calamity of a few Years, is made pre∣posterously, but the End must be expected, (as Calvin observes on the place fore-quo∣ted, Jer. 24. 5.) The Lord Professeth that he humbled, and proved his Peo∣ple, and his end was to do them Good in the latter End, Deut. 8. 16. We are Corrected for our Profit, Heb. 12. 10. Luther used to say, Schola crucis, est Schola lucis, & non est Christanus qui non est crucianus. It's a common saying, ; Corrections are In∣structions; so they should be; and they are happy, where Correction and In∣struction meet together, as the PsalmistCum vi∣bices dor∣so meo im∣primeres, precepta tua cordi meo in∣sculpsisti. Rivet. in Psalm. expresseth, Psal. 94. 12. Blessed is the Man, whom thou chastneth O Lord, and teachest him out of thy Law. Joseph's Bre∣thren, when they were in distress in Egypt, reflected upon their Sin, and were perplexed for it, which was committed many Years before, and lookt upon their present Suffering, as a just Punishment for that Sin, Gen. 42. 21. And they said one to another, we are ve∣rilyPrius quam urgeret eos afflictio tor pebant, nunc ingredi cogun∣tur in suas conscientias. Cal∣vin in Gen. 42. 21. Guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the Anguish of his Soul when he besought us, and we would not
hear; therefore is this Distress come upon us. They are good Observations, Ocu∣los, quos culpa claudit, poena aperit, vexatioQui tri∣bulantur, Sacras Scriptu∣ras meli∣us intelli∣gunt, Se∣cundi & prosperi eas legu sicut O∣viii car∣men, Lu∣ther. dat intellectum. The Fiery Furnace did not hurt the Three Children. Only Three were cast into the Furnace, but there appeared a Fourth, even the An∣gel of God for their Deliverance: The nature of Fire was changed, insomuch, as it had no power, so much as to Singe an Hair of their Heads. The Mouths of the Lyons were stopt, and could not hurt Daniel; Daniel wasDan. 7. 22. cast alone into the Den, but he was not alone there, for he had the com∣pany of an Angel of God, who was sent to shut the Lyons Mouths. The Deluge of Water, which Drowned the whole World, did not drown No∣ah's Ark. but bare it up; so Afflictions, when Sanctified, are so far from hurt∣ing God's Children, as they help them, and lift them up nigher to Heaven. Af∣flictions are as a vantage ground, to raise them higher, to see a great deal further; or like so many Looking-Glasses, to re∣present to the Children of God, their Stains and Deformities. I shall apply a saying of St. Ambrose, Quod pateris, un∣de plangis, Medicina est tibi non poena, ca∣stigatio, non damnatio; noli repellere flagel∣lum
Domini, nisi vis repelli ab haereditate.Tribu∣atio est aqua salsa quae Sca∣biem pur∣gat & ab∣stergit. Guil. Pa∣ris. de morib. 9. It's reported that salt Marishes cure dis∣seased Sheep; I am sure, Salt preserves Meat from Putrifaction. Scullions scoure away Rust from Vessels. The Fan se∣parates the Wheat from the Chaff: much more do Afflictions when Sancti∣fi'd, advantage God's Children: But we must know, that it was not the movingVeniet tribulatio mea, veni∣et & pur∣gatio mea. August. Psal▪ 61. Joh. 5. 4. of the Waters of the pool of Bethesda, that made them Healing; but it was the coming of the Angel at a certain Season, who troubled the Waters, and afterwards, who ever stept in first was Healed. It was not the Mantle of Eli∣jah that divided the Waters, but the God of Elijah: neither will Troubles, Losses, Sufferings, meerly considered as in them∣selves, do us any good, unless the Lord Sanctify them to us, and by them, Purge, Purify, Refine, and Cleanse us, and make us partakers of his Holiness: Wherefore our Duty is, with a calm and sedate Spirit, to submit unto God's Correcting Hand, and act Faith on Pro∣mises, and exercise Patience, and PrayJob 36. 10. that God would open our Ears to receive Discipline, and Purge out our Dross and Tin; so that by Afflictions and Correcti∣ons, our Sins and Corruptions, may be wrought out, and Graces wrought into
our Hearts. If Afflictions produce such good Effects, we shall be exceeding great Gainers by our Losses; and after a deli∣berate reflecting upon all our Suffer∣rings, we shall Experimentally conclude▪ with David, every one of us in particu∣lar, as Psal. 119. 67. Before I was Af∣flicted I went astray; but now I have kept thy Words, Comp. with vers. 17. It is good for me, that I have been Afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. What great benefit God's People get by their Suf∣ferings, is evidently Represented, Psal. 68. 13. Though ye have lain among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the Wings of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold. Etiam jacueri∣tis inter vasa ple∣na fuli∣ginis i. e. oppressi fueritis magna calamitate candidi laetique reddemini ob liberationem Vatab. This (as good Authors ob∣serve) sets forth the happy Issue of Af∣flictions, and the great Benefit which the People of God get by them; but of this more largely in the next particu∣lar. Fourthly and lastly, though Afflicti∣ons4thly. Ʋnde se∣quitur non sem∣per jucun∣da sere∣nitate frui Ec∣clesiam; sed ex tenebris erutam splendorem recuperare, ac si ab omni malo intacta foret. Calv. may be heavy for a time, yet the exceeding great Compensation, and Pro∣fit acruing in the close, will make a∣mends for all: So it was with Job, Jam.
5. 11. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. And what that was, we have Recorded, Job. 42 10. Scrip∣tura mo∣net ipsi duplo fa∣cultates amissas fuisse red∣ditas be∣nedictione sc. Domi∣ni, quae abunde di∣tat. Merc. The Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Christ makes a large Promise, consisting of many par∣ticulars (which according to the Rule of an Induction, concludes Universally) Mat. 19. 29. And every one that hath for∣saken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife or Children, or Lands for my Names Sake, shall receive an Hundred Fold, and shall Inherit Ever∣lasting Life. The meaning is not, that a Man should receive an Hundred Fa∣thers or Mothers, &c. but that he should receive Christ, who is infinitely Ipse u∣nus Chris∣tus erit ti∣bi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono bo∣na snt oma▪ August. Exo 12. 36. more worth then all. Sometimes God makes up the Losses of his Suffering Servants in kind. God gave the Israelites Favour in the Eyes of the Egyptians, so that at parting from them, They Spoiled them. And God took away the Substance of Laban, and gave it unto Jacob, in Re∣compence of his rigorous Servitude; however, if God doth not make up worldly Losses, with the Riches of the World, yet he makes them up to his Children with Spiritual Riches; which are as much better, as Heaven is bet∣ter than Earth. David lost his Wives,
his House, even all that he had of the World, at the sacking of Ziglag; but he had that which was infinitely better, than all that he had Lost; for he had Consolations from Heaven, and Sup∣portation from God, 1 Sam. 30. 6. But David incouraged himself in the Lord his God. It's a saying commonly observ'd, Virtus repulsae nescia Sordidae. I have Read, that when Alexander was in a great Strait, and was put upon an hard Service, he said, En periculum par animo Alexandri; here's a Danger fit for the Mind of an Alexander to Encounter withal: So Da∣vid▪ in his great Straits at Ziglag, dis∣covered heroical Magnanimity; he sunk not under those heavy Pressures, but made use of the Right and only Sup∣port, and Strength in Trouble, as the Text Specifies. But (i. e.) notwith∣standing the Burning of Ziglag, the car∣rying away his Wives, and many Peo∣ple Captive, and the Mutiny of the dis∣contented Souldiers, who threatned to Stone him; David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Manasseh gain'd more good by a Prison, than by a Pa∣lace, and was a greater gainer for his Soul, by an Iron Chain, than by a Chain of Gold; when the Prodigal fed on Husks, he understood himself better,
than when he fed delicately at his Fa∣thers Table. Zeno could say after heJam di∣dici Phi∣losophari Zeno. had suffered Shipwrack, Now I have learned to be a Philosopher. And should not a Christian say Experimentally; By Sufferings, Losses, and Crosses, I have Learned to value all things under the Sun at a lower rate than ever, and Christ, and his Graces, and Heaven at an higher rate. It was a frequent saying of Aquinas, that great School-Doctor,Mallem bonam conscien∣tiam, quam ple∣num mar∣supium. Aquinas. I had rather have a good Conscience, than a full Purse. But instar omnium the A∣postles Determination takes place, Phil. 3. 8. who counted all things but Loss and Dung, in comparison of Christ. The Original words are Emphatical , Loss and Garbidge. Put Christ and his Riches in one Scale, and the World with all its Pomp, and Bravery in another Scale, and these are less, than the Dust of the Ballance, in compari∣son of Christ and his Riches; for these will infinitely preponderate. Wherefore let us make sure of Eternal, and never fading Riches. It was a choice saying of Lewis of Bavoyer, Emperour of Ger∣many, Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes quae cum naufragio simul enatent, i. e. Such Riches are to be got, as when a Ship∣wrack comes, they will Swim out with
us. And these are only the Riches of Christ. CHAP. VIII. Containing a Second Reason, drawn from the excellency of a quiet, and submissive Frame of Spirit. I now Proceed to a Second Reason,2. Rea∣son drawn from the excellen∣cy of this submis∣sive Spi∣rit. drawn from the excellency of this submissive Frame of Spirit, which yields to God, and Resignes all to his Disposal. Solomon tells us, Prov. 12. 26. The Righte∣ous is more excellent than his Neighbour, and Prov. 17. 27. A Man of Understan∣ding is of an excellent Spirit. Now where∣in doth the excellency of this Wise Man Shine, but by the lustre of his Graces? Grace is the Beauty of the Soul, and no Ornament like those of Divine Gra∣ces, to Adorn a Christian. Now a Man of a Wise composed Spi∣rit, who depends on God for his Porti∣on, and stays upon his All-Sufficiency, and makes it his Study to resign him∣self, and to submit to God's Will, in all Estates and Conditions whatsoever; such a Man doth in a Conspicuous and E∣minent manner, exert, and exercise six
choice Graces, viz, Wisdom, Faith, Hope, Patience, Self-Denial, and Holy Courage; Every one of these is an expedient, and help for the right Management of a Christian, excellent Spirit, amidst varie∣ties of Hardships, and Sufferings incum∣bent on us. First For Wisdom. As it is a sign of1. Wis∣dom. Prov. 22. 3. Mich. 6. 9. Prudence to Foresee Evil; so it is a Character of a Man of Wisdom, To hear the Rod, and who hath appointed it. He is a Wise Man, that deliberately ob∣serves the handy Works of God, and ac∣knowledgeth his Wisdom, Power, and Soveraignty in ordering all Affairs. It's a doggish Quality to snarl at the Stone, and not to take notice of the Hand that Threw it. To make a strict enquiry into Second Causes, to find out such and such an Evil Instrument, and to quarrel wlth them by reviling words, and revengeful deeds: Oh! How unsu∣table is this to a Christian Spirit! That eminent Servant of Jesus Christ; Mr. Dod, was a signal example of Meekness, and Compassion towards his Enemies. In the beginning of the late, sad, and lamentable Wars, a Souldier who had Plundred his House, and gave him re∣proachful and threatning Language, a few days after, that Souldier being Sript
in the Battle at Edge-Hill, Fled for his Life, and came again to Mr. Dods House in a forlorn Condition, ready to be Star∣ved for want of Cloathing; which when that good Man Mr. Dod heard of, h▪ sent Cloaths unto him, to cover his Na∣kedness. Here's the Wisdom of a Chri∣stian Spirit, to understand the great Du∣ty mentioned by the Apostle; Not toRom. 12. 21. be overcome of Evil, but to overcome E∣vil with Good. When the Psalmist tells of the Af∣flictions of God's Children, Psal. 107. 39. and of their Deliverance, ver. 40, 41, 42. he Concludes, ver. 43. Who so is Wise, and will observe those things, e∣ven they shall understand the Kindness of the Lord.Quid de paenarum acerbita te qneci∣mur? u∣nus quis∣que no∣strum se punit. Slav. lib. 3. A Wise Man under Afflictions will inquire into the Cause, and reflect up∣on himself, as the Church did, Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is Righteous, for I Rebelled against his Commandement. A Wise Man will inquire into the end of all God's Chastisements, and La∣bour to answer God's End, and that isA Deo putimur, sed ipsi facimus ut punia∣mur. Id. lib. 8. Isa. 9. 12. 13. to Repent, and Turn unto God. For this very Reason, The Anger of God, is not turned away, but his Hand is Stretched out still; For the People turneth not to him that Smiteth them, neither do they seek
the Lord of Hosts. Here then lieth the great Wisdom to understand God's Mean∣ing, and end in Chastising, and that is to reform, purify, and new mold us, and to bring us forth out of the Fur∣nace, purified Seven times. Every Good and Wise Man, should ponder in his Heart, and practise accordingly, that ex∣cellent Speech of Elihu, Job. 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, Teach thou me, If I have done Iniquity, I will do no more. This is the right use of Wis∣dom under the Rod of Correction. Second, The excellency of this Spi∣rit,. Faith. Shines in a strong, vigorously acting Faith. The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We Walk by Faith, not by Sight. Sense fail'd in the time of a dark Vision, but Faith failed not, Heb. 2. 4. The just shall Live by his Faith. Estates, Contrivan∣ces, Friendship, and Favour of Men, Pro∣jects, and Expectations, all these may Fail: A Believer cannot Live by any o these; but the Life of Faith is such an excellent Life, as we may compare it to Goliahs Sword, and say of the Life of Faith, as David said of that Sword,1 Sam. 21. 9. Give me that, there is none like it.
What Wonders Faith did, the 11. Chap. to the Hebrews gives an ample Catalogue. Sense fail'd Job on the Dung∣hill, he saw no visible means of Restau∣ration to his former Enjoyments; yet▪ how strenuously did his Faith act, Job 13. 15. Though he Slay me, yet will I Trust in him. And on his Dunghill, he sawJob 19. 25. his Redeemer. Reason was non-plust, concerning Sarahs bringing forth a Son against the Course of Nature: But A∣braham against Hope, believed in Hope, that he might become the Father of many Nations, &c. See Rom. 4. 18, 19, 20, 21. Stephen, when the Stones were clatte∣ring about his Ears, saw Christ standingActs 7. 56. on the Right Hand of God. We often Read in Scripture of Christ sitting in Ma∣jesty and Glory; but when Stephen was a Stoning, Christ was said to be a Stan∣ding, a ready posture to vindicate theCredere impossibi∣lia ratio∣ni, Spe∣rare dila∣ta, amare deum, cum se praebeat inimicum. Luther. Quarrel of his Suffering Servant. Luther gives Three grand Properties of Faith, viz. (1.) To believe things impossible to Reason. (2.) To hope for things defer'd. (3.) To love God when he shews himself an Enemy. There are also two great Properties of Faith; One is Prophetick, to foresee De∣liverance, Answers of Prayers, Remo∣val of Judgments, and such like: A∣nother
is Magnetick, to have an attrac∣tive Vertue to draw things near, that may seem to be afar off. Faith will Approxi∣mate a Promise, and by a patient wait∣ing Spirit, acquiesce in the same, not doubting the performance thereof, in the appointed Season. Faith will trust God upon his Word. Third, Hope acts vigorously in a dis∣consolate3. Hope. Condition. Ezra Comforts the People thus: Yet now there is HopeEzra 10. 2. in Israel concerning this thing. Hope is like a Prop or Pillar, to support, and stay a Building from falling; It's an An∣chor cast out in a Storm to stay the Ship. The Church quietly bore those sad Calamities incumbent on them, Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a Man should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. ver. 29. He putteth his Mouth in the Dust, if so be, there may be Hope. But what's the Ground of Hope? Read ver. 21. The Lord will not cast off for E∣ver. There's Hope, that the Rod will not alwaies be on our Backs: And there's Two strong Grounds for our Faith. (1.) There are Multitude of Mercies in God, ver. 32. (2.) He doth not Afflict willingly. We may add further, that God poureth not out his whole Wrath;Heb. 3. 2. but in Wrath he remembers Mercy. God
hath not forgoten to be Gracious, nor shut up his loving Kindness in displea∣sure. Were it not for Hope, we should not receive such Comforts, from the Scriptures as we do. But amidst all the Troubles of God's People, they draw singular Grounds of Hope, and Con∣solation from the Scriptures. And to this purpose are the Scriptures Wrote, Rom. 15. 4. The Saints rejoyce in Hope, Rom. 5. 2. Rom. 12. 12. Although they are cast into Prison, they learn their Du∣ty there, Rev. 2. 10. And though they are close Prisoners, they are Prisoners of Hope, Zach. 9. 12. Hope is the Saints Helmet, 1 Thes. 5. 8. In great Trou∣bles and Perplexities, there's a Door of Hope to get out of them. For after Achan was Stoned, it was promised, that the Valley of Achor should be a Door ofHos. 2. 14. Hope. Times of Jacobs Troubles, should be special times of Jacobs Trust. It was a dismal day mentioned, Jer. 30. 5, 6, 7. But there's Comfort near approach∣ing. It is even the time of Jacobs Trou∣ble, but he shall be Saved out of it. In the Grave, though the Body moulder into Dust, there's a certain Hope of a Resurrection, Psal. 61. 9. comp. with Acts 2. 9. Now the same God that can raise the Body out of the Dust, can raise
up those that lye in the Dust, though despised and trampled upon, by maliti∣ous and inveterate Enemies. Anti-christ shall fall, and never rise more: A Mill-Stone shall be put about his Neck, and he thrown into the Sea: But Gods Peo∣ple, though they may fall, they shall rise again; though their Sufferings be Sharp, yet they shall be short; as A∣thanasius said of Julians Persecution, Nu∣becula est cito transitura. And the grea∣ter the Sufferings of God's People are for Righteousness sake, their Resurrection shall be more Glorious. There's Mat∣ter of Comfort and Duty, by them to be put in Practice, mentioned, Micah. 7. 8, 9. Rejoyce not against me, O mine Enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in Darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have Sinned against him.Levius fit patien∣tia, quic∣quid cor∣rigere est nefas. Horat. Eccles. 7. 8. Fourthly, There followeth the Exer∣cise of Patience. And this will make an hard Yoak easy, and an heavy Burthen light. The Patient in Spirit (as Solomon tells us) is better than the Proud in Spi∣rit. The Reason a Learned Author gives, is, because Anger is Rash and Precipitate,Quia ira praecps est, finem nunquam expectabit, quod faciet patiens, & ira lentus iram moderabitur, exitum spectans. Merc.
and will never expect an End; but a Man Patient, and slow to Anger, will moderate his Anger, expecting an End. By Faith, we possess the Head, by Love, we pos∣sess one another; by Patience, every one possesseth himself: wherefore Christs Charge is, to be again and again incul∣cated,Luke 21. 19. In your Patience, possess ye your Souls. The Saints are Recorded for Pat∣ternsNon po∣test accipi dolorum & passio∣num coro∣na, nisi praecedat in dolore & passio∣ne patien∣tia. Cyp. de Bono patien∣tae. of Patience, Heb. 6. 12. We are here Commanded to be followers of them, Who through Faith, and Patience in∣herit the Promises. The Patience of Saints is Commended, Rev. 2. 19. Rev. 3. 10. There's a necessity of Patience, Heb. 10. 36. Cyprian that Holy Martyr tells us, That we cannot receive the Crown of our Sufferings, unless Patience go before. And he saith likewise in the same Book, which is De Bono patientiae, That we areHoc ip∣sum quod Christiani sumus fidei & Spei res est; ut autem spes & fi∣des ad fructum sui possint perveni∣re, patien∣ti opus est. Cyp. de Bono patientiae Christians, this is the Matter of our Faith and Hope; but that our Faith and Hope may come to any Fruit, we have need of Patience. This Grace of Patience shines in the Dark, and in the Night of Suf∣ferings, puts forth it self more Conspi∣cuously; For Sufferings are the Tryals of Patience. Hence it comes to pass, that even in times of a dark Vision, when God clouds his Countenance, a Spirit endowed with Patience, Waits,
Believes, Hopes, Prayes, and thus is pre∣pared for the reception of Mercy, when it comes, and for the bearing of Suffe∣rings whilst they continue. Lay then aside all querulous, murmuring, revenge∣ful Thoughts, and let it be a Christians Strength to sit still, and wait quietly, and patiently for the Salvation of God.5. Self-Denial. Fifthly, Amidst Losses and Sufferings, Self-Denial Eminently appears, and shews it self. When the World Frowns, Enemies Rage, all Cystern, and Crea∣ture-Helps, are dried up quite, or Run very low; when Interests fail, then to keep a Composed quiet Frame of Spi∣rit, and to get the Heart above Envy, Hatred, and Malice, is a rare Frame of Spirit. But it's much more an excellent Frame of Spirit, to deny a Man's self in time of Prosperity, when one enjoys the World (as we say) at Will, and to be in the Float of Prosperity, then to strike Sail, and to deny Pleasures, Luxury, and Excess, this is a property of an excel∣lent Spirit. Of this Spirit was Moses,Heb. 11. 24. . 2 Sam. 11. 11. when he liv'd at Court, When he came to Years (more properly rendred, when he became Great) refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter. Thus did Uriah in a time of War, deny himself. Godfry of Bulloyne would not wear a
Crown of Gold, where Christ was Cru∣cifiedAbdica∣re a teip∣so, ne ab∣diceris a Christo; epudia te, ut re∣cipiaris  Christo Salv. lib. 5. with a Crown of Thorns. This Duty of Self-Denial is frequently Com∣manded in the Gospel, as an Instrumen∣tal means to receive Christ. And it's worth our Observation, that as we are Commanded to beg our Dayly Bread, Day by Day; so we are Commanded to Deny our selves, and to take up our Cross Day by Day. The same Expres∣sion. Ʋt dies diem se∣quitur, sic crux cru∣cem exci∣pit Beza. we have in Luke 9. 23. and Luke 11. 3. For an Ambitious Man to Deny his Honours; a Rich Man, to Deny his Riches; a Voluptuous Man to Deny his Pleasures; these are great Acts of Self-Denial. Sixthly, and Lastly, there follows ho∣ly6. Ho∣ly Cou∣rage. Courage, a well temper'd, and regu∣lar Zeal, which (as Luther used to say) When it's well Temper'd, it's the best giftIra in suo loco est opti∣mum dei donum. Luther. of God. Here's a Critical Distinction of Zeal (which is of the right Stamp) from a private Grudg, or distemper'd Passion, viz. By being Zealous in the Cause of God, and by being meek in a Mans own private Cause. Of this Heroick Spirit was Moses; when a Calf was made, and there was Dancing about it, Moses Transported with singular Zeal, threw the Tables out of his Hand, and Broke them, and Stampt the Calfe to Pow∣der,
and caus'd Exemplary Justice to be Executed upon the Idolaters. Thus Zea∣lousCausa redditur cur Deus injuriam Mosis ul ciscendam credide∣rit, quia ipse in su∣is injuri∣is ferendis erat lenis∣simus. Grotius. was he for the Cause of God: But in his own Cause, none more Meek; for when Aaron, and Miriam chode with him concerning the Aethiopian Woman; the Text gives an ample Testimony of his Meekness, leaving it upon Record, Numb. 12. 13. Now this Man Moses was very Meek, above all the Men which were upon the Face of the Earth. Luther used to say, in the Cause of God, Hic geroIn aliis mansue∣tus ero, in Blasphe∣miis in Christum non item. Zuingli∣us. titulum, cedo nulli. Though Zuinglius was of a comparative Moderation; yet in case of Blasphemies, he was a Man of Courage. The Courage of Martyrs, is renowned in Ecclesiastical Histories. Amongst variety that might be named, I'le relate only this following, viz. TheSi Pati∣bulum crucis (in∣quit Mar∣tyr) Ex∣pavesce∣rem, glo∣riam cru∣cis non predica∣rem Bern. in vigilias Andreae. Cout∣zen. Aulae spe∣culum. p. 47. History of Surgius and Bacchus, two great Courtiers, who being accused for Chri∣stians, and commanded to Offer unto I∣dols, refused to go to the Temple, and gave this answer to the Emperour. Nos Imperator sola terrrena militiâ tibi obstricti sumus. In animas nullum tibi jus est; Il∣larum Dominus est solus Deus. There are two Apostolical Characters of Zeal, which if observed, we may go on Cou∣ragiously, and Prosper. One is, Zeal must be in a good Matter, Gal. 4. 18.
Saul's Zeal before his Conversion, wasPredica∣re Evan∣gelium est derivare in se fu∣roremtoti∣us Inferni & Sata∣nae. Luth. Loc. Com. stark naught. And the other is, it must be according to Knowledg, Rom. 10. 2. Luther used to say, That to Preach the Gospel, was to bring all the Devils in Hell about his Ears; yet he was resolved, That if every Tile on the Houses was a Devil, he would go to Worms, and Preach the Gos∣pel. CHAP. IX. Containing a Third Reason drawn from the Utility and Benefit, accruing from this yielding Submissive Spirit. A Third Reason shall be drawn from  from the Benefit of a sub∣missive Spirit. the Utility and Benefit, accruing from this yielding Submissive Spirit. The Benefit is exceeding great, because hereby the whole Man is set in a right Frame and Order. When we can chear∣fully rely upon God, and depend upon his All-Sufficiency, then our Thoughts, Words, Affections, and Actions, even our whole Life and Conversation, are all Ordered aright, and we are exceeding great gainers thereby. Now to Prose∣cute these Four Particulars.
First, Our Thoughts are rightly Or∣dered.1. Here∣by our Thoughts are Rightly ordered. The Thoughts may be compared to the Reubens of our Souls; They are the beginning of our Strength; but they are as Reuben was, Unstable as Water. How many vain Thoughts seize on us; But though they come violently upon us, we must not willingly give them any Harbour or Lodging. How long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within thee?Jer. 4. 14. Thoughts are the Womb to conceive Va∣nity; wherefore the Physitians Rule is, Obsta Principiis. Our care must be to crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, and to stifle bad Thoughts in the first Concep∣tion: As Streams flow from the Foun∣tain, and as the Fruit grows on the Tree; so Thoughts flow from, and grow out of the Heart. Out of the Heart pro∣ceed both good and evil Thoughts. And it may be Marked, that what Sin a Man is most prone to, his Thoughs run most that way. Let's beware of allowing our selves in any Evil Thoughts, least those Thoughts bring forth Evil Words, and those Words end in abominable Deeds. Because Thoughts come not within the compass of Man's Cognizance, and so are not liable to Man's Punishment; God himself will Punish them most Severely. For God Threatneth, Jer. 6. 19. Hear
O Earth! Behold I will bring Evil upon this People, even the Fruit of their Thoughts. Thoughts are not free (however some presume) from the Judgments of God. A good Remedy to Cure evil Thoughts is prescribed, Prov. 16. 3. Commit thy Works unto the Lord, and thy Thoughts shall be Established. And likewise we should bear in our Mind, Heb. 4. 12. That God's. Quia co∣gitationes compagi∣natas se∣cernit q. d. Hic filius Dei ad haec omnia efficax est, nihilque illum latere potest. Tena in loc. Word is a discerner of our Thoughts. Let's then abandon vain ungodly Thoughts, distrustful, carking, and vexatious Thoughts, and labour to get our Thoughts quieted, and settled, and established up∣on the Word of God. Second, If we believe God's Omnipo∣tency2. Our Tougues will be rightly ordered. and Omniscience, his care and pro∣vidence in Governing of the World, then our Tongues will be bound to their good Behaviour; they will be set in such an excellent order, as all querulous reviling Language will be avoided. The. Rotam nativita∣tis nostrae. Qui ca∣lumniatur, non satis est quod vapulet in corpore suo, sed propter eum vapulet mundus. Drusius. Apostle hath a great Expression, con∣cerning the ill Government of the Tongue, Jam. 3. 6. That he setteth on Fire the Course of Nature. If then (O Christian) thou wouldest learn the right Art of the
Government of the Tongue; thou must begin at thy Heart first, and reform that: For the disorders of the Tongue, usually proceed from the disorders of the Heart. A rotten Heart, vents it self by a rotten Language. Hence the Apostle cites Menander (a. Warrant, that Heathen Authors upon a good occasion may be quoted) 1 Cor. 15. 33. Evil words corrupt good Manners, and it followeth in the same Author, If thou conversest with Evil Men, thou thy self will be Evil. Luther, was falsely reported (for it was his Enemies custome to raise Slanders on him) to be a Trum∣petTuba Rebellio∣nis. of Rebellion. But our Tongues ought to be the Trumpeters of our Cre∣ators Praise and Glory. We are exhor∣ted,Cele∣brabo te Jehova, quia mihi iratus, redieris tamen sta∣tim in gratiam. Calv. Psal. 100. 4. To be thankful unto God, and bless his Name. A great, and signal Act of Thankfulness is mentio∣ned, Isa. 12. 1. O Lord I will Praise thee, though thou was Angry with me. To Praise God for Chastisements, and to acknow∣ledge with Thankfulness the benefit of Afflictions, is so high a pitch, as few can attain unto it. How have many learned to bridle their Tongues, and to set a Watch before the Door of their Mouths, after they have felt the smart of Afflictions? Some given to rash Cen∣suring
and Murmuring, have learned to be of a more calm and charitable Frame of Spirit. Some given to frothy Dis∣course, and vain Jesting, after they have been under the Rod of Correction, have proved more serious and sober in their Discourses. The Apostles charge is, Eph. 4. 29. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is Good, to the use of Edifiing, that it may Minister Grace to the Hearers. The. Putrefa∣cio, trans∣latio ab arboribus quidam praetule∣runt, spur∣cus, obscae∣nus, ac corruptus. Drus. word rendered Corrupt cometh from a Verb, that signifieth to Putrify: Rot∣ten Words, and Putrifying Speeches be∣come not Christians. Neither doth cu∣stomary jesting become us; though a facetious, affable Behaviour kept within due bounds is commendable; yet a jest∣ing and frothy Spirit, is much unbe∣seeming a Christian, , though it be reputed for a Vertue in Aristotle, yet it's reckoned by Saint Paul amongstEph. 5. 4. those things which Are not convenient. Cicero himself sets bounds to jesting; andNon ge∣nerati su∣mus a na∣tura, ut ad ludum, & jocum facti esse videamur; sed ad severitatem potius, & ad quaedam studia graviora atque Majora. Cic. offic. lib. 1. tells us, that we are not Born for sport and jesting. And it's a Verse not more common than true. Non patitur ludum, fama, fides, oculus.
But what shall we say of some who jest at Sin, and when they hear or seeSensus est Sim∣plicissi∣mus, Stul∣tos Ser∣mone or∣nare de∣lictum & offensum. Mercer. notorious Debaucheries, laugh and jest at them, Solomon gives them a Brand of Infamy, Prov. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at Sin. And those especially are to be reproved, who vent their frothy Fansies in a Pulpit, having no reverend Thoughts of the dreadful Presence of God; to them I may apply those say∣ings. Qui ludunt in Cathedra, lugebunt in Gehenna. Non est tutum ludere cum sa∣cris. Third, Our Affections will be set right.3. Our Affecti∣ons must be set in Order. We are apt to misplace our Love, Loving where we should Hate, and Hating where we should Love. Our Joy, Hope, Fear, &c. are out of Order, and pla∣ced upon wrong Objects. It's almost as difficult, to hold the Wind in ones Fist, or to turn the Tide, as to bound the Affections. To Conquer an inor∣dinateTe vin∣ce, & mundus tibi vic∣tus est. Prov. 25. 28. Affection, is a great Victory. But for a Man to have no Rule over his own Spirit, is (as Solomon saith) Like a City that is broken down, and without Walls. A Man that hath no Government over his Passions, exposeth himself in all Com∣panies, to variety of Mischiefs. He re∣sembles Samson, who was amidst the Philistines, after his Locks were Shaven.
Affections, we may compare to Fire and Water, which are good Servants, but bad Masters. Fire, we say is good up∣on the Hearth, but mischievous in the Thatch. If Water Keeps within its Banks, we are Secure; but when it breaks through, and makes an inundati∣on, it may Drown a whole Country. For Instance, in the Affections of Love, Joy, and Anger; to use these with Mo∣deration, may be useful: A Stoical A∣pathy is hurtful, and when Passions are immoderate, then they become exceed∣ing Prejudicial. To Mourn for the loss of a dear Relation, argueth a Sympathi∣zing tender Heart; but to Mourn as without Hope, is not beseeming a Chri∣stian, and to Mourn so, as to become the Elegy, and the Hearse, to be thus immoderate in our Sorrow, becomes Sinful. When Reason rules a Man, he is his own Master; but when Passion rules him, he is his own Slave. Where∣fore the best (as I suppose) of Heathen| Curcen∣dum est ut appetiture rationi o∣bedien∣tem prae∣beamus. Cic. 1. lib. Off. Orators adviseth, | That we make our Ap∣petite obedient unto Reason. To be like Hercules Furens, or like the Lunatick in the Gospel, rending and tearing himself, or like a Door pluckt off the Hinges. So is a Man, who cannot Govern him∣self, and hath no command of his Pas∣sions.
Fortior est qui se, quam qui for∣tissimaMagnus est Domi∣nus, qui sibi impe∣rat. vincit—Maenia. Wherefore, as when a River breaks all Banks and Bounds, Men cut a Passage elsewhere to turn the Stream; so let the Stream of our Affections be turned, and then all will be well; And to this the Apostle exhorteth, Coll. 3. 2. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth. To turn the Fear of Man, into the Fear of God, to turn Worldly into Heavenly Joy, Carnal Love, into Spiritual Love, Earthly Desires, into Heavenly; to cease from rash Anger a∣gainst our Brethren, and to be Angry against Sin. O! What a Blessed Alte∣ration is this, and a change every way for the better! Fourth, Our Actions, and our whole4. Our Actions must be set in Order. Conversation must be rightly Ordered. What are all fair Speeches, unless Acti∣ons keep pace with them? To speak, and to do. To name the Name of Christ, and toNon habitu Sapientiam, sed mente praeferimus; non elo∣quimur magna, sed vivimus. Minuc. Fel. depart from Iniquity; to Hear and Practise; herein consists the Vitals of Religion. Therefore the Profession, and Conversation ought to go together in a Mutual Equipage. It's a good Ad∣vice,
Speak that I may see thee, for WordsLoquere ut te vi∣deam; dicta e∣nim factis deficien∣tibus eru∣bescunt. without Deeds cause Shame. When we have been put into a Furnace, we should come forth as Gold. When we have been emptied from Vessel to Vessel, our old Scent should be took away. Our Conversation should be Holy: We1 Pet. 1. 15. Eph. 5. 15. should walk Circumspectly. Do we pro∣fess Submission, and Resignation of all that's dearest, and nearest unto God. If so, the Holiness of our Lives will Te∣stify the Truth of our Profession. When we meet with straits and difficulties, and hard measure, from unreasonable Men; we dare not take irregular Cour∣ses; we dare not practise any excen∣trique Motions. The Primitive Chri∣stians in Tertullians time, profest, Ora∣mus, non pugnamus, q. d. We Intreat, weVolens locum mi∣hi com∣missum non dese∣ram, co∣actus re∣pugnare non novi, Arma e∣nim nostra praeces sunt & la∣chrymae. Amb. Hom. de Basil. tradend. Fight not. Ambrose in his time, men∣tions an excellent Professor, that said, Willingly I will not desert my Place where∣with I am Entrusted; being compel'd, I know not how to resist; for our Weapons are Prayers and Tears. The same good Spirit of God guide all Suffering Chri∣stians, that they may Suffer as Christi∣ans, by choosing Affliction rather than Sin; and not Suffer as Evil doers, by resisting Authority, or acting beyond their Callings, in any indirect irregular
Motion. Unbelievers (in their Distress)Patien∣ter expec∣temus ul∣tionis di∣em, nec ad vindictam doloris nostri querulae & invidi∣osa festi∣natione propere∣mus. Cyp. de Bono pa∣tient. betake themselves unto indirect, and unlawful Means; and they pay dear for taking of wrong Courses. But a True Believer repairs to God for Counsel. God is his Riches, Refuge, and hiding Place: He dares not presume to take God's Office out of his Hand, by pur∣suing a personal Revenge; but he leaves Revenge unto God. In a Word, the whole Conversation of a Christian, is so Ordered, according to the Rule of the Word of God, as he will not recede from it; but Order his Life accordingly. AndGal. 6. 16. as many as Walk according to this Rule, Peace be to them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
CHAP. X. Containing a Fourth Reason, concerning the sad and mischievous Consequences of Striving, Strugling, and Repining a∣gainst God. A Fourth and last Reason shall be Causa  from the Mis∣chiefs of striving against God. a contrario, drawn from the Mis∣chiefs of striving against God, and not relying and depending upon him; this will appear more Evidently, by these following Convictions. First, Repining, Discontent, and1. Mur∣muring provokes God to bring those E∣vils up∣on us, which we Fear. Murmuring, Justly provoke God to bring those Evils upon us, which we Fear, with greater strength, and renewed vi∣olence. None ever Opposed God, and Prospered. Children, by Strugling, have more Lashes inflicted on them. What gain'd the Israelites by Murmur∣ing, but dreadful Judgments, one upon the Neck of another? They boasted of their Onyons, and Garlick, and Flesh-Pots in Egypt, and Murmured for want of Food in the Wilderness; God sent them Manna and Quailes; It was sweet Meat, but there was sower Sauce added to it; For, While the Meat was in their
Mouths, the Wrath of God came upon them, and Slew the Fattest of them, and smote down the chosen Men of Israel, Psal. 78. 30, 31. And what was the Ground of Intellec∣tui fides aditum aperit, in∣fidelitas claudit. Aug. Ep. 3. all, but unbelief, ver. 32. For all this, they Sinned still, and Believed not for his wondrous Works. And what Judgments successively befell them, is set down, ver. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, &c. And how∣ever, Men may Murmur and Repine, they are never the nearer; for God's Will shall stand, when all is done. Men hurt themselves, but do not in the least help themselves by Murmuring. Second, By Murmuring, Discontent, 2. By Mur∣muring, Men be∣come their own Tor∣mentors. and Non-submission, Men become their own Tormentors, and Executioners. When a Burthen, I say, is imposed up∣on thee, and thou Frettest, and Fumest, and Disquietest thy Self; thou makest thy Burthen heavier, and thy self more unfit to bear it. Patience and Chear∣fulness facilitate a Burthen, whereas im∣patience adds more Load thereunto. | Cyprian, that excellent Martyr tells us,Omnia omnino quae pari∣entia ope∣ribus suis aedificat ad gloriam, impatientia destruit ad runiam. Cypr. de Bono Pa∣tientiae. That what Patience Builds up, Impatience Destroys. Jonah added to his Affliction, by Fretting for the Loss of his Gourd.
Thirdly and Lastly, Hereby (when 3. Mur∣murers call Gods Attri∣butes in∣to Que∣stion. we give way to unbelieving, disconten∣ted Thoughts) we call the Attributes of God in Question; we Question the Pow∣er of God, as the Murmuring Israelites did, Psal. 78. 19. They spake against God: they said, can God Furnish a Table in the Wilderness? We Question the Truth, Goodness, and Faithfulness of God; We Traduce Divine Providence by Unbe∣liefe, and Murmuring. This is that grand Damning Sin (though there's no Sin, but deserves Damnation) mentio∣ned in the Gospel, John 8. 24. If ye Be∣lieve not that I am He, ye shall Dye in your Sins. For this Sin of Unbelief, the Lord,2 Kin. 7. 19. on whose Hand the King leaned, was Trod to Death in a Crowd. For this Sin, Zachary was struck with Dumbness.Luc. 1. 20. This Sin excluded out of the Temporal Canaan, the unbelieving Jews. And un∣believersHeb. 3. 19. are excluded out of the Eter∣nal Canaan; For the unbelieving, are Rankt in the Bed-roll of those abomi∣nable Sinners, which shall have theirRev. 21. 8. part, in the Lake that Burneth with Fire and Brimstone, which is the Second Death.
CHAP. XI. Containing a Resolution of particular Ca∣ses. IN the next place, I come to lay down3. Head contain∣ing a Re∣solution of parti∣cular Cases. Case 1. concern∣ing the Prospe∣rity of Wicke Men. some particular Cases, and return Answers accordingly. The First Case is concerning the Pro∣sperity of Wicked Men, and the great Confluence of outward things, which they enioy. This Stumbled David, Psal. 73. 2, 3, 4, 5. and ver. 12. He prefixeth a Note of Observation. Be∣hold, these are the ungodly that Prosper in the World, they Increase in Riches. But observe what Course David took for Sa∣tisfaction, ver. 16. 17. When I thought to know this, it was too Painful for me, until  went into the Sanctuary, then un∣derstood I their End. And what was their End, the 18. ver. Specifies, Surely thou didst set them in slippery Places, thou cast∣est them down into Destruction. Who of any Understanding will envy the Risings and Promotions of Wicked Men, when he hears of their miserable Down∣fall? The higher Wicked Men are, they are more in Danger of swift and utter De∣struction.
Sheep, put into the best Pa∣stures, come soonest to the Shambles. HowQuo altius extolluntur, eo peri∣culofiori loco constituuntur, ut citius corruant. Mollerus. many Wicked Men are Fatted to the Day of Destruction! What will Riches a∣vailZeph 1. 18. in the Day of God's Wrath? Nei∣ther their Silver, nor their Gold, shall be able to Deliver them in the Day of the Lord's Anger. The Prosperity of the Wicked Stumbled, Jeremy, c. 12. 1, 2. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with Thee: Yet let me talk with Thee of thy Judgments; Wherefore doth the way of the Wicked Prosper? Wherefore are all they Happy, that Deal very Treacherously? ThouQuic∣quid no∣bis tem∣poraliter mundus arridet, magis est pericu∣lum quam ornamen∣tum. Aug. Serm. 53. hast Planted them; yea, they have taken Root, &c. But observe, how the Spirit of the Prophet is raised to Pray against them, ver. 3. Pull them out like Sheep for Slaugh∣ter, and prepare them for the Day of Slaugh∣ter. For a more particular Answer to the Case propounded, we are to lay down these Four ensuing Considerations. First, Riches, Profits, Pleasures, Pro∣motions,1. Riches are not distingui∣shing Signs. and Honours, and what else are the Worlds Darlings; when the Quin¦tessence is extracted out of them all, when they are at the best, they are neither Divisive, nor Constitutive, i. e.
They neither distinguish a good Man from a bad; neither do they Consti∣tute any Man Good, and Happy to E∣ternity. Some good Men are Rich, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and others, who were both Rich in Grace, and Rich in Gold and Silver. Some good Men are Noble, as Theo∣philus,Genere nobilis, Sanctita∣te nobili or. Hie∣ron. de Paula. to whom Saint Luke Dedicates his Epistle. The Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many Noble are called: He saith, Not many; he doth not say, Not any. For some are both Enobled byNobili∣tate gne∣rosus es & Parentes tuos lau∣das, omnes tamn pa∣ri sorte nascimur, sola virtu∣te distin∣guimur. Minuc. Fel. the New-Birth, and by a Noble Extracti∣on from their Parents; but Vertue is the best Character. But for the most part it comes to pass, that good Men are Poor, Ignoble, and Contemptible, in the Eyes of the World; and Vile, Prophane Men, are Rich and Great, and bluster in the World, like those proud swelling Gyants, who made Men to Fall; therefore, they have their Name in the  a verbo nphal qud sig∣nificat cadere, vl quia avero Dei cultu decederam; Vel quod more Gigantum Deum Deique filios proterve ppugnarent. Piscat. Original. Nimrod, Esau, Haman, He∣rod, the Rich Glutton, were Great and Rich in the World; but we Read not of one Dram of Grace, in any one of them. We may not conclude, because they have outward Happiness, which
this World gives, therefore they shall be Happy to Eternity. Neither may we conclude, because others are Poor, set at Naught, and Trampled on, in this World; therefore, they shall be here∣after Miserable. Solomon determines the Case, Eccles. 9. 1. No Man knoweth ei∣ther Love or Hatred by all that is before them. The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, sheweth a great Difference in their Worldly Estate. One wasInop, cui nemo oem fert. Cloathed in Purple, the other, a Beggar full of Sores, Luke 16. 19, 20. One Re∣ceived his Good things, It's said,  i. e. such things as he Esteemed so, even the Pomp and Bravery of the World: these things the Rich Man En∣joyed, and he Fared deliciously every Day: But the other, even Lazarus ReceivedSese Ex∣hilarabat quotidie Splendi∣de. Bez. Evil things, i. e. Poverty, Sores, Na∣kedness, Contempt, Ignominy, and Va∣riety of Afflictions. But there's a vaster Difference in their Eternal Estate, ver. 25. Lazarus was Comforted, and the Rich Man Tormented. Second, Consider further, the Wicked2. Wicked Rich Men have their Portion in this Life. Turci∣cum Im∣perium, quantum quantum est, nihil est, nisi panis mica, quam dives pater familias projicit canibus. Luther in Gen. 2. Rich Men of the World, have their Por∣tion in this Life. Seeing they place their Happiness in Earthly things, and
make the World their God, that's all the Happiness, which they shall have: David prayed to Be delivered from Men of the World, which have their Portion in this Life. Psal. 17. 14. Ne mag∣ni penda∣mus ter∣renam fae∣licita∣tem, quae malis eti∣a ple∣runque concedi∣tur. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 2. C. 23. Their Portion is soon wast∣ed; Their Honours sometimes are laid in the Dust, and they survive to See their own Degradations and Infamy; as Histories Record variety of Examples. However, Death Levels the Noble Man with the Peasant. And if you ask what becomes of Riches, you may as well ask, What becomes of Eagles flying in the Air? It's as easy to stay the Flight of so many swift Birds, as the Flight of Riches: They are Winged Creatures; so Solomon tells us, Prov. 23. 5. Wilt thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not? For Riches certainly make themselves Wings, they Fly away as an EagleQuod miraris pompa est, osten∣duntur istoe res non possidentur, & dum placent, transeunt. Sen. Epist. 110. towards Heaven. Seneca hath a notable Passage; That (saith he) which thou admirest, is but Pomp, these things are shewed, not posses∣sed, and whilest they please, they pass a∣way. However, Wicked Men abuseNulla res longa est omnis∣que feli∣citas saeculi, dum tenetur, amittitur. Hieron. vid Sleydans Hist. their Riches to Luxury, and Riotousness, and abuse their Greatness to Trample
on others; yet it's altogether unlawful to rob or spoil any, because they are Wicked. The Frantick Practices com∣mitted at Munster, by John of Leyden, and his Complices are Abominable in the Sight of God, and all Good Men. It's a received Maxime, acknowledged for Truth amongst Orthodox Divines, viz. Deminium temporale non fundatur in gratiâ. Another is suitable to it, Gra∣tiâ destituti Dominio non excidunt temporali. What Charge God gives for the Poste∣rity of Esau (though he was a Man ha∣ted of God for his Prophaness) you may see, Deut. 2. 5. Meddle not with them, for I will not give you of their Land, no not so much as a Foot-breadth; because I have given Mount Seir unto Esau for a Possession. Now then, if the Riches, Ho∣nours, and Pleasures of this present World, be all the Heaven, which un∣godly Men look after; there's not the least cause of Envying of them. The meanest Beggar that hath Interest in Christ, would not change Conditions with such vile Persons, as Antiochus, Nimrod, and such like. Sanctified Po∣verty is infinitely to be prefer'd before un∣sanctified Riches. Afflicted Godliness, is better than Prosperous Wicked∣ness.
Third, Put all the Greatness, Honours,3. Rich∣es are but the Blessings of the Left-Hand. and Riches of ungodly Men together, in their highest Grandeur and Accom∣plishments, that the World can give them; yet they are but the Blessings of the Left Hand, such as Wicked Men may have, and yet be Miserable to all Eternity. They are not Blest to them; they have not Christ with them. Oft∣times they are got by Fraud, Robbery, and Oppression; by Grinding the Fa∣ces of the Poor, by raising a Foundati∣on to Build upon others Ruines. Some∣times they decay Miserably, and are Con∣sumed, they know not how, as Job men∣tions, c. 20. 26. A Fire not Blown, shall Consume him, (i. e.) he shall be Consu∣med insensibly, and se∣cretly. Etsi ab hominibus non inji∣ciantur in eum manus, divino ju∣dicio Consumetur. Merc. Otherwise, they are snatcht away Sud∣denly: So was the Rich Man (when he was Plotting, and Pro∣jecting how to dispose of his Riches) took away Suddenly, Luk. 12. 20. And whenNon hoc levamen denique ae∣rumnis datum est, videre Sal∣tem & nosse quo pereant mal. Sen in Agamem. Death Surprizeth a Man, then all his Thoughts vanish; all his Contri∣vances, and Designs come to nothing. There are two dreadful Curses against Oppressors, and Extortioners: One is,
Jer. 17. 11. As the Partridge sitteth on Egges, and Hatcheth them not; so he that getteth Riches, and not by Right, shall leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End, shall be a Fool. The other Curse is, Hab. 2. 9. Wo to him that Coveteth an Evil Covetousness to his House, that he may set his Nest on High, that he may be Delivered from the Power of Evil: And Read, ver. 11. For the Stone shall Cry out of the Wall, and the Beam of the Tim∣ber shall Answer it. Fourthly, Wicked Men have a dread∣ful4. Wick∣ed Men have an Account to make for the abuse of their Riches. Account to make, for the abuse of their Riches, and outward Prosperity. Their Rioting, Luxury, Drunkenness, and Gluttony, will bring black Bills of Indictment against them, at the impar∣tial Tribunal of Christ. Imprimis, So much precious Time, and great Sums of Money, Squandered away in Drin∣king, Healthing, Carrowsing, oft-times Perverting the Order of Nature, by tur∣ning Day into Night, and Night into Day. Item, So great a Patrimony spent in Gaming, and all sorts of Voluptuous∣ness. Item, Great Revenues spent up∣on Harlots, &c. When the general Au∣dit comes, How Dreadful will the Con∣dition be of great ungodly Persons? He that could Ride many Miles in his own
Land; and he that on Earth, possessed Thousands of Gold and Silver, cannot for one Moment, Bribe Satan, nor abate the Flames of Hell. He that Persecu∣ted others, and made them to Fly be∣fore him, would be glad himself to Fly into a Hole, and wish that the Moun∣tains, and Rocks would be so favoura∣ble, as to hide him from the Wrath of the Lamb. Let the Living, and O! That the Living would lay to Heart, the Sacred Irony of the Wise Man, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoyce Young Man, in thy Youth, and Walk in the Wayes of thy Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes, Qui voluptatibus indulget & Genio, cogitet sibi reddendam esse rationem coram Deo de om∣nibus tum dictis tum factis su∣is. Drus. but know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment. This, But, Stands like the Angel in the way with a drawn Sword,Jer. 20. 4. to Divert the presumptuous Carreer of Balaam. This But, if well Considered, would make a Sinner like Pashur, when his Name was changed into Magormis∣sabib, make himself a Terror to himself.Dan. 5. 6. This, But, is like that Fand-Writing that Loosened the Joynts of Belshazar, amidst his Cups, and made His Knees Smite one against another. The Day of Judgment will set all Right, and then will be Pro∣nounced an impartial Sentence; then all
false Judgments will be revoked. SaintVeniet, veniet Dies, quando male ju∣dicata re∣judicabit Deus. Bern. Bernard saith, The Day will come when God will Judge over again, all those things that are Judged amiss. Upon all these Consi∣derations, there's no cause of Envying the Prosperity of great ungodly Men. I Proceed now to a Second Case, Con∣cerning the Adversity,Case 2. Concerning the Ad∣versity of the Godly. and manifold Afflicti∣ons, and Sufferings of Godly Men; such asInfelicitatis est, adversa nesci∣re: miserum te judico, quod non fuisti miser. Hieron. M. truly Fear God, are made a prey to Wicked Men, even the very Butt, whereat they Schoot their keenest Shafts of Malice and Ha∣tred. The best of Men, oftentimes Drinks deep of the Cup of Affliction.Psal. 34. 19. Acts 14. 22. 2 Tim. 3. 12. John 16. 33. Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous. They enter into Heaven, Through many Tribulations: All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must Suffer Persecution. Christ hath foretold that his Children, should in the World meet with Tribu∣lations, The Title of Psalm 22. is, Aije∣leth Shahar (i. e.) The Hind of the Morn∣ing Hunted, and Pursued. That Psalm, is a Prophesy of Christ's Sufferings, and upon a serious Comparing of it, with Mat. 27. we shall find this Chapter to be a perfect Commentary upon that Psalm.
But if we ask, How comes it to pass,  that the Righteous, and Holy Ser∣vants of God, Suffer such hard things, and meet with such great Sufferings in this World? I shall lay down an An∣swer in these ensuing Particulars.  The Godly have not their Portion in this Life. Mich. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 4. First, The Godly have a Portion pre∣pared for them in a better Life. Here is not their Portion; here is not their Riches; Here is not their Rest. They have a brave Reversion, i. e. the King∣dom of Heaven: That's Christ's Purchase, and the Saints Inheritance: This is a Crown of Glory, that Fadeth not away: This is an Inheritance Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that Fadeth not away, Reser∣ved in Heaven, for all true Believers. When Anaxagoras was ask't, Hast thou. no Care of thy Country? Yes (saith he) I have a great Care of my Country, and he Stretched out his Hand towards Heaven, implying that Heaven was his Country. The Godly have, as it were an Hell here in this World, by reason of Persecution, Ignominy, Dis∣grace, and the Hearing, and Seeing the Abominations of Wicked Men: The Wicked have, as it were an Heaven in this World; (for so they Esteem their Bravery, and Jollity.) They are De∣scribed in their Characters, Plal. 73. 5, 6, 7.
They are not in Trouble as other Men: nei∣ther are they Plagued like other Men. There∣fore, Pride compasseth them about, as a Chain: Violence covereth them as a Gar∣ment. Their Eyes stand out with Fatness: Stultae corum cogitationes nul∣lis finibus possunt claudi aut coreceri. Quo enim plura af∣fluant, eo Majora appetunt sub∣inde. Cupiditates hominum sunt insatiabiles. Mollenus. they have more than Heart can wish. Now who of Un∣derstanding, would En∣vy such Men their Por∣tion, which they Possess for a few days, and afterwards become Miserable unto all Eternity? A good Man said well (if it be well Interpreted) Give me Heavens Misery (i. e. Afflictions, Troubles, and Sufferings, which meet us in our Way to Heaven) And take thou Hells Happiness; i. e. the Pleasures, Profits, and Riches of this World; which is all the Heaven that Wicked Men shall have. Better to go with Lazarus full of Sores to Hea∣ven, than with the Rich Glutton in all his Mirth and Jollity to Hell. The Con∣templation of Heaven, and Meditation of the Glory that shall be Revealed, will Sweeten the most bitter Pill of Af∣fliction. Second, Whatsoever Afflictions God's2. The Afflicti∣ons of God's People are San∣ctified. People Suffer, they are Sanctified unto them, by God's gracious Hand, and turn∣ed unto their greater Good, as is evi∣dent
from Rom. 8. 28. There's no Ex∣ception. All things; Be they Losses, Persecutions, Imprisonments, Exiles, e∣ven the greatest Mischief that Men and Devils can contrive against God's Chil∣dren; Yet all Shall work together Non dicit quod non accedat quicquam periculi, caeterum ad bonum cooperetur: hoc est quod ipsis periculis utatur ad bono∣rum insidias, & calamitates su∣stinentium probationem. Oc∣cumen. for Good to them. By Afflictions God's Children are de∣fecated, by being empti∣ed from Vessel to Ves∣sel, they are Rinsed and Cleansed; by being cast into the Fur∣nace, their Dross is took away. He that ran a Sword into his Enemy, with an intention to Kill him, let out his Imposthume, and so against his will, sa∣ved his Life. So wicked and violent Adversaries, may, against their will, do good to the Children of God: They may put them more and more upon searching their own Hearts, and upon more circumspect Walking. Carthage Emulating Rome, and Rome Emulating Carthage, both of them became mutual∣ly more Industrious; likewise, more VVatchful, and more Valorous. But sure I am, that God so Orders the Suf∣ferings of his People, as to make them gainers thereby. Although their Ene∣mies intend nothing but Ruin, and De∣struction
to them, yet God brings much Good out of the Evil Designs of the vi∣lest,Periissem nisi peri∣issem. Themi∣stocles. inveterate Enemies; so that Expe∣rimentally, a Suffering Servant of God, can say, I had Perished, unless I had Peri∣shed. Third, The Afflictions, and greatest3. The Saints Afflicti∣ons are but Mo∣mentary. Sufferings, are but Momentary; for at the longest, they last but while they Live in this vale of Tears, in this present World; but the Mercies reserved for them, last to all Eternity. There are grand Incouragements from Three choice Scriptures; one is, Isa. 54. 7, 8. For a small Moment, have I forsa∣ken thee; but with great Mercies will I gather thee. In a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee, for a Moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have Mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. The other. Puto hoc ipsum es∣se quod Latini verbo Reor sig∣nisicant, unde ratum dicitur quod certum ac firmum censeri debet;  vertimus pro cgitare, reputare colligere, imputare. Beza. Scripture is, Rom. 8. 18. For I reckon that the Suf∣ferings of this present time, is not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us. A Third Scripture is, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction, which is but for a Moment, worketh for us, a far more exceeding, and Eternal weight of Glory. That Christian,
who lives upon these Scriptures, and makes particular Application of them to his own Soul; he needs not fear the most boisterous Storms and Tempests;Act. 27. 1. Ejus est timere mortem, qui ad Christum nolit ire Cypr. no, not that Tempestuous Wind called Euroclydon. He that hath Interest in Christ, and is assured of God's Love, need not be afraid of Fiery Serpents, Sons of Anak, and Beasts of Ephesus; for there is more for him, than can be against him, Rom. 8. 31. What shall we say then to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? Caesar comforted the Boat-man with this saying, Be of good. Comfort, Thou carriest Caesar: Thus in a Storm, he cheared up the Boat-man; but how much greater ground of Incou∣ragement is it in Afflictions, to have Christ's Presence, and the Consolations of his Spirit; these will hold up the Head above Water, and keep thee from Drowning, amidst all the Tossing of Waves, one following upon the Neck of another; even then will the Believer be safe, and secure from Danger. A Third, and last Case, I shall men∣tion,3. Case, How to behave ones self in Afflic∣tions. is, How should the Children of God behave themselves, as to the Wick∣eds Prosperity, and as to their own Ad∣versity? For Answer, I shall lay down Tw
Negatives. (1.) That those that fear God, ought not to Envy the vilest of Men. (2.) They ought not to act any Per∣sonal Revenge against them. After I have proved these Negatives, I shall pro∣duce, and prove several Affirmatives, as so many Remembrances, and Frontlets, which ought to be set before the Eyes of all good Men. First, For the Negatives, The First1. Pro∣pos. We ought not to envy Wicked Men. Mat. 27. 18. Act. 7. 9. Act. 13. 45. Gal. 5. 21. Prov. 27. 4. Proposition is, That Good Men in their greatest Sufferings, ought not to Envy Wicked Men: Envy is frequently For∣bidden in the Word of God; particular∣ly, Psal. 37. 1. Prov. 23. 17. Envy caused the Jews to Crucify Christ. En∣vy moved the Patriarchs to sell Joseph into Egypt. Envy caused the unbelieving Jews to contradict Saint Paul's Doctrine. En∣vy is one of the Deeds of the Flesh, It Slayeth the silly one; it's the cause of Confusion; who is able to stand be∣fore it? And therefore, itsIpse Hercules, qui omni gene∣r monstrorum terras liberavit, non prius invidum debellare v∣luit quam erebus humanis ex∣emptum esset. Baud Orat. unbeseeming any Chri∣stian to Envy the Great∣ness, and Riches of the worst of Men. That old Mnason, and Eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Dod, wished thus, I would (saith he) I were the worst Minister in England; not meaning that he himself would be worse
than he was; but that all Ministers were better than he. Saint Augustine saith,Tolle in∣vidiam & quod me∣um est habes. Tolle in∣vidiam & quod tu∣um est e∣go hbeo. August. in Psal. 136. Take away Envy, and what is mine you have; and take away Envy, and what is yours I have. Luther saith, That Envy∣ous Men Feed upon the Dung of other Men. They are like Flies that love to fasten upon Sores. Erasmus tells of one, who Collected all the lame defective Verses in Homer, and passed over all those that were Excellent. Parisiensis a learned Au∣thor, and one of the most Ingenuity (that I know of) amongst his Party, brings in Gregory saying, That all the Poi∣son in the old Serpent, is in the Sin of Envy, as if it had Emptied it self of its Poison, and Vomited it self in this Sin. Envy by some is called Serra animae, a Saw to Cut the Heart-strings Asunder. Envy caused the first Division, and Breach that ever was in the World; and that was between Cain and Abel; and wherefore was Cain so Envions against Abel, as to Slay him? The Apostle gives the Reason, 1 Joh. 3. 12. Because his own Works were Evil, and his Brothers Good. Let all Christians therefore be perswa∣ded to lay aside all Envies: Why should any Envy any Man Tormented with the Gout, although he wear a Golden Slip∣per? Why should a Man Envy a Mur∣therer,
therer, upon the Gallows, because he is Cloathed with Tissue, and Hanged in a Silken Halter? I have read a Story of a Souldier, who upon his March left his Colours, and Rob'd a Vineyard; whereupon he was Condemned to Dye, and as he was going to Execution, he fell to Eating a bunch of Grapes; where∣upon saith one of his fellow-Souldiers, Doest not thou take Notice whither thou art going; and wilt thou now be Eating of Grapes? O, saith the Condemned Person, My Friend, Envy me not these Grapes, for they Cost me Dear! There's no cause of Envying Wicked Men their Pleasures, which are but Bitter-sweets.2. Pro∣pos. That Good Men ought not to act any personal revenge. A Second Proposition is, That Good Men ought not to act any Personal Re∣venge against those Wicked Men, who are their bitter Enemies, and such as are Inveterate and Implacable. None may presume to Rob God of his Prero∣gative, nor wring the Sword of Justice out of his Hand. God hath said, Ven∣geance is mine, I will Repay, saith the Lord, Rom. 12. 19. A place took out of Deut. 32. 35. It was the high CommendationNihil obivisci solebat praeter in∣jurias. of Julius Caesar, That he was wont to for∣get nothing but Injuries. When a Phi∣losopher was railed at, by a prating ma∣licious Fellow, he caused his Servant to
Light him Home, with a Candle and a Lanthorn. Remarkable is the Story of Doctor Cranmer Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, in forgiving Injuries, even to Admiration of all; insomuch, as it be∣came a Proverb. Do Bishop Cranmer an ill Turn, and you shall have him your Friend ever after. Christians should shew a generous Spirit in passing by Injuries, and recompencing Evil with Good. This is their Honour (as Solomon saith) For a Man to cease from Strife, Prov. 20. 3. And it's a Character of Discretion and Glory, both To defer Anger, and to pass over a Transgression, Prov. 19. 11. To render Good for Good, that's a Com∣mon Civility, even amongst Heathens themselves: to render Evil for Good is Diabolical: But to render Good for E∣vil, is well becoming a Christian. And by forgiving our Enemies, and doing Good to them, that do Evil to us, we Imitate the Example of Christ; Who when1 Pet. 2. . he was Reviled, Reviled not again; when he Suffered, he Threatned not. Christ Prayed for his Enemies, and so did Ste∣phen; And so ought we to do. By Meekness, and Patience in Suffering, and by passing an Act of Oblivion for In∣juries, we Heap Coals of Fire on the Heads of our Enemies, and we shall
melt, and mollify them. For (as Bucer observes) He being ashamed by thy Kind∣ness, will descend intoIlle beneficentiâ pudefactus in sese descendet, um enim ignis, quem ejus Conscient accendi∣sti, exuret in eo quicquid est erga te. Bucer. his own Heart; and then the Fire which thou hast Lightned in his Consci∣ence, will burn up all Ma∣lice against Thee, and Thou shalt Save him. Yet notwithstanding, a Christian ought to Study to forgive, and forget Injuries; hereby he is not prohibited any Appeal to Good and wholesome Laws; for Justice, when necessity and equity Compel there∣unto;Rom. 13. 4. Rom. 13. 3. For the Magistrate beareth not the Sword in vain. And Rulers are not a Terrour to Good Works, but unto Evil. However, let all Christians follow the things that make for Peace, and evi∣dence their patient, and meek Spirits, by overcoming the Evil of Anger, with the Goodness of Meekness, the Evil of Pride, with the Goodness of Humility, the Badness of Revenge, with the Good∣ness of Forbearance, having before their Eyes, the Charge of the Apostle, Eph. 4. 32. And be ye kind one to another, ten∣der Hearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's Sake hath forgiven you. Thus I have shewed (Negatively) that Christians ought to avoid Envy and Re∣venge; now it remains, that I should,
Affirmatively, set down some particu∣lar Duties, which ought to be reduced unto point of Practice, by the Suffe∣ring, Afflicted Servants of God. The First Duty is, to acknowledgeDuty 1. To ac∣know∣ledge the righ∣teous dealings of God. the Righteous Dealings of God in eve∣ry thing; so did the Church, Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is Righteous, for I have Rebelled against his Commandements. And Micah. 7. 9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord; because I have Sinned against him. It's a great Fault in many, when they have suffered Wrong, to be over curi∣ously, and restlesly Inquisitive, after se∣cond Causes; and when they have found them out, to be Evil Instruments, do trouble themselves with angry querulous Language, and Repinings against them. By this means, a Christian adds Oyl to the Flame, and increaseth his Vexations and Troubles. Whereas, if a Christian could look at the Hand of God, and ac∣knowledge his Proceedings to be Just, and Righteous altogether; How com∣posedly, and quietly, should he bear up under Sufferings? Salvian hath an Ex∣cellentQuis est causatio∣nis locus? Quam liber aspera & adversa patiamur, minor a patimur quam meremur. Quod querimur, quod dure nobiscum agat Deus? Multo nos cum Deo durius a∣gimus, Exacerbamus quippe Deum impuritatibus nostris, & ad pu∣niendos nos traimus invitum. Salv. saying, What Cause is there of Com∣plaining?
Although we Suffer sharp and bitter things; yet we Suffer less than we deserve. Why do we complain that God Deals hardly with us? We Deal much more hardly with Him, because we provoke Him by our Impurities, and draw Him unwilling∣ly to Punish us. David look't at the Hand of God, when Shimei reviled him; and so did Job, upon the Report of his great Losses: So must we under Af∣flictions look at the first Cause, and acknowledge God's Righteous Dealings, and look unto the Meritorious Cause, and acknowledge that the Evil of our Doings, which we have Committed, have justly procured the Evil of Pu∣nishment which we Suffer. Let's then cease from Murmuring, and resolve the Effect into the Cause, i. e. The Evil of Punishment which we Suffer, deser∣vedly befalls us, for the Evil of Sin which we have Committed. A Second Duty is, to Endeavour toDuty 2. To get a submis∣sive Spi∣rit. get a submissive, quiet, yielding Frame of Spirit; so did David, Psal. 39. 9. I was Dumb, I opened not my Mouth, because Thou didst it. The Wicked were a Sword to David, but he looked at that Sword, as Over-ruled, and Ordered by the Hand of God. This submissive Be∣haviourPsal. 17. 13. Lam. 3. 29. is, a Putting our Mouths in the
Dust, and a Keeping of Silence, when we are chastened by God, as Job was, c. 38. v. 2. Who is this that darkneth Counsel, by words without Knowledge? We should Answer with him, c. 40. v. 5. Once have I Spoken, but I will not Answer; yea twice, but I will Proceed no further. Job's Heart was Wrought over into a submissive Frame; and therefore, he elsewhere Pro∣fesseth, as c. 42. 6. I abhor my self, and Repent in Dust and Ashes. Let's then Acquiesce, and rest Satisfy'd with God's Dispensations, and learn to Kiss the Rod that beats us: Where we are bid to Kiss the Son, least he be Angry, Psal. 2. 12. The Seventy render the Words, Kiss. Versio 70. Discipline or Correction. Do not say I must Submit, for that's not enough (for God will make thee bend, or else break thee to Pieces) but say, I will Submit to a Wise God, whose Works are per∣fect, and all his Ways are Just, and Righteous altogether.Duty 3. to prac∣tise the divine Art of content∣ment. A Third Duty is, to Study, to Practise the Divine Art of Contentment. It's a . Mystery to learn; And it's a Jewel of great Value, to him that is the Posses∣sor of it. The Apostle got an habit of Contentment, by the Exercise of many Acts, Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have Learned in whatsoever State I am, therewith to be
Content. I know how to be Abased, and I know how to Abound, e∣very where, and in allNunquam ergo fuit pper. P∣per enim, qui multa pt:  um qui plurimis dettur, se qui pluribus inhi ppere censeas, Divitem vero qui su sorte contentus est. Lud. de Dieu. things; I am Instructed, both to be Full, and to be Hungry, both to A∣bound, and to suffer Need. This Content∣mentPraeclara est aequabilits in om∣ni vitâ & idem seper vlts, eademqe frons. Cic▪ o. . 1. is a gracious Frame of Spirit, where∣by a Christian takesVir bonus est semper idem, & in omni ctu par sibi. Se. Complacency in God's Dispensations, in eve∣ry Condition. Antisthenes desired of the Gods A great Boon, and that was to give him the Spirit of Socrates, and that was a composed, and contented Spirit, One, and the same in all Conditions. It is said of Cato, that no Man saw him to be Changed, though he Lived in a time, when there were many Changes. It's Observable, that when David Pen'd Psalm 57. he was in Adversity, he fled from Saul in the Cave; and the Title of that Psalm is, Al-taschith, Destroy not; Yet in his Adversity, he had resolved upon a fixed contented Spirit, ver. 7. My Heart is Fixed O God, my Heart is Fixed. And when he was in Prosperi∣ty, he holds on the same Resolution, Psal. 108. 1. O God, my Heart is Fix∣ed,
I will Sing, and give Praise even with my Glory. His tongue (which was here∣by meant his Glory) should be the Trum∣peter of the Creators praise. Now a contented minde can bear losses better then other men. When God is pleased to bring down a mans condition, if then he bring the heart down, all's well. To bring thy mind to thy condition, and to look upon that Dimensum, or allowance given thee by God as sufficient, and to be thankful for it, this argueth a contented mind. Heathens highly extoll a conten∣ted minde. Satis divitiarum erat, ni∣hil amplius velle. Quintil. Declam. One saith, It's riches enough to desire no more. Another judgeth him an happy man, who isBeatus est presentibus, qua∣liacunque sunt, contentus. Sen. de vita beata. content with what he hath at present. A third accounts him not an happy man, thatBeatus est non qui habet quae cupit, sed qui non cupit quae non habet Asonius. hath what he desires, but him, who desires not what he hath not. Nature is con∣tent with a little, Grace with less. It seems to be a riddle, which Hesiod the antient Poet propounds , i. e. Halfe is more then the whole. A lear∣ned Commentator brings in the judg∣ments of Plato and Aristotle interpreting that saying, to be understood of a mean moderate estate, or mediocrity. And the
same Author concludes thus. To whomCi pa∣rum non est satis, i nihil est satis, ci quod satis est, non est sa∣tis, i ni∣hil est sa∣tis, Peer. in Ge. 28. 20. a little is not enough, to him nothing is e∣nough; And he that hath enough, and thinks he hath not enough, to him nothing is e∣nough. The Patriarch Jacob did not beg great matters, onely bread to eat, and raiment to put on. He did not capitu∣late for delicate food, nor gorgeous at∣tire. And the Apostles commands, 1 Tim. 6. 8. Having food and rayment let us there∣with be content, The expressions are Em∣phatical. Three words I'le explain in the Text. 1. , not high feeding but such only as may nourish us, what's enough for nourishment to keep us alive should content us. Another word is  enough to cover our nakedness; no rich and costly apparrel is here meant. 3. The other word is , We should be contented and count them suf∣ficient. This excellent Spirit of content∣ment will help us to bear our burdens, and to undergo hardships with alacrity of Spirit. 4. Whatever thou fearest most to lose,Duty 4. Cast all upon God. and what thou desirest most to keep, cast them upon God, and trust God with them. What God is entrusted withal, is in the best and safest custody. Are thy burthens great? put in practice the Psalmists coun∣sel, Psal. 55. 22. Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall ne∣ver suffer the righteous to be moved. But are not the Righteous moved, and tost up and down, and chased to and fro, as the Partridge on the Mountaines? Yes, they are thus moved, and they are tost up and down with Storms and Tempests; but (as Calvin observeth on theQuia autem nihil miserius est, quam inter continuos aestus versari, finem tandem fore promittit, quia Deus passurus non sit, ut semper anxietati∣bus obnoxij sint, vel pericu∣lis & curis concutiantur; sed daturus sit tranquillum sta∣tum. Calo. in Loc. place) that they shall not al∣wayes be thus troubled, at last they shall have a quiet state. Are thy fears many, by reason of potent Adversa∣ries? Jehu-like drive furi∣ously, to whom, he that departeth from evil is made a prey. Re∣member the Council of Christ, Math. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body but are not able to kill the soul: But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. The worst that men and Devils can do to the Saints is to deprive them of a tem∣poral life only. Eternal life is out of their reach, none are able to deprive them of that life. Dogs may bark at the Moon, but they cannot bite it. The most mis∣chievous Enemies cannot hinder Christ from communicating himself to his Chil∣dren, nor them from enjoying Commu∣nion with him.
But are thy cares great, insomuch as thou art bewildered, and knowest not how to wind thy self out? Here's Counsel and Incouragement for thee, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care up▪ on him, for he ceth for you. The word is , The same word is once more mentio∣ned,Omnem nostram curam conji∣cer de bus in eum, tum quia opem nobi  potest u  Deus, tum uia curam nostrum gerit ut  Pater▪  in Loc. Luke 19. 35. It's a thowing a mans self upon God, a committing himself unto Gods disposing. Now when we can ast our selves upon Go Providence, rely upon his Wisdom stay and depend upon his promises, and quietly wait for his Salvati, then even then amidst the most boysterous  and tempests, there wi be a Serenity and quietness upon our Spirits.
CHAP. XII. Containing an Use of Reprehension to thre Sorts of Persons, viz. Unbelievers, Murmurers, and rash Censurers. NOw in the last Place, to infer the Use and Application particularly unto all our Consciences; There are four Uses to be made of this Doctrine, . For Reprehension, Exhortation, Ex∣amination, and Consolation. The first Use is for Reprehension and  Of Re∣prehen∣sion. severe Redargion, unto several sorts of Persons. Three of them e single out, vi. Unbelievers, Murmurers, and rash Censurers, who in an especiall manner come under the verge of this Repoof. 1. Here's matter of Reproof unto all1. Unbe∣lievers. Unbelievers, who neither will trust God upon his threatnings, nor upon his pro∣mises. These live by Sense, and not by Faith. They imitate those, who will part with nothing without Money in hand. When Creature-Comforts faile them, their Faith failes with them. Hence it comes to pass, that they traduce the Divine Providence with profane King. . 33. Jehoram, saying, Behold this evil is of the
Lord, why should I wait for the Lord any longer? Now what's the reason that men are to seek for help and comfort under their greatest pressures, and know not how to get any help, but because they trust not God, they go to King Hos. 5. 13. Idololatr axiliis buais confidu, sed hc ultum & Lepe eos fallunt. Nam quum Assyrius debebat  ipse incipie∣hat vastare, & Historiae te∣stantur, plerunque exters Reges  advocantes  Tamou. Jareb and to the Assyrian, i. e. They go to broken reeds, to outward means, which will no way help nor heal them. Job was of an Excellent Spirit, who would take a curse up∣on himself, If he made Gold his Hope, or the fine Gold his Confidence, Job. 31. 24. Not to stay in Generals. An Unbe∣liever (who res satisfied in his Unbe∣lief) is no better than an Heathen, a Lyar, and a Thief. Such would fly in that Mans Face, that should call them by such Ignominious Names; and yet, so they are branded by the Word of God.1. An Unbelie∣ver is an Hea∣then. First, An Unbeliever is an Heathen, Mat. 6. 31, 32. Therefore take no Thought, sying, What shall we Eat, or what shall we Drink? or wherewithal shall we be Cloath∣ed? For after all these things do the Gen∣tiles Seek; for your Heavenly Father know∣th, that ye have need of all these things.
Now, shall not Christians out-strip Pagans? Heathens pore only upon the present Life, and understand not any thing concerning a Life to come. What a shame is it for Christians to imitate Heathens? Salvian saith, It's the GuiltMinoris criminis reatus est, egem ne∣cire quam spe∣rnere. Salv. lib. 4. of a less Crime, to be ignorant of the Law than to Despise it. Heathens, who know not Scripture, shall fare better, than knowing Christians, who abuse their Knowledge, and confute what they know, by the practice of a contrary Life, and Conversation. Second, An Unbeliever is a Lyar, and2. An Unbelie∣ver is a Lyar. puts a Lye upon God himself. To give a Man the Lye, is accounted a great af∣front and indignity. But how much greater must it be, to give the Lye to the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth? as is plain from 1 Joh 5. 10. He that believeQuis non horrat fidem▪ Ean∣gelio derogare, in quo Deus nice verax & fidelis vult ha∣beri. Calv. not God, hath made  a Lyar, because he bel∣veth not the Record, th God gave of his Son. An Unbelieve belyeth the Holy Gospel, and males in his account, no better than a Fable and Christ no better than an Impo O! How great then must this S be?
Third, An Unbeliever is a Thief, and3. An Unbelie∣ver is a Thief. a Robber. He (so far as in him lyeth) robbeth God of his Glory and Honour. We must distinguish (for prevention of Mistakes) of a twofold Glory, viz. Es∣sential and declarative. It's imposible to Rob God of his Essential Glory: But an Unbeliever doth his utmost to Rob God of his Declarative Glory: For he distrusts God's Power, Wisdom, Mercy, and Truth; He calls all the Attributes of God into Question, and this is an in∣terpretative Blasphemy, and a transcen∣dent Affront, and indignity offered unto the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth. Could Pythagoras a Heathen Philosopher, so far prevail upon his Schollars, as his , what he said, was Authen∣tick and Perswasive? And shall not the Word of Christ, who spake as never Man spake, even the words of Eternal Life, shall not these gain Credit and Obedi∣ence? But I proceed to reprove a Second2. Mur∣murers are Re∣proved. Sort, who are Murmurers, complaining, and discontented Persons. They are so far from being thankful (as they ought to be) for what they have already Re∣ceived; insomuch, that they Murmur swhich they ought not) for what they want. These entertain hard Thoughts
of God; And when they are not Satis∣fied, nor answered as soon as they call, they break forth into repinings, and dis∣contented Language. So did the mur∣muring Israelites smart for their Mur∣murings, and became Spectacles of dread∣ful Judgments. They were denied en∣trance into the promised Land, Numb. 14. 29, 30. The Earth opened her Mouth and Swallowed Korah, Dathan, and A∣biram. And the Psalmist gives the Rea∣son of their overthrow in the Wilder∣ness,Psal. 106. 25. because They Murmured in their Tents, and Hearkned not unto the Voice of the Lord. The Mischiefs of murmur∣ing, and discontented Spirits are excee∣ding great. I shall represent them in these ensuing Aggravations. First, There is a great deal of Un∣thankfulnessAggrav. 1. There is Un∣thank∣fulness in Murmu∣ring. in a murmuring Spirit. It is the Lord's Mercy that we are not Con∣sumed; because his Compassions fail not, We are yet Living Men; That we are not struck Dead in our Sins, is Mercy; and we have great cause of Thankfulness, that we are Living Men; Wherefore, thenam. 3. 39. should the Living Man complain? Yet we are on this side Hell and Eternity; and if we have less than Hell, it's more than we deserve. Unthankful and u∣holy2. Tin. 3. 2. are Ranked together. Unthank∣fulness,
is a Wicked Effect that comes from a murmuring Spirit. For though, Quibus nullum ju est, nec . Beza. many receive Mercies heaped, and va∣rieties of Loving Kindnesses; Yet Mur∣murers, account the Mercies which they Receive, as no Mercies, or very small things; because they have not what they would have. And thus Men lessen God's Mercies, and lightly Esteem of them; which is a very great Evil. Thus the Israelites accounted Manna but Light Bread. They were weary of it, and their Murmu∣ring,Numb. 21. 5. They counted Ainsw. discovered their great Ingratitude. it▪ base, and vile in comparison with othe Meats. Secondly, Murmuring hinders the Pra∣ctice2. Aggra. Murmu∣ring hin∣ders the Practice of Du∣ties. of Duties. A Man Discontented, cannot set himself to pray Aright. When we Pray, we should acknowledge God's Soveraignty over us; and resign our wills to His disposal. But by Murmuring, we presume to Prescribe to God, and to be our own Carvers; and so undoe our Prayers. How can a discontented Man. reap Profit by a Sermon, when his Mind is Distracted, and roving in the utter∣most parts of the Earth? How can a Man, that's dayly Murmuring, and Dis∣contented, perform (as he ought to do) the Duties of his Relations, as a Hus∣band, Father, Master, &c. when as his
Spirit is Perplexed, and his Mind Tor∣tured, like one upon a Rack? His Bread is his Gravel, his Bed, a Bed of Thorns; he hath a restless, and unquiet Spirit, which unfits him for every Duty. Thirdly, Murmuring adds greater3. Aggra. Murmu∣ring adds greater weight to Afflic∣tions. Weight to any Affliction. If a Marri∣er in a Storm will be froward, and angry at the Storm, and will not pull down his Sails; his discontented Hu∣mour, may hazard the losing of the Ship: So a discontented Heart, is a froward Heart, and frets, and fumes, and swells with Pride, and will not yield; and therefore, the Affliction is much more Grievous, and Insupportable. Fourthly and Lastly, A murmuring4. Aggra▪ Murmu∣ring ends in a Curse. and discontented Spirit, terminates in a great Curse, Psal. 59. 15. Let them wan∣der up and down for Meat, and Grudg if they be not Satisfied. This is an Imprecation, andCerte justo Dei judicio ad eum moum pununtur tyrannorum sa∣tellices, iserum oppressores quibus bona pperum per inju∣riam ablat impenduntur, ut oes per calum aqisitas non d obtineant: deinde ad gstatem reacti neminem inveniant qui ∣furientium Commisereatur; dig∣ni qui andem inhuma, quam itsi antea exercuerunt in immritos, expriantur. Mu∣cul. in Loc. Curse upon wicked Men, that if they be not Sa∣tisfied, they shall Grudg. There is likewise, a Curse upon those that are not Content with their present Condition, Deut. 28. 67. In the Morn∣ing thou shalt say, would
God it were Even, and at Even thou shalt say, would God it were Morning. Nei∣ther Evening nor Morning pleaseth a discontented Person. He is such as the Proverb saith) Who is neither contented, Full nor Fasting. There is a Curse like∣wise (Deut. 28. 4.) upon thos Who ser∣ved not the Lord with Joyfulness, and with Gladness of Heart, for the abundance of all things. God would have his People serve him with Chearfulness. This was the Resolution of the Church, when she was in a low trembling Condition, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig-Tree shall not Blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vine, the Labour of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls: Yet will I Rejoyce in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my Salvation. None indeed have causeGaudi propriu est Pio∣rum. Aug. of Joy, but God's Children. Joy (saith Augustin) Is only the Portion of the Godly. Away then with, and abandon all mur∣muring, discontented Speeches. LabourRes se∣vera est verum Gaudium. Seneca. to be Thankful, and a thankful Heart, is a contented Heart. A Third Sort to be reproved, are Rash Censurers, who by their uncharitable3. Rash Censu∣rers are Repro∣ved. Censures, add more Weight to the Bur∣dens, and more Afflictions to the Bonds
of God's Afflicted Children. Every pro∣phane Miscreant is pt toƲima est adversae fortunae sar∣cina, quod dum miseris aliquod crimen effigitur, quae perferunt meruisse creduntur▪ Boeth▪ lib. 1. Pros. 4. de consol. Trample on them, that are already cast down, and reproach Sufferers, and censure them for the vilest of Men. They throw Dirt e∣nough, hoping that some may Stick. But Christ gives a seasonable Caution, Luk. 13. 2. Suppose ye, that these Galileans were Sinners above all the Galileans, be∣cause they Suffered such things? and ver. 4. Or those Eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell, and Slew them; think ye, that they were Sinners above all Men that dwelt in Jerusalem? Christ puts them in mind of that necessary indispensable Du∣ty of Repentance, ver. 5. I tell you, nay: but except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish. Si ipsi nostri simus accusato∣res, profic nobis ad salutem; s vero expectamus ut a Diabo∣lo accusemur, accusatio illa no∣bis cedit ad paenam. Origen Hom. 3. in Lev. If Censurers of others would reflect up∣on themselves, and en∣quire into their own Hearts, they would find work enough to busy themselves at Home, and take more heed, least they Condemn the Genera∣tion of the Righteous. For every one toEx o squis∣que justus esse incipit, ex quo sui Accusator Extiterit. Bern. de inter▪ Dom. c. 1. Accuse himself, is the way to mend.
Job's Friends were mistaken Excee∣dingly, in Condemning him for Hy∣pocrisy: Whereas Hypocrisy was not the cause of his Sufferings God had a Design to prove the Devil a Lyar, Wh moved God against him. And likewise, God made Job a Probationer, and proved him, and refined him by Afflictions, and left him upon Record, as a mirror of Patience to Posterity. Had it not been for the exercise of Patience under Af∣flictions, we had not injoyed that excel∣lent Book of Job. But nothing more common, than to Brand the greatest Sufferers, for the greatest Sinners, to cen∣sure them for Cast-awayes, and rejected of God. This is the gross mistake of Multitudes. We Read in the Gospel, when they brought a Man Born Blind to Christ, the Disciples asked him, Ma∣ster, Who did Sin, this Man, or his Pa∣rents, that he was Born Blind? Jesus An∣swered, Neither hath this Man Sinned, nor his Parents; but that the Works of God should be made Manifest in him. Though he was a Sinner from the Womb, yet he did not Sin himself Blind. God did not inflict Blindness upon him for any particular Sin. Thus God, according to his Soveraign, and absolute Prerogative, may do what he pleaseth, and none
Question. In Affliction (as a Lear∣nedSi ini∣quitatis merita respiciat, nullum est adeo in∣gens s∣plicium, &c. Fe∣rus in loc. Author observes) God either looks at Sin, or at his own Glory: If he look at Sin, no Affliction is so great, but we deservedly Suffer it. But oft-times, God only looks at his own Glory, and then he Afflicts not for Sin. Now if it be thus Sinful to pass wrong, and uncharitable Censures upon God's Children in Affliction, How much more Sinful is it to Rejoyce in their Calami∣ties? , i. e. a Rejoycing in others Sufferings, argueth a brutish, and a barbarous Spirit; even as bad as the Spirit of a Tyger, or the Bowels of an Estrich. Thus David was troubled withPsal. 70. . such inhuman Enemies, who desired his Hurt, and Cried, Aha, Aha. They Rejoyced in any Evil that befel him. They Insulted over him in his Afflicti∣ons,Malo meo gau∣dentes di∣cunt de me euge, euge. Jan. in loc. and (as Jansenius observes) shewed Acclamations of Joy. Now such there are, who (as Solomon saith) Rejoyce to do Evil, Prov. 21. 4. They Sleep not, ex∣cept they have done Mischief, and their Sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to Fall. These are the Persons, who like the Devil, are most pleas'd, when they have done most Mischief; and are most Joyful, when they hear of the Sor∣rows, and Afflictions of God's Children.
To such, I will relate a Story of StephenVid. Fox Acts and Monu. Queen Maries Days . 3. Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, who had provided a great Feast to Entertain his Acquaintance that Day, that Bishop Rid y, and Bishop Latimer were to be Burnt▪ but he would not sit down to Dinner, till a Messenger late in the Afternoon, brought word of their Burning; then he went merrily to Dinner with his Guests. But behold, the Hand of God was upon him at Dinner, and he was Carried from Table; his Tongue was Swoln, and a dreadful Disease called Miserer mei, seized on him; he Dyed of that remarkable Sickness, and in his Sickness he Confessed, That he Denied Christ with Peter; but he did not Repent with Peter. Let such Stories be a Warning-Piece to all such, who Rejoyce in the Suffe∣rings of God's Children. God Professeth, that he was sorely displeased, with such as help forward his Peoples Afflictions, Zeph 1. 15. Although God chastise his dea∣rest Children (for they may be Sub ira, yet they are not Filii irae) yet God will not  them. He chastiseth his own People with the Rods of Men; but the Wicked he will Chastise with Scorpi∣ons. What the Godly Suffer, is only a Fatherly Correction, a Judgment of
Chastisement: They are Chastised in Mea∣sure and Mercy, and for a Moment, and shall escape Eternal Punishments; But the Corrections of the Wicked, are Judg∣ments of Revenge, part of Payment of a greater Sum, as an earnest Penny of the Flames of Hell Fire, which the Wicked, and all that forget God, shall Endure, Easeless, Endless, and Remedi∣less.Isa. 28. 22. Wherefore, Be ye not Mockers, least your Bands be made Strong: Scorn not, Jeer not; neither any whit undervalue any Afflicted Servants of God: of all o∣thers, there's least hope of Reforming such Vile, and Abominable Persons, who make God's Children their Langhing-stoch, and Subjects of Derision. The same Doom may be Applicable to them, with those mentioned, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Whose Judg∣ment now of a long time Lingreth not, and their Damnation Slumbreth not.
CHAP. XIII. Containing an Use of Exhortation, where∣in are laid down moving Considerations to depend, and rely on God's All-Suffi∣ciency. for Ex∣hortati∣on. I Come now to a Second Use, which it for Exhortation, that from the Consideration of God's All-Sufficiency, we would endeavour quietly to stay, re∣pose, and establish our Spirits. In pur∣suance of this Exhortation, some Mo∣tives or Perswasives are to be Urged: some Impediments to be removed, and some Duties to be Practised. First, For Motives or Perswasives, to this grand Duty of reposing our Strength, and Confidence in God's All-Sufficiency, take these following. First, There's an Insufficiency, andMot. 1. There's Insuffi∣ciency in all Crea∣tures. utter Impotency in all the Creatures in the Universe. If you make an Extract of the choisest, and most admired Crea∣ture-Comforts; they cannot give any rea, and solid Satisfaction. They are in their best Estate, Vanity, and VexatiEccles. 2. 11. Isa. 55. 2. Eccles. 1. 8. on of Spirit; and no way able to satisfy an Immortal Soul. The Eye is not sa∣tisfied
with Seeing, nor the Ear filled with Hearing. The Heart of Man is Trian∣gular, and the World is a Circle, and it's imposible for a Circle to fill a Tri∣angle. Take all the Melodious Musick to tickle the Ear, and all the gaudy Pageants to please the Eye, and all the admirable Fancies, Contrivances, and Imaginations, to affect the Heart; yet upon a serious deliberate Review, there's Vanity, Insufficiency, and Dissatisfacti∣on in them all. The desire is Insatiate, crying out with the Horse-leeches Daugh∣ter, Give, give. When Men are upon their Sick-beds, and Tormented with great Pains, What help can Riches af∣ford? When Men are troubled in Con∣science, & the Guilt of Sin flies in the Sin∣ners Face, Multo difficilius est consci∣entean afflictum consolari quam Mortuos texcitare. Luth. in Gen. What can the Pomp and Riches of the World do, to quiet and settle the Spi∣rit? A Man may as soon hoard up the Graces of Faith, Love, Patience, and such like in his Coffer, as satisfy his Soul with Gold and Silver. The Soul is Immaterial and Infinite; the things of the World are Material and Finite, and between Material and Im∣material, Finite and Infinite, there holds no Rule of Proportion.
Secondly, Confider, whatsoever isMot. 2. All thats Good, is deriva∣tive from God. Good, Amiable, and Desirable in any of the best Creatures, it is derivative, and borrowed from the Creator. Crea∣tures are, when compared to God, not so much as the Dust to the Ballance, nor so much as a Ray to the Sun, or a Drop to the Ocean. God is not only Eminently Good and All-Sufficient, but Exclusively; for he admits no Competitors, nor Corri∣vals with him. God is a Fountain ope∣ned,Zach. 13. 1. Jer. 2. 13. and a Fountain of Living Waters. An inexhausted Fountain, which never fails, nor can be drawn dry. Creatures are oftimes Pits without Water, and what Water they have at any time, it's borrowed elsewhere. But the Spring never fails. The Fountain of Grace and Mercy, is a Well of living Water, Spring∣ing up unto Eternal Life. Thirdly, God is infinitely Excellent,Mot. 3. God is in∣finitely Excel∣lent. absolutely perfect, and what he doth is Compleat, and every way Perfect, Ec∣cles. 3. 14. I know that whatsoever God doth, it shall be for Ever; nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, and God doth it, that Men should fear before him. It's ordinary amongst Creatures, for one Artificer to mend the Work of a∣nother; because one Man hath more
Dexterity and Sagacity, in managing his Trade, than another. Every one hath not Arrived to the Skill of Beza∣liel and Aholiab, who were filled with Wisdom from God. Nothing more com∣mon, than for one to find fault with anothers Work. And many Eyes may SeePlus vi∣dent oculi quam o∣culus. more than one. It's not unusual for the self-same Man to mend his own Work, for One day may learn of another. But allPosteri∣or dies est prioris discipu∣u. God's Ways are absolutely Perfect. And God alone is able to perswade the Heart, to Acquiesce, and rest satisfied in him alone. Whereas no Creature-comfort can quiet the Heart, and remove all dis∣contents. The want of a bended Knee more vexed, and displeased Haman, than all his Court-Favours, and Promotions pleased him, Om∣nia haec non ha∣bent pretium, valorem, dignitatem apud me. Lud. de Dieu. Esth. 5. 13. Yet all this a∣vaileth me nothing, so long as I see Mor∣decai the Jew, sitting at the King's Gate. Fourthly, God is an Universal GoodMot. 4. God is an Univer∣sal Good. at all times, in all Cases, Places, and in all Conditions. Creatures at the best, are but particular Goods, and serve for use only, in some particular Cases, and in others, are not useful, nor helpful at all. For Instance; Fire, and Cloaths warm the Body, but cannot satisfy Hun∣ger,
nor quench the Thirst; Friends may be willing to help, but are absent, and cannot convey help, or if they be present, they may not be able. They cannot help a Man to Health in Sick∣ness, nor to Riches in Poverty, nor to Peace in a time of War. But God is e∣very where, by the Ubiquity of his Pre∣sence, and alwayes able to help. All Creatures are at God's Command. All Cattle on a Thousand Mountains are at God's Disposal. In all Conditions, Wants and Distresses, Supplies, Helps and Re∣lief come from God. It hath pleased the Father, that in Christ should all Fulness dwell, Col. 1. 19. There's Fulness of Wisdom to Coun∣sel, of Power to Defend, of Mercy to Pardon, of Righteousness to Justify, ofHabet omnia qui habet pos∣sidentem omnia. August. Holiness to Sanctify, of Grace here, and of Glory hereafter. Now He hath all, who hath Interest in him, who Possesseth all. Fifthly, God is an Eternal Good. HisMot. 5. God is an Eternal Good. Jer. 31. 3. Ps. 130. . 2 Sam. 23. 5. Inter pe∣ritura vi∣vimus. Sen. Love is Everlasting, his Mercy Endureth for Ever, his Covenant Everlasting. No Creature in the Universe, is of any long Continuance. Time is short, and Riches are but for a short time. Health, Peace, Friendship, Relations, dearest and nea∣rest are Transient, and of short Conti∣nuance.
It's to be Observed, when So∣lomonBreve est quod delectat, aeternum quod cru∣ciat▪ Bel∣lar. de Con∣temptu muni. reckons a time for several Purpo∣ses and Conditions, Eccles. 3. 1, 2, 3. &c. He Mentions no time to Live. Orimur, morimur. From our Cradle to our Grav, there's one continued progressive Motion. There's something cutting at the Root, and hastening us each Moment to our Grave. Where then shall we Rest, and confidently Secure our elves? We must Ascend from Earth to Heaven, from Transient and Fading Creatures, to an Eternal and Unchangeable God. No rest for Noah's Dove, till She was took into the Ark; no rest nor acquiescence for a Christian, butIn omnibus quae percurro non invenio tutum locum animae meae nisi in te, quo colligantur sparsa mea, nec a te quicquam rece∣dat ex me. Aug. confes. l. 10. in God. Whereever I go (saith Augustin) I find no Safety, but in Thee. Let's then have continual Re∣course unto God. In his Presence there is fulness of Joy, and at his Right Hand, there are Pleasures for Evermore. With∣al Holy Greediness, and unwearied Pains, let us pursue the Wayes of Wisdom: There's a great Incouragement, Prov. 8. 18. Riches and Honours are with me; yea, durable Riches and Righteousness. Other Riches, which the World in∣joyes; if God be not there amongst them, what are they else but Pover∣ty.
Omnis mihi copi∣a quae De∣us meus non est, e∣gestas est. Aug. Confes. l. 13. Col. 3. 2. A Painter said, Pingo Aeternitati. I am sure, a Christian ought to have Eternity in his frequent, and deliberate Thoughts, and to Labour to get his Heart weaned, from things Transient, and fixt upon things Permanent, to Set his Affections on things above, and not on things below. Sixthly and Lastly, Consider, If we be∣lieveMot. 6. We shall Speed the worse, if we do not de∣pend up∣on God's All Suffi∣ciency. not God's All▪ Sufficiency, nor depend upon his Power, and Goodness, and Wis∣dom, for Provision Supplies, and Assistan∣ces, but betake our selves to any Creature, we shall speed the worse. To our Pe∣ril be it: For to leave God's Way, and to follow a devised Way of our own; to leave a Fountain, and to repair to a Cystern, is the High-Way that leadeth to our own Ruin, and utter Destructi∣on. Who ever Prospered by any indi∣rect, irregular Way? For any to make haste out of a Trouble, and through Im∣patience betake themselves to wrong Re∣medies, as by lying, dissembling, and rendring Evil for Evil; this is a Reme∣dy worse than the Disease; this is to throw away the Plaister, before the Soe be Healed, and a ready means to cause the Wound to Bleed afresh, and renew the Pain. For Instance, Abraham and Isaac, both Sinned greatly in Denying
their Wives, and thereby they expo∣sed themselves to great Temptations: Jacob compassed a Blessing by indirect means; though now he obtained the Blessing, yet he met with variety of Af∣flictions; he was an Exile Twenty Years, for fear of his Brother Esau; he endu∣red a rigorous Servitude under his Uncle Laban, and many Domestick Crosses he met with amongst his own Children. Some in their Straights, betake themselves to a broken Refuge of Lyes; But ob∣serve the Judgment Isa. 28. 17. The Hail shall sweep away the Refuge of Lyes, and the Waters shall overflow the hiding Place. Others in Extremity, betake themselves to Carnal Compliance with Men; they even commit Idolatry with them, like the Antient Persians, who Worshipped the Rising Sun. The Charge of the Apostle, is, 1 Cor. 7. 23.Mentes vetras libe ma ha∣bete, neque eas unquam aut be∣ris vestris, aut ullis hominibus subijcite; sed soli Christo a quo empti estis▪ cr quum servipis, ne existimate vos hominun, sed scitote vos solius Christi▪ esse servos. Lu de Die. Ye are bought with a Price, be not ye the Servants of Men. And the Apostle Professeth his Integrity, and Resolution against Men pleasing, Gal. 1. 10. Do I seek to Please Men? For if I plea∣sed Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ. And such as trust in Men, are under a dreadful Curse, Jer. 17. 5.
Thus saith the Lord, Cursed be the Man that trusteth in Man, and maketh Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departeth from the Living God. What said Saul to the Benjamites, Will the Son of Jesse give you Fields and Vineyards, and make you Captains of Thousands? So say I, Will any thing under the Sun give you any real lasting Comfort? Will any Earthly thing help you in a Day of God's Wrath, then especially, when a Guilty Conscience flies in thy Face? Will thy Riches and Greatness carry thee beyond this Life; and lead thee to Eternity? Upon Experience we shall find that we are disappointed, and crost most, when we expect most; How was David crost in his Beautiful Son Abso∣lom? And how was he crost in his Dar∣ling Adonijah, whom he never once re∣proved? When Judas had most need of a Word of Counsel and Comfort, then he was Answered by the High Priests, after a slight and careless man∣ner,Ad mo∣dum Cai∣ni loquun∣tur, ve∣ra proge∣nies Cai∣ni. Grot. Mat. 27. 4. And they said, What is that to us? See thou to that. Absolom had never so much need of his Mule, as when his Head was caught under the Thickets of an Oak; but then his Mule went from under him, and left him Hanging between Heaven and Earth,
a ready Mark for the next Enemy that came, to thrust him through, as Joab did. Mephibosheth had never more need of Ziba's Service, than at that time, when David fled from Absolom (and Me∣phibosheth that true Hearted Loyal Sub∣ject, had a willing mind to wait on the King; but could not for want of Legs) yet then Ziba raised a notorious Lye against Mephibosheth, and accused him falsly, who was a faithfuller Subject, than his Accuser. Let all these Con∣siderations ingage us to trust God, and distrust Creatures; and to this purpose, I shall remove some Impediments, or Obstacles, which hinder our trusting, and depending on God.
CHAP. XIIII. Wherein are Two grand Impediments dis∣covered, viz. Covetousness and Hypocri∣sy, which hinder us from Believing, and Depending on God's All-Sufficien∣cy. FOr Discovering of those Impediments, which hinder us from trusting in God, and Believing his All-Sufficiency, and staying thereon, there are several Sins which might be named, Impatience, Murmuring, Unbelief, &c. But these having been mentioned before, I shall mention Two grand Impediments or Obstacles, viz. Covetousness and Hypo∣crisy. That I name Covetousness, none will wonder; but that I name Hypocri∣sy may be more Scrupled; The Reason is, because a deceitful false Heart, is rea∣dy to trust any thing or person, soo∣ner than God. First, Then Covetousness is a great1. Im∣pedi∣ment is Cove∣tousness. hinderance of trusting in God: This Sin of Covetousness (as far as I observe) is no where in Scripture charged upon any of the Saints; though many other Sins are charged on them; yet I find
not this Sin in particular, charged on them (though none can say his Heart is clear, more or less from this Sin:) Judas betrayed Christ for Thirty Pieces of Silver. The Covetousess of the Ga∣drens caused them to prefer their SwineMark 10. 22. before a Saviour: The Young Rich Ru∣ler preferred Treasures on Earth, before2 Tim. 4. 10. Treasures in Heaven. Too much Love of the World, caused Demas to turn A∣postate. Lather had a Spirit above theHem Germana ista bestia non curat urum; valde protesta∣tus sum e lle sic satiari ab o. Melch. Adam in vita Lu∣theri. World; he profest that he never found his Heart inclined to Covetousness, In∣somuch as when Preferment was to be offered to him, to stop his Mouth, his very Enemies confest that he loved not Gold. And he profest That he would not be put off with outward things. That Noble Italian, Marquess Galeaius Carac∣ciolus left his Marquessdom, his Relati∣ons, and Honours for Christ, and left this Heroical Speech upon Record to Posterity, worthy to be Wrote with a Pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, viz. Cursed be that Man, that prefers all the Gold and Silver in the World, before one days Communion with Jesus Christ. Preferments, Riches, and Ho∣nours could not prevail with Learned Basil, that Worthy Father; he bad of∣fer such things to Children; such things
were beneath his Cognizance. How frequently doth the Holy Scrip∣tures note this Sin of Covetousness, with a Brand of Infamy. Covetousness is the Root of all Evil. It's called there, the1 Tim . 10. Love of Mony: Two Words the Scrip∣ture useth to express Covetousness by; one is , the other is , and both are in Name and Nature stark naught; for Covetousness is Idolatry;Col. 3. 5. it's a Fruit of a naughty Heart, andMark. 7. 22. joyn'd with bad Company, as Theft, Malice, and what not. It's so abomina∣ble a Sin, as not worthy of naming. Nothing, saith a Heathen, arguethNi est tam angusti tamque parvi a∣nimi, quam ∣mare di∣vitias. Cic. more, a narrow and low Spirit, than Co∣vetousness. When Men are fast Glued, and Riverted to the World, they believe not the Omnipotency, and the All-Suf∣ficiency of God, because they have made choice of another God, even Mam∣mon. And whither will not Covetousness drive a Man, and to what will not Co∣vetousness tempt a Man? A Man that alloweth himself in this Sin, will Spin a Thred thinner and thinner, till it and his Conscience break both together: he will find out new coyn'd Distinctions, Apologies, Subterfuges, Evasions, and what not to baffle the Truth, and his
own Conscience. It's Christ's Caution,Luke 12. 15. Take heed, and beware of Covetousness. And Bishop Latimer, that Eminent Mar∣tyr, would frequently Inculcate this Cau∣tion, Beware of Covetousness, For when the Devil, and a Mans own Corrupti∣ons meet with a Heart greedy of Gain, What Wickedness will be left Unat∣tempted? Hence it comes to pass, that Multitudes will not believe God, nor rely upon His All-Sufficiency, because they Love the World too well; and the Love of the World justles out the Love of God. It was an excellent saying of an antient Experimental Divine, Where SinMr. Green∣ham. Cujus a∣nima in oculis ejus est preti∣osa, in ejus oculis Mundus est parvus Buxtor. Floril. sits light, the World sits heavy; and where the World sits light, Sin sits heavy. Where∣fore let the Apostles Charge leave deep Impressions upon our Consciences, 1 Joh. 2. 15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; If any Man Love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him. A Second Impediment, is Hypocrisie;2. Impe∣diment Hypocri∣sy. and this is a Reason, why so many di∣strust God, because they deal Hypocriti∣cally, and have divided Hearts, partly for God, and partly for Mammon. The Heart is Naught, and keeps Reserves for that Profit; the other Interest, and Car∣nal
Advantage. Many braid of the Strumpet, who would have the Child divi∣ded: So they will divide in Duties and Commands. This Hypocritical, Deceit∣ful Spirit, keeps multitudes from Trust∣ing and Depending on God's All-suffici∣ency. Ananias and Saphira would not Trust God; they feared, that some Po∣verty might befal them: And therefore, they made a Defalcation from the Price,Act. 5. 3. and used Hypocritical Jugglings. No Hypocrite can trust God; for he acts all for Self-Interest, and turns like a Weather-Cock with the Wind, and strives to swim with the Stream. It's a Sincere Heart alone, that can cast it self upon God, and can venture all upon his Promises. He it is, who alone will trust God with all that he hath; for he knoweth, that God is infinitely nearer and dearer to him, than all the World besides. This Consideration comforted Hezekiah upon his Bed of Sickness. 2 King. 20. 3. I beseech thee Lord, remember now, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart; and have done that, which is Good in thy Sight. A Heart divided between God, and the World, between Christ, and Anti-christ, will ne∣ver stick close to God, in a Time of Ad∣versity. A Rotten, Hypocritial Heart,
will not Suffer for Christ: A Hypocrite will not willingly bear a Scorn, or Word of Reproach for Christ; much less, will he Fry at a Stake. The Lord thus ex∣postulateth the Case: Jer. 12. 5. If thou hast run with the Foot-Men, and they have wearyed thee; then, How canst thou contend with Horses? And if in the Land of Peace, wherein thou trustedst, they have wearyed thee; then, How wilt thou do in the Swel∣ling of Jordan? Bilney the Martyr, made Assay first,Acts & Mon. in Q. Mar. Dayes, Vol. 3. to try how he could bear the Burning of his Finger; because he expected, (which came to pass afterwards) that his whole Body should be Burned. But an Hypo∣criteTimeo, ne animam perdas, qui capil∣lum non perdes. Aug. in Psal. 96. will lose neither Finger nor Body, neither Life nor Limbs, for Christ. So far he will pretend for Christ, as his In∣terest is concerned, for the Loaves; (as many follow Christ) for Preferment and Promotion, in Halcyon-Dayes of Peace and Tranquillity: But when Religion is Contemned, and the Professors are Per∣secuted, a Hypocrite takes Offence; he makes the worst Choice, To Video te post hu∣jus plgoe tuae horrendm miseriam ad interitum tuum hanc impietatis sequi vel∣le perniciem. Hieronym in Loc. choose Sin,Job 36. 21. rather than Affliction; and rather to sleep in a whole Skin, than a whole Consci∣ence.
None more Odious to God and Man, than a Hypocrite; for God, and Good Men hate him, because he is no better, and is not so good as he seems to be: And Wicked Men hate him, because he pretends to any Goodness at all. Not∣withstanding many Failings▪ Sincerity is that which will stand us in stead, when we come to dye. A Reverend Minister, when he came to dye, said; I have aMr. Giles Workman, a Mini∣ster in Glocester∣shire. 2 Chron. 15. 17. little Sincerity, and that's all that comforts me. Asa had many Failings; yet it's said of him; i. e. Af∣firmo op∣timâ con∣scientiâ, me nec corrum∣pere Do∣ctrinam, nec tte flectere ad cujusque affectus, nee privat ulli cupiditati ser∣vire. Melancthon in loc. Nevertheless, the Heart of Asa was Perfect all his Dayes. This is the Cause of the Saint's Rejoycing: 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our Rejoycing is this, the Te∣stimony of our Consciences, That in Simpli∣city, and Godly Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World. A Heathen could commend Plainness, and Simple-Dealing, as most agreeing o the Nature of Man: So saith Tully; Quod verum, simplex, sincerumque sit, id est na∣turae Hominis aptissimum. Much more should a Christian embrace Sincerity, as knowing it to be that which God re∣quireth, and so highly esteemeth of.
If then we desire to trust God in all Conditions, let's labour for a Sincere and Single Heart, and abhor and hate Hy∣pocrisy with a perfect Hatred: For a Hypocrite will never hold out in any Duty; he will not believe, when Sense Fails him: He will not pray alwayes; he will not hold on in the Profession of Religion, farther than may consist with his own Secret Designs, and Self-Inte∣rests. CHAP. XV. Directing to Three special Duties to be put in Practice, viz. To Live by Faith; and, To set the Spirit of Prayer a work∣ing; and, To get a meek and quiet Spirit. HAving laid down several Motives, and removed some Impediments; for a Close of this Use, here are several Du∣ties, as Helps to stay our Selves, and rely upon God, necessary to be Practi∣sed. The First Duty is, To Live by Faith.1. Duty, To Live by Faith. There's no Life like to this: All other
Lives; (in Comparison of this) are no better than sharking, shifting Lives. Epaminonda, that great Theban-Com∣mander, after a great Overthrow, ask't, Whether his Buckler was safe? A great Man of our Nation, in the Time of his Sufferings, ask't, Whether his Honour was safe? Now, the Buckler, and Honour of a Christian; is the Life of Faith. Faith is a Shield and a Buckler, a Stay and a Staff in the greatest Afflictions. When Sense▪ and Reason fails, and Men are e∣ven at their Wits ends, then is the Time for Faith to act on Promises; then is the Time to live the Life of Faith; and to strive, that Faith and Patience may hold out. It is storyed of Cynagirus, That whenJustin. he was thrown over Ship-board, then he held by his Hands; and when one Hand was cut off, he held by the other; and when that was likewise cut off, he held by his Teeth; and (as the Historian saith) Instar rabidae ferae, morsu navem detinuit. Thus a true Believer will not let go his Hold; he will not be beaten from his Strong-hold. The Promises are as so many Fort-Royals to a Believer; wherefore, he is resolved to stand▪ his Ground, and lay fast hold on the Promi∣ses. Though he be beaten off several
Holds, and deprived of several Helps, and disappointed of his Expectations; yet heHeb. 10. 35. is resolved, not to let go his Confidence in God. Here then consists the Life of Faith in an Eminent way; when the Oyl fails in the Cruse, and the Meal in the Bar∣rel, then to depend upon God's All-suf∣ficiency, and trust God upon his Word, though Sense and Reason fail. And such a Man, who acts Faith on Promises, ap∣plyeth himself to all good Means; heFides Maxima, & Heroi∣a opera∣tur. Lut. in Gen. 29. will not tempt God, by Negligence and Sloathfulness; presuming of Supplies, without the Use of lawful Means. But as the Antients held the Plow, and Prayed; so a Believer will be diligent in his Calling, seek God by Prayer, ex∣ercise Faith and Patience. This is the most excellent Life in all the World: The Apostles experimented it; Gal. 2. 20. The Life which I live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. The Life of a Believer, is a None∣such, without a Parallel; there is none like to it. Some live by their Lands, some by their Trades, some by their Wits and Shifts; not one of these Lives will hold out, when a Storm comes. Wherefore, let us labour to live that Life, which will hold out amidst the grea∣test
Sufferings, and support us against the sorest Burthens, either Imminent or Incumbent upon us. This Grace of Faith is not an Herb that groweth in our Gar∣dens: It is a Plant of our Heavenly Fa∣ther's Plantation; it's the Gift of God. There are Three sorts of Faith; viz.Eph. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. . Fidem ip∣sam nobis exigit Deus, & non inve∣nit quod exigit, ni∣si dederit quod in∣veniat. August. A General Assenting-Faith; A Special Re∣sting-Faith; and, A Particular Applying-Faith: We must joyn all these toge∣ther; for we have need of all. i. e. We must trust God upon his Word, because he hath said it: We must Assent unto the Truth of his Word. Thus did Da∣vid trust God upon his Psal. 119. 42. Numb. 23. 19. Word. Whe∣ther God threatens Judgments, or pro∣miseth Mercy, we must believe his Word to be True. Balaam himself, though a Mercenary-Prophet, gives a true Atte∣station; viz. God is not a Man, that he should Lie; neither the Son of Man, that he should Repent: Hath he said it, and shall he not do it? Or, Hath he spo∣ken, and shall he not make it good? 2. There is a Special Resting-Faith, which is called a Faith of Adherence, or Recumbence; when we rely, and stay our selves upon God, and will not part with any one of his Promises. The People, when Rabshakeh Railed, Rested themselves2 Chron. 32. 8. on the Words of Hezekiah. All Rabshakeh's
Railing Speeches, could not batter down Jerusalems Walls, nor drive back Heze∣kiah, and his People, from Trusting and Relying on God. Thus Job did act sin∣gularly, and resolvedly: Job 13. 15. Though he Slay me, yet will I Trust in Him. There's a Third sort of Faith, which is a Particular Applying-Faith. Thus did Thomas acknowledge Christ, in particu∣lar, in those words; My Lord, and myJohn 20. 28. God: And St. Paul professeth; Christ hath loved me, and given himself for me.Gal. 2. 20. A Believer will apply the Promises to himself by Faith: And though, under some Desertion, he is afraid to apply Christ to himself; yet he applyeth himself to Christ, begging his Counsel, and his Wis∣dom to direct, and his Consolations to re∣vive him. Christ is All in All, to the true Belie∣ver: Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Whereupon St. Bernard gives a choice Exposition: We (saith he) willNos se∣quemur e, perte, ad te: quia tues via, veri∣tas, & vi∣ta: via in exemplo, veritas in promisso, vita in praemio. Bern. Serm. 2. de Ascen. Do∣mini. follow Thee, by Thee, unto Thee; because Thou art the Way, the Truth, and the Life: Thou art the Way in Example, the Truth in Promises, the Life in Re∣ward.
A Second Duty is, To set the Spirit of Pray∣erDuty 2. To set▪ the Spi∣rit of Prayer a working. a working. To pray by the Spirit, is the Property only of a Gracious Spirit: For the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, are joyn'd together, Zech. 12. 10. That we may know, wherein the Spirit of Pray∣er consists, we have it set forth; Rom. 8. 26. With Groanings, which cannot be ut∣tered. By the Spirit of Adoption, cry∣ing Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6. Rom. 8. 15.1 Sam. 1. 15. by Pouring out the Soul, as Hannah did; by Wrestling, as Jacob did, Gen. 32. 24. And what this Wrestling was, the Pro∣phet Hosea Hos. 12. 4. expounds: Yea, he had Pow∣er over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made Supplication unto him. Although God is Omnipotent, and is every way able to help his People; yet he will (as it were) suffer himself to be commanded by the Prayers of his Peo∣ple; for so we read, Isa. 45. 11. Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker; Ask of Me Things to come, concerning my Sons; and concerning the Work of my Hands, command ye me. God pro∣miseth great Things to his People, even the Sprinkling clean Water upon them, the Giving them a New Heart, the Putting of his Spirit within them, and Causing them to walk in his Fear. What high invalu∣able Promises are these? Yet though
God intend the full Accomplishment of all these Promises, he will grant them in his own way; he will be sought unto by the Prayers and Supplications of his People: Ezek. 36. 37. Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them. We have ma∣ny Promises of the Churches Deliverance; but the Church must Pray. Turn back our Captivity, O Lord, as the Stream inPsal. 126. 4. Psal. 14. 7. Psal. 44. 17. Psal. 25. 22. the South.—And, O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Zion!—Thou art my King, O God! Command Delive∣rances for Jacob.—Redeem Israel, O Lord, out of all his Troubles. You read of Manasseh's Prayer, whenDulcio∣es lacry∣mae oran∣tium quam gaudia Theatro∣rum. Aug. in Psal. 28. he was in the Thornes, of Jonah's Pray∣er in the Whales- Belly, of the Apostles in Prison: And it's the Churches Pra∣ctice; Isa. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a Pray∣er, when thy Chastening was upon them. Whatever Losses or Calamities befal us, Prayer is that , an Universal Medicine, mentioned by Solo∣mon, 2 King. chap. 7. We have a Pre∣cept, and an Encouragement; Psal. 50. 15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt Glorifie Me.
What could Achitophel do against Da∣vid's Prayers? By them, that great Po∣litician was Counterplotted, and his Counsels were turned into Foolishness. What could Herod, and the People of the Jews do against the Churches Pray∣ers? Though the Keeper shut the Pri∣son Doors, yet the Church opened Hea∣ven Doors; and Peter, the Prisoner, was inlarged by the Angel of the Lord, and given in as a Return of the Prayers of the Church. Mary, Queen of Scots, was afraid of the Prayers of John Knox: She professed, That she feared his Pray∣ers, more than an Army of Forty Thousand Men. But some distressed Persons complain,  That they Receive no Answer of their Prayers. The Answer to them I shall return, is: 1. To examine, whether they Pray not for Superfluities, & unlawful Things? whether they pray not for Revenge a∣gainst their Enemies? whether they al∣low some secret Iniquity in their Hearts, or some Bosome-Sin unrepented of? We read James 1. 3. Ye Ask, and Receive not, because ye Ask amiss, that you may Consume it upon your Lusts.
2. Let us labour to mend what is amiss in our Prayers: It's a Mercy to be deny∣ed, when we ask for Things not accor∣dingDeus qu∣dam negat propitius, quae co∣cedit ira∣tus. Aug. 1 Joh. 5. 14. to God's Will. We only have a Promise of Audience, when we ask ac∣cording to God's Will. God knoweth what's best to give, in Answer to our Prayers. That our Prayers may speed the bet∣ter, there are required Five SpecialAut De∣us dabit quod peti∣mus, aut quod▪ nobis noverit esse utilius. Bern▪ Qualifications: As, First, Humility. Abraham, when heQualif. 1. Humili∣ty. had to deal with God, acknowledged him∣self to be but Dust and Ashes; and so did Job abhor himself, and Repent in DustCum sis Humi Li∣mus, cur non es hu∣milimus. Bern. Qui sibi vilis est, Deo Cha rus est. Id. de in∣ter. Do∣min. and Ashes; and Ephraim smote upon his Thigh: He that is most vile in his own Eyes, is dearest in God's Eyes. We cannot brook a proud Beggar: We are all Beggars at God's Door, poor Indi∣gent Petitioners. All, whatever we re∣ceive, is of Favour, and nothing of Me∣rit. Shall Beggars be puff't up with Pride? Shall proud Dust swell against God? Bernard propounds Christ's Humilia∣tionApage ut intumes∣cat ver∣miculus, quum sese exinaniverit Dominus. Bern. for a curb of Pride. It's (saith he)
abominable, that a Worm should swell, when our Lord made himself so low. Upon Deliberate Thoughts, when we reflect upon our own Unworthyness, we shall with Jacob confess; I am not Wor∣thyGen. 32. 10. of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truths, which thou hast shewed un∣to thy Servant. Let's lye low, and beware of all In∣flamations of Pride; when we have to deal with God, we can never be Hum∣ble enough; we can never think too Meanly of our Selves, nor too Highly of God. The more Holy, the more Humble: The Humblest Christians are. Sedes pri∣ma vita ima. the best of Christians. Nazianzen gives a Character of Athanasius, that He was High in his VVorks, and Low in Mind. The Higher Men are, the more Humble towards God. Now, when we make our Addresses to God in Prayer, let's entertain serious and high Thoughts of God's Infinite Goodness, and low Thoughts of our Selves; and this will prepare us to Pray aright. A Second Qualification of Prayer isQualif. 2. is Faith. Faith: We must Pray believingly, other∣wise there is no Hopes of speeding. An Unbeliever, so remaining, is without
Hope: He cannot Pray nor trust God, neither can any thing that he doth, ob∣tain Acceptance; because Without Faith,Heb. 11. 6. Heb. 14. 23. it is impossible to please God, and Whate∣ver is not of Faith, is Sin. Mr. Tyndal, that precious Martyr, in a Letter to Mr. Fryth, layes down Four Expressions of Faith. 1. To give up your self. 2. To cast your self. 3. To yield your self. 4. to commit your self wholly, and only to your Loving Father. It's the Prayer of Faith, which proves Effectual, Sani∣tatem ae∣groti ad∣scribet o∣rationi fi∣dei, hoc est ex fi∣de ad Deum, profusae a Presbyteris. Ne vero in Presbyteris vel in precum opere operato haerebit ger, principalem addit causam, Dominus excitabit, &c. Pareus. James 5. 15. The Prayer of Faith shall Save the Sick. The Promise is made to what's Prayed for in Faith, Mat. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever ye ask in Prayer Believing, ye shall Receive. Let's then believe God to be True and Faithful in all his Promises, and that he will not fail of performing what he hath Promised. Though our Sense may be puzled, and our Reason non-plust; we must believe against all Reasoning with Flesh and Blood, and submit our Reasonings to the Will of God. Tertullian saith, Faith fears no Hunger.Fides non timet fa∣mem. Tertul. And I have Read a Character of a Be∣liever,
That he neither fears, Poverty, norQuem ne∣que pa peries, que Mors, nec vin∣cula ter∣nt. Bonds, nor Death. Where's greatest Dif∣ficulty, there's most work for Faith, to put forth it self. A true Believer will venture his All upon God's Word. He will say, Credo quia incredibile, I belie because it is Incredible. I'le leave off Dis∣puting, and learn to Believe. Great and wonderous Effects have been brought to pass, by the Faithful Prayers of the Chil∣dren of God. When the Army of the Antoni∣nus. Emperour was like to Perish for want of Water; the Christian Army that was calledEuseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 5.  Prayed, and a plentiful Rain was poured down: When a Young Man at Wittenburge, had Sealed an In∣denture to the Devil; upon the Prayers of Luther, and others joyn'd with him, the Indenture was thrown in amongOratio est Deo Sa∣crificium, Diabolo flagellum & animae Solatium. Aug. them through the Window. What will not a Prayer made of Faith (as an In∣strumental Means under God) effect? Such a Prayer is said to be a Sacrifice to God, a Scourge to the Devil, and a Com∣fort to the Soul. A Third Qualification of Prayer isQual. 3. Prayer must be Offered in Christ's Name. this, that it must be Offered in Christ's Name, and his alone. No other Ob∣ject of Faith but Christ, nor any other
Advocate; no other Mediator, nor In∣tercessor,Joh. 16. 26. Joh. 15. 16. but Christ alone. Christ tells us, we must Ask in his Name, and we shall have whatsoever we Ask for, gi∣ven unto us. Christ is that Altar, where∣upon we must Offer all our Sacrifices. He is that great Master of Requests, who must prefer our Petitions to his Father: Besides his Name there is no Salvation, Acts 4. 12. Besides his Blood there's no Redemption, Eph. 1. 7. Where∣fore Luther tells us, Whatsoever is Prayed,Quic∣quid ora∣tur, do∣ceur & vivitur, Extra Christum est Idola∣tria coram Deo & peccatum. Luth. Tom. 3. Edit. Gen. p. 300. Non solum periculum sed horribile est de Deo extra Christum co∣gitare. Luth. in Psal. 28. Taught, and Lived without Christ, is Ido∣latry before God and Sin. And he like∣wise saith, That it's not only Dangerous, but Horrible to think of God without Christ. Neither Heathens, nor Jews know how to Pray, neither can any Prayer they make, obtain Favour at God's Hand, because they Pray not in the Name of Christ. And without Christ, God is a Consuming Fire, an Inexorable Judge; but in Christ, a Merciful and Reconciled Father. Christ is our Peace, Eph. 2. 14. He hath Trod the Wine-press alone, Isa. 63. 3. Wherefore we must prefer all our Pray∣ers in the Name of Christ.
As it's reported of the Persians, that when they had Offended their King, they brought his Son in their Arms, hoping thereby to Reconcile themselves to the King. So we must present Christ unto the Father, in the Arms of Faith; He is our Reconciler, the beloved Son, in whom the Father is well pleased. If Adam, and all his Posterity had Suffe∣red Pains and Torments, to all Eterni∣ty, they could not have merited God's Favour; But Christ hath merited by his active, and passive Obedience, And savesHeb. 7. 25. to the uttermost all those that come unto God, through him, seeing he ever Lives to make Intercession for them. Luther hath a notable Expression, I (saith he) often, and willingly InculcateEgo sae∣pe & li∣benter hoc incul∣co, ut ex∣tra Chri∣stum ocu∣los, & au∣res claudatis, & dicatis nullum vis Scire Deum, nisi qui fuit in gremio Mariae & suxit ubera ejus. Luth. in Psal. 30. this; That without Christ, you may shut your Eyes and Ears, and say, that you know no God but him, that was in the Lap of Mary, and Suckt her Breasts. A Fourth Qualification of Prayer is,Qualif. 4. Prayer must be Offered up with Fervency. Quod assi∣duam so∣na instan∣tiam▪ Eras. that it must be with Fervency. Hence the Apostle Exhorts, Rom. 12. 12. Con∣tinuing instant in Prayer: The Word is Emphatical  Fortiter perdu∣rantes, there's Strength and Perseverance
exprest by that original word: We must put our whole Strength to the Duty; so we are exhorted, Col. 4. 2. And we have Encouragement from the great Suc∣cess of a Fervent Prayer; James 5. 16. The effectual Fervent Prayer of a Righte∣ous Man, availeth much. In which words there are observable; 1. The Person qualifyed, A Righteous Man, i. e. Such a one who is made Righ∣teous by the Imputation of Christ's Righ∣teousness: Such a one hath the Spirit of Adoption, and the Spirit of Prayer; for they both go together, Gal. 4. 6. And as for such who have not Christ's Spirit, they have their dreadful Doom, Rom. 8. 9. They are none of his; and if none of Christ's, they are the Devils que∣stionless. 2. Observe the Qualification of Pray∣er: It's rendered, (Effectual fervent Pray∣er) in the Original: It is  a word of great Weight, and choice Sig∣nification. Those that were , were Inspir'd, and Transported in a high manner: they could do great Things. As Saul said of David, we may say of Prayer; Thou shalt do great Things, and also shalt prevail. It was said of LutherQuasi dicas ∣tuosam, i. e. ardetem, & assiduam opponi putant perfunctorie. Beza.
in Prayer; Tantum potuit, quantum vo∣luit. The Prayer that God Requires and Accepts, must be a Rowzing, Fervent, Vi∣gorous Prayer. God requires the Male in the Flock; and there's a Curse upon the Decei∣ver, that hath a Male in the Flock, & vow∣ethui timi∣de rogat, docet e∣gare. Deus differt dare, ut tu discas orre. Deus frequen∣ter differt nostra po∣stulata, ut discamus grandia granditer desidera∣re. Aug. & Sacrificeth to the Lord a corrupt Thing, Mal. 1. 14. The Life, Heat, Vigor, and Fervency of the Heart, must all be im∣ployed for God: To ask faintly, is the ready way to be denyed. If God delay s, it is that we may add more Vigour, and Fervour to our Prayers. God would have us Cry louder, and Knock harder, and Seek more diligently, and Wait more Patiently. 3. The Success followeth, , Availeth much. There's a Blessed Success. Prisoners have been Prayed out of Pri∣son; Armies have been Discomfited; Plots have been Counterplotted, by Fer∣vent Prayers. O! What great Things have been brought to pass by Prayer? Yet I cannot approve of those over-bold Expressions of some, who say, That Pray∣er is an Omnipotent Vertue; and, Prayer is Clavis viscerum Dei: But these may be understood, Clave non Errante; and, in a sound Sense, admit of a fair Inter∣pretation. We Pray, but the SpiritBombar∣da Chri∣stianorum Luth. teacheth us how to Pray. Prayer is on∣ly
an Instrumental Means, as a Weapon in God's Hand, that Moves and Guides it: So that, the Gift, Grace, and Suc∣cess of Prayer, all come from God; and to God, we must return the Praise and Glory of all. A Fifth and Last Qualification of Pray∣erQualif. 5. of Pray∣er is Perseve∣rance. Nisi ad∣sit in ora∣tionae per∣severandi constan∣tia, nihil oando agimus. Cav. Iustii. l. 3.  20. August. Hae. 57. is Perseverance; so we are comman∣ded, 1 Thes. 5. 17. Pray without Ceasing. The word is, , without In∣termission, or Continually: This is In∣terpreted by the same Apostle, Ephes. 6. 18. , i. e. in every Season, and Col. 1. 3.  Alwayes. He (saith Au∣stin) prayeth continually, who lets no Day pass without Prayer. Though God Frown, and be Angry, we must persevere in the Duty of Prayer. And it's a good Signe to continue Fervent in the Duty, even when God defers us, and seems not to hear us. A Hypocrite will not hold out: He prayes only by Fits and Starts. VVill he delight himself in the Almighty? VVill he always call upon God? saith Job, c. 27. v. 10. A Third and Last Duty, as a SpecialDuty 3. To get the Orna∣ment of a meek & quiet Spirit. Help, and Direction, to depend upon God's All-Sufficiency, even in Suffering Times, is, To labour to get the Orna∣ment of a Meek and Quiet Spirit:
which (as the Apostle Peter saith) is in1. Pet. 3. 4. the Sight of God of great Price. A com∣posed quiet Spirit, is put into an ex∣cellent capacity to submit unto God, and depend on him, amidst the greatest Straights and Difficulties. It's Obser∣ved, that Glowormes shine brightest in the darkest Nights; I am sure a meek and quiet Spirit, appears most conspi∣cuously in the Night of Afflictions. Some are naturally more Meek than o∣thers, and have in some measure attain∣ed unto this Moral Vertue▪ as Socrates, and other Heathens did: But a Chri∣stians Meekness shews it self amidst Re∣vilings, Buffettings, and variety of E∣vil Entreaties from ungodly Men. How doth he labour to moderate his Passi∣ons? and even amidst blustring Storms and Tempests, then he endeavours to becalm his Spirit; so that though there be Storms without, he would gladly get, and keep Serenity within. For Instance, when God Chastiseth with his own Im∣mediate Hand, by Famine, Pestilence, or other Noxious Diseases; now is a time to exercise Meekness, and Com∣posedness of Spirit. When God permits Satan, and his Instruments to Persecute the Saints; then is the time to be Si∣lent, and avoid Murmuring, and Revi∣ling
Language, and to prepare, to do and Suffer as becomes Christians, and quietly to wait for God's Salvation. God's Vine Thrives most by Bleeding; and Persecutors serve instead of Gold-Smiths, to Purify, and Refine God's Children, in the Furnace of Affliction. The Fire purifieth Gold and Silver, but consumes Stubble. Wicked Men grow worse and worse by Afflictions; but Godly Men grow better and better, more weaned from the World, more Heavenly minded, and more Fruitful in every Good Word and Work. It's observable that Oyl in∣creaseth the Flame, whereas Water quencheth it; Fretting and Chafing, is like Oyl to the Flame; Meekness is like Water to quench it: A Flint is sooner broken on a Pillow, than on an Anvile. A soft Answer (saith Solomon) turneth away Wrath. Meekness and Calm∣ness of Spirit, Works much Good eve∣ry way; for a Meek Man enjoyeth him∣self, and those Possessions which God be∣stoweth on him, Psal. 37. 11. But the Meek shall Inherit the Earth, and shall De∣light themselves in the abundance of Peace. This Christ Promiseth, Mat. 5. 5. They are Blessed Persons: They shall be free from many outward Vexations, where∣unto Angry Persons expose themselves.
They shall (as Hierome Observes) Inhe∣ritHaere∣ditabunt terram il∣lam vi∣ventium, a mi∣tes & hu∣miles pos∣sideb terram, hoc est vi∣tam aeter∣nam. Hie∣ron. in Psal. 37. this Earth, and the Life to come. Meek Persons have Interest in those Promises, whereof one is, They shall Eat and be Sa∣tisfied, Psal. 22. 26. Another is, That God will Guide them in Judgment, Psal. 25. A Third is, That God will Beautify the Meek with Salvation, Psal. 149. 4. If then we would profit by Afflictions, we must get a meek and quiet Spirit. Affliction Preacheth Meekness of Spirit. And some have learn't more Meekness by a few Weeks Imprisonment, than by hear∣ing Sermons for many Years before. Af∣fliction is one of God's Teaching Ordi∣nances; and when a chastising Rod, and a teaching Word go together, there's a Mercy in such an Affliction. If we would be followers of Christ, we must be Lowly and Meek; for he Propounds himself a Pattern for our Imitation, Learn of Me, for I am Meek and Lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls, Mat. 11. 29. If we would Reap any Profit by the Word, we must Re∣ceive it with Meekness, 1 Jam. 1. 21. If we would gain a lapsed Brother, weGal. 6. 1. , ap∣tum red∣dite & sanate quod Corruptum est, quae significatio bene congruit buic loco. Grt. must Restore him, or set him in Joynt, in the Spirit of Meekness. Wherefore this
will be our Wisdom and Glory, both to get such a composed, and quiet Frame of Spirit, and so to behave our selves in Sufferings, with that Mildness, and Chri∣stian Meekness, as that the worst of our Enemies may be constrained to Con∣fess, that God is in us undoubtedly of a Truth. How many have lost the Ho∣nour, and Comfort of their Sufferings, by mixing their own Passions, and Re∣vengeful Speeches? Froward, and Reviling Speeches, detract from the Honour of a Cause, be it never so Good. Excellent is the Counsel of Cyprian. If (saith he)Si filii Dei sumus pacifici esse debe∣mus, cor∣de mites, Sermone Simpli∣ces, affectione concordes, unanimitatis nexibus cohaerentes. Cypr. de unitate Ecclesiae. we be the Sons of God, we ought to be peaceable, and mild in Heart, single in our Speeches, agreeing in our Affections, and agreeing in the Bonds of Unanimity. Thus then if we put these Three fore∣mentioned Duties, into continual Prac∣tice, viz. To Live by Faith, to set the Spirit of Prayer a Working, and Possess our selves with a meek and quiet Spirit We shall Learn to Trust, and Depend up∣on God's All-Sufficiency, amidst the grea∣test Fears, Dangers, Straights, Losses, and Difficulties, that are either Immi∣nent or Incumbent upon us.
CHAP. XVI. Containing a Third Use for Examina∣tion in Five Queries. IT will now be Requisite, that I In∣large  for Exa∣mination a Third Use, for Examina∣tion and Tryal, whether we believe God to be All-Sufficient; and whether in all times, we will stay, and depend upon him. This nearly concerns every one of us, to put our selves upon a strict Tryal and Inquisition. In pursuance of this Use, I shall propound these ensuing Queries. Whether we acknowledge God's absolute  Whe∣ther we acknow∣ledg God in the Relati∣ons he hath o∣ver us. Power, Soveraignty, and Dominion? And, do we acknowledge him, in those Rela∣tions he hath over us? Do we ac∣knowledge him our Creator? If so, we may conclude, that a Creator will take care of his Creatures. Do we ac∣knowledge him our King and Gover∣nour? If so, we shall confess that a King will Defend, Protect, and Rule his Sub∣jects? Do we acknowledge God our Fa∣ther? Then a Father will provide for his Children. Do we acknowledge God,
our Lord and Master? Then a Master will provide for his Family. If we did consider these Relations between God and us, How much would our Spirits be settled and established? To Consider, That God is our Porti∣on,Lam. Psal. 23. 1. Gen. 15. 1. and Shepherd, our Shield, and excee∣ding great Reward, a tender Father, full of Bowels, a God of all Consolations; these things should keep us from sink∣ing in the greatest Storms and Tempests. If we had Faith enough to make use of our Pronoun, My, and apply God, as My God, there's abundantly enough to Support and Revive us, under the hea∣vyest Pressures, that can befal us. De∣usCol. 3. 11. meus omnia, God is all in all, and with God, the most Bitter thing is Sweet, and without God, the Sweetest thing is Bit∣ter. A Second Query is, Whether we have  Whe∣ther we have re∣course to God, as our Coun∣sellor. continual Recourse to God, as to our Coun∣sellor, in all Conditions, both in Prosperity and Adversity? Do we Ask Counsel of God, and beg the Guidance and Directi∣on of his Spirit? Many Ask Counsel of Flesh and Blood, Corrupt Interests, and Carnal Relations, and have no re∣gard to the Word of God; and they Prosper accordingly. Saul Ask Coun∣sel
of the Witch of Endor, and Ahaziah sent to Ask Counsel of Baal-Zebub, the God of Ekron; but they paid dear for going to such Counsellors: But a true Believer makes God his Counsellor; he's sensible of his want of Wisdom, and he Asks Wisdom of God; he knows not what to do, not how to wind himself out of intricate and perplexed Affairs; but he falls upon his Knees, and begs Directions from Heaven. Abraham's Servant made Applications to God by Prayer, and he was Success∣ful in his Journey. Jacob Prayed to be Delivered from his Brother Esau, when he came against him with Four Hundred Men; where to Ask Counsel else, he knew not, nor would not Ask of any, but of God alone. It's easy to Judg, how much a Man respects his Counsellor, and how much Confidence he reposeth in him, when forsaking all others, he adviseth with him alone, in all his doubts, and appli∣eth himself to Him alone, in all his Dif∣ficulties. If then we repair to God by Prayer and Supplication, and beg his Directi∣on and Assistance, and Wisdom from him to Counsel us, and if we rely up∣on the Counsels of his Word; it's E∣vident,
that we believe him to be All-Sufficient, and put our Trust and Con∣fidence in him. What a stir was there amongst Phi∣losophers,. to find out the meaning of one Word; Insomuch, as Hermolaus Barberus went to the Devil, to know the mea∣ning thereof, and he left him more un∣satisfied, than he found him. What a bussle do Star-Gazers, and Judicial A∣strologers make, in giving their Judg∣ment upon Conjunction of Planets? And how false they are in their Judg∣ments, is notoriously Apparent. Such Chaplains of the Devil have their Doom, as the Prophet Denounceth, Isa. 47. 13. Let now the Astrologers, the Star-Gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators stand up, and Save thee from those things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as Stub∣ble, the Fire shall Burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the Power of the Flame, there shall not be a Coal to warm at, nor Fire to sit before it. Mr. Ga∣taker. A Reverend, and Eminently Lear∣ned Divine, Encounters these Star-Ga∣zers, and (though they opposed him as Jannes, and Jambres resisted Moses, yet) he abundantly confuted them. SuchAnnota∣tions of Mr. Ga∣takers. (saith he) as tell before hand the Occur∣rents of each Month, as our Prognostica∣tors
also do, these are under the Judg∣ment of that Text. But whither should a People go, but to their God? He isIsa. 9. 6. Heb. a God of Wisdom; Christ is a Counsel∣lour, and the Wisdom of the Father. To go for Counsel else-where, we shall e sure to speed worse. What befals those, Who Ask Counsel at their Stocks? But to be given over to vilest Abominati∣ons, and so left Incorrigible, Hos. 4. 12, 13, 14. What's their Punishment, Who set at Naught all the Counsels of God? Read Prov. 1. 26. I also will Laugh at your Calamity; I will Mock when your Fear cometh. Wherefore let's resolve as Naomi gave Counsel to Ruth, not to be found Glea∣ning in any other Field. Let's not Con∣sult with Carnal Interests, and Selfish Ends and Designs; but let us be much upon our Knees, seeking God for Di∣rection, begging Wisdom of God, for Ordering all our Affairs. We may Ask of Men, Counsel, and meet with Re∣proaching, Upbraiding Language from them; but the Apostle tells us, Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him Ask of God that giveth to all Men Liberally, and Upbraideth none, and it shall be given him. The Gifts of some are , like the Trojan Horse, with an Ambuscado
in it, and as a Greek Author saith,Timeo Danaos & dona ferentes. Virg. Aen. 2. Isocra. , They rather make a Market, than do a Courtesy: But God is a Liberal free Donor; God gives , simply and singly. A Third Query is, Whether we in all  Whe∣ther in all our dangers, we have recourse to God as our Re∣fuge? our Dangers, have Recourse unto God, as our Refuge? That's a Sign of our Affi∣ance in God, and of our dependance on him; When in our greatest Dangers, we make him our Refuge, and our hi∣ding Place. Thus the Psalmist begins, Psal. 46. God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in time of Trouble. This Psalm comforted Luther in all his Afflictions, he would say, Come let us Sing, Psal. 46. And then we will not Fear. God's Children have a place of Re∣fuge, Prov. 14. 26. And who is this Refuge, we Read, Isa. 25. 4. For thou hast been a Strength to the Poor, a Strength to the Needy in his Distress, a Refuge from the Storm, a Shadow from the Heat, when the Blast of the Terrible one, is as a Storm against the Wall. Christ is this Refuge promised, Isa. 32. 2. A Man shall be as an Hiding place from the Wind, and a Co∣vert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Wa∣ters in a Dry place, as a Shadow of
a great Rock in a weary Land. Who Seeks not in Danger, some Re∣fuge or other? Even brute Creatures Seek after a Refuge and Shelter. The Conies (saith Solomon) are a feeble Folk,Prov. 30. 26. yet make they their Houses in the Rocks. The Birds of the Air have Nests, Foxes have Holes; the Beasts of the Field (when a Storm is a coming) make hast to Shelter themselves under the Defence of great Trees. Amongst Men, there are variety of Refuges; For Instance, The Jews had their Cities of Refuge. The Romans had their Asylum. And amongst variety of Men (as their Fancy leads them) they make choice of various kinds of Refu∣ges. The Voluptuous Man hath re∣course to his Pleasures, the Ambitious to his Honours; the Covetous Man toJob 31. 14.. Prov. 18. 10. his Riches; the Wedg of Gold is his Con∣fidence, and strong City. And Malicious, and Implacable Persons comfort them∣selves with Hopes of Revenge; that's their Refuge: And others betake them∣selves to lying, dissembling, and equi∣vocating: But all these are broken, de∣ceitful, and fading Refuges, which will fail a Man in the greatest Extremity; when he hath most need of Help, then they will Deceive, and give him the
Slip: But the Child of God, applyeth himself to God for Refuge: God is a Re∣fuge, a strong Tower, Bulwark, and Rock of Defence. God is the Believers Strong Tower from his Enemies. A strongPsal. 61. 3. Tower for Security, Prov. 18. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower; the Righteous runneth to it, and is safe. i. e. When God's Name is call'd upon in Sincerity and Truth, there's strongQuaqua∣versum se verterit anima, ad dolores fi∣gitur ali∣bi, paeter∣quam in te. Aug. Confes. l. 4. c. 10. Ground of Security against Trouble. When People, through an inconstant, fickle Spirit, have made tryal of seve∣ral Refuges, they find by Experience, that there's no Security, but in God; no Rest for a Christian, but in Christ. God is said to be Centrum quietativum, the Center of all Rest: no rest nor Qui∣etness elsewhere. All the letters in the Name Iehovah (as some Rabbins, and others observe) are Quiescent; I amQuia fisti nos ad te, in∣quietum est cor nostrum donc requiecat in te. Ang. Confes∣lib. 1. c. 1. sure, there's no Acquiescency for a Christian, but in God. I'le Conclude what I have to say of this Particular, with the Experimen∣tal Speech of Moses, the Man of God, Deut. 32. 31. For their Rock is not our Rock, even our Enemies themselves being
A Fourth Query is, Whether we make  Whe∣ther we make God our Trea∣sures. God our Treasure? Where the Treasure is, the Heart will be; And if we make God our Treasure, our Heart will be fixed upon him. Now, to get and keep a Treasure, there's required great Diligence, high Appretiation, and a provident Careful∣ness.1. There is requi∣red Dili∣gence. First, There's required great Dili∣gence, much Labour and Industry: For getting of Pearls, and pretious Stones,Non nisi sublato reperitur gemula saxo. many Scramble upon Rocks, and others Dive into the Indian Ocean. Some for Treasures, Digg in the Mines, and be∣stow indefatigable Pains. What abun∣danceImpiger extrems currit mercatr ad Indos. of Pains doth the Merchant take, in his Voyage to the Indies, for to com∣pass the Treasures there? And, if there be such Pains taken for Temporal Trea∣sures; O! What Pains ought to be took for Eternal Treasures? All the Trea∣sures in the Universe, are not to be com∣pared to the Treasures of Wisdom. Throughout the whole Book of Pro∣verbs, by the Name of Wisdom, are set forth Christ, and his Graces: What an high Commendation given of Wis∣dom, is upon Record, Prov. 8. 11. Wis∣dom is better than Rubies; and all the things
that may be desired, are not to be compared to it. This is prefer'd before the Gold of Ophir, the Onyx, and Saphire, Coral, Pearl, the Topaz of Aethiopia, Job. 28. 16, 17, 18. &c. What pains then, and what dili∣gence must be imployed, for the At∣tainment of Divine Wisdom? There's re∣quired Crying after Knowledge, lifting up the Voice, Seeking and Searching: All must concur to the finding of the Know∣ledge of God, Prov. 2. 5. Then Secondly, There followeth an high2. There must be an high prizing of God, & all his Ways. Appreciation of God, and all his Ways. That Soul that's Diligent to make sure his Interest in God; O! How will he prize God, and the Graces of his Spirit? God is his Riches and Treasure; he reckons of no Riches, besides the Riches of Christ, and the Riches of Faith; and Ezek. 34. 29. Cant. 5. 10. Christ is Pretious, or an Honour in the Estimation of all true Believers, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Christ is a Plant of Renown, the Chiefest of Ten Thousand. A Pearl of Superlative Estimation; which, whenMat. 13. 45.. Nimieta∣tes & ex∣cessus de∣bentur Deo. the Wise Merchant found, he Sold all for the Purchase thereof. We cannot think too vilely of Sin; we cannot think too highly of Christ.
Thirdly, There followeth a Provident3. There is a Pro∣vident Careful∣ness. Carefulness: If we have been at great pains to get this Treasure, and know how to value it; then it will follow, that we ought to Exercise all the Provident Carefulness we can, to keep this Treasure. We throw not Trea∣sures carelesly on the Ground; but we lock them up in our Cabinets; Christ is our Chiefest Jewel; we must keep Him in the Cabinet of our Hearts. God is our Treasure; we must set at nought all other imaginary Treasures, in Competition with him, or Opposi∣tion to him. We must take fast hold of VVisdom, and not let it go, for it is our Life. Let all that's dearest and nearest go for God. Let's part with the greatest Rich∣es, which the Universe can afford, ra∣ther than lose our Interest in God. The foolish young Man, Mark 10. 22. could not brook the Doctrine of Self-denyal: He would rather part with Treasures in Heaven, than Treasures on Earth. Multitudes braid of his humour, who prefer Earthly, before Heavenly Riches; who grasp with all Greediness, Earthly Accomodations, and Secular Interests; and in the mean time, neglect the great Things of Eternity: These verify a Vul∣gar
Proverb, to be Penny-wise, and Pound-Foolish. But our Duty is, to make sure of a durable Substance, of Riches and Treasures, which will abide unto all E∣ternity. VVhen the Trojans (as they say) lost their Palladium, all was lost: That's a fabulous Story of Poets. But I am sure, if we lose our Interest in God, if we lose his Favour, we are altogether lost, and utterly undone to all Eterni∣ty. He then, that knows the Infinite Dignity, Price, and Value of this Trea∣sure,Fidelis homo, cu∣jus totus mundus divitia∣rum est, & quasi nihil ha∣bens om∣nia possi∣det inhae∣rendo tibi cui Servi∣unt omni∣a. Aug. l. 5. Con∣fes. c. 4. what an high, and excellent thing it is, to make God our Portion; what a rich Treasure it is, to be a Possessor of Divine VVisdom; what an unspeak∣able happiness it is, to have the Lord for our God; to have an Interest in his Promises, and the Consolations of the Spirit: That Man (I say) who know∣eth the high Valuation of these things, he would not lose them, for all the Kingdoms of the VVorld, and the Glo∣ry of them. The Martyr cried out in the Flames▪John Lambert. None but Christ: So, none but Christ, can inrich, and comfort a Christi∣an.
The Fifth and Last Query is, Whether  Whe∣ther we make God our chiefest Joy. we make God our chiefest Joy. There's in every one, something or other, that they most rejoyce, and delight themselves in the serious Meditation thereof. Some fancy one kind of Joy, some another; and there are many varieties of Fancies, as Philosophers reckon upon several Ap∣prehensions of Felicity. We Read in Scripture, of Joy in Harvest, Joy in Espou∣sals, and Joy in taking of Spoils; but noneQuam suave mi∣hi subito factum est carere suavitabus nugarum, & quas committere metus fuerat, jam dimittere gaudium erat. Aug. Confes. l. 9. c. 1. of these are lasting Joys: But a Belie∣vers Joy is in God; He never fails. Upon a serious deliberate Considera∣tion, there's no Joy elsewhere. What's the joy of debaucht Jovialists, but like the Crackling of Thorns, a blaze, and suddenly gone? What's the joy of Am∣bitious Men, such as Haman's were, but dasht upon a sudden? When the King was Angry at him, His Face was cove∣red, and he immediately was carried from a Banquet, to a Gallows. What be∣came of the Joy of Belshazzar amidst hisDan. 5. 5. Quaffing and Carrowsing? He was sud∣denly doomed to Judgment. Laughter and Mirth, are vanity; and Joy, and Rejoycing in the World, are but that
Laughter, which is called, Risus Sardo∣nicus;Tumul∣tuosis va∣rietatibus dilanian∣tur cogi∣tationes meae, intima viscera animae meae, donec in te confluam pur∣gatus & liquidus igne amoris tui. August. Confes. l. 11. c. 29. which endeth in Bitterness and Mourning. Here then lieth our Duty; To make God our Joy. So did Nehemiah comfort the Jews, in a time of Heaviness, Nehem. 8. 10. The Joy of the Lord▪ is your Strength. Amidst variety of perplexing Thoughts, Comforts from God refreshed David's Soul, Psal. 94. 19. Amidst the great decay, and failing of Creature-Comforts, there was still matter of joy, and rejoycing in God, Hab. 3. 17, 18. If then we can, amidst Sorrows and Troubles, make God our Joy, and Re∣joycing; if we can delight, and com∣fort our selves, in God's Consolations, when all Worldly Consolations fail; this evidently proves our Trust in, and Dependance upon God. Joy in God (as Aaron's Rod swallow∣ed up the Rods of the Egyptians) swal∣lweth up Worldly Joys, and World∣ly Sorrows. To rejoyce in Wife and Children, Corn and Wine, and Gold and Silver, are uncertain Joys: But Joy
in God, is an abiding Joy. The greatest Worldly Joys may have their Changes: Worldly Joys are fading and deceitful, like the River Jordan, that emptieth all its Sweetness into a stinking, and sul∣phureous Lake; But Heavenly Joys are lasting, and bend not to a Declinati∣on. Therefore it's an excellent Expressi∣on of Aug. Sol. c. 35. an Ancient Father speaking of this Joy; O Gaudium supra Gaudium, Gaudium vincens omne gaudium, extraVerum gaudium non desi∣nit, nec in contrarium vertitur. Sen. Epist. 59. quod non est gaudium.
CHAP. XVII. Containing the Fourth and last Use for Consolation. THe Fourth and Last Use (for a Con∣clusion  fr Con∣solation. of this Treatise) is, for singular Consolation unto all true Belie∣vers, who depend on God's All-Sufficien∣cy and Faithfulness. Their Benonies, will prove their Benjamins: Though they Sow in Tears, they shall Reap in Joy. Amidst their greatest Losses, it's a Ground of Singular Consolation unto them; That God is able to give them much more, &c. And if God see it good for them, he will give them much more, and abundantly Recompence their Losses. What? Though they be tost up and down with Boisterous Waves; yet they have a Rock to climb upon, which Da∣vid Prayed to be led into, Psal. 61. 2. When my Heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock, that is higher than I. Dedux∣isti me i. e. in te∣metipso, quia es Dux me∣us, tu es viator meus. Quia factus es spes mea, vox Ecclesia ad Christum q. d. Quo modo tu resurrexisti immortalis & nos sic ere∣dimus resurgre. Hieron. The Psalmist disclaimes all other Rocks: God
is the only Rock; and if we climb up∣on any other Rock, that is not higher than our selves, we shall non be safe. What? Though Enemies have great Wrath, and Flourish; yet the greatest of them, have but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. And, notwithstanding Prospe∣rity at present; yet inevitable Destructi∣on, is the Portion of Prosperous wicked Men, Psal. 92. 7. What; Though God respite the Deliverance of his People, and Answer not speedily: It is but to prepare them for the better Reception of Mercies, to humble them, prove and refine them. And though Offences must of necessity come; yet, wo be to them, by whom they come. Let all that fear God, make it their Study to give no just Offence, neither by imprudent Words, nor imprudent Actions. The Wisdom of the Serpent, is as needful as the In∣nocency of the Dove. Neither let any Man limit the Holy One of Israel, nor prescribe Times and Seasons to him. Let's rest contented, and satisfied with all God's Dispensations. If Poverty, Pri∣sons, Disgrace, Exile be allotted for us, let's justify God's Dealings in all, and leave of Murmuring at and Censuring of Second Causes. What said Job in Answer to his Wise? Job. 2. 10. Shall
we receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall not we receive Evil? Hath not Christ foretold, that in The World, ye shall have Tribulation; but he addeth a singular Word of Comfort in the same place1 Thes. 3. 3. (viz. John 16. 33.) Be of good Comfort, I have overcome the World: This is That we are appointed unto. Let not any of God's Children be dis∣couraged by their Sufferings, provided that they Suffer for Righteousness Sake; neither let them faint in the Day of Ad∣versity: For if thou faint in the Day of Ad∣versity, thy Strength is small, Prov. 24. 10. There's a Learned Author, who hathAscendi∣sti in na∣vem cum Christo, quid ex∣pectabis srenum? Imo ven∣tum & procellas, & fluctus navem o∣perientes, ut mergi incipias; sed hoc Baptismo Baptizandus prius es: tum se∣quetur serenum, Excitato & implerato Christo, qui saltem dormie aliquando. Melch. Adam. in vita Hessi. a Saying; Thou hast Ascended with Christ into the Ship; What, wilt thou expect a Calm? Nay, rather Winds, Storms, and Waves over-whelming the Ship, that it may begin to be Drowned: But thou art First to be Baptized with this Baptism; Christ being Awakened, and Prayed unto, who will sometimes Sleep. Let not any ante-date Deliverances, nor precipitantly Carve out Wayes of their own devising, and Means according to their own Imaginations, as if at such a
Time, and in such a Way they should be delivered from their Troubles. Let's Patiently and Believingly wait on that Promise, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the Godly out of Temptati∣ons, and to reserve the Unjust unto the Day of Judgment, to be Punished. But still let Christians remember Silently, and Patiently to wait on God. Both Primitive Martyrs, and those of See the large de∣claration of Bi∣shop Far∣rer, Bi∣shop Hooper, Taylor, Philpot, Bradford, Crome, Rogers, Saunders, Laurence; Fox. Act. & Mon. vol. 3. p. 162. Edit. 1641. the last Century, often charged, and advised their Brethren in these Words; Take heed ye Rebel not against Authori∣ty. Let such as profess Religion, and de∣sire to walk most closely with God, E∣vidence the Sincerity of their Professi∣on by their Loyalty, Meekness, and Pa∣tience; so that Enemies, who watch for their Haltings, may either be altogether put to Silence, or else Confess, that (as it was said of Daniel) They can find noDan. 6. 5. Fault in them, except the Law of their God. There are some special Grounds of Comfort to all true Believers, to uphold and revive their Spirits amidst the sharp∣est Sufferings, which they meet withal;
I shall mention them in Particulars, and so Conclude. First, They have Communion with1. Com∣munion with God. God; of this only God's Children are Partakers, and only they know, what's meant by Communion with God, and cannot be content without it: Carnal Men are as meer Strangers to Commu∣nion with God, as Nicodemus was to the Mystery of Regeneration. Now, this Communion with God is a Sacred Acquaintance; to which Eli∣phaz Exhorts Job, Chap, 22. v. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, thereby Good shall come unto thee. This, Moses attained unto in an Emi∣nent manner, even unto a Sacred Fa∣miliarity; Exod. 23. 11. And the Lord spake unto Moses Face to Face, as a Man speaketh unto his Friend. The Apostle speaks in his own Name, and in the Name of all true Believers, 1 John 1. 3. Truely, our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. This Communion Bradford attain'd unto, in a great measure: For he often, not only Prayed, but Studied Kneeling, and would not rise up, till he found some Spiritual Illapses, some Divine In∣fluences upon his Soul.
Bernard us'd to say; Lord, I will ne∣verNunquum abs te abs∣que te recedo. Bern. Ep. 116. depart from Thee, without Thee. Communion with God, will make a Prison to be a Palace, a Dungeon a Pa∣radise, Chains of Iron to be as so many Chains of Gold. Alice Driver, a Faithful Martyr, whenAct. & Monum. Vol. 3. she came to the Stake, and was bound with the Iron-Chain, she kis'd it, and said; It was the best Neckerchiff, that ever she wore all the Dayes of her Life. Sampson did eat Honey out of the Car∣cassMelior est tristi∣tia iniqua patientis, quam l∣titia ini∣qua fe∣rentis, Aug. of a Lyon; and so, those who have Interest in Christ, and enjoy Communi∣on with Him, suck Sweetness out of all their Sufferings, and their very Sorrows are better than the Mirth of Wicked Men. This comforted Basil in his Ba∣nishment, and in his Sufferings; Let (saith he) the Queen cast me into the Sea, I will remember Jonah; let her cast me into the Fiery Furnace, I will remem∣ber the Three Children; let her Banish me, the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fulness thereof. He that hath Communion with God, and comes to God, as a Child to his Fa∣ther, making his Moan and Complaints to him; he is a Man of Comfort, even in Times of greatest Troubles. And no∣thing
but Communion with God, will comfort and quiet the Soul. A Second Ground of Comfort, is God's2 Ground of Com∣fort, God's Special Prote∣ction. Matth. 6. 34. special Protection, and gracious Preserva∣tion. None can say, They shall be exempted from Troubles; for each Day hath its Troubles; and Sufficient for the Day, is the Evil thereof. Yet God's People meet with Singular Protections; Job 5. 19. . Polych. in Catena Graeco∣rum Pa∣trum. He shall deliver thee in Six Trou∣bles; yea, in Seven, there shall no Evil touch thee. Sometimes, in Common Calamities, and Epidemical Diseases, both Good and Bad smart under the Rod: Yet Josiah, though he dyed in War, was promised to dye in Peace; for he had Peace with God, and Peace with his Conscience; and that's Peace enough. Sometimes, God delivers his People, as Brands, out of the Burning, and gives them their Lives for a Prey; as Baruch and Jeremy had. In the Last Century, when there was Persecution in England with Fire and Faggot, in Queen Maries Dayes, within the Compass of less than Four Years, there dyed Two Hundred Seventy-Seven Persons by Fire and Faggot; Five Bi∣shops, One and Twenty Divines, Eight
Gentlemen, Eighty-Four Artificers, One Hundred Husbandmen, Servants and La∣bourers Twenty, Twenty-Six Wives, Twen∣ty Widows, Nine Virgins, Two Boys, and Two Infants. In Scotland dyed Two Eminent Mar∣tyrs, viz. Mr. James Wiseheart, and Mr. Patrick Hammelton. In this time, there dyed none (upon the same Account) in Ireland: The Rea∣sonDr. Ʋsher Arch-Bi∣shop of Armagh. and Narrative, a most Eminent Light in the Church, (whose Name is Famous throughout all the Churches of Christendom) not long before his Death, desired that the Story might be trans∣mitted to Posterity. Thus he told the Story, (and many can witness it, that then heard it from his Mouth.) There was (saith he) a Commission from the Queen, sent down by a Doctor into Ireland; who go∣ing with the Commission thither, at Che∣ster (where he lodged in his Travels) he boasted, that he had a Commission de Comburendis Haereticis: One of the Servants of the Inn, being a Well∣willer to Protestants, took notice of the
Words, and got away the Commission. When the Commissioner came into Ire∣land, he was Entertained with great Re∣spect. After some time, he appeared be∣fore the Lords of the Councel in Ire∣land; and then opened his Box, to shew his Commission; but there was nothing in the Box, but a Pack of Cards: Whereupon he was Committed to Prison, and threatned exceedingly; but upon Se∣curity given, he was afterwards Relea∣sed, and return'd into England, and ob∣tain'd a New Commission: But as soon as he came to Chester, the Report came of Queen Maries Death, and he stop't his farther Journey. This Story, that Reverend and Lear∣ned Arch-Bishop, and Lord-Primate of Ireland aforesaid, desired that it might be divulged, and kept in remembrance; for he said, He was sure, that the Story was true. But, suppose this to be a more than ordinary (as it is) Preservation; how∣ever, Wonderful are the Preservations of God's People! Let every one call
to mind, in particular, the Gracious Pro∣vidences of God in his Protection, and Preservation; hence will arise Grounds of Comfort from, and Confidence in God's All-sufficiency. A Third Ground of Comfort, is Experi∣ence3 Ground of Com∣fort, is Experi∣ence of Dayly Provisi∣ons. of Dayly Provisions; dayly Bread, wonderful Supplies; and these in Mer∣cy given, and Sanctifyed. The Men of the World enjoy outward Things, (and they are not to be accounted Usurpers) ex Largitione, by God's general Bounty; but Believers enjoy them ex Promisso, by Vertue of a Promise. By common Donation, and general Providence, wick∣ed Men enjoy their Possessions; but good Men enjoy them by special Favour and Mercy in Christ: With Him they have allRom. 8. 32. Things. For one to have the Good Things of this Life, as Riches and Honours, and to have Christ with them, to have them Sanctifyed; this is the Mercy in∣deed. And, Fourthly and Lastly, Here is the4 Ground of Com∣fort, is Hope of Eternal Glory. greatest Ground of Comfort, even the Hope of Eternal Glory. Whatever be the Sor∣row in Seed-Time, the Harvest will make amends for all: Whatever be the
Losses, the Riches of Christ will make a∣bundant Compensation. The Kingdom of Heaven, the Glory to be revealed, the Eternal Sabbath, the Beatifical Vision; these are in the Eye, Heart, and Meditation of the Saints of God. Wherefore, with Moses, they look unto the Recompence of Reward; with Ste∣phen,Heb. 11. 26. they see Christ amidst their Suffe∣rings; and, with Moses, see him who isHeb. 11. 27. Invisible. Compare the Outward Sufferings, with Inward Comforts; and especially, Tran∣sient Sorrows, with Eternal Joyes, and there will be abundant Cause of Comfort, notwithstanding the greatest Afflictions that are on us, or may befal us in this present World. Heaven will make a∣mends for all; and the Consolations of God, are sufficient for us. Amidst Fears and Perplexities, for real or imaginary Losses, let us Comfort our selves with the Text; and take Coun∣sel from the Man of God, his Answer to Amaziah; viz.
The Lord is Able to Give us much More than This. And upon this Consideration, our Spi∣rits will be Revived, and Supported, in the Times of Jacob's Troubles. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE First Treatise. Chap. I. Containing the Cohe∣rence and Exposition of the Words, the Di∣vision of them, and a Doctrine inferr'd from them; page 1, unto page 12.
Chap. II. Contains the Me∣thod of Proceeding, & there∣in the First Argument took from God's Attributes; pag. 12, unto pag. 32. Chap. III. Contains a Second Argument drawn from God's Promises; p. 32, unto p. 37. Chap. IV. A Third Argu∣ment is took from God's Providences; p. 37, unto p. 52. Chap. V. Contains a Fourth Argument, took from the Saints Experiences; p. 52, unto p. 59. Chap. VI. Contains the De∣monstration of the Doctrine, by Reasons; and first, from
Necessity of Precept; p. 59, unto p. 65. Chap. VII. Proves the Do∣ctrine, from the Necessity of Means, in Four Particu∣lars; p. 66, unto p. 77. Chap. VIII. Contains a Se∣cond Reason, which is took from the Excellency of a Quiet and Submissive Frame of Spirit; p. 77, unto p. 89. Chap. IX. Contains a Third Reason, drawn from the Ʋ∣tility and Benefit, accrung from this yielding, submis∣sive Spirit; p. 89, unto p. 99. Chap. X. Contains a Fourth Reason, concerning the sad,
and mischievous Consequen∣ces of Striving, Strugling, and Repining against God; p. 99, unto p. 102. Chap. XI. Contains a Resolu∣tion of Particular Cases; p. 102, unto p. 130. Chap. XII. Contains an Ʋse of Reprehension to Ʋnbelie∣vers, Murmurers, and rash Censurers; p. 130, unto p. 143. Chap. XIII. Contains an Ʋse of Exhortation, with seve∣ral Motives to depend on God's All-Sufficiency; p. 143. p. 153. Chap. XIV. Discovers Two Grand Impediments, viz. Co∣vetousness, and Hypocrisie;
p. 153. unto p. 160. Chap. XV. Directs to Three special Duties, viz. To live by Faith, To set the Spirit of Prayer a working, and, To get a meek and quiet Spirit; p. 160, unto p. 180. Chap. XVI. Containing a Third Ʋse for Examination, in Five Queries; p. 181, un∣to p. 195. Chap. XVII. Containing the Fourth and Last Ʋse for Consolation; p. 196, unto the End, p. 207.
ERRATA In the First Treatise. PAge 3. in the Margent, r. aegre velli potest. p. 27. Marg. r. Paterculus. p. 35. Marg. r. restaurare; and, naufragio. p. 39. Marg. r. Benefacit. p. 43. lie 5. r. Thirst. p. 53. lin. 5. r. . p. 64. Marg. r. . p. 79. Marg. r. Salv. and, punimur. p. 92. Marg. r. . p. 117. Marg. r. Exemptus. p. 127. lin. 19. r. . p. 144. Marg. r. conscientiam afflictam; and, excitare. p. 167. lin. 26. r. Jam. 4. p. 170. Marg. r. profectae. p. 173. Marg. r. vos. p. 193. Marg. r. amittere. p. 197. lin. 3. r. none.
THE Second TREATISE, Concerning the PRECIOUSNESS OF CHRIST; Preach'd long since for the substance thereof, (but since much inlarged) at St. MARIES OXON. By Henry Wilkinson. D. D. Then Prin∣cipal of Magdalen-Hall. Matth. 13. 45, 46. Again the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-Man seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great Price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it. LONDON. Printed for John Kidgel, at the Great-Atlas in Cornhill, 1681.
TO THE Candid READER. WHAT here (Reader) I present to thy View, (and as I hope) to thy Candid Interpretation, I Preach'd many Years agoe at St. Maries in Oxford: Since I have form'd it a Treatise with Inlarge∣ments. The Subject Discoursed on, is, The Pre∣ciousness, infinite Dignity and Value of our Blessed Lord, and only Saviour Je∣sus Christ. The Wise Merchant in the Pa∣rable Sold all, and Bought this Pearl of great price. It's Chrysostomes Observa∣tion,Matth. 13. 45, 46. . Chrysoft. in loc. Christ is the Pearl of infinite Va∣lue, if you sell not all you cannot pur∣chase it. It's worth our best Inquiry, to ask who are they that put the highest price, and estima∣tion upon our Holy Lord Jesus? The Text
gives a full Answer; Unto you which believe, he is precious. Only true Belie∣vers value Christ above all others. The Ʋnbelieving Gadarens preferred their Swine before a Saviour, and Demas valued the World above Christ and his Apostles. It's▪ Recorded in History, that a Profane Duke of Bon proest, That he would not leave his part in Paris for his part in Paradice. It's no new thing for Swine and such who (though they are in Mes shape) who have Brutish Qualities, to tram∣ple precious Pearls under their Feet, they resemble the Dung-hill Cock in the Fable, who would rather have a Grain of Barley, than all the Jewels in the World: But a True Believer who hath Experimental Knowledge of the Superlative worth of Christ, values him at a higher Price than all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them. It's evident how highly the Love-sick-Spouse, valued Christ, Ct. 4. 10, 11, 12. A Holy Martyr when the Flames were about his▪ Ears, Cryed out▪ None but Christ, None but Christ. AndJohn Lam∣bert. Mr. Bradford that eminently precious Mar∣tyr often poured out abundance of Tears up∣on his Trencher (as he sate at Table) and being asked the reason why he Wept? he An∣swered, because he could not bring his dull Heart to love Christ more than he
did. Mr. Calamy, late Pastor of Alder∣manbury, an Eminent and Faithful Mini∣ster of the Gospel, who (though Dead) speaks in choice Works, and Exemplary Conversation) amongst many other excellent Writings of his in Print, put forth a very seful Book, well worth the reading over and over again, call'd, The Godly Mans Ark, in the close thereof he makes a Colle∣ction of several distinguishing Evidences for Heaven, Mrs. Jone Moore, a Godly Woman of his Congregation, declared and acquainted him with ll, I'le make menti∣onThe God∣ly Mans Ark. p. 25 2. p. 25 3. of her own Words. Now (saith she) I find nothing so hard to me, as to be∣lieve aright to cast away my own Righ∣teousness as Dung, in point of Justifica∣tion, and to cast away my Unrighteous∣ness, so as that be no better to me, and to Roll, and Cast, and Venture my Im∣mortal Soul upon Jesus Christ, and his Righteousness, for Life and Salvation by him alone, and to see my self com∣pleat in him, this is Supernatural: Yet I must and will give Glory to God, and say, Lord I believe, help thou my Unbe∣lief: And by this I prove that this preci∣ous workof Faith is wrought in me, be∣cause I find that Jesus Christ is to me ve∣ry precious: and I find in the Word, Ʋnto them that Believe, he is precious.1 Pet. 2. 7.
What I shall further add is by way of an Humble Entreaty, and a Just Apology. Be pleased (Reader) through thy Candour to pass by, or Correct, several mistakes of the Printers. Had I enjoyed my Health (though I live at fifty Miles Distance from that Press, and am in the 64th Year of my Age, yet I would willingly have undertook so long a Journey to review and Correct the Press, but for two whole Months Space (whilest these Treatises were Printing) I was very sick of that Feverish Distemper, which is now adays Epidemical, and likewise (as I am Informed) one of the chief Printers was very Sick at the same time. Whoever thou art that art pleased to read these two Treatises, and gainest any Spiritual Advantage for thy precious soul, thou wilt much rejoice the Heart of the Au∣thor (whose Cordial Desire is thy everlasting good) and e heartily desires thy prayers, and remains, From my Study in Great Cornard, near Sudbury in Suffolk, Nov. 29. 1680. Thy Souls Servant. Henry Wilkinson.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second TREATISE. CHAP. 1. COntaining the Coherence, Division, and Exposition of the Text, and the Deduction of a Doctrine, with the Method of Prosecuting the same. p. 1. unto p. 9.
CHAP. 2. Contains an Enumeration of several choice Names in Scripture, ascribed unto Christ. p. 9. unto p. 21. CHAP. 3. Concerning the great Mystery of the Di∣vine, and Humane Nature of Christ; and the Hypostatical Ʋnion that Christ is God and Man, Ʋnited in one Person. p. 21. unto p. 41. CHAP. 4. Of Christs Sacerdotal Office, p. 41. Sect. 1. Of the Properties of Christs Priest-hood. p. 41. unto p. 47. Sect. 2. Of the Parts of Christs Priestly Office, and first of his Satisfaction. p. 47. unto p. 51. Sect. 3. Of the Fore-runners of Christ's Passion▪ p. 51. unto p. 57.
Sect. 4. Of Christs Passion. p. 57. unto p. 63. Sect. 5. Of the Consequents of Christ's Passion. p. 63. unto p. 73. CHAP. 5. Concerning Chriss Prophetical Office. p. 76. Sect. 1. Why Christ must be a Prophet. p. 76. unto p. 81. Sect. 2. How Christ differs from other Pro∣phets. p. 81. unto p. 85. Sect. 3. Of the Fruits and Benefits, that accre unto us by Christs Prophetical Office. p. 85. unto p. 90. CHAP. 6. Of Christs Kingly Office. p. 90. Sect. 1. Proving that Christ is a King. p. 90. nto p. 94.
Sect. 2. Why Christ must be a King. p. 94. unto p. 100. Sect. 3. Concerning our Duties to Christ our King. p. 100. unto p. 103. CHAP. 7. Representing Christs Dignity by several Metaphors and Resemblances. p. 103. Sect. 1. Christ is Resembled unto a Stone. p. 103. unto p. 108. Sect. 2. Christ is Resembled to a Fountain. p. 108. unto p. 11. Sect. 3. Christ is compared to a Tree: p. 112. unto p. 116. CHAP. 8. Concerning Christs Purchases of Justifi∣cation, Sanctification, and Glorification, p. 116. Sect. 1. Of Justification by Christ. p. 116. unto p. 123.
Sect. 2. Of Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ p. 123. unto p. 127. Sect. 3. Of Glorification. p. 127. unto p. 130. CHAP. 9. Containing two Ʋses, viz. 1. An Ʋse of Information. 2. An Ʋse of Reproo▪ p. 131. Sect. 1. From Examples. p. 131. unto p. 135 Sect. 2. Evidencing by Arguments, why Christ should be Precious in our Estimation. p. 135. unto p. 144. Sect. 3. Containing a second Head of Reasons in respect of all True Believers. p. 144. unto p. 151. Sect. 4. Containing an Ʋse of Reproof to all Ʋn∣believers. p. 151. unto p. 160.
CHAP. 10. Containing an Ʋse of Examination. p. 160. Sect. 1. To put every one upon Tryal, whether they prize Jesus Christ. p. 160. unto p. 166. Sect. 2. Whether we prize Christ, by our Like∣ness and Conformity to him? p. 168. unto p. 172. Sect. 3. Shewing that those that prize Christ, burn in Ardent Affections of Love to him. p. 172. unto p. 185. CHAP. 11. Containing an Ʋse of Exhortation to la∣bour for the excellent Grace of Faith. p. 185. Sect. 1. Containing Persuasive Arguments to get Faith. p. 186. unto 202. Sect. 2. Containing an Ʋse of Direction. p. 20. unto p. 216.
CHAP. 12. Concluding with an Ʋse of Consolation. p. 216. Sect. 1. Proving that Believers are Precious in the account of Christ, and this is a ground of their Consolation. p. 118. and unto p. 237. Sect. 2. Containing the Fruits of Justification, which are a Ground of the Believers Com∣fort. p. 237. unto the end. p. 247. ERRATA in the Second Treatise. PAge 3. Margin. r. . p. 6. r. . p. 7. marg. r. elegerunt. p. 11. marg. r. . p. 15. l. 10. r. expected. p. 19. l. 7. add My. . marg. r. advocatus est. p. 71. marg. r. diceretur. p. 81. in. 1. r. this. p. 119. marg. r. purioris. p. 130. lin. 13. r. Justification. p. 145. Tit. r. Believers account Christ Pr∣ious. Id. marg. r. Magni. p. 149. marg. lin. last. r. Be p. 152. lin. 11. r. Quarrels. p. 153. Partie. 3. r. accom∣ied. p. 159. lin. 10. r. Unregracy. p. 172. Sect. 3. 1. Affections. p. 197. marg. r. Turcum. p. 220. marg. r.  in Vin. Id. lin. 25. r. plac. p. 222, lin. 23. r. Tempe∣. p. 225. lin. 14. r. quenching. p. 245. lin. 1. r. grounds. p. 26. lin. 13. r. promises.
THE Pretiousness of Christ; OR, The Inestimable Dignity and Ho∣nour of Christ unfolded: Upon 1 Pet. 2. 7. Ʋnto you therefore which believe, heTreatise II. of the Pre∣tiousness of Christ. is Pretious. CHAP. I. Containing the Coherence, Division, and Ex∣position of the Text and the Deduction of a Doctrine, with the Method of prosecu∣ting the same. OUR Saviour Christ before his Passion gave in charge to St. Peter a Duty of weighty con∣cernment, viz. Luke 23. 32.  si diceret si∣cut tu, a me specialem misericordiam consecutus es & post lapsum erigeris, & firma∣beris, sic tu, conversus perfecte misericordiam impende proximis tuis, ro∣bora, ac subleva eo. Stella in loc. When thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren Like∣wise
after his Passion he presseth three times with great Vehemency, the grand Pastoral Office, which is saith(b) Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. he) (b) to feed my Sheep and to feed my Lambs. Christ challengeth a pecu∣liar propriety in them, because he calls them his Sheep and Lambs. Peter was not the Lord, but the Servant of them, as Non igitur  Dominus, quod ipsemet Petrus agnoscit. 1 Pet. . 3. neque ut  (Is enim est icus ill  saguine suo redemptarum) sed ut fidu  Minister. Be∣ in Joh. 21. 15. Beza appositly notes a∣gainst the Popes usurpation. Questionless this charge reitera∣ted with such ardency of affecti∣on by Christ, made deep Impres∣sions upon the Heart of Peter, as may be evidenced by the whole current of his Epistle: For the main design in them (which he drives at) is, to gain Souls unto Jesus Christ. For instance and particular proof of what I have asserted: This holy Apo∣stle makes it his grand business through∣out this whole Epistle, partly to perswade the converted Videntur haec ad Ju∣daeos pro∣pri scribi, quod Pe∣trus esset Apostolus Circumci∣sionis. E∣rasm. Hujus dispersionis caput erant Judaei Babylonenses, quos vel ideo  minat qia  Babylone scribebat. Drus. dispersed Jews to whom he wrote. That the Doctrine of the Gos∣pel is the only true Doctrine of Eternal S∣vation, and partly to ingage them to per∣severe in the Profession thereof, and to live up to that Profession.
For accomplishment of these great ends the Apostle quits himself as becomes a faithful Minister of the Gospel in endea∣vouring to distinguish the pretious from the vile: Such as put this great Duty into Practice, have a high Character of Honour put upon them; Jer. 15. 19. And if thou take forth the Pretious from the Vile, thou shalt be Summa est eos demum cense∣ri coram Deo fideles Ecclesiae Pastores, qui non moventur respectu hominum qui non flex∣ibiles in hanc vel in illam partem, sed rect judicant ex lege Dei. Calv. in loc. as my Mouth. Now the difference is evidenced both by what they have left off, and forsaken, and by what they have made choice of and embraced, 1. They have lest off and laid aside, or rather rejected and reused (as a  propriè-significat aliquid repudiare in electione vl etiam aliquem b officio tanquam inignum recere. Gerh. Harm. Learned Au∣thor observes on the word) all Malice and all Gile, and Hypocrisies, and Envys, and all evil speakings. v. 1. 2. They have chosen and embraced the bles∣sed fruits of regeneration, which are re∣presented by their desires. . Nam  est evan∣gelium. infra. v. 8. Came∣ron. New food, and Spiritual growth. v. 2. As new born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that yee may grow thereby. A∣nother fruite of regeneration is a spiritual tast. v. 3. If ye have  non est eviter ∣gustare sed experiri. Grot. tasted that the Lord is gracious. And my Text is an infallible character
instar omnium drawn from the highest va∣luation of Jesus Christ. If the Question be propounded, who are they that set the highest estimate upon Jesus Christ? The Text gives in the Answer—You which be∣lieve. And if we require, who are they that believe? The Answer will be as clear, viz. Ʋnto whom he is pretious. So then onely the true Believer knows how to set the highest valuation upon Christ, and he who so highly values Christ, is the true Believer. The words contain, The true BelieversThe Text divided & opened. evidence for his interest in Christ. In them are contained two Generals. 1. The high Dignity, Honour, and inestimable valuation of Christ. 2. The Persons in whose account Christ is so highly honoured. There are two words which require Explication. 1. Pretious (as we usually read it in1. What is meant by Pretious? the Concrete) But the word is in the ab∣stract in the Original and sig∣nifyeth , honor pretiosus & vel in pretio habends a Vo∣bis. Vatal. Vobis honora est. Grot. Honorificus est creden∣tibus in ipsum  enim hic aptis pro honore sumitur quam pro preio. Zegerus. Honour it self, there∣by shewing that all pretious Excellencys, Honours, Dig∣nities, Treasures, and Wis∣doms, are concerned in Christ. If Zion (i. e.) the Church be call'd the perfection of Beauty. Psal. 50. 2. How much more eminently
may Christ the Head of his Church be cal∣led the perfection of all Beauties, because whatsoever Beauty is in the Church (which is Christ's Mystical Body) is derivative from Christ the Head. In him there's a fulness of all excellencies and perfections.(c) Col. . 19. (c) For it hath pleased the Father that in(d) Col. 2. 9. him should all fulness dwell. (d) For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (i. e.) essenti∣allyIn Christo est, quicquid  quritur ad constituendum perfectum Redemptorem. Da∣ven. in Col. 1. 19. and personally really and substantially in oppositi∣on to the Figures and Sha∣dows of the Old Testament. Christ is honourable in himself even honour it self. And he is anIn ipso inhabitat plenitudo di∣vinitatis corporaliter, quia in Templo habit averat umbraliter. August. honour unto all his Mem∣bers. None of his Servants shall be dishonoured by his Service, Moses was called Gods Servant. Moses my Servant is Dead; Joshua 1. 2. and St. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ. So he begins his Epistle Rom. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 1. Its a common saying, Deo Ser∣vire est Regnare. Theodosius Ecclesiae se mem∣brum esse magis, quam in ter∣ris regnare gaudebat. Aug. de Civit. Dei. L. 5. c. 26. Theodo∣sious the Emperour profest That he rather desired to be a Member of the Church then an Emperour on the earth. None more no∣ble then the Bereans who Act. 17. 11.  Quamvis  de  received the word with all
diligence, and searched theproprie dicatur tamen cum Comparatio hic videatur in∣stituta non generis (erant enim omnes isti Judaei) sed virtutis ac pietatis generosiores malui interpretari quam Nobiliores. Beza in Loc. Scriptures dayly, whether those things were so. The imitation of their example will ennoble Nobility it self. The more Holy the more Noble. If we speak of Wisdom, Christ is a Isai. 9. 6. Councellor, Col. 2. 3. in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. If we speak of Riches, the Riches of Christ are Eph. 3. . unsearchable, If we speak of Beauty, Christ is Cant. 5. 10. . Vers. 70. white and Ruddy the chiefest of ten Thousands. Christ is white for his in∣nocency and purity, ruddy for his Suffe∣rings, as his bloody Sweat, Agony and Passion upon the Cross. Now because it infinitely exceeds the capacity of Men or Angels to represent Christs Dignity, Honour, and excellencies, to the full in positive expressions, therefore by way of negation we express the Price, Dignity, Valuation of Christ to be infinite, unpar∣rallell'd, and inestimable; and when we have said inestimable, it's beyond the sphere of our activity (as an ancient Nobis ad intellectum pectus angustum est, & ide sic Deum digne estimamus, dum insti∣mabilem dicimus. Min. Felix. Father observes) to reach any higher in our expres∣sions. 2. Here's another word2. What is meant by Believers. to be explained; viz. Be∣lievers. Its sayd  Sola est des quae pretium ac, excellen∣tiam Christi nobis patefacit. Calv. in loc. Ʋnto you
therefore which believe. For (as judicious Calvin ob∣serves) it's faith alone which lays open to us the price and excellency of Christ. Such then as believe unto Salvation are such, whose hearts are Act. 15. purified by faith, Rom. 5. 1. and justi∣fied by Faith, and have such a faith as Gal. 5. 6. works by love. Called Tit. 1. 1. the faith of Gods Elect. They are chosen saith the A∣postle unto Salvatio through Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth. 2 Thes. 2. 3. Quia electi sunt elegerunt, non qui ellegerunt electi sunt, elligentium meritum nullum esset, nisi os eligentis grati Dei preveniret. Aug. These have their Robes washt and made white in the Blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7. 14. They are begotten again to a lively hope. 1 Pet. 1. 3. and made Partakers of the Divine Na∣ture▪ 2 Pet. 1. 4. These and these alone dis∣cern the Excellency and Dignity of Christ, and they set the highest estimate and valu∣ation upon him. From the Premises thus di∣vided and expounded, there results this Doctrinal Conclusion. That. Christ is of inestimable Dignity and Ho∣nour,  and infinitely Pretious in the accompt of all true Believers. For the Methodical inlargment of thisMethod propounded Excellent Doctrine, my work in the en∣suing Treatise shall be first to give in the clear proof of the Doctrin, and afterwards to infer an useful improvement thereof.
The Assertion to be proved is—That Christ is of inestimable Dignity. This shall con∣stitute the Doctrinal part. That which shall be intended by way of improvement, is—That as Christ is thus pretious and high∣ly to be valued as in himself, or so he ought to be by all true Believers. This shall con∣stitute the particular Use and Application of all.1. That Christ is of inesimabl Dignity; Honour, and this is proved in 5 several Particu∣lars. In handling of the former Assertion I shall confine my self to these ensuing Heads of discourse. 1. To reckon up several excellent Names of Honour and Dignity appropriated un∣to Christ in Scripture: 2. To unfold the grand Mystery of the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ Hy∣postatically united in one Person. 3. To represent the invaluable worth of those threefold Offices of Christ, viz. Sacerdotal, Prophetical and Regall. 4. To set down several Metaphors and Resemblances in Scripture which applied to Christ declare his singular Dignity. 5, To consider those great Purchases which Christ hath made for his People, which are Justification, Sanctification and Glorification. These Heads of discourse I shall endeavour (through Christ that strengthens me) to inlarge in so many di∣stinct Chapters. Which (as I hope and
desire) will abundantly satisfy, confirm, and establish us in this Fundamental Truth—That Christ is pretious and estimable for Dignity and Honour. Of these I shall treat in order in the following Chap∣ters. CHAP. II. Chap. 2. Containing an enumeration of several choice, and honourable Names in Scripture ascri∣bed unto Christ. AMongst variety of Names in Scrip∣ture appropriated unto Christ, I shall select these following (not naming all that might be named) and explain them as I go along. The first I shall mention is Shiloh; Gen.1. Name, Shiloh. 49. 10. Which name the whole current of Orthodox Interpreters unanimously apply unto Christ. The name signifies, safe, happy, and blessed (as Est nomen verbale, Salvus, beatus, faelix, unde Shiloh de∣rivatur, Servator, felicitetor hoc est faelices reddere. Pet. Mart. in Gen. 49. 10. Peter Martyr observes) some render Shiloh (as learned Jerome and others) He that is to be sent. Quasi tranquillatorem dicas qui tranquillitatis nostrae spi∣ritualis Authr sit futurus, Scultet. Exercit. Evangel. Scultetus after he had mentioned variety of Inter∣pretations
acquiesceth in this. That Shiloh signifies to cease and be quiet. Ludovicus de Dieu understands Shiloh to be the promised Seed, which was to spring from Judah. The ver∣sion of the 70 is emphatical, and plain∣ly declares Christ to be . Vers. 70. Interpre∣tum. a Saviour; That Jacob's Prophesy was fulfill'd, and that the Scepter did not de∣part from Judah till the co∣ming of Christ may thus be convinced: For the Politick state amongst the Jews was not changed, but still the Non aufe∣retur Scep∣trum Regi∣um, dicet regnum permansu∣rum esse in Judaus{que} ad Christum, quantum∣vis affli∣geretur & propecollap∣sum vide∣retur. Va∣abl. in loc.  Name, a Star. 1 The Star of Jacob. Regal Dignity and Politick Government conti∣nued in Judah, Maugre all Persecutions, and Oppositions whatsoever. Judah was the Law-giveing Tribe: And those Laws continued till the coming of Christ. But at Christs comeing the Scepter departed from Judah and was translated to an Hea∣then King. 2. Another Name attributed to Christ is a Star. He is called the Star of Jacob, and a bright Morning Star. 1. He is called by Balaam the Star of Ja∣cob, Numb. 24. 17. although Balaam was a Mercenary Prophet who (as he is brand∣ed by the Apostle) 2 Pet. 2. 15. loved the Wages of unrighteousness. Yet he gives this true attestation. There shall (saith he) come a
Star out of Jacob and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. This is a clear Pro∣phecy concerning . Vers. 70. Surget Princeps ex Israel. Vers. Syr. Ungetur Christus de dom Is∣rael Paraphr. Chald. Christ. Christ is that Star that light∣neth and Shineth, and what light we have is borrowed, and derived from him, who is that great light Joh. 1. 9. which lighteth eve∣ry Man that cometh into the World. Mala∣chy calls him, Mal▪ 4. 2. the Sun of righteousness, Za∣chary calls him Luk. 1. 78. The Day spring from on high St. Peter calls him 2 Pet. 1. 19. The Day Star. For Christ shines gloriously in the Gospel; He inlightens, guides and di∣rects: He scatters Clouds, and dispels Mists and Fogs, and removes darkness by the marvelous Sun-shine of the Gospel. Our Duty is not to be led by any other light, but to follow Dominus▪ non aliter nobis luceat quam dum in ejus verbum intuemur quasi lucernam. Calv. that light only. 2. Christ is called the Bright and Morn∣ing2. The right and Morning Star. Star. Rev. 22. 16. As the Morning Star excels all others, so Christ excels all Men and Angels. And this Epithite of Bright is attributed to Christ, because of his brightness, which is so resplendent, as to expel darkness and blindness out of our Minds. . Arist. Et. lib. 5. c. 1. Aristotle (though an Heathen) hath high thoughts of Justice, insomuch that he prefers it before the Night-Star
and Morning Star. Christ without all question is more bright, more amiable, and desireable, and more glorious then all the Stars. For he is said to be . Splendor gloriae Dei: Et quid est gloria Dei, nisi gloriosa Dei natura inaccessâ luce reful∣ges. Pareus. Filius est splen∣dor a lce Paternâ editus, si∣cut in Symbolo legitur Lumn de Lumine. Victor. Strigel. in Nov. Test. the Brightness of his Fathers Glory: The expres∣sion is sublime yet it comes far short of the Original; Christ irradiates his Chil∣dren with Splendor, and Glory, and according to their measure they participate of his brightness▪ But the Glory and Splendor of Saints is thus distinguished from the Glory and Splendor that is in Christ; In them the Glory is as a Beam, in Christ as the Sun, in them as a drop, in Christ as the Ocean, in them as Rivulets in Christ as the Fountain from whence they are de∣rived. There is a fulness of a Fountain, and a fulness of a Vessel; In Christ there is a fulness of a Fountain, in the Saints (though glorify'd) there's only the full∣ness of a Vessel, and this Vessel is fill'd by Christ, and receives all of his fulness; Joh. 1. 16. And of his fulness have all we receiv∣ed, and grace for grace (i. e.) By Christ we receive Gratiam gratiâ cumulatam. Dunaeus, Piscator, Davenant. Gatakerus, &c. vid. Gatak. Miscell. cap. 26. grace upon grace, or abundant in∣crease of all grace; For all grace is the free gift of Jesus
Christ, although . Chrys. Probat (inquit Beza) sen∣tentiam Chrysostomi, Cyrilli, Theophylasti, & Augustini statuentium  hic significa∣re vice, loco, & sensum esse accepimus gratim Novi Fae∣deris loco gratiae veteris, vel gratiam Evangelii pro grati Legis. Lud. de. Dieu. some Learned Authors under∣stand by grace for grace the grace of the New Testament, and the singular benefit there∣of, instead of the old, yet its undoubtedly true that whatever grace it is, it comes to us from Jesus Christ the only Liberal Doner thereof, from whom we receive grace both in the truth, and in the growth thereof. A third Name of Christ is a Prophet.3. Name, a Prophet. The promise is recorded, Deut. 18. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thy Brethren like unto me; unto him shall ye hearken. This place is ci∣ted. Act. 3. 22. and Act. 7. 37. Christ is he, of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote, so Philip informs Nathaniel; Joh. 1. 45.—When the Jews askt John who he was, they askt art thou that Prophet: Joh. 1. 21? In asking after , Chrysost. in Joh. 1. 21. that Prophet, theres some singularity and special re∣mark of excellency and pre∣heminency above all other Prophets. And so is Christ The Prophet in Dignity a∣bove all other Prophets. But a farther in∣largement I shall refer to another place,
where I shall insist more largely upon the Prophetical Office of Christ. A fourth Name is Immanuel. Isai. 7. 14.4. Name, Immanuel. And you have the Interpretation of this Name. Matth. 1. 23▪ God with us. This Name represents Christs infinite condescentionto make his Addi quque Propheta n∣men partus illus Immanuel, ad exprimandam personam e∣jus simul ac fficium, & fa∣miliarem ejus cum hominibus conversationem quod habiu∣rus esset inter homines. Joh. 1. 14. Caelo terram conjunctu∣rus, & hominem Deo in gra∣tiâ, prout utrumque conjun∣cturus erit in personâ. Walae∣us. in Mat. 1. 21. abode for a time and converse with Men: Nomina illa Jesus & Imma∣nuel in eo solum differunt quod nomen Iesus  principaliter designet officium, secundario personam; Imma∣nuel principaliter personam secundario officium. Span. Dub. Evang. Immanuel is a Name of Dig¦nity and Preheminence. The Divine Nature of Christ is thereby set forth: It's like∣wise a Name of singular pro∣fit and benefit to us, because he is God with us, and there∣by is set forth the humane Nature of Christ. And as a Learned Expositor ob∣serves; Quod quaeso hoc fructu bta∣bilius? Hic virginis partus jam nobis attulit, ut huma∣no genri se Deus cjunxerit in Christo. Nec putandum est tiosam esse, & infrgif∣ram istam conjunctionem, quae primum nos Deo reconlivit in Christo. 2 Cor. 5. 19. De∣inde carnem nostram ad dex∣tram Patris in caelis colloca∣vit, & supra omnia exalta∣vit. Tertio etiam hoc attu∣lit, ut in omnibus adversis fi∣ntr dicer liceat. Si Des pro nobi qu contra s Rom. 8. 31. Musc. in loc. what fruit can be more desireable then this, this fruit of the Virgin brought this to us, that God in Christ joyn'd himself to mankind, nei∣ther may we conceive that this conjunction is useless and fruitless, which first hath Re∣concil'd us to God in Christ, and afterward placeth our bo∣dies at the Right Hand of the Father, and lastly gives us boldness and confidence in all
adversity; If God be for us, who can be against us.—But I shall inlarge no more of this Name, because I may see cause to resume a farther exposition thereof, when I treat of Christs Hypostatical Union. A fifth Name is Messiah or Messias, Pro∣phesyed5 Name, Messiah. of by Daniel. Dan. 9. 25, 26.—But Joh. 1. 41. it's said—We have found the Mes∣sias. Both Jews and Samaritas excepted Redemption and Instruction in all things from Christ as may appear by the Wo∣man of Samaria's answer Joh. 4. 25. The Woman saith unto him I know that Messias comes which is called Christ, when he is come he will tell us all things  glish Dies on Dan. 9. 25. Antiquitus i∣populo Dei, Reges, Prophetae, c Scerdots gebatr, un∣ctione significatur copia Spiri∣tus quâ ista tria hominum ge∣nera perfundur. Pet Mart. Loc. c. some understand Messiah and Christ to be of one and the same significa∣tion For (say they) the eternal-Word is by the Angel named Messiah (i. e.) in Greek , Christ, or anointed, or written in Abstracto. Annointed in regard of both natures, as to the Office of Reconciliation and Redemption. But anointed in the humane nature only as to the gifts of the Holy Ghost llated upon it, and infused in∣ it. This Name Breve verb sed efficacissi∣mum fatend um s esse Mes∣siam quid aliud innuit, quam s esset um q vere a Do ncts sit in Regem & sacerdo∣tem, adeo ut ad se confugintes, ne dum possit defender ut Rex, sed etiam Deo reconciliare ut verus Sacerdos. Ferus. in Joh. . 26. Messiah carries Royalty and high Dignity in it, because its
the same with Christ, an∣nointed; and because the Prophet Daniel plainly sets down the Name and Digni∣ty of Christ conjoyned in the place forecited. Dan. 9. 25. Messiah the Prince. Thus the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 9. 6. calls him the Prince of Peace Isa. 32. 1. a King that shall reign in righteousness. The Psal∣mist calls him a King Ps. 2. 6. yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Zion. Christ hath absolute rule and government: All Subjection must be to him, all Scepters, all Government must yield homage unto Christ and be subordinate and subservi∣vent unto him. Bishop Reynolds on Psal. 110. v. 1. p. 12. Edit. 1. A Learned and Reve∣rend Divine thus Expounds; Phil. 2. 10.  &c. At the name of Jesus every Knee shall bow of things in Heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth; (i. e.) unto that Holy thing, unto the Power and Scepter of that Divine Person, which is unto us so comfortably manifested in a Name of Salvation, every Knee should bow. A sixth Name is A Branch. This name6 Name, a Branch. Isai. 4. 2. Isai. 11. 1. Jer. 33. 15. is twice mention'd. Zec. 13. 8, 9. and c. 6. 12. In the former, God promiseth, be∣hold I will bring forth my Servant the Branch; And in the latter (as if the) Pro∣phecy was already accomplished) God points him out: Behold the Man, whose
Name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord. Christ is often in Scripture call'd a Branch, thereby (Est Germen propri quod è terrâ oritur. Quo Christi ma∣nifestatio in carne & ortus  Virgine Mariae had obscur innuitur. Drus. Sic dsignat Christi Nativitas terrena, quod instar surculi ê ter∣ra proditurus esset, & e trunco velut succiso & om∣ni ramorum, viroris, et flo∣rum gloriâ destitut. Span∣hm. dub. Evangel. as is observ'd) the Hu∣mane Nature of Christ is shadowed forth. And we read Math. 2, 23. He shall be called a Nazarene. Where to find the word▪ Nazarene, in so many Syllables in the Old Testament is not pro∣bable. No particular Pro∣phet is cited by the Evangelist. But we frequently find the Word Netzera Branch. And that Christ▪ is called a Nazarene, is an allusion to those Prophesies which call Christ a Branch. I am not Huc rspicientes aliqui du conantur hoc Testimonium ad ctum referre locum fuptum putat ex Is. 11. 1. Et egredi∣tur virga de radice Jesse et flos de radice ejus ascendet, Porro quod Netzer soli 70 transtlerunt Radicem, at{que} Sym. et Theod. verterunt  i. e. stirpem sive truncu▪ In hanc ferme sententiam Hieronymus annotavit locum. Erasmus. in Matt. 2. 23. alone in my judgment. Now this Branch is both beautiful, and glorious. Isa. 42. Its a growing and a Temple∣building Branch Ze. 6. 12. It's there said he shall grow out of his place. (i. e.) He shall sprout forth of Bethlehem, where he was born, out of the Stem▪ and Root of David, to whom he was promised, and he shall build the Tem∣ple of the Lord (i. e.) by the Preaching of the Gospel he shall build up the Church made
of all true Believers. Christ shall fasten them (as Stones in a Building) to himself the chief Corner-Stone. A seventh Name is Jesus, and why he7. Name, Jesus. Scite anno∣tat Cassia∣nus libera∣re a pecca∣ts & opu∣lum suum, non posse  convenire nisi e qui uaturâ sit Deus. Beza. was so call'd is exprest: Mat. 1. 21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call his Name JESƲS, for he shall save his People from their Sins. Joshua was on∣ly a Temporal Saviour, but Jesus is an E∣ternal Saviour: Joshua a Type, Jesus the Truth; Joshua brought the Israelites in∣to a Temporal Canaan, Jesus Christ brings all the Israel of God (whether Jews or Gentiles) into an Eternal Canaan, a Hea∣venly Jerusalem, a Mansion not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Now when we speak of Christ according to his Name Jesus. What can be more said, for this is a Name above every Name? It is 1 Thes. 1. 10. Jesus, which delivereth us from the wrath to come. The only Name where∣by Act. 4. 12. we must be saved. Eph. 1. 7. We have Redemption through his Blood the forgive∣ness of Sins. Eph. 2. 14. He is our Peace; Mat. 20. 28. A Ransome; 2 Cor. 5. 19. our Reconciler; the 1 Tim. 2. 5. only Me∣diator, our Intercessor, Heb. 7. 25. for he ever liveth to make Intercession for his Saints. He is likewise an Vel Pa∣tronum; aut etiam Mediato∣rem, & in∣tercessorem omnia enim haec signifi∣cat vox Graeca  Vata∣bl. 1. Joh. 2. 1. Luke 22. 44. Fuit sudr ejus instar sanguinis concreti de∣scendens sa∣per ternin. L de Dieu. 1 Joh. 2. 1. : Quicun{que} adeo alteri in causa officij gra∣tia. Pr∣ces Eccle∣siae Chri∣stus more Advocati Deo com∣mendat. Grot. Advocate to Plead our Cause; in Person and as Mediator and Advocate both, he Pleads for all his Children in such Language:—This is the Man for whom I
came to be incarnate, for whom I sweated drops of Blood, clodded blood, and congeald∣, for whose Sins I died and rose again for his Justification: Righteous-Fa∣ther since thy Justice must be satisfied impute all this persons Sins upon my Score, and im∣pute Righteousness unto him. And this Of∣fice of an Advocate is of singular Benefit and Consolation unto all the Children of God, amidst their Fears, Perplexities, Doubts, Mournings, and Weepings over their manifold Infirmities, that they have an Advocate to Plead their Cause as Law∣yers do by Vertue of their Calling, and Interpose in their behalfs: Our Prayers come as from us but raw, and cold very indigested, and imperfect, but our Advo∣cate mends and perfects them, and Pleads for them as if they were absolutely exact and perfect; for he interposeth his own merits and pleads satisfaction of Justice, from his own meritorious Sufferings. Hence the Apostle grounds the Consolati∣on o the Saints: 1 Joh. 2. 12. If any Man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the Pro∣pitiation of our Sins, and not for ours only, but the Sins of the whole World. In this excellent Scripture we may observe seve∣ral Singularities. 1. There is an Advocate for Sinners.
An Advocate is upon the place, and un∣dertakes the Cause, by defending and plead∣ing. And so doth Christ as an Dum o∣stendere vult quo∣modo rede∣amus cum Deo in gra∣tiam, dicit Christm esse nobis Advec∣tum, nm in hoc ap∣paret co∣ram facie Dei, ut sa∣crificii sui vim & ef∣ficaciam erga no sex∣erat. Calv. in loc. Advocate and Pleader carries on the Cause of poor Sinners, even all such as he hath loved, and washt in his Blood. 2. This Advocate is Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, the second person in Trinity, the Beloved Son, Matth. 3. 17. in whom the Father is well pleased. 3. He pleads with the Father the per∣son offended. 4. He is Jesus Christ the righteous, with∣out Sin, for no guile was ever found in his Mouth, and therefore being righteous he is the only fit person to be an Advocate. Heb. 7. 26. He is Holy, harmless, undefiled, sepa∣rated from Sinners. 5. He is the Propitiation for Sins, he offer'd up himself for a Propitiation, he in∣terposed as a surety, payd the debt and sa∣tisfied Justice to the utmost, and not only for our Sins, but 6thly, For the Sins of the Usit atum est Hebraeis totum mundum dicere pro certâ uni∣versitate quorundam de qui∣bus in subjectâ materiâ agi∣tur, ubi agitur de fidelibus, (loquitur enim fidelis fideli∣bus) intelliguntur per toti∣us mundi peccata, omnium quot-quot sunt fidelium pec∣cata. Lud. de dieu. in 1 Joh. 2. 2. whole World. Not that for every individual person Christ was a Propitiation: But there the whole world im∣plies all those who out of the Nations of the World shall believe in him. Compare this
with Rev. 5. 9. Thou hast Re-deemed us to God by thy blood out of every Kindred, and Tongue and People, and Nation. I shall now come from the Names to treat of the Natures of Christ, but this shall be the business of the next Chapter. CHAP. III. Concerning the great Mystery of the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ; and the Hypostatical Ʋnion, that Christ is God and Man, united in one Person. THe Apostle declares 1 Tim. 3. 16. with∣out Controversy great is the mystery of godliness. The first and greatest mystery that he mentions is, that God was made ma∣nifest Ait Apo∣solus, . i. e. in carne carnaliter; nempe cum Deus alio∣quin  non sit tam en Christus manifesta∣tus est  occulis seu visu verè adspectabilis, conspicuus, manifestus, visu, auditu, ta∣ctu,  1 Joh. 1. 2. id{que} est quod Joh. 21. 1. dicitur  hu∣man deni{que} more & carne, Quod suâ alioquin natura Deus non est Quod diam Gentiles agovêre. V. Gothosredi Exercit. poster. in 1 Tim. 3. 16. in the flesh. Of this mistery in order we are now to treat. And 1. Of the Divine Nature of Christ; 2. Of the Humane Na∣ture of Christ. And 3. Of the Hypostatical Union. For the first this Proposition shall be pro∣ved, That Christ is God from all eternity. The Proof shall be made plain by evidence of Scripture and strength of Reason.
1. For Scripture Evidence. Amongst1 Proof of Christs De∣ity rom Scripture Testimony. many Testimonies I shall only select a few principal ones. David calls Christ his Lord; Psal. 110. v. 1. Christ urging this Scripture nonplus'd the Pharisees. Mat. 22. 44. 46. The Prophet Isaiah calls Christ the Isai. 9. 6. Mighty God, the Everlasting Fa∣ther; Jeremy calls him, Jer. 23. 6. The Lord our Righteousness. He is Fellow, and Fellow∣like with God the Father. Zachary calls him Gods Zech. 13. 7. Fellow. And this Testi∣mony the Apostle confirms that Philip 2. 6. Christ being in the form of God, thought it no Rob∣bery to be equal with God. Christ is not God by Similutude or Figure, not  of like Substance,Though Christ was Man, yet he was more then a bare Man. For jure natrae no Son is Lord to his Father; Domi∣nation doth never ascend. There must be something a∣bove nature in him, to make him his Fathers Soveraign, Christ is the a Lord to his People. He had Dominion and was the Salvation of his own Fore-fathers. Bishop Reynolds in Psal. 110. vers. . but  of the self same substance, not Metaphori∣cally as Judges are called Gods, Psal. 82. 1, 6. but pro∣perly, and really, and essenti∣ally Christ is God, coequal, coessential, and coeternal with God the Father. We have the Testimony of Christ himself, Joh. 8. 58. Jesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was I am; Christ is the Word that was God; Joh. 1. 1. This Christ is the essen∣tial substantial Word: And Sesus  Pro∣ mihi vide∣tur  cum esset in princi∣pio, esset{que} apud Deum, erat quo{que} ipse Deus. Nam ex hoc ipso quod erat apud Deum sequitur eum fuiss quo{que} una eadem{que} cum Deo essentia, ade∣o{que} Deum ipsum. Unde fundamentum quam firmum habeamus nos qui credimus in Jesum Christum, nempe eum, qui Deus sit, & unum cum Patre & Spiritu Sancto. Rolloc. in Joh. 1. the Word was God. St. Paul declares Christ, to be God over
all blessed forever. Rom. 9. 5. St. John speaking of Christ confidently affirms this is the true God, and Eternal Life. 1 Joh. 5. 20. And St. Jude concludes his Epistle with this Doxology. v. 25. To the only wise God our Saviour, be Glory and Majesty, Domini∣on and Power, both now and ever, Amen. Thus having proved the Deity of Christ by Scripture Testimony, I shall add strength of Reason, (though I conceive there's given abundant Proof of what's al∣ready forementioned) that so there may be more Measure prest and running over. Amongst many I shall instance in these2. Proof of Christs Deity by 3 Reasons. Reasons only, which are drawn from the Divine Attributes ascribed to Christ, the Divine Honour due to him, and his Di∣vine Works; from all which, the Conclu∣sion inferr'd is of eternal truth, That Christ is God from all eternity. 1. If we consider the Divine Attributes  From the Divine Attri∣butes. given unto Christ, thence will be drawn an infallible Proof of his Deity: For in∣stance we have two Attributes mentioned in one verse, viz. Power and Wisdom; 1
Cor. 1. 20. Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. And this Wisdom is from eternity: Solomon brings in Wisdom speak∣ing thus. Prov. 8. 22, 23. Possemus verbum illud ad divinam hypostasin referre per quam natura divina in filio subsistat hoc modo fundavit me, (i. e) Pater propri  subsistentiâ me donavit. Quod si Vulgatam lectionem ad eum sensum vocare velis sic dirigenda est. Ab aeter∣no ordinata sum, (i. e.) ab aeternitate in Statione me locata sum, ut in or∣dine trium hypostase ego secunda persona sim, ita utinde avelli aut loco moveri non possim. Salzar. The Lord possessed me in the begin∣ning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or e∣ver the earth was. To me it's out of question, that this is spoken of Christ the Essential Wisdom of the Father Christ was possessed and begotten of the Father in an incon∣ceiveable and incomprehensible manner, and it's said before his works of old, (i. e.) when there was nothing created, nothing in be∣ing but God, and in nothing but Eternity. And not only Power, but Omnipotency is ascribed to Christ, Joh. 5. 19.  for whatsoever the Fa∣ther doth, these also doth the Son likewise. No∣thing too hard for Omnipotency, nothing too difficult for Christ to conquer Philip. 3. 21▪ He is able (saith the Apostle) even to subdue all things unto himself. Like∣wiseNotare operae pretium est jus & pote∣statem suscitandi mortuos, imo quidvis suo arbitrio agendi conferri in Christi personam: Quo encomio divina ejus Ma-Jestas splendede ornatur. Calv. in loc. Eternity and Om∣nipotency both meet in Christ, I am Alpha and Omega, the begin∣ning and the endng, (saith the Lord)
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. Rev. 1. 8. Further, Om-Niscience Christ challengeth to himself; Joh. 2. 25. For he knew what was in Man. He knew who should Betray him, and when he should be delivered up to the Cross. He foretold his Sufferings, and all were accomplished accordingly. Rev. 2. 23. He searcheth the Heart and the Reins: Peter confest Lord thou know∣est all things. Praeclarum Divinitatis Christi argu∣mentum, Absolute citra limitationem, divinum hoc Attributum Christ hic tribuitur ijsdem verbis, quibus alibi ad∣scribitur Jehovae, non solum quod justi judicij administrationem sed & quo ad cordum srut ationem. Parens. Hence it appears Christ is Omniscient and there∣fore God, for Omnisci∣ence is an incommuni∣cable Attribute to any created Beeing. Add hereunto Christ's Heb. 13. 8. immutability. Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day and for ever: And his Immensity: For he it is that Joh 3. 13. Haec sententia Pharisaeo nova erat qui ignora∣bat filium Dei fuisse ab initio. Quomodo & descen∣dit & est in caelo Re∣spondetur descendit Filius Dei, quia & induit naturam humanam, & humiliatur infra omn captum humanum, dum fit victima pro peccatis generis humani, & ta∣men est in caelo. i. e. cernit Patrem, & retinet potentiam divinam. Me∣lanc. in loc. came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven: Immensity and Ubiquity of presence, is an Attribute belonging to God alone. Though Christ was then corporally on earth, yet his Deity could not be con∣fin'd to any place, for, according to his Di∣vine Nature, he fill'd Heaven and Earth: No place can exclude his Omnipresence.
A 2d. Reason shall be drawn from the  Drawn from the Divine Honour due unto Christ. Divine Honour due unto Christ. The Fa∣ther commands † the same honour to be gi∣ven unto Christ as unto himself. Joh. 5. 23. Adoration of Christ is injoyn'd to all the† Hoc est non tantum smili, sed aequali prorss ho∣nore, quem∣admo∣dum omne judiciim non aliquo tam tan∣tum jus partem de∣dit Pater Filio suo. Rolloc. in loc. Angels. Heb. 1. 6 Let all the Angels of God wor∣ship him. This Arch-Angel even Christ is the Angel of the Covenant, and with∣out blame may be worshipped. The A∣postle worshipt him, and fell at his Feet, (though he was forbidden to worship ano∣ther Angel:) Rev. 1. 17. The four Beasts and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb. And further Honour is exhibited unto Christ in saying, Rev. 5. 13. Reas. 3. Drawn from the works of Christ. Blessing and Honour and Glory and Power, be unto him that sit∣teth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. These high Praises and Ce∣lebrations represent Honour due untoRev. 5. 8. him, a clear Proof of his Divinity. A 3d. Reason shall be drawn from the Works of Christ. Not to multiply many instances, only consider. 1. Christ created the World. He was Heir of all things, by whom God the Fa∣ther, Heb. 12. made the World; Without him no∣thing was made. 2. Christ governs and preserves the World, Joh. 1. 3. Quamvis indefinite loquatur, debet intel∣ligi uni∣versaliter, quod per il∣lum fcit omnia sae∣cula. i. e. omnia cre∣ata juxta illud. Prov. 8. 30. cum eo eram cuncta com∣ponens: U∣bi est ser∣mo da Sa∣pientia g∣nita Chri∣sti. Tena ad Hebr. He upholds all things by the Word of his Power. Both Works of Crea∣tion and Providence are ascribed unto Christ.
3. Christ wrought Miracles, he cured the Lame, and the Blind, the Deaf, and the Dumb, he healed all Diseases, calmed the rageing Sea, and walkt on the Sea, raised the Dead to Life again, and by his own Power raised himself, fed 5000 with 5 Loves and two little Fishes; and which is above all these things he forgave Sins, (which only God can do) Christ in the dispensation of his Miracles frequently dispatcht two works in one journey, by healing the Diseases of Body and Soul both, as he did to the Paralytick Man, Mark 2. 4, 5. When John the Baptist sent his Disciples to Christ with this Question, Luke 7. 20, 22. Art thou he that should come, or do wee look for another? Jesus answered and said unto them, go and shew John those things which ye do hear and see, The Blind receive their Sight, and the Lame Walk, the Lepers are Cleansed, and the Deaf Hear, and the Dead are Raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel Preacht unto them. Although the Apostles wrought Miracles afterwards, yet they acknowledged all to be Act. 4. 10.  i. e. virtu∣te, poten∣tia, & o∣pe. Vatabl. by the name of Jesus Christ. By vertue re∣ceived from Christ they cured all Diseases. And likewise where ever the Gospel took effect and prevail'd it was by the assistance of Christ. Ministers may faithfully and sedulously labour in the work of the Gos∣pel,
and yet may not so succeed in their endeavours as to convert Men to God: But the Lord Christ can give grace with his Gospel, and infuse Holiness into their hearts to whom he Preacheth his Holy Word. For he is God, and cannot only command obedience, but give Grace and Ability to yield Conformity unto his Command. A 4th. Reason shall be drawn from the  Drawn from the Instituti∣on of Or∣dinances. Institution of Ordinances. God only is the Institutor of Ordinances. The Sa∣craments are of Christs Institution. Bap∣tism hath Christs Authority and Commis∣sion. Matt. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Ho∣ly Ghost. And as Christ was the Institutor of Baptism, so was he of the Lords Sup∣per. 1 Cor. 11. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which I deliverd unto you, &c. The Apostle acted by vertue of Christs Commission. And Christs Institution of the Lords Supper is recorded: Matt. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. This Insti∣tution the Apostle received from Christ: As for Sacraments devised by Papists, such as are Pennance, Extream Unction, &c. they are none of Christs Institution, but rotten Inventions, and Mock-Sacraments. And they shall meet with that censure:
Isai. 1. 12. Who hath required these things at your hands? And with another suteable thereunto from Christ. Matt. 15. 9. But in vain they do worship me teaching for Doctrines Satis liquet quicunque ex ho∣minum commentis cultum Dei. discunt, non modo plane desipere, sed etiam se conficere exitiali la∣bore. Calv. in Isai. 29. 13. Legi∣tur appositiv, Doctrinas, quae sunt mandata hominum, non Dei. Vatabl. in Matth. 15. 9. the Commandments of Men. None hath power to institute Sa∣craments but Christ: The Apostle would deliver no Doctrine but that he re∣ceived from Christ, Christ sets up Church Officers: They are the Gifts of Christ, and the Fruits of his A∣scention: Eph. 4. 11. And he gave some Apo∣stles, and some Prophets, and some Evange∣lists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers: A∣postles, Prophets, Evangelists, these are ex∣traordinary, and they are ceased; Pastors & Teachers they are ordinary standing fixt Officers. We must not set up our Post by his Post, and our Threshold by his Threshold, as the Lord complains; Ezek. 43. 8. This is an high Indignity, and a great affront to God, to mix Hominum inventa in Dei cultu impurae sunt cor∣ruptelae. Calv. In∣stit. l. 4. c. 10. The Affir∣mative part in the 2d. Com∣mand∣ment is, that our outward worship be as he hath prescribed it: We must make his Word our Pattern. The Negative, that we mingle not our Will-worship with his Precept or Worship. Bp. Andr. 2. Com. Thou shalt not worship me with any device of thine own, contrary to my Will and Nature: and the Affirmative is implied, thou shalt in every respect worship me according to my Will and Nature. Babington. 2 Com. Humane Inventions with Divine Institutions. When Nadab, and Abihu presumed to offer strange fire upon the Alter, they became a signal example, of disobedience. Lev. 10. 2. Christ is the only Lord of our Consciences, the only Institutor of his Word, Sacraments, Mi∣nistery, and all other Divine Ordinances.
His Institutions are every way perfect, and stand in no need of Addition or Di∣minution. That Text urged by the Apostle. 1. Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. Beza In∣terprets of a decency: And Gro∣tius against confusion in the Church. Yet the Original expresly de∣clares (what we render in order) . Beza. , Parti∣tis temporibus suo quis{que} ordine. Grotius. accord∣ing to order, Ordination or Appointment. And this seems to allude to Exod. 39. 43. Where its said they had . Vers. 70. done all things as the Lord commanded. We might further prove the Deity of Christ from his Mission of the Holy Ghost, Revelation of things to come, Conquering the World by the Power of his Eternal Gospel, giving Eternal Life unto all his Children. But those foregoing Arguments may suffice for confirmation of so clear and infallible a Truth. And this Doctrin of Christ's Divinity is a Fort Royal, which will remain impregnable notwithstanding all the violent Assaults and Batteries made
against it by Qui Chri∣stum no nisi homi∣nem gno∣snt, summ venerandum incarnationis mysterium, ut purum putum fig∣mentum blasphemè rident. Brochm. Syst. Theol. A 15. de Christo. c. 2. Socinus and other Blasphe∣mous Hereticks. In the 2d. place we come to treat of2. Christs Humane Nature. Christs Humane Nature. And this Pro∣position that Christ is Man, we shall clear by express Scripture, and Evidence of Reason. 1. For Scripture Testimony, Christ1. Scrip∣ture Testi∣mony. was the promised Seed (i. e.) Gen. 3. 15. Per promissio∣nem gratiae vivificatus ost Adam: Est autem haec Ipsum semen con∣teret caput tuam. Est autem Se∣men mulie∣ris Chri∣stus & quicun{que} sunt in Christo. Melan∣cton in Gen. Advertendum est Hebraicè haberi ipsum, ita ut semen mulieris (i. e.) Christus demonstretur. Pet. Mart. Soli Christo contritio serpentini Capi∣tis tribuitur, sed Hujus victoriae suae per fidem nos facit participes. Gerrh. the Seed of the Woman. And this was the first Pro∣mise which was ever made, which was made in Paradise: Christ is that Child born, that Son given, mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah c. 9. 6. call'd a Man; Mich. 5. 5. Zech. 13. 7. 1. Tim. 2. 5. The Son of Man; Mat. 8. 20. The Son of Mary; Luke 1. 31. Of the Seed of Abraham; Hebr. 2. 16. Of the Seed of David. 2. Tim. 2. 8. Christ the Eter∣nal Substantial Word, was made Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. and he was manifested in the Flesh: 1 Tim. 3. 16. There are two words which plainly express the Humane Nature of Christ: One is,  Joh. 1. 14. he dwelt amongst us. And the other is Phillip. 2. 7.
He made himself of no Evacua∣vit seip∣sum, dum immensam divinae gloriae & munificen∣tiae maje∣statem àd tempus omubilavit. Inanitio ipsius nostri est adimpletio. Musc. in loc. Reputation. For God to come down, and dwell with Men, as it were to disrobe himself, and unite a Clod of dust to his Divine Person, here is an unparallell'd Condescention, and an evident proof of Christs Humanity. Add hereunto a threefold Reason drawnProved by 3 Reasons that Christ is Man. from the Birth, Life and Death of Christ, and in every one of these his Manhood is fully proved. 1. For Christs Birth, he was Gal. 4. 4. born  Drawn from the Birth of Christ. of a Woman, and she was I∣sai. 7. 14. a Virgin. A Mother and a Virgin, here's a great un∣parallell'd Mystery. Luke . 35. The Power of the Highest overshadowed her. The Con∣ception was Matth. 1. 20. by the Holy Ghost. There was no concurrence of Man. As Christs Name so was his Birth and Conception wonderful. You have the History ofOpus erat virtute agente, & virtute non huma∣nâ sed di∣vina, ex immundis enim geni∣tus, nec mundus esse potuisset formaliter nec mundans efficienter. Unde andem quidem naturam communicatam habere debebat, sed modo communicationi diverso debet esse ut  secundum divinam nturam, sic  se∣cundum humanam ut plene responderet typo Melchisidechi. Spanh. dub. Evang. both; Matt. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, &c. This is the mystery that the very Angels desire to peep into. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Angels Proclaim it, Wisemen came from the East to see it, All the Heathen Oracles ceased; Christ the Eternal God the Antient of days became
became the Infant of days; he whom the Heaven of Heavens could not contain, lay inclosed in the Virgins Womb, and when he was brought forth he was laid in a Manger. That the Lord Christ the E∣ternal God should be wrapt up in Swad∣ling Cloathes, and became a Child; This is an Evident Proof of his Humane Na∣ture. The Quem Coelum & Terra bene∣dicit, in praesepi an∣gusto collo∣catur, nu∣meratur in saeculo qui est ante saecula: Christus Jesus heri & hodie i∣dem ipse & insaecu∣la. Aug. S. p. 589. E∣dit. Frob. Fathers rise high in expression of this high Mystery. Christus multis servis in mundo minor esset; aetate, ipso mundo antiquior sine vetustate; Homo fieret, qui hominem fecit; crearetur ex matre, qum creavit; portaretur manibus, quas formavit; sugeret ubera quae implevit; in praesepi muta vagiret infantia, &c. Aug. de Temp. Serm. 21. That Christ should be made of that Woman, who was made of him; that Christ should be before all Ages, and yet born in time. These are Transcendent Mysteries. We may not be over curiously inquisitive, lest with the Men of Bethshemesh we smart for our curiosity: Let it suffice us to believe that which we read in Scripture revealed, and let us acquiesce in that belief. 2. Christs Humane Nature may be ea∣sily  Christs Humane Nature proved by his Life. proved by his Life. If we consider his actions of eating and drinking, and his infirmities, (which were not sinful) of Hunger, Thirst, and Weariness, his Weeping at Lazarus his Funeral, these are evident proofs of his Manhood. Now
Weeping, Thirsting, Hunger, and Wea∣riness, are Infirmities, incident only to Mankind. These and all such Infirmities (free from Sin) were incident unto Christ. Indeed Lameness, Deafness, Blindness, and such like, which are only incident to individuals and some particular persons, these Christ had not: But those Infirmi∣ties, which are in Common to Mankind, as Weakness, Hunger, &c. these Christ was subject unto. The Gospel gives ma∣ny Instances, as Matth. 4. 2. Joh. 4. 7. Joh. 11. 35. Joh. 4. 6. I refer my Reader to the pe∣rusal of those Scriptures. 3. Christs Humane Nature appears by  Christs Humane Nature proved from his Death and Passion. his Death and Passion. The God-head is impassible, and hath neither Body, nor Parts: But Christ assumed an humane Body. The Apostle, Heb. 10. 5. (which is taken out of Psal. 40. 6.) gives a full proof.—Sacrifice and Burnt-offerings thou wouldst not, but a Body hast thou prepared me. Christ had a real Body, and there∣fore Marcion who held that Christs Body was Phantastical, in Semblance and shew only, likewise Manes and his Follow∣ers who held that Christ brought his Bo∣dy from Heaven, and Valentinus who held that Christ had an aerial Body, and assumed nothing of Mary, but only pas∣sed as Water through a Channel; these
Hereticks with their Heresies have been long since exploded and Condemned, and they are not worth reviving by any re∣petition, unless for a larger confutation. Now the self same Body which was of the Flesh and Substance of the Virgin Mary, was Buffeted, Scourged, Crowned with Thorns, Spit upon, Crucified: Christ as the Apostle tells us, Phil. 2. 8. Became obe∣dient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Object. But it will be Objected; Is this for Christs Dignity and Honour to become incarnate? My Argument I treat on is con∣cerning Christs Dignity.—How can Christs Dignity and Incarnation stand together? Answ. For Answer, Though it's a great Humiliation in Christ to be incarnate, and to assume Humane Nature, yet his Di∣vine Nature puts Glory and Honour up∣on the Humane Nature, for what Quamvis nulla sub∣stantia digna est ut Deus in∣duat, quod∣cun{que} ta∣men indue∣rit, ipse dignum facit▪ Tertull. ever God assumes he makes honourable. Christ advanceth the Humane Nature, by ta∣king Flesh upon him: He sanctifieth it, and afterwards will bring it unto Glory. 3. Let's consider the Hypostatical Uni∣nion,3. The Hy∣postatical Union. that Christ is God and Man in one
Person, these two Natures of Christ, (Paulus eximiam Christi commenda∣tionem ha∣bet, quaedu∣as in eo na∣turas di∣sertè cofi∣tetur. Hu∣mana na∣tura indi∣catur his verbis: Ex Judaeis se∣cundum Carnem. Nam per carnem Phrasi Hebraica ttus homo intelligitur. Divina natura apertissime descri∣bitur his verbis—Qui est super omnia benedictus in saecula. Pet. Mart. in Rom. 9. 5. as Peter Martyr observes) are plainly set forth from Rom. 9. 5. Of whom as concer∣ning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God Blessed for ever. How this may be understood I have read thus shadowed by a Similitude. One Tree may be set into another, and it groweth in the Stock thereof, and becomes one and the same Tree, though there may remain two Na∣tures, or Kinds of Fruits: So in the Son of God made Man though there be two Natures, yet both being united into one Person, there is but one Son of God. There are four Quatuor haec adver∣bia  totidem haeresibus in Symbolo Chalcedonensi opposit a sunt. Adverbs, which op∣pose so many Heresies, and represent this Union, viz. Inconfusedly, Inconverti∣bly, Undividedly, Unseparably. 1. Inconfusedly (i. e.) The Natures and Proprieties of the Natures remain still distinct: There is no change or confusion in them. When one propriety is given to another, as when we read Christ pur∣chased his Church Act. 20. 28. Salvâ pro∣prietate u∣trius{que} na∣tur & in unm counte personam suscepta est à Majestate humilitas. E natur inviolabilis unita est passibili. Tertull. contra Prax. with his Blood,
The Son of God Gal. 4. 4. was made of a Wo∣man, The 1 Cor. 2. 8. Per haec, qui erat Dei filius factus est hominis fi∣lius as∣sumptione inferioris non versione potioris; accipiendo ipse quod non erat, non mittendo quod erat. Aug. de temp. Permanente integro statu divinitatis assumpsit hominem Dei filius, nec amisit quod erat, sed sociavit sibi quod in ipso non ante fuerat: invisibilis ergo secundum Divinitatem Dei filius, visibilem suscepit hominem, immortalis mortalem, impassibilis passi∣ilem, & ut totum breviter comprehendam, Deus hominem. Aug. Serm. 4. de Tempore. Lord of Glory was Crucified; we are to understand a Communica∣tion of Idioms; for Blood, Birth and Crucifixion appertain to the Humane Nature. 2. Inconvertibly. There's not a Con∣version of the God-head into the Man∣hood, nor of the Man-hood into the God∣head; God is not changed into a Man, nor Man changed into God. 3. Undividedly, (i. e.) one nature can∣not be separated from the other; for though there is a Distinction yet not a Division. There are not two Christs, nor two Per∣sons, but one Christ, one and the same Person. 4. Unseparably. This Union remains to all eternity, Christ, Immanuel, , God-Man in one Person, for so continu∣eth he for Quod se∣mel assum∣psit nun∣quam di∣misit. Damasc. ever. We are then to understand an Union of two Natures, not (as Nestorius af∣firms an Union of two Persons, though
the Union be personal, yet it is not of Persons. To help us to conceive this better, some illustrate it by the Soul and Body which make up one Man, and by Iron and Fire, where both remain in one, so Basil: As the Sun and Light meet in one, so Justin Martyr and Athanasius. But Similitudes are more for Illustration than Probation, and therefore I let them pass and put no great stress up∣on them. What is writ in an excellent Treatise Intituled Immanuel by an D. Usher A. Bishop of Armagh Lord Pri∣mate of Ireland. eminent Light of the Church of God will give abundant satisfaction, which I have here transcrib'd—For the nearer conceiving whereof we may call to mind, that which the Apostle hath taught us touching our Saviour, Col. 2. 9. In him dwelleth all the fulness of the God∣head bodily, that is to say, by such a personal and real Ʋnion, as doth inseparably and ever∣lastingly conjoyn that infinite God-head with his finite Manhood in the Ʋnity of the self∣same individual person. He in whom the fulness dwelleth is the Person. That fulness which doth so dwell in him is the Nature. Now there dwelleth in him not only the ful∣ness of the God-head, but the fulness of the Man-hood also: For we believe him to be bth perfect God, begotten of the Substance of hi Father before all Worlds, and perfect Man▪
made of the Substance of his Mother in the fulness of time. And therefore we must hold, that there are two distinct Natures in him: And two so distinct, that they do not make any Compounded Nature, but still remain Ʋncompounded and Ʋnconfounded together. But he in whom the fulness of Man-hood dwel∣leth is not one, and he in whom the fulness of the God-head another, but he in whom the fulness of both those Natures dwelleth is one and the same Immanuel, and consequently it must be believed as firmly, that he is but one person. And here we must consider that the Divine Nature did not assume an Hu∣mane Person, but the Divine Person did as∣sume an Humane Nature. Thus far that Reverend and Learned Author. Exinani∣vit seip∣sum for∣mam ser∣vi suscipi∣endo: Non quod aliud qum quod erat, fieret; (i. e) non ut mutaretur ab e quod er at, sed ut seposito interim majestatis suae honore humanum corpus inueret, quo suscepto salus gentium fieret. Ambros. lib. de fide, contra Arrianos, cap. 8. Ips natura suscipienda erat quae liberanda. Aug. de vera religione. Sic voluit ruinam fragilis vasis reformare, deni{que} ut nec peccatum hominis dimitteret impunitum, quia justus est, nec insanabile, quia est misericors: potut aliter fieri quantum ad potentiam Medici, sed non potuit commo∣dius aut doctius praeparari, ut esset Medicina aegroti, & quantum ad ju∣stitiam Dei. Aug. Serm. 3. de Annunc. Domini. St. Am∣brose writes to the same sense very perspi∣cuously. Quest.—But it will be askt why was it requisite that Christ should be Man? Answ. The Answer is, that satisfaction might be made in the same Nature, Man
had offended, and Man must be Slain. This was Typified by the Dead Bird and Paschal Lamb, and all those Levitical Sa∣crifices which were slain, without shedding of Blood (saith the Apostle) there is no re∣mission, Heb. 9. 22. The God-head could not suffer Death, Christ as Man pour∣eth forth his Precious Blood out of his Veins. Quest. But why was he God and Man in the same Person? Answ. For Answer, The God-head gave strength and supportation to the Manhood. The Manhood could suffer Death, but could not overcome Death: The God∣head could overcome but not suffer, wherefore there was an happy conjuncti∣on of the God-head and Manhood: Christ is that middle Person in Trinity to deal between God and Man, he himself being God to deal with his Father, and he being Man to deal for the business with Men: So that notwithstanding the opposition of Nestorians, Eutyches, Marcion, and other Hereticks, the Truth is abundantly clear∣ed concerning the Hypostatical Union of Christ.—I proceed to the Next Chapter, wherein I shall discourse of the Offices of Christ, viz. Sacerdotal, Prophetical, and Regal, and first of his Sacerdotal Office
CHAP. IV. Of Christs Sacerdotal Office. SECT. I. Of the Properties of Christs Priesthood. THis Division of Christs Offices, as a Priest, a Prophet, and a King, is generally received, and may be evidently proved thus, for Christ had the Holiness of a Priest, the Wisedom of a Prophet, and the Power of a King. In us there's both Pollution and Guilt: Now Christ, as a Priest takes away both. In us there's Ignorance, and Blindness: Christ as a Prophet, opens our eyes and illuminates our Understandings. In us there's Rebe∣lion and Disorder, Christ as a King takes away Rebellion, and Disorder, by bring∣ing us under Government and Subjection to his Laws. Some were Priests and Pro∣phets, so was Samuel; some were Priests and Kings, so was Melchisedeck; some were Prophets and Kings, so was David: But Christ alone was Priest, Prophet and
King. These three all together only met in Christ. A great Priest, a great Prophet, and a great King, above all others, and after all others; he abides a Priest for ever, Psal. 110. 4. a Prophet for ever, Mat. 28. 20. and a King for ever, Dan. 2. 44. Of these Offices I shall treat severally, and first of Christ's Priestly Office. Sui∣das relates a notable Story, That when one of their Priests were dead at Jerusalem, the rest of the Priests met to choose another, and when many were nominated, they could not agree in their choice, till at last . Suidas in nomine . one of them named Jesus, and by a common consent he was chosen Priest. I put no weight up∣on this Story, but I shall keep my self within the limits of sacred Scripture. And in handling Christs Priestly Office, I shall represent some distinguishing Properties between the Priesthood of Christ, and the Levitical Priesthood; and then I shall make further inquiry into the parts of Christs Priesthood. 1. For the distinguishing Properties of1. There are distin∣guishing Properties between Christs Priesthood, and the Levitical Priesthood. Christs Priesthood. 1. Christ is a real Priest, and his Priest∣hood1 Christ is a real Priest. a real Priesthood; The Levitical
Priests were Typical, and their Priest∣hood Typical. All their Sacrifices and Ceremonial Observations, were Types and Shadows of Christ to come; so that at Christs coming, the Shadows vanish∣ed. Priests under the Law (as the Apo∣stle observes) serve unto the Example and Shadow of Heavenly things. The Cere∣monies of the Law were significative, and prefigured Christ, and his Graces. Now seeing Christ is already come, for any of their own heads (as the Pope doth) to introduce Levitical Ceremonies, this is to prefer Moses before Christ. A Learned and judicious Qui Chri∣stianos adi∣gunt ad Ceremoni∣as Judai∣cas, tyran∣nidem ex∣ercent in populum Dei, & quasi à mortuis tributa exigunt. Non enim mortui magis liberi à Magistratuum imperio, quàm Christiani à lege Mosis. Davenant in Col. 2. 1. Prelate fully declares hisHeb. 8. 5. mind, in this Corollary. They (saith he) that force Christians to Judaical Ceremonies, do exercise Tyranny upon the People of God, and do as it were require Tribute of the Dead, for Dead Men are not more freed from the Command of Magistrates, than Chri∣stians from the Law of Moses. 2. Christ is an Holy Priest, without2. Christ is an Holy Priest. Blemish; without Defilement: All the Sa∣crifices of the Law were to be without Blemish, nothing polluted, nothing de∣fective ought to be offered unto the Lord; the Priest was to have no Corporal Ble∣mish,
all these were Types of the Holi∣ness of Christ. Christ was Holy, Harm∣less, Ʋndefiled, separate from Sinners. Christ was made Sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that was by Christus summus peccator, non quod ipse commi∣serit pecca∣ta, sed quod ea à nobis sus∣ceperit in corpus su∣um. Luth. loc. com. p. 35, 36. Heb. 7. 27. 3. Christ is an un∣changea∣ble Priest. imputation only. There was neverHeb. 7. 26. any guile found in his Mouth: None of his Enemies could ever yet convince him of the least Sin. But as for Leviti∣cal Priests they were Sinners, and offer∣ed first for their own Sins, then for the Sins of the People. But Christ offered up him∣self for our Sins only, and not for any of his own Sins, because (though he was not free from Infirmities, yet) he was free from all Sins whatsoever. 3. Christ is an unchangable Priest, for he was made not after the Law of a Car∣nal Commandment, but after the Power of an Cum vi∣tam aeter∣nam vocat , tacite prae∣sentis vitae lubricita∣tem nobis subjicit. Est , in horas & momenta dissolvitur morbis & mor∣te, quando anim & Corporis nexus abrumpitur, & corpus in terram unde sumptum fuerat resolvitur. At vita Christi, quâ tum ipse beatus fruitur in coelis, tum suos donabit in aeternum, est . Pareus in loc. endless life, Heb. 7. 16. Levitical Priests changed; Eleazar Succeeded Aaron; al∣though the Priesthood continued long, yet the Priests dyed, and the Office was trans∣ferred upon others, but the Priesthood of Christ was unchangable, Heb. 7. 24. 4. Christ was chosen a Priest of the4. Christ was chosen a Priest of the Tribe of Judah. Tribe of Judah and not of the Tribe of Levi. And this (as an eminently learn∣ed
Dr. Usher A. B. of Armagh's Sum and Substance of Christi∣an Reli∣gion. p. 168. Writer observes) was to shew that he was no Successor of Aaron, but rather was to a∣bolish all the Ceremonial Services and Offi∣ces. The Apostle gives abundant Testi∣mony, Heb. 7. 14. Messiam oriturum à Judâ docu∣erat Moses, Messiam autem illum Sacerdotem futurum multus post Mosis obitum seculis docuit David. Cameron. For it is evident that our Lord sprung out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spake nothing concerning Priest∣hood. 5. Christ was made a Priest by an Oath,5. Christ was made Priest by an Oath. and so were not Levitical Priests. Heb. 7. 21. Those Priests were made without an Oath, but this with an Oath. Christ was anointed a Priest and consecrated by an Oath, to signifie the unchangableness of his Priesthood. 6. Christ is the only Priest: The Law6. Christ is the on∣ly Priest. admitted Plurality of Priests, Christ is the only High-Priest, the only Sacrificer, the only Mediator. The Apostle makes a great difference between Christ and the Priests under the Law, Heb. 7. 23, 24. And they truely were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of Death, but this Man because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable Priesthood. 7. And Lastly, Christ is an Eternal7. Christ is an Eternal Priest. Priest. The Apostle repeats, Heb. 7. 21. what was long before declared, Psal. 110.
4. The Lord sware and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Mel∣chisedeck.The ver∣tue of Christs Blood goes back∣ward as high as A∣dam. He was foreor∣dain'd be∣fore the Foundati∣on of the World, 2 Tim. 1. 9. It goeth downward to the end of the World: He must raign till all be put under his feet, and he must raise up all by the power and vertue of his Victo∣ry over Death, Joh. 5. 26, 29. Bishop Reynolds on Psal. 110. Verse 4. Page 538. fol. Other Priests dyed and saw Corruption: But Christ ever liveth, and for ever executes his Priestly Office. The vertue of Christs Priesthood began with the first Sinner, and continues to the last. Christ was the Lamb, slain from the begin∣ning of the World, Rev. 13. 8. and the ver∣tue and efficacy of Christs Priesthood lasts to all Eternity. Christ admits of no Sucession, nor Change, as Levitical Priests did. Hence we may conclude: That the Po∣pish Priesthood of Rome, so much conten∣ded for, may be easily overthrown: For they are not of the Tribe of Judah, and so cannot be accounted our Saviours Succes∣sors, neither are they confirmed by an Oath for perpetuity, likewise they are Mortal and dye, and they are Unholy and Polluted, and therefore have no re∣semblance or similitude unto the Priest∣hood of Christ.
SECT. II. Of the Parts of Christ's Priestly Office, and first of his Satisfaction. HAving set down these forementio∣ned distinguishing Properties, I come now to discourse of the Parts of Chrifts Priestly Office, and they are two, viz. His Satisfaction and Intercession. 1. For Christs Satisfaction, He is said1. Christ's Satisfacti∣on. Rom. 3. 25. Matt. 20. 28. 1 Tim. 2. 6. Heb. 13. 10, 12. to be a Propitiation, a Ransome, and the price of our Redemption. He is not only a Priest, but an▪ Altar and a Sacrifice. The Burnt-offering, Trespass-offering, Sin∣offering, Scape-Goat, Dead Bird: all these mention'd in the Book of Leviticus, related to Christ, who alone made satis∣faction for the Sins of his People. Now this satisfaction is made up of two kinds of Obedience, viz. Active and Pas∣sive. 1. For Christs Active Obedience. He1. Christ's Active O∣bedience. fulfill'd to a Tittle, all that the Law re∣quired. Christ was made under the Law, and became obedient to the Law of Cir∣cumcision, he came not to destroy, but to fulfil it. The Law required exact and perfect Obedience. It will not abate a Tittle, but curseth all the Transgressors
of it. Now Christ by his Perfect Obedi∣ence, performed whatever the Law requi∣red. No meer Man could ever keep the Covenant of Works; Christ alone who was God and Man, fulfilled the whole Law. Christ pleased the Father in everyMatt. 3. 17. thing. He is the Beloved Son in whom he is well-pleased. This the Apostle fully clears, Rom. 8. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh. And the Reason is added, v. 4. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. The meaning is not, that the Law was weak in it self, but through our default: The Law pointed at our disease, but could not heal it. But Christ took Flesh upon him, and he by Offer∣ing himself a Sacrifice expiated for Sin, and by his Death, was the Death of Sin: And thus the Law is fulfill'd, which re∣quires perfect Righteousness and perfect Obedience; And only they have interest in this great Priviledge, who are not Car∣nal but Spiritual, whose Walks are not af∣ter the Law of their own Lusts, but after the Law of the Spirit of Life. Here's a discriminating Note,—Who walk not af∣ter the Flesh but after the Spirit. A Learn∣ed
Jus justi∣tiae, Justi∣ficatio le∣gis, in eo consistit,  per omni∣modam cum lege conformi∣tatem ju∣sti at{que} in∣culpati ha∣beamur co∣ram Deo: Id obtineri non potuit, dum per le∣gem pecca∣tm vive∣ret ac reg∣naret, sed damnatoin carne Christi pec∣cato, atque ipsa lege damnatio∣nem hanc approbante per plena∣riam Chri∣sti capitis nostri cum lege confor∣mitatem, Justi atque inculpati in eodem capite fatente lege habemur: nec hoc tan∣tm, sed ut membra capiti sint conformia, uat ex eo in nos spiritus Regenerationis, qui in nobis quoque ipsis justificationem Legis perficiat. Is nos ita regenerat, ut mente nostrâ, Lege Dei delectemur; Qudque in carne reliquum est peccati, ita paulatim abolet, ut tandem sine maculâ ut labe ab ipsâ lege simus agnoscendi. L. de Dieu in Rom. 8. 4. Expositor writes appositely to this Sense, the Righteousness and Justification of the Law consists in this, that by a through Conformity with the Law, we may be accoun∣ted Righteous and Ʋnblameable before God. That cannot be obtained whilest Sin Liveth and Reigns: but Sin being Condemned in the Flesh of Christ, and the Law it self appro∣ving of this Condemnation, by the full Con∣formity of Christ our Head with the Law; we are accounted Righteous and Ʋnblameable in our Head, even by the Testimony of the Law; nor in this only, but that the Members may be conformable unto the Head, from him flows the Spirit of Regeneration, which in us perfects the justification of the Law. The same so regenerates us, that we take delight in the Law of God: And the Reliques of Sin in the Flesh, he doth by Degrees abolish, that so at length we may be acknowledged by the Law it self, without Blot or Spot. Thus far that Judicious Author: And thus it e∣vidently appears, that Christ hath made satisfaction to Divine Justice, by his Active Obedience in fulfilling the Covenant of
Works, and yielding perfect Obedience to the whole Law. 2. Let's consider Christs Passive Obe∣dience2. Christs Passive Obedi∣ence. in suffering the Wrath of God due to Man, upon the Cross. Many are the degrees of Christs Humiliation, as by ta∣king Flesh upon him, as it were Uniting a clod of Earth unto his Divine Nature, and by suffering Contempt, Ignominy, and Reproach in the World, by taking upon him Humane Infirmities, of Weariness, Thirst, Hunger, &c. But the highest degree of Christ's Humiliation, (where∣unto we purpose to speak) was the Death of the Cross, which was the Signal Obe∣dience of Christ, as the Apostle expresseth it, Phil. 2. 8. He humbled himself and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. There's a Gradation in the Words: Christ humbled himself, that was much, and became obedient unto Death, that was more, but to become obedient, even to the Death of the Cross, that was most of all, even beyond all degrees of Comparison: For Christ to yield up himself to Crucifixion, was a kind of Humiliation more than Su∣perlative. For a more full Discourse of the Passive Obedience of Christ, let us consider, 1. The Fore-runners of his Passion. 2. The Passion it self.
3. The Consequents thereof. From these Particulars the Prehemi∣nence and Exaltation of Christ, will most evidently be Demonstrated. SECT. III. Of the Fore-runners of Christs Passion. 1. FOr the Fore-runners of Christs1. The Fore-run∣ners of Christs Passion. 1. Christ was Be∣trayed. Passion. 1. Christ was Betrayed by Judas with an Hypocritical Kiss, Matt. 26. 49. Judas one of the Twelve Disciples, was one that did eat at Christ's Table, and saw his Mi∣racles, and was Commissionated by Christ to Preach the Gospel; even Judas a Dis∣ciple, Betrayed his Lord and Master. 2. Christ the Lord of Life was Arraign∣ed2. He was Arraign∣ed. before Pontius Pilate an Heathen Judge. 3. False Witnesses were Suborned to3. False Witnesses Deposed. Accuse him. Their Accusations are no less than Blasphemy and Treason; by the one to Condemn him in the Civil Court, by the other in the Ecclesiastical Court. The Blasphemy that they charge him with was, in that he said, that he was Christ the Son of the Blessed, Mark, 14. 61. Jo. 19. 7. The Treason they Accused him of,
was, that he made himself a King, Joh. 19. 12. 4. His Disciples Deserted him. Peter4. His Dis∣ciples de∣serted him. himself followed asar off, and as soon as he was Assaulted he was Conquered, by de∣nying his Lord and Master, and adding Perjury to his denial. 5. Consider his great Sorrow, and5. Consi∣der his Sorrow, earnest∣ness in Prayer, and Swea∣ting of Blood. earnestness in Prayer, and Sweating of Blood, Matt. 26. 38, 39. Then saith he unto them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, tarry ye here, and watch with me. And he went a little farther and fell on his Face, and prayed, saying, Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. Never∣theless not as I will, but as thou wilt; As if he should say, Father, thou couldst, (if it pleased thee) grant an absolute pardon, without any satisfaction, but this way of satisfaction will only please thee: Thou wilt have my Blood shed, and without shedding of Blood there is no Remission: I am here ready willingly to lay down my Life, I have took a body for that pur∣pose, that I may perform Obedience to thy Will. The Apostle Heb. 10. v. 5, 6, 7. quotes the 40th Psal. v. 6, 7, 8. When he co∣meth into the World he saith, Sacrifice and Offerings thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared me: In Burnt-Offerings, and Sacrifice for Sin thou hadst no pleasure, then
said I, Loe, I come (in the volume of thy Book, it is written of me) to do thy Will, O God. The rendring of these Words compar'd with the Psalmist, differ espe∣cially in one Expression, viz. Mine Ear hast thou opened, or digged. It's the Observa∣tion of a Learned Ains∣worth in Psal 40. 6. Est obser∣vandum, quod plu∣rali nume∣ro utens auresdicit, non aurem. Nam servo una tan∣tum auris perforatur subula, sibi dicit u∣tram{que} per∣forari, qui∣à intelligit se obstingi non tantùm ad externum obsequium, ut servi in hoc populo, sed ad interiorem cultum; et quidem praestare illi obsequia non possumus, nisi divinitus nobis aures perforentur. Mollerus in loc. Expositor, That mine Ears hast thou digged open or pierced (i. e.) Thou hast made me obedient to thy Voice, so the Chaldee explains it, thou hast digged open mine Ears to hearken unto thy Com∣mandments, or mine Ears hast thou bored as thy Servant for ever, according to the Law, Exod. 21. 6. The Greek Interpreters to make the Sence plainer, say, But a body hast thou fitted to me: Meaning that his body was or∣dained, and fitted to be a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, when the other Legal Sa∣crifice was refused, as unprofitable. His earnestness in Prayer is set down by the Evangelist, Luke 22. 44. And being in an Agony he Prayed more earnestly. . auges∣cente dolore intendebat vim preca∣tionis, ge∣stu quoque id ipsum exprimens, nam ante genu flexerat, nunc toto Corpore in terram procum∣bit. Grot. Instabat; incubuit; magno studio ursit. Hinc innuitur Com∣motio, Perseverantia, Velocitas, Studium, Diligentia. L. de Dieu. The Word in the Original is Emphati∣cal, Christ was in an Agony, which was
the difficultest of all Combats; Martyrs strove with the Terrors of Death, but Christ strove with the Wrath of God, be∣cause he bare the Burthen of our Sins. O! How strong must that Back be, that must bear the Burthen of all his Peoples Sins! Even all those whom he Justified by his Blood, and Sanctifyed by his Spirit. Next followeth his Bloody Sweat, Luk. 22. 44. His , Magnus angor, Guttae. Jansen. Non dicit sempliciter guttas san∣guinis su∣sse, sed quasi gru∣mos con∣creti terro∣re sangui∣nis, & proptered addidit particulam  ad leniendum id quod dixerat. Steph. Thes. Sweat was as it were great drops of Blood, falling down to the ground. Consider the Season of the Year, they who were within doors were glad to keep close to the Fire, and they that were without Doors made hast to get within. To see one in an extream cold day, sweat, was much, but to see one sweat Blood, not little drops, but clodded, congealed Blood, which brake through his Garments, and trickled down to the very ground: This is matter of Wonder and Astonish∣ment. 6. Consider the Releasing of Barabbas,6. Consi∣der the re∣leasing of Barabbas. a Notorious Thief and Murtherer, and Condemning of Jesus, an Innocent Per∣son, to gratifie the People in Releasing a Prisoner, (according to Custome, whom they desired) Pilate acquitted a most infamous Person, and delivered Christ the
most Just and Holy one to their Will, to be Scourged and Crucified. I have heard (and since read it Prin∣ted) a Passion Sermon Mr. Wil∣liam Carth∣wright Student of Christ-Church Oxon. p. 10, 11. of an Eloquent Orator, thus expressing himself.—What Barabbas? One that Cured your Blind, or Healed your Halt and Lame? No, one whose Violence maimed them, and by the Fre∣quency of his Injuries, occasionally increased the Number, perhaps of those Miracles, which Jesus wrought. Did Barabbas purge the Temple of Thieves? Or make it their Den? Did he cast out Devils? Or do Acts by the Instigation of the Prince of them, &c. Before Christ's greatest Passion on the Cross, he was in Scorn, hurried from place to place, from Person to Person, from An∣nas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, and thence reman∣ded with Contempt and Ignominy. To make use of the Rhetorick of the fore-cited Learned Id. p. 26. Author. Cruelty walking the Circle, and Impiety (if ever) now treading the Ring: His Apprehending joyn'd to his A∣gony, and his Accusation to his Apprehen'd∣ing, and his Condemnation to that: Then his Condemnation received by Irrision, Irrision by Stripes, Stripes by Crowning with Thorns. So far he: Add hereunto, Scourging, putting on a Purple Robe, and Reed in his
hand, an Emblem (as they supposed) of his Brittle and Feeble Government. All the Men and Devils combin'd to put forth their Malice and Mischief to the height. They prepared Spittle for his Face: Blind solding for his Eyes: Nails for his Hands and Feet, a Whip for his Back: Thorns for his Head, and a Cross for his Shoul∣ders. They laid an Heavy Cross upon him to crush the Thorns into his Harrow∣ed Head, and crush out the bruised blood into his Furrowed Back. So that Pro∣phecy, which His ver∣bis ad vi∣vum ex∣primit dorso Eccle∣se semper infixam fuisse Cru∣cem, quià longè & latè ipsam proscinderet Calv. Terra nisi aretur & subigatur, nihil profert nisi sentes & spinas. Sic cor humanum extra Crucem, est securum & indulget vitiis. Mollerus. Calvin applyeth to the Church, may be applyed to Christ, which the Psalmist mentions, Psal. 129. 3. The Plowers Plowed upon my Back: They made long their Furrows. But alas! What with Scourging, Buffe∣ting, and Crowning with Thorns crusht into his Head, (O dreadful exquisite Pain!) and what with Watching and Fasting, Christ was not able to carry his Cross. Though he bare it a while, yet afterwards they compelled Simon a Man of Cyrene a Stranger, to bear his Cross. The Jews out of a Superstitious Devotion, durst neither touch the Cross, nor adventure to come into the Judgment Hall, no nor af∣terwards
to put Judas his 30 pieces which he restored back, into the Treasury: Be∣cause they would not defile themselves, therefore they would not go into the Judgment-Hall; and because they would not keep in their Treasury the price of Blood, they converted it to another use: viz. To buy a Field to bury Strangers in: Which was call'd Aceldama. How desperate was their Qualis haec inno∣centiae Si∣mulatio, pecuniam sanguinis non mittere in Arcam, & ipsum sanguinem mittere in Conscientiam? Aug. Hypocrisy, considering they made not the least Scru∣ple at all, to embrue their hands in the In∣nocent Blood of Christ? SECT. IV. Of Christs Passion. NOw in the second place we come to the Passion it self, and this was the Death of the Cross, a Punishment never used among the Jews. For we read only of four kinds of Death, which were in use amongst them, viz. Strangling, Stoning, Fire and Sword. None of these the Jews thought bad enough to inflict on Christ: Therefore they have recourse unto the
Gentiles their Enemies, to whom they were now under vassallage, and they bor∣row from them, that horrid cruel Death of Crucifixion. Pilate bad them judge him according to their Law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawfulJoh. 18. 31, 32. for us, to put any Man to Death, That the Saying of Jesus, might be fulfilled, which he spake signifying what Death he should die. This Death was accounted afterwards so ignominious and cruel, that Christian Em∣perours caused it altogether to be laid a∣side. Facinus est vincire civem Ro∣manum, Scelus ver∣berare, propè Parricidium necare: Quid dicam? In Crucem tollere? Cice. And Heathens likewise did utterly abhor the greatness of the Cruelty as be∣yond Expression and Apprehension. To aggravate the height of the Jews Malice, and the greatness of their Cruel∣ty, We are to consider in this Death of Crucifixion, three things, viz. Shame, Pain, and a Curse. 1. For Shame: If one Death was more1. The Shame of the Cross. shameful than another, that was devised for Christ to suffer: He was Crucified Na¦ked: Even as Naked as he came into the World. I heard above 25 Years since a most Reverend and most Learned Dr. Usher A. B. of Armagh. Prelate thus express himself: Christ (saith he) was Crucified Naked: Believe not your Painters,
they teach nothing that is good. Thus was Christ exposed to the publick view of all Beholders. And what shame he endured was long before Prophesyed of, Isai. 50. 6. I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them that pluckt off my Hair. I hid not my Face from Shame and Spitting. They would not let Christ Suffer within theirHeb. 13. 12. Walls, but he Suffered without the Gate. But notwithstanding Contradictions, Mockings, Revilings and a Shameful Death, Yet he despised the Shame, and isHeb. 12. 2. set down at the Right Hand of God. 2. Consider the Pain of Crucifixion.2. The Pain of the Cross. Such as have seen any stretcht out upon a Rack, may in some Measure, (though not sufficiently) conceive the great exqui∣site Pain of Extension to the utmost on a Cross Beam. The 27th of Matthew, is a Commentary upon Psal. 22. Wherein read v. 14, 15, 16, 17. I am poured out like Water, and all my Bones are out of joynt. My Heart is like Wax, it is melted in the midst of my Bowels. My Strength is dryed up like a Pot∣sheard, and my Tongue cleaves to my Jaws, and thou hast brought me into the Dust of Death. For Dogs have compassed me, the As∣sembly of the Wicked have enclosed me, they pierced my Hands and my Feet, I may tell all my Bones, they look and stare upon me; The 70 read (pierced)  they have
digged. The Hands and Feet were fast∣ned and nailed to the Wood. The nails (which were great Spikes) were driven into the Palms of the hand, and both his feet, where the Pain was sharpest and the Sense acutest. Thus our Saviour hung by his bare Bo∣dyMatth. 27. 46. Mark 15. 25. upon the Cross, as upon a Rack, six Hours by the Clock, all the while in ex∣tremity of Torment. It was not with Christ as with others, whose Sense the greatness of the Torment blunteth, ac∣cording to that usual Maxim, Excellens sensibile corrumpit Sensum: But from the first to the last, Christ was in perfect Sense: Notwithstanding the height of Rage and Fury, which the Jews put forth to the utmost, no Man could take away his Life till he voluntarily Resigned it. And therefore Joh. 19. 30. Christ said , It is finished, And he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost. And Matth. 27. 50. Je∣sus when he had cryed again Hoc ip∣sum mi∣rum, pa∣rum{que} ex communi hominum more, statim à magno Clamore emori. Erasm. Palam ostendit, se mori non violentèr, quasi nequiret se ipse diutiùs in vitâ servare, sed propriâ voluntate. Nam qui moribundus valuit Cla∣morem edere ingentem, valuit & à morte se servare. Impossibils est enim à Clamore valido statim quis moriatur, si quidem morte lentâ interfici∣tur; Nam qui subito conficiatur gladio, nihil mirum clamare simul & mori. Lucas Brsiugen. with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. This is called Strong crying, Heb. 5. 7. Others that were
Crucified, could not utter a Word, or scarce express a groan, being so grievous∣ly tormented: But Christ was as strong at last, as at first, and never cryed he stron∣ger and louder, than when he gave up the Ghost. Add hereunto the Suffering of Christ in every Sense. His Eyes which before were Blind-folded, are now Opened, to see their insolent scornful Gestures of wag∣ging their Heads, and deriding of him. His Ears heard their Blasphemies, Insul∣tations, Revilings and Contumelious Speeches. His Tast was afflicted with Gall and Vinegar. His Smelling was afflicted from the place Golgotha, a noisome loath∣some nasty Dung-hill. His Feeling grie∣vously suffers, by the Nails extension, and the acuteness and Sharpness of the Sense.—These are sad Stories, but for our sin∣gular Consolation. Christ Suffered, and we reap the benefit of his Sufferings. By Christ's Stripes, Wounds, and Sufferings we are Healed: By his Cross we are Re∣conciled to the Father. In his Sorrows are our Comforts: In his Sufferings con∣sists our Salvation, and in his Cross our Triumph. 3. Consider the Curse denounced against3. The Curse of the Cross. this kind of Death. Of all others, and a∣bove all other kinds of Death, a Legal
Curse was put upon this, as may appear by comparing Deut. 21. 23. with Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us; for it is Written, Cursed is every one that hangeth upon a Tree. So that Envy and Malice rai∣sed to the height, set the Jews a-work to cry Crucify him, Crucify him. O Cursed Death! but the Curse they intended, pro∣duced the greatest Blessing that ever was, (I mean the vertue of Christ's Cross) to all true Believers; for hereby a perfectCol. 1. 20. Reconciliation was wrought. Eph. 2. 15. Having abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one new Man, so making peace, and that he might Reconcile both unto God in one Body by the Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby. By the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, are Ceremonial Institutions to be understood under the Levitical Paedagogy. Christ being made a Sacrifice, abolished all those Sacrifices of Beasts: And this Christ accomplished on the Cross, working a perfect Reconciliati∣on between God and Man. And though the Execution of the great work was per∣formed on the Cross, yet about this Re∣conciliation, there were Transactions be∣tween God the Father, and God the Son
from all Eternity (as the Apostle declares) 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. And hath given unto us, the Ministry of Reconciliation, (i. e.) the Gos∣pel. And what is the Substance of this Evangelical Ministry? It is set down, v. 19. to wit, That God was in Christ, recon∣ciling the World unto himself. This is that which administers cause of Glory and rejoycing to the Apostle, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid, that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. SECT. V. Of the Consequents of Christs Passion. HAving treated of the Passion it self; let's consider some Remarkable Par∣ticulars concerning the Consequents of his Passion: And these evidently declare the dignity and honour of Christ. This shall be represented in these ensuing Particulars. 1. There was darkness over the whole1. There was an U∣niversal Darkness over the whole Earth. Face of the Earth, Matth. 27. 45. Partial E∣clipses are frequent, but such an Universal Eclipse (as that was) was never known be∣fore nor since Christs Passion. The Sun to shew a dislike of such an horrid Act, with∣drew its light. A natural Eclipse it could not
be, Annotat. of English Divines, on Matth. 27. 45. some think, it being so Total, so gene∣ral, and the Moon being now in the full, and so of necessity the Body of the Moon, (which useth to Eclipse the Sun, by its interposition and being between us and the Sun) must be opposite unto, and distant from the Sun, the Diametrical breadth of the Hemisphere, the full Moon rising at the Sun-setting. Many were astonished at this Universal Eclipse. Allophanes is reported to have been at this time in Heliopolis, who when he saw. this Eclipse, said, They were changes of the Divine Works. Dionysius the Areopagite, is reported to say, Either the Deity suffereth or hath Sympathy with that which suffe∣reth. 2. The Veil of the Temple was rent,2. The Veil of the Tem∣ple was rent. Matth. 27. 51. and this was to shew, 1. That Christ opened the way to the Holiest, Heb. 10. 20. 2. To shew that the Ceremonial Law was abolished by the Death of Christ. Heb. 9. 8, 9. 3. To shew that the Partition Wall was broken down, and Gentiles were Parta∣kers of the benefit of Christs Blood, Eph. 2. 14. 4. To shew that the Veil of our Sins was Cancelled, Col. 2. 13, 14. 5. To shew that the Veil of Ignorance was taken away in the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 13.
A third Consequent of Christs Passion3. An Earth∣quake. was an Earthquake. It was an Universal Earthquake. We read of the trembling of the Earth. Psal. 114. 7. It's a Sign of Gods Wrath for Sin, Psal. 18. 7. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the Foundation also of the Hills moved, and were shaken, because he was wroth. The Earth shaked and trembled to bear such Vile Wretches, who embrued their hands in the Blood of Jesus Christ. The Earthquake signified Gods incensedVerissimu est apud Prophet as, terrae-mo∣tus alibi rerum Mu∣tationem, alibi De Majesta∣tem signi∣ficare, sed bic pertior est ea significatio, quae pariter à Judaeis, & Gentibus als  intelligi, irae scilicet Divinae ob hominum scelera. Grot. in Matth. 27. 51. anger and great wrath against the Jews, and the displeasure of the Divine Majesty of Christ, for an Earthquake sets forth the great Power of God, Psal. 114. 7. Trem∣ble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. 4. The Rocks rent: though the Hearts4. The Rocks rent. of the Jews were not rent, yet the Rocks did rend, and in such a manner, as Histori∣ans have reported, as never was the like seen: Such a way were the Rocks rent, as no Wit of Man could invent the like way of rending them. 5. The Graves were opened, and many5. The Graves were ope∣ned. Bodies of Saints, which slept, arose, Matth.
27. 53. But though here's mention madeQui è Se∣pulchris furgebant, resurge∣bant mori∣ente Domi∣no, ac mor∣tis ejus vi. Heinfius. of the Saints Resurrection before Christs Resurrection, yet it's evident, that Christ rose before them. v. 53. it's said, They came out of their Graves, after Christs Re∣surrection. For by Christs Resurrection they were raised. Christ (as the Apostle saith) is risen from the Dead, and become the first-fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20. He is the beginning of the first-born from the dead, Col. 1. 19. 6. The Centurion having observed6. The Centuri∣on gives a Testimo∣ny of Christ. 7. Christ raised himself by his own Power. what was done, gives this Testimony, Truely this was the Son of God. Such Mi∣racles none but a God could do. 7. Christ raised himself by his own Power. Notwithstanding the strictness of the Watch, and Sealing of the Stone of the Sepulchre, Christ the Lord of Life would not be above three days in the Grave, but caused the Grave to open to the Terror and Amazement of the Keep∣ers. A notorious Lie (as full of Contradi∣ctions as Malice could invent) was inven∣ted after Christ was risen, Mat. 28. 13. Say ye, his Disciples came and stole him away by Night, while we slept.—How couldQuomodo constare po∣terat fides de co, quod se dormien∣ bus dic—rent, eve∣nisse? De∣inde quâ fiduciâ au∣si hoc fuis∣sent homi∣nes & in∣ermes, & Piscatores? Si Imposto∣rem Chri∣stum ipsi jam intra mentem a∣nimis sen∣tiebant, si∣ve pro ipso subirent periculum? Si à Deo missumcr∣deret,  religio illos impellebat ad furtum & mndcium? Grot. . i. e. Partûs dolorem, cum mors nihil aliud videretur quàm ipsorum Cruciatuum ac dolorum quasi victoria, ac plenum imperium. Christus merito dicitur, tum demum dolores istos lethales ac mortiferos superasse, cum mortuus moriem vicit, ut in aeternum cum suis Deo vivat. Beza. they tell, if they were asleep, that Christ was took away? What ridiculous, absurd Evasions doth a Malicious Heart invent!
But maugre all the Watch and Ward of Souldiers, Christ Triumpht over the Grave, as a Glorious Conquerour. The Apostle fully expresseth the Power of Christs Resurrection, Acts 2. 24. Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pain of Death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. Some understand these words as a Metaphor drawn from Child-bearing. Notwithstanding Pains and Sorrows there's a bringing forth: And though Christ suffered himself for a time to be under the Power of the Grave, yet he being the Lord of Life, over came Death and the Grave. And 8thly and lastly, after this Glori∣ous!8. Christ Ascended into Hea∣ven. Resurrection followeth a Glorious As∣cension. He that was Crucified rose again, and Ascended into Heaven, and there ac∣companied him the Saints that rose with him, (as it is most probable) we never read of their returning into their Graves again. Now after Christs Ascension the Holy-Ghost was sent: Gifts were given in a plentiful Measure, Eph. 4. 8. Wherefore he
saith, when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity, Captive: And gave gifts unto Men. Both Church Officers and suitable Qualifications for their Offices are the Fruit and Benefits of Christs Ascension, Eph. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Put all these Consequents and Wonder∣ful Eects of Christs Passion, viz. Uni∣versal Darkness, the Renting of the Veil of the Temple, a General Earthquake, the Renting of Rocks, the Rising of Saints out of their Graves, the Cen∣turions Confession, and acknowledg∣ment, that Christ was the Son of God, and Christs Resurrection and Ascen∣sion, all these particularly and eminently declare the infinite Dignity and Prehemi∣nence of Jesus Christ. And thus having proved the first part of Christs Priestly Office, by making sa∣tisfaction to the Father, I come now to the second part of his Priestly Office, by2. Christ's Interces∣sion. making Intercession. Though the Pains he indured were only for a little time, yet the vertue of his Pains abides unto Eter∣nity. His Sufferings are of infinite Effica∣cy, Dignity and Value: Christ on Earth in the days of his Humiliation, was full of Bowels of Compassion: He fed a fainting Multitude, healed the Diseased, wept a a Funeral, wept over Jerusalem, and on
Earth he pleaded for his People, and in∣terceded to his Father for his own which were given him out of the World. And now Christ is in Heaven, he is full of Bow∣els, Heb. 4. 15. For we have not an High-Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities: But was in all points, tempted like as we are; yet without Sin. But when we speak of Infirmities incident to Christ, we must understand such infirmities, as appertain to Mankind in general, as Thirst, Hunger, Weariness, and such like, and not such as are incident unto some Individual as Lameness, Blind∣ness, Deafness, (as intimated before, and shall now be more briefly) much less may we understand any Infirmity, that hath the least tincture of Sin and Polluti∣on. And to declare the Bowels of Christ opened. He executes his Mediators Of∣fice now in Heaven, by making Inter∣cession for his Children. And this is an evident Demonstration, that Christ is an absolute and perfect Saviour, because he intercedes for all his Children unto Eter∣nity. As the Apostle fully declares, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the utmost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make Inter∣cession for them. To save to the utmost, is (i. e.) absolutissi-mè, it a ut nihil ad e∣am salutem possit am∣plius des∣derari. Beza. , non dicit ut offerat; nam hoc semel fecit: sed super∣est altera sacerdotii pars, nempe interpella∣tio, qua partim p∣renni Sa∣crificii sui vigore nobis pacem obtinet, partim nos non nisi in uno-ipso  mus, & exaudimur à Patre, tantisper dum Deus sit omnia in omnibus. Beza. every way a perfect Salvation. Nothing
can be added thereunto. And this is evi∣denced by Christs Intercession. And this is an Eternal Intercession, as long as Christ liveth, and that is for ever. It's a memo∣rable Observation of Beza.—He doth not say that he may offer, for this he did once; but there remains the other part of Christs Priesthood, viz. His Intercession, whereby partly by the Eternal vertue of his Sacrifice, he obtains peace for us; partly we in him please the Father, and are heard of him, so long as God is all in all. Our work is to make inquiry, what this Intercession is, and what benefit we receive thereby. 1. Let's consider what this Intercession is, and that will fall under the Answer to a double Question. viz. Quid Nominis and Quid Rei. 1. Quid Nominis. The Name is 1. The Name . and signifies properly to meet one and in∣tercede in a way of Supplication. 2. For the thing or nature of Interces∣sion,2. The Na∣ture of In∣tercession. it is by Christs applying his Merits, and presenting the Service of his Children to his Father, as an Advocate and Media∣tour interposing for them, and pleading their Cause. This is an , Con∣decending to our Capacities, and not to
be Non co∣gitandum est supplex flexis genibus, manibus expansis, Patrem deprecari. Sed quia apparet ip∣se assidue cum morete & Resur∣rectione suâ, quae vice sunt aeternae in∣tercessionis & vivae orationis efficaciam habent, ut Patrem nobis conc∣lient at{que} exorabilem reddant, merito di∣citred in∣tercere. Calv. in Loc. understood Litterally, as if Christ on bended Knees and with stretched out Hands did intercede, but on∣ly he presented his Prayers, Death and Resurrection, as effectual means to ob∣tain Reconciliation with the Father. And in this great work of Intercession, Christ continually imploys himself in Heaven, in the most prevailing Rheto∣rick; pleading the Cause of all True Be∣lievers. Therefore saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justi∣fieth. The , Propriê significat in jus vocare, sed sitatè capitur, pro minari, per Metonymiam effecti destinati. Piscat. Metaphor is borrowed from usual forms of Indictments in Courts, where according to Law a Charge is drawn against the accused party, but now who shall bring any of Christs Members into Question? Let Satan and his Instru∣ments do their worst, and lay their Accu∣sations as high as Malice can possibly In∣vent, yet here's Christ justifying who makes void all Accusations whatsoe∣ver.
For a farther Inquiry Primo e∣rat Chri∣stus oratio∣ne inter∣pretativâ sc. exhibendo se & cicatrices suas quas in passione acceptas adhuc servat, & patri ostentat, ac consequenter orat sua merita, suos labores, suas passi∣nes allegando divino conspectui. Secundo propriè Christus quà homo in cael orat pro nobis, proinde ac in terris oravit. Est enim aequè ut hic Advocatus, Mediator, & Pontifex noster, cujus proprium est orare pro populo. Corn. à Lap. wherein this1. Where∣in this In∣tercession consisteth. Intercession consists, we are to know, 1. This Intercession is made unto your Father. Christ presenting his merits, doth as it were shew his Wounds, the Print of the Nails in his Side, Hands, and Feet. 2. In putting up Prayers in his own Name, and making continual Supplicati∣on unto the Father, as a Mediator, and as an Advocate, as an High-Priest inter∣ceeding for us at the Throne of Grace. Christ is the great Master of Requests, who prefers the Petitions of his People un∣to his Father. The High-Priest when he was to make an attonement for the Peo∣ple, entred into the Holy of Holies, with Blood and Incense: So Christ our High-Priest in Heaven, present his Blood and the sweet Incense of his Prayers, Rev. 8. 2. And I saw the seven Angels which stood be∣fore God, and to them were given seven Trum∣pets. And another came and stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censer, and much Incense was given to him, that he should offer, &c. Heb. 9. 12, 23, 24. Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he
entred in once into the Holy place, having ob∣tained Eternal Redemption for us. v. 23, 24. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the Heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifice than these. For Christ is not entred into the Holy places made with Hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Q Let us inquire into the fruit and be∣nefit2. Benefits of this. In∣tercession. 1. We are acquitted from all our Ad∣versaries. of this Intercession. 1. We are acquitted from all Adversa∣ries, even from Sin, Satan, and the Law; having interest in the Intercession of Christ, we are freed from all Accusations and Condemnations of the greatest Ad∣versaries, Qualis est ista in∣cercessio, non oral sed real, ex merâ suipsius in cruce ob∣lati reprae∣sentatione. Hinc est quod dici∣tur compa∣rere cor Deo pro no∣bis. D. Tuis. Vindic. l. 1. part 2. Sect. 23. Rom. 8. 34. Who is he that Con∣demneth, it is Christ that died, yea ra∣ther that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh In∣tercession for us. Here are four things to ac∣quit all Believers from Condemnation, viz. Christs Death, Resurrection, Ascen∣sion and Intercession. Christ died to give Life unto his People: He rose again and became the first Fruit of them that slept: Christ Ascended on high, and gave gifts to Men, and he interceeds at the Throne of Grace, presenting his Bloody Sufferings and the vertue of them unto the Father
for a full and compleat satisfaction. 2. Christ by his Intercession teacheth2. Christ by his Intercessi∣on teach∣eth us to Pray. us to pray, and to make our Intercessions and Supplications unto the Throne of Grace. We of our selves cannot put up one Meritorious Petition, though we might gain the whole World for so doing. For we pray coldly, rawly and indigested∣ly, with much deadness, disorder, and distraction of Spirit; but these Prayers come not so to God the Father as they are presented by us, for Christ mends them in the carriage, and presents them in his own Name unto the Father, and for hisRom. 8. 26. Quasi dicat, cum mole tenta∣tionis op∣pressi nesci∣mus orare: ipse spir∣tus qui in nobis habi∣tat exerit se & orati∣onem in a∣nimo ex∣citat. Bu∣cer in Loc. 3. Through Christs Intercessi∣on our duties and works ob∣tain ac∣ceptance. sake alone we obtain acceptance with the Father: Christ interceeds to the Father for us, and his Spirit helpeth our Infirmities, and maketh intercession for us with Groanings which cannot be ut∣tered. The Spirit of Christ doth two great works: One is to make intercession for us, and the other is to help us to make in∣tercession for our selves. By the assistance of the Spirit, we can Pray and Sigh and Groan in such prevailing Rhetorick as will obtain acceptance, but without the assistance of the Spirit, we cannot Pray nor express our selves in any acceptable manner. 3. Through Christs intercession our Duties and works obtain acceptance. As
for our selves and our own righteousness we have great cause to confess with the Church, Isaiah 64. 6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: But through Christs Re∣conciliation and acceptance, our works obtain acceptance. Though there be no worth in the work nor in the workers, yet there is through Christ acceptation and imputation, a worthiness accompted of in the sight of God; as Joshua was to have his filthy Garments took from him, Semper in ani∣mum sibi revocent verbi di∣vini pre∣cones, im∣positum sibi esse cidarim mundam cui inscrip∣tum sancti∣tas Jeho∣vae: & pro∣inde ei stu∣deant ipsi, ut & ali idem faci∣aut horten∣tur sedulo ut sint typi fidelium. Tarnovius  habet, quo significat spiritum singulari contentione & studio intercedere pro sanctis. Buceru. in Loc. Unà sub∣levat infirmitates nostras, quasi dicatur ipse vicissim onus attollere, ex altera parte, ne sub eo fatiscamus. Ut sensus sit, sicut spiritus S. un cum Patre & filio, testatur spiritui nostro nos esse filios Dei, similiter i∣dem spiritus cum sdem opitulatur infirmitatibus nostris. L. de Dieu. Zech. 3. 4. So in the best of our duties, there is filthiness, and we stand in continual need of the inestimable benefit of our Interces∣sour, who takes away our Pollutions, and not only acquits us from the Guilt of Sin, but cleanseth us from the filth of Sin: He doth purge us as well as pardon us, and sanctifie us by his Spirit, as well as justi∣fie us by his Righteousness: Hence it comes to pass that the services of all such s have interest in Christ are accepted at the Throne of Grace; and though in us there are many weaknesses and Imperfections, yet Sincerity is accepted. And though there are manifold failings in our Duties, yet all are made perfect through the perfect satisfaction of Christ; for he as a surety hath paid our Debt and fully satisfied the Father by doing and suf∣fering
all that the Law required. Christ is the Beloved Son in whom the Father is well pleased, Mat. 3. ult. CHAP. V. Concerning Christs Prophetical Office. SECT. I. Why Christ must be a Prophet. HAving insisted largly on Christs Sa∣cerdotal Office, I come now to his Prophetical and Regal Office, and I shall be more brief in the handling of these, not in∣tending a just volume of this Argument: only so far I may inlarge as may afford good Measure full prest and running over for the further Demonstration of the Do∣ctrine that I insist upon, viz. The inestima∣ble Dignity of Christ.
In the 2d. place it follows that I should2▪ Of Christs Propheti∣cal Of∣fice. treat of Christs Prophetical Office, Christ is called Deut. 18. 5. Christus dicitur Na∣bi Prophe∣ta: est au∣tem Nabi usu scrip∣turae is qui profun∣diora de Deo, de∣que rebus divinus dis∣serit, qui mentem divinam hominibus aperit: sae∣pius etiam de iis u∣surpatur, qui futura praedicunt. Sol. Glass. onomat. the Prophet, he was the Doctor of all Doctors, a Doctor that nonplust the greatest Doctors. Christ is the Law∣giver, Jam. 4. 12. The Counseller, Isa. 9. 6. The Master or Rabbi, Matt. 23. 10. He taught with Authority, and by vertue of his Prophetical Office he teacheth the Church all things appertaining to their Salvation. Christ reveals the Will of his Father, concerning all the ways and means of Salvation. Christ was the prin∣cipal Author of Prophecy; He had the Gift of Prophecy immediately, he ex∣actly knew his Fathers will, but all other Prophets had the Gift, mediately. They had their Revelations from the Power of the Spirit of Christ, their gift was tran∣sient, and by Intervals, and there were Intermissions amongst them: But Christ had a permanent gift of Prophecy abiding in him, without measure and limitation. For a farther inlargement of these Par∣ticulars, I shall indeavour to resolve three Inquiries. 1. Why Christ must be a Prophet. 2. How he differs from all other Pro∣phets. 3. What fruits and benefits accrue un∣to us by Christs Prophetical Office.
1. Why Christ must be a Prophet.1. Why Christ must be 2 Prophet. 1. Christ was a Pro∣phet to re∣veal the Will of God to his Church. This I shall Answer in a few Reasons. 1. Christ was a Prophet to reveal the Will of God to his Church, and instruct them by his Word. Christ received his Message not only from the Mouth of God▪ Joh. 8. 26. but also from the In sinu esse est proximum, & infi∣mum esse dicitur de conjugibus inter se. Grot. 2. Christ was a Pro∣phet to place Mi∣nisters in his Church. Bosom of God, Joh. 1. 18. Christ was a great Pro∣phet, Luk. 7. 16. He was the most eminent of all Prophets, a Prophet to direct all other Prophets, and he was the substance and main end of all their Prophecies. 2. Christ was a Prophet to place Mini∣sters in his Church to teach his People▪ Ministers are of Christs institution, Offi∣cers Commissionated by Jesus Christ: They are not a Calling nor an Order of Men of their own appointment running upon their own Heads, and Fancies, (as Novatus made himself a Bishop) neither are they of any humane appointment for politick ends and interests. It is true, that by Humane Authority Ministers are per∣mitted pro hic & nunc to exercise their Mi∣nisterial function in the places where they live, yet their calling is from Christs In∣stitution. And Gifts and Qualifications wherewith they are endowed, are the fruits of Christs Ascension. The Apostle is clear, Eph. 4. 11. And he gave some Apo∣stles, and some Prophets, and some Evan∣gelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ. In this Text we observe two sorts of Church-Officers, viz. Extra∣ordinary as Apostles, Prophets, Evange∣lists,Doctoris munus fu∣it verbum Domini fi∣deliter ex∣plicare, & veluti Scholam Eccles∣asticam re∣gere, ut sin∣cera doctri∣na dogma∣tum et ve∣rae inter∣pretationes in Ecclesia retineren∣tur: At pastorum (qui & E∣piscopi di∣cebantur 1 Pet. 2. 25.) munus longe latius patebat, nimirum ut verb & orationi vacarent, et ecclesiam sibi commis∣sam modis omnibus tuerentur; ex quibus etiam satis perspicitur haec do munera perpetua esse portere in Ecclesia Dei. Beza. which were changeable, and for a time only, and afterward ceased; and or∣dinary, as Pastors and Teachers, which are standing Officers, and abide to the end of the World: So that maugre all the mali∣tious Oppositions of Men and Devils a∣gainst the Gospel Ministry, it shall conti∣nue: Though it may be laid low, yet it shall never be overthrown, neither shall Christs Ministers be ever laid aside, for Christ hath promised them his presence▪ And that promise, Matth. 28. 20.—Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the World, makes more for the Ministery of the Gospel, than all the malice and fury of inveterate implacable Adversaries can make against them. 3. Christ was a Prophet to teach his3. Christ teacheth inwardly. Church by the inward effectual Teachings and Inspirations of his Spirit. This grand Prophetical work Christ undertook from the beginning of the World, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
Christ by his Spirit went and preached unto the Spirits in Prison. This is to be un∣derstood of the old World, who though they were then in Prison, (i. e.) Hell, when the Apostle wrote this Epistle; yet in the days of Noah they were alive, and Christ by the Ministery of Noah and o∣thers; Preacht unto them, whilst they were in the Land of the Living. Those abominable Sinners had means of Grace offered unto them: They had the Mini∣stery of Noah, Enoch, Methuselah, and o∣ther Patriarchs who warned them of a Deluge coming. And Christ by his Spi∣rit Preacht unto them. An antient Fa∣ther and a modern Divine, both eminent in their times, fully (as I apprehend) ex∣pound this Scripture.—One saith—Per Spiri∣tus in Car∣cere intel∣ligit ani∣mas im∣piorum vi∣ventium tempore Noah cor∣poribus in∣clusas quasi carcere quodam, & his praedicasse Christum dicit, secundum divinitatem, vel per interna inspirationem, vel per linguam Noae. Aug. Epist. 99. ad Evodium. Non potest dubitari quin hoc referatur ad ea quae sequuntur, i. e. ad illud tempus quo Spiritus per os Noae arcam constituendi iram Dei imminent praedicabat. Nam cui fuerunt immorigeri? Cert illi qui praedicabat. Non potest ergo prdicatio ista ad posterius aliquod tempus referri. Beza. By Spirits in Prison, he understands the Souls of wicked Men living in the time of Noah, shut up in their Bodies, as in a cer∣tain Prison, and he saith that Christ Preach∣ed unto them according to his Divinity, or by inward inspirations, or by the Tongue of Noah.—So far that Learned Father. The other saith, that it cannot be doubted, why
his may not refer to those things which follow (i. e.) unto that time wherein the Spirit by the Mouth of Noah that made the Ark, Preached the wrath of God hung over their heads. For to whom were they disobedient? Truely to him that Preached; therefore that Preaching cannot be referred to any after time.—There was no Preaching to them after they were in Hell. All Reproofs and Exhortations then are out of date, for time is past, and the door of hope shut. But now whilst we are on this side the Grave, the Spirit of Christ moves, wooes and en∣treats us to make our peace with God. Christ sends his Ambassadors to beseech us to be reconciled unto God. Now we are cal∣led2 Cor. 5. 20. Is. 55. 6. to seek the Lord whilst he may be found, now to call upon him while he is near. And thus you have the Reasons why Christ must be a Prophet. SECT. II. How Christ differs from other Prophets. A Second Inquiry is, how Christ dif∣fers2 How Christ differs from other Prophets. from all other Prophets? A. We read of many Holy Prophets,
high in the Favour of God, and Honou∣rable Persons; yet in Christ there are these three Singularities above all other Pro∣phets whatsoever, viz. Holiness, Gifts, and Authority. Although other Prophets were Holy, and had Gifts and were of Authority, yet the Holiness, Gifts and Authority of Christ infinitely exceeded them all. 1. There's in Christ an absolute perfect1. Christ's Holiness is absolute and per∣fect. Holiness without mixture of the least im∣perfection. Christs Holiness is in himself and from himself, but the Holiness of the Prophets was derivative, they had it infu∣sed into them by the Spirit of Christ: And although they were Holy Persons and Honourable Men of God, Anointed and Sanctified for the Discharge of their grand and weighty Office, yet they were not without their sinful Infirmities. We read that Jeremy in a great Passion cursed the day of his Birth. Abraham a Prophet, through Infirmity, denied his Wife. And David a great and eminent Prophet com∣mitted those scandalous Sins in the matter of Ʋriah, and Jonah a Prophet Fretted and Quarrelled with God himself, and Moses a Holy Prophet, whom God highly loved, spake unadvisedly with his Lips at the Waters of Meribah, and other Prophets had their failings. But Christ is a Pro∣phet,
who never committed any thingLuk. 23. 41. . Doctissimus Hesychius  interpreta∣tur. Wal∣leus,  videntur proiisdem. Hic prro videtur  dici quic∣ praeter officium sit, quod non male videtur indecentis nomine exprimi. za. amiss. The Penitent Thief gives a true Testimony of Christ—That he had done nothing amiss (i. e.) nothing out of place or order. No guile, no deceit was ever found in Christs Mouth. He challengeth the worst of his Adversaries, John 8. 46. Which of you convinceth me of Sin? Ma∣licous and implacable Enemies are very Eagle-Ey'd, to espy Faults, yet none of them could lay any Sin to the charge of Christ. 2. Christs Gifts are transcendent above2. Christs Gifts are transcen∣dent. all other Prophets: The Gifts in them were like a Drop, in Christ, as the Ocean; in their Gifts was only a measure, in Christ a fulness. The Prophets were a∣ointed and qualified with great Gifts for he discharge of their imployment: But Christ was anointed with the Oyl of glad∣ss above his fellows, Heb. 1. 9. Christ did ot receive Gifts by measure, after such a int and proportion, but it pleased the Fa∣her that in him should all fulness dwell, Col. . 19. All fulness of Wisdom, all fulness of Righteousness, all fulness of Holiness, ll fulness of Grace, and all fulness of Glory are in Christ.
3. Christs Authority is Omnipotent:3. Christs Authority is omnipo∣tent. We read of the teaching of Christ, far different from that of the Scribes, Matth. 7. 29. For he taught them as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes. Other Prophets and Teachers laboured all Night, and spent their strength often in vain, yet this comfort they reaped, that their Judg∣ment was with the Lord, and their Work with God. Hereupon the Prophet grounds singular comfort from Isai. 49. 5. ThoughIs. 49. 5. Sensus est, etiamsi Is∣rael ad meum mo∣nitum nolit converti, ego tamen Deo place∣bo, qui scit me in officio non fuisse cessa∣torem. Grotius. Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. Here then consists a vast difference between the Authority of Christ and all other Prophets; other Pro∣phets reproved, exhorted and intreated, but Christ commanded obedience, and ina∣bled People to obey his Commandments. The Authority of Christ was incompara∣ble, for what he commanded them to do, he gave them Strength and Ability to perform. Christ perfectly knew his Fa∣thers will, and he commanded and ena∣bled the Hearts of People, to yield ready obedience thereunto; and no other Pro∣phet could attain to so great a perfection.
SECT. III. Of the Fruits and Benefits that accrue unto us, by Christs Prophetical Office. WE are now thirdly to enquire3. The Fruits and Benefits of Christ's Prophet∣cal Office. 1. By Christ's Propheti∣cal Office we are ful∣ly assured that we have a sure Word of Prophecy. concerning those choice and ex∣cellent Fruits, which we reap by Christ's Prophetical Office. Amongst others these two principally I shall insist upon, 1. By Vertue of Christ's Prophetical Office, we are fully assured, that we have a sure word of Prophecy to rest and rely upon; we are not left at random to un∣written Traditions, nor to humane In∣ventions, and devised ways of Men; we are not left to Apocryphal Writings, and uncertain and fallible Dictates, of such Imposers, who magisterially command, and obtrude their own Brain-Fancies, and (as it was applyed to the Pharisees) teach for Doctrines, the Traditions of Men. ButMat. 15. 9. His verbis aufertur omnis fidu∣cia, quam positam ha∣bebant in observan∣ti humanarum traditionum. Nam credebant se Deum colere si illas obser∣ssent, & qui eas docebant, praeteribant cultu Dei. Deus contra per∣gat se hoc pacto coli, & omnem hunc cultum respuit. Musculus in loc. what Christ teacheth us, is sure and cer∣tain, and not left to the pleasure of Men or Angels to change. For we read, Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Hea∣ven,
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. And the Apostle tells us of a sure word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as un∣to a Light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your Hearts. This Word of Prophecy is the Gospel of Christ, and it's said to be more sure (i. e.) more sure than those Revelati∣ons which were not Foundations of Faith, or more especially in regard of the greater credit, which the believing Jews gave to the Doctrine of the Apostles, than that of the Prophets of old. The dark place isVid. Diod. in loc. meant our Hearts, and the Day-Star is Christ; who shining in our Hearts, and illuminating us by his Spirit, scatters a∣way Mists and Darkness. 2. By vertue of Christ's prophetical2. By Ver∣tue of Christ's Propheti∣cal Office we have a divine Uncti, or Spiritu∣al umi∣nation. Office, we have a divine unction or Spi∣ritual Illumination, whereby the eyes of our Mind are opened, to understand the Mysteries revealed in the Gospel. Christ not only reveals his Will, and declares his Covenant of Grace in his Word, but he teacheth us to understand, believe and o∣bey the same. The Gospel is a Mystery, and only he that is anointed with Eye-Salve from Christ can discern it. The
Gospel is a Book sealed, to ignorant car∣nal Men. Take a natural Man in his best Accomplishments of Nature, yet he nei∣ther receives nor perceives the things of the Spirit of God, Rerum supernatu∣ralium & mysterii e∣vangelici, non esse cog∣nitionem aliquam naturalem, aut naturae viribus ac∣quisibilem, &c. Vid. Doctorem Reynol∣dum, in conc. cui tit. Ani∣malis ho∣mo. 1 Cor. 2. 14. A Beast may as soon understand Reason, as a natu∣ral Man (whilst he remains so) the saving things of God: Spiritual things are be∣yond his Ken and beyond his Cognizance. But a Spiritual Man judgeth all things, v. 15. He hath his Eyes in his Head, his Senses exercised, an Ʋnction whereby he knoweth all things, 1 John 2. 20. He knoweth all things necessary to Salvation; for Christ is his Teacher, Christ is that great Pro∣phet who instructeth his Church: the great Rabbi and Master, that teacheth as never any Man taught. He is a Counsel∣lor, Isa. 6. 9. The Wisdom of the Father; Therefore we must go to Christ for Wis∣dom: He teacheth us that divine Wisdom that cometh from above. In our Doubts, let us go to Christ for Counsel; In our Distress, let us go to Christ for Comfort: He is both a Counsellor, and a Comfor∣ter. And by vertue of Christ's Propheti∣cal Office, we have light in our Under∣standings. This is Christ's Gift, Eph. 5. 14. This was prophesied, Isa. 60. 1. Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. This Prophe∣cy
relates to the glorious Light breaking forth, in the days of the Gospel. And this was the end of Christ's coming, to give light to them that sit in darkness, Luk. 1. 79. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel, Luke 2. 32. Hence we obtain renewed Spirits, inlightned Judg∣ments, a Spirit of discerning, to discern between things that differ. These are the Fruits of Christ's prophetical Office. All things necessary for Salvation are taught in the Word of Christ, and by the Spirit of Christ. The Word is a Lamp, and the Spirit directs us in the use thereof. The Spirit worketh by the ministry of the Word. We have no warrant for inward teachings by a Light within us (as some strangely fancy) Thus we may discern, whether that Light which is within them (as they say) be a true or false Light, for if it be true, it borrows its Light from the Lamp of the Sanctuary, even the writ∣ten Word of God, and accordingly walks. Otherwise that inward pretended Light, which derives not its Light from God's Word, is an Ignis fatuus, and will lead the Followers into by-paths and dangerous Ways. Wherefore let's be exhorted to keep close to the Word of God, which is the Gospel of Reconciliation, and the Gospel of our Salvation; and let us be
earnest Solicitors unto Christ the great Prophet, that he would assist us by his Spirit, to understand his Will, revealed in his Word. Let's go to God for Wisdom and Illumination, James 1. 5. If any of you ack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who giveth to all Men liberally, and upbraideth none. Here are two great encourage∣ments. 1. God is a most liberal Donor, he. Isocrates. giveth liberally; though Men expect great Rewards for their Counsel, yet God most liberally giveth Counsel: Men may give good Counsel, but cannot compel them to whom it is given, to take and follow it. But God can open the Eyes and Heart, and direct the Feet, and order and guide the whole Man, and work Obedience. 2. God upbraideth none. It oft times falls out amongst Men, that if they do a Kindness, they upbraid them with it who are the Receivers. But it is not so with God, he doth not exprobrate nor hit us (as we say) in the Teeth, either with pre∣sent Defects or former Failings. And if Men be constant Suitors to great Persons, they will soon be weary of their Compa∣ny. But God doth not upbraid his Peo∣ple, notwithstanding their frequent ad∣dresses to him. Here then is singular en∣couragement to make our Applications
frequent and serious, to this great Pro∣phet, our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would take away the Scales of Darkness, and Veil of Ignorance, from our Under∣standings, and instruct us in his Will, and guide us by his Almighty Counsel, till at length he bring us unto his Glory. CHAP. VI. Of Christs Kingly Office. SECT. I. Proving that Christ is a King. HAving before handled the Priestly and Prophetical Offices of Christ, I shall now treat of his Kingly Office. And in this method I shall proceed. 1. To prove Christ to be a King. 2. Lay down Reasons why Christ is a King. 3. To represent our Duty to Christ as our King.
1. To prove Christ to be a King, there1. Christ is proved to be a King by Scripture Prophecies and the accom∣plishment of them. Praeficerem Regem me∣um Messiam populo meo Israelitico, ut illi no∣mine meo imperaret. Vatablus. are many Prophecies extant, particularly Psal. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. This plainly declares Christ to be King of his Church. The Prophet Isaiah calls him the Prince of Peace, Isa. 6. 8. And to distinguish Christ's Government from all other Kings what∣soever, he sets forth the perpetuity of Christ's Government, ver. 7. Of the in∣crease of his Government and Peace there shall be no end. Further, I'le cite the same Evangelical Prophet, prophesying of Christ's Regal Government, and the great Security we shall obtain thereby, Isa. 32.Quod si vere di∣ctum fuit de Eze∣chia, mul∣to magis de Christo, quem opti∣mum ac po∣tius uni∣cum refu∣gium ha∣bemus in his procel∣lis, quibus nos agita∣ri necesse est quam∣diu in hoc mundo ver∣samur: quoties ergo torremur aestu, sub ejus umbram nos recipere dis∣camus. Calv. 1, 2. Behold a King shall reign in Righteous∣ness, and Princes shall Rule in Judgment, and a Man shall be as a hiding place from the Wind, and a cover from the Tempest, as Ri∣vers of Water in a dry place, as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. This King, this Man is Christ who shall judg righteous Judgment, who shall abundantly secure, protect and preserve his people from the violence of their malicious Adversaries. When Herod enquired of the chief Priests and Scribes where Christ should be born, they gave their answer out of the Prophet
Micah c. 5. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth un∣to me, that is to be Ruler over Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from ever∣lsting. Upon this Answer given from this Scripture by the chief Priests and Scribes, Herod supposed that a King should be born to depose him; therefore he bar∣barously murdered the young Children. In that Text two things are principally observable. 1. Christ's Incarnation, out of these Words, Thou Bethlehem (i. e.) out of thee shall Christ come; there Christ was born. Though Christ's Mother and Joseph her espoused Husband did not live in Beth∣lehem; yet God by his Providence so orde∣red it, that Joseph and Mary came at that time to Bethlehem, to be taxed▪ and there Mary brought forth Christ. Prophecies of Christ shall not want accomplishment, but many have been already, others shall be fulfilled in their season. 2. Here's evidently set forth Christ's Kingly Office—He is called the Ruler over Israel. The People would have made Christ a King, at that time he refused it, and went his way, John 6. 15, 16. Christ's Kingdom was Spiritual,
not of this World. The People blest himJoh. 18. 36. Hoc dicit Christus refellens laesae Cae∣saris Ma∣jestatis & affectati Regni cri∣minatio∣nem, R∣gem se esse prof∣tens, si∣mul ac ne∣gans, ut qui Rex quidem esset, ve∣rum eâ gu∣bernatio∣nis ratione, quae pror∣sus à Re∣gum hujus mundi imperio differat, nempe quae est Ecclesiae suae Caput. Beza. as a King, Luk. 19. 38. Blessed be the King that cometh in the Name of the Lord, Peace in Heaven and Glory in the Highest. Christ being demanded of Pilate whether he was a King, an∣swers, John 18. 37. Thou sayest that I am a King, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear Wit∣ness unto the Truth. Insomuch as Pi∣late wrote a Title, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. And notwithstand∣ing the Chief Priests importun'd Pilate to alter the Title, and Write—He said I am the King of the Jews; Pilate was peremptorily resolved against all al∣terations, John 19. 22. What I have Written I have Written; he would stand to what he had writ, and would not blot any thing out.
SECT. II. Why Christ must be a King. NOw there are many Reasons to beSect. 2. Why Christ must be a King. 1. Christ is 2 King to appoint Laws and Statutes. alledged why Christ must be a King. Three only I shall insist upon. 1. That Christ might appoint Laws and Statutes, which should direct his People, and bind their Consciences to the Obedi∣ence of the same. Christ alone is the Lord of our Consciences; what he com∣mands is of absolute Authority, not to be disputed, but obeyed. But as for the Popes Canons and other obtruded Inven∣tions against the Law of Christ, they are of no estimation; only the Law of Christ is authentick, and all other Laws must be in Subserviency and Subordination to the Law of Christ. Wherefore the Pope hath presumptuously invaded Christs Kingly Office, by pretending himself to be the Head of the Church, and Christs Vicar, and so making Laws to bind the Consci∣ence. But Christ is the only Head; he is called , with a demonstrative Article, he and no other is the Head, as the Apostle mentions, Col. 1. 18. And all
other Heads and Rulers must yield sub∣jection and Homage unto Christ; they must Reign for Christ, as they Reign by Christ; Prov. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice; By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. 2. Christ is King to Rule and Govern,2. Christ is King to Rule and Govern and Com∣mand Obe∣dience to all his Laws. 1. Christs Kingdom is Spiritu∣al. and Command Obedience, and keep his Subjects in Obedience to his Laws: But we must know that the Kingdom of Christ is a Spiritual and an Eternal Kingdom. 1. Christs Kingdom is Spiritual, he is King of his Church, and Rules and Go∣verns the Spirits of Men. It was a curious Question of the Apostles, Acts 1. 6. Lord wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? They fancied a Temporal King∣dom and Earthly Preferments; but Christ checks their curiosity in asking, and mi∣stake in fansying outward Dignities and Honours to themselves, by any Tempo∣ral Government of Christ. For Christ said unto them, v. 7. It is not for you to know the times and the seasons, which the Fa∣ther hath put in his own Power. There are many that oppose Christs Kingly Office: The Jews say, Christ shall be an Earthly King, and bring them again into their old inheritance, the Land of Canaan, and set∣tle them there, and bless them with abun∣dance
of Earthly Blessings. The Papist deny Christs Kingly Office, for they make the Pope Head and Supream Judge in matters of Spiritual Cognizance. And another sort there are who say there shall be a Personal Reign, and Christ shall de∣stroy all Monarchies, and live Gloriously on Earth with his Saints. But Christ him∣self plainly overthrows these Opinions by his own Words, John 18. 36. Jesus answer∣ed, My Kingdom is not of this World; If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be de∣livered to the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence. Christ by his Kingly Au∣thority appointed Church Government,1 Cor. 12. 28. and appointed Church Officers and Church-Censures; And that dreadful Sen∣tence of Excommunication rightly given is an Ordinance of Christ. Christ hath left his Church destitute of nothing con¦ducing to the Right Government there∣of. 2. Christs Kingdom is Eternal, and this2. Christs Kingdom is eternal. is a Kingdom of Glory. All other King∣doms shall have their Periods: But the Kingdom of Christ shall never have an end. The Kingdom of Christ is an ever∣lasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is from Generation to Generation; and this KingdomDan. 4. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 11. is called the Everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: By which Scriptures (not to name any farther Proof) it evidently appears that the Kingdom of Christ lasteth to all Eternity; when all Kings shall yield up their Scepters to Christ, and all earthly Monarchies shall fail (which I believe will not be till the day of Judgment) Christ shall Reign (though I cannot understand personally on Earth, yet) I believe eternally in the Heavens. 3. Christ is King to Protect, Defend3. Christ is King to protect, defend and pre∣serve his Church. and Preserve his Church from the Vio∣lence and Out-rage of Enemies both Cor∣poral and Spiritual. Christ hath promi∣sed his Presence to his Church, Matth. 28. 20. Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World. The perpetuity of Christs presence is a preservative from the fury of Enemies: Although Enemies may make Bulworks and raise Batteries a∣gainst the Church, yet they shall not be able to prevail against her. Christ told Peter, Matth. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Papists hence claim an infallibility of Peters Chair, and that he was chief Bishop of Rome, (which none of them could ever prove to this very day, not so much as he was ever at Rome, much less
chief Bishop there.) But Ambrose, Chryso∣stome and others of the Learned Fathers, understand by the Rock, not Peter's Per∣son, but the Profession of Peter's Faith; It's said, Super hanc petram, non super hunc Petrum, for Christ built his Church upon the Faith, and not upon the Person. Lear∣ned Expositors as Lyra, Hugo de sancto Victore, Ferus, all these, though of the Romish Party, expound the Rock to beBp. Mor∣ton's Ap∣peal▪ L. 2. Cap. 17. meant Christ, as a Reverend and eminent∣ly Learned Prelate declares. Let the worst of Enemies put forth their rage to the utmost, and in their Malice and Fury endeavour the Destruction of the Church; yet the Church shall prevail against them. The Church is under Persecution, but like a Vine it thrives by bleeding. What's the reason, but because God is the Protector and Defender of his Church, Christ is the King of it? There are many comfortable promises for the preservation of the Church. One is Isa. 4. 5. Ʋpon all the GloryDiligentr not andum est quia monemur non aliter gratiae Dei nos fore participes, quam sie∣jus imagi∣nem geste∣mus, ac in nobis relu∣ceat cjus gloria. Calv▪ shall be a defence.—By the Glory is meant Gods People, for they are his Glory, and are made Partakers of his Glory: God first makes them Glorious, and then ac∣counts them his Glory, and upon them the Lord will be a defence or covering. Another Promise is Isaiah 27. 2, 3. In that day sing ye unto her a Vineyard of Red
Wine, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment lest any hurt it, I will keep it Night and Day. There are two things especially prejudicial to a Vineyard: The one is drought and want of Water to re∣fresh it: The other is a violent breaking in either of Man or Beast, to pluck off the rapes and destroy the Branches; against both, God promiseth his Gracious Prote∣ction: God waters it and keeps it; his re∣freshings and defence are abundant securi∣ty. A third Promise (to name no more)Non tan∣tum est Ig∣nis adver∣sarios ter∣rens & de∣vorans si accessernt props, sed & murus qui & un∣diquaque tegit. i Zech. 2. 5. For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a Wall of Fire round about, and I will be the Glory in the midst of her. Here's a wonderful Protector: A Wall of Fire is such an impregnable defence, as Enemies dare not venture thorough it: And God by his presence makes his Church Glori∣ous: And not one of these Promises but have partly already, and shall further be accomplished in the days of the Gospel: Witness all Ages wherein the Church hath suffered Persecution, and notwithstanding Fire and Sword, the Gospel hath flourish∣ed and the Church prevailed. Those fa∣mous Waldenses, Wicklevites, Lollards, and others of later date bare Testimony to the Truth, maugre all the violent op∣positions of their Adversaries. Christ is King, and will go on conquering and to
conquer. Some he bends and makes them willing and obedient Subjects to his Scep∣ter, Psal. 110. 3. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy power, or more suitable to the Original, a people of willingness. O∣thers Christ breaks to pieces: Psal. 2. 9. Thou shalt break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shalt dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. Those who yield not to Christs Govern∣ment, but oppose it, shall be broken in pieces. Whatever Potentate sets himself in opposition to Christ, shall surely be broken to pieces. Christ will maintain, defend and protect his Church; though it be a little Flock and despised by the World, yet Christ will protect them, and preserve them from the outrage and violence both of Corporal and Spiritual Enemies. SECT. III. Concerning our Duties to Christ our King. 3. FArther yet to inlarge concerning3. Our Duties to Christ as our King. the Kingly Office of Christ. The last particular is to inquire into our Du∣ties. Duties are incumbent on us unto Christ as our King. Amongst many Du∣ties which might be named, I shall only in∣sist on two, viz. Prayer and Obedience.
1. For Prayer, we must make our ad∣dresses1. We must pray to Christ. to Christ, and prefer our Suppli∣cations in his name. We have Promises to rely on, John 16. 23. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. With Christ we are promised all things, Rom. 8. 32. Whatever we want, we must go to Christ for; he is a great King and able to help us; and a High-Priest full of Bowels of Compassion, touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. But in an especial manner, we must pray, that the King∣domes of Sin, Satan, and Antichrist may be utterly destroyed, and the Kingdom of Christ may be advanced. We must make it our grand Petition, That Christs Kingdom may come (i. e.) The King∣dom of Grace here and the Kingdom of Glory hereafter; That Christ may Reign and Rule in our Hearts, that he may be Glorified in us and by us, and that the Kingdoms of the World may become the King∣domsRev. 11. 15. of the Lord and of his Christ. Christs Kingdom is an Holy Kingdom, and he Rules in Righteousness; we should labour after Holiness, that we may be conforma∣ble unto Christs Kingdom. We must not only take Christ for a Prophet to instruct us, and a Priest to Sacrifice for us, but for a King to Reign and Rule in us.
And there's a second Duty incumbent2. We must Obey Christ. on us which is Obedience: As Loyal Sub∣jects, we should be obedient and submis∣sive to the Laws of Christ: His will is a binding Law, and his command ingageth ready and chearful Obedience. Our Con∣sciences are at Christs command, for he is the Lord and Commander of them. As it is our duty to obey Temporal Gover∣nours (for so we are commanded in the Word of God, and the fifth Command∣mentRom. 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 17. expresly obligeth us to obey our Superiours) So we must above all yield obedience unto Christ. Even the greatest Earthly Governours themselves must ac∣knowledge Christ above them: Even the greatest Powers on Earth, which will ac∣knowledge no Earthly Power above them, yet must acknowledge themselves subor∣dinate unto Jesus Christ, and yield Obe∣dience and Subjection unto him. All Rule and Authority must be imployed for Christ and not against him. Wherefore the Turks which set up that grat Impostor Mahomet, and prefer him before Christ, and the Pope who pretends himself to be Christ's Vicar, and takes Christs Office out of his Hand, in commanding and forcing the consciences of Men, these do abominably, and highly derogate (what in them lies) from the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ: But Christs Kingdom shall stand for ever, when Antichrist and his Kingdom shall perish. CHAP. VII. Representing Christ's Dignity by several Metaphors and Resemblances. SECT. I. Christ is resembled to a Stone.—The 49th Chapter of Genesis and the 24th verse, and Isa. 28. 16. are expounded. THere are many Scripture MetaphorsChrist is resembled to a Stone. and Resemblances representing the Dignity of Christ. One Resemblance is to a Stone, for Strength, stability and so∣lidity. Two Scriptures I shall fix on, and by the Exposition of them clear the Ana∣logy. The first Scripture is Gen. 49. v. 24. Jacob giving the Blessing to his beloved Son Joseph, saith—But his Bow abode inSub  typo depi∣cta est no∣bis imag Christi, qui antequam emergerat Victor mrtis & Author vitae positus . Calvin. Strength, and the Arms of his Hands were
made strong by the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob, from thence is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel.—By this Shepherd and Stone, Jacob endowed with a Prophetick Spirit, look'd with the Eye of Faith upon Christ; for Joseph was a Type of Christ, who is the Shepherd of Israel, the Foun∣dation Stone, and the Corner Stone of his Church. Joseph as a Shepherd fed his Father and Brethren, and was a helpful Instrument to save much People alive in the time of Famine. So Christ is the Shepherd and Preserver of his People, to provide for them and supply them. Jo∣seph was as a Rock, or Stone for defence, as an hiding place in providing for his Fa∣ther and Brethren in Egypt. So Christ is a Rock and Refuge, and Shelter unto his People: Without question, that Pro∣phecy, of a King that shall reign in Righte∣ousness, is to be applied to Christ, Isa. 32. 1. Jerome one of the Learnedst of all the Fa∣thers applyeth this Prophecy to Christ, and the safety of God's People by Christ mentioned ver. 2. And a Man shall be a hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Quicu∣que sub e∣jus umbra∣culo fuerit, sic tutus ∣rit in tribulationibus & angustiis & in mundi istius tempestate,  qui ventm & turbinem fugiens, se tuto abscondit loco. Hieron. in loc.
Another Scripture (which is more clear) I shall mention out of Isa. 28. 16.—Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Be∣hold I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Corner Stone, a sure Foundation. These are rare excellen∣cies of a Stone, and this Stone is laid in Zion, (i. e.) the Church of God.—Let's review all these excellencies of a Stone, and it will evidently appear that they all meet in Christ in an eminent manner. 1. This Stone is laid for a Foundation.1. A Foun∣dation Stone. A Foundation Stone must be strong and firm, whereon the Superstructure may depend, for if the Foundation fail, the Building either sinks or falls down. Now Christ is the Foundation of our Faith. He hath founded and setled his Church, and if we rely and hold fast on Christ, we cannot miscarry. The Doctrine of the Gospel is built on Christ. Other Founda∣tion can no Man lay, than that that is laid which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. The Foundation which will hold, is neither Gold nor Silver, Hay nor Stubble, no Merits, no devised Will-Worship, these are rotten Foundations, and will fail. But the Foundation which will hold, is that of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone, Eph. 2. 20.
2. This Stone is a tryed Stone. Some2. A Tried Stone. Stones are tryed and they moulder and are unfit for a Building; but Christ is eve∣ry way tried, by Buffeting, Scourgings, Crucifixion, and by the highest Malice that Men or Devils could put forth against him. Many try their Armour before they venture into Battel, whether it be Shot-proof. Now Christ is Bullet proof (as we say) and Armour of Proof, the whole Quiver of God's Arrows were shot against him, and yet he endured it, and came off Conqueror. 3. This Stone is a precious Stone: So3. A pre∣cious Stone. Christ is precious in himself. He is the Pearl of Price, and Plant of Renown, the chiefest of ten thousands. Christ is pre∣cious in the estimation of the Father, he is the beloved Son, the brightness of the Father's Glory, the express Image of hisHeb. 1. 3. Person. And he is precious in the account of all true Believers; they know how to value him, they admire his Beauty, and are ravished with his Love. They have interest in the Blood of Christ, and this is more precious than Millions of Worlds. If the Soul be precious (as we all acknow∣ledg) how much more must he be preci∣ous who redeems the Soul? and Christ alone is the Redeemer of the Soul.
4. This Stone is a Corner Stone. O∣ther4. A Cor∣ner Stone. Stones are knit and cemented to the Corner Stone; so all true Believers are cemented in one Body and knit to Christ their Head: He is the Corner Stone, and the Head of the Corner. 'Tis true that the Builders rejected this Stone. The Jews reviled, persecuted and crucified Christ; yet he is the Person of whom the Prophecy (Psal. 118. 22.) was fulfilled. And so the Apostle expounds that Prophe∣cy in his Sermon, Acts 4. 11. This is the Stone which was set at nought of you Builders, which is become the Head of the Corner. 5. This is a sure Foundation Stone.5. A sure Foundati∣on. Stones may and are oftentimes laid for a Foundation, but they are not firm and stable, and no ways able to support the Building; but Christ is a sure, firm and strong Foundation. To build on this Foundation, there's Strength and Securi∣ty. I might further add, 6. That (which6. A living Stone. is beyond humane Sence) Christ is a li∣ving Stone: And yet it is evident from the Word of God, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as unto a living Stone, disallowed in∣deed of Men, but chosen of God, and precious.—Ye also as lively Stones are built up a Spi∣ritual House. Now Christ is a living
Stone, and he communicates Life unto his Members, and by vertue of his Life, they live. The Dead were raised by the Voice of Christ, and those that are dead in Trespasses and Sins, are quickned by Christ, Eph. 2. 1. Dry Bones take Flesh and Sinews, and become an Army, when the Spirit breaths Life into them; so theEzek. 37. dead, sleepy, drowsy, never so unlikely in the Eye of Man, may be quickned by the Life of. Christ. But this comparison I need inlarge no farther. SECT. II. Shewing that Christ is resembled to a Fountain. A Second Resemblance of Christ is to a Fountain. There are choise Words spoken by the Church (as is con∣ceived) resigning all the praise of Beauty and Dignity unto Christ, who gave it to her. The Words are Cant. 4. 15. Significat populum hunc ha∣buisse foe∣cunditatem & copiam donorum spirituali∣um. Clarius. A Fountain of Gardens, a Well of Living Wa∣ters, and Streams from Lebanon. Gar∣dens that are of the greatest Note, have Fountains to water them: Standing Pools are not valued, here's mention made of
Streams and Living Waters, and these Streams come from Lebanon. The Head of the Streams of Jordan, riseth from Le∣banon, and makes the Land exceeding fruitful: So do the Rivers of Grace, and the Wells of Salvation, which flow from Jesus Christ, make glad with her Streams and refresh the City of God. But the place which I shall chiefly in∣sist upon is Zech. 13. 1. In that Day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusa∣lem, for Sin and for Ʋncleanness. The Exposition of this Text will abundantly conduce to the proof of this Assertion, That Christ is a Fountain. It's said, In that day, (i. e.) After they had mourned, and been affected with Godly Sorrow for Sin; This is evident from Zech. 12. 10, 11. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitter∣ness for his First-Born. And to express the greatness of the Sorrow, it's said, ver. 11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hada∣drimmon in the Valley of Megiddo. Which mourning, for the greatness of it becomes a Proverb, and it was for the Death of that rare King Josiah. Now
observe, after that mourning, Christ is promised, and he is called a Foun∣tain opened. There are Multitudes, for whom Christ would not pray nor wash. To these he may be said, to be a SpringCant. 4. 12. shut up, a Fountain sealed. But to the House of David and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, (i. e.) his own Children by Grace and Adoption, those whom Christ loveth and washeth, to them he is a Fountain opened, and he pur∣geth them from Sin, and from Un∣cleanness.—In a Fountain are consi∣derable, 1. That there's a confluence of Wa∣ters. Fountain are not drawn dry. Christ is a Fountain of Waters, his Blood can never be drawn dry. Christ compares himself to a Well of Water,Joh. 4. 14. springing up to Eternal Life. In Christ is plenty of Grace, riches of Mercy, abundant effusion of his Spirit. Now to repair to a Cistern and forsake a Fountain, O! what madness and Folly is it? Of this the Lord complain▪ Jer. 2. 13. For my People have commit∣ted two Evils: They have forsaken me, the Fountain of Living Waters, and he∣ed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that n hold no Water.
2. The Waters of a Fountain are li∣ving Waters. Waters in Ponds and Ditches are dead Waters, noisom and muddy; Garbidge is thrown in them, and makes them unwholsom and in∣fectious. But a Fountain will not keep any noisom thing, but purgeth it a∣way. Christ is this Fountain of living Waters, He is the gift of God, and his Promise is to give Living Waters. And as Living Waters run and communicate themselves, from the Spring-Head to the Streams: So Christ the Spring-Head, communicates Waters to the Streams. He, as the Head, hath influence upon all his Members. More I would pro∣secute this Comparison, but that I have prevented my self, by handling this Argument upon Zech. 13. 1. published in print.
SECT. III. Christ is compared to a Tree. THe Tree of Life in Paradise was a Type of Christ. Joseph in his great Sufferings was a Type of Christ, and he is said to be a fruitful Bough by a Well, Gen. 49. 22. Trees grow best by the Rivers side, and so become more fruitful. Of all Trees, these most properly resemble Christ. 1. Christ is compared to an Apple-Tree, Cant. 2. 3. As the Apple-Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved a∣mong the Sons, I sat down under his Shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my Tast. From this Scripture many Learned Authors infer that the Church sets forth the Excellency of Christ by the Similitude of an Apple-Tree. 1. We are to consider the benefit of the1. Consi∣der the Shadow of an Apple-Tree. Libens sub ejus umbra versor, in illo ab aestu persecutionis, afflictionis, vitiorum, & omnis denique in∣firmitatis aut molestiae refrigerium quaerens, ad eum confugiens, & me ut in tutissimum asylum recipiens. Merc. in Cant. 2. 13. Shadow of an Apple-Tree. The Sha∣dow keeps off Heat and Storms, so Christ is a Shadow for refreshing and comforting against the heat of Persecution. Christ is
compared to the Shadow of a great Rock inIsai. 32, 2. Isai. 25. 4. Isai. 4. 6. a weary Land, he is a Shadow from the Heat, likewise he is a Shadow for a Tabernacle in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from Storm and Rain: So that whatever Persecutions andSicut Ten∣trii teg∣men de∣fendebat olim Is∣raelitas  Sle, Vento, & pluvia; sic nunc hos Deus tutos praestabit. Gro. Troubles may befal us, let us make sure of our Interest in Christ, and we shall be safe. 2. The Fruit of an Apple-Tree is plea∣sant2. The Fruit of an Apple-Tree is pleasant to the Tast. Ps. 34. 8. to the Tast, it's a wholesome and de∣lightsome Fruit: The Palate relisheth it well. Much more is Christ delightful to the Spiritual Palate of a True Believer. The Psalmist calls upon us Mont verb g∣standi, nos in hac vs∣tâ illam bonit at em De expriri tantùm ex parte, non enim dicit Implemini sed Gustate. G∣stus quidem nobis praebetur in hac vita, non plena fruitio. Mollerus in Loc. to Tast and see that the Lord is good. Blessed is the Man that trusteth in him: To taste Christ in an Ordinance, how delightsome is this to a True Believer! 3. The Apple affordeth more variety of3. The Apple-Tree af∣fords▪ variety of Frui. Fruit than any other Tree. No Fruit-Tree hath so many kinds of Fruits as an Apple-Tree hath, it is difficult for any to reckon up the several kinds of Apples of different Tast: So Christ excelleth in va∣riety of Graces which he bestoweth on his Church▪
2. Christ is compared to a Vine; John2. Christ is compar'd to a Vine. 15. 1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. Of all Trees none more fruitful than a Vine: No Tree hath a more succulent Root full of Sap and Juice, com∣municating it to the Branches. We read of the Fruit of Canaan, which the Spies brought by way of Tryal or earnest of more to be received: One cluster of Grapes cut down at the Brook Eshcol was a Bur∣thenNumb. 13. 23. sufficient for two Men to carry: Be∣tween Christ and the Vine there are these Resemblances. 1. A Vine is the Root, Foundation, and1. A Vine is the Root, Foundati∣on and Support of all the Branches. support of all the Branches, insomuch that as soon as a Branch is cut off, it receives no more nourishment: so Christ is the Foundation and Support of his Church: The Church cannot thrive unless it receive influence from Jesus Christ. Christ is the Foundation of all Foundations, and if any Foundation be laid besides Christ, it will fall and be utterly ruined. 2. A Vine is exceeding nourishing.2. A Vine is nourish∣ing. Wine makes the Heart glad, and refresh∣eth the Spirits, and comforts the Weary and Afflicted: So Christ abundantly re∣fresheth and comforts his Children. His Consolations are abundantly sufficient for them.
3. The Vine communicates Juice and3. The Vine com∣municates Juice and Nourish∣ment unto the Bran∣ches. Joh. 1. 16. nourishment unto the Branches; so Christ communicates his vertues to his People. In Christ there is a fulness, Col. 1. 19. and there is a Derivation from the Root to the Branches: Of his fulness we receive Grace for Grace. A 3d. Tree whereto Christ is compared3. Christ is com∣par'd to a Medicinal Tree. is a Medicinal healing Tree, a none-such and unparallel'd for its excellent virtues, Rev. 22. 2. It's the Tree of Life which bears twelve manner of Fruits, and yielded her Fruit every Month, and the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations. Such a Tree as this was Prophesyed of, Ezek. 47. 12. and the Fruit thereof shall be Meat, and the Leaf thereof for Medicine. Now who is the Healer of Soul and Body but Jesus Christ? The Word of God is our Souls Physick, but Jesus Christ is the Physician, who prescribes the Phy∣sick: And Christs Spirit accompanying his Word, makes it effectual. The twelve manner of Fruits mentioned in the foreci∣ted place, Rev. 22. 2. shews variety of comforts, and plenty. And as Leaves laid on Wounds, conduce to the healing of them: So in all the Ordinances of God (when Gods Spirit sanctifieth them) there's a healing vertue; not as if they healed by their own Power, but by the Power of
Christ working effectually upon them. I might add further comparisons, but I conceive there's no necessity to make far∣ther Inlargements in so clear a point. CHAP. VIII. Concerning Christs Purchases of Justificati∣on, Sanctification, and Glorification. SECT. I. Of Justification by Christ. FUrther to represent the excellency ofSect. 1. Of Justifica∣tion by Christ. Christ, we are to consider his three∣fold purchase, viz. Of Justification, San∣ctification and Glorification for all true Believers. In order we begin with the Purchase of Justification. And herein we are to consider that we are not to treat of any legal Justification by works, so no Man can be justified, for we
have all sinned: None but Christ (who was and is God and Man United in one Person) could keep the Covenant of works: but we are to treat only of Evan∣gelical Justification, which consists in the imputation of Christs Righteousness. In handling of this Justification we are to consider, Quid Nominis, and Quid Rei, (i. e.) The Name and the Thing. 1. For the Quid Nominis. The Greeks1. For the Name of Justifica∣tion. express it by , and  and . The Terms are Forensical, oppo∣site to Condemnation. The Metaphor of Justification is taken from a Judge, who absolves the Prisoner at the Bar, when a Pardon is brought from the King: So though we are Condemned by the Law, at the Bar of Divine Justice, yet we are justified and acquitted by the imputation of Christs Righteousness. We read in Scripture of being Justified before God, Rom. 2. 13. and of being made Righteous, Rom. 5. 19. and of imputing Righteousness, Rom. 4. 3. and of being accounted Blessed, who have Righteousness imputed, and Sins remitted, Rom. 4. 6, 7. All these are Synonymous Expressions, and serve for the farther Explication of the Doctrine of Justification. From the Quid Nominis let's come to the Quid Rei,
and inquire concerning the thing it self or nature of Justification.2. Consi∣der the thing it self or na∣ture of Justifica∣tion. The Article of Justification was so highly valued by Luther, that his thoughts Night and Day ran upon it: This indeed is the Foundation of all our Comfort, and all our strength lies in the Doctrine of Justification by free Grace.In corde meo regnat iste unus Articulus, in qu fiuunt refuntque mae cogitationes theologi▪ die ncteque. Luth. Instead of giving Definitions of Justifi∣cation (because they are many) I will make a farther Inquiry into the causes of Justification, and the Properties or ra∣ther Singularities, which appertain there▪ unto. 1. Let's consider the causes of Justifi∣cation:1. Consi∣der the Causes of Justifica∣tion. The Efficient cause is God, Is. 43. 25. The impulsive moving cause is the Mercy of God, Eph. 2. 2. The Material cause is the effusion of Christs Pretios Blood: The formal cause is the imputa∣tion of Christs Righteousness: The In∣strumental cause is Faith. But considering every Instrumental cause is to be reduced to it's efficient cause, from whence it pro∣ceeds, I shall distinguish Non  ut qua∣litas pro∣priè aut otus acti vl passi aut opus a∣liquod bo∣num & eximii pretii, quasi ips sit justitia aut ejus pars, aut e∣tiam justi∣tiae loco ex censu & aestimatione Dei; sed , nmpe ut modus, medium & In∣strumentum ceu oculus & manus qua Christi ejusque Justitiae participes red∣mur, adeoque relative ad objectum Jesum ipsius justitiae & prssis gratiae. Purions Theol. Synops. with a Learned Author, that we are not Justified by Faith primarily in a proper sence, as a Quality, but secondarily as a means and
instrument, as an Eye to see, and as an Hand to lay hold on Christ. Lastly the fi∣nal cause of Justification is either in re∣spect of God, and so it is his Glory, for all things must be done to the Glory of God; or as in respect of our selves, and so it's our Salvation. 2. Now let's consider the Properties or2. Consi∣der the Proper∣ties or Singulari∣ties of Ju∣stification. 1. Justifi∣cation is an Act of free Grace. rather the Singularities of Justification. 1. Justification is an Act of free Grace. No Intuition of merits; no concurrence of Good Works moved God to set his Heart upon any. How free this Act of Justification is, we may read, Rom. 3. 24▪ Being justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: The Word is  freely: nothing that we can do of our best works merits any favour at the Hand of God. For when we were in our blood in a most loathsome forlorn con∣dition, he said Live, that was a time ofQui docet in opera confidere, is negt merit Christi sufficere. Aug. Love. So then here's not the least ground to trust in our works: That were to de∣rogate from Christ's righteousness. Can any thing be freer than free-gift? The Ju∣stification of a Sinner springs from free
Grace, free Love, and Mercy. Faith is the instrumental, but not efficient cause of Justification; neither can the bare  Cre∣dere, the Act without the Object Justifie. Christ is he that justifieth. Faith is the Hand to lay hold on Christ: Neither is Faith the Hand of a Work-Man, that earns his Wages, but the Hand of a Beggar that receives all of Favour and Mercy. 2. Justification by Faith consists in the2. Justifi∣cation consists in the Re∣mission of Sins. Remission of Sins, and non-imputation of Transgressions, Ps. 31. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered; Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputeth not Iniquity. Likewise the Apostle declares how the great work of Reconciliation was transacted, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Not imputing their Trespasses unto them. It's true, that the best of Gods Children have their Failings: For in many things we offend all, and he that is without Sin. let him cast the first Stone, and it will re∣coil upon himself that casts it: But Gods Children are humbled for Sin, they waterPsal. 6. 6. their Couches (as David did) with their Tears. They sigh with Ezekiel to theEzek. 2. 6. Jer. 31. 19. breaking of their Loins, with Ephraim they smite upon their Thighs. Sin is their Sor∣row, Grief and Burthen, wherefore they are by Christ call'd unto Repentance, and Christ imputes their Sins not unto them∣selves,
but unto himself: They indeed are the Principal Debtors, but Christ hath made himself liable to pay their Debts, and make full satisfaction, because he hath become surety for them unto the Father. 3. Justification consists in the Imputa∣tion3. Justifi∣cation consists in the impu∣tation of Christs Righte∣ousness. of Christs Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. 21. We are made the Righteousness of God in him. Of Unrighteous we are made Righteous, of Ungodly we are made God∣ly: And though we are Ungodly Christ justifieth us, for he doth not find us good, but he makes us so. Now this Righteous∣ness of Christ is altogether a Righteous∣ness without us, not depending on any inherent Righteousness, nor any work in us: But it's free, and Gratuitous, without any Praevision or Intuition of Grace in the Person to be justified. St. BernardAssignata est homi justitia ∣lien, qui carit su Justitia. Bern. Ep. 190. fully expresseth it saying, that anothers Righteousness is assign'd to Man, because he wants a Righteousness of his own. Hence our Works and Services (though Failings in themselves) are accepted Righteous by imputation of Christs▪ Righteousness. How miserable would our condition be, if our Services were no better offer'd to God than they come from us! But Christ mends our Services in the carriage by offering them to the Father in his own Name and Mediation, so that though our Duties be
raw, weak, and imperfect, yet Christ makes them perfect by the imputation of his own Righteousness, and so they obtain ac∣ceptance with the Father. 4. Justification brings forth choice and4. Justifi∣cation brings forth choice and excel∣lent Fruits. excellent Fruits, as we may read Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3. All those choice Fruits grow on that Tree of Justification. Faith is the Mo∣ther-Grace there mentioned. Peace, and Access unto the Throne of Grace, Joy, Hope, Glorying in Tribulation are the Daughters or the Fruit which grow on this Tree. Wherefore though Faith only Justifies, yet Faith is not alone when it Justifieth: For it is accompanied with a Goodly Train of Graces. Though Faith Justifieth the Person, yet Works Justifie the Faith, or declare the Faith to be true. Faith works by Love and purifies the Heart;Gal. 5. 6. Act. 15. 9. and it's the Apostles charge, Tit. 3. 8. This* Hujus fi∣di chari∣t non est forma, sed frctus, & pnitti est justifi∣cati condi∣ti non cau∣sa justifi∣cationis: fids  qu justificat, non quae justificat est sine operibus, & sola dicitur in isto munere non solitaria respectu comitatus aliarum virtutum.  , non , Per, non propter fidem Justi declar, & per  ict . Prideaux, Manu∣ductio ad Theologia. is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly that they which have Believed in God might be careful to maintain good Works. A Learned Profes∣sor very dextrous in stating of Contro∣versies concludes thus, Love is not the
form but the Fruit, and Repentance is the Condition of him that is Justified, not the cause of Justification, &c. This then is the Purchase of Christ who imputes his per∣fect Righteousness to his Members, and their Sins to himself; and this Justification is active whereby Christ fulfilled the whole Law, and passive whereby Christ became obedient unto Death even the Death of the Cross. SECT. II. Of Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ. A Second Purchase of Christ is Sancti∣fication.2. Pur∣chase of Christ, Sanctifi∣cation  the Spirit. For whom Christ justifies by his Grace, those he Sanctifies by his Spirit. In order of Nature Justification may be conceived to preceed Sanctificati∣on, because Justification is the Root or Mother Grace. The Works of Sanctifica∣tion are the Fruit proceeding from it, yet in order of time they are simultaneous. Those who are purged from the guilt of Sin, labour to be purged from the filth of Sin. It's a good Character to be as soli∣citous and desirous for Mercy to sanctify, renew and purify, as for Mercy to pardon us. Wherefore Sincerity is an undoubted
evidence of a justified Condition, Psal. 32. 2. It's an infallible sign of Justification, In whose Spirit there is no Guile. In handling of the Doctrine of Sanctification, we are to consider these ensuing Particulars, which may serve as so many strong Arguments to perswade, or as so many Motives to stir us up to the practice of Holiness. The first Motive is drawn from Electi∣on,Motive 1. We are e∣lected un∣to Holi∣ness. we are elected unto Holiness, Eph. 1. 4. According as he hath chosen us in him be∣fore the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Election doth not give the least licentious Liberty, but engageth us unto Holiness. Observe the Words now cited, It is not said that we should live as we list,Non eli∣guntur Paulus & qui ei simi∣les sunt, quia rant sancti & immacula∣ti, sed eli∣guntur & praedesti∣natur, ut in sequenti vita per pera atque virtutes sancti & immcula∣i fiat. Hieron. in ph. 1. 4. but that we should be holy. Neither is it said that we are elected for any Holiness foreseen. Election and effectual Calling go together, and to be assured of our Election, we must make sure of our effectual Calling, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Calling is put before Election in the situ∣ation of the Words, and in respect of our Duty incumbent on us. Wherefore (saith the Apostle) the rather Brethren give dili∣gence to make your Calling and Election sure. Now if we ask why doth Christ purchase Sanctification for us? The Answer is, be∣cause he loved us. His Love moved him
to wash and put such Royal Dignities up∣on his Children. Rev. 1. 5, 6. Ʋnto him that loved us and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and hath made us Kings and Priests unto God and to his Father. This Election was before the Foundation of the World was laid, 2 Thess. 2. 13. God hath* Primum dixit san∣ctificatio∣nem spiri∣tus, ut ∣stederet quod ne∣quaquam ad fidem venissemus, nisi ipsa gratia Spi∣ritus Sancti disset. Ocum. Quomodo eos separavit Deus sanctificando eos per Spiritum, & quomodo pervenitur ad illum Spiritum per fidem habitam Evangeli. Grot. from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and be∣lief of the Truth. Wherefore the Apostle calls the Saints Elect, and that according to the fore-knowledg of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience. Those that are elected unto Glory are e∣lected unto Holiness: No Holiness, no Happiness. A second Motive is drawn from Crea∣tion,Motive 2. We are created unto Ho∣liness. we are created unto Holiness. All the Members of our Bodies, and all the Faculties of our Soul should be employed for holy uses to serve God. External and Internal Purity are required, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from filthiness of the Flesh and of the Spirit. The Heart mustJam. 4. . be purified and the hands cleansed; the Tongue must minister Grace to the Hearer: Holiness must sit upon the Lips, Heart, and Life. To this purpose were
we created, Eph. 2. 10. We are his work∣manship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk therein. Good works are (as a Father saith) The way to the Kingdom,Via ad Regnum, non causa rgdi. Bern. not the cause of reigning there. We may not, we dare not trust to our own Merits, and expect to be justified by our own Works, yet we must perform them in Obedience to God's Command, in Testi∣mony of our Duty and Thankfulness. They are necessary necessitate praecepti, non necessitate causae. Wherefore let us seri∣ously reflect upon our Creation, and consider that we are ingaged thereby to Holiness of Life. The frequent remem∣brance of our Creation, should excite us unto the practice of Holiness. 3. Let's consider our Redemption, andMotive 3. We are re∣deemed unto Ho∣liness. this was purchased at the dearest rate, even the purchase of Blood, and that not of an ordinary Blood, but of Royal Blood, and more than that, it was the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. (So we must understand it by a communication of Idioms.) To this purpose hath Christ redeemed us out of the Hands of our Enemies, that we mightLuke 1. 74, 75. serve him without fear in Holiness and Righ∣teousness before him all the days of our Life. Christ did not redeem  that we might live to our selves, or as we list, but (as
the Apostle expresseth it) Christ gave himself for his Church, that he mightEph. 5. 26, 27. sanctify it and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Whoso∣ever then hath an Interest in the Blood of Christ, is sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, He is redeemed from his vain Conversation;1 Pet. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Eph. 4. 23. He is a new Creature; He is renewed in the Spirit of his Mind: The Image of Christ is imprinted in him, and that consists in Righteousness and Holiness.Eph. 4. 24. SECT. III. Of Glorification. SAnctification is here begun in thisSect. 3. Glorifica∣tion is th Purchase of Christ. Life, and it must receive daily Aug∣mentations, till it be consummated in Glory. Now Glorification is Christ's Purchase. The Kingdom of Heaven, the Crown of Glory, the price of our high Clling, Abrahams Bosom, the purchased Possession, the lot of the Saints in Life,
an Inheritance immortal, undefiled, which fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for us; all these are synonymous Expressions to set forth the State of Glory, and all these are the Purchase of Christ. Glorification is one of the Links, even the highest of them in that Golden Chain, Rom. 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also cal∣led: and whom he called, them he also justi∣fied: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Christ himself is in Glory, and he the Head, would have Glory put upon all his Members. Christ is in all the Saints the Hope of Glory. The Salvation which isCol. 1. 27. 2 Tim. 2. 10. Cum ibi erimus ubi ipse est, tum qui∣dem eum perfecte & coram vi∣debimus, cm autem videbimus um sicut st, tum plene per∣fecteque psi glorifi∣cabimur: am si fi∣des nos glo∣rificat ex parte, hoc est dum um quasi eminus intumur, profecto aspectus nos pl perfecteque glorificabit. Rolloc. in Christ Jesus is with eternal Glory; and this is Christ's grand Petition unto his Father, John 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. Christ is gone before to prepare a place for his Children: He sits at the right hand of the Father in Glory, and hath purchased Glory for all his Mem∣bers. Hence the Apostle assuredly con∣cludes in his own Name, and in the Name of all true Believers, Col. 3. 4. When
Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in Glory. And there shall not only be Glory put upon the Bodies, but also upon the Souls of the Saints, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change ourHere then is a nota∣ble com∣fort for all God's Children that not only our Souls after this Life shall go unto God that gave them, but our Bodies likewise in the last day shall be raised up again and made like unto Christ his glorious Body, that our Souls and Bodies being united together: We may live for ever with him in his Kingdom of Glory. Dr. Ayry, on Phil. 3. 21. , i. e. Excellen∣tissimè gravem gloriam, Hic Hebraeo more per verbum geminans Apostlu summam quandam excellentiam indicavit. Grot. vile Bodies that it may be fashioned like un∣to his glorious Body, according to the work∣ing whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. Whatsoever Sufferings we meet withal they are not to be compa∣red to future Glory. There's a Superla∣tive above a Superlative, mentioned be∣yond the capacity of our Language to ex∣press to the full, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eter∣nal weight of Glory. Thus I have endeavoured to representA brief re∣capitula∣tion of the Premises. the Excellency and Dignity of Christ, and have endeavoured to make good this As∣sertion, That Christ is of inestimable Dig∣nity: This I have handled in five Parti∣culars. 1. By reckoning up several Names of Honour and Dignity appropriated unto Christ.
2. By unfolding the Grand Mystery of the Divine and Human Nature of Christ, hypostatically united in one Person. 3. By representing the unvaluable worth of those threefold Offices of Christ, viz. Sacerdotal, Prophetical, and Re∣gal. 4. By setting down several Metaphors applyed to Christ. 5. By considering those great Purcha∣ses that Christ hath made for his People, viz. of Information, Sanctification and Glorification. Now then follows the practical Im∣provement of this Doctrine which shall be in Uses, viz. Information, Reproof, Examination, and Exhortation, Directi∣on, and Consolation.
CHAP. IX. Containing two Ʋses, viz. 1. An Ʋse of Information. 2. An Ʋse of Re∣proof. SECT. I. From Examples. WE should all be exhorted and per∣suaded  For Infor∣mation▪ to account Christ preci∣ous, even the chiefest of ten thousands; our Treasure, Refuge, our Honour, our All, and infinitely more worth than all. Review seriously those five Heads before handled, and it will evidently appear, what strength of Reason there is to per∣suade us all to set upon Christ a greater valuation than upon all the Kingdoms of the World and Glory of them. To what hath been said already, I shall add for a close some Uses, viz. for Information, Reproof, Examination, and Exhortation, Direction, and Consolation.
I. For Information and that in two particulars. 1. That Christ is thus precious is pro∣ved by Examples of true Believers. 2. Upon what Grounds and Argu∣ments the Truth may be evidenced. 1. That Christ is thus precious, is pro∣ved1. That Christ is precious is proved by Examples. by Examples. We tread not in un∣beaten Paths. Abraham accounted Christ precious, having seen him by the Eye of Faith: Wherefore Christ tells the Jews, your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day,Joh. 8. 56. Dies Domi∣ni nihil a∣liud signi∣ficat quam ipsius ad∣ventum in earnem, vi∣di enim e∣um eminus; Abraham fidei nimi∣rum oculis, ut decla∣ratur. Heb. 11. 13. Bza. and he saw it and was glad. Abraham was dead many hundred years before, but by the Eye of Faith he saw Christ's Incarnati∣on and rejoyced therein. David likewise highly valued Christ, insomuch as he penn'd many Psalms concerning Christ. And in particular David calls Christ his Lord, Psal. 110. v. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thy Enemies thy Footstool. The Pro∣phet Isaiah foretells of Christ's Sufferings, and how he was debased, yet withal he tells us of his great Dignity, Isa. 53. 12. Therefore will I devide him a portion with the Great, and he shall devide the spoil with the Strong: and what a great esteem the Prophet Jeremiah had of Christ may ap∣pear from Jer. 23. 5, 6. Behold the days come saith the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute Justice in the Earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness. The Prophet speaks in his own Name, and in the Name of the Church, that whatsoever befel him, even the greatest Losses, and Crosses, Dis∣apointments, and Vexations, yet his Sa∣viour was the joy and rejoicing of his Soul, Hab, 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig∣tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vines, the labour of the Olives shall fail, and the Field shall yeild no Meat, the. Vers. Graec. 70 Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Heard in the Stall, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and I will joy in the God of my Salvation. The seventy render it, I will rejoice in the Lord in God my Saviour. I might further instance in the noble Army of Martyrs, who set such an high price upon Christ, as they parted with their Goods joyfully, and laid down their Lives for the Testimony of the Gospel. I shall only mention Moses and Paul; Moses though learned and highly esteem∣ed of in Pharaoh's Court, though it is said, he was mighty in Words and Deeds,Acts 7. 22. yet in the confluence of his Honours, he
preferred Christ infinitely before all, Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt, for he had respect unto the recom∣pence of Reward▪ Moses preferred afflicted Godliness before prosperous Wickedness, and a Crown of Thorns with Christ be∣fore a Crown of Gold without him. To Moses I will add St. Paul: O! how did he value Christ at a price above superlative. He though a great Schollar more skill'd in Tongues than all the Apostles, bred up at the Feet of Gamaliel, an Hebrew of the Hebrews (that is an Hebrew both by the Father and Mother (and circumcised the eighth day, as touching the Law a Pharisee, yet Christ he infinitely prized above all: See his zealous Protestation at Corinth (which was so learned a place as was by the Orator called Oculus Graeciae the Eye of Greece, yet he upon deliberate thoughts determines, 1 Cor. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing amongst you, save JesusExcellentia cognitionis Christi in quo the∣sauri sunt sapien∣tiae ac sci∣entiae Dei tanti erit huic Apo∣stolo, ut non mdo Judaismum sed & quicquid eximium est uspiam in Cl, & in Terra propter hnc nihil fuerit, imo dni loco duceret. Musc. Christ and him crucified. And see how ab∣solutely he declares his Judgment, Phil. 3. 7, 8. But what things were gain to me, those I accounted loss for Christ, yea doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excel∣lency of the knowledg of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things and do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ. So great was his zeal for Christ, that he protested that he was not only ready to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem, forAct. 21. 13. the Name of the Lord Jesus. Thus we see how the Saints accounted Christ pre∣cious. SECT. II. Evidencing by Arguments why Christ shouldWhy Christ should be thus ac∣counted pretious. be Pretious in our Estimation. IN the next place to confirm the truth by Arguments. The Question will be propounded what Grounds and Reasons is there, why we should set such an infinite value on Christ. For Answer there are two sorts of Rea∣sons, or Arguments. 1. Drawn from Christ. 2. From true Believers. 1, If we consider that Christ is the E∣ternal1. Reason▪ drawn from Christ. Son of God, the Mediatour of the New Covenant our Advocate, and Re∣deemer there's all the reason why we should price and esteem and account him Pretious and Honourable. But I'e instance
in particulars, concerning the Beauty Riches, Honours, and Wisdom that is in Christ. 1. For his Beauty: Though his Visage was Marred in the days of his Flesh on Earth,1. Christs Beauty. Is. 53. 2. and (as the Prophet speaks) he hath no form nor comliness, and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty, that we should desire him: Yet notwithstanding there is in Christ unparallell'd Beauty: This is Prophesi'd of Christ, Isaiah. 4. 2. In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be Beautiful. Christs People shall attend willingly upon his ser∣vice in the Beauties of Holiness. Psal. 110.Bp. Rey∣nold's on Psal. 110. v. 3, , 6, 8. Edit. ult. 3. That (as an eminently Learned Divine observes) from the Word, willing, or of willingness, notes the Ground or Inducement of their great Devotion and Subjection unto Christs Kingdom that as the People came up in Troops to the Lords House, which was the Beauty of Holiness, or as Men do flock to∣gether to the sight of some honourable and stately Solemnity, so Christs People by the Beauty of his Banners, shall be allur'd to be gatherd unto him and fly in Multitudes as Doves unto their Windows. How amiable was Christ in the estimation of the Spouse, in so much that she prized him the chiefest of Ten Thousands? And Christ prized herCant. 5. 10, 16. Cant. 4. 12. for the Beauty of Holiness, which he put upon her the fairest among Women. Christs
Beauty allures and ravisheth the Spouse; In what variety of expressions doth she set it forth. Cant. 5. 11, 12. His Head is as the most fine Gold, his Locks are bushy and black as a Raven, his Eyes are as the Eyes of Doves by the Rivers of Waters washed with Milk and fitly set, &c. All these Expres∣sions declare the singular Beauty that is in Christ. And wherein confists Christs Beauty but in his Holiness? Holiness is a thing altogether Glorious, and Beautiful. Christ is a Holy High Priest harmless, andHeb. 7. 26. undefiled separate from Sinners. Christ is altogether lovely, the desire of all Nati∣ons.Hag. 2. 7. The Word of Christ is a Holy Word, for we are clean through the Word. The Ho∣lyJoh. 15. 3. Oyl, with which all the Vessels of the Sanctuary were to be Consecrated, was aExod. 30. 23. Type of the Spirit of Christ, which san∣ctifies and makes us Kings and Priests unto God: So then this Beauty of Holiness which is in Christ should infinitly inhance our valuation of him. 2. Consider Christs Riches, and these2. Christs Riches.  are unsearchable. Eph. 3. 8. The Ʋnsearcha∣ble Riches of Christ: And these are Riches of his Grace, Eph. 1. 7. And the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. There are four Singularities in the Riches of Christ, which cannot be appropriated to any Riches under the Sun besides.
1. The Riches of Christ are solid and1. Solid Riches. substantial, of great weight and worth, whereas the Riches of the World are things that are not. They are upon the Wing: For Riches make themselves Wings, they flyProv. 23. 5. away as an Eagle towards Heaven: The things of this World they are not Bread, and the Prophet expostulates, Isai. 55. 2. Wherefore do ye spend Money, for that which is not Bread: (i. e.) We should not anxi∣ously and carkingly busy our selves a∣bout earthly things, for they are not so∣lid, but there's Vanity pronunced upon them all by Solomons Verdict, Eccles. 2. 11. There's a vast difference between RealRs, huma∣nae cinis; pulvis, fu∣s, um∣bra, folia cadentia, flos, somni∣um, fabu∣lae, ven∣tus, aer, penna mo∣bilis, unda decurrens, et squid illis infertus. Chysost in Epist. ad Heb. Hom. 9. Food, and Imaginary Food, between So∣lid Meat and Painted Meat, and as vast a difference therein between the Riches of Christ, and the Riches of the present World. That's then the best sort of Riches which is convey'd by Wisdom, Prov. 8. 21. That I may cause these that love me, to inherit substance, and I will fill their Treasures. 2. The Riches of Christ are invalua∣ble.2. Inva∣luable Riches. We often put too high a price on earthly things, but we can never enough prize the Riches of Christ, it's a common Proverb, Deus et Coelum non patiuntur Hy∣perbolen.
Wherefore all must be forgon for Christ and his Riches: All the Treasures of the Judges, all the Riches of the great∣est Potentates, may be valued at their own rate, but the Riches of Christ can never be enough, and sufficiently valued: Where∣fore the wisest of all Merchants stands not cheapning nor dodgeing for Abatements, but parts with all for Christ. Matth. 13. 46. , &c. Chrysost in Loc. Its said who when he found one Pearl of great price he went and sold all that he had and bought it: He knew the great va∣lue of it, and thereupon ventur'd all for it. 3. The Riches of Christ are satisfying3. Satis∣fying Riches. Riches: The desires of Covetous Men are never satisfacted. They are al∣ways a craving more; Though their Bags may be fill'd with Gold and Silver, yet their Hearts are never satisfyed. But the Riches of Christ, his Graces, his Consola∣tions can satisfie the Soul. Wherefore Phillip propounds the Question. Joh. 14. 8. Shew us the Father and it sufficeth us, and Moses the Man of God Prayeth. Ps. 90. 14. O satisfye us early with thy Mercy that we may rejoyce and be glad all our Dayes.
4. The Riches of Christ are Eternal4. Eternal Riches. Riches. Oftimes Men are deprived of their Estates in this Life, even whilst they live, but when Death comes they are stript of all: And those that could ride many Miles in their own Grounds are now confind to the narrow compass of a Grave six-foot long: But the Riches of Christ last unto all Eternity, It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bowyer, Em∣perour of Germany, such Goods (saith he)Hujusmodi comparan∣dae sunt o∣pes, quae cum na∣fragio si∣mul na∣tent. are worth getting and owning as will not sink nor wash away, if a Ship-wrack happen, but will wade and swim out with us. The Riches of Christ will be preserv'd amidst Storms, Tempests, and Shipwracks. The Graces of the Spirit the Purchases of Christ, viz. Of Justification, Sanctificati∣on, and Glorification will abide for ever, and run Parallel with the longest line of Eternity: And thus it's evidenced, how highly Christ is to be valued, and how pretious he is to all true Believers if we consider the Riches of Christ. 3. Let's farther instance in the Ho∣nours3. Christs Honours.  in the Text. Ezek. 34. 19. of Christ: He is Honour it self in in the abstract, and a Plant of Renown; and it's our Duty to honour him, John 5. 22, 23. The Father hath Committed all Judg∣ment to the Son, that all Men should honour the Son, even as they Honour the Father:
He that Honoureth not the Son Honoureth not the Father, that hath sent him. Christ hath Honour in himself being the Foun∣tain of Honour and he puts Honour upon his Children: They are Honourable and Precious in his Sight. Isai. 43. 4. And he it is, that hath made them Kings and PriestsRev. 1. 5. unto God. And if he be Honourable, and his People are so in his account, hence we may infer that no Honour is like unto the Honour of a True Believer, It's true that in this World there are distinctions of Per∣sons, and due reverence ought to be given towards great Personages according to their Qualities (for all Levelling Designs are plain Breaches of the 5th. Commande∣ment.) Yet those are most noble whom Christ ennobles with the Graces of the Spirit, these render Nobility Noble in∣deed. It's the high Commendation of the Bereans. Act. 17. 11. These were more Noble Cùm com∣paratio vi∣deatur in∣stituta non Generis (e∣rant enim omnes isti Judaei) sed virtutis ac pietatis, generosiores malui in∣terpretari quam no∣biliores. Beza. than those in Thessalonica, in that they re∣ceived the Word with all readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. According to the Phi∣losopher Honor est in honorante, and so is a Man more or less Honourable, as he is in the esteem of Jesus Christ. Now if there be Honour in ther Ceature, what is there in the Creator? If there be Water in a Ri∣vulet, what is there in the Fountain from
whence it flows? If then we price and value here on Earth Persons of Honour, preferring them before our selves? O! how much more should we honour Christ, and prize his Ordinances, viz. His Word, Sacraments, and Sabbaths: O! How should we honour the Faithful Mi∣nisters of the Gospel, and give them that which they are worthy of (as the Apostle saith) 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double Ho∣nour, especially they who labour in the Word and Doctrine. That Christ is not only honourable but Honour it self. 4. Let's instance in the Wisdom of Christ, and herein he appears infinitely4. The Wisdom of Christ. precious: He is the Wisdom of the Father, the Treasurer of all Wisdom and Know∣ledg, for (saith the Apostle) In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Know∣ledg.Col. 2. 3. Christ is a Counsellor, Isa. 9. 6. And such a Counsellor as is beyond all compare. Other Counsellors give Coun∣sel for their Fees being mercenary, and according to their Reward take more or less pains for their Clients; but Christ is a free Counsellor, he gives his Counsel freely without expectation of Reward: Other Counsellors many times betray their Trust, but Christ never doth; for
he is a most faithful Counsellor. Other Counsellors have their Errors and err in Counsel, but Christ is infallible and never errs, and all his Counsel is infallible. O∣ther Counsellors may give good and pro∣fitable Counsel, but they cannot com∣mand Obedience thereunto, but Christ can command the Heart, and so mighity over-rule the Spirit of a Man, as to engage him to yeild ready and chearful Obedi∣ence unto his Commands; Farther other Counsellors, though perhaps they may give their Counsel freely, and may give good Counsel and prevail with their Cli∣ents to follow it, yet no Counsellor will give himself and part with his Life for the good of his Client: But Christ gives him∣self, lays down his Life for the good of his Children, whence then must we beg Wis∣dom, but from Jesus Christ the great Counsellor; and O! how precious is he for his Wisdom unto all true Believers?
SECT. III. Containing a second Head of Reasons in respect of all true Believers. A Second fort of Reasons and Argu∣mentsA second sort of Reasons in respect of true Believers. are drawn from true Belie∣vers. The Question is, How comes it to pass that they only account Christ preci∣ous? I answer, they only have their Sences exercised, they only have experi∣mented how good and how excellent Christ is, More particularly, 1. Every true Believet hath a Spiritual1. Every true Be∣liever hath a Spiritual Eye. Eye, and an inlightned Judgment to dis∣cern Beauties, Riches▪ Honours, Wis∣dom, Holiness, and all other Excellencies that are in Jesus Christ. A Stranger, an Alien from the Life of Christ discerneth no Beauty in a crucified Christ; but a true Believer, who is renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, discerns Beauty in Christ (even when he was spit upon, and crowned with Thorns and) crucified; he discerns the price of his Redemption, purchased by the effusion of Christ's precious Blood. A Believer beholds excellency in all the ways of Christ, even an exact pattern of Holiness, and he beholds excellency in all the Ordinances of Christ. The Word is
sweeter to him than the Honey and Ho∣ney-comb, and more pleasing than his appointed Food. Christ's day even the Christian Sabbath, called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1. 10. He accounts the Market day of his Soul, and the desire of days. And the Lord's Supper, he receives in remem∣brance of Christ, and therein testifies his Love and Thankfulness, and prepares himself for the reception of such an Hea∣venly Banquet. Now then seeing the Believer only hath the Eyes of his Mind opened, and his Understanding inlight∣ned: He only knows how to value Jesus Christ. He hath an experimental know∣ledg of Christ, he hath had Communion with the Father and the Son; he hath been partaker of his ravishing Consolations, and therefore values Christ before all the Treasures of the Universe. A Pearl of great price may be brought to an ignorantQuis Mag∣nam emit Margari∣tam, nisi cui notum est preti∣um? Musc: Man, but he heeds it not, and will not venture any price for it; but when the same Pearl is brought to a skilful Jewel∣ler, he will set a great value of it, and give largely for it. So carnal and ignorant Men of the World undervalue Christ, and, with the foolish Gadarens, desire his Room rather than his Company, and wish himMat. 8. 13. to depart from them: But a true Believer esteems Christ's Company before all the
Company in the Universe beside. He discerns such rare Beauties and Excellen∣cies in Christ, as he looks upon all sublu∣nary things as contemptible and of no value in comparison of Christ. This is the Man that hath his Eyes in his Head, who is endowed with a Spirit of Wisdom, and Understanding. He is the Spiritual Man who judgdeth all things and shall be judged1 Cor. 2. 14. , &c. . Thephyl. of none: whereas a carnal, or natural Man, receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually di∣scerned. O! what a great Mercy is it to have a seeing Eye and a hearing Ear, and a believing Heart! Christ pronounced such blessed, Math. 13. 16. Blessed are your Eyes for they see, and your Ears for they hear▪ and for this the Apostle pours forth his servent Prayers and Supplications, Eph. 1. 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom, and revelation in the knowledg of him, the Eyes of your understand∣ing being inlightned that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. 2. A true Believer hath a spiritual tas2. A true Believer hath a spi∣ritual tast.  ph. 1. 14. and relish of Christ's Goodness. He hath tasted that the Lord is gracious, he hath received the earnest of his Inheritance, viz
The first Fruits of Glory, even some glimpses of a beautiful and Transcendent∣ly excellent Saviour. Now having expe∣rimental knowledge of Christs Mercy in pardoning and purging of him, and ma∣king particular Application of Christ, as St. Paul did, Gal. 2. 20. who loved me and gave himself for me: Upon these conside∣rations (I say) how can it be otherwise but Christ must be Precious to such an one? Christ hath preheminence in a Belie∣vers estimation, for in his doubts he hath experimented Christ to be his Counsellor, and in his distress his Comforter, a Refuge in storm, Riches in Poverty, Health in Sickness, Life in Death: Christ is all in all to those who have experienced of his goodness. All true Believers put the highest appretiation upon Jesus Christ, both for what they already have and whatever they shall have. 1. They already have part of payment,1. Believers receive in this Life part of payment. earnest given in this Life of his love: They have Influences from the Spirit of Christ, They are endowed with the Gra∣ces of his Spirit: They injoy a Sacred Communion with him. They tast sweet∣ness in his Ordinances by his Gracious Presence, and by the Gracious Operati∣ons of his Spirit. For it's Christ's pre∣sence and the effectual working of his
Spirit, that makes an Ordinance effectual to the Soul. Of this all the Adopted Sons and Daughters of God are Partakers more or less in this Life. Now, for what they now enjoy they have cause and ac∣cordingly endeavour to extol the Dignity and Honour of Jesus Christ. 2. For what Believers shall have hereaf∣ter they account Christ pretious: Though2. Believers shall have Glory. Heb. 11. 26. . It importeth a remov∣ing of the lye from one Ob∣ject to an∣other. Mo∣ses turned his Eyes from the Pleasures of Egypt, and fix'd them on Heaven. Dr. Gouge. Col. 1. 27. ui Chri∣stus dulces∣cit mundus amarescit. they are not mercenary, yet with Moses they have an Eye unto the reward: The I∣sraelites in their tedious Pilgrimage had Canaan in their eye, and the Thoughts of Canaan sweetned their present hardship and Sufferings. Observe the order men∣tioned, Rom. 12. 12. Rejoycing in hope, pa∣tient in Tribulation. The hope of Glory is cause of rejoycing, and will make us more chearful to undergo Afflictions in this present World. Christ the hope of Glory, when he hath the preheminence in all things, and we account him all in all, then all things are but loss and dung when compared with Christ. All things are accounted bitter where Christ is sweet. Now the Crown of Glory, the purchased Possession, and the price of the high cal∣ling, and Eternal Life all these are the gift of God through Jesus Christ, having then these things in our deliberate and se∣rious Meditation, O! how infinitely shall
we esteem of Jesus Christ, more then our Hearts can conceive, or our Tongues can express. 3. A true Believer hath Spiritual Affe∣ctions,3. A true Believer hath spiri∣tual Affe∣ctions. and sets them all on work to mag∣nifie the excellency of Christ. For In∣stance. 1. His Love is swallowed up with the1. The Love of a Belie∣ver is on Christ. Love of Christ. He is with the Spouse sick of Love for Christ. The Love of Christ constrains him (2 Cor. 5. 14.) to do and suffer what Christ would have him. 2. His Joy is fixed on Christ: Christ is2. His Joy is fix'd on Christ. the Believers Joy, he cannot rejoice in Corn and Wine and affluence of earthly things, for there is Vanity and vexation in them all: But he rejoyceth in Christ: He delights hearing Christ speak to him in his Word, and in his speaking to Christ in Prayer, and Supplication. We read of the Joy of Espousals, and of the Joy of Harvest, and Vintage, but no Joy like to the Joy in God, and to Joy in the Holy Ghost, which is Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, Senica would have JoyVol laeti∣tiam tibi esse Domi. Sen. Vis nun∣quam esse tristis bene vive. Bona vita semper Gaudium habet, conscientia rei semper in poena est. Beza de inter. Dom. to be at home. Inward Joy, Joy of the Heart is better than an outward flashly Joy, and that is Joy wherein the Mind is
quieted: Now Christ alone can quiet the Mind and rejoyce the Spirit; For other Joys, Men may be seemingly Merry, and force an outward Mirth, when there's a damp upon their Spirits, and they are in∣wardly sad, but the Joy of Christ causeth a serious solid Mirth, so that a Believer may be full of inward Joy, though he may seem outwardly sad, (i. e.) or rather serious, having a sedate and composed Spi∣rit. Now to rejoice in Christ, shews how much we prize him. 3. Our desire is on him. That which3. His de∣sire is on Christ. we desire above all, and are most eager in pursuit of, it plainly evidenceth, that it's in our highest estimation. It's Christ whom the Believer desires above all, and as Rachel cryed out Give me Children, or else I dye: So a Believer cries Give me Christ, or else I dye: So did the Martyr inJ. Lambert Fox Act. and Mon. Vol. 3. the Flames.—None but Christ, none but Christ; Christ is the Love, Joy, Delight, and Desire of every true Believer. The Hunted Hart doth not more earnestly thirst after Water, then a Believer thirsts after Christ. Nothing but Christ can sa∣tisfie his desire; Cicero's works could not please Austin, because Christ was not men∣tionedAug. Con. l. 3. c. 4. Valde pro∣testatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab o. Ad in vita Lutheri. in them. Luther would not be put off with outward things, he lookt for
Christ and his Riches; He preferred them before all Preferments: They would not satisfie Bazil nor Caracciolus, nor other He∣roick Spirited Christians: Their Desires and Longings were after Christ, and Christ alone could satisfie their Desires. No sa∣tisfying or quietting a Believers Heart without Christ. SECT. IV. Containing an Ʋse of Reproof to al Ʋnbe∣lievers. Of Reproof. THE second Use is for Reproof unto non cre∣dentibus. Vulg. Ed. all Unbelievers. These are call'd dis∣obedient in the next words following my Text! Christ is the Stone which the uilders disallowed, yet it's made the head of the Corner. Now as Christ is to Belie∣vers Pretious, and esteemed the chief Corner Stone, so unto Unbelieves he is a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offence,1 Pet. 2. . even to them which stumble at the Word, be∣ing disobedient. Unbelievers undervalue Christ, and reject his Gospel, and refuse the Salvation tendered therein. These are they that strike at the Root of Religi∣on: For they endeavour to make the
Gospel no better then a Fable, nor Christ any whit better than an Impostor. Un∣believers are such high presumptuous Sin∣ners, as they presumptuously put the Lie upon God himself. 1 John 5. 10. He that Believeth not God, hath made him a Lyar; because he believes not the Record, that God gave of his Son. It's a high affront to put the Lie upon a Man, and the giving of the Lie hath oftimes caused sad Quar∣rals, but how much higher an Affront and Indignation is it to give God the Lie, and so doth every one who believes not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Farther to aggra∣vateAggrava∣tions of the Sin of Un∣belief. Aggrav. 1. Unbelief binds the hands of God. the Sin of Unbelief I shall lay down these Aggravations. 1. Unbelief (that I may speak with reverence) binds the Hands of God, and after a sort obstructs his Proceedings, for Proof whereof read Matth. 13. 58. And he did not many works there, because of their Ʋnbelief, God will not cast away his Mercy upon Unbelievers, who underva∣lue them. Christ immediately left the Gadarens, assoon as they prefer'd an una∣nimous Petition for his departure: Their Unbelief caused them to put a higher va∣lue upon their Swine than upon aAggrav. 2. Unbelief hinders the Effica∣cy of eve∣ry Duty. Jesus. 2. Unbelief obstructs and hinders the efficacy and benefit of every duty we per▪
form: For Instance, In praying, we have no hopes to speed unless we pray in Faith, though Prayer is an Ordinance of Gods own appointing, yet Prayer obtains no acceptance unless it be put up in Faith: The Promise is made only to Believers, Matth. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall re∣ceive. And so for hearing, Unbelief is the cause of unprofitable hearing. Heb. 4. 2. The Word Preached did not profit them not being mixt with Faith in them that heard it. In a word nothing is accepted as come∣ing from an Unbeliever. For what ever he doth he spoils in the doing for want of Faith. For whatsoever is not of Faith isRom. 14. 23. Aggrav. 2. Infidelity is accom∣panied with a Fraternity of Sins. 1. A the∣isme is a Compa∣nion of Unbelief. Sin. 3. Infidelity is compared with a fra∣ternity of Sins and Abominations. A∣mongst many I shall only instance in three, viz. Atheisme, Hardness of Heart, and Apostacy. 1. For Atheism. Unbelief is the cause of it. Did Men believe the Word of God, they durst not live without God in the World. There are two sorts of Atheists: There are speculative Atheists, such, who deny God, and his Works of Creation and Providence, and the Immortality of the Soul: They will believe no farther than sense, and yet if they had their sen∣ses
exercised they would believe that their is a God by a visible demonstration of his Works of Creation and Providence. The Book of Nature proves that there is a God, but how God is to be Worshipped in Christ, this is taught only in the Book of Holy Scriptures. When a Man deni∣ed a Deity, a Philosopher would bid him walk out of doors, and look about him. For the goodly Expansum of the Heavens and the Earth hanging upon no∣thing plainly prove that there is a God.Psal. 19. 1. Job 26. 7. A second sort of Aiheists are Practical, who live in all manner of wickedness; they neither fear Heaven nor Hell, Death nor Judgment; they run into all excess of Riot, adding Iniquity unto Iniquity, and so treasuring up unto themselves wrath a∣gainst the day of Wrath. Now unbelief is that Root that brings forth the Gall and Wormewood of speculative and practical Atheism: For did Men in serious compo∣sed thoughts consider that there is a Holy God, before whose Judgment Seat we must all appear, and from which there is no appeal they would than abhor all Athe∣ism both in Opinion and Practice. What caused Pharoah to answer so Atheistically to Moses, but his Unbelief Exod. 5. 2. And Pharoah said, who is the Lord, that I should obey his Voice, to let Israel go, I know
not the Lord (thus Atheistically he spoke) Neither will I let them go. This is the Language of desperate Unbelievers. 2. Infidelity is accompanied with hard∣ness2. Hard∣ness o Heart is a Compani∣on of Un∣belief. of Heart. That eminent place men∣tioned. Is. 6. 9, 10. and cited in all the four Evangelists, in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistle to the Romans shews the heavy Judgment of a hard Heart.—And he said, go and tell, his People, hear ye indeed but understand not; and see ye indeed, but per∣ceiveIntellectui fides adi∣tum aperit, infidelit as claudit. Aug. p. 3. not, make the heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted and healed: These words the Apostle cites Act. 28. 26. and applyeth them to the Unbelieving Jews. 3dly. Infidelity is accompanied with3. Aposta∣cy is the Compani∣on of Un∣belief. Apostacy. Unbelief is the Mother and Apostacy the Daughter: And if we would prevent Apostacy we must beware of Un∣belief, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed Brethren least there be in you a Heart of Ʋnbelief in de∣parting from the Living God. Unbelief causeth Multitudes of Carnal Men to leave Christ's colours; and hide them∣selves under Antichrist that Man of Sin.2 Thess. . 3. What's the reason that Men make hast to be Rich, and with all violence pursue the Riches of this World, and stick at no
course be it never so unjust and base for∣getting worldly wealth; it's because they will not trust God? What's the reason then when Men are in great straights and difficulties they will not wait Gods lei∣sure, but wind themselves out by making Breaches upon their Consciences? It's for want of Faith and dependance on God. Lastly Unbelief meets with dreadfulAggrav. 4. From the Judg∣ments. 1. Unbe∣lievers are given over to a Judi∣cial Blind∣ness. Judgments. 1. Unbelievers are given over to a Ju∣dicial blindness, what was their Sin, is their Judgment, 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom the God of the World hath blinded the minds of them, which believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ which is the I∣mage of God should shine unto them. Be∣cause when the light of the Gospel breaks in by the Ministry of the Word, People shut their eyes and will not see, there∣fore God leaves them to blindness as a dreadful Judgment. 2. Unbelievers are given over to De∣lusions,2. Unbe∣lievers are given over to Delusi∣ons. 2 Thess. 9. 10, 11. and to believe Lies. For this cause Antichrist shall come with all decei∣vableness of Unrighteousness, Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might he Damned who believed not the Truth, but
had Pleasure in Ʋnrighteousness. To be given over to a Spirit of Delusion, and to have the Leprosie in the Head is a terri∣ble Judgment: Such an one the Priest pro∣nounced utterly unclean, his Plague is inLev. 13. 44. the Head, Levit. 13. 44. The Gradations are no more common then true; first a Sceptique to question every truth, next an Heretick, at last an Atheist. 3. Unbelievers are given over to final3. Unbe∣lievers are given over to final im∣penitency. Impenitency. Joh. 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins. No Death so bad as to die in ones Sins; To die on the Wheel, to be torn in pieces by Wild Horses, to be burnt in a Cauldron of Scalding Lead or Scalding Oyl, these are exquisite Torments and Cruel Deaths: But to die in Sins, and to die Unreconci∣led to Jesus Christ, this is the worst of all sorts of Deaths beyond all expression and Apprehension. We read of a dreadful Woe against the vilest of Sinners, who have this brand of Infamy stampt upon them, Jude 12. Trees whose Fruit withereth,. without Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots. This is the condition of Unbe-Lievers: They are as twice dead, being altogether and certainly dead, irrecovera∣bly, and totally deprived of all Vital Ope∣rations.
4. Unbelievers are in a state of Dam∣nation.4. Unbe∣lievers are in a state of Dam∣nation. Joh. 3. 11. . Di∣ctum est vetus; Illo nocens se damnat, quo peccat die, si in legibus Ro∣manis.—Ipse se Pa∣pae subdit. Et qui sceleratum capiant consilium suo merito puniuntur. Grot. Nil tam e∣rit debile tam con∣fractum tam obje∣ctum, in quo vel a∣liqua spes sit salutis acceptan∣dae, quod non cura∣turus ac servaturus sit. Musc. Joh. 3. 26. Unless Mercy interpose to give them space and Grace to repent; They shall be certainly Damned. An Unbelie∣ver is condemned already as a Malefactor Condemn'd to Death, who (though he may be a while Repriv'd, without all Que∣stion shall shortly be Executed: Christ pronounceth Damnation to all Unbelie∣vers, Mark. 16. 16. He that Believeth not shall be Damned. Christ, when he was to take the last farewell of his Disciples leaves with them singular Exhortations and Consolations, but he thundreth out dread∣ful Menaces against all Unbelievers: O! how doth Christ raise up weak Believers: Where is but a little Faith he increaseth it, and where there is weak Faith he strength∣ens it. That Prophecy, Isa. 42. 3. he ap∣plyeth to himself, Matth. 12. 20. A brui∣sed Reed shall he not break, and smoaking Flax shall he not quench, till he send forth Judgment into Victory. But as for those that believe not, Christ pronounceth their dreadful doom; They shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abideth on them. They are ranked with the Black Regiment of Hell for their company, and they shall have Hell for their Portion, Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and Ʋnbelievers and the a∣bominable and Murderers, and Whore-mon∣gers
and Sorcerars and Idolaters, and all Lyars shall have their Portion in the Lake which burneth with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death. By what hath been said in the forementioned Aggravati∣ons, who of any understanding would continue willingly one moment in the state of Unbelief? But herein consists the greatness of their Misery, that though they are in a State of Unregeracy, Blind∣ness, enmity against God, and Infidelity, yet they are not sensible of their conditi∣on: O! what necessity is incumbent up∣on every one of us to ask the Question as the Disciples did: Is it I? Is it I? Am I the Unbeliever? Did a Man know the greatness of the Sin, and the greatness of the Judgment of Unbelief, he durst nei∣ther Eat nor Drink nor Sleep in that mi∣serable condition.
CHAP. X. Containing an Ʋse of Examination. 3. Use For Exa∣mination. SECT. I. I proceed to a third Ʋse, which is for Exa∣mination,Sect. 1. Examina∣tion whe∣the we prize Christ. to put every one of us upon an exact Tryal and Inquiery, to ask this Que∣stion in a particular manner, Do I prize Jesus Christ? NOW▪ by way of Character, Il'e lay down three Propositions. 1. Those that set the highest price ofProp. 1. Christ have an earnest high and unfeigned likeing and approbation of Christ, and his ways and his Ordinances. 2. They endeavour to be like and con∣formableProp. 2. unto Christ. 3. They burn in ardent affection andProp. 3.
love to Christ. To handle them distinctly.Propos. 1. Those that prize Christ have a high lik∣ing of Christ & his ways. . Just. Mar. Q. Orrhod. 98. Those that set the highest price on Christ, have an earnest high and unfeig∣ned likeing and approbation of Christ and his Ways and Ordinances, and where this high approbation is found it will be evidenced by these three Characteristical Notes, ensuing. 1. There will be a deliberate choice of1. A deli∣berate choice of Christ and his ways Christ and his ways: Men are not born true Believers by nature, but they are made so by Grace and Mercy. A Believer whose Sences are exercised, to whom God hath given a pretious anointing. he chooseth Christ (though with his Cross) before all the Treasures in the Universe. Thus did Moses choose Christ however Reproach'dHeb. 11. 25. rather than all the Treasures of Aegypt. The ways of Christ are such excellent al∣luring and rational ways, as a Man of un∣derstanding will try them, and walk in them, and prefer them before all the King∣doms of the World, and the Glory of them. Let it be put to Mens second and serious thoughts, whether they would take Christ with his Cross, or the World with all it's Pomp and Bravery, whether Men would make choice of those Riches
which are transient and Fading, or those which are durable, and last to all Eterni∣ty, it is easy to imagine what choice a Wise Man would make who is endowed with a Spiritual Sence to understand the excellency of the ways of Christ. For such an excellent Spirit the Apostle prays Phil. 1. 9, 10. And this I pray that your love may abound more and more in all knowledge, and all Judgment, that ye may approve things that are excellent. 2. There will be an exceeding Cordi∣al2. A de∣light and rejoycing in Christ and his ways. delight, and rejoicing in Christ and his ways. O! how is a true Believer ra∣vished with Joy, when he enjoys Com∣munion with Christ? The Evnuch after he was Baptized by Phillip went on his wayAct. 8. 39. rejoycing. A whole City was full of Joy after they had received the Gospel. We read what exuberant Joy the Prophet had for the Word of God, Jer. 15. 16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the Joy and rejoycing of my Heart. A Godly Man is known by this Character, his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditatePsal. 1. 2. Day and Night. God's Testimonies were David's Delight and Counsellors, sweeter then Honey, and the Honey Comb, more valuable than Rich Spoiles, even than Thousands of Gold and Sylver. He than
that knows and hath experimented the Beauties, Treasures, and Consolations of Christ, O! how doth he delight in Com∣munion with Christ? O! how doth he prize Ordinances, and Delights to walk in that way where Christ comes by? The Joy of taking great Spoil, the Joy of the Vintage, the Joy of Espousals, the Joy of Harvest, are mentioned in Scrip∣ture to represent causes of rejoycing: But all these are infinitely short of that Joy which is in the Heart of a true Believer, who hath a new Name, a white Stone, and hidden Manna, who hath a Sacred Com∣munionRev. 2. 17. with Christ, and feels his Divine Influences: This is a Joy Unspeakable beyond the Capacity of Men and Angels. Wherefore he that hath a liking and ap∣probation of Christ and his Ordinances, he Joys in them, (as Job Professed) more than in his necessary Food, and with theJob 23. 12 Love sick Spouse, he takes more delight in Christ, and is at more pains to seek him then all besides, Cant. 3. 1. Even on the Bed of Sickness and Affliction the Spouse sought her Beloved. 3. A ready and couragious Spirit to3. A ready and cou∣ragious Spirit to bear Testi∣mony for Christ▪ bear Testimony for Christ and the truth of the Gospel. He that likes and loves Christ will vindicate him and his Honour from the Reproach of Gain-sayers: When
a Believer speaks of Christ, he will speak with Reverence and highest appretiation of him, when he speaks to Christ, he will speak with Faith, Fervency, and Humili∣ty: And when he speaks for Christ he will discover an Heroical Magnanimous Spirit, such a Spirit the Apostles had when theyActs . 17. . He∣braeorum more, qu vehemen∣tem & a∣crem signi∣ficant in∣terminati∣onem Eras. were straitly threatned, that they should speak no more in the Name of Jesus, they answer'd with an undaunted Resolution. Act. 4. 19, 20. But Peter and John answered and said unto them, whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, Judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard? Thus the Apostle Paul took cou∣rage against Elymas the Sorcerer when he sought to turn away the Deputy from the Faith: The Apostle branded him for the Child of the Devil, and an Enemy of allAct. 13. 10. Praedicare Evangeli∣um Dei, nihil liud est quam derivare in se toius in∣ferni furo∣rem & Sa∣tanae. Lut. Loc. Com. Righteousness. Luther knew what it would cost him, even to bring all the Devils in Hell about his ears, yet he was resolved to go to Worms and Preach the Gospel, though every Tile on the Houses was a Devil to oppose him. Bishop Latimer said often, that the Preaching of the Gos∣pel would cost him his Heart-Blood: And so it came to pass, for when he was a Bur∣ning, his Blood gushed forth, and quench'd a great part of the Fire. Here then is a
Proof of a Christians likeing and appro∣ving of Christ and his Gospel, when he will plead for the Truths, which are in Je∣sus, and vindicate Christs Honour from Contempt and Reproaches. A true Be∣liever (when he is called to witness for Christ) is neither like a Still-Born, nor a Tongue-Ty'd Person, but he will speak for Christ, and stand up for the cause of Christ, what ever it cost him. He is not affraid to be good, nor affraid to own a despised Christ, and a Persecuted Gospel. To be of a timerous and cowardly Spirit, and to seal up ones Lips, when Christs in∣terest lies a bleeding, what's this but to be spiritually benum'd, or else Possessed of a dumb Devil? Wherefore Luther professed that he would rather be guiltyImpius sim avarus, a∣dulter, i mninm vitiorum reus; mo∣do impii silenti non arguar, dum Dominus patitur. Luth. of the worst of Crimes, than of wicked silence when his Lord suffered.
SECT. II. Whether we prize Christ by our likeness and Conformity to him. I Proceed to the second Proposition,Prepos. 2. Those that prize Christ en∣deavour to be like and con∣formable to him. that those who prize Christ endea∣vour to be like and conformable unto him. Christ is our Head, and we are his Members, and there ought to be a confor∣mity between the Head and the Mem∣bers. And where this is▪ it will be evi∣denced in these three Particulars. 1. There will be a conformity to the1. There will be a conformi∣ty to the commands of Christ. Mark 1. 15. Mat. 6. 20. Mat. 6. 24. commands of Christ, as that perfect abso∣lute and infallible Rule of our Obedience. Christ commands us to repent, and be∣lieve the Gospel, to lay up for our selves Treasures in Heaven, to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, to ask and it shall be given you, to seek andMat. 7. 7. ye shall find, to knock and it shall be opened∣unto you: Likewise Christ commands, enter ye in at the Straight Gate, &c. In aMat. 7. 13. word Christ in his Gospel commands the whole Duty of Man. The Gospel is eve∣ry way comprehensive and sufficient to prescribe all things needful for our Salva∣tion.
We may not then devise ways of our own Heads and Fancies, and prescribe humane Inventions and Superstitions for Politick ends to justle out Divine Institu∣tions. It is not any Rule which will serve the turn. As it was not any Partern which would serve for the Building of the Ta∣bernacle, but that Pattern only which was shew'd to Moses in the Mount. And the Lord gave a strict charge, Exod. 25. 40. And look that thou make them after their Pattern which was shewed thee in the Mount: Neither is it any Rule will serve, but only the Rule of the Word of Christ, which is the Everlasting Gospel, and com∣mands our Obedience. Wherefore the A∣postle glorieth in nothing but the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14, 15. Neither Circumci∣sion availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature. And such are Partakers of Peace, and walk according to his Rule, Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Let then Christ's command ingage us to a ready and chear∣ful Obedience, and let's not dispute but obey what he commandeth, when he bids seek my Face, let our Hearts return this ready answer, Thy face Lord will IPsal. 27. 8. seek.
2. There must be a conformity to the2. There must be a Confor∣mity to the Life of Christ. Life of Christ. Christ's Life is a perfect Pattern for our imitation, and an exact example of Holiness. Christ lives in eve∣ry true Believer, and he lives in Christ. Christ's Image, which consists in Righte∣ousness,Gal. 2. 20. is imprinted upon the Lives and Hearts of all his Adopted Children. Christ propounds his own example for Meekness and Humility: Let's then thus argue the case every one in particular, Was ChristMat. . 29. humble, and shall I swell with Pride? Was Christ meek, and shall I be transported with anger? Christ was much in Prayer and Meditation, much exercised in watch∣ing and fasting; O! what a similitude ought there to be in every one of us unto the Life of Christ? Christ went about doing good, comforting the Afflicted, counselling the ignorant, strengthning the weak. His whole business, even his Meat and Drink, was to do the Will of his Father. Now what pains should we take to imitate Christ in some proportion? Quest. But some will say how can we be  as Holy, as Humble, and as Meek as Christ was? Answ. I Answer, though we cannot at∣tain  to that Equality and Measure of Holi∣ness, which is in Christ, yet we must en∣deavour after the quality and similitude
of that Holiness which was in Christ. And what measure of Grace we have already attained, we may not propound as the Just Standard, or the Ne plus ultra, but still we must labour for augmentation of every Grace, after the example of the A∣postle, forgetting those things which are be∣hind,Phil. 3. 13, 14. and reaching unto those things which are before, I press towards the Mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Je∣sus. Every one that hath true Grace la∣bours for more accessions to it, and heQui desi∣nit profice∣re, incipit deficere. Bern. Desinit esse bonus, qui desinit vel▪ le fieri me∣lior. Bern. 3. There will be a Confor∣mity to Christ in his Suffer∣ings. that ceaseth to get more Grace, begins to fail of what he seemeth to have. Here than is that perfect Pattern for our imita∣tion, even the Holiness, Meekness, Hu∣mility, and other Graces which eminent∣ly appeared in Jesus Christ. 3. There will be a conformity to Christ in his Sufferings. The Apostle tells us, Phil. 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh, for his Bodies sake which is the Church. We are not to conceive Christs Sufferings to be imperfect (for by one Offering he hath per∣fected for ever them that are sanctified.) But as Christ had personal Sufferings in his Humane Body, which are fini∣shed, so Christ hath and shall yet have more Sufferings in his Mystical Bo∣dy
the Church. Christ hath suffered once for all upon the Cross. But the Saints Militant (which are Christ's Body) must prepare for Sufferings, they are-appointed1 Thess. 3. 3. Luk. 9. 23. thereunto. They must take up their Cross daily. When Saul was Converted to be a Preacher of the Gospel, and was chang'd both in his Name and Nature, and of a Persecuting Saul, became a Preaching Paul, and a chosen Vessel to bear the nameActs 9. 15, 1. of Christ unto the Gentiles, then the Lord shewed him how great things he must suffer for his sake. And this is that knowledge that the Apostle so highly valued that he might know the fellowship of his Suffer∣ings,Phil. 3. 10. being conformable unto his Death. Every true Christian is a Martyr in Heart and Resolution, willing to lay down his Life for Christs sake. It's observ'd that Luther used to say that he should never have the Honour to dye for the Professing of the Gospel: But he was a Man vali∣ent for the truth, and a Martyr in the purpose and Integrity of his Heart, and a willing mind obtains acceptance. It's said by Faith Abraham when he was tryedHeb. 11. 17. offered up Isaack. God accepted the real Intentions of Abraham, as if he had actu∣ally Sacrificed Isaack. Christians must consider before hand, what Religion will cost them, not only
the loss of Liberties, Riches, Honours, but sometimes the loss of their Lives al∣so. And happy are they that die for and in Christ. Men in this respect have a preheminence above Angels, for Angels have not Bodies to suffer withal as Men have. Christians must consider that they are Members of Christ their Head, and he hath gone before them in Sufferings, leaving them an example to follow his Steps. Shall Christian sexpect Pleasure, and think to Crown themselves with Rose Buds, when Christ drank a Cup of trembling, and wrung out those bitter ingredients down to the very Dreggs? Shall Christians pamper their Appetites and live in Luxury and Wantoness whenNon opor∣tet membra deliciari sub capite spinis coro∣nato. Tert. Phil. 3. 10. as Christ drank Gall and Vinegar, and in scorn was Crown'd with Thorns? Let's consider farther that we must with the Apostles desire to be made conformable unto Christ's Death. Quest. But it will be askt wherein con∣sists this conformity unto Christ's Death? Answ. I Answer in regard of Mortifi∣cation of Sin. Christ condemned Sin inRom. 8. 3. the Flesh. And there holds some propor∣tion beween the Death of Christ, and the Death of in u. Christ died for us that our Sins should dye in us: Christ died a Cursed Death to note that we should ab∣hor
Sin as a most accursed thing: Christ drank Gall and Vinegar to signifie the sharpness of Gods Displeasure against Sin, and that Sin ought to be in our account a most grievous and bitter thing: Christ was nailed to the Cross and endured great pains to shew that we should never let Sin have a quiet Minute of ease, but that we should Crucifie every corruption. SECT. III. Shewing that those that prize Christ burn in ardent Afflictions of Love to him. LOve is as strong as Death: It's hot∣terProp. 3. then the Coals of Juniper: All the Waters and Floods of Persecution can∣not quench Love. There's nothing can turn Christ's Love from us, and therefore nothing should be able to extinguish our Love towards him. Now where Christ is valued there cannot be wanting an ar∣dent Love. For those things which we prize most, we love most: But because there are many pretences, and semblances of Love, where Love in reallity is want∣ing; we must bring the Love which
ought to be in every Believer towards Christ, unto the Touchstone and Tryal. Wherefore I shall fix upon five tryals of our Love to Christ. 1. Our Love must consist in an univer∣sal,1. Our Love must consist in an univer∣sal Obedi∣ence to the Com∣mands of Christ. chearful, and cordial Obedience unto the Commands of Christ. Obedience to Christ's Commands, is an evident Chara∣cter of our sincere Love to Christ, John 14. 21. He that hath my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loveth me. And ver. 23. If any Man loves me, he will keep my Words. It's not the verbal Profes∣sion of Love to Christ, that will serve the turn, but a practical Conformity to the Commands of Christ, which will obtain acceptance. Pretences of Love are like the barren Fig-tree, which had Leaves without Fruits, or like the Apples of So∣dom, which seemed beautiful to the Eye, but as soon as they were touched, they dissolved into Cinders and Ashes. We must not be Christians only in Name, but in Deed and in Truth: We must not only name the Name of Christ, but we must depart from Iniquity. And we must not only say that we love Christ, but we must express our Love by our Obedience unto his Commandments. And we must notDeus non vult cum exceptone coli, Le Dei est una tota copulutiva. Illeric. make any exceptions but we must take in
all, It's commonly observed, that the Love which descends is greater than that which ascends, as the Love of the Father to his Child is greater than the love of the Son to the Father. I am sure God's Love to us is infinitely greater than our Love can be to him. However we must endea∣vour after a sincere, chearful, and univer∣sal Love. God's Love to us is his Bounty and Beneficence, our Love to him must be a Love of Duty and Service. And though we can never equalize and match the Love of Christ to us. Yet we must endeavour by our Obedience to study to please him, and walk in the ways of his Word, and hereby we giue Testimony of our Love to Jesus Christ. 2. Our Love to Christ must be a su∣pream2. Our Love to Christ. must be a supream & principal Love. and principal Love. Inferiour and secondary sorts of Love are due to Relati∣ons, provided they be in subordination to the Love of Christ, and neither stand in competition with him, nor opposition to him. We may and ought to love our Relations, and love our Lives and Crea∣ture-Comforts, always provided that the primacy of our Affections be given to Christ. Though things of this World be dear and near unto us, yet Christ must be esteemed dearer and nearer than all. Christ must be preferred above all and be∣fore
all. The Parents of our Bodies, the Children of our Flesh, the Wives of our Bosom, the Blood in our Veins, the Heart in our Breast, even all the dearest things in this World must be laid down and fore∣gone if they stand in comparison and com¦petition with Jesus Christ. That Man that hath had experience of the Love of Christ in his own Soul, and hath tasted how good and gracious Christ is, he can∣not but acknowledg, that there is ten thousand times more Beauty and amia∣bleness, more Honours and Riches, and more solid Satisfaction in Christ, than all the choicest admirable things, which the World can afford in its greatest Estate and Confluence. Christ therefore must have the chiefest Love, more than superlative, even our Love to him must be beyond all degrees of comparison. It's to be observ∣ed, that the high Priest might not marry a Widdow; Why not a Widdow? Be∣causeLev. 21. 14. her first Love was given to a former Husband. The high Priest was a Type of Christ: He will not be contented with a second Love; He must be loved su∣preamly and principally, His Services must be the best: A Lamb without ble∣mish, a Male in the Flock, and the best of the Substance was to be offered unto God in the Levitical Law. And under the
Gospel, the Worship must be pure, pure Hands must be lifted up and purifyed Hearts are required by Christ. FerventJam. 5. 16. 2 Cor. 1, 12. Mal. 1. 8. Prayer, Sincere Love: Simplicity and Godly Sincerity are required, God rejects the lame and the blind and curseth the DeceiverMal. 1. 14. that hath in his Flock a Male, and voweth and offers unto the Lord a corrupt thing. God'sMat. 6. 23. Kingdom and his Righteousness must be sought in the first place. That Figure cal∣led  must be abhorred in God's Worship. God must have the prime of our Strength, the Marrow of our Bones, the Vigour of our Soul, the Activity of our whole Body dedicated to his Service: Whatever is lovely and desireable under the Sun must strike Sail, and yeild Ho∣mage unto Jesus Christ. The supream and primary, the highest and the dearest Love must be given unto Christ alone. 3. This Love must be a whole entire3. Our Love must be whole and undi∣vided. and undivided Love. It must not be shared with any Corrivals: Christ will not admit any Competitors or Corrivals with him. He will either have all our Love or none. Christ allows not Partnership, nor will have his love to be let to halves. Christ is all in all unto us, and our Affe∣ction must be all in all unto him. When the Sun ariseth in its Brightness, the lesser Stars appear not: upon the appearance of
our Love to Christ, all other sorts of love vanish and disappear. I haue read that in a Battel between Alexander and Darius a Motion was made, that there should be made an equal devision between them, so that by giving each a part a farther tryal by the Sword might be laid aside. But Alexander refused the Motion; No saith he, there can be but one Sun in the Firma∣ment, meaning that his aim was to be sole Lord and Master of all. To Christ this may be much more applyed; He is our sole Redeemer; He hath conquered the World, Satan, and our own corrupt Selves; He hath wrought a perfect Re∣demption for us; He hath merited our whole Love, and requires it wholly and undividedly. It was the Language of that notorious Strumpet, Let it be neither thine nor mine, but let it be devided. A di∣vided Heart is faulty, Hos. 10. 2. Their Heart is divided, now they shall be found faulty. David professed with my wholePs. 119. 10. Heart have I sought thee. And our Love must be with the whole Man, many Alls are reckoned together, Deut. 6. 45. Hear O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength▪ Christ expects from us a total, not a partial Love. He will not
have his Love parted between him and Anti-christ, between him and Mammon, between him and a Lust; Christ will not be so unequally yoaked: The Ark and Dagon, the Ephod and Teraphim cannot stand together. A Mungril Religion, partly for Popery, and partly for Prote∣stantism, is abominable in the fight of God. When Men (as Water-men look one way and Row another) pretend in visage and shew to be for the Interest of Christ, but in reallity drive Designs for Anti-christ: When Men (as Sanballat and Tobiah offer∣ed to build for the Jews, but intended to destroy them) pretend in publick to pro∣pagate the true Religion, but in private undermine and seek the extirpation there∣of: such as these God will discover and their Sins will find them out, and they shall appear not only odious to God, but to Men also. We read of Redwald King of the West Saxons, that after he had profes∣sed himself converted to Christianity, he rected in the same Church, one Altar for the Worship of the God of the Christi∣ans, and another for the Worship of his Heathen Gods. And this way of wor∣shipping God was no worshipping, and worse than no worshipping at all. We have an Instance in that mixture of the Samaritans Religion: Several Nations
and Cities amongst them according to their own devised Intentions chose several Gods. And it is said, 2 Kings 17. 33. They feared the Lord, and served their own Gods. But what a Judgment the Lord passeth on them, Psal. 34. Ʋnto this day, they do after their former manner, they fear not the Lord. If then we pretend to love Christ, and love other things in competition with him, we do not love him at all. It was the great Sin of the Jews to make mixt Marriages, and to be unequally yoaked with Hea∣thens: Insomuch as their Language be∣trayed them not to be a genuine sort of the Jews, not of the right breed of the Jews: For they speak in the Language of the Jews, and in the Language of Ashdod. So it's their Sin, and a far greater to join Christ with Harlots, I mean, to yoak Christ and Anti-christ (as far as in them lies) together. And such there are, who would reconcile England and Rome, Pro∣testantism and Popery. But they may as soon reconcile the Artick and Antartick Poles, considering that there are between us fundamental differences both in Princi∣ples and Practices: Christ will say one day as Elias doth to the Worshippers of Baal; How long halt ye between two2 King. 18. 21. Opinions: If the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal then follow him. So it may be
said, why do People hanker between Christ and Antichrist? Why do they not plainly declare themselves what they de∣sign, that so we may know where to find them? But be assured that if Men neglect Christ and seek after other Lovers: If they leave the true Worship, and betake themselves to false Worship; they will pay dear for it. Let Men pretend what they will, if they have a Heart and a Heart, a double and a divided Heart partly be∣tween Christ and any other, Christ will not accept of their Love as genuine and right, but account it false and spurious. 4. Our Love to Christ must be sincere4. Our Love to Christ must be sincere. and incorrupt without Hypocrisy, ab∣stracted from all self-Interests, and sinister Respects. He that loves Christ must love him with a single, sincere, and incorrupted Spirit. Incorrupted I name; because I have the Apostle for my Warrant. Grace be unto all them that love our Lord JesusEph. 6. 24. Christ in Sincerity. The Word rendred for Sincerity signifies Incorruption: Such Significa∣tur is, qui nulla vi, nullis pre∣cibus, nullis illecebris, i. e. a re∣cto abduci patitur. Grot. who are sincere and incorrupt abhor all mercenary Love and all verbal Comple∣ments. Between true Love and comple∣mental Love, there's as wide and vast a difference, as there is between Courtship and Friendship. Christ ought to be loved for Himself, for his Beauty, Goodness, and
Excellency. There's enough in Christ to enamour a Soul, and ravish it with De∣lights, notwithstanding all the hardships and sufferings which come by Christ. For one Beam of Christ's reconciled counte∣nance and one glimpse of his Love will su∣perabundantly recompence the greatest sufferings for his sake. Wherefore let us lay aside altogether all oblique aims, and colla∣teral Interests, and in the simplicity and singleness of our Hearts love Christ with the most ardent Affection. The Shecemites embraced Circumcision upon a Politick Design, to compass in all the Cattel and Substance of the Israelites. The PeopleGen. 34. 23. followed Christ for the Loaves: And therefore the Gadarens petitioned for Christ's departute, because they were so affected with the loss of their Swine, inso∣much that they preferred their Swine be∣fore a Jesus. A Man mentioned in the Gospel, pretended such respect to Christ, as he offered to follow him whether ever he went: But Christ who knew his Heart, discovered, that he only aimed at his own accommodations for a dwelling place, as may appear by Christ's Answer, Mat. 8. 20. And Jesus saith unto him, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man hath not whereon to lay his Head.
Herein consists the high commendation of Love, when self is abandoned, and the Beloved is entirely embraced, and when we renounce all self Love, and in Sinceri∣ty set our Affection on Jesus Christ, then our Love is genuine and of the right stamp: For to love Christ for Himself and Holiness for its self is a constitutive difference of a Child of God, a divisive difference to distinguish a true from a counterfeit Lover, and one that loveth in shew and semblance, from him that loveth in reallity and in Truth. 5. Love to Christ must be constant and5. Love to Christ must be constant. lasting; we must not love him by fits and starts, as humors take us, and as may serve most for our particular Interests: Both in Prosperity and Adversity, in a Storm as well as in a Calm, in days of Afflictions and Troubles (when Wars and Oppositi∣ons are multiplyed) as well as in Halcio∣nian Days of Peace and Tranquillity, our love must be one and the same, fixed on Jesus Christ. The Church was of such an excellent frame of Spirit, as to give thanks in a time of God's displeasure, Isa. 12. 1. O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with me. Both in Prosperity and Adversity David had a fixed and an esta∣blished Spirit. For when his Soul was a∣mongst Lyons, and when their Teeth was
as Spears and Arrows, and their TnguaPsal. 57. 7. sharp Sword. When his Enemies prepared Nets and digged Pits for him, yet then he professeth, My Heart is fixed, O God, my Heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise. And when he was in Prosperity he shewsPs. 108. 1. the same excellent temper. O God my Heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, even with my Glory. Love is that grand lasting Grace: It lasts unto Eternity. Faith and Hope carry us (as I may say) to Heaven Doors and there leave us, for when we enter in∣to Heaven our Faith is turn'd into Vision, and our Hope is turn'd into Fruition; there we shall enjoy the blessed Presence of the Holy Trinity: But Love abideth for ever. We shall always love God: Our Love is here begun on Earth and shall never be consummated till we per∣take of Eternal Glory. Wherefore then whilst we live here in this World, let us not abate a jot of our Love, but dayly endeavour after Augmentations: Not∣withstanding Hardships and Oppositions from the World, let our Love to Christ be like the Love of Jonathan that abode in its Strength. Love which holds out to the end, which passeth through good re∣port and bad report; both through fair and foul Weather: that's the Love which
will obtain Acceptance. Love will con∣quer Difficulties, as Jacob's did to Rachel, who thought many years but a few days because he loved her. Love to Christ will make us willing to pass through Fire and Water, and encounter Sons of Anach, and Beasts of Ephesus. Love will cause a Christian to be willing to bear and suffer any thing for Christ: Persecutions, Op∣positions, and variety of Sufferings, try the Sincerity and Constancy of a Christi∣an's Love to Christ, There's a constrain∣ing Power in the Love of Christ, which engageth all Christ's adopted Children to hold fast their Profession, to be faithful to Death, to account Christ All in all, and persevere in their Faith, so that Difficulties are as Whet-stones to sharpen a Believers Fortitude. And the Snuffers of Persecu∣tion makes the Saints Candles burn brigh∣ter. And thus in these five mentioned particular Tryals, I have represented our Love to Christ.
CHAP. XI. Containing an Ʋse of Exhortation to labour for the excellent Grace of Faith, and an Ʋse of Direction. THe foorth Use is for Exhortation.  For Exhortati∣on to la∣bour for Faith. Is it so that Christ is only precious to Believers, then let's hence infer one grand Duty to labour for the excellent Grace of Faith. Hereby we shall set the highest value on Christ. Faith is an in∣strumental means to help us to know the excellency of Christ: For Faith is an Eye to ehold Christ, Faith is a Hand to re∣ceive Christ, a Mouth to feed on him, an Heart to believe on him. But we must interpose this caution, that Faith receives all of Grace, and Mercy, and nothing of Merit. Faith embraces Christ, but Christ first gives Faith to embrace him. Faith rests and relies on Christ, but Christ sup∣ports our Faith. If we believe, he works it in us, we must be thankful for what we receive, and give God the Praise and Glo∣ry
of all. The Apostle gives an absolute determination, Eph. 2. 8. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, it is the gift of God. That our Endeavours, Affections, even the whole Man may be quickned to get this choice and excellent Grace of Faith. I shall lay down these ensuing persuasive Arguments in the following Section. SECT. I. Containing persuasive Arguments to get Faith. THat I may use all the prevailing Arguments (as far as I apprehend) to get Faith, I shall insist on these follow∣ing. 1. Faith is a condition of the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Works was,  Faith is the condi∣tion of the Covenant of Grace. do this and live, none but Christ who is God and Man could perform this Cove∣nant. The Covenant of Works will not abate us a Transgression in the least title: It exacts perfect Obedience, and curseth the Transgressor. Who continues not in allGal. 3. 10.
things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do them: But the Covenant of Grace runs, Believe and thou shalt be saved. The Law sheweth us our Sores and Wounds: the Gospel applyeth Soveraign healing Plasters. The Law like a Serjeant arrests and shuts us up, and so hampers us that we cannot possibly escape. The Gos∣pel sets us at Liberty, Gal. 3. 22. But the Lex veluti sit com∣plexa, con∣cluserit que omnes in peccatum, peccatu∣rum virsus ostendit. Oecum. Rom. 9. 20. Scripture hath concluded all Men under Sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Who then can lay any claim to this Covenant but the true Believer, God accepts the Faith of a Believer through Chtist's Me∣rits, instead of legal Obedience: Where fore we read of that Righteousness which was of Faith, which is a Righteousness im∣puted by Christ's Righteousness, even a Righteousness without us, which is our Justification. And here's the great privi∣ledg of a Believer; That he is justified by the Righteousness of another, and not by any Righteousness of his own, but only by the Righteousness of Christ by imputa∣tion: By Christ's Merits; of Unrighteous we are made Righteous. For saith the A∣postle, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he hath made him to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. So that hence it's evident that He was
accounted a Sinner by Imputation, for he imputed our Sins unto himself, and we are accounted Righteous by Imputation, for he imputes his Righteousness unto us. Here then appears Riches of Mercies, that Evanglical Righteousness is accepted in∣stead of Legal Righteousness. Christ's Wisdom makes amends for our Folly: Christ's Obedience for our Disobedience, and Christ's absolute Perfection, for our manifold Imperfections. Now the Believer only hath interest in the Covenant of Grace. Covenants es∣sentially include Conditions. The Cove∣nant is a free Covenant, a free Gift, and of free Grace. The Condition on our part is Faith, but the Condition as well as the Covenant are given of God. Take heed therefore O Christian that thou Sacrifice not to thine own Net and Dragge: O do not trust to thy own Strength and Abili∣ty, as if thou wert able to perform this Condition: For the best of Believers by rheir own Strength are no more able to believe, than to perform the Command∣ments. Both to will and to do are the workPhil. 2. 13. Ki . Chrys. of God. And as Chrysostome observes, God gives the very propension and inclination to will. Faith indeed is the Believers Act, and it's his duty to believe, but it's God's Gift; Faith is a lively Motion wor∣king
upon a Believers Heart, but this Mo∣tion is powerfully wrought by the Assi∣stance of God's Spirit. Whoever thou art, if thou believest give God the praise of working this Belief in thee: For God en∣ables thee to perform what he requires, and thou couldst not do any thing accep∣tably unto God, unless he first gave to thee what he commandeth of thee. Hence the Apostle tells us, that We are buried withCol. 2. 12. him in Baptism, through the Faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead. The self-same Power that raised up Christ from the Dead, must raise us up to believe in Christ. 2. Faith is an instrumental means of our  Faith is an Instru∣mental Means of our Union unto Jesus Christ. Union unto Christ. Between Christ and us there must be an Union, before there can be an Imputation of Righteous∣ness. We believe before we are Justified. How Justification may be (as some suppose) ab Aeterno, I can no more conceive than Glorification is, (such is in the secret De∣cree of God.) That Faith goeth before Ju∣stification is evident from Gal. 3. 24. The Law was our School-master to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. We believe that we may be justified, Christ is said to be of God, made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemp∣tion. It's said unto us who were first united
unto Christ by Faith; That is that which the Apostle prays for, That Christ mightEph. 3. 17. dwell in their Hearts by Faith. As there is a substantial Union between God the Fa∣ther and God the Son, so there is a Mysti∣cal Union between Christ and all his Members. This (as the Apostle saith) is a great Mystery concerning Christ and hisEph. 5. 31. Ut indicet ad istam Spiritus nitatem opus esse so∣lidâ et con∣stanti co∣haesione, qualus est membro∣rum in cor∣pore, & ramorum in arbori∣bus. Musc. Church. And this Union the Apostle de∣clareth farther, 1 Cor. 6. 17. But he that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit: The Spirit on God's part, and Faith on our part (which Faith we could not have, un∣less God first gave it) makes up this Uni∣on between us and Christ, i. e. a Mystical Union. And by vertue of this Union we paticipate of Juice and Nourishment from Christ, as the Branch doth from the Vine, and receive influence as a Member from the Head, and we receive Supportation and Strength, as the Building from the Foundation. Farther yet in the very Grave we shall yet remain united to Christ. For Christ will be with us in the Grave. Every Saint is a part of Christ's Body, and not one Member can be want∣ing, otherwise (which is impossible) Christ's Body would not be compleat. And these Bodies of ours, (if they be the Bo∣dies of true Believers) they shall be made like unto the glorions Body of Jesus Christ.Phil. 3. 21.
This Union is the ground of Commu∣nion with Christ. There' a mutual Uni∣on and Communion between Christ and his Members, for in Christ there's a fulness, and of his fulness we receive Grace for Grace.Joh. 1. 19. There's in Christ fulness of Wisdom to Counsel us, and of Mercy to pardon us, of Righteousness to justify us, and of Ho∣liness to sanctify us, and of Eternal Glory to make us happy to all Eternity. The Head takes care of all the Members. Christ the Head of his Church will not leave it destitute of Supplies and continual Influences from him, Now it's Faith that makes particular application of all the be∣nefits of Christ. By Faith we draw ver∣tue from Christ, and fetch Supplies from him. In hearing, by Faith we taste the sweetness of God's Word: In praying, by Faith we have a sacred Communion with God, and receive a gracious answer of our Prayers; In receiving the Lord's Sup∣per, by Faith we feel Strength and Help for the subduing of our Corruptions. So then Faith is an Instrument that makes Christ and all his Benefits our own by par∣ticular Application. 3. Faith gives us Victory over all our3. Faith gives us Victory over all our Ene∣mies. Enemies. There are three grand Ene∣mies of our Salvation, viz. the Flesh, the Devil, and the World.
1. The Flesh (i. e.) corrupt Nature isThe first Enemy is the Flesh. a grand Enemy, always plotting destru∣ctive Designs against us, and the harder it is to be avoided, because it is an inbred Domestick Enemy, an Inhabitant that lieth in our Bosom, like the Syren it lulls us asleep, and then devoureth us, it kis∣seth and kills, embraceth and strangles,Inter am∣plexus strangulat. and when it maketh the most fair and plausible pretences, then it intends the most mischief. It's an Enemy to God, even Enmity it self in the abstract. We read of the miserable estate of unregene∣rate Men, who have this grand InfamyTò . Rom 8. 7. Hic obser∣vemus ho∣minis vo∣luntatem divinae vo∣luntati per omnia ad∣versari. Calv. stampt on them fulfilling the desires of the Flesh: In the Original it's  Eph. 2. 3. The Wills of the Flesh, plainly shewing that the Flesh hath a comman∣ding Will requiring Obedience. And the Flesh hath an enticing alluring way to en∣tice Sinners, and draw them with all allu∣ring Persuasions to follow that way that leads to Destruction. For we read of Sedu∣cers that they allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 2. 18. The Expression is em∣phatical : They lay a bait and so allure to the rnine of those that take it. We must beware of the Baits of the Flesh, least if we swallow them we be choaked by them. Many Diswasives the Scrip∣ture gives against lusting, loving and
living after the Flesh. It's the Apostles charge, & entreaty both, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pil∣grims abstain from fleshly Lusts: And there's a strong Argument added to persuade in the following Words, which war against the Soul. The Flesh sets it self in battel array, and useth all the battering Engines which it can invent, that it may conquer the royal Cittadal of our Immortal Souls. O∣ther diswasives which the Scripture useth against the Flesh are, Rom. 8. 6. To be carnally minded is Death. And Rom. 8. 8. They that are in the Flesh, that is, they that abide in the state of unregeneracy, they cannot please God. And Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.1 Cor. 15. 50. Now having discovered our Enemies, let's prepare to encounter with them, and the Weapon which we must use is Faith: For Faith is an Instrument to subdue our selves even unto our selves, even corrupt self unto renewed self. When thy pre∣tended Friend (i. e.) thy Flesh, but rather that real Enemy, which (as I may com∣pare) is as a Snake, which is in thy Bosom; I mean corrupt Nature enticeth and allur∣eth thee to Sin, and assaults thee with re∣newed Forces; fight by a strong Faith a∣gainst this dangerous Enemy: so through the strength of God thy corrupt self will
be subdued unto thy renewed self, (i. e.) the Flesh unto the Spirit. A second Enemy is the Devil. TheA second Enemy is the Devil. Devil throws Darts, and not ordinary Darts, but fiery Darts: Wherefore the A∣postle exhorts us above all taking the ShieldEph. 6. 16. of Faith, where with we shall be able to quench the fiery Darts of Satan. The Devil is a potent Adversary compared to a Lyon for Strength; and not to a Lyon penn'd up in his Den, but to a rageing Lyon; not a sleepy, but a roaring Lyon; not a lazy, but an industrious Lyon; and indu∣strious to act Cruelties. Wherefore the Apostle's caution is both seasonable and necessary, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigi∣lant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lyon walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. And what's the Weapon offensive and defensive against this potent Enemy? The Apostle prescribes it, ver. 9. Whom resist stedfast in the Faith: This Adversary hath strong holds. And the2 Cor. 10. 4. Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. Luther used to say. AlthoughEsto Diabo∣lus magni∣poteris, nunquam eris Omni∣potens. Luth. the Devil could do great things, yet he shall never do all things. This Adversary is a subtil Adversary: He hath Devices, Me∣thods, Snares, and Depths. He is an in∣veterate and long experienced Enemy;
He useth all the Sophistry and subtil devices to seduce Mankind. To Envy he adds Lyes, and to Lies malicious Prosecu∣tions, and the most exquisite arts of cun∣ning conveyance to destroy precious and immortal Souls. How necessary is it for us to be always ready armed with the Divine Panoply, even the com∣pleat Armour of a Christian, viz. TheEph. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. Girdle of Truth, the Breast-plate of Righte∣ousness, the Shoes of the Gospel of Peace, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit. Let us fight with these Weapons, and we shall over∣come. Let us resist the Devil, and he willJam. 4. 7. flee from us. Notwithstanding all the Arts of Legerdemain and the cunningest sort of Sophistry which Satan useth, a well grounded unfeigned Faith (which work∣eth by love, and purifieth the Conscience, and which relyeth and stayeth upon God's Promises) this Faith under God will con∣quer Satan's subtile Machinations. This is the Faith which will be victorious. Such a Faith joined with fervent Prayer was in Luther, who fasted and prayed for a young Man at Wittenberg who had given his Soul to the Devil: Whereupon the Devil threw in the Indenture through the Win∣dow. Let Faith hold out, and let the strength of Faith act vigorously, then will
the Temptations of Satan be quickly van∣quished. 3. Enemy is the World, with all its3. Enemy is the World. Riches, Honour, Grandeur, Pomp and Bravery: These tempt and allure Men to Conformity to them. The World throws to one a Ball of Pleasure, to another a Ball of Honour, to a third a Ball of Profit, and exceeding great Riches. O! what sweet melodious Musick doth the World play, and how doth it bewitch Multitudes to dance after the World's Pipe, and how ma∣ny are there who for the fruition of a few paltry Delights of this present World have hazarded their Souls to all Eternity? What way then is their left to get Victory over the World? The Apostle informs us, 1 John 5. 4. This is the Victory that over∣comes the World, even our Faith. Where Faith is principled in the Word of God, it will prevail with a Christian not to be con∣formedRom. 12. 2. 1 Joh. 2. 15. to the World: And not to love the World. Faith will help a Christian to live above the World, and to mind heavenly things, and to have his Conversation in Heaven. And thus through the strength of Faith being acted and enlivened by the strength of Jesus Christ, we get Victory over our Spiritual Enemies, viz. the Flesh, the Devil, and the World.
4. Faith gives us a Title to, and Inte∣rest4. Faith gives us a Title to, and Inte∣rest in the Divine Promises. 2 Cor. 2. 20. Tim. 4. 8. in the Divine Promises. All the Pro∣mises are made in Christ, and in him they are yea and Amen. Now Believers have only a propriety in the Promises: with∣out Faith we can lay no claim to any Pro∣mise. Godliness (saith the Apostle) hath the Promises of this Life and that which is to come. There's a love of Beneficence, whereof all Creatures are partakers: Not the least creeping Creature but tastes of God's Bounty: God feeds the poorest Creature. This is a general Providence which extends to all good and bad, just and unjust. The Sun shines on the unjust as well as on the just, through God's com∣mon Bounty. But how many Curses, For∣feitures, and Variety of Mischeifs befall wicked Men, so that their Bread is Gra∣vel, their Table their Snare, their Bed a Bed of Thorns; They have outward Riches, and no Man should rob them be∣cause they are wicked, yet they have them unsanctifyed, they have not God'sTurkium Imperium quantum est, est nisi mica Pa∣nis, quam Pater Fa∣milias pro∣icit su Canibus. Luth. reconciled Countenance to comfort them. Therefore Luther, speaking of the Turkish Empire, saith, that as great as it is, it is no more than a Crum of Bread, which the Father of the Family gives to his Dogs. Whatso∣ever wicked Men have is ex largitione, of common Bounty and by vertue of a gene∣ral
Providence. But Godly Men enjoy all their Substance, ex speciali Providentia & Promisso. They have Christ with all their worldly Enjoyments. They receive all outward things in Mercy, and sanctifi∣ed. Not a Bit of Bread a Believer eats but it is by vertue of a Promise: Where∣fore Faith helps a Believer in all Streights and Difficulties, to apply the Promises for his Supportation and Consolation. Poor Persons plead their wants and pressing Poverty: But Faith answers all Objections by proposing the Promises, one is, Psal. 35. 9, 10. O fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him: The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger: But they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Another is, Psal. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory, no good thing will he with-hold from them that walk uprightly. A third is, Matth. 6, 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness and all these things shall be ad∣ded unto you. A fourth Promise is, Rom. 8. 32. He that spared not his own. Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things. And that one Promise may be added, ex abun∣danti, the last but not the least of what hath been already mentioned, viz.
Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be with∣out Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have, for he hath said I will never leave leave thee nor forsake thee. Those five Negatives have the force of the strongest Negation. Consider that all the Faithful are the Houshold and Family of God, and he is never a whit the poo∣rer by maintaining Multitudes Rich Men may decrease in their Estates by being o∣ver liberal to others: this the Mu Patimo∣nia estude∣run∣csulte  ende. Qid au∣tem stulti∣ui est quam quod libe∣ters acias  diuti ?  Offic. l. ▪ Orator reproves as a very great folly: But God by giving wasteth not. The Sun looseth no Light by communicating Light to o∣thers: For its Light cannot be wasted. The Fountain looseth no Water by giving Water to Streams. Now God is a Light never extinct, a Fountain never exhau∣sted; all the Granaries, Treasures, Cattle on a Thousand Mountains, and all the Hearts of Men, are at Gods disposing, and he or∣ders them all for the supply of his People. There's no deficiency, nor weakness nor Poverty in God. All the Promises are the Believers Inte∣rest, or Magna Charta, for Heaven: They are so many Wells of Salvation. And Faith (through Gods Gift is a Bucke toIsa. 12. 3. draw Waters of Consolation out of those Wells. All the Promises are as so many Breasts of Consolation, and Faith is as i
were a Mouth to suck Milk out of those Breasts. Wherefore in all Conditions inward or outward, let Faith act on Promises, and depend on them, and by experience a Be∣liever will find ground of singular support and comfort in the Promises. 5. Faith gives us an insight into Hea∣ven5. Faith gives us an insight into Hea∣ven, and a Prospect▪ of Eterni∣ty. and a prospect into eternity, Paul was wrapt up into the third Heaven and by Faith had a foretast of those unspeakable Joys. A Reve∣rend and eminegly learned Divine gives his conjecture that at that time when Paul was Sto∣ned,  was in a Trance, and saw the third Heaven. The Rea∣on of his Suppositi∣on he gives, be∣cause the self same Year that Paul was Stoned, he was caught up in∣to the third Heaven. A. B. Ur. Stephen by the Eye of Faith (though the Stones were about his Ears) saw the Heavens opened, and Christ standing at the Right Hand of his Father. Job on the Dunghil when he was scraping himself with a Pot-shread by the eye of Faith saw his Redeemer. By Faith Moses amidst all the Reproaches and Cruel Bondage in Aegypt, saw the recompence of reward. Faith is the Eye, whereby we peep through the Curtains of Mortality, and take a view of the Glory of Heaven. By Faith we enjoy Communion, with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we receive the first Fruits of that plentiful Harvest, earnest, or part of payment of a greater Sum, which we shall receive in Heaven. The
Glory which is to be revealed is apprehen∣ded in part in this Life, by true Believers. We have a pledge and some foretasts of the Glory in Heaven. What necessity then is incumbent on us to get this Grace of Faith both as to the truth and growth thereof? We have such daily need of Faith as we cannot live without it. When we pray, Faith makes us successful; when we hear the Word, Faith helps us to pro∣fit; when we suffer Affliction, Faith helps us to be Patient. In a Word in dissertion Faith makes us comfortable; in Tryals and Encounters, Faith makes us so couragi∣ous as to stop the Mouths of Lyons, quench theHeb. 11▪ 33, 34. violence of Fire, &c. In Life Faith makes us fruitful, and in Death Faith makes us Victorious. And whilst we live in this World Faith helps us to a Prospect of Hea∣ven. As the Israelites saw a glimps of Ca∣naan, though a far off, whilst they were in the Wilderness; so a true Believer by the Eye of Faith sees the Heavenly Canaan: He enjoys a Sacred Acquaintance and Com∣munion with God in his Covenants, Pro∣mises Gracious Influences, so that by Faith we enjoy an Heaven upon Earth, (i. e.) some fore-tasts of that Eternal Hap∣piness which is reserved in Heaven for us.
SECT. II. Containing an Ʋse of Direction. SEeing then (as it's evident by the  for Direction how to get and in∣crease Faith. premises) that only true Believers set a high estimate upon Christ, and Faith is essentially requisite to get and keep so high an estimation of Christ. I shall now proceed to the 5th. Use, which is for Di∣rection, how we may get, and increase Faith. To this purpose, I shall prescribe some means partly internal, and partly ex∣ternal both exceeding necessary. First for Internal, Means, and that is theThe Spi∣rit is an internal means of getting Faith. Holy Spirit of God. Faith is a Divine Habit infused into the Soul by the Spirit of God: Hence we are said to have the Spirit of Faith. 2 Cor. 5. 13. The Spirit doth not stand in need of Moral Persuasi∣ons to excite us to Faith leaving it to the indifferency of our wills and understan∣dings whether we will chuse, or refuse, as∣sent, or dissent: But the Spirit of GodNolentem praevenit ut velit volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit, Arg. de Grat. & lib. Arg. works powerfully and irresistably, and of unwilling makes us willing by antecedent
Grace, & of willing makes us more willing by Subsequent Grace. The Seeds of Faith are not sown in our Nature. We are Dead as were those dry Bones, mentioned byEzek. 37. 2. Ezekiel, until the Spirit of God infuse vital Operations into the Soul. The Begin∣nings of Augmentations and finishings of our Faith all proceed from the Operations of the Spirit of God. Where this Spirit is, it opens the eyes of the Mind, that so we may understand the infinite value of Christ, and the absolute necessity of Faith to make particular application of him unto our selves. Faith is a wise gift of God, and it makes Believers wise unto Salvation. Faith and knowledge are hand-fasted and may not be separated. Joh. 17. 3. This is Life Eternal to know thee to be the true God, and him whom thou hast sent Jesus Christ., Clem. Alex. There can be (saith a Learned Author) no Knowledge without Faith, nor any Faith without Knowledge. 2. The Spirit of God as it opens the eyes, so it inclines the will to yield ready Obedience unto Christ. As soon as Di∣vine Light breaks in upon the Soul by the powerful illumination of the Spirit, then by the assistance of the same Spirit, the will is made pliable and willing, and be∣comes as swift in it's Motions as the Chari∣ots of Aminadab, to embrace Jesus Christ
with the Arms of Faith. Now we cannotCant. 6. 12. John 6. 44. Cant. 1. 4. come to Christ, unless the Father draw us. Wherefore the Spouse prays, draw me, and I will run after thee. Though we are not to be accounted as meer Stocks, and Stones; (Because God hath endew'd us with a rea∣sonable Soul, and the faculties of under∣standing and Will) yet unless we be assi∣sted with Supernatural strength, we can∣not perform any Supernatural works: We must fetch strength from Heaven, o∣therwise we cannot perform any Spiritual action in a Spiritual manner, But being prevented and assisted by Divine Grace, we can cooperate through the assistance of that Strength, as the Apostle professeth. Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. We cannot under∣stand any saving Mystery, till the Spirit inlightens us, neither can we will any good thing till the Spirit of God inclines us: But by the assistance of the Spirit we have our eyes opened to discern what is good, and our Wills inclind to act what is good. Having mentioned the Internal means of getting and increasing Faith, I come now to the External means, andExternal means of getting & increasing Faith. they are three, the Word, Prayer, and the Lords Supper.
1. The Word is an External means1. The Word is a means to get and encrease Faith. both to get and increase Faith: and we are to consider the Word in a threefold Capa∣city as it is Read, Preached, and Medita∣ted on; and in all these respects the Word exceedingly conduceth both to the beget∣ting and encreasing of Faith. 1. The Word read is an Instrumental1. The Word read. means both for the begetting and aug∣menting of Faith. John Huss (whom Luther calls Sanctissimum Martyrem) was Converted by reading of the Scriptures. Reading of Scriptures in publick Assem∣blies is an Ordinance of God, and ancient∣ly practised, for we read. Neh. 8. 8. So they read in the Book, in the Law of God di∣stinctly, and gave the sence, and caused them to understand the reading. It's our Duty likewise in our private Houses, and in our Closets to read the Word of God. Joshuah, a great General, is Commanded to read the Book of the Law: His Military Imploy∣ment allows no dispensation from reading of the Book of God. He (notwithstan∣ding his great and weighty affair) was in∣join'd both to speak of, and Meditate in the Law of God Day and Night, ThisJosh. 1. 8. Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall meditate therein both Day and Night, that thou may observe to do, according to all that is Written therein, for
then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, andDeut. 17, 18. thou shalt have good Success, The Book of Books, Kings themselves must read: And it shall be when he sitteth upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write a Copy of this Law out of a Book, out of that which is be∣fore the Priest and Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the Days of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them. The Ho∣ly Scripture is the Rule of the Govern∣ment, and the Conversation of the greatest Potentates. By keeping close to the Rule of Scriptures, they both learn to govern well, and live well. We read Acts 15. 21. For Moses in old time hath in every Ci∣ty them that Preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. The mean∣ing I suppose to be this, that after reading an Exposition was given of the sence and meaning. It concerns all sorts of Persons to read the Scriptures. It's the Peoples Duty (though Popish Priests Sacriligiously Rob the People of the reading of the Scriptures) to read the Scriptures, there's an express charge given. Deut. 66. 7, 8. Deut, 31. 11, 12. And Christ gives a strictJoh. 5. 39. command, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Everlasting Life, and they are they which testify of me. The Apo∣stle
Paul chargeth Timothy to give atten∣dance1 Tim. 4. 13. unto reading: If then we would get Faith in Christ, we must read and study the Word of God. Every one is bound to believe with an Explicite Faith and not to take things upon trust by an implicite Faith from Popish Priests: We must see with our own eyes (as the Spirit of God hath opened them) and not trust upon the Popes Spectacles. It's a great Sacriledge in the Pope and his Adherents to keep the Scriptures from the sight of such (as they call Lay People) It was in Q. Maries days Prohibited to read the Bible, and some for reading of it were brought to trouble, as William Hunter, and others, as in theFox Acts and Mon. Q. M. Acts and Monuments stands upon Record. And K. Hen. Eighth made a severe Law against the reading of the Scriptures in English. Bellarmine denies the reading ofCatholic Ecclesia statuit ne passim om∣nibus con∣cedatur Sript ura∣rum Lectio. Bellarm. L. 2. de verbo Dei. Scriptures to all, so doth Molanus, Costerus, Stapleton, and others of that Bran. But are not People commanded to try the Spi∣rit. 1 Joh. 4. 1. and to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good. 1 Thes. 5. 21. But how can they do this unless they search the Scriptures. Let us than consider it's our Duty, and make it our business to hear the Word read in Publick Congrega∣tions, and to read it frequently when we are in private. Let's both hear and read
with a serious reverential frame of Spirit: Let's in reading compare the Old Testa∣ment with the New, how the Old Testa∣ment abounds with Prophecies and Pro∣mises concerning Christ, and how the New Testament makes Performances of them.2. The Word Preach'd. 2. As we must read the Word, so we must with due regard hear it Preach'd. The Word read is sound and solid, and con∣tains a sincere Milk, but something like the Milk suckt out of a Sucking Bottle, which through our weaknesses and dull Appre∣hensions may sometimes be dispirited: But the Word Preach'd is like the Breast Milk: It being deliver'd with Power, and viva voce, is like the Brest Milk most Nu∣tritive. Though God can work without means, yet ordinarily he vouchsafes his Blessing upon the Word Preach'd in the de∣monstration of the Spirit and Power. TheEph. 6. 17. Isai. 53. 1. Rom. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Heb. 4. 12. Preaching of the Word is call'd the sword of the Spirit, the Arm of the Lord, the Power of God unto Salvation, the Word of Reconciliation, It's an exact Critick of the thoughts, It divides between the Joynts and Marrow: There's no such exact Inquisi∣tor as the VVord Preach'd: It will find out a Sinner in the Croud and tell him thou art the Man. Though the Preacher knows nothing of such and such secret Crimes, whereof the Sinner is guilty (for
no Man hath acquainted him with them, yet the word of God meets with the Sin∣ner, and by the powerful Ministry of the word the most secret sins are discovered, the most hidden works of darkness are brought to Light. Some, when such sins have been Preach't against, have discove∣red their Murthers Committed long be∣fore. The Power of the word hath so prevail'd that the most secret Sinner hath been discovered, and with a troubled Spi∣rit hath addressed himself to the Preacher by acknowledging of his Sins, and beg∣ging Prayers and Counsels for his Souls edification. Neither Mountains nor Ca∣stles, neither Rocks nor Foretresses can be able to withstand the conquering Pow∣er of the Word of God. If than we would get and increase Faith. We must attend at the Posts of Wisdomes Gate, and (as Bar∣timaeus did) we must lie in the way where Christ comes by. We must wait at the Pool of Bethsdah, where the Angel will come and stir the Waters. We must neglect no Sermon, for that Sermon, for ought we know might be a means of our Conversi∣on or Confirmation. The Apostle tells us, Rom. 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Therefore if we would get Faith, we must attend with all reverence and dilligence unto the Mi∣nistery
of the Word. Faith is like Oyl to the Lamp, as it causeth it at first to give light, so by additions of supplies it keeps it Burning. Therefore let's neither absent our selves from the Word read, nor from the Word preach'd. Both are Instruments to get and increase Faith. 3. Both to reading and hearing let's3. The Word Me∣ditated. joyn Meditation, otherwise we may loose the fruit of our Labours. Meditation is the Spiritual Digestion of the Soul: ItPsal 4. 4. uk. 2. 19. Jr. 8. 6. consists in a Communing with our own Hearts, a pondering, a calling our selves to an ac∣count, and asking the Question, What have I done: It's a ruminating, digesting, a making what we hear or read our own by a particular application. 'Tis true the work is difficult, it is as it were the climb∣ing up a great Hill, but it's exceeding pro∣fitable and comfortable. For this Medi∣tation is a Divine Contemplation where∣by we have a view and Prospect of Eter∣nity. It's the Wing of the Soul, by help whereof it soars aloft as high as Heaven. Wherefore that we may profit by the Word read and by the Word preach'd, we must exercise our selves seriously and frequently in this Divine art of Meditati∣on. This was the frequent practice of Da∣vidPs 63. 6. Ps. 119. to Meditate on God in the night watch. He both Meditated on the Word of God
n the Works of God. He awakened with God in the Morning, and lay down with him in the Evening by heavenly meditati∣on. The Character he gives of a blessed Man is, that his delight is in the Law of thePsal. 1. 2. Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night. This was Isaac's pra∣ctice to meditate in the Field at the even∣tide.Gen. 24. 63. He went out and sequestred him∣self from other Company, that he might enjoy Communion with God. This then is the choice and excellent means for Chri∣stians to thrive in Faith, Love, and all the Graces of the Spirit, and to be good Proficients in the School of Christ, when they addict themselves unto frequent and serious Meditation. A Second External Means both of get∣ting2. Prayer is a means of getting & encreas∣ing Faith. and encreasing Faith is Prayer. Faith is worth the asking for: Let's then e earnest and sollicitous to the Throne o Grace to obtain it. Let's pray with the Disciples, Lord increase our Faith; For he that hath true Faith is desirous of accessi∣ons thereunto: He finds many things wanting in his Faith, and therefore he prays for daily Supplies and Augmentati∣ons. Let's pray as the Man in the Gospel did, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. There. 1 Thess. 3. 10. may be the Root of the Matter, even true Faith in a Christian, yet he▪ is sensible of
his Unbelief. He apprehends the remain∣ders of Infidelity vexing him as a broken Bone, he meets sometimes with Fears▪ Doubtings and Perplexities, distracting Thoughts, but these things are his Bur¦then and a Perplexity upon his Spirit Herein consists our Duty to be much i Prayer, that God would give us the Spiri of Faith. The Spirit is promised to thos that ask for it. And it's the Spirit tha works Faith in us, and Prayer is an Instru¦mental means to get the Spirit. God pro¦miseth his Spirit, Luke 11. 13. & Matt 7. 11. He promiseth to give good things t them that ask him: which evidently shew that God by giving his Spirit gives a good things. Let's then be quickned t our Duty to pray in Faith, and to pray for more Faith, and then we shall be sur to speed, Matth. 21. 22. And all thing whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believin ye shall receive. Go then to God and com¦plain of thy unbelieving Heart, mour for it, be earnest and importunate fo Faith. As Rachel cryed out, Give me Chi¦dren or else I die; so cry out Lord, giv me Faith or else I am undone. Lo strengthen my weak Faith; quicken m dull Faith: thus making our applicatio to God in the Name of Christ, we sha receive a gracious Answer.
3. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The Sa∣crament  the Lord's Supper is a great means to confirm our Faith. is a great means to confirm our Faith: It's to be necessarily presupposed that before we come to the Lord's Table we must have Faith, otherwise we cannot discern the Lord's Body. There is a great diffe∣rence between the Word, and the Lord's Supper: For the Word both begets▪ and encreaseth Faith, but the Lord's Supper ordinarily encreaseth Faith where it was begun before. The Sacrament is a Seal, and God doth not set his Seal to a Blank. An ignorant Person is as a Blank, and he hath no right to approach unto the Lord's Sup∣per. An ignorant Person is more fit to go a gazing with Nebuchadnezzar amongst the Beasts of the Field, than to participate of the Sacramental Elements of Bread and Wine: exhibiting Christ Sacramentally to the Faith of true Believers. And pro∣fane Persons are uncircumcised in Heart. No uncircumcised Person ought to parti∣cipate of the Passover, neither may the un∣circumcised in Heart, any debauch'd scandalous Liver presume to approach un∣to the Lord's Table. There was but one Man who came without a wedding Gar∣ment, and Christ found him out and doom'd him to Judgment. Such then as walk in their Pollutions, and with profane Hands and Hearts receive the Holy Eu∣charist
expose themselves to dreadful Judgments both temporal and eternal, 1 Cor. 11. 28. For he that eateth and drin∣keth unworthily, eateth and drinketh Dam∣nation unto himself▪ not discerning the Lord's Body. It's of absolute necessity that we should labour for Faith, pray for Faith, read the Word, hear it preached and medi∣tate on it, that we may get Faith. And upon survey of our Hearts and diligent Inquisition, when we find our Faith weak and flagging we should adde more unto our Prayers, and apply our selves to the sealing Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Sometimes we may not meet with God in the Word read: our dulness may not ap∣prehend the manifestation of God's graci∣ous Countenance unto our Souls. There∣fore we must apply our selves to the Word preached: It may be through our inad∣vertency and distractions, we may not meet with God in the Word preached. Let's then fall upon our Knees in earnest Prayer: It may be God may hide his Face from us. Some Jonah we must cast over Ship-board, and then there will be a Calm: Some Achan must be ston'd and then the Valley of Achor will be a Door ofHos. 2. 14. Hope. And to hearing. reading, and praying; let's with preparation receive the Holy Sacrament, Before we go thi∣ther
let's do as the Jews did in case of Lea∣ven; They first made diligent inquisition, and took a Candle and searched every Corner throughout: Having found Lea∣ven they cast it out: And i they found none, they took a voluntary curse upon themselves, if willingly they left any Lea∣ven in their Houses. Let us go and do likewise: Let us light up a double Can∣dle, viz. the Candle of the Word, and the Candle of our own Consciences, then up∣on discovery of any Sin, let's loath ab∣hor and cast it out, and willingly allow our selves in no Sin. When we receive the Lord's Supper we either do, or I am sure should do so, even enter into a solemn Covenant to amend our Lives: And how much is our Faith strengthened by the Re∣formation of our Lives? For Faith and Obedience, Faith and purification of the Heart go together, and cannot be sepera∣ted. Thus I have shewed both internal and external Means of getting and encrea∣sing Faith.
CHAP. XII. Concluding with the sixth Ʋse for Consola∣lation. AND now to put a period to this Trea∣tise,  For Con∣solation. I shall close with a Word of Consolation unto all true Believers, the adopted Children of God. They esteem Christ precious, his Ordinances precious, his Ministry, and all his Members preci∣ous, his Day, i. e. the Lord's day Sab∣bath, they esteem precious, and account it the delight of their Souls; to such as these I shall apply an Use of Consolation upon a double Ground. 1. Because they are precious in the ac∣count of Christ; hence they ground their Comfort. 2. From the choice and Fruits which they receive from Justification by Faith in Christ.1. All true Believers are preci∣ous in Christ's e∣stimation. 1. All true Believers are precious in Christ's estimation. Christ first prized and valued them, making them precious
by the application of his precious Merits, before they knew how to prize him: Christ first loved them before they loved him. Now if a Creature, a Man, can set such an high price on Christ, after Christ hath enlightned him to discern his inesti∣mable Dignity; O! how much more doth God the Father prize Christ his Be∣loved Son in whom he is well pleased? And if we honour Christ he will honour us. Let us therefore take a narrow view, and thence make a Judgment, how pre∣cious all true Believers are in the Eyes of Christ. This shall be evidenced in these four Demonstrations. 1. Christ gives precious Names unto all true Believers. 2. Believers have interest in Christ's pre∣cious Merit. 3. They have the precious influences of his Spirit. And 4. Christ assures them of a precious Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven. In all these re∣spects it will abundantly be evidenced, That all true Believers are precious in the estimation of Christ. For a distinct enlarge∣ment of these Particulars.
SECT. I. Proving that Believers are precious in the account of Christ, and this is a ground of their Comfort. THere are in Scripture several preci∣ousDemonst. 1. Names given by God the Fa∣ther and God the Son unto all true Belie¦vers. 1. They have precious Names sounding. Belie∣vers have precious Names. forth Bowels of Affection. 2. Precious Names of Honour and Dig∣nity. 1. Christ gives Believers precious1. Names of Affecti∣on. Heb. Mat. 12. 50. Joh. 10. 28. Lnke 12. 36. Joh. 21. 15. Jer. 12. 7. Gen. 24. 31. Cant. 12. 2 Names full of Affection: He calls them Children, Friends, Brethren, Brother, Sister, Mother, Sheep-Flock, Lambs. Fur∣ther yet, the Saints are called the dearly be∣loved of the Lord: The Spouse of Christ. From all those Names and affectionate Titles given unto the Children of God, may evidently appear how high they are in his estimation. Now then to wrong a Servant of Christ is to wrong his Friend, his Brother, his Spouse. And questionless Christ will Revenge those Injuries and In∣dignities which are offered unto his Ser∣vants.
And as there are Names of Affection, so2 Names of Ho∣nour and Dignity. there are Names of high Honour and Dignity put upon the Saints, even the Li∣ving Members of the Body of Christ, for First they are call'd Gods peculiar Trea∣sure. Exod. 17. 5. That (as a Learned Au∣thorAbulensis in Exod. 17. 5. observes) is call'd Peculium, which the Son and Heir of the House hath of his own, besides the right of his Fathers Inheritance, which he may dispose of as he thinks good. So though the Earth be the Lord Christ's by right of Inheritance, yet he hath an interest in his Church a¦bove all other. Add further they are ac∣counted Gods Jewels. Mal. 3. 17. Although vile and profane Persons account Gods Children no better than the Off-scouring1 Cor. 4. 13. Scobem aut Rumen∣tum aut quicquid limando deteritur. Budaus. 1 Cor. 4. 13.  suut Pur∣gamenta aut excre∣menta seu quaequae de re immun∣da qua una fiat pura ne pecatur in metallis Scocii in uno aut o∣lei faeces. Illyric. and Filth of the World, and no better than the Whitlings of Sticks, and the Filth that comes from the scouring of Pots, yet God esteems them as his Jewels; and whose Judgment will you take the Judg∣ment of the Wise Infallible Lord God, or the Judgment of foolish sinul Men? 2. They are accounted Kings and Priests unto God. Rev. 1. 5. When Gideon had Ze∣ba and Zalmunnah his Captives he pro∣pounded this Question unto them, What manner of Men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? They Answered. As thou art, so were they, eac one resembling the Children
of a King. Judg. 8. 18. So will Christ ask the Question, who are they whom you, the Men of the World, Revile and Perse∣cute? Who are they whom ye scorn and trample on? Are they vile, contemptible Persons? No they are Spiritual Kings and Priests, Persons Honourable in the ac∣compt of God. And therefore as Gideon put Zeba and Zalmunnah to Death for killing his Brethren, so will God severely punish the Wicked of the World for all the Inju∣ries and Persecutions, which they have done unto the Children of God. Howe∣ver Ignorant Profane and Malicious Men debase and scorn such as truly fear God, yet they are precious in the Sight of God and honourable. There are many compli∣catedIsa. 43. 4. Epithets of Honour joyn'd together. 1 Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculi∣ar People. 3. They are accounted a Crown of Glo∣ry,3. They are ac∣counted a Crown of Glory. and a Royal Diadem, Isai. 62. 3. God calls his People his Glory. Isai. 46. 13. I will plead Salvation in Sion for Israel my Glory. And the Saints are call'd the House of Gods Glory, Isai. 60. 7. More yet they are call'd the Throne of Glory. Jer. 4. 21. What need I enlarge further? All Gods Children areCol. 12. Deu. 32. 9. Jer. 12. 10. Is. 19. 25. Saints, his Portion, his pleasant Portion, His Inheritance. Other People are the
Work of Gods hands, but Israel is his In∣heritance. They are the Church, the Fa∣mily, of the First-born, the Sons and Daughters of the Living God. In all these respects (and many more which might be mention'd) it evidently appears how pretious all Christs Members are in his estimation, and this is a singular ground of Consolation unto them. I proceed to a second DemonstrationDe mon. 2. All true Believers have In∣terest in Christs Pretious Merits. that all Believers have interest in Christs pretious Merits. Christs Redemption and Intercession: Christ's Blood, his Ago∣ny, his Sweating in the Garden, his Cru∣cifixion upon the Cross, all these were for his People. Isai. 53. 5. He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our I∣niquities? The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are heal∣ed? So that hence it evidently appears, that Believers, and they alone, have interest in Christs Merits, and enjoy the benefits flowing from them. They are his Seed, the Church, his Body, his Members,  Redeemed ones, a Peculiar People. For them Christ pray'd, Joh. 17. 9. For them Christ shed his Precious Blood: For them he became a Ransome and a Price of Re∣demption. For them he Died and Rose again: For saith the Apostle, Rom. 4. 25. Who was delivered for our Offences, and rose
again for our Justification. And which is the highest Degree of Christs meriting for us: He took our Sins upon him by imputation, as the Apostle saith, the 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he hath made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. A third Demonstration is, That Belie∣versDemon. 3. Believers have the Precious Influences Christs Spirit. have the Precious Influences of the Spi∣rit of Christ. All true Believers do per∣take of such Heavenly Influences as are from the Head shed down upon the Mem∣bers. Now the Influences of the Spirit of Christ are discovered. 1. By the Graces of the Spirit, and the resemblances whereunto the Spirit is com∣pared. 1. For the Graces of the Spirit or Fruits they are mentioned, Eph. 5. 9. Goodness, Righteousness and Truth. And a large enu∣meration is set down, Eph. 5. 22, 23. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Faith, Meekness, Temeprance: Every Grace is the Fruit of the Spirit. Now Christ as Head Communicates Grace to all his Members, and they receive according to their Measure and Proportion. There's in Christ a fulness of Wisdom to Counsel, of Mercy to Pardon, of Righteousness to Justify, of Holiness to Sanctifie. AndPro Legis gratia quae prae∣teriit gra∣tiam E∣vangelii accepimus hanc manentem & pro numbris & imaginibus veteris Testamenti gratia & veritas per Christum facta est. Aug. Epist. 11. there's a derivation from the Root to the
Branches, Joh. 1. 16. And of his fulness have all we received and Grace for Grace. 2. Lets consider the Resemblances whereunto the Spirit is compar'd. There are certain Metaphors mentio∣ned in the Scripture, whereby the Pro∣perties and Influences of the Spirit of God are more evidenced, as for instance.1. The Spi∣rit is com∣pared to a Fire. 1. The Spirit is compared to a Fire. 1. As Fire enlightens and gives Light to a whole Room; so the Spirit of God inlightens the understanding. 2. Fire ascends, so where the Spirit of God is, there the affections are raised from Earth to Heaven. 3. Fire is Consumptive, it burns Stub∣ble, so doth the Spirit burn and consume Corruptions. 4. Fire hath a penetrative vertue to creep into the pores of a combustible Bo∣dy. So doth the Spirit penetrate the Windings and Diverticles of the Heart: The Spirit searcheth the Reins and disco∣vers the most hidden things. 5. Fire doth inflame and transform things into its own nature: It makes combustible matter like it self: So the Spirit of God fills the Soul with a Divine
Ardour. It's called the Spirit of burning, Isa. 4. 4. where the Spirit of God comes it purgeth away the Dross of Corruptions by the Spirit of Judgment and by the Spirit of Burning. 2. The Spirit is compared unto Water.2. The Spirit is compa∣red to Wa∣ter. 1. Water hath a quenching Vertue. In Water there's a quenching and purify∣ing Property. 1. In Water there's a quenching Proper∣ty. Water quencheth Fire, at least abates and cools the heat; so where God's Spirit comes, it sometimes quencheth the heat of inordinate Passions, and sometimes a∣bates cools and moderates the heat of them; God's Spirit is a Spirit of Meekness. A Man's own Spirit is a boistrous Spirit, which upon any disgust is all in a Flame. But God's Spirit extinguisheth the heat of Fury and Anger. When Christ bad the ra∣ging Sea be still, there was a great Calm: so when the Spirit of God comes into the Spirit of Man it becalms all the Affections, it sets them in order and fixeth them upon the right Objects. Philosophers write, De sedandis affectibus, and yet they are meer Strangers to that Meekness which is one of the Beatitudes, Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the Earth. That is Meekness in a Theological accep∣tation, which moderates Anger and keeps it within just bounds, when there are cau∣ses
of provocation. To know when to be angry and when to be meek is a great Point of Wisdom. To be zealous in the cause of God, and meek in a Man's own cause is well beseeming a Christian. Wherefore Luther speaking of a right placed Anger or Zeal, saith, It's the bestIra in suo loco est op∣timu Dei Donum. Luth. Gift of God. But when Men are transpor∣ted with Passion, like the Lunatick in the Gospel rending and tearing themselves, or like Cities without Gates or Bars, or like Waters that will keep in no Banks, or like Fire that flames higher and higher: O! what necessity is there of the cleansing Vertue of the Spirit of God, which as Water quencheth flames of Fire, so it quencheth the flaming Fury of exorbitant Passions, and brings a Man into a sedate and composed frame of Spirit. In Water there's a purifying and clean∣sing2▪ Water hath a cleansing Vertue. Property. Water casts out Garbidg, and noisom Carrion. And as Water cleanseth bodily Filthyness: so the Spirit of Christ cleanseth from filthyness of Flesh and Spirit, (i. e.) both outward and inward defilements. Where the Spirit of God takes it's habitation, it ringeth and wash∣eth all clean: what's filthy and noisom it throws out: For God's Spirit will not co∣habit with a Cage of unclean Birds, and noisom Lusts. We read that Elias, Christ's
Fore-runner, was like a Refiners fire, and like Fullars Soap. As the Refiner purgeth outMal. 3. 3. Dross, so doth the Spirit of Christ purge out Sin and Corruption: and as the Fullers Soap scours, washeth, and cleanseth the Cloth and makes it pure and white: so doth the Spirit of Christ purify and cleanse the Soul. At Christ's transfiguration we read, Mark 3. 3. And his Rayment became shining, exceeding white as Snow: so as no Fuller on Earth can white them. From this comparison it's intimated that although other Fullers can make Garments white and clean, yet no Fullers Soap can make the Cloth so white and clean, as the Blood of Christ can purify and cleanse the Soul.3. The Spirit is resembled to Oint∣ment. A third comparison of the Spirit, (whereunto it's resembled) is Ointment. The Properties of Ointment are, 1. To supple and asswage Humors in the Body: so doth the Spirit of Christ as∣swage and bring down all proud swelling thoughts. High Inclinations are cast down by the Spirit of God. The hard Heart is molified and of insensible it be∣comes sensible, and of seared it becomes tender and apprehensive of Sin. 2. Ointment hath a penetrating Power to pass through the Pores, and diffuse it self through every Pore of the ill affected part: So where there is the Unction of
the Spirit it openeth the Eyes, subdues the Will, raiseth the Affections, enlargeth the Heart. Hence saith the Apostle, 1 Joh. 2. 20. But ye have an Ʋnction from the Holy One, and ye know all things, i. e. All things needful for Salvation. And this Unction is an abiding Unction, ver. 27. But the an∣nointing, which ye have received of him, abi∣deth in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you, that is, they need not, that any should teach them any new Opinion▪ Let them retain those Principles wherein they have been taught, and stick close unto them. 3. Ointment hath a refreshing and comforting Vertue. Ointments as they make way for the emission of all noxious Humors, so likewise for the free passage of all Vital Spirits, which do enliven, re∣fresh and comfort the Heart. Hence wePs. 104. 15. sal. 4. 7. Isa 1. 3. Joh. 14. 25 Joh. 14. 16 read that Oil makes the Face to shine▪ And it's called the Oil of Gladness, and the Oil of Joy: So the Spirit of God is a Spirit of Con∣solation, call'd the Comforter, A Comforter that may abide with us for ever. In all our Troubles, if we can get God's Spirit for our Comforter, we shall chearfully re∣joice in Tribulation. The Question wasJob 15. 1. ▪ propounded to Job, Are the Consolations of God small with thee? So it may be ask'd, Are the Consolation of God's Spirit small
with thee? No questionless; for they abound in Comfort. The Illapses, Influen∣ces, and Communications of the Spirit of God in comforting the Afflicted, binding up the Broken-hearted, refreshing the Lan∣guishing, raising up those that are Fallen, strengthning the Weak; all these set forth abundantly the singular benefit of Divine Consolations flowing from the Spirit of God. A fourth Demonstration that BelieversDemon. 4. Believers have a Peions Inheri∣tance. are Precious in the sight of Christ is, be∣cause that Christ assures them of a Preci∣ous Inheritance in the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. Heaven is Christs Purchase, and by vertue of Christs Purchase it becomes the Saints Inheritance. The Tenure where▪ by the Saints hold is in capite, in their Head, Christ. Now for their full assurance there's a threefold Title whereby true Believers lay claim to Heaven, viz. By Promise, Donation, and Possession. 1. By Promise; Christ hath promised1 Title by Promise. Heaven unto his Children. Amongst ma∣ny I shall select a few excellent Promises, one is Joh. 14. 23. In my Fathers House ae many Mansions, if it were not so I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also▪ A∣nother
nother Promise is, Matth. 19. 28. Verily I say unto you that ye which have follow'd me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thronis, Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. A third Promise is, Matth. 19. 29. And every one that hath forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, shall receive an hun∣dred fold, and shall Inherit Everlasting Life. The meaning is not, that all these things should be made up in kind, that he should receive so many Fathers, Mothers, and Sisters, in the room of them, but the meaning is, that he shall receive Christ and Everlasting Life, which is his Purchase, and is infinitely more worth than all the World. A second Title which Believers have to2. Title by Donation Heaven, is a Title of Donation. Eternal Life is the gift of Christ, as may appear, Joh. 10. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck, them out of my Hand. Fur∣ther Christs Donation is evident, John 17. 22. And the Glory which thou hast given me, I have given them: Heaven is Christs Gift, and there is no merit, nor any thing in the Creature to procure God to bestow his great Gift, for saith our Saviour, Luk. 12. 32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your
Fathers good Pleasure, to give you the King∣dome. But though we cannot merit Hea∣ven, yet we must be constant and consci∣entious in the performance of our Duties, we must repent, believe and be zealous to do good works; and to such as are faithful unto Death, the promise will be made good unto them. Rev. 2, 10. I will give thee a Crown of Life. It's true that Sal∣vation is a free Gift, and Heaven is the purchase of Christs Blood, yet our Duty is to work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 12. A third Title to Heaven is that of Pos∣session.3. Title by Possession. Joh. 3. 36. He that Believes in the Son hath Everlasting Life. A Believer hath such an assurance as present Possessi∣on can give him. For the Word of God is his assurance: He hath a Witness, 1 John 5. 10. He that believes on the Son of God hath the Witness in himself. And he hath both Sealing and Earnest, Eph. 1. 13, 14. Ye were Sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheri∣tance. The Sealing of the Spirit is Assu∣rance, the Earnest is part of Payment, or some first fruits of the Harvest, so than to have a Title of Promise, Donation, and Possession must needs be a strong Title.
Quest. But the Question hence will be moved whether any can be assured of their Salvation in this Life. Answ. To this I Answer, That some have been assured, and others may be assu∣red. 1. Some have been assured as Job, c. 19. v. 25. I know that my Redeemer liveth; and Paul, Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me and gave him∣self for me. And 2. Why others may be assu∣red of their Salvation in this Life. For in those Beautitudes mentioned, Math. 5. If upon serious search and Examination, a Believer can conclude that he is poor in Spirit, pure in Heart, &c. Thence he may infer, that he is in a state of Blessedness. Likewise the Scriptures give several di∣stinguishing Characters, whence we may evidence the assurance of Salvation. One is love to the Brethren, 1 Joh. 4. 14. We know that we have passed from Death to Life because we love the Brethren. Another Character is the loving of Christs appearing. The Apostle speaks not only in his own name but also in the name of all Saints. Henceforth there is2 Tim. 8. laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day, and not to me only but unto all them that love his appearing.
A third Character is effectual calling: If we make our calling sure, thence we may be assured of our election. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather Brethren give dili∣gence to make your calling and Election sure. These may suffice for the Trial of the Grounds of assurance. But we must know. 1. That many Precious Servants of God may for a time want the sence of Gods favour, and be at a loss for assurance.Ps. 10. 1. Psal. 88. 5. David complains of Gods hiding his face from him: And so did Heman complain that he was free among the Dead, like the Slain in the Grave, whom thou remembrest no more. And he likewise expostulates the case with God, why hidest thou thy face from me? Gods Children are always in a safe condition, yet they are not always apprehensive of their safety. Sometimes they are under Desertions, and With∣drawings of Gods Countenance. A Child of Light may walk in Darkness. Com∣fortIsa. 50. 10. may be near him, and yet he may not discern it, as Mary could not see Christ for Tears in her Eyes. 2. Assurance admits Degrees, some∣times it's more sometimes less. The best are not always at a stand: Upon strict In∣quisition in their Hearts, they find cause
of Humiliation; and walking heavily. The remembrance of an old Sin may cause a great damp and sadness upon the Heart, 3. Assurance may be a long time before it be obtained. There will be long search∣ing the Heart, fighting against Sin, Fer∣vent and Assiduous Prayer, a great deal of combating against the Flesh. A Holy Mar∣tyr could not get assurance till he came to the Stake, at last he told his Friend, OGlover. Act. Mon. Q. M. day. Austin he is come, he is come, he is come. 4. Notwithstanding there may be assu∣rance, yet sometimes Doubts and Trou∣bles may arise in the Spirit, upon Appre∣hensions of Gods clouding his Counte∣nance, and upon Apprehension of the diffi∣culty to get rid of some secret Sin. Quest. But what's our Duty. Answ. 1. Allow thy self in no Sin, beDirect. 1. it ancient, customary, beloved, or secret, away with it. The hankering after any beloved Sin, the delay of executing Ju∣stice upon it, may break thy peace, and hinder thy assurance. Wherefore give no quarter to Benhadad, nor to Agag: Make a League with no Gibeonite. Foster no Dali∣lah, no Herodias. Throw Jonah over Ship∣board that's the way to make the Sea calm. Stone Achan, that's the way to
make the Valley of Achor a door of Hope: Brain Goliah, a Champion Sin, and than o∣therHos. 2, 14. Sins will sooner be vanquished, as the Philistines were when Goliah was destroy∣ed. 2. Make it thy serious business to clearDirect. 2. Make it thy busi∣ness to clear up thy evi∣dences. up thy Evidences for Heaven? Examine whether thou hast Christ formed in thee, whether the new Creatute is manifested in thy understanding to know God, in thy will to obey God, in thy affections to love him, in thy Heart, and Life, whether they are inlarged to run the ways of Gods Commandments, search and examine whether Sin be mortified and the Body of Sin Crucified, Whether thou art Justifi∣ed by the Bloud of Christ, and Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, whether thou art Redeemed from thy vain Conversation: upon such a serious Inquisition into thy Heart assurance may be obtain'd. 3. If thy Evidences be dim, and thou canst not read them; yet let not thyDirect. 3. Let not thy hold go. hold go: What thou wantest in Evidence, make up in Adherence to, and recum∣bance and reliance on God. Thus did David under Disertions. Ps. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God for I shall yet Praise him, who is the health of my Countenance and my God. And
thus did Job behave himself amidst all his Afflictions; Job 13. 15. Though he slay me yet I will trust in him. And such as are in a dark condition, who apprehend not the light of Gods Countenance, they are ex∣horted to trust and stay upon God. Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant, that walketh in Darkness and have no light: Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God? 4. Be fervent and frequent in Prayer.Direct. 4. Be fre∣quent and fervent in Prayer. Gen. Rebekkah when there were struglings in her Womb, went to enquire of God. If it be so, why am I thus? So amidst the Trou∣bles Fears and Tumults of thy Spirit ex∣ercise Prayer. If Gods Countenance be clouded pray with David, Restore unto mePs. 51. 22. the Joy of thy Salvation. Thou wantest assurance and art troubled upon the sus∣pensions and hidings of Gods Counte∣nance, thy duty is to be an earnest Solici∣tor unto the Throne of Grace, and pray that the Lord would lift up the light of his Countenance on thee, Ps. 4. 6. Great things are promised, Ezek. 36. viz. Sprinkling of clean Water, v. 26. A new Heart, the Spirit, 27. Security, 28. Plenty and Fruit∣fulness, yet God expects and requires the Prayers of his Children. Ch. 36. 37. Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. If than we would obtain assurance of Gods Love, we must pray much, and joyn Fasting and Watching with Prayer. Gods loving kindness is better than Life,Ps. 63. 3. therefore we must pray for it, and labour to get assurance of Gods love unto our Souls. How welcome was Samuel to Han∣nah being the Child of her Prayers. And oh how highly valued will assurance be to him who hath obtain'd it in answer to his Prayers? Wait than and pray, conti∣nue instant in Prayer. And to Prayer joyn Hearing, Reading, Meditating, and receiving of the Lords Supper: And when once thou hast got it, be sure thou be thankful and watchful. Take heed of the least Sin. The least crum of Leaven must be cast out. A Servant being incou∣raged by more wages hath more strong Obligations on him to serve his Master with more diligence and Fidelity. Assu∣rance and Manifestations of Gods love to a Christian are Ingagements to excite him to a more humble, holy, and close walk∣ing with God. The more mercy he re∣cieves, the more he is ingaged to a faith∣ful performance of his Duty. Whatever Manifestation of love is given unto thee know that thou ought to be more thank∣ful and fruitful in every good work. The
Apostle Writing of the Blessed Vision, 1 Joh. 1. 2. For we shall see him as he is; infers our great Duty to be reduced unto Practice. v. 3. And every Man that hath this hope in him, purifies himself even as heMatt. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. is pure. The pure in Heart are Partakers of the Blessed Vision. And without Holi∣ness no Man shall see the Lord. Let's than follow after Holiness. If ever we hope to be happy hereafter, we must here be Holy. No Holiness no Happiness. SECT. II. Containing the Fruits of Justification, which are a Ground of the Believers Comfort: HAving proved the first Ground of the Comfort of Believers, because they are Precious in the  of Christ. I come now (and with this Section I shall conclude) To lay down a second Ground of Be∣lievers Comforts drawn from the Fruits of Justification. And they are set down, Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore being Justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by Faith unto this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. And not only so, but we Glory in Tribulation, also know∣ing that Tribulation worketh Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope. There are sixspecial Fruits of Justificati∣on by Faith mentioned as so many Daugh∣ters of that Mother; or as so many Precious Fruits growing on that Tree. And they are Peace, Access, Joy, Hope, Patience and Ex∣perience. These I shall inlarge particular∣ly and so finish the Treatise. 1. By being Justified by Faith we have1 Peace with God. Peace with God. We have sweet tran∣quility and security upon our Spirits. What though Men Condemn and the World Persecute us? What though trou∣bles come as violently as Waves in a Storm, dashing upon us with more re∣newed fury? Yet Peace with God and se∣curity of Conscience will quiet our Spi∣rits, and comfort us amidst discontents, and fortifie us against Euroclydons and most Tempestuous Storms. When God Justi∣fieth who can Condemn? When God speaks Peace, who can speak Trouble? It's a grand incouragement, notwithstanding Troubles come thick and three-fold, that in Christ, we have Peace. He is our
Peace and Peace-maker, and Reconciler. However the World Storm, yet Christ be∣calms the most Blasting Winds. These things (saith he) I have spoken unto you that in me ye might have Peace: But in theJohn 15. 33. World ye shall have Tribulation, be of good chear, I have overcome the World. We should indeavour after the things that make for Peace, and (as the Apostle Com∣mandeth) If it be possible as much as in youRom. 12. 18. lies, live peacable with all Men. But some are of such implacable Spirits, as will ne∣ver be at Peace, and of the same maliti∣ous temper with David's Enemies, who when he was for Peace, they make themselvesPsal. 120. 7. ready for Battel. Yet here's a ground of of singular Comfort, that we have Peace with God, and this will make amends for all. For saith the Apostle. What shall we then say to these things? if God be forRom. 8. 32. us, who can be against us? Wherefore let's labour to get and keep Peace with God, and a good Conscience. Peace within will support and quiet us against all Troubles without, as Aarons Rod swallowed up the Rods of the Aegyptians. 2. Another Fruit of Justification by2 Acces unto God. Faith, is Access unto God. Sin sets Bars a∣gainst us, and hinders our Access unto the Throne of Grace: But Christ breaks theRom. 5. 2. Barrs and gives us Admission. We are
led by the hand of Christ unto the Father. The Original Word imports as muchRom. 5. 2. . This Manuduction or leading of us by Christ unto the Father is a great Priviledg Hereby we are admitted into the presence of the great King. None might presume to come into the Court of Ahasuerus, un∣less the King held out to him the golden Scepter. Behold Christ hath purchased this Priviledg of the King of Kings to hold forth his golden Scepter, and admit Believers into his presence. Hence a Be∣leiver enjoys a sacred Communion with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and hath freedom to make his request known in Prayer and Supplication. What then re∣mains but that we should make use of our Priviledg, and reduce the Apostle's Pre∣cepts in continual Practice, Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. A third Fruit of Justification by Faith is3. Joy. Joy, and this is Joy in the Lord, or a spiri∣tual Joy in believing. The sence of God's Love: The apprehension of his re∣conciled Countenance: The Believers In∣terest cleared up that he hath a new Name, a white Stone, and the hidden Mannah re∣joyceth his Heart more than the Fruition of all the Honours, Pleasures and Profits
which the Universe can afford. When God speaks to the Soul, and saith, Thy sins are pardoned, this is the most joyful and welcome day that ever a Believer saw▪ The good Hearers received the word with Joy, and brought forth Fruit with Pati∣ence. Amidst great straits and exigen∣cies the Church discovers an heroical Re∣solution, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, IHab. 3. 1. will Joy in the God of my Salvation. Amidst multiplicity of rolling troublesome Thoughts, the Psalmist takes ground of encouragement, Psal. 94. 19. In the multi∣tude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul. A Believer's Joy acts ex∣traordinarily; that which extinguisheth the Joy of a Carnal Man, is Fewe to en∣kindle the Joy of a Godly Man: or (saith the Apostle) And not only so, but weRom. 5. 3. . Jam. 5. 2. glory in Tribulation also. A Believer ac∣counts it all Joy, when he falls into divers Temptations: He kisseth the Rod that beats him, and with a Martyr bids wel∣come to the Cross of Christ, and with the Apostles, rejoice that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ▪Acts 5. 41. O! what Joy doth Faith bring to Belie∣vers in all their Sufferings! so that scoffs and reproaches they account their Ho∣nour, whips and tort ures scars of Mar∣yrdoms Though a Believer be tost up
and down with boistrous Waves and Tem∣pests, he can see Christ by the Eye of Faith: Though his Body be tormented upon the Rack, yet he can see Christ his Comforter; Though his Name be trampled on upon Earth, yet he rejoiceth that his Name is written in Heaven. A fourth Fruit of Justification by Faith4. Hope. is Hope: and this is the Anchor of the Soul. Were it not for Hope, the Heart would break, in the days of Jacob's Trou∣bles. But days of Jacob's Troubles are▪ days of Jacob's Hope. When Ezra and the People were full of grief and perplexi∣ties, because the Holy Seed had mingled themselves with Heathens, and were un∣equally yoaked with strange Wives, but notwithstanding Hope was left, quasi ta∣bula post naufragium, Ezra. 10. 2. Yet now there's Hope in Israel concerning this thing.Rom: 8. 24. By Hope (saith the Apostle) we are saved. When Spoilers come, a Believer is a Man of Hope. Whatever they take from him, yet they cannot take away his Hope. Amidst Clouds of Darkness his Hope is, That the Sun of Righteousness will arise with healings under his Wings. He hopes against his Reason: Though Sense fails, and Rea∣son be non-plust, and all humane Confi∣dence seem to be broken, yet the hope of
a Believer abides like the Bow of Janathan firm in it's strength. A Believer hath hope for his Helmet. For (saith the Apostle)1 Thess. 5. 8. putting on the Breast Plate of Faith and Hope, and for an Helmet the hope of Sal∣vation. Let's then make God our hope, as the Prophet Jeremy did. Jer. 17. 17. Thou art my hope in the Day of evil. Let's apply Jeremys Resolution, with Jeremys Affe∣ction. Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is the Portion of my Soul, therefore will I hope. A Fifth Fruit of Justification by Faith5 Patience is Patience. In your Patience (saith Christ) Possess ye your Souls. There's an absoluteLuk. 21. 19. necessity of the Grace of Patience, for saith the Apostle, ye have need of Patience,Heb. 10. 36. that after ye have doen the Will of God, ye might receive the promise. Were it not for Afflictions there would be no Tryal of Pa∣tience: But Afflictions and Sufferings trie a Believers Patience. When Enemies make long Furrows on the back of the Righteous, when the Vision is dark, and the Chariot Wheels of deliverance drive heavily, when expectations (though highly raised) are disappointed: In a Word, when Troubles, Losses and Per∣secutions come, and fear upon ar, and one danger upon the Neck of another, as one Wave of the Sea follows another,
then, O! then, what necessity is there of the exercise of the Grace of Patience, Submission and Resignation of our Wills in all things unto the Will of God: A waiting Patient frame of Spirit is pre∣par'd to undergo Hardships and Sufferings, with Courage and Alacrity. If then Faith and Hope begin to flag, let Patience in∣terpose. A Believer makes not hast. He dares not prescribe to God, nor limit the Holy one of Israel. When God hides him∣self, our Duty is to continue waiting. Isa. 8. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord that hideth his Face from the House of Jacob, and I will look for him. There's the exer∣cise of Faith and Patience. Let us then immitate those, who through Faith and Patience have Inherited the Promises. Let Faith and Patience hold out, and whate∣ver Pressures are upon us, they will either be removed or else be made more easy for us to bear them? The best and last Fruit is Experience. If6. Experi∣nce. Christians Treasured up their Experiences, and brought them forth upon variety of emergencies they might live more com∣fortable Lives than they do. Faith makes much  of Experience, and puts a Chri∣stian upon a serious review of Gracious Passages of Providence, and thence draws
Groans of Consolation. As for Instance (saith a Believer) I have been bewildred with Troubles on every side, and then God delivered me. I have been at the brink of the Grave, and then God deli∣vered me. I have known a pinching sea∣son, and a great scarcity, then God kept me alive even in a time of Famine, and made Provision for me. I have been delive∣red from Satans Temptations, and from my own Corruption▪ I have been delivered from Enemies within me, and Enemies without me. I have escaped Fire when others have been a Taberah. I have esca∣ped Pestilence when Thousands fell be∣sides me, and ten Thousands at my Right Hand: I have escaped the Sword when many have been numbred to the Sword: Thus then let me infer, O! how thankful ought I to be to God for all his Mercies, and O! what cause have I to trust and depend on him, and conlcude that the same God Om∣nipotent Reigneth, as Good, as Gracious, as Merciful, as ready to help as ever, and therefore the experience of former Mercies should ingage me to depend on God for the Future. When David was to encoun∣ter with Goliah, he assum'd a strong ground of Incouragement from his own Experi∣ence. 1 Sam. 17. 36. Thy Servant slew both the Lyon and the Bear, and this Ʋncircum∣cised
Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the Armies of the Living God. Let's Write down our Experiences of Gods dealing with us, and let's comfort our selves with this consideration, that God is in Heaven still. There's no defici∣ency in the All sufficient God: His Hand is not shorned that it cannot help, his Ear is not heavy that it cannot hear. Put then all these Fruits of Justification toge∣gether, and labour to be abounding and Fruitful in them. Now for a close of all, I heartily desire that the Promise may a∣bide on all our Hearts, and our profiting may appear, that so I may comfort others with those Comforts wherewith I my self have been comforted. I know (and I ac∣knowledge) that there are many Practical Treatises in Print (and I wish there were more) And I acknowledge that of Solo∣mon, to be an undoubted truth. Eccles. 12. 12. Of making many Books there is no end. Yet if I can by this Treatise, or what I have formerly Written, be Instrumental for the Spiritual good of any one Christian, I shall account it a great incouragement to add greater Labours and further Pains, ho∣ping that something may leave a deep im∣pression on the Hearts of Readers, that their Souls may thrive thereby. The de∣sign I endeavour and desire to drive at in
Writing is this, that my self and others may be made better; my Conclusion therefore of all shall be in the Words of that most excellent Father St. Bernard, Therefore are all Books Written, that one Book of the Conscience may be amen∣ded. FAXIT DEƲS. FINIS.
