5424 99891611 183009
Joy and sorrow mixt together: Or, a pleasant new Ditty, wherein you may find Conceits that are pretty to pleasure your mind. To the tune of, Such a Rouge would be hang'd. HAng sorrow, let's cast away care, for now I do meane to be merry; Wée'l drink some good Ale and strong Béere, with Sugar, and Clarret, and Sherry. Now Ile have a Wife of mine own, I shall have no néed for to borrow: I would have it for to be known, that I shall be married to morrow. Here's a health to my Bride that shall be, come pledge it you boon merry blades: The day I much long for to see, we will be as merry as the Maides. I long have sought out for a Wife, before that I any could sée: But now for to end all the strife, I have found one that pleaseth me. She is a brave gallant indéed, besides she is loving and kind: Good luck had I so well to spéed, she is according to my mind. Here's a health to my Bride that shall be, come pledge it you boon merry blades: To morrow's the day you shall see, we will be as merry, &c. Dame Nature hath shewed her Art in framing my Love so compleat, Shee's handsomely made in each part, her like is not in my conceit: Her haire it doth glitter like gold, her eyes like to Stars do appeare: Shée's beautious for to behold, yet she is my joy and my déere. Here's a health to my Bride that shall be, come pledge it, &c. There's many a one will admire, how I should obtain such a Lasse: But now she's mine, gold shall not buy her, for ever I will her imbrace: Besides she's a friend that will give ten pound to me when I am married, This will maintain us while we live, and if things be orderly carried. Here's a health, &c. This man is a friend to my Lasse, I doubt not but so hée'l remain: He tels me what ere come to passe, my labour shall not be in vain, If he his own promise do kéep, 'tis likely with me to go well: This makes me both waking and sléep to think of my bonny swéet Nell. Here's a health, &c. Now is the sad night overpast, and day chearefully doth appeare, To Church with my Nell Ile make hast, to voyd all suspicion and feare: All you that will now go along, I pray you not to use delay; Delay oftentimes causeth wrong, I'm joyfull of this happy day. Now here's a health to my Bride, come pledge it you boon merry blades, And to all married couples beside, wee'll now be as merry as the Maides. Now wedding and all being done and finished as he did desire, The Company homewards were gone, the Bride a bed, and he lay by her: Some spéeches there past them betwéen, which made him his bargaine repent, The next morning as it doth séem, the Bridegroom began to relent, He'l now drink no more to his Bride, nor yet to no boon merry blades; Now he layes his joyes all aside, he is not so merry as the Maides.
The second part now makes the young man complain, He wisheth with heart, he were unwedded again. To the same tune. YOu young men I'm marryed too soon, my Wife she is not what she séem'd, Alas I am now quite undone, now sorrow comes which I never déem'd: In Wiveing I have made too much hast, I would the fast knot were untide, If my wedding day were not past, I would not be tide to my Bride. I'm wedded to sorrow and pain, now farewell all my merry blades; Would I were unmarried again, I would be as merry as the Maides. My Wife's not what I thought she was, the more is my grief and my care; She proves to me but a crackt glasse, alas I am catcht in a snare: She was promis'd me to be sound, but now I find 'tis nothing so, Would I were rid of her ten pound, so that I were rid of her too. I'm wedded to sorrow, &c. The man that did give me the money, I doubt that he had the best share, It séems he did love my swéet honey, and still doth so I greatly feare: But now here is the worst of all, my Wife she proves to be with Barn, The Child it will me Father call, although me it nothing concern. I'm wedded, &c. My Wife was with Child long before that I married her, I do find, 'Tis folly to say any more, and yet it doth trouble my mind: If I ask her in loving sort, to whom she her Maiden-head did give, With words she doth cut me off short, saying, I shall never know while I live. I'm wedded, &c. What Man living can brook this wrong, to Father another Mans Child? Yet I were as good hold my tongue, now I find that I am beguild: With patience I must be content, 'tis many mens Fortune like mine, Now I have no way to prevent, this I might have foreséen in time. I'm wedded to sorrow, &c. Before I was wed I nere thought of any such matter at all, I thought a great price I had caught, but now my reward is but small: 'Tis true indéed I have ten pound, and a dainty curious fine Wife; But had I known what I have found, I would have lived a single life. Im wedded, &c. Let young men take warning by me, for Maidens are dangerous ware, I have got a Wife and some money, and yet I have bought her too deare: For cunningly I am buguild, unto all my Neighbors 'tis known, Now I must Father a Child, although it be none of mine own. I'm wedded to sorrow and pain, now farewell all my merry blades, Would I were unmarried againe, I would be as merry as the Maids. Richard Climsall. Finis. London, Printed for Iohn Wright the youn∣ger dwelling in the Old Bayley.
