E402 99890134 182497
depiction of Skull AN ELEGY, On the Death of the Reverend, Learned. and Pious William Bell, D.D. Vicar of S. Sepulchres; who Died July the 19th, 1683. WHAT Bell is that? I fear it will be Se'd, England's no Ringing Island, Bell is Dead. Grave Oxford's Fell, and Lincoln's Mighty T— Chester, and Brave Ely, and Sarum; Are somewhat out of Tune (I fear) to see Bell cast anew, to take his full Degree. Sorrow each Breast, Silence each Tongue hath ceas'd, Since the Bell Told, that, Doctor Bell's Deceas'd. In Silence Grieve, since Silent now he is, Who when he Spake, all Silent would be. 'Tis A Tacite mournful Text, the Winding Sheet, Makes Poets Sigh; Verses give up your Feet, "Who ever Sob'd in Numbers? Can a Groan "Be Quaver'd out by soft Division? If then our Loss be rightly understood, No News, our Land should Weep into a Flood: Yet Bords your Aid; for here's a Choice Theam, Your Wits can never Jump to the Extream: But in Defect; no Praise is Excessive, On Excellencies most Superlative, Reader, I Pray, let not your Virgin Faith, Scorn to Submit, to what your Poet Saith; Without Hyperbole; who knew him, Kens He was a Pattern of all Excellence, So Excellent, that even to Express, His Excellencies seems to make them less. A Mighty Loyalist, and Truths Defendant, Of Papists and Sectaries, a sweet Opponent: Panduct of all Knowledg; for no Prelate More Learn'd, or more Profound, or any Legate, Or any Pope, Jesuit, Cardinal: In Fine, more Learn'd, more Critical than all. "Knowledg and Zeal in him so Sweetly-met, "His Pulpit seem'd a Second Oliver. "Where from his Lips he would deliver Things, "As though some Seraphims had clasp'd his Wings. "His painful Sermons were so neatly dress'd, "As if an Anthem were in Prose express'd. His Words were Pat & Smooth, & yielding much Of Nectar and Ambrosia, they were such As would allure Angels, at any Rate, To be his Auditors (if possible) Fate, Made him a Tenant of a longer Date, Than those ill Husbands  so Live, (we see,) As to neglect to Die, and Die to be. Unfit to Live again; he Liv'd to Die, And Di'd to Live unto Eternity. Whose Conscience, both to God and Man, Was equal inoffensive, and the Span Of whose unspotted Life deserves to Be Preserv'd in Mind by his Posterity, Bless'd Soul departed, if to any one O' th' Saints above to Thee I'd Pray alone. And in my Kalendar I'd place thy Fall And make thy Dying-day Canonical. "Thy Ghost inspires our Muse, what Spirit Ran "In Thee before, Lives now in every Man. Yet can no Muse express how thou art Blest With Saints above. Let Angels speak the Rest. The EPITAPH. The Vicar of S. Sepulchres Lyeth Within this Sepulcher; who Craveth His Name, the Bells will that declare, To tell his Worth, who able are, But He himself? Yet all can tell, The Doctor liv'd (and dy'd) so well. London, Printed by T. Moore, & J. Ashburne, for Joseph Roberts, at the Bible in Fleet-Lane, 1683.
