F406B 47012442 174410
Joyfull News to the Nation: OR, The Crowning of King Charls the II. on the 23. of April being on St. Georges day, of his going from the Tower of London to White-hall, on mon∣day, being the 22. day, with his passing by Water from White-hall to Westminster-hall, and from thence to the Abbey, where he was Crowned; From thence quite back a∣gain with his Noble train, with the rare fire-works upon London Thames, To the Tune of Packintons pound. OF all the rich pleasures that ever was séen, The like unto this I think never has been; All people are glad and rejoyce in our Nation, To think they should live for to sée ye Crownation: Let's give God the praise, To see the brave dayes, And let vs repent us of our evill wayes, And then God will bless us in every relation, And happy will be this our Kings Coronation. On April being the twenty two day, The King from th' Tower did then take his way, And as for his pleasure he marched along, Thousands of people did after him throng, His Majesty then With his Noble men, The people still cry'd out, and never would len, With God bless your Majesty in all relation, And send you long Raign, and a happy Crow∣nation. The glass on the windows they then did take down And they on their Chambers made many a pound For the sight of the Gentlemen yt there did stand They had what they pleasd on them to demand, And all this was why The Kings coming by: They on the tops of the houses did lye, The like neer was heard of not in any Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. Four Pageans prepared for the King to pas in, Like Castles & towers, the like was not seen, The one imitating Pleasure and Peace The which from our borders should never de∣crease About it a Vine Showing Plenty of time, The conduits did run down with brave claret wine The like never heard of not in any Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. The Second part to the same Tune. THe twenty third being on St. Georges day, The King then by water did then take his way Where he did go unto Westminster-hall, There the Nobility, Gentry and all Did meet and did stand With caps in their hand: Ready to be at our good Kings command, The like nere was heard of not in y Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. From thence to the Ab he went with's train, Where the two Bishops did him entertn And under his féet there was cloths on th'ground For to walk on as he went to be Crown'd: The peope did fill Their voices most shrill, Cry'd, God bless your Majesty ever more still: The like neer was heard of not in any Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation The King then was crown'd & went quite back again, To Westminster-hal with his brve noble train With Knihts & with Lords, & Barons & Earls And all for to beautifie Noble King Charls. To sée people throng As they passd along. It would be to tedious to put in my song. The like never heard of not in any Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. The Knights & the Nobles were brave in attire Which made the beholders much to admire, The Duke went before him, and the way led, The King followed after with the Crown on his head: The people id shout, That was roun about, Onely the Phanaticks that stood very mute: It grieved them to see such a turn in the Nation And troubled their conscience to see the Crowna∣tion. Then strait came a Champion unto the hal-dore And out came two Earls, and did put him before The King call'd him to him & drank in a Cup, And bad yt the Champion should then put it up; The Cup it was Gold Most rare to behold! My self I did see it, no by others was told, The like never heard of not in any Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. The guns in the ships, and the Canons on shore The bels and the trumpets most loudly did rore The bonefires did burn in every street, And al pople made up their joy most compleat, They feared no dismay, But thus they did say, Happy are we for the Crownation day, The like never heard of not in any Nation, As there was prepared for our Kings Coronation A Castle or tower that seemed very good, Made by an Artist, which on a barge stood, It stood on the river of Thames there all night, With fire-works about it most full of delight, Those fire-works there, Which I doe declare Was to the beholders most wondrous rare, The like never heard of not in any nation As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. And by it a bowling green there did stand, As séemed as handsom as any on land T'was framed by one man, who thought it no charges A most rare green, and it stood on two barges His Majesty then With his Noble men, Might when he pleased to go to that green, The like never heard of not in any Nation As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. Let al men on earth now but think on this thing To see how our God have preserved our King, And let all rejoyce, and not any be sorry, And ive God the praise, where belongs all the glory And honour your King In every thing For he unto us glad tidings did bring, The like never heard of not in any Nation As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation. Now God bless the King, and send him a long raign That truth and peace may with us still remain; Let all hearts joyn one in love and unity, And let us pray all for the King Progeny With Lords and with Earls That loveth King Charls He is worth more to us then thousands of Pearls, And let any one pray in any Relation And then God will send us plenty in our Nation. Peter Fancy. FINIS. London, Printed for Richard Burton at the Horse-shoe in Smithfield.
