H1593 99885208 182585
An Heroical SONG On the Worthy and Valiant Exploits of our Noble Lord General GEORGE Duke of ALBEMARLE, &c. Both by LAND and SEA. Made in August, 1666. To the Tune of St. George. KIng Arthur and his Men they valiant were and bold, the Table Round was high renown'd, twelve hardy Knights did hold; all in the dayes of old extoll'd for Chivalrie: but they long since are dead, and under ground do lie, to keep up England's Fame, our present Story Chorus. tells, How Lord George, Lord George, in prowess now excells. Lord George was born in England, restor'd his Countryes Joy, come let us sing Vive le Roy. Chorus. Lord George was born in England, restor'd his Countryes Joy, come let us sing Vive le Roy. he Monarchies, all four, were purchased with blood; arthage of old, and Rome as bold, each other long withstood; nd many Lives were lost in every enterprize. Orlando Furioso, he was more rash than wise: ut never heard before, so well contriv'd a thing, ow Lord George, Lord George, in Peace brought home our King. Lord George was born in England, Restor'd his Countryes Joy, Come let us sing Vive le Roy. French Mounsieur Complements his Cracks and Cringes many; The Spanish Don his Hat keeps on, and looks as big as any; The Irish Tory fierce; Venetians Courage Hot; The Welshman still high born; most subtle is the Scot: But yet among them all, deny it now who can, Still Lord George, Lord George Renowned English-man. Lord George, &c. Darby and Capel both did Noble Martyrs die, Their latest breath, unto the Death, pronouncing Loyaltie; Good Subjects many more, did suffer Deaths most vile; n Scotland brave Montross was murdered by Argyle: For King and Countries sake, all those laid down their Lives; But Lord George, Lord George, to serve his Prince survives. Lord George, &c. Brave famous Noblemen, and others here did fight For Charles His Cause, when 'gainst the Lawes detained was His right: In those unhappy Wars, dy'd many Worthies good, Did win Immortal Fame by Losing Loyal blood: Yet maugre all their Force, Usurpers got the Throne; But Lord George, Lord George, He gave the King his own. Lord George, &c. By many Battles fought, the Turk's a Potent Lord; King Philips Son of Macedon, got all the World by's Sword; Great William 'gain'd this Land, and all the Danes drave out; Fifth Harry Conquer'd France, by force and valour stout: Their Greatness to Encrease, these exercis'd their might; But Lord George, Lord George, doth for his Master fight. Lord George, &c. Jephtha and Gideon by Miracle did strike; The Son of Nun did stay the Sun, no Man did do the like; Sampson was the strongest begot of humane race; Jonathan and David kill'd Philistins apace: All those did fight on Land, their Foes when slaughter'd they; But Lord George, Lord George rides Conquerour at Sea. Lord George, &c. Of many brave Exploits do ancient Stories tell, But Sea-fights such as ours with Dutch, yet none could parallel: Towards Midsummer the Moon works strongly on their brain, If in the Month of June they venture once again; For thrice they had the worst at that time of the year, And Lord George, Lord George still keeps them all in fear. Lord George, &c. We often read of Knights, Wilde Beasts did overcome; Our General, beyond them all, beats Belgick Lyon home; A Beast of wondrous Size, sometime did hold him play, But he the Conquest gain'd, upon St. James's day: The Lyon then was hurt, did lamentably rore, But Lord George, Lord George since that did wound it more. Lord George, &c. The Victory obtain'd, was further still made good, Our Englishmen, unto their Den, the Dutchmen home pursu'd: Their Fleet in Harbour fir'd, their Village sack'd and burn'd, Made Butterboxes swear the Monck to Devil was turn'd; As flam'd the Trojan Walls, so did their Ships or worse, For Lord George, Lord George sent in the Wooden-horse. Lord George, &c. If daring Frenchmen now our Valour longs to try, Soon as he will, we ready still, his Mind to satisfie: His Itch shall quickly Cure, when he shall feel our Sword With Dutch not blunted yet, we'l t'other Bout afford; And if he thinks it good, the Dane may likewise call, For Lord George, Lord George doth hope to beat them all. Lord George, &c. Success wait on his Arm, till Tryumph bring him home To Native Soil, enrich'd with Spoil of Enemies o're-come: Whilst they by Weeping-Cross are driven back again, May he with Joy return to his Dear Soveraign; And in his proper Orb, with Honour still attend, Till Lord George, Lord George 'mong Angels shall ascend. Lord George was born in England, Restor'd his Countryes Joy, Come let us end Vive le Roy. [Licens'd according to Order.] London, Printed by W. Godbid for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple. 1667.
