g964 52211832 175683
GODS VOICE to CHRISTENDOM, OR, Alarum to Europe: By the Remarkable Earthquakes, with the several kinds thereof, two hundred years before the Birth of CHRIST. The Causes and Kinds, Antecedents, and Consequents, (Pestilence, Sword, Famine) following there upon, the nature of Meteors, Effective, and productive of an Earthquake. Some part whereof was delineated by the great and Vertuous ROBERT BOYLE Esquyer, in the year 1681, relating to the dreadful Comet. The Impendent Judgements and Causes of GODS Wrath against a sinful people, sea∣sonably and particularly applyed to the Sons of LEVI. Habbakuk 1.4.5. The Law of the LORD is slackned, the wicked com∣pass about the Righteous, wrong judgement pro∣ceedeth forth: Behold I will work a work in your dayes, which ye will not believe, tho it were told you. By a Minister of CHRIST. Edinburgh Re-printed in the Year, 1693.
TO all Right, High, and Mighty Princes, States, and Earls of EƲROPE. Sacred writ confers on you the name and dignitie of Gods, though ye must die like men. Plutarch and Senica qualifies the lives of great persons to that of the gods, who delight in actions of Benifi∣cence, the contemplation of which is superior to all satisfaction loving Justice and Mercy; which made the Duke of Calabria affix an Bell near his Chamber, to be rung by the poorest of his Subjects. Kings of Old, indefatigably for fear, Sacrifysed your fear be Christian, for vere magnus Deus Christianorum; Nor are you to be Priest riden with a Vain bragg, God has spoken so, he did to Balaam a beastly Prophet, and yet a propheiical Ass. The Greeks ascribe the ruine of their Church, rise and progress of Mahomet, to the division of Christian Kings; which made the Goths and Vandels ransact the Romans, outdared by the Hunns born of Witches, and begot by Divels, who found a safe passage unto the confines of Europe, by the chase of an Hart, which did invite these Clans and Rascalities to flock into Europe whit their wits and Arme their Sperits, in one night 100000, by the help of Bladders to swim the Danube, and murther so many Christians.
THO the Efficient & Matterial causes of an Earthquak be natural, yet the Final is the signification of an Angry GOD, moved by the execrable Crimes of a wicked people according to that of David, in the 18 Psalm, verse 7: The Earth trembled and quaked, the foun∣dation of the hills also shook and removed, because he was wroth. Fear chills our hearts, what heart can fear dissemble When steeples stagger, and hudge Mountains tremble The Romans in time past commanded by edict, that Prayers & Supplication should b made in time of an Earth-quake, but the must call upon no God by Name, as on o¦ther Holy-Dayes, for fear they mistook th GOD into whom it belonged. And the mo Ancient of the Graecians called Neptune, the Mover and Shaker of the Earth, supposi the Cause proceeds from the Fluctuatio and Flowings of the Waters up and down the hollow places under the ground, or th the Shaking proceeded from the downfal of Subterranian Caves, and that sometimes whole Mountains sunk in and caused the trembling. But properly the cause of a
Earth-quake happeneth when Air and Win∣dy Spirits be shut up within the Caverns of the Earth, or have such passage as is too narrow for them, they then striving to break their Prisons, shake it, and make it tremble. Now this Imprisonment is caused thus, Namly, when the Earth which is dry by Na∣ture happeneth to be Watered by continual Rains. Then not only the Pores and Ca∣verns thereof are stopped and closed up, but the Exhalations and Air within the Earth are increased. To which purpose Dr. Fulk in his third Book of Meteors saith, The great Caves and Dens of the Earth, most needs be full of Air continually, for there is no Vacu∣um in Nature, for when by the heat of the Sun, the moisture of the Earth is resolved, many Exhalations are generated, as well within the Earth as without; And whereas the places were full before, so that they could hold or receave no more, except part of that which is in them be let out, it most needs follow, that in such Countrey, where the Earth hath few Pores, or else where the Ait stopped with Moisture, that there I say, these Exhalations striving to get out, do ei∣ther rent the Earth or lift it up, that there∣by, a free passage may be had, or else room enough to abid therein, & as in other kinds, so, also in this Subterranean fires multiply: Neither do we think that the Sun
is the only cause of shuting up of the Pores of the ground, for then Earth quakes should be in a manner, as frequent as dryings af∣ter Rain. The kinds of Earth-quakes be various, some when the whole force of the Wind driveth to one part: there being no contrary motion to let or hinder it, many Hills and Buildings, have been rushed down by that kind of Earth-quake, especialiy when the Wind causing it be strong, for if it be a feeble Wind, it only looseneth or unfasteneth foun∣dations: If less-feeble, then the Earth with∣out any further hand shakes like one sick of an Ague. The second kind of Earth-quake, is not so much Lateral, as Perpendicular or upright, which is when the Earth with so great Vio∣lence riseth up by & by sinketh down again, for after the Wind that causeth the Earth to swell is broke out of Prison, the Earth re∣turneth to its old place, even as it was be∣fore. The Third is a Gaping, or Rending, or Cleaving of the Earth, one part being driven so farr from another, that whole Towns, Cities, Hills and Rocks, Rivers, Seas, and the like, are swallowed up, and never seen again. The Fourth, is a shaking, that causeth a sink∣ing, and is farr differing from the former,
for now the Earth splitteth not, but sinketh; This being in such places, where the surface of the ground be solid, yet it hath a salt foundation, which being moistned with wa∣ter, by the sorce of the stinking exhalation, is turned into water also: Thus was the Antlantlck Ocean caused to be an Sea, which before was an Island, according to the Testi∣mony of Famous Plato 366 years before the Birth of CHRIST. The fifth kind of Earth-quake, is contrary to the former, for as before the ground sinks downso now it's cast up, like as in the second kind already mentioned only this is the dif∣ference that now the Earth returneth not into its place again, but remaineth a great Moun∣tain, yea, if such a rising be in the Sea, it not on∣ly causeth overflowings, but produceth like∣wise many Islands, such as was never seen before. Thus absolutely have we considered the Case; Now relatively of the Antecedents of an Earthquake. A great Calmness of the Air mixed with some Cold; the reason of which is, because the Exhalation which should be blown abroad, is within the Earth. 2ly. The Sun looks very dim certain dayes before there be no Clouds. The reason of which is, because the Wind which should have purged and dissolyed the gross Air, takes
taken prisoner, and enclosed within the Bowels of the Earth. Thirdly, The Birds fly not, but sitt still beyond ordinary, thô there be no Clouds; The reason of which is, either the Pent Exhalation sendeth some strange alteration into the Air, which slenderly breath out of some insensible Pores of the Earth, which it may do, thô the Exhalation comes not out; or else it is that they are scarce able to fly for want of some gentle Gales for their Wings to strike upon, It being a thing well known, that Birds fly more willingly and chearfully when the Air is of such a temper. 4ly. The weather is calme, and yet the wa∣ter of the Sea is troubled, and rageth migh∣tily: The reason of which is, because the great plenty of spirits or wind in the bottim of the Sea, beginneth to lay out for passage that way, and finding none, is sent back a∣gain, whereupon, soon after it shaketh the Land, this is a certain sign. 5ly. The wa∣ter in the bottom of the Pits and deep Wells is troubled, ascending and moving as if it boyled, stinking, and is infected: The rea∣son of which is, because the Exhalation be∣ing Pentin; and striving to get forth, mov∣eth some stinking minerals, and other Poysonous Stuff to the springs of those waters and they with the strugling Exhalation, stir and attaint them. 6ly. There is a long
thin Cloud seen in the clear Sky either a little before Sun setting, or soon after. More∣over in a quiet Sea, the waves float to their Shore 'long and straight. 7ly. There is another infallible sign, the great noise and sound heard under the Earth, like to a groaning or very Thundering, this noise being made by the strugling of the Wind under the Earth. Hence followeth the sad effects, the first whereof is the ruine of Buildings, to∣gether with the Death of many People. Lan∣quet in his Chroniele saith, about the year 29, before the Birth of CHRIST, was an Earth-quake in Jury, whereby thirty thous∣and People perished. In the 5th year of Ti∣berius, Empercur of Rome, 13 Cities of Asia were destroyed in one night by an Earth∣quake. In the 66 year of CHRIST, three Cities of Asia, were overthrown. And near Herapolis, Colosse a little after Pauls Death, their Church and Clergy degenerating, some by open Prophanity, some by horrid Hypo∣crisy commencing wickedness in CHRISTS Name. In the year of CHRIST 79, three Cities of Cyprus came to the like ruine, and in the year following there was a Death of many People at Rome. In the year 114 An∣titoch was much damnaged, the Emperour Trajan escaping very narrowly. About the year of CHRIST 181, the City Smyrna came to the like tuine. Eusebius tells us of an Earth∣quake
that was all the world over, to the damnadge of many Towns and People. In the year 551, at which time a Quave of the Earth swallowed most part of the City Mi∣lesia, where the voice of the Inhabitants was heard crying for Succour and Help. In the year 1456, perished about Naples 40 thous∣and People. Fromond Hist: saith, in the year 1508, Constantinople was so sore shoken innum∣berable Houses and Towers were cast to the ground, and Chiefly the places of the great Turk, in so far that he was forced to flee to another place, 1300 perished in this calamiy. 1531. in the City of Lizbon 1400 Houses and Churches were shaken to the ground, attend∣ed with Pestilence. Thia was made an Island in the very sight of the Mariners turning sea unto dry land, so also cutting the neck of the Istmus from the contenent. Thus Britain was severed from France, Africk from Spain, Sici∣ly from Italy hence brake out Rivers & Foun∣tains in new places happening by the breaches of the Earth among water Springs by the vio∣lence of the Exhalation, which poisonous fume infects the Air and the Air us, causing the Earth became sick and steirl, Drachomera Queen of Bohemea murdered her mother up∣on her knees at prayer, slew pious Prince Weneisluas mocked and misused Gods ser∣vants, till the revenging eye of God made the Earth, swallow her up, and all her company.
LET any judge whether this lower ball, Whose endless greatness we admire so all, Seem not a point compair'd with upper Sphear, Whose turnings turn the rest in there Career, Why then should man this nothing thus respect, As be for it Heavens Kingdome do neglect. If thou feeds well, if feet and back be cled, What more to thee can Kingly Riches add, Not house nor Land, nor heaps of Gold and Trersoure When sickness of thy body doth take Seasure, Can thence remove it, neither canst thou find A force in them to cure a troubl'd mind, Are all men Moral, are all men born to die, Can none on Earth posses Eternity, Sure he who looks upon the Worlds Frail Stage, And veius the actions of this present Age, Such Souls inspir'd with the Gales of Grace, Esteem the witching World no resting place, A place of travel not a place of stay, Such well devoted Pilgrims count their way. Rouze then thy thoughts think what it is, To be partakers of Eternal bliss. For when the dry land GOD did make appear, Was not that man should think his Heaven here: Hence the inferences are patenr: Inser, first, asholy writ, doth well forewarn and allarm, we ought not to be partaker of other mens sins, else we most share of there plagues: Bradford the Martyer used to pray, to be delivered from other men sins; the Apostle
John, at Ephesius Alarm'd the people to fly from the great Inn (where Cerinthus, and that pestilent Crew of Clergy were spreading there Blasphemy) before the Earth swallow∣ed down the cursed Caball; The Earth shall disclose its Blood, saith Isay, and no more cover its slain, Put thy self O Sword into thy Sca∣bard, saith Jeremiah, how can I do this till I be drunk with the Blood of my Enemies: The Sword of persecution goes round from hand to band. Papists drew Satans Pleugh and wore that Sword near 500 years. Prelats above 150 years. The indulg'd party disclaim∣ing the Mediatory Chair, declarative Glory of Jesus CHRIST a new swarm of Locust Lamb like with a Fox Skin of policy, have taken it from both, their hands, Commence all there malice in Jesus name, knock down all Learning in the fore head, perswad poor ig∣norants to Communions that know not the Creed! Tho out faternity could never hold Communion with them, nay not in hearing, conform to Dr. Ames, and Assemblies acts. Os orare vale convivia mensa negatur. Yet Hundreds are put to Hell, and thou∣sands on their march, verefy the Motto whose Veins are full of the Martyers Blood, arteers are full of pride and error, their Bones hardned with a custome of Apostacy, so that one man is a Wolf to another.
2, why do we dwindle away the time and blind our eyes eating dust with the Serpent, picking out Desaesion prelacy, from two poor words Tit. 1.5. every City, when Jerusalem 40 years after Christ had so few Christians that being warned to God, to depart to Pella, a little Village contained them all Eusebius lib: 3. Cap. 5. Lidda, Jemnia Joppa, were within three Miles of one another and three Episcopal Towns, and as Bishop Langham said those Bishops had high Racks and poor Mangers: there were 1000 Bishops in Armenia saith Baronius 1143. And Petraven saith there were but 20 Cities in Armeinea, nay, come nearer there were in Ireland 365 Churches founded by St. Patrick, & as many Bishops saith Nemius and Ʋsher and yet still but 19 Citys in Austeins time there were 900 Bishops in Africa. Philippe a City not so big Edinburgh had several Bi∣shops and Deacons. Philippians. 1.1. Infer 3io. The abounding Impiety of Ja∣maica, and the forementioned places pro∣claims Magnalia legis, the great things of GODS Law: Morality and Charity are still wanting, Faith Love, and Charity: Faith to possess God, and love our Neighbour: which maketh the Earth to reel too and fro, like a Drunkard: flinging out its Inhabitants in some places in other places swallowing them down. With the unseparable conse∣quents of a rageing sword, and sweeping pest∣a
Besome of Destruction for ignorant and, pragmatick Levites and Hypocrital Gospel∣lers professing absolution by the blood of Christ, yet scorning ablution, hating to be glewd by the blood of Christ, Janguine Christi conglutinari. Let the Mofttes of Barbary, and Musslamen of Turky be limned with our silly Clergy, and their Paganisme and Civility shall overreach, their Cristianity. Memo∣rable is the saying of a pious and learned Divine, the Bible suffers more abuse in Scot∣land nor any Kingdom of the World. Our Clergy being these 30 Years, like the Woodcoks of Denmark, long nibs, fat bellies little brains, and so delight to be. Wittily replyed the Indian King to the Spaniard, he would rather dwell in Hell, as live him in Heaven, with such company. Where is the spirit of these reverend Divines Mr. Alex-Handerson, Mr. Rollock Mr. Calderwood. Who thundred in ther Doctrine, and lightened in their conversation; terras a∣straea releqnit! We cry out against, Cain, Judas, Julian, Sodom and Gommorah! Alas they are but glasses to see our hearts. Magus believed Foelix feared, Jesabel fasted, Pharises prayed Herod listned, yet never the more reguarded, they wanted the principle of Faith, motive of love and end of charity creating Gospel un∣ity to see one Egyptian smiting another is nothing but to see one Israelit smiting ano∣ther
in most unnatural; seeing man created corrupted, restored, is the designe of Christi∣anity. I know bitter veritie begets me emni∣tie in place of amity; to that I answer, there be causes of none union, tho not of separation saieth Voet, si modo firma fides nulla ruina nocit Luther in his day sounds the Trumpet. Were there as many Devils at Worms as Tyles on the houses, I shall cry cleanse your hands ye sinners. Finaly, preachers and Candidats be not content with laping of Divinity as Dogs at the River Nilus, who cannot take a full draught least the Crocodil bite them; but Sa∣lomon tels us, he that breaketh over the Hedge a Serpent shall bite him. FINIS
