S1560 52529233 178959
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament to the Fifteenth day of March next to come. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith: To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren He∣raulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greet∣ing: Forasmuch as, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our Proclamation of the date the Twenty ninth day of August last by past, Adjourn the Current Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the Twelfth day of September also last bypast, to the Ninth day of January next to come: And We considering that the present State of Our Affairs in this Our Ancient Kingdom, doth not require that the Members of Our said Par∣liament should meet upon the foresaid day: And We being unwilling that they should be put to any trouble that may be dispensed with, do therefore with Ad∣vice of Our saids Lords of Privy Council hereby Adjourn Our said Current Par∣liament until the Fifteenth day of March next; hereby requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to attend that day in the usual way, and under the Certifi∣cation contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, & We Charge you straitly, & Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the Adjourn∣ing of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said Ninth of January next to come, to the said Fifteenth day of March thereafter. And ordains these presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty sixth day of December, and of Our Reign the Fifth Year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save King VVilliam and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printers to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno DOM. 1693.
