170 99887977 183650
A NEW PRESBYTERIAN BALLAD, To the old Tune of, The clean contrary way. 1. Whiggs, our Senat's gone, Our Glory's now a setting: with Plot's laid at our door, of our getting: bloody Cheats, and Shifts & Tricks, all our Devilish Play be disclos'd and we prov'd saints The clean contrary way. 2. will discovered be, ltry purjur'd stuff, the Hellish Plotters, that such Hell-hound-Proof: the face to guild their Vice, them like Saints display, wheedled them to swear the Truth The clean contrary way. 3. We made their piteous Nonsence good, And Contradictions true, relisht their unlikely Tales, So blundering like blind Hugh. What car'd we, if they damn'd themselves? we obtain'd the day, meritorious make our work The clear contrary way. 4. did scruple to believe ings, so absurd to Reason; ed Reasons Ballance, and We still cry'd, Treason, Treason; When the Informers halted had Our hubbubs bore the sway, ighting folks into their wits, The clean contrary way. 5. we rack'd for Evidence, that search in Ditches, some holes for poysonous Toads, And hungry sucking Leeches: We gull'd Fitz-harris for more guile, The guitless to betray: For which he'l reap a sweet reward The clean contrary way. 6. the Papists Traitors all, none the Snare might scape, all the Royal Protestants the Tra: be , What e'r they do or say wishers to the Pope The clean contrary way. 7. The Realms Religion, that's by Law In its Establishment, We made as if afraid to lose, Though from it we dissent; The Church of England in the dust That level we would lay To shew our selves true Protestants The clean contrary way. 8. The long-black-rebel-Parliament We stood to vindicate, We blossom'd new in th'good Old Cause Of Commonweath and State; Yet Monmouths Duke cry'd y the while And us'd him like a Toy A future Monarch he's design'd, The clean contrary way. 9. 'Twas such, as we, for Charles the first, With many a Prtoestati His Glory did so much pretend, His Weal and Preservation; But drew the sword against his Friends, And forc'd them all away, And him forlorn they did preserve, The clean contrary way. 10. Twas such, as we, the second Charles Did scornfully disown, Call'd him the Common Enemy Debar'd him from his Throne: Who now, but we, cry out of Plots, And for his safety pray, And stand up stout in his defence The clean contrary way. 11. Twas such, as we, in Scotland late Twice actually Rebel'd, And (Maugre all the Mercy here) Our English venom swel'd: We to Oblivions act so kind Vnkind Oblivion pay Like cherisht Vipers yielding thanks, The clean contrary way. 12. Yet we assum'd the confidence Tho conscious of what's past, To busy our Petitions bold, So frequent and so fast: Instead of Blest, we Blasted are, Alack and well aday! And we henceforth shall trusted be The clean contrary way. Printed in the Year, 1681.
