D957C R175927 [ocm]64551159 184514
A most Delightful HISTORY Of the Famous Clothier of England, CALLED, JACK of NEWBERY, In the days of King Henry the Eighth; how he was beloved of his Mistris above all her Wealthier Sutors: what great and valiant things he did for England: and the great number of poor he daily cherished. And how (when the King sent for him) he refused (with his company) to leave the Hill of Ants to go to the King: and therefore the King went to him: which he wittily excused: with many other very pleasant passages. Written by W. . F. C. Printed for W. Thackeray, at the Sign of the Angel in Duck-Lane.
THE MOST Delightful History OF Jack of Newberry. IN the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, one John Winch∣comb, being an Apprentice to a rich Clothier in the town of Newberry in Barkshire, a pretty handsome Youth, his Master dyed, and left his Mistris a Widdow; who perceiving Jack to be a faithful, careful, and trusty Servant, she put him in great trust in the House; who as carefully performed the trust reposed in him. His Mistris having many Suitors com∣ing to her, could not fancy any: for her Man John had stoln away her heart. The Par∣son of Spinhome-land woo'd her, and often so∣licited with her to make her his Wife, but could not obtain her love, because he was a Clergy-man; too much (she thought) de∣voted to his Study. A rich Tanner was a second Wooer, but could not speed; for
though he was rich, yet was he too Old for hee young and lusty desires. A Taylor was a third man, who was almost confident of her love; but all in vain, for her man John, oh! he was the man that had so wounded her heart that she could love no other man. She seeing the backwardness of John, her man (after many occasions which she gave him to wooe her) came at last, and told him plainly that she loved him, which secret she did earnestly desire him not to impart to any: but he very modestly blushing with a Rosie colour in his Cheeks, not knowing low to express himself s he desired, being astonished hereat, answered: Sweet Mistris (quoth he) I am but a Child to undertake so great a thing, it is a charge, the discharge whereof methinks I fear to undertake: At which answer, she was something dicouraged in her sute for the pre∣sent, and kissing of him, brake off discourse for that time; and night approaching, she went to Bed, but took but little rest; but either slumbering (at the best) or Dreaming of her pretty Man John. She was so troubled, as if she had been wounded in a Prison, and with many Cogitations of her Beloved, fetched many deep sighs in that dolesom and dark
night: thinking it long e're morning came, rejoycing to see the light appear; more to embrace her dear Servant, or rather her Ma∣ster, John. She going to see Bartholomew Fair, as Women use to do, to see and be seen, took her man John with her; who whilst she was talk∣ing with a friend, espyed him saluting a pretty Maid, which made her own mouth water; and biting her Lips, she left discoursing with her Neighbor to go to John, to prevent his further familiarity with the Maid. Afterwards she met with the Taylor her Sweet-heart, so neat as could be, in the Fair; who desiring her to drink a Cup of Wine with him, was denied again and again, but by importunity she was perswaded; and he espying the Tanner, called him into te Tavern to them, to help to bear their Charges; little imagining that he was a Sutor to the same Widdow; and both of them espying the Parson go by, called him in, expectig to make him their Solliciter; thus were they all meerly drawn into Cupid's Paradice: but when each had discovered their intents to other, they were all exceedingly perplexed, not knowing how this Division might be ended: At last, it was desired of the
Widdow which of them she loved best: and she answered, that she loved them all; and gave them thanks for their charges; but (quoth the Parson) can you find in your heart to Marry me? It is your Office to Marry, quoth she, and not mine. Then (quoth the Tanner) will you make me your Husband? Truly Neighbour, quoth she, me∣thinks you might better be my Father, you are of great Years to Marry such a young Widdow as I am. Then (quoth the Taylor) Widdow, i is I that must enjoy you; shall you and I be Marryed? Yes, I hope so (quoth the Widdow) when we and our sweet-hearts are agreed: So desiing to take her leave of them, giving them tanks for their costs they spent on her, she arose up to go away; but they desiring a full answer from her, de∣sired her to give them better satisfaction to their Requests. If (quoth she) you will come to my Houe on Thursday, I will give you full satisfaction: at which time they all came; and she told them all then plainly, that she would marry none of them, for she had one nearer home, whom she loved so well, that she could not marry any other man; so they went all away very sad and discontented. Night approaching, she talked privately
with her Man John, wooing him to marry her; which he still through bashfulness re∣fused: And when night approached, she caused a special bed to be made for her man John to lie in; which bed was onely for special strangers to lie in, or for her Husband when he was not well: and she lay her self in the next Chamber to him, which she locked up, and kept the Key thereof her self. But when she had lain in Bed an hour or two, she began to think it very long to lye alone; so she arose out of her bed, and went to her man John, shivering and shaking, and lifting up his bed cloaths, he started; Who is there, quoth he? It is I my sweet John, quoth she, I am your Mistriss; it is an ex∣tream cold Night, and I, lying alone, am almost starved in my Bed: Good John, afford me the favour of one Nights lodging by thy side, my John, I pray thee. Alas poor Mistriss, quoth he, come, come lye close: Yea, yea, quoth she, O sweet and good John; but here I leave them till the next morning. She got up very early in the morning, and calling for John her man to go abroad with her, she took him to the Church of Saint Bar∣tholomews;
and calling for the Prsest of the place, she, with him, perswaded John that they might then be married together; which with small intreaty he was perswaded to, and so they returned home; and when they went to dinner, she made him to sit in her old husbands Chair by her self at the end of the Table, at which his old fellow servants began to smile; and before Dinner was ended, she took him about the neck and kissed him, and told her Servants that he was her Husband, and com∣manded them to give him the respects due to a Master. He also spake lovingly to them, and told them, that he would not forget that he was once their Fellow-Servant, but would deserve their respects to the uttermost of his indeavour. Thus they spent the day in loving Toyings, only some over-sight of the Work-men withal, and at night they went to Bed. This new married Bride was the next morning visited by divers Gossips of her acquintance, that heard of the Wedding, who spent each of them their verdict, what the event of this her hasty Match would be; which Gossips did exceedingly discourage her▪ Oh! but (quoth she) I wll take an Order
for that, for I will curb him at the first, that I will make sure that he shall never crow over me, I warrant you. And indeed she began to grow as great a Gossip as any was in Newberry, and would sometimes come home very late at night; in∣somuch, that at last her Husband John went to bed, and locked her out, and took the Key up into his own Chamber; and when the good wife saw that she was shut out of doors, she knocked very hard, till at last her Husband looked out at the window, and bad her to go look her lodging at night, where she had been sitting all day: Such Gossips (quoth he) as you, the Cage is the fittest Lodging for, go to the Con∣stable, and bespeak a bed of him. Oh! dear Husband, quoth she, be not so angry, I pray you; give me leave to come into my Bed, good sweet Husband, I pray you, and let me not stand thus in the cold, lest I lose my life thereby: After many fine words wherewith she had intreated her Hus∣band to come down and open the door, he came down to her, and let her in; to whom she dissemblingly pretended to have lost her Wedding-Ring from off her hand, who lo∣vingly going forth with the Candle in his hand (in his shirt) looked up and down upon
the goound for it: and she the mean time step∣ping in, clapped to the door, and shut him out; whereat he was much perplexed, and knocked a long time in the cold before she would answer, who at last opening the Window, bad him go look a Lodging with him Constables Wife; and asked him whether he thought it good to lye in the cold in the Street: Now (quoth she) she who was even now at your mercy, hath gotten you at hers. Oh sweet Wife, quoth he, be not angry, but let me come in; I swear unto thee, that I will never shut thee forth of doors again, but thou shalt do what thou wilt and I will never meddle no make with you whatsoever you do hereafter: where∣upon she came down and opened the door, and let him in; and there they made great pro∣testations each to other, never to affront or fall out one with the other after; and with a good Sack-posset the Covenant was agreed between them. Shortly after the King was to raise an Army of Souldiers against the Scots, who was risen against the English; and Jack of Newberry raised at his own charges an hun∣dred and fifty men, and allowed white Coats red Caps, and yellow Feathers; and led
them himself: fifty of them were valiant Horsemen; fifty Pikes, and fifty Musque∣tiers; all brave Steeds, good Arms, and va∣liant men; who marching by before the Queen, Queen Katherine, she called for him, and understanding what he was, after she had put forth her hand for him to kiss, she promi∣sed to acquaint the King's Majesty with his free and great service. A Song used by Jack of Newberry and his Souldiers: KIng Jamy of Scots had raised an Army against England; But let him come, we'l thunder him back, he cannot us withstand. Jack of Newbery comes proud Scots take heed with valiant Souldiers stout; Who for brave England will fight with you, and never will give out. Our milk-white Coats, red Caps, and yellow Feathers declare, Our Resolution's stout and good, there Scots will not spare.
Shortly after Jack of Newberry heard that the King was to ride by Newberry, so he with his Servants went out into the field, and finding an Hill of Pismires, drew his Sword and guarded it; and the King coming by, sent for him to know the reason why he guarded that place with his Sword drawn, the King in person being to pass by there? who returned answer, That he was busie, and could not speak with him; and the King is on Horse-back, and I am on Foot, therefore (quoth he) he may the better come to me. Tell the King, that I stand here to guard the la∣borious Ants from their Enemies: which Message being brought to the King, he went to Jack of Newberry, expecting that it was done to make some jest for his pleasure: and when the King came, Jack, with all his men, fell on their knees, and cryed, God save the King; your Sacred Majesty (quoth he) hath vanquished all mine Enemies. Now trust me, quoth the King, you are stout Souldiers to fight against Butterflies, and withstand such mighty Gyants. My dread Soveraign, quoth Jack of New∣berry, not long ago, in my conceit, I saw the most provident Nation of the Ants, sum∣moned
their chief Peers to a Parliament, which was held in the famous City of Drie-dustie, the one and thirtieth day of September; whereas by their Wisdoms I was chosen their King; at what time also many Bills of complaint were brought in against divers ill Members in the Common-Wealth, amongst whom the Mole was attainted of High-treason to their State, and therefore was banished for ever from their quiet Kingdom; so was the Grashopper and Catterpiller, because they were not only idle, but also lived upon the la∣bours of other Men: Amongst the rest, the Butterflie was very much misliked, but few durst say any thing to him, because of his Gol∣den Apparel: who, through sufference, grew so ambitious and malapart, that the poor Ant could no sooner get an Egg into her Nest, but he would have it away, especially against Easter which at length was misliked. This painted Ass took snuff in the nose, and assembled a great many other of his own Coat, by windy Wars to root these painful peo∣ple out of the Land, that he himself might be above them. These were proud But∣terflies, quoth the King. Whereupon, I, with my men, quoth Jack, prepared our selves to withstand them, till such
time as your Majesties Royal presence put them to flight. The Song which Jack Sung with his Men before the KING. I Have taken upon me a charge, to govern these poor Ants, That they may walk at large, to gather in their wants. That they may walk mo safe, to bring home their relief, And keep that which they have; from every idle Thief. But now my King is here, I bow down low my knee, For we that vaunted here, are Subjects unto thee. God bless thee Royal King, and send thee long to Reign, And joy in every thing, and freedom from all pain. I, and my men, and mine, my Ants, and all we have;
Command us, we are thine, and so the King God save, Now to return again to Jack and his Wife, it fell out that she fell sick and dyed; and being buried, Jack fell in love with one of his Maids: and sending for her Father, to know what he would give with his Daugh∣ter: he came to Newberry, and seeing the wealth of his Daughters Sweet-heart, and Master, he was astonished: for Jack had, viz. In one Room two hundred Loom all going. Two hundred Boys making Quills. A hundred Women Carding. Two hundred Maids in another Room Spin∣ning. An hundred and fifty Boys picking of Wool. Fifty Siermen. Eight Rowers. Fourty Dyers in the Dye-house. Twenty men in a Fulling-Mill. Ten fat Oxen he spent every week in his house, besides Butter, Cheese, Fish, &c. A Butcher for his own house. A Baker for his own house. A Brewer for his own house.
Five Cooks. Six Scullion-Boys. Divers Turn-spits, &c. Sir, (quoth the old man) I wis the zee you be bominable Rich, and cham content you shall have my Daughter, and God's Blessing and mine light on you both. I vaith cham but a poor man, but I thong God cham of good exclamation among my Neighbours, and they will as zoon take my vice for any thing as a richer mans: thick I will bestow you shall have with a very good will, because che hear very good commendation of you in every place: therefore thick give you twen∣ty Nobles, and a weaning Calf, and when I dye, and my Wife; you shall have the Re∣velation of my Goods But Jack made more reckoning of the Wo∣man's modesty, and virtues, than of his Fa∣thers proffer; and he married her, and made a great Wedding; and instead of receiving the old mans Dowrie, he gave him twenty pounds in money; besides other good gifts. Oh my good Zon! quoth the old man, Christs benizon be with thee evermore; For to tell thee true, we had zold all our
Kine to make money for my Daughters mar∣riage, and this zeven year we should not have been able to buy any more. Notwith∣standing we should have zold all that ever we had, before my poor wench should have lost her marriage: I should have zold my Coat from my back, and my Bed from under me, before my Daughter should have gone with∣out you. I thank you good Father and Mo∣ther (quoth the Bride) and I pray God long to keeep you in health: then the Bride kneel∣ing down, did her duty to her Parents; who weeping for very joy, departed. Now there was one Randal Pert, a Dra∣per, dwelling in Watling-street, who owed to Jack of Newberry five hundred pounds; and it happend that Jack came up to London; and as he went to his Customers, he met in the street this Randal Pert in a Frock, carring a Porter's Basket, and an old ragged Doublet, and a torn pair of Breeches, with his Hose out at Heels, and a pair of old broken slip-shooes on his feet, a Rope about his middle, and a greasie Cap on his Head, and newly come out of Prison. Now was his Wife, who before for dain∣tiness would not foul her fingers, nor turn her head aside for fear of rumpling her Nem∣kinger,
yet now glad to go about and wash Bucks at the Thames side, and to be a chare-woman; her soft hand was now hardened with scouring, and instead of Gold Rings up∣on her Lilly white fingers, her hands and fin∣gers were now filled with chaps. But when her husband espyed Jack of New∣berry his Creditor, he ran away as fast as he could, for fear of being arrested: but he sent h s man after him; who seeing one pursue him, he ran the faster; and in running, here he lost one of his slip-shooes, and there ano∣ther, ever looking behind him with great fear: At last his Breeches being tyed but with one point, that with the haste he made, and the oldness thereof, brake, and his Breeches fell about his heels, and did so shackle him, that he fell down all along in the Street which his Arse bare, and an old ragged Shirt, he lay sweating and blowing, being quite worn out of breath; to whom the fellow came, and brought him to his Master, who took him to a Scrivener, to give him Bond for the pay∣ment of the money; and the time of the payment of the money was to be paid when the said Pert was Sheriff of London, a thing very unlikely. Well, the Scrivener made the Bond, to
be paid when Randal Pert was Sheriff of London, and thereunto set his hand for a Witness, and twenty persons more that stood by. And Jack of Newberry sent for a new suit of Apparel for him out of Birchen-Lane, and a new Shirt, and Band, Hat, Hose, Shooes, and all things necessary, Merchant-like; then he took for him a Shop in Canwick-street, and furnished the same Shop with a thousand pounds worth of Cloth, by which means, and other favours which he did for him, he grew in good credit again, and became very provident; and his Wife turned to be the best Housewife in the Parish; and he soon got good custom, and was very provident, and increased in wealth, so that in short time became one of the best men for wealth in the Parish; and there was so much notice taken of him, that he was chosen Sheriff of London, and paid the five hundred pounds every penny; and kept a brave House in his Shrevalty, and afterwards being an Alderman of London, dyed before he came to be Lord Mayor, and left his Wife a gret Estate. Jack of Newberry, otherwise called Master John Winchcomb, being grown very old, he fell sick, and after few days he dyed; and
his Wife buried him in great Pomp: and he left his Wife a great Estate, and many Legacies to Friends, and to many poor people were left by him; and to his Burial come the greatest part of the Country all thereabouts, to see the good old man laid in his Grave, where we will leave him with this Epitaph.
EPITAPH. OF Newberry here lies valiant Jack shrowded in white, come to his end By Death that now hath broken his back, who to his Country was a Frend; An aid to those that labour lov'd, an help to poor, both blind and lame, Men, Women, Children, all have prov'd the succour sweet that from him came. Winchcomb adieu, God hath thy Soul, thy Body lies inclosed in earth, Thy Works brave Histories do Enroul, thy Life, thy Fame, ev'n from thy birth. FINIS.
These Books following are to be Sold by William Thackeray, at the Angel in Duck-Lane, near West-Smithfield. THe famous History of the Gentle Craft. The Book of Knowledge, of things un∣known: the old and best sort. The History of Thomas of Reading. The History of the Golden Eagle. The History of the Jews, a small one. The Book of Merry Riddles. Variety of Riddles and Songs. Corydons Complements. Robin the Cobler. With all sorts of Histores New or Old. There is also to be had these Books of Divinity. FEnner's Sermon of Repentance. A Sermon of Dives and Lazrus.
A Warning-piece for the Slothful. These three are not above Three-pence a piece. The Godly Mans Gain, and Wicked Mans Woe. Sinners Sobs. The Christians Guide. These three last are but Two-pence a piece. There is also two Excellent Tables: One called, Ch istus Natus Est, of the Birth Christ. The other, A Watch for a Wise Mans Ob∣servation: very good, pretty, and delight∣ful things. FINIS.
