T1063A R224274 [ocm]80924313 192065
blazon of the Commonwealth The liberty of the Deane and Chapter of St. Pauls. depiction of St. Paul's Cathedral blazon of the diocese of London An Abstract of St. Pauls late DEANRY. See Hen. 3. Ed. 1. Edw. 4. Hen. 7. & Hen. 8.THE Bayliwicke and Liberty of the late Deane and Chapter of St. Pauls is a speciall Liberty, and a distinct Iurisdiction, and is Granted and Confirmed to them by spe∣ciall Letters Patents and Charters of Confirmation by severall Kings, in these very words, viz. The Return, and the Exe∣cution of all Writs what∣soever.THat the Deane and Chapter, and their Successors for ever, shall have the Executi∣on and the Returne of all VVrits. Precepts, and Mandates, whatsoever, as well Pleas of the Forrest, as to all Comon Pleas, and Pleas of the Crown. No Officer may enter or incroach upon the Inha∣bitants, or infringe their liberties.SO as no Sheriffe, Bayliffe, or Minister of our Lord the King, may enter or incroach upon their Freedomes, Lands, or Tenements. The great Charter.AND this is the first Charter and Grant in Magna Charta, viz. to have all their Rights and Freedomes inviolable, to the and their Successors for ever. All these Charters, grants, & freedoms are confirmed by the late Parliament.ALL which Letters Patents, Charters, Grants, and Freedomes, are confirmed by the late Parliament, as fully as the then Deane and Chapter did hold an njoy the same. AND is sithence contracted for and purchased by EDMUND THOROVV GOOD, Bayliffe. Directions concerning the Officers belonging to this Liberty. To keepe our pretended Officers, Intruders, and Bum.THose Bayliffes that belong to this Liberty, shall have their names Printed in their VVarrants, or fayrely written, without interlining, and the Chiefe Bayliffes name, and the figure of St. Pauls Church, as above, in the margent of their VVarrant. Who will assume that they are Officers, and are not, &c.TO this end that all the Inhabitants may know them to be Officers belonging to this Li∣berty, and where they may call for Return of their VVarrants, and of whom. Not to part with their money for nothing.THus they shall have full satisfaction of the doing and dispatching of their Business, and may know what Bayle is taken for them. Sworn Officers.AND also that they may know of whom to complaine, and where, for the not perfor∣ming of their Office according to their Oath. A Clerk at the chief Bay∣liffs house to attend the business of the Bailiwick, &c to take Order &c.THose that have Business to be done in this Liberty, may come to the Chiefe Bayliffs House, where there shall be Order taken for the dispatching of their Business forth∣with, and there they may know whats done therein. The Tenants and Inhabi∣tants not to pay toll. See the Inrolment of Patents in the Tower, Ed. 4. Ed. 5. &c.ALL the Inhabitants dwelling within the late Dean and Chapter of St. Pauls afore∣said, are acquitted of all Tolls, Passage, and Cariage, in all places throughout the Nation, aswell by land as by water, in all Fayres and Markets, to them and their successors for ever, as by the severall Letters Patents, Charters, Grants, and Confirmati∣ons aforesayd, doth appeare. IF any of the Inhabitants are or heereafter shalbe Arested by forreign Officers, not belonging to this Liberty, doe forthwith send to the Chiefe Bayliffe, (or in his absence to his Officers) order shall be presently taken for such intruders as do introach upon the Inhabitants to infringe their Liberty.
