F1263A [ocm]19373280 205486
THE CONFIRMING WORKE OF RELIGION, In its necessity and use briefly held forth; that each Christian may have a proper ballast of his own, of the grounds and reasons of his faith, and thus see the greatnesse of that security, on which he adventures his eternal state. OR The true and infallible way, for attaining a con∣firmed state in Religion, from these primary evi∣dences and demonstrations of our faith; which the Lord hath himself given, so as it may be easy for the meanest in the Church to know the same, and be ready to render an account thereof to all that ask. With a short and confirming prospect of the work of the Lord about his Church, in these last times. BY R. FLEMING, Minister of the Gospel of Christ. At ROTTERDAM, Printed by REINIER LEERS. M.DC.LXXXV.
The PREFACE. THis small Essay, here offered, is on the greatest subject, can fall under the consideration of mankind; and is a study, was never more pressingly called for, then in these dayes, for men to be making peace with God, and to have such an assurance of his truth, as can fully quiet and support the soul, though all sensible props should be brocken, and fail. Great changes doe surely hasten on this generation, and the life of faith, is in an other manner like to be put to tryal, then since the Churches rise and recovery from An∣tichristian bondage. The storme now visibly grows upon the Churches of Christ, though nothing is thus to faint or shake, the spirits of any, who know their anchor is sure and cast within the vail; but the strongest difficulties, in following the Lord, when overcome, yeelds the greatest vic∣tory, and will be not only matter of joy here, but to all eternity, in having with patience and hope indured, and got well through a throng of tempta∣tions and assaults in a resolute adherence to the truth. If men think it their wisdome to secure their private interest, by dividing it in such a time from the publick cause of the Reformed Church, and make light of the greatest truths of God now assaulted, of the blood of the Martyrs, yea of their own eternal state, by any coolnesse or shrin∣king
from the same; they will find no temporal motives, can ever compense that losse and ruine which inevitably will meet such in the issue, yea that these words of Mordecai to Esther, Esth. 4: 13, 14. have the same voice, and weight in this day. What is held forth in the following worke, I may with humble confidence say, was under some pressure to have such clear evidence and quieting persuasion of divine truth, as made it lesse easy to have my own spirit satisfyed herein, then possibly it may be to others; for if it were not from that blessed assurance of the Lords being God, of the revelation of Christ, and of the glory to come, I should not know what could be confor∣ting or make a rational being desireable. Some sin∣gulare ingadgments I judge my self also to stand under, for putting to my seal to the truth and faithfulnesse of God in his word, from many signal confirmations hereof in the course of my pil∣grimage, if such a poor testimony might be of any weight. Let the blessed Lord, gratiously ac∣cept this small offering to him, and for the in∣terest of his truth, by so mean an instrument, and give some fruit hereof, that may abide, and be found in the day of Christ. I hope the Reader may find by a perusal of the I. Chap. of what serious use and intent the II. is; yea that in this day it was not unseasonable or incongruous to the forgoing subject what is held forth in the III. Chapter. But oh it is sad and amazing to think how few are un∣der that weight of Religion, as once to have a serious inquiry on the grounds and reasons thereof, and to ac∣compt the most special assistances to their faith to be the greatest helpers of their joy within time.
THE True and infallible WAY For attaining a confirmed state in RELIGION, &c. CHAPTER I. The Primitive Confirmation in the truth of Christianity, held forth and cleared, in its continued necessity and use to this day, in a few Positions. THat nothing can have a mo∣re sad and threatning aspect on the present state of reli∣gion in all the churches of Christ,  then that utter es∣trangment, most are un∣der, to the true grounds of faith, and to those foundamental differences betwixt Christianity, & every false way, which no pretended religion can lay claim to. The reasons of the Position, are these. I. That it is too visibly manifest, how no men in the
world know so little of their own profes∣sion, were it of any human art or science, as such who bear the name of Christians, or are so generally strangers to the truth and firmnesse of the principles therof, for main∣taining either a due valuation, or powerful sense of the same on their soul; so that an implicit and traditional profession is the only part and propriety which most can claim in the truth, and doctrine they professe. II. That so rare also is any such serious worke amonghst men, as a personal inquiry and tryal, if there be indeed such a thing as an experimental and soul quickning religion in the earth, that can bear the expense of the most dismal and afflicting times, and hath so great a temporal revenue lying therto, as peace with God, an immediate communion with him, the joy and comforts of the H. Ghost, when under such pressours of trouble as are above the support of nature. III. That the furthest account, why most goe under the name of Christians, rather then of any other forme, can rise no higher then custo∣me and education, that it did bespeak them from their birth, and was the religion of their ancestours, yea become in that man∣ner naturall to them, as the customes and language of their country; which are grounds that should determine to the very
opposite profession, if they were stated un∣der the same circumstances, and had the sa∣me motives to be Mahumetans; since it is sure these can found no other assent, then is suitable to the nature and strenth therof IV. That thus it cannot be under debate, how the most numerous part of visible pro∣fessours, are so destitute of any defense from internal motives, and solid conviction of the truth they professe, upon its own evi∣dence; as there was never more cause to fear, some unusual apostacy from the very visible profession of Christ, upon any violent try∣al and assault this way, when such finds it more easy to render up their religion, then to adhere to the same, under strongh temp∣tations, who yet never knew that substance, advantage, or certainty herein, as could preponderate with the want of all external motives for such a profession. That thus one of the highest services of these times,  for the publik good of the Church, does convincingly lye here; to have the faith of assent to the truth and doc∣trine of Christ, in a clear and firme certain∣ty of the judgment, on its own evidence, more vigorously promot, and the proper means and assistances, which the Lord hath given for this end, in some other manner yet improven, then seems to be this day,
for a more universal use. The grounds to inforce the necessity hereof, are these; I. that its sure wherever the Gospel is revealed to men, it comes with so full an assurance of understanding, and sufficiency of objec∣tive evidence, as can admit no possible doubtfulnesse herein, which is the credit and glory of our religion, that in no other way it doth require acceptance, but with the furthest conviction of evidence. II. Be∣cause the expresse designe and tendency of this blessed revelation, is no lesse to found such a rational assurance in the judgment, of its truth, then to ingadge their will and con∣sent, for imbracing therof; and though such great demonstrations for this end can only, in suo genere, have a convincing influence to perswade the understanding, yet are they of such weight here, as next to the demonstration of the Spirit of God, they are the greatest means to bring up mens assent to a full and quieting rest on that se∣curity to which they must concredite them∣selves for ever, and to let them see, that this even here by the way, is assuredly full, though not yet their injoyment. III. Be∣cause this faith of assent, should be first fol∣lowed in the order of nature, as being the very first principle of conversion, to know and be sure, that God hath sent his son into
the world to save sinners; wherin as the H. Ghost is not the objective, but the efficient cause here of our faith, so is not the inter∣nal worke and testimony he gives on the soul the first testimony, but must still have res∣pect to the revelation of the word without, and such demonstrative evidences therof, wherwith it is revealed to the world, nor may ever be separate, that which God hath himself so indissolubly joyned. IV. That so convincing a necessity and use is hereof to the Church, and in a special way with res∣pect to the youth, for a more firme laying of the groundwork of their Christian pro∣fession, and to be as the seed-plot of a bles∣sed and desirable grouth amonghst such in this day; that they might thus know early, something of these primary grounds and de∣monstrations of their faith; so also is it a stu∣dy of that high importance, as I humbly jud∣ge, should be of notable use for a Manuduc∣tion in the first place to students of Divinity, before they launch forth in that vast and im∣mense ocean of the speculative part therof; and for being at some greater advantage thus for carying on such a confirming worke in the Church in their future service. V. Yea of what use might this be with respect to many, who may be sore haunted, with hid and dreadful temptations to infidelity, and
to weaken them on the very foundations of their faith; who are wholly unfurnished of any such grounds and arguments in their judgment to repel the same: and it is sure, to believe firmly the history of the Gospel, that God was manifested in our nature, to save man, is with respect to the object a much higher act of faith, then to believe, that he will save us; since as the one doth unspea∣kably more transcend all human reason then the other, so doth the Apostle thus argue from the greater to the lesse, Rom. 8: 32. That he who gave his own son to the death; will he not also with him give us all things. That such a confirming worke,  was most specially followed in the practize of the pri∣mitive times, and one of the great ends of the ministry of the Apostles and Evange∣lists, to have this faith of assent and doctri∣nal certainty therof, on its proper grounds and evidences, deeply founded in mens judgment; is so clear, as cannot come un∣der debate. I. That this way did the great author of our profession himself take, not only by the authority of his word, and the power and energy of grace, but with that convincing evidence and demonstration of his truth to mens understanding, as might found also a firme and rational assurance he∣reof. II. That for this end, he did pray
the Father, Joh. 17:21. and was so much pressed herein, that so great an external de∣monstration of the truth of the Gospel, in the concord and unity of his people, might be kept clear, that the world might thus be∣lieve that he was sent of God, and have a dee∣per conviction hereof served on them, by such an evidence. III. That one special intent of the Evangel of Luke, was for this end, Luke 1:4. that men might know not only the things themselves by a naked relata∣tion, but the certainty of these things, wher∣in they had been formerly instructed. IV. That herein did the ministry of Apol∣los so brightly shine forth, Act. 18: 28. and was then of most singulare use to the Church, by that clearnesse of rational con∣viction and demonstrative arguments for the truth of Christ, as the greatest gain sayers could not withstand. V. That its sure it was then without exception, expressly re∣quired of the meanest within the Church, to be allways ready to render the reasons of their hope to all who ask; and not only to know what they did believe, but why they did so, as is clear 1 Pet. 3:15. yea that this could not be by bringing forth of internal evidences, for conviction of others, but to give them an account of the most cogent grounds and demonstrations of the Gospel,
as might be most prevalent, and confirming to the weak, and leave others inexcusable; and seems to have been then specially pres∣sed in these primitive times, as a proper test of their Christian profession. VI. And we see herein also, how much these excellent Bereans were taken up, and were so highly commended of the H. Ghost, Act. 17:11. to know the demonstrative part of Christia∣nity, and by its own evidence, with that intire harmony and consent of the Scripture therin, and their being thus diligently in∣tent in that comparing-worke of religion, to see the truth therof not singly and apart by themselves alone, but in that joynt union and coherence, wherin they stand, each in their own room, for confirming and giving light to other. VII. That this was the way also, wherin the Gospel did come to the Gentil church is cleerly shewed 1 Thess. 1:5. Not in word only, but as in power, and in the H. Ghost, so also in much assurance of un∣derstanding, upon its own evidence; which was that way, it did so wonderfully prevail over the world against nature, and stream of flesh and blood, that stood in the furthest opposition therto. VIII. That one of the greatest services of the Apostles in their visiting the Churches, did expresly ly here Acts 14:22. to confirme the souls of
the Disciples in the first place on the cer∣tainty of their faith, and then in exhorting them to continue in the same, so as they might follow the Lord, with the fur∣thest light and assurance of mind, amidst the great tryalls of such a time. IX. That its this way also the world is rendred inexcu∣sable for their misbeliefe of the Gospel, when under such sufficiency of means given for this end, by so great a discovery of the confirming evidences of its truth, so as they can have no pretence herein, but an obsti∣nacy and resolution not to be convinced; on which ground doth our blessed Lord testify, that it was no want of light, upon the certainty of his truth, why men did not receive it, but that they loved darknesse better then light, because their deeds were evil; & when such clear, rational, and con∣vincing evidences are laid open to their view, how most possibly can get these put by or rejected, is not easy to comprehend, but that a real irritation and torment of spirit, from such clearnesse of evidence, doth thus more tend to harden then convince. That there is a continued necessity of such a confirmation in the faith to this day,  what ever can be objected of so long a consent and prescription of time in the profession therof, is fully demonstrable on these
grounds. I. Because it is sure, the Chris∣tian faith doth still need these assistances; and is a strang mistake, that only for Hea∣thens, and Atheists, such confirming evi∣dences of the same should be adduced, but not for any under a visible profession, when the whole of divinity, and doctrine of our faith, is so full of demonstrative arguments, for the dayly use of the most established Christians in their passage through time. II. That as the highest motives to all serious godlinesse and the moral duties of Christia∣nity must needs be from its known certainty to us, so is the continued use therof to be still the same. III. That these numerous tryalls and conflicts of Christians now, doe no lesse call for some higher establishment in the truth on which they must alone rest, when all visible props fail in their judgments, then of supporting grace; nor is it concea∣vable how men can this day walk in the light of any true joy and comfort, without a mo∣re sollid assurance of their being on safe grounds herein then most seem to reckon. IV. Because the revelation of the Gospel and of an eternal state in an other world, is so great and wonderfull as its strang how this is not the highest interest of mens life, to have their faith more deeply confirmed on the furthest tryal of their security now
by the way herein, who must shortly make so great a tryal therof at death; for if we we∣re but once this length to ask our own soul, what the Christian faith indeed is, and are thus called to believe, it could not possibly but beget some extasy of wondering at the greatnesse therof, and to reckon any light and implicit assent to the same as a degree both of Atheism & indifferency in this mat∣ter. V. Though there be no conflict with Heathens as in the first times, yet was such a spirit never more aloft then it is now to take of all firm assent to the greatest principles of truth, when Atheisme seems to be at its ul∣timus conatus in the world, and we are fallen in so amazing an hower of the power of dark∣nesse as makes these latter times more remar∣kably perillous and trying then the first. VI. Yea if such a confirming worke, be one of the greatest means to advance the re∣pute and honour of religion, when its won∣ted awe and veneration is so far lost, and to awake men to deeper impressions of its truth, when so few seeme now under any such weight; then it is sure there was never more need of the same then in this day. That such a service to the Church,  doth not only respect the more knowing, inqui∣sitive, and judicious part therof, but the meanest professours of religion also, of
whom this is necessarly required, is evident on these grounds. I. Because each Christian should have undoubtedly such a ballast on their own soul, of the solid and rational grounds of their faith, as well as these of grea∣ter parts and induments: the promotting of which were it more deeply considered, I da∣re humbly adventure to say, should be found one of the choicest meanes to promot Christianity this day. II. Because this is not to drive any to doubt or question the least sincere degree of assent, though it be not with such strenght of evidence as in others, nor can by that formal argumenta∣tion give the same accompt therof; since a few grounds this way may specially help to some solid conviction and confirming of their mind, when they may be ignorant of many other cogent arguments for this end; but its sure also the greater clearnesse of evi∣dence doth still in the appointed way of means lead in to a more firme and strong as∣sent of the judgment, to the truth of our religion. III. Becaus the strenth of the foundation in it self cannot be enough if it be not with such a known evidence, as men may build firmly and with assurance theron; nor hath the Lord thus only designed to gi∣ve his people an infaillible and sure testimo∣ny to adventure on, but that it should be
made sure also to them. IV. Because none can in truth say that Jesus is the Lord but by the H. Ghost, 1 Cor. 22:3. by which is not to be understood so much there, the neces∣sity of supernatural grace, for a saving faith, but that none can give a true assent and con∣fession of the same, but from these grounds and arguments which are revealed by the H. Ghost unto men for this end; and as its sure that these characters and evidences of divinity, which are imprinted on the whole revela∣tion of the Gospel, may be clear & demon∣strative to our judgment, so are they as tru∣ly divine, as the doctrine which is confirmed therby. V. Because there can be no pos∣sible cause for credulity of the truth from any intricate obscurenesse of the same, when the Lord hath given such great assistances to our faith to be as milk for babes as wel as meat to strong men. And though it be objected that the furthest objective evidence of the Gospel, with so clear and strong a convey∣ance therof, is yet so little operative on most; the same might be said also of the whole let∣ter of the Scripture; but as this tends not in the least to resolve our religion into any meer exercise of reason, and leaves the who∣le worke of the Spirit, in its energy and ope∣ration therwith on mens souls, intire; yet doth it fully evince such a sufficiency of evi∣dence
with the Christian faith, as makes any doubtfulnesse herein simply impossible, through want of the greatest advantage of means; yea such as are of another kind then to induce only a probable perswasion of the sa∣me. VI. Because it is one of the saddest symp∣tomes of the present state of religion, that so few almost in whole congregations can give any clear assent to the truth and certain∣ty thereof, but to amazement both live and dye strangers to the same, yea how many of these who are otherwise serious in reli∣gion, yet have their faith starved this way, and are destitute of any such support; but as it is not the numberousnesse of professours, but the strength and solidity of their faith, wherein the Churches strength most lyes, and hath more slowrished in a few such to beget a greater awe and veneration of reli∣gion amongst men, then at other times in the greatest multitude; so is it the glory of divine truth, that it can subsist by its own proper evidence, and preserve its station in the worst of times, when all external argu∣ments does most visibly cease. That its thus fully demonstrable and clear,  how no simple instructing of men in the ge∣neral principles of religion, can be the proper and adequate mean for such a faith of assent to the truth thereof, on its own evidence,
or answer that Apostolick pattern of laying the foundation, Hebr. 6:2. but that some special duties else are called for to so high an end; such wherein not only that true primitive confirmation in the Christian faith might have some practical use, but we might also hope therewith, for a more remarkable out∣letting of confirming influences of the Spirit of God. What is to be understood herein I shall humbly offer in a few particulars. I. That it is one of the greatest concerns of the ministerial worke, and of the key of doctrine, to have all who heare the Gospel, in the First place pressed to take religion so far to heart as to have a serious inquiry on the grounds and reasons hereof, and thus to know their being on sure ground herein, not because they know not another way, but because they know this is the alone way of truth, to which they dar trust their immor∣tal soul. II. That for this end the supreme truths of religion be represented with that certainty of evidence, and demonstration, as both such great and marvelous things does require, and the temper of such a gainsaying age now calls for; and to have this pressed more on mens judgment and conscience, that the things of God, which are of the highest consequence, reality, and substance, can have no possible reception by any implicit or pro∣bable
belief thereof, nor can admit any pre∣tence for the same, when the Lord hath gi∣ven such kind of proofes and evidence, as leaves mens darknesse herein, without any shaddow of excuse. II. That it peculiarly belongs to the Ca∣techetical work of religion to take some ac∣compt of the meanest professours thereof, and with a special respect to the youth; of their faith of assent to the doctrine of Christ, on what grounds and certainty of evidence this is founded, and for their instructing therein, as well as in the general principles of religion; when one of the most ruining things to the Church lyes here, that the pro∣fession of most is layed in so deep an igno∣rance, as they have almost nothing to say for the same, but a naked affirmation. I know the difficulty hereof for the weak may be objected, but without just cause; since as the prime truths of religion are few, easy and plaine for the meanest capacity, so also are the primary evidences and demonstrations of our faith, if such once with that desire did search after the same as for a hid and invalua∣ble treasure; wherein this respect should be still had, to difference betwixt what is ini∣tial and of a more fundamental concern for the weak, and what may tend to an higher grouth and increase of others.
III. It should be of greatest use and ad∣vantage also for the same end, that the young grouth now coming up in the Church were put to give some explicit evidence of their con∣sent and choice of the profession of Christ, so far as may witnesse a ratification of the baptismal covenant, now as their own proper dead, wherein they were implicitly ingad∣ged in their infancy. Some special grounds and reasons for this are; I. Because God will have his service freely entered in and upon choise, as that way which is most agrea∣ble to his honour; for as the covenant binds mutually, so doe the seals therof also, and therfor, upon our part is baptisme a sacre∣mental oath of aledgence to God. II. Because it tends to a more resolute and firme adhe∣rence to the service of God, that this bus∣sinesse should be personally brought home to mens conscience, especially before their first admittance to the Sacrament of the Lords supper, and thus to ingadg them as Joshua did Chap. 24: 22. Ye are witnesses a∣gainst yourselves herein, and they said we are witnesses. III. Because this is expresly held forth 1 Pet. 3:21. where baptisme is called the answer of a good conscience toward God, upon this ground, that such then who were come to years of knowledge, were personally sisted to confirme by their own consent that
solemne ingadgment and dedication by Baptisme to be the Lords, and therefor it is called , which is vox juris, and signifies, sponsio, & stipulatio publica inter Christianum, & Dominum Christum, as the most judicious Commentators on that scrip∣ture does clearly render; and so this was a special part of the primitive practize, not only with respect to such, who were con∣verted from Heathenisme, but were born within the Church and partakers of that seal of Baptisme in their infancy, to siste them upon answer to that great demand of the Covenant, doe yow now consent upon evi∣dence and choise to be the Lords and to be a subject of his Kingdom, and embrace the laws therof, and doe yow thus in sincerity and truth declare the same wherein you have a good conscience before God. And of what blessed fruit and advantage should this be both for the increase and honour of the Gospel, if this were more deeply taken to heart for some practical use, according to the rule, and primitive pattern in the Churches of Christ. IV. It were specially desirable also, that there be some clear view and summary by it self, of the most cogent grounds and demon∣strations of the Christian faith, with respect both to the Doctrinal, Historical, and Pro∣phetical
part therof, and in that manner ac∣commodate, as the meanest within the Church might have such a help still at their hand, and thus with the least expense of time, be provided of such arguments and reasons, as should tend (through the bles∣sing of God) not only to the furthest ratio∣nal assent, and certainty of the truth of their profession, but to give a most special sup∣port of mind against that inward tryal of Sa∣thans temptations and fiery darts this way; yea is such a mean, that in the serious im∣provment herof by having such evidences once brought in on mens judgment and conscience, so as to see with their own eyes the truth of the same, I must humbly judge, there is nothing, next to the internal work of the Spirit, of this kind might tend more to promote the Kingdom of Christ in this day. I shal but add this further on the present subject,  that as there are some more signal periods of time, to which a greater brightnesse and increase of light hath respect under the New Testament, so doth there now seem to be some remarkable call and excitment, to such a confirming work, in this day about the Christian faith; when we may hope that a more solemne and restoring time of religion in the world, is on a near approach, (though
all sensible evidence would seem to control this) and may be now more looked after, then prepared for, under any suitable im∣pression of these grounds for the same. I. That the promised time of the conversion of the Jewes doth assuredly draw near; and whatever be judged by some of the Lords immediate appearence herein by a mi∣racle, yet is it unquestionable that no∣thing in the way of means could be more promising and hopeful to promot this great end, then in promoting so great a service as this for the Christian Church. II. That a greater extent also of the profession of Christ amonghst the Gentils, and renting of the vaile that is now over many dark nations, seemeth clearly insured therwith; and what a hopeful evidence should this be if such a publick and catholick spirit were more seen, how to advance the highest ends of religion on such an accompt without respect to any partial or divided interest; yea that this blest zeal of God might in that manner appear to have the dark world get a more clear and convincing prospect of the highest rational demonstrations of Christianity, as might through the Lords gracious concurrence bring men once to an inquisitive and serious spirit about the same. Oh that such may be thus raised up in this dismal hower with
something of that ancient spirit, to travel with desire for the salvation of mankind, and of whom it may be said, as of blest Nehe∣miah, these are indeed come to seek the wel∣fare of their people, in their greatest interest. III. And this farther excitment we are now under for this end, in a time when Popery seems to be upon one of its last and greatest assaults against the Church; since its so clear what ever tends to confirm men in Christia∣nity from their own tryal and inquiry upon the confirming evidences therof, must have the same native result, to make such confir∣med Protestants; yea nothing is more de∣monstrable then that the method and grounds that are taken both to ingadge and fix men in the Popish profession, have the same rational tendency to promot Atheism, and to give infidels the greatest advantage to reject the profession of Christ.
CHAPTER II. The confirming worke of Religion, reduced to practical use; in some clear view of these primary grounds, and demonstrations of our faith; which none should pretend ig∣norance of, who enters the profession of Christ upon choise, and certainty of evi∣dence. SECTION I. QU. I. WHat reasons, and demonstra∣tions, can yow give for so great a faith of the glorious being of God, when he is invisible to humane sense, since this is the fundation of all religion? ANSW. Though on the sacred truth and authority of his own word, this is principally founded, yet I am with the furthest infallible evidence herein confir∣med; I. That it can be no more sure, this marvellous frame of the heavens and earth hath a being, and is the object of our sense, then that a supreme infinite wis∣dome and power must be the first cause hereof, and it were simply impossible it could ever otherwise have been. II. That he hath thus made himself visible to our eyes by such a visible world, and in so exquisite
an order and correspondence there to sup∣port the same, as nothing stands alone by it self, but in a line of mutual respect, which runs through the whole creation, whom we may as clearly thus see, as that there is an invisible soul in a living body. III. That this harmony is amongst thinghs, in their own nature so contrare and destructive to other, for to hold this wonderful frame, as all must abandon reason, or see an infinitly wise conduct herein; and no need of extra∣ordinary miracles, to confirme what the whole constitutions of nature do witnes∣se. IV. That this rare frame of man could never have come in being, but by him who could unite such different substances as a material body, and an immaterial soul, in so near and marvelous an union. V. That such an universal consent of mankind is in all ages therto, as shews religion to be founded in the very nature of man, and as essential to his being, as his reason is, yea how the ul∣timate difference of man from the beast, and most essential property of human nature lyes here. VI. That though every one be an enemy to what torments him; yet was it never possible for an Atheist to free himself from that unavoidable sense and fear of a Deity; nor, in a world so much lost in wic∣kednesse, could ever extinguish the awe of
religion, or make any rational opposition to this greatest article of the common faith of mankind. VII. That the reason of the whole constitution of nature, and vicissi∣tude of things here, is so great, as, without shutting out the use of reason, we cannot but see, how nothing possibly could have been better; and that any want hereof in the whole frame of the universe, would be as the dislocation of a joynt of the body, and were not conceivable to be otherwise then it is by infinite wisdome appointed. VIII. That its simply impossible that God blessed for ever should not exist, or that this uni∣verse, (which is a worke so highly becoming the greatnesse of its maker) could possibly subsist for one hour or minute of time, with∣out a supreme independent power and being, on which all visible beings have their dependance, since they cannot depend upon nothing. IX. That such is the absolute necessity of the faith also of a God-head, as without this the state of mankind could not morally subsist, or any possible order, subjection, piety, and justice, be to sup∣port human society, but as Bradwardine saith, O quam necesse est hunc esse, quem im∣possibile est non esse! O that men cannot but see these effects of his power on the con∣science, in the certainty of a profetick light
and discovery, as hath been oft given of fu∣ture things, and in the undenyable truth of miracles, so as such a prodigy as a profest Atheist, can have no claime to human race, as a rational being, more then the greatest monster in nature to be a true man. QU. II. What doth witnesse the worlds not being eternal, and its first origi∣nal and beginning from God, to confirme your faith herein, by the further rational de∣monstration. ANS. I. That as an eternity is only com∣municable to the first cause, so that which is made up of corruptible & perishing things, as this visible world, cannot possibly be in it self eternal; nor could ever produce it self, since thus it must both exist and not exist at the same time, which is the greatest contra∣diction. II. That if there be such a thing now as time, there can be no judging of dayes, yeares and ages to be infinite, or how one thing in a continued order, should thus goe before another, without coming to some first beginning. III. If there be a gradual advance of human learning on the earth, and a further discovery of arts and sciences; and that the greatest experiments and inventions there have been but of a late rise and date; then can there not possibly be an eternal succession of mankind, with a
continued progresse and experiency this way; nor that but of late one part of the world is known and discovered to another. IV. That so short an history as we have in the most ancient records of time, were wholly inconsistent with such an eternal du∣ration, or that infinite ages preceeding, should leave no rememberance to posterity, when so small a measure of time, as a few thousand years, have left so much. V. Nor could men beget other eternally without going back to some first man, who could not beget himself. VI. That if eternity be preferable to time, then should not the excellentest being in the earth, man, be thus corruptible, and only this inanimate masse of the earth eternal. VII. That infinite ages past, though they should have but mul∣tiplyed the race of man in an age, to two or three more, should have come at last, that the whole precinct of the earth could not possibly bear the product of such an infinite increase; and no wears or extraordinary judgments were ever yet known to be such, as to restrain such an unavoidable grouth. QU. III. What infaillible evidence to rea∣son is there of a supream Providence, both in the conservation, and government of the world; for confirming your faith of the Scripture herein?
ANS. I. That it is so clear the support of this great frame of the Universe, with that continued & regular coure of nature herein, are as simply impossible without an infinite divine power, as its first being and creation. II. That such an extent of providence as respects so innumberable objects, with such a contrariety both of qualities and passions in the same, must needs be from an infinite and intelligent cause. III. That all things to this day, continue in that established or∣der of second causes, wherein God hath pla∣ced them by a law so visibly imprinted on the nature of things without reason, that they doe as exactly answer the same in their proper course and station, as if they had a ra∣tional knowledge of their duty. IV. That universal respect, the sun in the firmament hath to things here below, though at so great a distance, yet doth neither cease, nor weary to emit its beams and hid influences to the meanest creatures, may let us clearly see, how it hath the same visible use and end to confirme an incomprehensible and infini∣te providence about the meanest things, as wel as the greatest. V. That immediate precedency of the soul in that lesser world of man, bears the same evidence therwith; which though we never saw with our eyes, yet doth undenyably actuate the whole bo∣dy
in its functions, as the proper spring of every act and motion there. VI. It is thus further confirmed, by these continued vi∣cissitudes of Summer and Winter, and of day and night, that man might have, both light for his labour, and darknesse as a covering for his rest. VII. By such visible discove∣ries of divine judgment and execution of his laws on men here, as all may see his hand therin, who yet will not hear his voice in the word. VIII. By these extraordinare and wonderfull works of providence, which have been in all ages. IX. By so evident a restrainct both over Devils, and wicked men, without which they would quickly disturbe the whole frame of this earth, and make it uninhabitable for human society; if their being thus bounded and chained, were not as visible, as the certainty of their being. X. By such a natural obligation to moral du∣ties, with the sense of a difference betwixt good and evil, as is founded in the very ra∣tional nature of man, that none can possi∣bly root out, even where the Scripture is not known. XI. By that natural confi∣dence also in God, and in a recourse to him on any present extreme hazard, to witnesse, not only the most high beares rule in the kingdomes of men, but that the sense and evidence hereof is unavoidable.
QU. IV. But doth this great admini∣stration of providence, about human affaires as uncheangably appear, in a differencing be∣twixt the righteous and the wicked, by some recompence to the one, and punishment to the other, as in the established course of na∣ture. ANS. It is sure such as desire a confirming of their faith herein, wants it not, with the furthest evidence, but may ever see that exact conformity in the whole dispensation of providence, to the rectitude and perfe∣ction of the divine nature, and how a firm beliefe that God is, and that he is a revarder of them that diligently seek him, is one and the same faith; when we cannot but see, I. That natural sense of good and evil, and essentiall difference betwixt the same, which is so fimly founded in the reason of all mankind, as no human laws or custome could ever ta∣ke this off their conscience, or make an in∣difference her in, without extinguishing the very nature of man; to shew that eternal and uncheangable difference, which the ho∣ly nature of God hath put betwixt them. II. That we see such constraint served on the worst of men, to an awful sense and regard of truth and weal doing, and to ac∣knowledge the lovelenesse and excellency hereof, as does make them seek their own
repute by a false shew and counterfite of the same; and gives such a being and rise to that dreadful imposture of hypocrisy. III. That its the truths priviledge ever to outlive fals∣hood, and prevail over the same, yea to have the greater triumph after its sorest con∣flicts; and how this is of as foundamental a constitution in the course of providence, as the most firm establishment of nature. IV. That in no time since man was formed in the earth, doth true joy and serenity of mind, cease to be the native result of weal-doing, or the fruit of righteousnesse, to be peace and assurence of mind, nor hath ever wanted a witnesse even before the world of the Lords taking pleasure herein. V. That its so evi∣dent, in the most dismal times, what a pu∣blick blessing, such are, who by more ex∣traordinare tryals have been put to the hi∣ghest exercise of their grace and patience; yea how visibly such have been promot to the most honourable service for God, and to advance the credite of religion before men, who on the first sight and view have been accounted the most miserable of any. VI. Whilst, on the other hand, it may be ever seen, how with the greatest prosperity of the wicked here, there are punishments of another kind dispensed, and more dreadful then any outward affliction, such as judi∣cial
obstinacy, and blindnesse of mind in oppo∣sition to God, even when their own ruine is made visible to them herein. VII. How oft men are thus evidently condemned to be happy in this world by some strang measure of temporall successe and prosperity, before so∣me great fall and ruine, as the issue hereof in the last shene of providence doth fully at∣test. VIII. That its seen also, how sin doth ever bring its own punishment therewith, in some begun degree both of shame and tor∣ment; and, as Seneca, an heathen could say, that wickednesse was the most exquisite contriver of human misery, so the world like∣wise may see how a present immunity from judgment is no release, but when its senten∣ce is not speadily execute, yet is it at last sure∣ly execute. IX. And how evident is it, that the greatest haters of godlinesse are yet inforced to justify the same and the Chris∣tians choise herein, as the greatest wisdome, upon any surprising state and extremity; yea how such would be glad to joyne interests then with such in their death, whom they most contemned in their life. QU. V. How is it convincing and demonstrable, that God hath given any clear and expres revelation of his will and councel unto men, and that such a wonderfull record is undoubtedly extant in the world.
ANSW. That, I. it is not possible to believe the being of God, and not also the truth of an established law, and rule of com∣merce betwixt him and man here, so as to know both what we should doe, and what to expect and hope from him. II. That this also must be known and display its po∣wer and efficacy to the world, in that man∣ner and by such infallible evidence of its truth, as may render all inexcusable, who give not intire credite therto. III. I can be no more clear and assured there is but one sun in the firmament; then that there is but one fountain, and repository of sacred light about religion, which is the Scripture, and its being the alone publick standard of truth to the whole world. IV. That no way was ever made known to recover mankind from a state of bondage, darknesse, and misery, compatible with the very use of rea∣son, but by this blessed light which shineth there. V. Yea that there is as visible a dif∣ference, betwixt the same and any preten∣ded religion which ever was besides in the world, as there is betwixt day and night, which is founded in the immutable nature of these things in themselves. VI. That the∣re is one proper sphere, where this glorious light of divine truth is fixed, and wherein it shines forth from one age to another; which is the Christian Church.
QU. VI. But what more peculiare eviden∣ces can yow shew of the divinity of the Scrip∣tures, that all may see to be of infallible truth. ANSW. I. That its sure such a book is this day in the earth, which no created wisdome could ever have done, and contains such things of highest conceirn to mankind, as doe infinitly exceed the bounds of human ability and invention, or could ever have been discovered but by God himself. II. That it gives forth such exquisite laws and constitutions of our religion, as men must needs see the holy nature, purity, and perfection of God, most brightly shining forth therin. III. Which doth discover so great and proper a relief for all these evils and mi∣series that doe attend this fallen estate of man, as none but an allsufficient God could only doe. IV. That he alone must be the author of this blessed record, who rules the world, and hath determined the changes and revolutions therof, when it is not more evident how these visible heavens are stretched forth over the earth, then that this line of the Scripture is stretched over the whole worke and frame of providence, and doth most clearly illuminate the same. V. That surely this was the product of infinite wis∣dome, whence so great a variety of matter, doth meet with so visible a concent and har∣mony
in one perfect and intire frame; yea knit in so closse a bond of union together, as makes the whole Bible to be intirly one piece; though in the writing of each distinct part therof it could never have possibly been contrived or forseen by humane wisdome, what we see here of so admirable an agree∣ment & correspondence, as is in all the parts therof. VI. That none els could have spoke to the world, in so majestick a way, & becoming the greatnesse and soveraignity of God, to as∣sume such a supremacy, & give forth laws for absolute obedience from all mankind therto, & on such a penalty of eternal destruction; or that any impostures, either possibly could, or durst have, in such a manner, personate the same. VII. That it must needs be his word who perfectly knows what is in man, and hath an absolute authority over the soul, and is a discerner of the thoughts therof, who thus not only gives law to the con∣science, and our inward parts, but doth establish an internal religion there, no lesse absolutly, then what respects our external worke and actions. VIII. Yea where all may see the whole penmen therof under so intire a subjection to the doctrine which they tought, and to be no contrivance of their own, as they did record their own failings, and imperfections in behalf of the
truth; and did thus also require all just re∣spect and obedience to the Magistrates, when through the whole earth they were then greatest enemies to the truth of the Gospel. IX. That this must be his word, who alone can derive principles of life to his own institutions, and animate the same with a quickning Spirit; and is a worke above the contrivance of Angels or men, when directed to each new tryal of the Church, and personal case of Christians, as though it had been alone writt for that time; so that I can be no more perswaded in reason there is such a book as the Bible in the earth, then that it came from heaven, and is the alone rule of religion, and of divine revelation, for the governing of mankind. QU. VII. How is the secure conveyance of the Scripture demonstrable amidst all the changes of times past, and that no possible accesse could be for its corruption. ANSW. I. That its so undenyably the first rule which ever was given to mankind of religion, and the alone publick standard of truth, that hath endured the tryal and in∣quiry of all times past, so as no pretences in the matter of antiquity could yet ever be to the contrare. II. That so exact an harmony is betwixt the Old and New Testament, as the one is a visible transcript of the other, in
its accomplishment; that I can be no more sure of such a venerable record as the Old Testament, and its unalterable conveyance to the Church, to which the whole race of the Jewes is yet a standing witnesse, then how it is continued and perfected in the re∣velation of the Gospel, and but one intire frame. III. That its deliverance was no private deed, but by a publick trust to the whole universal Church; so as it were more easy in the way of reason to question the most fundamental statutes and lawes of any nation, by which mens private right and property is secured, then the truth hereof. IV. That under the Gospel it hath been so fully dispersed over the world, and in such various languages; as an innumerable com∣pany of Christians these 1600 years past, hath been as a common library of the same. V. That these numerous versions and com∣mentaries transmit theron in diverse langua∣ges, doe fully evidence they had the same Scripture, and no other then what we have this day. VI. That this was delivered to the Church not only in write, but in that forme of sound words, for keeping closse therby, as could admit no possible accesse to corrupt or alter the same; besides the con∣tinued and publick reference hath been since the first ages of the Gospel to its decision,
which all these sharpe controversies, that have been in the Church on all sides, doe inevitably require. QU. VIII. What doth confirme the fall of man, and entry thus of sin into the world, this way, from clear and unavoida∣ble evidences of reason. ANSW. I. That there is such a thing as sin and evil in the world, with the sense and conscience of guilt arising hereon, amonghst all mankind, can need no proof or evidence. II. That it is simply impossible this should have been originally created with man, or essentially belonging to his first frame and constitution, since then there could be no conscience of guilt or remorse, for what was given to be a part of himself, in his first frame; or be any sin, to act thus suitably to their own original state. III. That it were not conceivable also how one part of man should be in such opposition to another. IV. Nor that such a thing as inherent shame could be in the nature of man, upon the sence of guilt, and by so natural a result fol∣low the same, or that such should be asha∣med of any part of his own being, if this were not upon ane undoubted apostacy from what once he was, and that inevitable conviction of conscience that he now is what he ought not to be, so as the certainty of mans fall
though alone revealed in the Scripture, as to the true cause thereof, yet may be as evident to reason, as the truth of his being now is. SECTION II. QU. I. ARe there such assistances to the Christian faith upon that great and astonishing mystery of the revelation of Christ to the world as can fully answer the greatnesse thereof from cleare and infalli∣ble evidence to mens judgement? ANSW. It is sure there could nothing pos∣sibly be desired more to satisfy the most doubtfull and suspicious minde then is given for the furthest certainty hereof. I. That such a glorious person as the Messiah was to come, and be anoynted to that great work of redeeming mankinde from sin and misery and bring man back again unto God; and how this promise is the alone foundation, whereon the church was founded since man fell. II. That all these numerous types and sacrifices under the law, did so expresly tend to confirm their faith of that one blessed propitiatory sacrifice which was to be offered up. III. That longer the New Testament was writ, there was so cleare and exact a portraicture of the Messias drawen forth in the old, with such peculiar marks whereby
he should be knowen to the church, and have infallibly taken place in the event as men could not upon any Scripture evidence exspect his comming in another way. IV. That his humiliation and sufferings were so expresly shewed forth and foretold, with the pe∣culiar circumstances thereof in the 53. chap. of Isaiah, and 9. of Daniel, as if they had been eye wittnesses of the accomplishment the∣reof. V. That even the speciall season and period of time for outmaking of this great promise was so far made knowen, as upon diligent search and inquiry, its neare ap∣proach might be discernable and cleare to what or what manner of time this did specially relate; for which both the fall of the mo∣narchies and Daniels seventy weekes were set up as highway markes to guide mens faith herein. VI. That its simply impossible according to the Scripture, how the promi∣sed Messias could be yet to come, except the Jewes were put in the same state they were in at his coming, when now for these 1600. Jeares there hath been no Scepter, nor lawgiver, no temple, or daily Sacrifice. VII. That this great mystery could never possibly have entered in our thoughts, or be devised by any created understanding. QU. II. But are there as cleare and in∣fallible evidences of the truth of this great
promise in the event, that surely the blessed Messias of the world is now come, as that it is sure be was promised. ANSW. Its beyond all possible debate. I. That so divine and wonderfull a person was in the dayes of Tiberius Caesar manifested then to Israel, with no outward shew or ob∣servation; who did so great and marvellous things, before all the people, as were above all created power, yea, was crucifyed at Je∣rusalem, under Pontius Pilate, and is a truth in the matter of fact, that both Jewes and heathens have been enforced to confesse. II. That this special season of his comming into the world as the great Epocha and period of time from which the Christian church, hath since to this day reckoned her state and succession, is undoubted and clear also. III. That the time of his appearance unto the world, did so exactly tryst with that which was foretold by the Prophets, as then the Jewish church was with greatest ad∣vertance looking after the Messias; so as some remarkable impostors were thus excited to deceive the people herein. IV. That in him who was then revealed, and whom the Christian church worships its sure, was most exactly fulfilled, what ever was foretold, concerning the Messias in the Old Testa∣ment; and we do appeal herein to these re∣cords
which all the Jewes even to this day do acknowledge to be divine. V. That this was not done in a corner, but in the publick view of men in these dayes, most noture and famous; yea by the special destination of God at so solemn a time of the passover in Je∣rusalem, where Christ our passover was then sacrificed. VI. That no humane interest or policy can possibly be in this discovery of the gospell; when nothing more visibly crosse therto or obstructive of its successe, then such a publishing of the death and sufferings of our Lord, with all the ignominy and aba∣sement which attended the same, had there been any accesse here to consult carnal rea∣son, or any other ground to beare it out then the evidence and certainty of its truth. VII. That herein have all divided partyes and sects in the Christian world been enfor∣ced stil to meet and consent, in ane acknow∣ledgement of the substance thereof. VIII. That in the same light which was held forth in the Old Testament about the Messias, did the whole gentile church enter; and made claime to their right for being adopted the seed and children of Abraham, on these cleare and expresse promises given for the same; which the Jewes could not but con∣fesse to be of divine authority. QU. III. What confirmation is to the
Christian faith, that for 4000. yeares the comming of the Messias should be deferred after the promise. ANS. Though the soveraign pleasure of God should silence and satisfy our minde herein; yet is there such a sight to be had hereof, and of insinit divine wisedome shining forth in the same as should be most confirming for these ends. I. That there might be a more distinct representing of the glory of this mystery to angels and men, in such a graduall opening up of the same. II. To put that weight and high value on his own promise and testimony herein, when on the alone credit thereof, he would thus both try, and beare out the faith of his church, for so many ages, and draw forth their desi∣res and longings in all that long space of time after the same. III. To testify the greatnesse of his wrath against sin and the Apostacy of mankinde, by suffering the generality there∣of to ly so long under its fatall effects. IV. To prepare the church for so great a reception, by all that long preparatory service of legall institutions, as so highly becoming the great∣nesse of this mystery, to have so solemn and stupendious ane introduction thereto. V. That thus the world might have its full tryall of the insufficiency of natural abilityes, and of any improvements of humane wisedome
and learning, for help; after this had first been at the furthest hight both in Greece and Rome, before the alone Redeemer of the church came. QU. IV. What can offer furthest con∣viction to the world of the truth of Christia∣nity from its nature and internall excellen∣cies; and that it is no lesse essentially good in its selfe, then evidently true. ANS. I. That its so undeniable even to these that live at a distance, how such is the truth of Christ that though all visible and humane props should faill, it can subsist by its oun evidence, and authority over mens conscience, and hath thus ever preserved its station in the worst of times. II. That as it holds forth the most exquisite rule of perfection to follow, so doth bring the greatest releef to the distempers of the minde, and these mi∣series which attend humane state here; so as a higher glory doth thus result to the holy God, by this dispensation of Grace to fallen man then if he had stood in his primitive state. III. That it is sure the truth and doctrine of Christ doth natively tend to fix men in a state of light and communton with God, and in a state of separation of such in their principles, affection, and conversation from the world. IV. That it doth more brightly shine forth in simplicity, and truth and in its internall
and vitallacts, then in any outward form or shew, yea in the way of selfe deniall, meek∣nesse, and poverty of spirit, doth such ane excellency appeare, as in its oun nature, hath as visible a difference from the proud and vindictive spirit of this world, as the day hath from the night. V. How such is Christianity, as by no naked doctrinall disco∣very of the same, to mens judgement, or such rules as any humane science is acquired by, can be knowen, without ane inward power and principles of a new life; nor can there ever be a right knowledge of divinity, untill it be first ingrafted in a divine heart; so far is this mystery above all humane rule, and contrivance. VI. That it is stated in the greatest opposition to any false shew or hypocrisy; yea, brings such inforcements therewith of candor, and truth, and of love, tendernesse and sympathy towards others, as all must see is not only the highest ornament and perfection of our nature, but the greatest blessing to the world that ever was knowen. VII. That such a native lustre and fragrancy doth attend the truth, and simplicity of the gospell, as its no more possible for humane art or cunning to represent this, then to make the dead image of a man to live, or to paint in a broad the vitall scent of a violet or rose, to our senses. VIII. That in this way
of the gospels subduing men to the obedience thereof, by the power of inward grace, the glory of Christ doth more eminently shine forth, then if he had appeared for this end with the greatest outward majesty and atten∣dance of Angels to our bodily eyes. IX. That it is so visible how the whole world besides, that is without the revelation of Christ, is a place where horrour, falsehood, and impiety doth manifestly reign. QU. V. But how do yow receive so wonderfull a truth, as that of the Gospell is, when its now so great a distance of time from its first promulgation. ANS. I. That we can be no more sure and perswaded of the most visible and pre∣sent objects of sense, then, that this is the same gospell which is still shining forth to the world, whereby ane innumerable company of all nations, tongues and languages, hath received the spirit, and been sealed; yea, hath made that change upon men, in turning them from ungodlynesse and idols to serve the living God, as hath been no lesse marvellous then the turning of so many wolves, into lambs. II. That it is the same gospell which not only through a series of 16. centuries hath been attested, but by such innumerable witnesses who counted not their life deare unto the death for sealing thereof, and found
it sweet to be offered up in the flames for Christ. III. Which in all ages past hath stood out the greatest opposition that ever the world made to any interest, while the weapons of its warfare were spiritual, and not carnal; & with that successe as the time of the Churches hottest persecution from heathens was that period of time also of a most remarka∣ble spreading in the world. IV. That the same Gospel is revealed this day, which hath had such discernable triumphs and successe when no external assistance could be seen herein; and no visible power by which it gained the most savage and dark parts of the earth, to take on the yoak of Christ, and pre∣fer the objects of faith to the most desireable objects of sense. V. Yea, which hath not only had such vital influence on mens heart, and practice to change it into the same image; but that herein the doctrine of the crosse of Christ in the greatest simplicity hath still been the most effectual way of its conquest, and the greatest attractive on mens souls to re∣ceive the same. QU. VI. How is it demonstrable that such remarkable sufferings of times past for the truth of Christ, were both founded on the alone certainty thereof, and carryed out by a divine Spirit above any assistance of nature.
ANSW. That it is sure, I. Here was no comedy, or personated sufferings which the primitive Christians, and in after times did endure for Christ; or that these unexpressa∣ble torments and paines were any dream, and delusion either to themselves or the world, and that their adversaries did thus conflict and wrestle with their own shadow in so continued and cruel ane opposition. II. That such joy and exultation of Spirit these witnes∣sed amidst their torments, who otherwise wanted no sense or feeling of their paines and sufferings, could have no rise but what was supernatural. III. That this could be no possible dissimulation or counterfit when they were stepping in on eternity, nor the product of a distempered judgment; whilst all might see what seriousnesse of Spirit, tendernesse, and bowels of compassion to their adversaries they did then evidence. IV. That these greatest sufferings were upon choise, and to endure rather then to be safe at the rate of receding in any thing from the truth. V. Yea no natural reason can comprehend how such mean and feeble persons as many of these were, should endure, what would have made the greatest natural courage to faint, as if they had foregone humane passions which flesh and blood must needs have here∣in, so as I am constraind to see something
no less marvellous and supernatural in the faith of martyres, then in the faith of miracles. SECTION III. QU. I. IS it fully demonstrable, that the faith of a deity, and of such an establishment as a religious worship, must necessarly determine men to be Christians, on this ground that they cannot but see how religion hath not another being in the earth, but in the truth of Christianity. ANSW. It is simply impossible to make a rational tryal herin, and not see the cer∣tainty of this demonstration, to be thus clear. I. That there needs no more for any of a serious spirit, but to come and see, what the whole frame of Heathenisme was, and if it be possible to deny, even under any sense of the law and dictates of nature, its being the highest reproach of mankind; and how the very mysteries of that Heathenish worship, was so horrid and impure, as they needed a vail then from the common view of the world. II. Nor can there be a ratio∣nal reflection this day, on that strang mon∣ster of Mahumitanisme, but of a visible pro∣digy of the judgment of God, on these parts of the earth; upon their apostacy from the Christian faith, by giving men up to such an
imposture, as exposeth the very name and form of religion, to derision; and can ne∣ver claime a reception either from the puri∣ty of its rule or internal evidence of the truth therof, or of its having any possible consistence with it self. III. That its sure also the Jewish religion had never another being but in the truth and faith of Christiani∣ty, and where this fundation is divided from, it hath none at all; yea how that peo∣ple unto this day are such a confirming wit∣nesse to the Christian Religion, as its strang this doth not beget deeper impressions on mens spirit. So that there is an absolute ne∣cessity, we must either forgoe the use of reason, or see, if there were not such a rule given and revealed for commerce betwixt God and man, as the Scripture, where the laws and constitutions of the Christian faith, are for this end held forth, that its then sure there is no such thing, as any religion in the earth, but what wer so highly irrational and absurd, as should rather justify Atheism. QU. II. What special confirmation to Christianity, can this visible state of the Jews bear, who are in so expresse an oppo∣sition to the Gospel of Christ? ANSW. If this were brought near our thoughts we should find it one of the great assistances to our faith. I. That its sure there
is such a people and race, as a living and vi∣sible evidence to our sense, of the truth of that renowned nation, and church of Israel, to which the oracles of God were committed, and thus are still, as some part of the evident ruines of that once flourishing state. II. That the world may see, such a people kept by themselves and not mixed with the na∣tions, whose fathers from one generation to another did still own the divinity of the Old Testament; and doth attest that doc∣trine, in which the truth and substance of Christianity lyes, even whilst with greatest malice they oppose the Christian faith, to witnesse there can be no possible collusion here. III. Their being under a stroak of that judicial induration and blindnesse of mind, as no reason could possibly compre∣hend such a thing, how they see not the light in the very noon-day of the Gospel, if it were not expresly fortold their being con∣cluded under such an arrest of judgment, until the fulnesse of the gentiles be brought in. IV. That so immediate an appearence of God, is in the judgment of that people, both in the manner and continuance there∣of, as no instance could ever be found to resemble the same, since man was formed in the earth; and thus as a conspicuous mo∣nument of divin wrath, set up for every
age and time of the Church, to turn aside and consider this great sight, and inquire what means so strang and amazing a thing, as the state of the scattered Jews is, now un∣der the times of the Gospel. V. That this desolation on them and stroak, had such special concurring circumstances for giving light therto; as being not above 48. years, after the death of Christ, with their hands, as it were, hot and reaking with that blood which they had wished on them, and their children; that it should be at that time of the Passover, which was the very same of the sufferings of our blessed Lord there, and pointing as with the finger at the same; as also by the Romans, whose interest in their op∣position to Christ they pretended to own. QU. III. Is the way and manner of the Gospels promulgation such, as no other pro∣fession could ever pretend to, and where all may see there can be no human interest or contrivance in the same? ANSW. It is undenyable, that no interest else was ever in such a way promot and does exceed all natural understanding, how the truth of Christianity could in this manner prevail. I. To perswade men without any motives, or inducements from this present world, to imbrace a doctrine so wholly re∣pugnant to nature; yea to preferr an interest
of things not seen, and which none ever in the earth saw, to the most desirable objects of sense. II. To admit no implicit reception from any, but on their exactest inquiry and tryal herein; or in an other way claime an interest in mens affections, but by a full as∣sent of their light and judgment to the same. III. To admit no gratification to the most predominant desires and inclinations of men upon any darling sin, which according to human wisdome would be judged of an ab∣solute necessity for gaining any acceptance with such; yea to give no partial respect to the greatest Princes more then to the meanest. IV. To pursue its interest, by so plain a discovery of the death, and sufferings of our blessed Lord, with the whole ignominy thereof, when nothing could more evidently con∣trol such an end by any rules of human wis∣dome and policy, if there had been a possi∣ble accesse to consult flesh and blood herein. V. And its sure there could be no designe, without an immediate divine power, in such a manner to plead the interest of Christiani∣ty with men, by inserting affliction, and the crosse in the first entry, as essential to the profession thereof, and holding forth the necessity of taking on the yoke of Christ, without which none can be his Disci∣ples.
QU. IV. But wherein doth the evidence of that great demonstration of the Gospel most clearly appear, in the love and unity of Christians amonghst themselves, which we find Christ doth so specially presse, for this end, that the world might know, and have such a visible seal of his divine mission, Joh. 17:21. ANSW. The greatnesse of this demon∣stration may be thus evident to all. I. That its so clearly demonstrative of the purity of our Religion, which can admitt of no bitter∣nesse, strife, recrimination, or such inde∣cencies of heat and passion, which are these fatal effects of discord in the Church; and thus lets us see the excellency of the spirit and rule of the Gospel. II. That thus also we may know the power and efficacy of the truth thereof, which is according to godlinesse, upon mens heart, in subduing these distem∣pers of the mind and judgment. III. That this doth so specially tend to make religion lovely, and to draw forth matter of praise and blessing to God from the world, when they see such a native effect of Christianity as this, to make those who professe the same in that manner shine forth in tendernesse, hu∣mility, and brotherly love, so that they be∣come as a publick good and blessing to man∣kind in the place they are in. IV. This ap∣pears
also from the nature of that union in the Church of Christ, and amongst his followers, which only a divine power could both frame and make effectual; and its sure no human society or constitution could ever claim such an unity therein as this is; where not only persons of all nations and languages and of all conditions, both high and low, but of the most different interests, humours, and dividing circumstances in other things, doe yet in so marvelous an harmony meet in the body of Christ which is his Church here in the earth. V. Because herein also doth the glory and honour of our blessed head, more eminently appear in securing this unity of his Church, under a diversity of light and judge∣ment otherwayes, by a spirit of love, meek∣nesse and condescendence amongst his peo∣ple; then by imposing the most severe and absolute uniformity in all things, to be the alone condition of Christian communion. QU. V. But what strength and evidence doth this demonstration of the Gospel, now bear in so divided a state of religion, and when the wounds and breaches of the Church this day are like to blood unto death? ANSW. Whatever just cause be of griefe, yet is there none for darkening the truth of this demonstration, on these grounds. I. That
none can deny the perfection of the rule of the Gospel, for the most firm and intire uni∣ty amonghst all the followers of Christ on the earth. II. That no opposition which is made therto, but what hath been fortold as one of the greatest tryals of the Church un∣der the New Testament, and the Spirit of God doth most expresly point at in these latter times. III. Because the furthest op∣position thereto can be no more cause for any to stumble, or question the truth of this demonstration, then that there is a Devil, whose greatest designe hath ever been to di∣vide and break Christians amongst them∣selves. IV. Because this union, which is chiefly mistical and invisible, is much greater oft, then what this way may appear to the world, and of that kind as is not interrup∣ted by distance of place, or any want of lo∣cal communion. V. That such a guard is set by the Lord unto this piece of his glory, and to oppose any invasion thereon; that there stands an Angel with a flaming sword, upon every hand in the commands and threa∣tings of the Gospel, to secure this blessed unity of the Saints amonghst themselves, so as none can invade the same but on their hi∣ghest peril, of opposing that which is as the apple of Christs eye. VI. That its ever found how this demonstration hath some clear evi∣dence
amonghst such who are indeed the Disciples of Christ, and according to their ad∣vance in the life and power of Christianity doth the more brightly shine forth; so that the nearer the lines are to the center, the nearer also are they amonghst themselves. VII. That in all times there hath been some tremenduous marke f the judgment of God made visible on such who are contentious, and have made it their worke to cause division in the Church and sow discord among bre∣thren. QU. VI. But what hath the Church now in these latter dayes to compense the want of that great demonstration by mira∣cles, and such extraordinare confirmations of the Christian faith, as were in the first times? ANSW. I. That we may see how far that seal of martyrdome, which came in the roome of miracles to the Church, hath ex∣ceeded that which was in the first times of the Gospel. II. That there hath been since such innumberable shining examples of holi∣nesse, yea these continued to this day, whom the world might see did walk in the light and power of Christianity, as sure as men walks, under the power and vertue of a living soul. III. That we now see what a length the course of the Gospel and of the
Church militant is come, and how far thus the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, which once was so contrare to all human appea∣rence. IV. That so sure and exact a per∣formance of the Scripture, is now undenya∣ble in the event, and of such great and mar∣velous things which were fortold under the New Testament, that in an ordinare way none could have believed, what we see with our eyes, and now have these things, which were in former ages the object of the Churches faith, made the object of our sense; and its sure this is such a seal and confirmation to our faith in these last times as doth much exceed the greatest miracles which were with the first planting of the Gospel. V. Though we may not resolve our faith on any extraor∣dinare providences, or lay the least weight hereon to support the authority of the doc∣trine we professe, since this only is founded on that sacred revelation of divine truth in the Scripture, which is that infallible rule to discerne true miracles, and what is Gods seal herein under the undoubted signature and stampe of his own power and working in the same; yet hath there been such incon∣trollable evidence of extraordinare signs and confirmations to confirme the truth of the Reformed Religion, since the Refor∣mation, as in no ages past was ever known,
but with the first planting of the Gospel among the Gentiles. SECTION IV. QU. I. IS it cleare and demonstrable that the doctrine of Christ, is a soull quickening and experimental religion, and the trial thereof, in its most supernatural truths, of such rational certitude and evidence, as the world can no more deny or question the same then these experiments of nature, that are of most universal use? ANSW. Though men looked but at a distance here or were come from Heathnism, so for as to make a serious trial of Christianity, its sure they could not but see, and be fully perswaded in their judgement, hereof on these grounds. I. That such a discovery is undoubted and cleare in the Scripture of so great things, as, that there is a holy Ghost, and his workings on mens souls, of peace with God, and the joy of his presence, which all who receive the gospel are called to know and prove on their oun trial. II. That this wittnesse of Christian experience, hath as discernable a consent and harmony there with as face answereth to face in the glasse, and is cleare to be no casual thing, but where every step in this way of trial, is by Scripture
light, and what they did before read there, ere they knew it on their oun soul. III. That this in all ages of the church and wherever such as served God in the spirit were found in the most remote parts from others, hath still been the same; and like a great roll is transmit from one generation to another, with their confirmatory seal, that God is faith∣full and true, in these truths of his word which seem most incredible to the world, & now comes to our hand to require the same attestation and wittnesse. IV. That these who know and testify these things once found it not easy to beleeve the same and did no lesse judge of such great experiments of religion as a dream or imaginary thing then most now doe, until they knew them on their soul. V. That such also have been the most burning and shining lights that ever were in the church and these innumerable in all ages who declare the same, yea this in the mouth of the grave and entrance to ane eter∣nal state when no outward intrest could sway them here. VI. That it must be a matter of greatest assurance which hath then pressed the most tender parents with their last and dying breath to commend the same trial to their children, and to obtest their making earnest herein as the greatest interest they could leave them. VII. That what ever
differences be oft among these in some matters of truth: yet, in the certainty of this great trial of the life, power and comforts of reli∣gion, is ane harmonious onenes in the same testimony in all times of the church. VIII. That if any question this because so remote from mens senses, and the judgement of car∣nal reason; the reality of its effects, doth unanswerably prove both the reality and excellency of the cause. QU. II. What cleare and rational con∣viction can yow offer, of so great a thing as conversion of men from a state of nature, to a new state by grace, which doth raise them as far above the residue of mankinde, as rea∣son doth above the state of the beastes? ANSW. Though I should strive against the conviction of such a miracle, and demon∣stration of the Gospel, as conversion is, yet were it not possible to deny such demonstra∣tive evidences as the world cannot but see hereof. I. That it is sure such a change is made essentially requisite to the being, and consti∣tution of a Christian, by the whole consent of the Scripture. II. That there was never yet ane argument in nature, for ones being a Christian in the life and power thereof what ever may be for a naked form or shew. III. That they are not a few, but innumerable instances in all times and of all rancks & con∣ditions
of men on whom so great a change and difference hath been made thus evident, both from themselves what once they were, and from the residue of the world. IV. That this hath been not only upon such as have been signally impious in their practise, but who in their judgment were wont to deread holynesse as a fancy, so as Atheists must grant that there have been as profest Atheists some∣times as themselves, who have been made such conspicuous monuments of the power of the gospel. V. That none can object here, as once the Jewes did, doe any of the rulers, or such as the world counts most wise, and knowing stand wittnesses to the same; when it is so knowen there have not been more wise, learned, and judicious in the things of reason upon the earth, then such as have been eminent examples of the power of conversion. VI. That its mar∣vellous effects in subduing men, to what once was there predominant interest and idol, and to part from what had been as their right eye, or hand could only be from ane immediat di∣vine power. VII. That such as were grea∣test adversaryes to the truth, have been made no lesse eminent instruments in the ser∣vice of Christ, and choise vessels of honour, then once they were in their enmity and op∣position. VIII. That this change hath
been so discernable in times of most visible persecutions and hazard, when no outward advantage or gaine could have the least in∣fluence thereon. Now as these are demon∣strably cleare, so can there be no possible ac∣cesse to question this. I. That the Scripture is faithfull and true in so great a discovery. II. That there is a divine spirit and a power above nature, which accompanyes the same in such a change. III. That there are surely, contrary states in ane other world, when they are so undeniably manifest here. QU. III. But can so great ane experi∣ment of religion as that of communion betwixt God and men, here upon earth be made ratio∣nally convinceing to such as are themselves strangers thereto; and for a further confir∣ming of the Christian faith? ANSW. Though this be ane experiment of divine truth of a more transcendent interest and value then all that ever were in nature, yet is it no lesse evident, there can be no pos∣sible delusion herein; if I. to which so in∣numerable a company beares testimony and hath transmit the same, as that which not once or twice they have proven but in the continued trial of their life. II. That its knowen to the world, how such as testify what they doe, and have so oft found in the retirement of their souls with God, are of as
discerning spirits to know the true value of things, as any else; yea such whose testimony in other things the worst of men could not refuse nor deny. III. How its undeniably evident, such must know ane other acquain∣tance and society then that of men; that not only makes these hid exercises of godlines so desireable, where all may see they more flee then follow any humane wittnesse, but thus makes so visible a change oft both in their case and countenance after most sad anguish and dounecastings of spirit. IV. That it is so evident also how such as are most serious this way, have been visibly oft rai∣sed above their ordinary case, and frame in prayer, and other dutyes of religion; yea, in that manner, as they who never knew, there is a holy Ghost but by report, could not withstand so cleare conviction of the reality hereof, that can beget such liberty, humble tendernesse and melting of heart, yea such discernable joy and confidence. V. That no delusion or false shew can be here, when its ever seen, how such as are most serious and frequent in prayer and these hid retire∣ments with God, are the most flourishing also in the vitals of Christianity, and have the most honorable lustre, and appearance of any in their profession. VI. That its such only whose joy and comfort is most specially
discernable beyond others when these lower springs of outward help and encouragement are most visibly shut up. QU. IV. Is that great, and experimental part of religion in the power of the conscience over man, such as may be as demonstrable to the world, as the truth of a rational being? ANSW. It may be matter of wonder how men are not struck with deeper convictions hereon, when they cannot but see. I. That though this be the greatest tormentor, and troubler of the world, yet is there no possi∣ble retreat from its power tho they should flee to the uttermost parts of the earth, but doth thus enforce the soul to a reflexion on its selfe even when it trembleth at that sight. II. Which causeth such feare and horrour upon the commitment of secret sins, when no dread of humane wittnesse, or of visible hazard this way could ever occasion this. III. Which admits no violence in any to outdare the same, but is a power that the greatest monarches finde to be stronger then they; and is such, as these oft are enforced for a present ease, and releefe either to divert, or bribe the same by some false grounds of peace. IV. That it constraines men to justify God, and judge themselves when his hand doth pursue them, and to finde out
their sin, and guilt, which was before hid. V. Which makes men also afrayed to be alo∣ne with themselves; and to tremble at the word of truth, because its light doth torment them, by that unavoidable application the conscience makes hereof. VI. Yea makes mens guilt so legible oft in their countenan∣ce, even when they study most to conceale it, as all may see, there is ane accuser with∣in whose authority and power cannot possi∣bly be declined. VII. Which with so re∣markable a considence, and security doth sup∣port mens spirit and makes it easy to sustain its greatest infirmityes from without, when it is a friend; yea, thus upholds the opprest with unspeakable peace and comfort, when it doth oft cause the oppressours to tremble. QU. V. But what doth most necessarly result from so cleare a demonstration as the conscience is for confirming of our faith? ANSW. I. That its infallibly thus cleare, how there is a higher power and judgment, to which all mankinde is subjected, & gives the world an unavoidable demonstration, both of the being of God, & the truth of his word, in the great & supernatural discovery which it makes hereof. II. That there is a supream & infallible law also & invisible judge above us, under whose power and authority this court of justice doth without respect of per∣sons
both summond, arrest, bring in wit∣nesse and sentence great and small. III. That the internal government of our blessed Lord, this way both in the severity of his rebukes and most sensible enlargements of peace and comfort is unavoydably demonstrat. IV. That it beares so clear evidence to that unknowen and undoubted releef; and how none else could be ever found, to these wounds and stings of the conscience, but in the light and power of Christianity. V. That it is simply impossible for men to delight freely in a course of sin, when no humane power can disarm the conscience of that so intollerable a sting, by which it begins so early a hell within the soul. VI. That such is the power and peace of a good conscience as can make it stand unbroken amidst the greatest ruines and terrours of the world when under such a guard, as it is wrapped up in its own innocency. SECTION V. QU. I. IS the evidence of a Kingdome of darknes, in a direct opposition and contrariety, to that Kingdome of light, which Christ hath set up by the Gospel, such as the certainty thereof may be a matter of sense, as well as of faith?
ANSW. Since this is of such special use, both to confirm the christian faith and awa∣ke such to deeper reflexion on the same, with whom there seemes no accesse to deall, but by proofes from palpable experience; it is not possible to deny. I. That there is such a power, as the devil and these wicked spirits incompassing the earth, yea that have ane ordinar and familiar converse with many therein. II. That these spirits though once originally excellent, have fallen into such ane apostacy, as all may see their aim and only pleasure, is to dishonour God, and des∣troy his image in man. III. That it is im∣possible to deny the marks of that power and conquest, which the Prince of this world, hath every where amongst men; yea how vi∣sibly many are transformed into his image into such prodigious and desperat acts of wickednesse; as we should think humane nature could not but tremble at. IV. That none can control the certainty both of sense and reason which is in the truth of apparitions and bodily possessions of men in all ages, and in all places of the earth; and can need no de∣monstration for this, that in many places of the earth, the devil is both visibly and audi∣bly knowen. V. That he is so manifest in his appearence as a spirit of blasphemy, which impetuously acts men to war against hea∣ven
with their tongue in such oathes and cur∣sing as hath no casual pleasure, or gain here∣in; yea, as a spirit of delusion in so visible ane excitement of others to these extravagancies under a shew of religion, as are incompati∣ble with any use of judgement or reason. VI. That so innumerable a company of hu∣mane race, hath in all ages been in a formal, and expresse covenant with these powers of darknesse is undenyable upon the most seve∣re and impartial inquiry herein. Qu. II. What special assistence to your faith doth the certainty of these powers of darknesse bring therewith? ANSW. I. That such a party both in their nature and continued actings, are in a stated opposition to the Kingdome of Christ. II. That it is so visible the prey which these mighty hunters do follow is not our body, or the things of this life, but is with respect to ane immortal soul, and ane after state, and that thus man might be made sharer of the same misery under which they are conclu∣ded. III. That all may see their being un∣der restraint of a supream power above them & under such chaines as do irresistibly bound their rage, and enmity against man by ane invisile guard and hedge which they cannot breake over. IV. How their greatest ra∣ge, and strugling is against the conversion,
of sinners to God, and to hold fast his pos∣session in such, as the Spirit of God doth not, more clearely move for their rescue, then these doe to crosse that blessed design of the Gospel. V. That there are none serious in the truth and life of religion but finde themselves pursued by such ane adversary; and to have as discernably another party then themselves, or the world to conflict with as if they saw them in a visible shape. VI. That by the Gospel and within the pre∣cinct of the church, is so discernably a grea∣ter restraint of Satans dominion and power then in all the earth besides; yea that the advanta∣ge of being within the external covenant of Baptisme, is so demonstrable as the least yeel∣ding or tendency to a renouncing of the sa∣me, or any acts of homage, for making use of his help, hath ever made way for some more extraordinary power of the devil over such then others. VII. Thus also is a most undeniable confirmation given of ane invisi∣ble world, and of such intellectual beings the∣re, as are far above man; yea that there is so undoubted ane intercourse betwixt men and spirits, as may clearely shew that interest mens soul hath in another state and world then this. QU. III. Is that great truth of the im∣mortality of the soull, and its never dying sta∣te
after death, as fully demonstrable to rea∣son, as it is by the furthest certainty of faith? ANSW. Though it be so amazing a thing to beleeve ane immortal soull, and eternal sta∣te, wherein it must shortly enter, as by few seemes to be apprehended, yet are its de∣monstrative evidences, such that except men lose all sence and use of reason, it is not possible to deny. I. That there is such ane immaterial and active substance as the soull, which can admit no cause, either of its decay or dissolution, from the body, yea that the greatest excellency of this visible creation, is here, that such a vital beam of life, light, and immortality, as the soull of man is therein. II. Though we cannot see this rare and wonderful being, yet it is here we both see, and feel it to be something di∣stinct from the body, and to have a distinct in∣terest, both in its griefs and comforts. III. How it can have no dependance on the body in its being, which doth no way de∣pend thereon in its actings and exercise; but is oft most vigorous and cleare, in its exer∣cise, not only when most separat and abstract from sensible things, but when the flesh is under the greatest decay, and neare its dis∣solution; to shew the soull lyeth not a dying with the body, but hath its distinct subsisten∣ce,
to live in a separat state, when it dyes. IV. Its being peculiarly framed for conver∣se, and intercourse with spiritual beings, yea is only of the visible creation admit to fellowship with the invisible God, and to have reflex acts upon it self. V. How it is a being of a higher nature and value, then the sun, moon and starrs; which not only can know, and conceive of things above the evidence and impressions of sense, but to make a rational choise of good, though cros∣se to any sensual pleasure; yea to rejoyce, and have its proper delights, when the bo∣dy is afflicted and in pain; nor can be defiled from the most loathsome sores and defile∣ments of the flesh, so as I must needs see both its dominion and preheminence over the body, and to have assuredlie a subsistence without the same. VI. That it is such a being, as is capable of a happinesse beyond the who∣le extent of the world, & hath these intellec∣tual facultyes, which cannot possibly want, both objects suitable thereto, and injoy∣ments, above the senses. VII. That the most choise and excellent, are usually most afflicted, and crushed under the feet of their oppressours, whilst these flourish in the earth and have no bands in their death, so as such were of all men the most miserable, if in this life, both their being and blessednesse
were founded. VIII. That there is so uni∣versal a sense of immortality, as these who both feare and hate the evidences hereof, yet under some constraint of reason hath the same for a continued terrour. IX. That it is sure the certainty of death, makes it sim∣ply impossible, for things only suited to this life of sense, to be the ultimate good, or fruition of man; since else the beasts should have a greater happinesse then such, if it were not from respect to ane after and immortal state. QU. IV. What confirmation to your faith does that great and amazing change by death offer, when it would seem to be some∣thing meerly natural? ANSW. Though the only wife God moves herein according to the nature of se∣cond causes, and that it hath various wayes of approach unto men, yet may all see with the furthest conviction of rational evidence, as well as certainty of faith, I. How death in its first constitution is penal; and comes by a divine appointment unto all, not meerly as men but as sinners, and to be thus no natu∣ral accident and result of our primitive and original frames. II. That its death, as a pe∣nalty which keepes the feare and dread there∣of so much on all living, as that last period, when the eternal state of men is then cast.
III. That the sting and bitternesse of sin, is so manifest in innumerable diseases and stroakes of death, which many feel an 100. times ere they dye once, beyond other of the creatures. IV. Though the sentence of dying is on all, yet so great a difference is be∣twixt the saints and residue of men here, that its penal execution on the ungodly, is such as nature can give no support herein. V. That supernatural presages and warnings hereof ere it come, are in all times so known and sure; yea such extraordinare evidences sometimes of the precise time, as could have no possible rise from any natural cause. VI. That its immediat commission from a supream and invisible power, is so evident in such exe∣cutions oft, of this sentence, by sword, famine and pestilence, as the visible finger of God, in a just retribution unto men for sin, may be no lesse seen, and a supernatural cau∣sality, then the effects have been undoubted and cleare; to shew such is the state of man, as this great revolution by death, doth each moment depend on a call from heaven. VII. That the certainty of something super∣natural herein, as the King of terrours, is so known as no releefe can possibly be found, but in the truth and power of Christia∣nity, to set men both above the feare of death and ane after state, when once it comes
neere. VIII. Yea that it is surely above the possibility of nature, which can beare out in this great adventure and trial of mens faith, both in the truth and strength thereof, at death, for which end the Lord hath thus choised that by so strange ane entry, and at so dark a port they should first passe to the full enjoyment of that glorious state a∣bove. QU. V. What evidence and demonstra∣tion can yow shew, to confirm so great a faith of an eternal glory abiding the Saints in heaven, and of its earnest and first fruits here, as may strike ane undeniable convic∣tion hereof on the world? ANSW. I. By that visible ripening and re∣semblance to such a state in all the degrees of a Christians grouth, to a more full stature of the man in Christ, as may be no lesse evident then the natural grouth of our body. II. That though the opening of these gates of the second world be hid, as no humane sense can discern the spirit in its ascent through these higher regions, to that unconceivea∣ble paradise and glory in the third heaven, yet is the triumphant entry and passage of innu∣merable Christians at death, such as hath oft been, a matter of sense and clearest evi∣dence to the world. III. That such also were both humble, tender, and sincere in
their life, and then in so great a composure of judgement, as all might see they knew what made them glade and could swallow up both the feares and bitternesse of death; yea that this was not given for their own sup∣port only, but for a more publick use, to the conviction and confirming of others. IV. That the state of glory is demonstrable and hath been oft brought downe to mens sense, by these ravishing joyes of the Mar∣tyres of Christ, and exultation of spirit even in the flames. V. By such supernatural comforts as attend the life of Christianity, and can have no possible rise from the flesh and outward causes, with that joy and peace, which by so natural a result followes well-doing; and any service of love for Christ as all may see to be the first fruits of that har∣vest which is above. VI. By so rare and marvellous a frame of the new man, set up in this lower region of grace, in so discer∣nable a conformity to the blessed God, and resemblence to another state then here, to which the world is but as a place of pilgri∣mage, trial and a preparatory state only. VII. By such visible returns of joy and comfort of Christians after saddest conflicts and downecastings, and day-break of these vital quickning beames of divine light, that have been no lesse evident oft, then that of
the martyrs at the stake, who cryed out, Now he is come, he is come. VIII. By these breathings of love after ane unseen Christ and visible effects of its power on men, as might shew some begun translation of the soull so far herein, as to be more where it loves then it lives. IX. Though we can∣not see here, that ineffable glory, which is above, but should have our faith insteed of eyes; yet such is the truth of holinesse, as doth not only evidence, but in its own na∣ture partake of a future glory; so as every degree and act thereof doth enter in a be∣gun state of fruition and blessednesse, and makes it simply impossible for a good man in any true exercise of godliness, not to be hap∣py also, and thus in a more near capacity to know that joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which is above. X. By so sure, known, and tryed a passage betwixt heaven and mens souls in prayer, with so setled a trade of com∣merce this way, and certain returns, as with assurance such can say, though they must change their place, yet not their company. XI. That the whole dispensations of provi∣dence in Israls passage through the wilder∣nesse, and to so excellent a country as Ca∣naan, is no lesse sure in it self, then that i was given for an embleme and type of the jurt nying and militant state of the faints here∣and
to be a solemne pledge of that Canaan a∣bove. XII. That such is the magnificence, harmony, and order of these visible heavens, and celestial bodies there, with their different degrees of glory, (though all illuminated from the same fountain of light the sun) as we may judge by a divine ordination have some peculiar respect to that end, to awake & raise our thoughts thus, to these higher regions of glory, which are above all these, by what is thus visible to our eyes; where the redeemed of the Lord shall be ever fixed, & shine forth as the Sun in the kingdome of their Father. QU. VI. What visible and awakning evidences are there of the truth of an Hell, and that state of horrour and torment in ano∣ther world, which even to mens senses here, might present the certainty thereof? ANSW. I. That it can be no more sure, there is such a power and party as that of the Devils, then the reality of some such horrid region and place also, to which they belong, and are adjudged to. II. From so innume∣rable a company of human race, as are not only in the visible service of these infernal spirits, but partakers of the same nature and enmity against the H. God and his image, as doth clearly witnesse their respect and ten∣dency to the same state and place, and to be consederate in their judgement, as they were
here in their sin. III. From such visible impressions of vindictive justice on mens souls, with such horrour of conscience and un∣sufferable torments this way, as in all ages have been known by most remarkable in∣stances, when not in the least distemper of their natural reason, that may present to mens senses something of a visible Hell, as convincingly, as if one had risen from the dead, for the same. IV. From such a trembling sense, and terror of divine ven∣geance, as oft follows upon horrid acts of wic∣kednesse and most eminently then breaks forth upon a surprising sight of death, as all may see something more dreadful herein then the dissolution of nature and the power and present arrest of a future judgment made visible in the same. V. From such begun degrees, as that of blaspheming and rage a∣gainst God, because of his plagues, with these prodigies of cruelty exerced by men here in the earth, as might be evident to all to be more then human, and rather the effects of infernal spirits acting in a human shape. VI. From so clear a prelude of the same in that judicial obduration, and blindnesse, so many are given up to under the greatest dis∣coveries of light, so as all may see their being thus bound over in chains, and shut up in prison, until death bring them forth to the
execution; and how no relief or application of the means of grace hath then any more ac∣cesse. VII. From such a mape & shaddow of eternal vengeance, in these terrible acts of divine judgment inflicted here on Apostates, and persecuters of the truth, and other flagi∣tious persons which with the very first view might present an awful and immediat appea∣rence of God in the same, and that some strang and supernatural punishment is oft vi∣sible on the workers of iniquity. VIII. And what ever be of natural causes in such visible representations here in the earth, as that sulphureous lake where once Sodom was, and these burning mountains such as Haecla, Et∣na, and Vesuvius, yet we may truely judge their being thus set before the world as some visible memorials of these infernal flames; and as it were so many lumeheads thereof, for such who will not believe the same, because they doe not yet see or feal such a thing. QU. VII. What assistances hath our faith, of that great and wonderful truth of the resurrection of the body, after its dissolu∣tion in the grave unto dust? ANSW. I. From that visible and stupen∣dious frame of the heavens and the earth, when its sure that the same infinite power, that hath not only made man, but the whole creation, can as easily collect and recount
the dispersed ashes of the body, as form the same. II. From that greatest pledge hereof, in the resurrection of the body of Christ. III. From that tribulation and sore pain, that the saints here in their outward man are ex∣posed to, since it is sure that in the holy justice of God, he did not give such bodies for labour, and for toyl, and to his mar∣tyrs, to endure unexpressible torments for Christ, to perish for ever. IV. From these visible resemblances and prefigurations of the resurrection which the Lord hath given to confirme our faith herein, in the ordinare course and productions of nature; so as all may see how every night is as the grave of the day∣light, and each morning a new resurrection of the same; and how visible an image of death is in each season of the winter, with so marvelous and beatiful a resurrection of the earth, on every return of the spring, in the herbs, flowers and plants, taking life and ri∣sing again, in the leaves, blossomes and fruites; yea this in such a variety, as may no lesse convincingly evidence an infinite divine power herein, then that the same body of man should be raised at the last day. V. From that continued miracle of the harvest, after the seed-time, with so amazing a pro∣duction of the grain sowen in the earth, and its first dying there before it be quickned,
so as to be at last brought to 30, 60, yea sometimes an hundred fold, out of the very same grain; which to these who had never before known the same would seem incredi∣ble, & above all reason to conceave, or bear credite therto. CHAPTER III. The confirming worke of Religion, impro∣ven wich respect to the times, to clear the way of the Lord herein, before this gene∣ration, and let us see how nothing is so strang in the events of this day, which should not more strenthen, then shake, and that the God of the Reformed Church doth still own the same interest, according to his faithful∣nesse: which is here briefly pointed at, upon some special inquiry, proposed about the same. SECTION I. QU. WHat can afford both light, and confirmation to our faith, in such a time, when we see the worke of the Lord, about his Church, to be most re∣markably now a worke of judgement, with such dark and searching tryals therwith, as former times have not known.
ANSW. It is sure, we have seen nothing, but what might have been too evidently looked for, and that we can pretend no want of light herein, upon these grounds. I. That the Trialls of a Church, should be suited to the measure of their talent of light, & when this hath been in some more then ordi∣nare way dispensed, that some remarkably searching times might be expected to follow; nor can it be now strang to us, that such things fall in with this day, which did not meet the Churches of Christ at the first entry of the Reformation, who then had not so clear discoveries of the truth, and that measure of confirmation therein, which hath been sin∣ce. II. That some unusual tryals, and conflicts, in the Lords usuall method of pro∣vidence, should be suited also, to the great∣nesse of that worke, which he is bringing forth, may be no strang thing; and to see a time of such sore wrestlings as this, when all things seem to cry, be in pain as Micah 4:20. Yea when some great event of the Scripture is to be revealed to the world, and near to its full hight, and period of accomplish∣ment, as we have safe ground for assurance of this ay. III. Nor hath this sad and dismal hower on the Church, been more obvious then the provoking cause hereof, in which the holy righteousnesse of God, may be
no lesse clear then the cloud now is dark; when such a visible falling of hath been from that love, tendernes, and power of religion that did formerly attend its profession; as for these many years past we might have seen that some sore and remarkable judgment was coming, and that if we had not been in such a maner undone, we were, under some sadder strock of spiritual judgment, ready to be undone. IV. Yea it hath been too visible, that such evils followed the Refor∣med Churches, as in no time it was ever known, that the holy God, did passe such by, without some signal evidence of his wrath against the same before the world. V. We know that carnal confidence hath a cur∣se ever waiting upon it in the Scripture, which none can take of, or make that thrive which God hath himself cursed; and it is too visible how far we have gone thus out of the way of our strenth, by such eager seeking human props, & support, as we have forot the guide of our youth, and convenant of our God, and what great things he hath formerly done in the greatest straits of his Church, when the∣re was much humble trusting, with little sence; as though the spirit of the Lord, had not done more to recover his truth, then all human might or power, ever could doe.
SECTION II. QU. WHat talent, are we still accoun∣table for to support our faith against the greatest fears of this time, from these immediate appearances of God, and of the glory of his power, for the same truth and cau∣se of the Reformed Church, we are now cal∣led to contend for, which hath been since the reformation when so strong & unusual a tyde, now is against the same? ANSW. If men shut not their eyes, and hide this great talent of the workes of God, un∣der the ground, its sure none can question such a seal, which before the sun, to the a∣mazment and conviction of the world, hath been put to the truth of the Reformed Reli∣gion; that we are now sisted under such a call, as the Church of Israel was, Deut. 4:34. to ask of the times, that are past, since Is∣raels coming out of Egypt, and since the first planting of the Gentil Church, by the Gospel, whither there hath been so great a thing as this in the earth, that God hath essayed to ta∣ke to himself a people from the midst of other na∣tions, by temptations, by signs, and by won∣ders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an oustretched arm, and by great terrours, according to all that the Lord our God hath
done for the rescue of his people, in these last times, from Antichristian bondage and dark∣nesse; and settling them in a church state; but unto us was this shewed, that we might know, that the Lord he is God, and there is noncelse beside him: yea are still called to see, and be as eye witnesses to these things; I. How bright a day of the Gospel of Christ, did goe before this great darknesse on the Church, and what a solemne triumph in these late ages the truth hath had over Antichrist, so as the full strock and ruine of his kingdome, which is sure and established in the promise of God, seems not now more marvelous and above human appearence, then what we have seen, in the begun degrees of its accomplishment. II. In how few years also, there was, as a new Christian world brought forth, in that swift course and progresse which the inga∣thering of the Reformed Churches had, so as between the year 1621, and 1560. such fa∣mous plantations of the Gospel, were setled in a Church state; which all may see was the immediate worke and power of God; to shew that none should fear, or stagger at his promise, though the waters yet swell, and come to the flowings of Jordan, and difficul∣ties appear unsuperable to human sense, af∣ter this great things which the Lord hath do∣ne. III. How extraordinare a calling, and
excitment of instruments, was then evident, for the service of that time, and reapers thus eminently prepared for so great an harvest of the Gospel, as might put the world to inqui∣re whence these were, in so numerous a con∣currence, when a few of such a spirit, we∣re so rarely to be found in many ages before. IV. Yea such an accession also, of spiritual gifts, and induments then for building of the Church, as had not been formerly known, since the first coming of the Gospel to the Gentils; wherein it may be said, the glo∣ry of these last times hath even in some degree exceeded that of the first. V. And can the most dismal things of this time, countervail the confirmations of our faith, who have so clearly seen, with the first breaking up of the pur doctrine of Christ, the power and life of Christianity came therwith to the world, as a seal, and attestation therto, beyond any miracles; yea how innumberable a com∣pany, in these last ages of different tongues and languages, and these so remot from one another, did not only receive the same truth, but with such resolution adventure their souls theron, as might fully witnesse, they had another prospect of Christianity, and to be in some other manner ravished with the glory & beuty of the same, then is now in these times. VI. That such high spring ty∣des
of the power, and efficacy of the Gospel, might be evident to all, after so sad a re∣straint had been for so many ages before, un∣der Antichristian darknesse; for whatever was then as a private seall, on the spirit of Christians whilst the witnesses did prophesy in sack-cloth, yet was there no such evidence and demonstration of the H. Ghost, or a publick confirmatory seal to the truth, as was after the Reformation. VII. Yea was it not the most sober, serious, and inquisitive part of men, upon a sure tryal of the grounds of their faith, who did most firmly imbrace the same; and how many of these also were of the greatest parts and abilities, whom none could judge to adventure so far herein, without the highest assurances, that this was their undoubted interest and upmaking. VIII. We have seen not only these of mean and low estate, but such of the highest place and quality, most chearfully adventuring whatever interest could be dearest to them, in the earth for the truths sake; yea was ever found, how such as were most acquaint, with the reformed religion in its power, and living up in their practise, to what they pro∣fest thereof, were these who with the grea∣test assurance, have most resoluty still adhe∣red thereto. IX. We have seen also, its most remarkable spreading in the world,
when there could be no possible pretence of a lucrative interest, or external motives for the same. X. We have seen something not only extraordinare, but even miraculous in the joy, and resolution of innumberable mar∣tyrs since the Reformation who did bear out with a more then human strenth, against a cruelty so visibly inhuman, and savage; yea which did in some degrees exceed that mea∣sure of the Heathens, in the Primitive times, as being against a greater light then theirs. II. And have we not seen of what spirit, such still have been since the Reformation, who were the most notour instruments in the Churches persecution, and how visibly such did act herein, under so impetuous an incitment of the Devil, that as Tertullien, in his Apollogy speaks of Nero, the truth might boast in having such adversaries. XII. It is sure we have seen, how no human power, could yet ever undoe this blessed interest of the Reformed religion, tho no way, or chan∣ge of weapons, hath been left untryed; but we have thus seen, whither so strong, and unite a confederacy, as the Catholick league in France did at last resolve, and, not only in the ruine of the greatest acters and contri∣vers therein, but to a further establishing of the Reformed Church there, as though such had intentionally acted for the same; when
if second causes had brought forth their ordi∣nare effects, it might have been judged im∣possible to fail. XIII. We have seen that issue of the whole councels, expense and cruelty of Philip the II. of Spain, to bear down the truth of the Gospel in the Nether∣lands, which was to the furthest setling of this illustrious state and the Church of Christ there; yea how their conspicuous rise and flowrishing even in the externals, and their resolute adherence to the truth of Christ did most visibly keep together. XIV. We know that deludge of blood, which so quick∣ly followed the French massacre; and the most dismal time which ever that nation know, did then visibly contemporate, with such a time of their greatest rage and perse∣cution against the truth, and that event of the third vial most clearly fulfilled herein, Revel. 16: 5, 6. Thou art righteous, o Lord, which art, and was, and shall be, because thou hast judged tus, for they have shed the blood of thy saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink in great measure. XV. Yea have we not seen how four Kings of France successively were in lesse then 30. years, taken away, in the same continued pursuit, how to destroy the Church there, in whom that whole race of the Valois was thus extinct; yea in the manner of their
death, were most remarkable monuments of divine judgement, as the most famous writers of that time does attest. XVI. We have seen what marvelous effects did follow these bloody years of Queen Mary's reign in England, to promot and commend the Protestant doctrine to mens consciences there, with so great a triumph it had in the sufferings of such choise and excellent wit∣nesses for Christ, as hath brought in more rent to the praise and glory of their blessed head, then may to the furthest compense all that blood of the Saints there, though high∣ly precious in the eyes of the Lord. XVII. We have seen likewayes the blood and cruelty, of late against the Protestants in Bohemia, in a short time most observably returned on the authors thereof, and how the im∣mediate finger of God might be seen in cal∣ling forth the Swedes to avenge the same, and in that desolating strock which followed on Germany. XVIII. We have seen in these late times the issue of that horrid massacre on the Protestants in Ireland, to the utter ruine in a very few years after, of that barbarous party, who had thus acted herein. XIX. We have seen what wonderful providences did attend the actings of that poor handful of Protestants in the Valleys of Piemont since the Reformation, upon the account of that
bloody massacre which was set on foot there against them, which was so astonishing as all might see an extraordinare appearence of the Lord herein, as is clearly attested by the most faithful Histories of that time. XX. And can it be forgot unto this day, how visibly a divine hand did appear in brea∣king that great Spanish Armado, in the year 1588. which had been for some years in con∣triving against England. XXI. As it was astonishing, and specially demonstrative of the immediate power and presence of God, it should be matter of wonder and praise also for after ages, that solemne time of the Reformation of the Church in Scotland, for planting the reformed Religion there; with that zeal and onnesse of spirit, as did then appear in all ranks to imbrace and adhere to the profession thereof, amidst the greatest threatnings of their adversaries; so as a few years did bring forth that, which would have seemed strang for an age to accomplish; yea that we find betwixt the last Martyr for the truth there, who was burnt at St. Andrews 1558. and the establishment of the Protestant Religion, and full abolishment of Popery, with the full concurrence of civil authority herein, in July 1560. was but little above two years; to shew what great things the Lord can doe, above all human councel or
confidence. XXII. Its sure we have seen in what remarkable degrees these last vials of the holy judgment of God, hath taken place on the Kingdome of Antichrist, and how conspicuous the event hath been of that prophecy, 2 Thessal. 2: 8. in these great ef∣fects and consumption thereof by the mini∣stry of the Gospel, as an assured pledge of the full accomplishment of what remains herein. XXIII. And as every step of the Churches rise, hath been still advanced in a continued conflict betwixt the truth and Antichrist, so have we still seen, when the assault and opposition hath been greatest, its most remarkable tendancy to a greater vic∣tory; which were it rightly considered upon clear and solid grounds from the Scripture, the most formidable appearences of trou∣ble from this adversary should with more comfort then fear this day be looked on; so that whatever be the nearest and most imme∣diate events, yet is it sure, as the Lord is true, whose word is passed hereon, that whosoever gives their power and strength to support that interest of Antichrist shall lose the day and find their cause desperate, for the party with whom they contend here∣in is the Son of God, against whom no hu∣man power shall ever be able to stand. These are but a few, which are here men∣tioned,
of the great acts of our God, in be∣half of his Truth, to be still as present in our sight, in a time when the spirits of ma∣ny are ready to stagger and faint; and here mentioned, to lay no stresse or weight of the authority of the truth and doctrine of our profession thereon, but on the alone reve∣lation of the Scripture; but that they are such an undenyable seal for confirming our faith, and of so known, publick and famous evi∣dence, as should be no lesse considered and taken to heart now, then in the time when the Lord thus appeared herein. SECTION III. QU. WHat present judgment are we called to have of this time, upon clear and assured grounds from the Scripture; that we may know under what aspect therof, the present state of Religion and of the refor∣med Churches is under, when so great a cri∣sis is this day, as would seem to be in the very  of its conflict, whither as to life or death? ANSW. It is no present appearences of the time must direct our faith, nor should we either streath our fears or expectations of things and events, beyond what the God of truth doth warrand in his word, but its
clear, if we credite the same, and admitt the divinity of the New Testament, there is no just cause of hesitation or darknesse as to what the Lord is bringing forth for his Church now in these latter dayes; nor can there be any pretence, to seek an other light, either from the stars above, or the diviners of this time, when so woful a trade hath got up in the world, that men will thus goe to the God of Ekron, as though there were not a God in Israel, or such a thing, as his written Oracles to inquire at, when its sure these ly open, and with a clear and distinct sound speaks to all who have a serious and unprejudged spirit. I. That the Church un∣der the New Testament hath now passed and gone through that most dismal and conti∣nued tryal herein, which was to goe over her head under Antichrists reigne and hight; and whatever appearence he now hath in great wrath, yet is it sure and evident that the winter is past and the Churches spring be∣gun; and a few steps further of that judg∣ment which is now hastning on, will at lenth end the quarrel; so that by a near converse with the word, we may clearly see from what point the Churches course and motion this day lyes, and how exactly it keeps, in the certain∣ty thereof, by that clear conduct of the Scrip∣tures of truth, where a full map of her whole
course and passage through time is clearly shewed. II. That we may now with some clear evidence judge, and have our faith perswaded hereof, that the Churches interest is upon the rising hand, and on a present ad∣vance, though nothing would seem more contradictory then all visible grounds now are; since this cannot sail, John. 3:30. that Jesus Christ in his kingdom in the earth must increase; yea that the Scripture so clearly points forth Antichrists ruine and progresse of his fall and douncasting, with resemblan∣ce to that great judgment on Pharaoh as an evident type hereof; in the same judicial strocks of induration, on both, and gradual progresse herein by one plague after another, until the last and greatest assault, as was then at the Red-sea, hath the same effect for a more glorious appearence of God, in the greatest step of judgment, and victory over this adversary, when not only the song of Moses but of the Lamb also shall be then sung, Rev. 15: 3. as importing something more glorious and a greater brightnesse to be put on this illustrious act of divine judgment, re∣served to these last times, when a more im∣mediate appearence of the Lord will be seen, then in any sormer deliveries of his Church. III. It is no conjectural thing, but what by a clear Scripture conduct we may see, that this
time of the Church now under so notable a Crisis in her case, is evidently falling under that remarkable assault and conflict, with that adversary, before the accomplishing of that vial on his seat and throne, as we may see Revel. 17:13, 14. that when so conspi∣cuous a step of the Churches victory is near; the opposition thereto also will be in some higher degree proportionable to the same, when the great men of the earth, and such who shall receive power as Kings, one hower with the beast, shall have one mind and give their power and strength thereto, and shall make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall over∣come them, for he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, &c. Nor is it found through the Scripture where any great thing, the Lord hath done for his Church, but some unu∣sual darknesse, and sore wrestlings hath still gone before, and should be no matter of staggering to our faith, whatever be of pre∣sent fears, to see so dismal a time of tryal as now is, and amazing hight of trouble beyond what former times have known, when one of the greatest events of providence in behalf of the Church, since the revealing of Christ to the world, until his second coming, is as∣suredly near in the fall and overthrow of the man of sin. IV. We have clear ground also to judge, that so great an eclipse as seems
allmost universally over the state of the Re∣formed Churches, is no goeing down of the sun theron, whatever did befall the most famous eastern Churches to an utter dissipa∣tion thereof; if these different periodes of time be justly considered, how their sun-set did then fall in with the entry of that great Apostacy of the Christian Church and with that long and dismall night of Antichrists reign; whilst now this hower of tryal on the Churches, doth meet in that blessed period of Antichrists begun fall, and of a growing light of the Gospel, and when the Scripture so clearly warrands our faith herein, that the worke of providence is to plant, and not cutt of, but to bring forward that interest of the Reformed Churches, in the founding of which the Mediator hath so eminently appeared in the glory of his power in these last times. V. It is sure me now live in the evening, and extremity of time, when the motions of providence may be expected to be more quick and speady, as being so near the cen∣ter, and to the last Epocha, and period of all prophetick Chronology; wherein the glory of God in his truth and faithfulnesse shall most eminently shine forth, and these Scripture truths which were formerly dark & abstruse, with that evidence shine forth in the event, as shall cause men to wonder at their former
thoughts and stumblings thereat. And here I must say, that there is such a sight now in the earth, as the Romish Church, in its complex frame and state, in so different a mould cast from any power or jurisdiction else, and such a compound of a civil, and Spiritual Monarchy in one and the same per∣son, is so solemn and undenyable a seal to the Christian faith, and divinity of the New Testament; that its strang why this is not im∣proven more, against the Atheism of this ti∣me, that such a visible event of the Scriptu∣re is now in being, which was so clearly for∣told by the Holy Ghost 1500. years ago, with its proper circumstances, as to the manner of that Antichristian state, with its rise, grouth, & duration, as is to admiration stil evident to the world, when not the least shaddow or appearence of so strang future emergencies was to be seen or could have en∣tred in mens thoughts; to shew it only could be revealed to the Church by him, to whom all his works are known from the beginning. This I have looked on, as such a confirmation to the truth of Christianity, that no mira∣cles in the first times of the Church could have more evidence for the same; yea if such a party were not in being, both what it now is and in former ages hath been, it might in another manner stagger the faith of the
Saints, to a questioning the truth of the Scripture, then its most formidable appea∣rence this day can doe. VI. I shall but add here, that we know and are sure the Lord hath reserved his greatest works to these lat∣ter dayes, wherein his judgments shall be manifest; and that one of the most eminent manifestations of his glory before the close of time shal be conspicuous in the fall of An∣tichrist, on whose ruines that glorious hous which Christ is yet to have for himself both of Jews and Gentiles, shall be prepared and built up; and though this great eclipse of An∣tichristian darknesse, should yet more pre∣vail, even over the visible profession of the truth in the Churches of Britain, and Ireland, there is no cause to be staggered in the faith of Romes fatal period, being near, but to look hereon according to the Scripture as the Ʋltimus Conatus of that wounded adver∣sary, which will be found in the issue to have the most immediate connexion with his greatest downfall, and the reviving glory of the Church; for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. SECTION IV. QU. WHat is specially called for, in this day, of such as are accoun∣table
for so great a talent of light, and confir∣mations to our faith? ANSW. If this were suitably taken to heart, we could not but reckon our selves under the greatest excitment and call, to such an improvment hereof. I. That we account it not enough to have a faith, for quieting our own spirits, but how to confirme others, by putting to our seal that God is true, in the great assurances of his word, and to sanctify him before the world, which is so important a duty, as the Lord was wroth even with a Moses, and Aaron for one short-coming, when he called for the same, Numb. 20:12. and its sure in no time was such a special trust more reposed the∣reon, then in this age, both as a publick debt on the Church, & personal on each Christian, how to witnesse for the Lord, upon that great interest of his faithfulnesse and for transmitting the same, to the ages to come, by a confirmatory seal, and testimony ther∣to. II. To reckon our selves also under some more then ordinare call this day, each in their present capacity and station, how to appear for the credite of the truth, and stemm so visible and impetuous a tyde, as is now run∣ning of distruct, and of a discreditable faint; for it may be said, never was the Church un∣der
the New Testament so remarkably sisted under such a trial, as that wherein the Lord did prove the Church of Israel, Numb. 14. or had a more evident resemblance therto, in the same circumstances as in this day, if they were seriously pondered; as I how in the sa∣me manner, such a false & evil report is too visibly raised upon the blest ways of the Lord, to discourage and faint the spirits of his people, as was then by the spyes, that there were insuperable difficulties in the way of the promise, by reason of the Anakims, and of their walled cities, and did thus op∣pose the credite of sense, to all these assuran∣ces which God had given to their faith. II. That this highly dishonourable faint and distrust did so sease on that people, as was like to resolve in a visible revolt, and to cry for a lea∣der to goe back to Egypt again; which amongst too many in this time may be justly feared. III. That this was after such extraordinare confirmations which the Lord had given to the faith of his Church then, who had by his own immediate and outstretched hand so latly brought them out of the house of bonda∣ge, and from the iron furnace in Egypt, as ren∣dred their misbeliefe to be a guilt under such aggravations, as the holy God did in that manner plead, vers. 22. These ten times have they tempted me, who have seen my glory, and
my miracles, which I did in the wildernesse, &c. IV. But herein we hope, and are con∣fidently sure of a blessed disparity in this re∣semblance, as to the numberousnesse of such, who shall be found of the Reformed Churches, to act something of that part, which these heroick witnesses a Caleb & Joshua did & were then put to stand alone therein, who through grat shall yet appear with some measure of that spirit, and withstand so high a tyde of fears, discouragment and misbeliefe as is this day, and thus to plead against the same as these did, Num. 14:9. if the Lord delight in us, then let us not rebel against him, nei∣ther fear the greatest difficulties can be in the way &c. V. And is not the same precedent of providence, of so singular a respect as the Lord did then testify to his Caleb and Joshua (who were of another spirit in following him fully, in that day) a continued assurance, for all who shall be helped to any honourable appearence of this kind, by making them see, and inherit the truth of his promise; yea that such a resi∣due who outlives this great and amazing storme shal have something of that testimony to bear also which Caleb gave Josh. 14:8, 10. My brethren which went up with me made the heart of the people faint, but I fully followed the Lord my God, and now behold the Lord hath keeped me alive, &c. o blessed they whose
souls are raised with that holy zeal for the truth to stand up in this great breach, by a resolute profession of their faith, and wit∣nesse to the faithfulnesse of God, as such great and extraordinar confirmations, given thertho, now calls for. III. It is one of the special duties of this day we stand also accomptable for, how to stemm this high and growing tyde of preju∣dice, and reproach against the Reformed Reli∣gion which in some unusual way is now aloft; and by manifestation of the truth to gain some more awfull regard herof on mens con∣science, that they may see somthing of the glory of our profession, and in what maner it maintains its conquest as no way else can pos∣sibly claim; I. Which reckons none else to be the true and genuine professours hereof, who imbrace not the same upon evidence, and with respect to its intrinsick excellency and worth; nor does judge the interest of reli∣gion to goe by number, and poll, where this is wanting; but to pursue that end to have men ingadged first to be Christians, that they may be true and sincere Protestants; and therfor can admitt no such methods of any base compliance with the humour and in∣terests of men, which its principles will not bear. II. Which in its course is ever regulare and certain, according to that rule
of an uncheangable and eternal truth, without dependance on the will of man herein, or any mutable revolutions of the time. III. Which doth with the greatest lustre shine forth in the brightest light, and is maintained by the clearest knowledge; yea by the furthest plainesse, and opennesse of heart, towards all, commends it self; so that the world may see, it espouseth not mens affection, before it gain on their conscience; and to have their judgment fixed on a judicious tryal, before their resolution; nor accounts the truth of religion, can ever subsist by an external shew and profession, without is known evidence and the efficacy therof on mens soul. IV. Which sincerly follows the Catholick interest of Christianitie and publick good of mankind, in promotting the great ends of the Gospel, so as the world may see its highest in∣tent is to exalt all divine institutions, and ad∣vance the simplicity, and spirituality of Gospel administrations, (according to the revealed rule) amonghst men, as that which doth most nearly conceirn the vitals of reli∣gion and ane inward life of communion with God. V. Which pleads an impartial tryal of al its adversaries, whither the principles of our profession or of Popery, gives the grea∣test security to Civil Government, & founds the strongest obligations to Magistracy and
to all Civil, and Moral duties, by which the awe and venerable esteem of religion is kept up in a nation. It is high time that men should cease to be implicit upon this greatest interest they have within time, which is the truth of their profession in the matter of re∣ligion, when a deceit or mistake here is of an eternal conceirn: upon which account without respect to interest, party, or edu∣cation, I have this day sought to know the truth, and what adversaries could possibly pretend, to reproach, or prejudge any at the Reformed Religion, which can only amount, to charge mens corruption and of∣fences in their practise, upon the rule and principles of their profession, that can never give the least latitude, or connivance therto, but is clear as the sun; when on the other hand I could know no other way, to im∣brace such a profession, as Popery, but by turning Atheist, in the first place, and quite both religion and reason at once: but may say, in a resolute adherence to the doctrine of the Reformed Church, I fear not to adventure my soul, and enter into an eternal state.
The CONTENTS. CHAPTER I. The primitive confirmation, held forth and cleared in seven Positions. POSIT. I. That sad aspect, which the implicit and traditional profes∣sion of this day hath upon the present state of religion. Pag. 1 POSIT. II. The greatnesse of that service for the Church to have a clear founding of the faith of assent, upon known and solid grounds herein, more universally promott. Pag. 3 POSIT. III. The true primitive confirmation as it was in the times of the Apostles, hold forth and cleared from the Scripture. Pag. 6 POSIT. IV. The continued necessity therof, no lesse convincing now, for the Churches use, then in these Primitive times. Pag. 9 POSIT. V. That such a confirmatory worke respects not only the more knowing and inquisitive part of men, but the meanest within the Church. Pag. 11 POSIT. VI. VVhat is specially called for in the practicall use of this pri∣mitive confirmation, held forth in some serious proposals for this end. Pag. 14 POSIT. VII. VVhat special excitment we are under, for promotting the same in so remarkable a period of time as this, and from that hope of a greater reviving yet of such a Catholick spirit, to advance the highest ends of religion amonghst men. Pag. 19 CHAPTER II. For giving some clear view, of these primary evidences and demonstrations of our faith, that the meanest Christian should know, and vvith the least ex∣pense of time may improve for their dayly use, on these greatest principles. SECTION I. I. Of the glorious being of God, which is the first foundation of all religion. Pag. 22 II. Of the original of the world, and its not being eternal. Pag. 25 III. Of a supreme providence in the conservation and goverment of the world. Pag. 26 IV. Of that special providence, which in its continued administration about human affaires, doth unchangably difference betwixt the righteus and the wicked. Pag. 29 V. How such a wonderful record as that of an immediat revelation of God unto men, is so demonstrably extant in the world. Pag. 31 VI. Of these special evidences of the Scriptures divinity, which men must needs see to be infallible. Pag. 33 VII. Of the secure convoyance of the Scripture through all the changes of times past. Pag. 35
VIII. Of the fall of man and entry of sin into the world, as it is fully demonstrable to reason, as well as by the certainty of faith. Pag. 37 SECTION II. I. Holding fort these great assistances to the Christian faith, and of the Messias being surely promised to the Church before his coming. Pag. 38 II. Of the truth and accomplishment of this great promise of the Messias, and how it is now as sure in the event as its clear he was promised. Pag. 39 III. Of that special advantage for confirmation of our faith herein, that for 4000. years the promised coming of the Messias was deferred. Pag. 41, 42 IV. Of the nature and internal excellency of Christianity, to bear fur∣thest evidence to the truth therof. Pag. 43 V. That this is the same Gospel we now receive and injoy, which from the first promulgation therof hath had so great effects on the world. Pag. 45 VI. That the sufferings of the saints in times past was so demonstrably above the assistance of nature. Pag. 46 SECTION III. I. For holding forth on what grounds the faith of a deity must determine men to be Christians. Pag. 48 II. What confirmations the Christian Religion hath from that visible state of the Jews. Pag. 49 III. That way and manner of its prevailing on the world, as no pro∣fession else could ever pretend to. Pag. 51 IV. The nature of that great evidence, which Christ hath himself given to the world of his divine mission in the love and unity of his people, Joh. 17: 21. Pag. 53 V. How the strenth of such a demonstration stands still clear and evident in these dividing times of the Church. Pag. 54 VI. What in these last times is under our hand to compense such a con∣firmation by miracles, which was in the first times of the Gospel. Pag. 56 SECTION IV. I. For holding forth with the furthest rational certainty, and evidence the truth and doctrine of Christ, to be a soul-quicking and experi∣mental religion. Pag. 58 II. The truth also of conversion of men from a state of nature to a new state of grace. Pag. 60 III. Of so great an experiment of religion as Communion betwixt God and men here in the earth. Pag. 62 IV. Of so great a demonstration of religion in the power and workings of the Conscience. Pag. 64 V. Of that special confirmation to our faith, which doth result from such a demonstration of this power of the Conscience over men. Pag. 65
SECTION V. I. For holding forth the truth of a Kingdom of darknesse in the world, in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. Pag. 66, 67 II. What confirmation to our faith, the certainty hereof, and of these powers of darknesse, doth clearly afford. Pag. 68 III. That great truth of the immortality of the soul, with the clearest evidence to reason, as well as by the certainty of faith. Pag. 69, 70 IV. How confirming a seal to the Scripture that great change which pas∣seth on all men by death is, and how its no natural accident. Pag. 72 V. Some special assistances to the Christians faith of an eternal glory in heaven, and to serve an unavoidable conviction thus on the greatest Atheists. Pag. 74 VI. Some thing of a visible Hell, in some near approach hereof even to mens senses, held forth to awake and convince the world of such a state of horrour and torment in another world. Pag. 77 VII. Some assistances to our faith of that great truth of the Resurrection of the body. Pag. 79 CHAPTER III. The Confirming vvorke of religion further improven vvith respect to this dismal and amazing time vve are novv fallen in. SECTION I. To hold forth what may be both for light and confirmation upon this great distresse the Churches of Christ are now under. Pag. 81, 82 SECTION II. How great a talent we stand accountable for in this day of such imme∣diate and extraordinare appearences of the Lord for confirming the same publick cause of the Reformed Church since the Reformation, which we are now called to adhere to. Pag. 84 SECTION III. What manner of time is the present lot of the Church now fallen in, and what judgment we ought to have hereof from the Scripture, for our furthest confirming in such a day. Pag. 93 SECTION IV. Some special service that we are now called to, and accountable for, in behalf of the truth, and for sanctifying the Lord in the eyes of others, who are under so great a talent of light and confirmation in the same. Pag. 99 FINIS.
AN IDEA, Of the confirm'd state of a Christian in dismall and shaking times. THo the same measure of Christians establishment in the truth be not alike to all, but must have re∣spect to the different trialls, ta∣lent, & improvements of such for this end; yet may it be cause of astonishment, how rare any study of this kinde is now to be sound, when its not only one of the highest concerns of Christianity, but in a more then or∣dinary way called for, as the work of this day; yea, that this is a part of religion, which seemes lest improven of any, for the more gene∣rall state of professours within the Church; un∣der some conviction hereof, was this essay de∣signed, where with humble confidence (I may say) the truth hath been sought with that seri∣ous enquiry into the nature of these things held forth, as I judged needfull for such, who have so great ane interest & venture not only through time, but for all eternity, to support upon the alone certainty hereof, & er these dayes of triall, which we now see, passe over this genera∣tion, it may be found this was not unseasona∣ble, or without cause directed to such a time,
if the Lord graciously blesse the same; nor will it (I hope) be found incongruous & without use to present yet further, in such a method, & way of example, some cleare prospect of a confirmed state in religion, & what these ought to be, who with light & assurance of minde would follow the Lord fully, in such a day, as is here offered in a 7 fold Character, under which a truly confirmed Christian in the truth of his profession may be stated. CHARACTER. I. That he is one who hath ane other sence, & impression of this great study for attaining to a confirmed state in religion, & is on higher grounds pressed to follow the same, then what most of the visible Church seemes to appre∣hend; & should be thus considred. 1. As one to whom the glory of the Christi∣an profession is in the highest degree deare, & to have the world see, that such as embrace the same & does most fully adventure on the testimony of God in his word, are these also who walks on the highest principles of true, & enlightned reason; yea, who takes deeply to heart that obligation which is on all, who desires to advance the repute, & honor of the truth, to be in such tearmes therewith upon its own evidence, as they may know how to serve a rationall conviction both on Atheists, & insidels, if called thereunto. 2. Who sees also, how such is the state of
fallen man, as stands in need of all the contri∣butions that can be, not only to strengthen the Christians faith, and beare out against the strong assaults of infidelity, but to gain also more cre∣dit and veneration to the truth with these who are not easily delt with, but by such meanes, as beares some congruity to their naturall light, and reason; for which end the Lord hath af∣foorded these ministeriall helpes, to render the misbeleefe of the world, or any pretense of he∣sitation about his truth more fully inexcusable. 3. He thus sees, how the most important, and fundamentall truths of Christianity, needs the greatest confirmation of his faith, & for these who enter in so high & discriminating a profes∣sion from the residue of the world, to know in what manner they embrace the same: yea that the naturall order of things does absolutly re∣quire to have the foundation sure laid, on which so great a superstructure must rest, so as he judgeth it a work by its selfe, and to need some peculiar retiring his soul in the most serious re∣cesse, and composure thereof, to attain a stedfastnes of his own in the truth, and to know the strong and firm convoyances of that greatest mystery of the gospell, in such a manner, as needes no paund of a miracle to confirm the same. But he knowes here that no sharpness of mens naturall understanding about the truth can ever attain a true rest, and settlement of minde
therein, without a humble, and serious spirit stooping doune before the wisedome of God, and to enter as little Children into his Schoole; yea that by humble practice, and obedi∣ence of the gospell there is ane undoubted com∣ming up to the greatest assurance and clearest de∣monstrations of the same, as Joh. 7: 17. 4. He knowes that as nothing tends more to shake mens spirits, and stagger them about the truth, then a light and transient view hereof, so does the greatest establishment, follow on the nearest approach by a deep and serious enqui∣ry about the same, and thus clearely sees that if such who look but at a distance on the way of religion, did but once come that length of triall, as to have their spirits separat, by a more serious reflection thereon, the first view they should have, could not but be matter of wonder, and amazement, to think what can determine and support in so marvellous a way as the life and practice of Christianity, which is so visibly above nature, and wherein they must do violence to the same, where they must part with the multitude, and oppose themselves to the strongest tyde of exemple, and must endure also in hope, and believe for things not seen, which were never the object of humane sence, to any in this earth, and are oft called to part with the most desireable things of sence, upon the alone credit of their faith, yea, where
they must enter in that profession, on no other tearmes, then to be martyrs for the same, and seall it with their blood; so that he must needs see a Christian according to the rule and in∣stitution of the gospell, to be the greatest riddle, and wonder of any sight within time; but when such come more closse and neare upon this triall, and have once understood the nature and great∣nesse of that security which these have to adven∣ture on, yea what is the glory of their hope, and the sure spring of their supplyes, for their work and trialls within time, then will this second wonder unspeakably exceed the first; how its possible that such are not of a more raised, and enlarged spirit, in the service of the Gos∣pell, in that short season they have here for it on the earth, and how their triall should not be more to beare the joy of so great a pro∣spect, and expectation, then any present griefes and troubles, yea how mens life who in∣deed makes earnest of the Christian profession, is not in some more continued transport of ra∣vishment and wondering, to know that they are surely made for an eternall state in another world, and are among these on whom the glorious God hath choised to have the exceeding riches of his grace shewed forth in these regions of blessedness above for ever. 5. He hath another sight and prospect of the Christian Creed, then most who give ane easy
assent thereunto; and hath his reason so dazeled with the revelation of the gospell and of the won∣ders thereof as hath put him to such ane exer∣cise as that 2 Chr. 6: 8. How to credit his eyes therewith, the more deep reflexion he hath upon the same, but will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth; and to judge their case, who after some fluctuating suspence, are admitt to see the truth of Christianity, with that certainty of its evidence, as the greatness of such a discovery does require, may have some resemblance to that transport which the Angells had at the first being of the creation, where the morning starres sung together, and the Sonnes of God shouted for joy, to see themselves thus, who were brought out of pure nothing, entered in∣to that inestable light of seeing God, and of their own blessedness in him, in so high a de∣gree; so that he accounts it one of the highest attainements of religion, for a Christian indeed to believe the articles of his own faith, and have his soul thus as fully persuaded, as of his be∣ing, that such a time assuredly was, & now many ages since past, when the glorious Redee∣mer of the Church, the second person of the God head came doune from heaven and was revealed in our nature, that on him as surety t divine justice in the roome of the Elect Church, was the whole guilt, and sin thereof transferred, and in this marvellous way did the holy God take
satisfaction to himselfe, by himselfe; that thus our nature is exalted, by the incarnation of Christ above the nature of Angels; that the time is neare when the meanest afflicted Christian, shall draw in no other aire, then the breathings of the higher Paradise above, and now hath ane eternity of joy, and blessednesse before him; that within a very little time he shall know this welcome of our blest Redeemer to his followers here on the earth, come ye blessed of my father inherite the Kingdome, &c. when he shall take off the crosse, and put on the crown, when it shall be then no more a matter of faith, but of sence to be partakers of that inheritance with the saints in light, and know these proper mansi∣ons in that state of glory and peculiar assignement thereunto which all the Redeemed shall then have, and be adjoyned in the same classe with the Elect Angels to be as pure flames of love, and joy, yea know what its to walk in these streetes of the new Jerusalem which are as gold transparent as Christall, and what that mee∣ting will be of his soul perfected, and in a tri∣umphant state with his glorifyed body, raised in∣corruptible and never to part any more; and to have his proper share of that blessed and great∣est solemnity, that shall be celebrated in heaven of the marriage supper of the lamb, with the whole triumphant Church, and heare that ho∣nourable account which the great judge will then
make of these trials of his faith, and sharp con∣flicts which he had gone through within time, with that solemn testimony of approbation which will be given thereof, and since its sure these great things must be a part of the Christian faith, can it be strange, that such, as would in that manner converse therewith (tho they be not yet seen) as no lesse undoubted realities then any present objects of sense, be not easily satis∣fyed with a low degree of evidence and confir∣mation of their judgement, but that their joy who are sure here should be perfected so far as this state of mortality can beare, and thus find it ea∣sy to rejoyce, and glory in tribulation, and to weep now for a season, who are to rejoyce for ever, yea to say in the words of Mephibosheth, let them take it all, & enjoy the same, since he who is their life and exceeding joy, lives and reignes, who is infinitly better to them then all these things. 6. He accounts the strengthning of his faith, to be such a concern, not only as it is his soules venture for all eternity, but as the highest way of gloryfying God here, that what ever tends to a more full confirmation of the same, he rec∣kons also one of the greatest additions to his joy and comfort within time; and that these ma∣nyfold assistances with such reduplication thereof which the Lord hath himselfe given for this end, are such as no fragments of such a talent should
be lost; & tho he knowes the greatest demon∣strations of our faith can add nothing to the certainty of divine truth in it selfe; yet are they thus given in regard of the strong trials of a Christians life, and of what their weaknesse stand in need of for support. 7. Its in this study, he sees and takes to heart, how not only the condition of man in the earth, but the profession of Christ also calls for such a reckoning, that he may have trialls in that manner dispensed, when no visible refuge will be found in the least to stand by, but all hu∣mane comfort and assistance wholly to succumb; as needes his laying in such ballast now in its season, and to be founded thereon with that assurance of judgment, as is needfull for that day, when he must either get through in the alone way of beleeving, against sence, or perish, and tho no such attainments of light can beare out then without present and immediat influen∣ces from above, and that it is sure according to the day, so must the Christian strength be, yet does he see also, the want of ane established judge∣ment, and of some proper stock laid up of aides, and assistances this way forgainst a sharpe storm, is like to make sad work among the pro∣fessours of this age, er the trialls of such a time have done their work. 8. He sees also how the greatest contest, which is this day in the world, is betwixt God, and
man, upon the truth and assurance of his word; and that the highest triall, and probation of a Christian, in which all the trialls of their life does still meet, may be resolved here, if they receive the testimony of God in his word as an absolute security to rely on, yea or not, and tho this is the peculiar glory of the only true God, to have ane absolute dependance of his whole work on himselfe, and to be the alone center of his peoples rest, yet may nothing be more evident, then that with most he bea∣res that name, of being their trust, when the whole burden and weight thereof lyes alone upon visible grounds, so that those bonds, and pro∣mises which he hath himselfe given unto men does beate no more credit, then they have some externall surety in the earth, which they still looke after, to stand as it were good and responsible for the same, which is the highest indig∣nity can be offered to the glorious Majesty of God. 9. He does much take to heart this present period of time, wherein the fluctuating suspence and halting of so many under a visible professi∣on of the truth is now one of the most dismall signes hereof; & that it seemes to be the time, wherein the Lord will in ane unusuall way take this generation off any implicit profession of the same; and when that great roll of visible profes∣sours in all the reformed Churches may be er long in that manner called, as each must answer
to his own name, and put to stand to the proofe before the world, when no temporall interest, but internall motives and certainty of the truth upon its own evidence, must beare out; yea that the most establisht may er long finde it not easy to be keept from staggering, and a few dayes come in the Churches way, more remarkable for triall then hath been in some ages before. CHARACT. II. A truely confirmed Christian, may be thus also stated as one who is in the first place most deeply taken up about that rare plot of mans redemption, and to see these great and wonderfull truths there, not singly, and apart, but in that harmony, order and consent of all the parts thereof, as they are linkt together in this marvellous frame, so as to make the whole one entire peece, and where no part does in the least interfere with an other, which he finds to be one of the most principall demonstrations of this great mystery of the Gospell, that the Lord hath given for confirming his peoples faith; and thus in another manner then formerly can now entertain his soul herewith, and have his joy unspeakably hightned, 1 to see at once the ruined state of fallen man, and what a floodgate of all evill is let loose on that race, not only mo∣rally in sin, but what is penall in the woe and miseryes thereof; yea such a state, where all hope of releefe is for ever cut off in the way of nature or by any created help; and where
the execution of a righteous sentence on such for the voluntare violation of a law, just, holy and equall, can be no impeachment in the least of the righteousness of God; But then therewith he does see such a releefe brought to light as can not only answer the whole extent of this ruin, but the glory of God more eminently displayed ther∣in, then if the law had been obeyed, or absolu∣tely execute in its penalty on the whole race of man, yea which makes this more wonderfull to see a higher dispensation of grace unto man now under the gospell then was to Adam in his primitive state; whereby innumerable Christians are made to en∣dure and prevail over stronger assaults then broke him even in his integrity, which is a conjuncti∣on so marvellous that the great and infinit God only could finde out and effectuat. 2. He does now see how cleare a consistence and har∣mony is here, that he who had no sin by in∣hesion, but holy, harmles, and undefiled, should be under the greatest weight of sin by imputation and by the exactest rule of divine justice made liable to answer both the whole duty, and full penalty of the Law, having as surety betwixt the creditor & debter, put himselfe in his peoples roome to answer the full demands thereof both for debt, and duty. 3. It is here he does see that blest consent and harmony betwixt the spot∣les justice of God, and his marvellous grace, so as his love is to the highest glorifyed, in that mar∣vellous
way, as secures the full and compleat satisfaction of his Law, and all the rights of ju∣stice inviolable. 4. Whilst he is thus dazled with the greatnes of such a light, and put to enquire what such a mystery can mean, he is then fur∣der led on to see that rare plot and contrivance of the covenant of reconciliation between God and man, here within time to be the very duplicat, and counterpart of that eternall transaction and sti∣pulation between the father and the son; and thus sees what ever God hath declared and promised in the one to his Church, was first promised and secured to our blessed head in the covenant of Redemp∣tion; wherein as with a reverend and aw∣full distance, so with the greatest evidence of light he is made to see here these reciprocall obli∣gations betwixt them, and mutuall trust for ma∣king good the whole tearmes thereof in the ap∣poynted time. 5. He does also clearly see that rare order & harmony of time in these signall periods of the revelation of this great mystery of Christ which from its more dark discovery and dawning did still more gloriously open its selfe to the Church by a graduall light and unvailing of the same, as the Sun in its course unto the perfect day; yea hath his faith thus unspeakeably confirmed to see herewith the gospell Church being still the same, whither of Jewes or Gentil's, and how that series and con∣sent hath yet never been broken off since the be∣ginning of one Church separat from the residue
of mankinde set apart as a peculiar people for the Lord, where none ever had right and priviledge to be members of the same, but by faith in the Messias, and profession of their obedience to his Lawes. 6. It is in this union and harmony he sees the whole branches and parts of gospell obedience most exactly meet, and terminat, to advance both the greatest excellency and blessedness of man, and assimulat him to the blessed image of God, yea how all the rules and precepts there does so entir∣ly conspire for this end as may constrain the world to see, and admire the glorious nature, and perfections of him, whose lawes these are, wherein he does so brightly shine forth. 7. Nor can he looke seriously herein and not see that sweet concord as a part of this harmony, which is betwixt the promissory, and mandatory part of the gospell, so as the Christians comfort is most fully establi∣shed and no duty abolished; but the very path rod to the must full enjoyments of the promise and proper way to attain rest and tranquillity of spirit must be ever here by taking on the yoke of Christ. 8. Yea to confirm this entire union and harmo∣ny more fully he now sees that exact and mar∣vellous correspondence which is betwixt that first fundamentall promise of the Messias, and the event; betwixt the whole ancient figures and types of the leviticall service and the revelation of Christ himselfe, in which all these did meet as their proper center, and now have their full end and
accomplishment. 9. His confirmation thus grows to see that wonderful consent of Christianity, and native result hereof to put fallen man in a due postour towards God, towards his neighbour, and himselfe, so as he may know by faith and adorati∣on how to enjoy God, and his brother by love, and thus by patience, meeknes and humility to possesse his own soul, and enjoy himselfe. 10. Yea it is in this rare and wonderfull frame he is made to see (and no sight can be like this) that exact corres∣pondence which is betwixt the foundation and su∣perstructure, how the whole tract of the gospell is but one entire and compleat mean to glorify God, and restore fallen man to the highest blessednes, how that excellent stream of sanctification does flow from that fountain head of ane eternall decree herein, which does still run under the ground, until it break up at last in the heart of each Christian, by the effe∣ctuall call of the gospell; and thus runs doune through time untill it lose its selfe in that unconceiveable deep of perfection and glory. Thus is it that each Christian might attain some higher degrees of con∣firmation in his faith, then most seemes either to know or looke after if he understood more how to improve this rare comparing work of Religion by setting the great truths and principles thereof in their order & dependance so as each may be seen, in its necessare coherence with other and under its proper aspect. But the more deep reflexion and enquiry he
hath herein, he is the more made to wonder and finds this one of the great assaults to his faith, that the revelation of the Christ, and redemption by his blood should have no greater effects this day amongst men, and that the Christian world is not in some other manner awaked with the glory of this light, and prest after a larger spreading and diffusion of this highest and universall good to poore man∣kinde; yea the more he considers this it doth highten his amazement to think how mens de∣signs in the matter of duty and service for the Kingdome of Christ, can be so low within time, whose designs and hopes in the close therof are so high in the matter of enjoyment; or take so litle to heart, that the whole day of the dispensation of the Gospell, amidst the most dismal trials may fall in therewith, is a continued time wherein we are called to keep the feast, and from one age to an∣other celebrate the same, as a perpetuall Jubily of joy and exultation, since Christ our passover was sacrificed for us; but oh how rare a thing seems this to be, and how litle of that flame and ferven∣cy of love to our blessed Redeemer is now kindled on his altar, that might be expected on such won∣derfull incitments therto, and which once was in the Church. CHARACT. III. Though a confirmed Christi∣an must be specially stated as such, who knowes the internall part of religion, and sealing work of the Holy Ghost on his own soul, which is not by words,
but things of the highest truth, substance, and rea∣lity; yet is he herein not alone satisfyed to know this by spirituall sence, untill he can see the same with the furthest evidence of light also to his mind; and have no lesse a clear and judicious tryal of this great mysterie of experimentall religion, for con∣firmation of his faith, then to be sensibly affected with the felt power therof. And in the first place why this is necessarly requisite and called for, with respect to the confirmed state of a Christian, may be thus considered, on some few grounds. 1. That the things of religion, which must be experienced within time, are such sublime, and wonderfull mysteries, as may be just matter of astonishment, and make men a wonder to themselves, to think that these present pledges of so great a hope which is to come, are no shaddows, no appearences of things, but most sure and undoubted realities; and that such are this day in the earth who knowes so near a con∣verse with an invisible God, and the supernaturall truths of his word, with the sensible fealing of that inestimable love of Christ, by this demonstration of experience; yea who in such dismall times does assuredly know what the joy of his presence, and an immediate fellowshipe with their blessed head is, upon the greatest certainty of tryall; since these are so high, and marvelous things, which exceed all naturall understanding, as the felt sweet∣nesse of their enjoyment should not more deeply
take men up, then to see the truth, and surenesse of these principles, wheron they found herein. 2. Because this testimony of the truth of ex∣perimentall religion, should be understood not only as its of highest use for Christians personall comfort and establishment, but with respect to the publick interest of the Church, as a special trust reposed theron, to have the credit of this greatest testimony and seal, demonstrably cleared, with the furthest strength of harmonious, and ar∣gumentive reason, for such who look but at a distance yet theron, as may not only awake them to some deeper sense and impression here∣of, but constrain them to see, how no natu∣rall science hath more clear, and firm demon∣strations, then the experimentall part of Christiani∣ty, (which is the very life and soul thereof,) may have to mens reason, and judgement, tho they never knew it within themselves; yea for this end should such, as have experienced the truth, and vertue of the Gospell, reckon themselves as witnesses who are judicially sisted to put their seal therunto; & is now more called for in an age, when no particulare truth seems more strongly impugn∣ed, then the reality of experimental godlinesse is, and become as a publick theam of derision, tho men must either quite the whole revelation of the Scripture, or see this to be as essentiall to the constitution of a Christian, as vitall principles are to a living man.
3. Yea its sure herein, that such as take re∣ligion to heart, must needs look to be put to the greatest tryal of its certainty, and should most nearly concern them to know if they can abide as firmly by their spirituall sense as by that which is naturall, and doe thus know as surely in them∣selves the operations and motions of a spirituall life, as that they have being by nature; and that here is no doubtfull or abstract notions, but who have had such deep tryall and reflexion on the same as these who dare venture their eternal state on the known certainty theirof, as they could thence reason their soul to a stedfast adherence to the truth, if they were called to sacrifice their lives therto, from what rare experiments, and proofs, they have oft had of the same in their own tryall. 4. It doth more specially call for a demon∣strative clearing of the credit of this testimony, as one of the services of religion, to promote the Kingdom of Christ amonghst men, which seems least improven of any with respect to the general state of such who are within the Church, who are so great strangers to the same; yea should be judged one of the great wants of this day, when Atheism is now at so astonishing a hight, that it is not more studied to have the experimentall part of religion, (which in it self lyes deep and hid, and is a secret betwixt God and the Christians soul,) with such clearnesse, and by that manner of evidence demonstrat to
the world, as might tend to beget some more awfull sense and conviction hereof, (when such clear and unanswerable grounds might be impro∣ved for this end) on these who look thereon as some strang and dark riddle, so as they could no more deny or withstand the evidences hereof, then that they have a living soul which yet they ne∣ver saw, or could ever be the object of human sense. And how sad a prospect should this give of the greatest part of the Christian world, who not only know nothing of the true glory, and spi∣rituall powers of Christianity, but have not the very notion, or any sense of the reality of such a thing. But in the 2d place it is thus that each Chri∣stian, for being solidly confirmed in the way of re∣ligion, may as clearly see, as he does sensibly feal, the truth of his own experience, and have his faith as fully established by this inward and great demonstration of the things of God, as his affections are quickned, upon such strong and de∣monstrative grounds of the certainty hereof, as these are. 1. By considering, his present and former state, that not in a dream, but in the most deep and serious composure of spirit, he knows how once he was blind and wholly estranged from this mysterie of Christian experience, which now he does see; and once had the same sentiment here∣of with such who doe most deeply reflect on the same, but no sooner did the truth, and
power of religion sease on his soul, then he found himself entered into a new world to know the dawnings of this marvelous light, and what be∣longs to these injoyments, and vital acts of Chris∣tianity, that hath not the least dependence on any naturall cause. 2. By considering that marvelous superstructure of experimentall religion, which from the inward observation of Christians in all ages, is such as the world could not almost contain the books, that might be write hereof, which yet is so intirely found∣ed on one and the same foundation, and does in all the lines of this great circumference, still meet in the same center; yea thus how intire and har∣monious a thing religion in all the parts therof is within upon the soul, as well as without, so as every step in this way of the experience of the saints is no groping in the dark, but what is by line and rule, with as sure and demonstrable a connexion with the externall testimony of the word, as there is in nature betwixt the cause and the effect; which affords a more wonder∣full assistance to his faith, then the greatest ex∣ternall miracles could ever doe; and tho the spirit of God does sometimes in an extraordinare man∣ner reveal himself to men (as acts of his Sove∣raign prerogative which make no rule) yet with the established constitutions of his word does the continued experience of the saints most harmo∣ciously ever correspond.
3. By considering thus also the being, & re∣ality of grace, not in its effects only but in its proper cause and original, & how the truth of holinesse in the life of a Christian is so express a transcript of the Gospell, in its external reve∣lation, that the impresse doth not more clearly answer the seal on the wax then it doth beget the same forme and image of it self in such as believe; yea also that conformity it bears to the ever blessed Architype, as well as to the revealed ru∣le, and how bright a discovery is thus of so glorious a being, and nature, to which its con∣formed, who is the alone patern, and exemple of all truth and holinesse; which is so great a discovery, as he is made to wonder, how men in this age are so much awakened to find out the true Phaenomena of nature, (though in its own room a most choise study, and specialy desirable,) and will be as in a transport, upon some rare natural experiment, as made one in that manner cry out ; whilst here is another kind of demonstration, and of more transcendent interest then all these could ever amount to, on which the eyes of most are this day shutt. 4. By considering that uncheangable congruity, which is betwixt the nature of these things, injoy∣ned in the whole institutions of the Gospell, and mens being made happy therby, now in their pre∣sent state, and how great a temporal revenew
of the fruits of religion, as inward confidence, peace, and serenity of mind, doth as natively fol∣low the life and practice herof, as the fruit of a tree answers to its kind, and is ever found the alone true relief of mankind, against all the griefs and bitternesse of time; yea that its no distance of place, but of mens spirit by impurity, and cor∣ruption that makes so sad a distance betwixt God, and man here in the earth. 5. He is thus further confirmed upon this great testimony of experimentall religion, by consi∣dering that its sure such as does bear this witnesse are known; 1. to be such who are of the most discerning and judicious in the things of reason, as any else. 2. Whose walke and practice use to have the greatest authority over mens conscience with whom they converse. 3. who are found most intensly taken up in the retired worke, and duties of religion, that can have no respect to the witnesse and observation of others. 4. Who seeks no implicit credit from any herein, but does ob∣test men to come and see, and prove the same in their their own experience, with an appeal to the most exact inquiry, and rationall tryall of all mankind, if here be any casuall thing, and if that testimony of the doctrinall, and experimentall part of religion be not still one and the same. 5. Who also out of the most remott places of the earth, and otherwise strangers amonghst themselves, does yet most harmoniously meet in the same wit∣nesse,
and are thus mutually disclosed to other, by a near and fealing intercourse of their souls, from such an onnesse in a spirituall state and these specifick properties of a spirituall, and new nature, with as discernible evidence as if one man should meet with ane other of the same kind, in such a place of the earth which were only inhabited with beasts. 6. By considering also, (with a deep and se∣rious reflection hereon,) that sure and known conjunction, which is betwixt the most rare ex∣periences of a Christians life, and the most se∣arching tryalls thereof, with that uniform con∣sent, that hath in all ages of the Church been, in such marvelous things, as these. 1 what solemne tokens and testimonies of the love of God, and his acceptance, are found usually to meet his people in the entry of some great tryall, or service for him, even in some unusuall manner then, in the sence whereof, as it was with Eli∣jah, they have been made to goe many days af∣ter in a wildernesse state; yea how this does not respect persons only, but Churches, that the word still useth to goe before with some remarkable confirming worke to secure the heart, before the crosse and some special tryal of persecution comes 2. That as each day hath its proper burden, and worke, so hath it its proper allowance provided for the same, which should be no lesse sought after by a Christian, then his dayly bread, and
when the pressure of such a day grows to some more singulare hight, so also should the ex∣pense hereof be in faith sought for & expected. 3. How the choisest mercies are reserved to the saddest times of a Christians lot, and most usually crosse to their own choise, and thus hath had the greatest struglings with these methods of providence, which hath in the issue tended most to their upmaking. 4. Yea how the returnes of a long deferred hope after much humble on-waiting, have been to such as a Pisgah, whence they have not only had a clear and comforting prospect of their bypast tryals, but for being more fully confirmed of the time to come; and can bear now that testimony, that the Lord hath clear∣ed all bygones to them, and hath taken the vail off his worke, which for long had been as a dark and strang riddle. 7. This likeways gives a most clear, and con∣firming prospect of that great seal of experience, when he can now see, both in his own case and of others, what the issue of believing in a sin∣gular exigence and tryal and upon some special act of trust and adventure herein does at last come to; which the more deeply its considered he finds one of the most peculiare assistances to his faith, and one of the greatest attainments of ex∣perimentall religion within time, when he can thus see the same way of believing, (in some strong and extraordinare assaults, which he hath had to
crush and break him herein,) which hath car∣ried so many thorow in their saddest tryals, bring him also in his turn, to be an instance in the same kind, to bear an honourable testimony to this sure, and excellent way of believing before the world, and that none fear, after him, to hold by the promise of God and venture on that security, tho it then seem against hope, whose dispensations, did yet never, never give his word the lye. CHARACT. IV. Such is a truely con∣firmed Christian, who in a dismall time, is not staggered in his faith from the present signs and ap∣pearences therof, but hath his soul ballast with such solid grounds of confirmation against the same, as these providences, wherat others doe most stum∣ble, tends to his further strenthning in the way of the Lord, when he does now clealy see; 1. How tribulation and the crosse makes one of the most illustrious and beutifull parts of the whole frame of Providence about the Church, and in the lot of each Christian, so as there can be no possible stumbling to any for want of light here, that sore tryalls, and distresse should most remarkably follow these in their journey, who have an eternall blessednesse before them in the clofe hereof, when so great a part of the Scrip∣ture is directed not only for comfort but for a clear conduct of the Christians faith, through all the intrcacies and labyrinths of such a dispensati∣on, and thus sees how highly congruous it is
to the infinit wisdom of God, that so strait and narrow a way, in such a state of tryall as is here, should goe before the state of everlasting in∣joyment; that there should be such a stage and theatre also, whereon the passive graces of the spirit, may not only be exercised, but display∣ed in their true lustre and glory before Angels and men; yea that thus the Redeemed of the Lord be first trained in so sharp a warfare, as may not only put a due value and respect on the great∣ness of that triumph and reward which is to come, but be matter of ineffable joy and exultation, that ever they were admitt thus to evidence their love and adherence to their blessed head and his truth here on the earth, and accounted worthy to be put on some hotter service, and to peculiare tryals and conflicts this way beyond others, for some example and incouragement to the Church in their day; and here also he can now see how the greatest injoyments of comfort are more owe∣ing to the most sharp and afflicting tryals of their life, then to the greatest externall calme; and that to endure patiently and suffer for the name Christ is such a priviledge as the elect Angels have not been admitt to, yea that the Lords chastning worke, and sorest smitting of his own, is an act also of saving; so that thus the more deeply he searcheth here, the more does he see, admire, and consent to that glorious piece of the administra∣tion of providence about the Church, and finds
it to be one of the greatest confirmations of his faith within time. 2. He does now clearly see how the truth and faithfulnesse of God is commensurate to his whole worke of Providence & that all the lines hereof, as they doe lead from his revealed councell in the Scripture, which is the adequat signe of his eternall councell and decrees, so doe they returne thither again, to make this great demostration clear; that if a full History were write of this world, and what hath been conspicuous thorow the whole series of times past in all these conjunctions of inseri∣our causes, whether necessare, free, or contin∣gent, and of such events that seem most casu∣al, it should be nothing else but an exact transcript and history of the Bible, to bear this witnesse, quod mundus nihil aliud est quam Deus explicatus secundum scripturam; but though a full discovery hereof be not attainable within time, yet is it a sad and deplorable want, that the great acts of the Lord, in each age of the Church are not more searched and sought out of all them that take pleasure therin, that they may be seen, observed, and admired by that part of the crea∣tion, Angels and Men, who are only in a capaci∣ty to know the same; which is a service for the Lord wherin his praise, and declavative glo∣ry is so highly conceirned, as a Christian should account the meanest roome herein one of the most desirable attainments within time; yea it
seems just matter of regret also that this comes not under a more publick care and nottice of particulare Churches and of the Christian Magistra∣te, where religion hath any true regard, to have such solemne providences as occurre in that time, and place, which may be called experi∣menta lucifera to the Church, and of a further reach and extent then any private use, both se∣arch'd after and recorded as becomes so high a service to the Christian cause and one of the hig∣hest conceirns of the posteritie, to have such not only possessed of a pure religion, but of that seal also; which the Lord hath in the great acts of providence appended therto, and thus to have that increase, which each successive age brings therwith to the publick stock of the Church, looked after, as a piece of the greatest trust re∣posed theron, so that the Children rise not up and say, we have not heard nor have our fathers faithfully transmitt to us the wonderous works which the Lord hath wrought in their time. 3. He is thus also tought to see the  and demonstrative causes of the most strang judgments on the Church, to be as clear in the Scripture as they are in the event, and though the holy God in the day of his patience, and long∣suffering is not alike quick in the execution of the sentences of his word, yet does he ever es∣tablish the authority of his Laws by the works of his providence in the most opportune season;
and as judgment deferred, is no acquittance, so does it more threaten its being the greater, when it comes, then a quick and present dis∣patch; yea though this tempest which now blowes on the Chruches of Christ, come to a gre∣ater hight, and the darknesse be such, as no Moon or Starres may for many dayes yet appear of any visible signs of hope, yet is his soul thus at rest whilst he can see the credit of the truth clea∣red, on which he hath more in dependence then any adventure within time, and does rejoyce, whatever miscarrying may be of inferiour ends, that this great and ultimate end of the works of God is secured herein, and the glory of his truth does shine forth in the most strang and amazing acts of his providence, wherat many are ready to stagger, when they doe not wisely consider the same. 4. He sees now likewise, so high a value which the Lord puts on the tryall of his peoples faith, and that the great dispensation wherby he deales with men is by trust and on the credit of his word, as it addes further to his confirmation, to see all human and visible refuges oft taken out of his Churches sight, yea his greatest works in the earth make the greatest delay er they be brought forth, & his Churches case put so far beyond help before a cure, as the first quick∣ning of her crushed and allmost dead hope, must be at the mouth of the grave; and he is thus here∣in
more singularly strenthned, that when the Lord speaks the same in the way of providence, which he hath spoke in his word, not by might nor by power, that he doth with unspeakable advantage supply and fill the roome therof by the next word, but by my spirit saith the Lord, which in this day should with a full assurance of faith be both sought and looked after. 5. It is in this rare study he attaines also the greatest confirmation to his faith that could pos∣sibly be desired within time, to see now when its so near the close therof and after all the re∣volutions of times past, how the truth and faithfullnesse of God, hath, as the sun in its strenth, still keept its way straight and fixt a∣midst all these dark clouds which have been to darken the same and is now gone its course un∣till it draws near to the full and perfect day; yea thus to see how signally this present age is sisted upon that same appeal and solemne testimony which as Josua gave, Josh. 23:14. that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning yow, all are come to passe to yow, and not on thing hath failed there∣of; and Solomon did bear also at the dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8: v. 56. Blessed be the Lord that hath given rest unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised, there hath not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant; so is this now that great testi∣mony of the latter dayes and the highest tribute of praise to the glory of God in his truth which can be
given by men, that this present generation stands accountable to make the same yea much greater appeal to the world, if they can in∣stance one promise or prediction of that sacred re∣cord of the Scripture which hath ever failed or fallen to the ground, but may be this day read in the event, & under these proper cir∣cumstances wherin it was to take place in its proper season, as evidently as it was fortold, and must still bear the same witnes, Psal, 18:30. that the way of the Lord is perfect, and his word tryed on all the adventures of faith, and tryals which to this moment of time have been made hereof, and of his being still a buckler to such as trust in him, and are called to transmitt this glorious testimony to the succeeding ages, that it may never cease to shine or want a publick witnesse therto before Angels and men, untill the whole mystery of God in his word be finished in that magnificent close which shall be therof at the second coming of the Lord. CHARACT. V. A confirmed Christian in this day should be thus also stated, as one who hath not only attained a solid rest and settlment of mind, upon the certainty of the Christian faith, but does know the pure genuine truth of Christi∣anity amidst such high oppositions betwixt the Romish and Reformed Church herein. And in the 1 place hath in this manner sisted himself upon such a tryal; I as one who knows
there is but one true and saving religion in the earth, to which God hath annexed the promise of eter∣nall life which can never be divided against it self. 2. Who knows that within a litle his re∣ligion will be tryed in the truth therof at the tri∣bunall of Christ, where each must give account of himself unto God. 3. As such who sees there can be no possible indifference in the exterior pro∣fession of either way, but that so high a contra∣riety of principles is in this opposition, that if the doctrine of Christ be on the one hand, it is sure Antichristianisme must be on the other hand. 4. Yea who hath in that abstract manner sought to state the case herein with his own soul as if he were come out of Paganism, to give a serious as∣sent to the divinity of the Scripture, and thus pres∣sed to joyn in with that profession of the Chri∣stian faith, which is most exactly conforme to the same, in the genuine and perspicuous sence therof. In the 2d place he hath sought to know, how he could imbrace the Popish creed and adventure his eternall state theron, or can extinguish his rea∣son, and conscience so far as to believe that the holy God would ever impose such a faith upon men, as this is; I where he must abandon these princi∣ples of naturall reason in the most necessare use therof, which God hath himself planted in mans soul, so as not to trust his own eyes but others in that great interest of his eternall state, and
with his own consent be shutt out from all pro∣per knowledge of the rule of his religion, yea account a blind and unlimited obedience to men, amongst the highest excellencies of saith. 2. Where he must at once believe the fullnesse, and perfec∣tion of the Scripture, and to be not only fitted for that great end of bringing mankind to God, but for such an universall use herein, as to make the simple wise, and that the poor may receive the Gospell; and yet believe also that it is a masse of dead, and unsensed characters, untill the Romish Cler∣gy put a just sense theron, tho its sense and mean∣ing is the very soul thereof, yea thus passe from the whole letter of the same, or any certainty of its truth, from intrinsick evidences and these marks and characters of its divinity, wherby the Chris∣tian cause could be maintain'd against Pagans. 3. Where he must believe also that these are the words of Christ Joh. 7:17. if any man doe my will he shall know my doctrine whither it be of God or not, and that men errs through not knowing the Scripture Math. 22. and yet believe therewith, that these sacred fountains of light should be shutt up, to keep men from going wrong, and that the sole right of un∣derstanding the same belongs to a few, but not to the multitude, who yet can pretend no ex∣traordinare assistance or revelation herein, nor will themselves come to these waters of Jealousie to be tryed. 4. Where he must needs believe that the Scriptures are the oracles of God committ
to the Church, to give answer in every darke case Rom. 3:2. the type and forme of sound do∣ctrine, Rom. 6.17. unto whose sentence in all matters both of faith and practise, we are ex∣pressly referred, Is. 8.20. and yet believe al∣so that it hath no authority or decisive voice, but what is precarious and dependant on the Romish Church, and thus consent to have the whole Christian faith visibly unhinged of that foundation of the Scripture, and subjected to a supreme, visi∣ble, and infallible judge here in the earth, with such a claime of dominion over the faith of the saints, as the Apostles of Christ durst never owne, but did fully disclaime 2 Cor. 1:24. 5. Where he must believe that Jesus Christ came for this end, to save lost man, and by one offering hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified Heb. 10:18. and yet joyn in the same faith herewith a hu∣man satisfaction for sin, so as men may both me∣rit, mediate, and supererogate above what is needfull for themselves, and be thus saved in the same way of life, which was by the covenant of works; ascribing that only to Christ to give sal∣vation to their merits, which yet their own in∣trinsick value, and condignity doth require as a debt. 6. He finds not how in the same creed he could possibly hold by one Mediator be∣twixt God and man, where a plurality for this end is admitt; and by the reality of Christs hu∣man nature, and his having a true and finit bo∣dy,
which is subjected to have a new created being, each time in the Consecrate Hostia; or believe the truth of his sufferings as now fully accomplished, and to be repeated no more, when it is in that dayly sacrifice of the Mes∣se still offered, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the liveing and the dead; so as on the most severe and im∣partial inquiry here, he cannot find how one holding by these principles should goe a further lenth then Morality, or claim another standing then by a covenant of works. 7. Nor knows he how to believe at once the truth of the Gospell, to be a doctrine of Holinesse, and infinite purity, and yet joyne in the same faith herewith such an immunity and indulgence for men to sin, as mo∣ney can stand for merit, and the rich have the most easy and large entrey to heaven and ac∣count it a priviledge to destroy themselves; yea where some externall severities and pennance to the flesh, like to the lanching and gashing of Baals Priests, are reckoned enough to supply the roome of Christian mortification. 8. Yea he finds it not posible to believe, that sin by the blood of Christ can only be expiate, and is his alone worke, who hath purged our sin himself, Heb. 1:3. or that there are but two ways that lead to a twofold state of men, a strait way which leads to a life, and a broad unto destruc∣tion, Math. 7:14. and yet believe that there is a Purgatory after this life, where men must
be tormented and suffer extream pains there, to expiate such venial sins, as their prayers and pen∣nances here could not doe; yea is here made to wonder how any that believes such a thing, can ever have true peace, or comfort in the world, but doe either take it as a fiction, or forget themselves when they are chearfull; where the fear of such a place, the uncertainty of release, and how long a term it may be er this purg∣ing worke be compleat, (when their own writers assigne no lesse time, then 10000 Years as need∣full to satisfy for some sins,) and least it prove a reall hell, must still be a present terrour; nor can he believe that such possibly doe credit them∣selves herein, who assume this power to change the condition of the dead, since were it real∣ly believed, that the keyes of such a prison were here in mens hand, and could, by the largest dotations to the Romish Church, get a safe out∣gate thence, it were not strang, to see the temporall state of Cristendome in a short time made o∣ver to these, and should Judge they were in a strang manner indead priviledged by the whole residue of men, who by such a power over the world to come can make so easy a purchase over this also which is pre∣sent. 9. He finds & is sure he could never get his rea∣son and conscience brought to such a faith, even tho he made a simulate profession herein, of that pretended supremacy of Peter as Bishop of Rome, on which the whole frame and structure of the pa∣pacy
leans, and the vertue of all the pardons and absolutions founded theron, on which so many have adventured into an other world except he would thus build on the sand only, but not on the rock. 10. He finds also how such an erection of the Gospell Church in her militant state here, as the Papacy in its complexe frame is, un∣ite in such an head, as the Pope, who as the sole vicegerent of Christ in the earth, is at once invested with a civill Monarchy, and universall impire over the Church, to impose, and judge in the highest transactions that relate to the eter∣nall state and immortall souls of men, is a thing that as to matter of right is as forreign to the Scripture and incompatible therwith, as Ma∣humitanisme can be, and as to matter of fact is a trust that no created being could ever exerce. 11. he sees & is sure that he must either lose sight both of the rule, and spirit of the Gospell, or have a just abhorrence at that way, where he should be in∣evitably involved in a virtual consent, and accession to all that cruelty and blood which for so many ages hath been shed therin, when its so clear that this was no exorbitance only of practice, but a native result of their tenets, and principles, and not only dispensed with, but counted an highly me∣ritorious service; yea when it is sure that under no secular government of the most tyrannicall state that ever was in the world, hath such arbitrary vio∣lence, and oppression been exerced, or so much in∣nocent
blood shed, as by this party. 12. And tho his judgment stood indetermined and in an equall ballance upon this great controversie, he could not exerce reason, and not see upon what hand such a decision is as was in Solomons time of the true mother of the child, and who does most ruthfully seek to interesse themselves in the im∣minent hazard of the Christian faith, and under least influence of any temporall motives does this day stand for the truth and substance of Chistia∣nity, and plead that it be not destroyed in envy and hatred to them; or on what side it is like∣ways that this manner of conquest is most follow∣ed to gain men to the profession of the truth by a prevailing evidence of their own light and jud∣gment herein, and to require their exactest per∣sonall tryall, and inquiry about the same. In the 3d place, tho he sees there can be no pretence of doctrinall wavering about the Re∣formed religion, and finds it not easy to com∣prehend how in one and the same age, wher∣in the truth hath so brightly shined, this way of Popery, should have prevalence, or gain ground any more by seduction from arguments to the rea∣son or conscience of any; yet since it is an hower of temptation, and of fainting, above all that hath been hitherto known, and mens eyes ar∣reasted with such a prospect of the time, as is like to stagger the faith of the most established, he is thus pressed, as one of the highest duties
of this day, to know and search out what may afford greatest assistance to his faith, from the dispensations of providence therin, and to know the evidence and strenth of such reslections as these are for this end. 1. That its sure, as the smallest things which the Lord does afford, to strenthen and support against such a storme, should be seriously impro∣ven, and taken to heart; so does it lay us in the way of that promise for having greater things given to our observation; yea that now is the time when such as have been most comforted by the word of promise, may be put to the forest tryal in their faith of any, to keep off stumbling at the worke of providence, and be thus tryed accor∣ding to the measure of these confirmations. 2. Tho the Churches declinings under greatest measures of light may be too visible, and that re∣ligion gains not by persecution as formerly, with such an amazing chang as is now in her external condition, yet sees it to be no strang thing, when most signal warnings have gone before of such a try∣al with too evident dispositions towards the same and discovery of its approach in all the causes therof; yea might be forseen by all, that the holy God would not still bear with an impure, and uninlivned profession of the pure and glori∣ous truth of Christianity, which hath now long been one of the most sad, and mortall signs in the publick state of religion; nor can it be found
that ever any Church did decline and fall from the purity of the truth and lose ground herein by ex∣ternall persecution, where a judicial departure of its life and power did not remarkably goe before; so as it is not of late this hath been too clear∣ly presaged, that som dark and unusual meas∣ure of tryall from Amichrist, and that ultima cla∣des of the Reformed Churches, was drawing near, which would be sore er it had done its worke. 3. He sees also, how this present hower is not more searching and dark, then it may be clear herewith, 1. that now after the issue of that op∣position, which was betwixt the Christian faith in the first entry of the Gospell and that dying Apostate Church of the Jewes, and next with the Pagan Impire, after that new erection of the Gospell Church among the Gentils, which is now over; so is the greatest tryall of the latter dayes fixed on the decision of that long depending contro∣versie betwixt Christ and Antichrist. 2. That ac∣cording to the Scripture we must believe that as after the manner of Egypt, that glorious triumph and delivery of the Church from Antichrist will be surlie carryed on, so the more near it comes to the last as∣sault, and when this falls in to have its proper roome in the frame and administration of providence, the greater extremitie, terrour and darknesse may be expected also, as hath not been in any such manner formerly, yea with that unite and formi∣dable conjunction of strenth and growing successe of
this adversary for a time, as the most established Christians may be in hazard to stagger. 3. That now is the day wherin the Lord will have men know what it is to have the Bible as the alone se∣curity of the Protestant religion, on which they must intirely rest no lesse then it is the sole rule and standard therof, which is a tryall worthy of all that expense of the pain, anguish, and wrestlings, that can now possibly attend the same. 4. Whilst the great standard of Antichrists King∣dome is visibly set up and brought to the open field, as its this day in the Church of France, and all human help taken out of sight; yet does he see here∣with, 1 how this now is concluded, as the most in∣fallible remedy to recover Popery, and that ar∣gument, to which they trust more then to Peters keyes to wit these sanguinary lawes by the sword, and rack, which they have again betaken themsel∣ves to, tho such an argument the Scripture ne∣ver knew, which sober heathens would abhorr, and gives up the credite of all religion to Atheism. 2. That there can be no more evidence of a desperate and sinking cause then is here, and how nothing else can support it but these weapons which are not against the Conscience, or by any ter∣rours of the 2d death, but of the first. 3. that this is such an argument, (if they have not in a strang manner forgot,) which hath within these 100 Years been so fully answered, and by such an immediate appearence of God in the King∣dome
of France, that according to these measu∣res of cruelty against the Protestants there, so was it returned in a deludge of their own blood, yea thus both the publick state of the Church and faith of the saints in the truth more deeply root∣ed; and tho we yet see not the end of these wond∣ers and the darke side only of the dispensations of such a day, yet doe we know this sore rod on the Church is but as the saw and axe in the car∣penters hand, who shall never undoe that glori∣ous worke which Christ hath done and is still fur∣ther perfecting on the ruins of Antichrists King∣dome. 5. Tho some unusuall deeps and methods of sub∣tilty be now on foot also against the truth, yet he cannot but see how nothing could more ef∣fectually tend to confirm the protestant cause and take the credite of popery off the conscience of these in their own profession who are considerate and in the least serious herein; when the world must thus see, 1 how easy its for such to take any measure and latitude in the doctrinals of their profession, when this can most serve the jun∣cture of such a time and highten or narrow the controversy betwixt them and the Reformed Church at their pleasure, so as to sacrifice the Church of Rome unto the Court of Rome, if no lesse can secure that end. 2. That the most horrid Turkish Slavery over mens bodies comes no such lenth, as that strang claime that these
now make of an absolute impire over mens con∣science by the sword, and to put them to such a tribute of their obedience, and they shall then be secure, if they but come the lenth to sin a∣gainst their light, and adventure on so small a thing as to goe to Hell and perish eternally, since its an externall and simulate profession of such a way they doe thus inforce from these, whom they see cannot in faith be perswaded hereof. 3. Yea it hath been too visible how much that master-plot, and ingine, hath in these times been working, to take men first off all sense of religion, and destroy them in the morals of Chri∣stianity, to make this conquest more easy, that such may have no inward defence and support a∣gainst the terrour of human violence, yea in this way, when they have sought how to divide Pro∣testants among themselves and betwixt Rulers and them, this seams the last and greatest ingine of all, how to divide betwixt them and their God, and act the same plot, which was laid betwixt Balack and Balaam, as knowing that its no naked shew or profession of the Reformed religion they nead fear, so much as that old protestant spirit in the power & life therof, before which their interest could ne∣ver stand, and dreads nothing so much as the reviving hereof, which as the hand-writing upon the wall did ever more threaten the fatall ruine of that Kingdome, then any human power or strenth.
6. Here also he finds just cause of astonish∣ment, how Kings or great men in the earth should give their power to support the Romish inte∣rest, that hath been so visibly destructive to theirs, when its not possible to deny how its first advance and progresse to that supreme hight, which it once attained, and the de∣clining of the civill impire, did by the same steps goe together, untill Magistracy was turned as unto a dead image and shaddow, except its being enlivened by their breath and authority, as it was during the whole hight of that Antichristian po∣wer; nor will it be denyed that in these late times the French Monarchy was never more near its dissolution in its right line, then by the Ca∣tholick league there; and would seem not easy to be forgot, how Henry the 3d, who had most sought to crush the Protestants there in pursuance of that league, was at last constrained to flee to such for help, or by whom he was killed; and that Heroick Prince Henry the 4. was first stobbed in the mouth and then in the heart; yea that the pu∣blick records of that nation cannot possibly deny how the house of Burbon owes its power and pre∣servation more to the Protestants, (without whom it had been fully extinct,) then Ahaswe∣rus did to Mordecai the Jew for what he found written in the Chronicles of Persia, when the decree was then past to destroy all the seed of the Jewes.
7. As in no times past was ever a greater expectation then is now, which way the scale will turn, and what will be the end of these wonders, when the nearest events of Providence are so darke and amazing; so does he find this, in some eztraordinare way called for, to be still, and see what God will doe for his Church, and with hum∣ble confidence look for some dispensation as hath not hitherto been in this extreme exigence, and tho he doe not appeare in that way and manner as in former times, that it shall be in a way more signally glorious, beyond what hath formerly been; yea does in faith thus judge, that then is the Churches day broke, and hath found the sure way of her strenth, and right lith of duty, when her hope and confidence is taken of all visible refuges and intirely setled on her invisible head, and his promise put to suite by prayer without fainting herein. It is sure the truth & faithfullnesse of God stands ingadged for Anti∣chris fall, as well as for salvation by Christ, and since he hath said this adversary shall be broke and brought down, it must surely be, tho the dust of the ground should rise for this end, and now is the faith of the saints called for be∣coming the greatnesse of such an assurance, on which are the eyes of men, of their own con∣science, of the elect Angels, yea of the glorious God, to see who does indeed credit him in this day, when there is no sensible support herein; and
tho it is now like to shake sore the departure of many from the faith who had some visible pro∣fession therof, yet may it be hoped for, that the turn of the next tyde shall bring in moe, with a solid and true increase to the Church, then these sad dayes doe now take off. CHARACT. VI. It is thus a confirmed Christian should be specially considered, as one who is not only at rest on the known certa∣inty of his saith, but is ready to render some account of the solid rationall grounds and demonstrations here∣of, unto all who ask after the same, and doth thus judge, 1 that these are the proper and appoint∣ed means which the Lord hath afforded for the greatest confirmation of mens faith within time, yea preferable to any externall miracles, which are more extraordinare and remott assistances ther∣to. 2. That these are given as so great an helper to his joy, and excitment of his affections to follow the Lord fully, as makes him wonder how the greatnesse of these things, which men are called to believe, can come near their thoughts, and yet not more taken up about this confir∣ming worke. 3. That the too visible neglect her∣of, both with respect to the youth and commu∣nity of professours in the Church, seems one of the sad, and fundamentall defects of this day. The reasons hereof, with some clear view of these means which might most answer such an end, are briefly offered, in this preceding worke.
CHARACT. VII. À truely confirmed Christian may in the last place be herein also consi∣dered, as such whose faith being oft tryed through all these stages of Christianity he hath been taken; hath some proper record of the most choise, and signall confirmations of his life, to improve the same not only for his own support in that last warfare of death, but for strenthning the faith of others; wherin he does thus judge, 1 that there could be no true support or relief from religion here in the earth, if it cannot bear out then, and that death is the great touchstone and tryall, when the true value and difference betwixt things of an eternall truth and substance, and the things of this world, will be best seen. 2. He reckons each real Christian, by his profession then sisted and accountable, even by some explicit perso∣nall testimony, to put to his seal that God is true, and bear the same witnesse with his last and dying breath to the truth of Christianity, which he gave in the whole course of his life; and of that joy, complacence and assurance of mind, which he hath found, and now hath in the way of truth, so as to presse the same on his dearest relations as their alone true interest. 3. He sees also, how honorable it is for the Lord, that such whose faith hath been oft tryed, (and when thus with joy and admiration he can look back on the most pressing and conspicuous conflicts of time,) should have it their last worke to pay
in some tribute of praise, unto him whose word & promise unto them did yet never fail. 4. He ac∣counts the more weighty tryalls he hath been car∣ryed thorow in his Christian warfare, doth both give more accesse to this service, and adds more to the value of such a testimony. 5. He judgeth this one special way and advantage, wherby one generation might declare the truth and faithfullnesse of God unto an other, in a family line and relation, to shew forth thus that the Lord is upright, that he is their rock, and with him is no unrighteousnesse; yea which should be matter of unspeakable joy, when now in his turn he can say that such hath the Lord been to him, what was Davids dying words 1 Kings. 1:14. Who hath delivered my soul out of all di∣stresse, how that in no trouble or exigence of his life he was ever left without a door of outgate; and thus also with Caleb Josh. 14:10. to give in some such wittnesse for God I am now near the close of time, and does testify, that the word of his truth, and promise he hath surely accompli∣shed, which hath brought me safe and honourably through, when such as did dicredit the same by misbelief, and sought after another refuge, found all their confidences fail. 6. And knowing like∣ways how great a suprizall death may be, and that such as have shined in their day, may yet fet under a cloud and goe silent off the stage, he jud∣geth it the more needfull to have such a piece of his dying worke prepared, as one of the chois∣est
legacies he can bequath to his surviving friends, in a season when it hath usually the greatest ad∣vantage of weight and acceptance: it being still qualified with Christian prudence, and humble so∣briety, so as all may see its whole intent is to commend to mens conscience the way of truth and godlinesse and not themselves, and thus only direct, for the proper use, and improvement of their nearest relations. I know it may be strang to some, what is spoke upon this head; but as its sure the present day hath its duty, and each time of our life hath some proper worke, so I humbly judge, that this seems to fall in as the last service of a dying Christian to his generation, to deliver of his hand the truth which he had re∣ceived and hath oft proven, with his confirmato∣ry seal and testimony therto, and now in some more then ordinare way called for in this hower of great darknesse, when if that security of the absolute promises stood not good to the Church, we might fear religion might quickly wear out, and truth perish from the earth; and as so so∣lemn and weighty a thing should be mannaged with much humble prudence, so it may be judg∣ed that no serious and observing Christian but hath some peculiare ingadgments under which they find themselves sisted even beyond others, yea some such singulare confirmations in the journall of their life, that should be not easy to hide under the ground, where the strenthning of others here∣by
is conceirned, and that such should not then leave the crosse of Jesus Christ at a losse, or part therwith without their testimony, which hath left them at so great an advantage. And though this is not to offer particulare rules in such a duty, but that Christian wisdome must direct here∣in, as the present case is circumstantiate, yet might it be hoped, were this more taken to heart, it should be a singulare mean, to put a more deep impression of mens dying worke on their own spirit, even whilst they are in health, to excite their surviving friends, and to keep re∣ligion thus alive in a family state, and relation, and gain a more venerable respect to the same on mens conscience, yea to fix also stronger ingadg∣ments on the succeeding offspring. Thus is presented here a short Idea of the solid and judicious worke of Christian confirmation in the truth, under these forgoing Characters, to shew how rare an atteanment of religion this is, yea to pre∣sent herein a speciall series and scale of the great∣est steps in this confirmatory worke, by which it should be followed, and where none of these may be parted from other, though some be of an higher and more absolute use for such an end. And if it should be objected here, what needs any such expense of time or pains in this case, when its sure the essentiall truths of the Gospell are not questioned, and that without internall evidence of the spirit, no externall means of this kind can
be of use. I know that its the alone worke of the holy Ghost, to beget a divine and supernaturall faith, without which the furthest light, and ob∣jective evidence, though backed with a continu∣ed dispensation of externall miracles, could never bear Christians out, either as to duty or comfort, in their passage thorow time; yea nothing is in the least here to subject the credite of our faith to mens rationall comprehension, but rather tends to enervate wholly the strenth of any such tenet and take off all pretence for the same: But its sure also, I must quite all solid security in the way of religion, and any clear founding in the light and certainty of the Scripture, or admitt these things as undenyable, 1 that supernaturall faith is the most highly rationall light thats within time, and that none who professe the name of Christ can be of so low a size, as should not be press∣ed and excited to be much about this ground worke of knowing the truth, and principles of their pro∣fession upon its own evidence; yea are thus called as new born babes to drink in the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2. Which, as its clearly in the originall, is the rationall milk of the word, to be thus received no lesse on conviction and certainty of the judgment, then with the out going of their affections. 2. That as its not conceivable how a true and firme as∣sent can be to divine truth, but on its known cer∣tainty, so here is no resolving of the Christi∣ans faith on the strongest rationall evidences here∣of,
yet must it still be resolved on the testimony of God, made clear & evident to them to be such. 3. It is sure also, the Lord hath not given so large a measure of these grounds and demonstrations of his truth with such redoubled arguments of that kind, to be of so small regard, as is with most, but for some great, and universall use hereof to the wholl Church, and knew how needfull such assi∣stances to the faith of his people would be, whilst they are on the earth. 4. That these means, which tend most convincingly to found a ratio∣nall assurence in the judgment, are the proper vehicle of the Spirit of God, by which his sealing worke, should be both sought and expected; nor can I judge how the credite and use hereof should be so small, and not on the same ground quite any externall ordinance of the Gospell, which without the Spirit of the Lord can never profite, nor how we should expect and suite his confirming worke on the soul, when these greatest confirming means, which he hath given to the Church, have no just weight; but o how wonderfull a teacher is the holy Ghost, when such ordinare means fail, and are inac∣cessable, by furnishing his people then with these strongest arguments of love and power, who hav∣ing had but small measures of light, yet were not unfaithfull to improve the smallest degree of such a talent. 5. Yea so great a thing is it, to at∣tain a solid faith of things wholly remott from our
sense, and so far above the reach and apprehension of nature, or to have an absolute relyance on an in∣visible refuge, for our present and eternall state, as no common assent can answer, when the very rest and quiet of the soul must needs ly in the sure and firme persuasion hereof. 6. It is too visible also how little the practicall use of such a mean hath yet been essayed in the Church, that all who are mem∣bers therof might no lesse know the strenth and firmnesse of the foundation of their faith by its own evidence, then the generall articles of religion, but whilst the most usuall instructing worke lyes almost wholly about the noetick part of Divinity, there seems not that serious regard to presse the dianoetick part hereof on mens conscience, as if this were to be restricted to a few who are more know∣ing, learned, and of an inquisitive spirit about the rationall certainty of the truth, and for whom these choise and abundant helps of this kind, which are in this age, seem more peculiarly directed. Its sure, that the Christian faith in the first times did remarkably then spread and prevail, by these clear evidences hereof to the judgment, made effectuall by the spirit of God, more then by extraordinare mi∣racles, nor knew they otherwise what it was to be Christians but by imbracing the truth with a full assu∣rance of understanding, no lesse then of delight and affection. But if it be objected, it is not the same case now, where religion is planted in a nation, and hath an uncontrollable publick profession under the
support of humane lawes; I know no weight this can have, except that should be admitt therwith, quod nunc nascuntur Christiani, sed non fiunt. 7. Yea is it not sure, (tho it seems little understood,) that the primary grounds and evidences of our faith are not only as to their nd demonstrative of the truth and divinity of the Scrip∣ture, but are upon the matter such demonstrations also which most natively result from the same by infalli∣ble consequence, and are thus to be accounted not as hu∣man but divine arguments, given us by the spirit of God. 8. I shall but further add, how such as doe seriously ponder things, will find this demonstration to be not more important then clear, that to be a confirmed Christian and a confirmed Protestant are convertible terms; and that if these as are under that deplorable bondage and dark∣nesse of popery were but once awaked to see the truth & certainty of the Christian faith, by its intrinsick and objective evidence, and taken off that brutish creduli∣ty and dependance on the alone credite of others here∣in, it might be said the strongest ingine to hold up that profession were then broke, and should see the doctrine and rule of faith to be of such full and perspicuous evidence from the Scripture, as without blasphemy they could not seek from the Lord to give them a plainer rule, then what he hath there given. READER. ITs like you may think strang, how these few sheets in the close fall in here, after the forgoing part was fini∣shed; but tho they meet in one designe and interest, yet was not this then intended untill the former was done, and if it might tend to a solid use and fruit unto any, I shall forbear a further Apology herein, I may trulie say, the weight of the subject hath carryed it some further lenth then was designed, when I so much sought to be short, as
I aim at in any thing of this kind, that through my desir to avoide any unnecessare multiplying of thords, I sar least it may make some things seem a litle dark at the first looke, tho I hope not upon any serious perusall of the same. Two things I must further crave leave to add; 1 that when some succinct view of the great assistances and confirma∣tions of our faith is here offered, which these of the low∣est capacity of the Church, might with that advantage improve, as in a few howers, by reading it some times over, may be so far impressed on their mind and judg∣ment, that they could give some clear and judicious ac∣count thereof; it may be by such but seriously weighed & taken to heart of what conceirn the use hereof is: 2. That I would humbly judge also, it were a most speciall service for the truth in this day, to have some short Directory and remem∣brancer of the great acts of the Lord and monuments of his Providence now under the New Testament, in that maner held forth as might most tend to some universall use of all within the Church. I confesse my desire pressed me to some smal essay herein, with intent to have joyned it to this worke, but haveing with much conviction laid this wholly aside, as to any further appearence that way, so is it with an earnest desire, that some more qualifyed, might take to heart and under their hand so great a service both for their generation and posterity. It is sure the Lord hath designed his people to be tought the greatnesse of his workes as well as the precepts of his word, and as no duty is more pressed then this under the Old Testament both as to Publick and Family instruction, so are we no lesse accountable i these last times for this improvement of such as are of known, publick, and uncontrollable evidence, and should be th care of each age to have that solemne remembrance kept up hereof, so as not a few, but the very multitude within th Church might be as a publick Library and Repository of th same. FINIS.
