H3644 816.m.13[63] N54504 99882369 186264
An Humble Representation to the Honourable the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, In relation to the Importation of Sail Cloath from Holland. AT the time of the Prohibition with France in King Charles the Second's Reign, the French had in a manner the sole Trade of Sail Cloath, and very little was made in Holland. But since then the Dutch have so greatly improved that Manufacture, and arrived at such perfection in the making there∣of, that at this very day they furnish all their neighbouring Nations with Canvas for Sails, and the French have utterly lost that Trade. By which means Holland does now draw from this Kingdom a∣bove Two Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year for this one Commodity, which might be prevented, in giving Encouragement to the making of Sail Cloath in England, which already is begun in several parts of this Kingdom, and brought to good perfection; and it is humbly hoped the Consideration thereof, will deserve the Favour and Countenance of this Honourable House: For the Reasons following, viz. 1. The setting up this Manufacture will improve the Lands of England, and Employ many Thousands of Poor, by setting them to work, and thereby enable them to maintain their Families, and also support great numbers of Seamen and Souldiers Wives, in the absence of their Husbands abroad in the King's Service, by Earning their Bread in the Spining Trade, of which above Two Hundred are now employed in one work of this kind near this City, and many more in the Country. 2. If this Manufacture find Encouragement at Home, should a War happen at any time with Holland, we may then be supplied with Sail Cloath of our own production, which otherwise may prove very difficult to be had in such Quantities, as will enable the setting out the Navy Royal to Sea. 3. By making of this Manufacture, and bringing it to perfection, we shall lessen considera∣bly the over Ballance of our Trade with Holland (which is none of the least Evils that attend us) and thereby prevent the Expence of so great a Summ from going Abroad, and Employ the same at Home, in one of the best and usefullest Manufactures to this Nation. If therefore this Honourable House shall so think fit, it is humbly proposed that some further Duty may be Charged on all Sail Cloath Imported, and that his Majesty may be addressed to encou∣rage the making of this Manufacture in England, by signifying his Royal Pleasure for the buying all such English made Sail Cloath as can be provided for the use of his Navy, and the same being of equal goodness with Hollands Cloath, may have such preference as his Majesty shall think fit: Which Encouragement is not doubted but will, in a few Years, enable the Manufacturers of this Commodi∣ty, to supply the Nation at Home, as well as the Plantations Abroad. Note, That Sail Cloath, when Imported, is always Entered as Vittery Canvas, which is Rated to pay 5 s. Subsidy, and 2 s. 6 d. Additional Duty, so that when the Deductions of 5 and 10 l. per Cent. are taken off, it pays but 6 s. 8 d. for every Hundred Ells, which is of the Value of Fifteen Pounds to be sold here. ☞ From whence please to observe, that this Commodity does pay little above Two per Cent. whereas all other Commodities not Rated, do now pay at Value 10 l. per Cent.
Reasons for Encourage∣ing the making of Sail Cloath in England, without having it from Holland.
