L3460 R1476 99834820 39378
MEMOIRS OF EDMƲND LƲDLOW, Esq; VOL. II.
MEMOIRS OF EDMƲND LƲDLOW, Esq; THE Act for putting a Period to the Parliament was still before a Commit∣tee of the whole House, who had made a considerable Progress therein, having agreed upon a more equal Distribution of the Power of Election throughout England: And whereas formerly some Boroughs that had scarce a House upon them chose two Members to be their Representatives in Parliament, (just as many as the greatest Cities in England, Lon∣don only excepted) and the single County of Cornwall elected forty four, when Essex and other Counties bearing as great a share in the Payment of Taxes, sent no more than six or eight; this unequal Representation of the People the Parliament resolved to correct, and to permit only some of the principal Cities and Boroughs to chuse, and that for the most part
but one Representative, the City of London only exceptd, which on account of the great proportion of their Contributions and Taxes were allowed to elect six. The rest of the four hundred, whereof the Parliament was to con∣sist, (besides those that served for Ireland and Scotland) were appointed to be chosen by the several Counties, in as near a proportion as was possible to the Summs charged upon them for the Service of the State, and all Men admitted to be Electors who were worth two hundred Pounds in Lands, Leases or Goods. Divers Informations were brought against the Irish for Murders committed at the begin∣ning of the Rebellion, and since upon the Eng∣lish. The Principal of the Accused were Col. Maccarty Reagh, who was seized in the County of Cork; the Lord Mayo in the County of Gal∣way; the Mother of Col. Fitz-Patrick in the Province of Leinster, with many others. And for the Encouragement of the Plantations in Ireland, the Parliament permitted the People of England to transport thither all sorts of Cattel and Grain free of all Custom, and ordered that their Commissioners in Ireland should raise a Revenue there for all such as had been wounded and disabled, and for the Widows and Chil∣dren of those that had been killed in the Pub∣lick Service. The Vice Admiral of Prince Rupert's Fleet carrying forty Pieces of Cannon, was brought into Plymouth by the English Seamen she had
on board, who finding a favourable occasion, near Cape de Verd, seized the Captain and the rest of the Company, being all French and Dutch: Upon which the Council of State re∣ceived Orders from the Parliament to reward the said Seamen, and to prepare an Act to en∣courage others to follow their Example. The Dutch Admiral Van Trump, with one hundred and ten Ships of War, and some Fire-ships, being joined by seventeen Men of War from Zealand, sailed from Goree with Orders to convoy safe out of the Channel a Fleet of near five hundred Merchant-Ships, designed for France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Barbary, and the Levant, and to take all the Advantages he could against the English. Hereupon the Par∣liament passed an Act for the Sale of the Estates of some, who having been adjudged Delin∣quents, had refused to lay hold of the Favour extended to them of Compounding; which they did to ease the People of some part of the Charge of this War against the Dutch; yet their Occasions were so pressing, that they were constrained to lay a Tax for some Months of one hundred and twenty thousand Pounds a Month, which the People willingly paid, be∣cause they knew that it was wholly employed in their Service. Most of the Dutch Merchant-Ships were by bad Weather and contrary Winds driven back into their Harbours, but their Men of War kept out at Sea; and Van Trump having re∣ceived
Advice that Admiral Blake had sent away twenty of his Ships to convoy a Fleet of Laden Colliers from Newcastle, twelve towards Plymouth, and fifteen up the River, which had suffered some Damage by Storm, and that he had left with him but thirty seven Ships of War, came into the Downs with fourscore Men of War, and thirty of the ablest Merchant∣men of the Fleet he was appointed to convoy. Notwithstanding which Inequality of Number it was unanimously resolved in a Council of War to fight the Dutch Fleet. Accordingly a day or two after ours engaged them about Noon, and the Fight continued till Night sepa∣rated them. In this Fight we lost two Ships, the Garland of 40, and the Bonaventure of 36 Guns; and tho' in recompence we burnt one of their Admirals, and killed many of their Men, particularly two Secretaries who were on board their Admiral, yet the Dutch were exceeding∣ly elevated with this little Success; and being informed that the English Fleet was in great want of all sorts of Naval Stores, they pub∣lished a Placaet to prohibit the Exportation of them hither under severe Penalties. They also threat'ned to drive us out of the Islands which we possessed in America, and to that end sent some Ships to join Prince Rupert, which with those revolted English made up in all twenty five Sail. The King of Denmark likewise pro∣mised to assist them by the next Spring with thirty Ships of War for the Summ of one Mil∣lion
of Guilders, which they agreed to pay to him. In the mean time the Parliament, having re∣ceived Information of the Misbehaviour of some Officers in the late Engagement, appoin∣ted a Committee, whereof Sir Henry Vane, Mr. John Carew, and Major Salloway, were the principal, impowering them to place and di∣splace Officers, and to regulate all Matters re∣lating to the Sea, in such a manner as might be most conducing to the Service of the State. These Commissioners used such Care and Dili∣gence in the discharge of this Trust, that the face of Affairs soon became much alter'd for the better; the Ships that were unserviceable re∣paired, a considerable Fleet put to Sea well officer'd and well mann'd, the Store-houses re∣plenish'd with all manner of necessary Provisi∣ons, and thirty Frigats preparing to be built. Lieutenant General Monk was also added to the Generals Blake and Dean, in the room of Col. Edward Popham lately deceased, to take care of the equipping and commanding the Fleet. And that nothing might be wanting on our part to preserve a good Correspondence with such Fo∣reign States as were in Amity with us, the Par∣liament sent the Lord Commissioner Whitlock on an extraordinary Embassy to the Crown of Sweden, where he was received with all the Ho∣nours due to his Character. The Commissioners for the Irish Affairs be∣ing at Dublin, Lieutenant General Fleetwood
came thither with his Family; after whose Ar∣rival a Commission was issued out for the Trials of such as were accused of having murdered the English, which was directed to Persons of known Ability and Integrity in each Province. To those formerly accused, was added the Lord Muskerry, who was charged to have put many English Men to death in the way between his House of Mackroom and the City of Cork. Up∣on this Accusation the said Lord was seized, and ordered to be prosecuted by the Court of Justice at Dublin for the same. The Commissi∣oners also by Order of the Parliament publish∣ed a Declaration to inform the Publick, and particularly the Adventurers, who had ad∣vanced Money upon the Irish Lands, that the War in Ireland was concluded. This they did as well that the said Adventurers might have what was justly due to them, as that the poor wasted Country of Ireland might have the Assistance of their own Purses and Labour, to recover the Stock and Growth of the Land; the Irish having all along eaten out the Heart and Vigour of the Ground, and of late much more than ever, being in daily Apprehensions of being removed. All Arrears due to the English Army in Ire∣land were satisfied by the Parliament out of the Estates forfeited by the Rebels, which were delivered to them at the same Rates with the first Adventurers. In this Transaction those of the Army shewed great Partiality, by confining
the Satisfaction of Arrears only to such as were in Arms in August 1649. which was the time when the English Army commanded by Lieu∣tenant General Cromwel arrived in Ireland; and tho' the hardships endured by those who were in Arms before had been much greater, yet no∣thing could be obtained but such a Proportion of Lands in the County of Wicklo, and else∣where, as was not sufficient to clear the fourth part of what was due to them. Those who so∣licited the Affairs of the Army in Ireland with the Parliament, having persuaded the Adven∣turers that there were Forfeited Lands enough in one Moiety of nine principal Counties, they accepted of them for their Satisfaction, and the other Moiety was assigned by the Act for the Satisfaction of the Soldiers; the rest of Ire∣land was also disposed of, only the Province of Connaught was reserved for the Irish under the Qualifications agreed upon by the Parliament: According to which they were to be put into possession of the several Proportions of Land which had been promised them in the said Pro∣vince; that so the Adventurers, Soldiers, and others to whom the Parliament should assign their Lands, might plant without disturbance, or danger of being Corrupted by intermixing with the Natives in Marriages or otherwise, which by the Experience of former times the English had been found to be, rather than to have bettered the Irish either in Religion or good Manners: and that the Natives being di∣vided
by the River Shannon from the other Pro∣vinces, and having Garrisons placed round and amongst them in the most proper and conve∣nient Stations, they might not have those Op∣portunities to prejudice the English as formerly they had. An Act being drawn up to this pur∣pose, the Parliament passed it, reserving the Counties of Dublin, Kildare, Carlo and Cork, (together with the remaining part of the Lands formerly belonging to the Bishops, Deans and Chapters of Ireland, whereof some had been already applied, to augment the Revenues of the College of Dublin) to be disposed of as the Parliament should think fit. The Forfeited Lands were divided between the Adventurers and Soldiers by Lot, accord∣ing to an Estimate taken of the Number of Acres in the respective Counties, in conformity to an Order from the Commissioners of Parlia∣ment; by whom were appointed Sub-Com∣missioners to judge of the Qualifications of each Person, and others, who upon Certificate from the Sub-Commissioners for determining Qualifi∣cations, were required to set out so much Land in the Province of Connaught as belonged to every one by virtue of the said Act. They al∣so established a Committee to sit at Dublin to receive and adjudge all Claims of English and others to any Lands, limitting a time within which they were obliged to bring in and make appear their respective Claims to be Legal; to the end that the Adventurers, Soldiers, and
others, might be at a certainty, and after such a time free from any Molestation in the posses∣sion of their Lands; and that none through Ig∣norance or Absence might be surprized, they prorogued the said time twice or thrice to a longer day. The Courts of Justice erected at Dublin and in other Parts, proceeded vigorously in making Inquisition after the Murders that had been committed: Maccarty Reagh, after much search into the Matter whereof he stood accused, was acquitted by the Court sitting at Cork; and so was the Lord Clanmaliere by that of Kilken∣ny; but the Mother of Col. Fitz-Patrick was found guilty of the Murder of the English, with this Aggravation, that she said she would make Candles of their Fat. She was condemned to be burnt, and the Sentence was executed ac∣cordingly. Col. Lewis Moor and Lewis Demley were also found guilty of Murder, for which they were hanged. Sir Charles Coote, with the rest of the Court of Justice in the Province of Connaught, proceeded against the Lord Mayo, and declared him guilty of the same Crime, for which he was executed accorded to the Sentence pronounced against him. The Trial of the Lord Muskerry was long, by reason of a Clause which he urged in his Defence from a printed Copy of the Articles made with him; which tho' it had been unjust for me to grant in the Terms there mentioned, yet would have cleared him, and thrown the
Blame and Guilt upon me; for Articles given ought to be made good. But this Clause upon search into the Original, which I kept, appeared to have been inserted by themselves in the Print which they produced for Evidence, under pre∣tence of having lost the Original Articles signed by me. Notwithstanding which, it appearing that tho' divers of the English were murdered by the Convoy appointed to conduct them safe to Cork, the Lord Muskerry had taken what care he could for their security, and had done what in him lay to bring the Person who was guilty of that Blood to Justice, the Court ac∣quitted him, and he was permitted according to his Articles to pass into Spain. I have heard that upon his arrival in that Kingdom, a Facti∣on appeared against him, upon account of his former Opposition to the Pope's Nuncio in Ire∣land; so that he finding but cold Entertain∣ment there, entred into a Treaty to put himself and his Men into the Service of the Venetians. Luke Took, the Head of a Sept in the Coun∣ty of Wicklo, being conscious of his Guilt, had formerly desired my Pass to come and Treat with me about Conditions for laying down the Arms of himself and Party; and to induce me to give him more favourable Terms, said, he had a Horse and Saddle worth a hundred Pounds, which he desired I would accept of. I refusing his Present, he took it as an ill Omen to him; for they are so accustomed to Bribe their Magistrates in that Country, that if any
one refuse their Presents, they presently con∣clude him to be their Enemy, and give their Cause for lost; and therefore he submitted not at that time. But now supposing he could by no means avoid falling into our hands, by rea∣son of the number of our Garisons placed in all Parts amongst them, who by this time were as well acquainted with their Retreats and Fast∣nesses as themselves, and it may be thinking there would not appear sufficient Evidence to prove him guilty, he submitted upon the same Condition I had formerly offered to him, which was, That he should be liable to be questioned for Murder, whereof being accused before the Court at Dublin, he was convicted, sentenced, and executed. Sir Phelim O Neal, Head also of a Sept, and one who had as great a share as any in the contriving and carrying on the Massacre and Rebellion, sell into the Hands of the Lord Caw∣field, whose Brother he had caused to be mur∣dered at the beginning of the Rebellion in this manner. O Neal being a Neighbour of the Lord Cawfield, came to him under the pretence of Friendship, with about half a dozen Friends, to his Castle of Charlemont, where being re∣ceived, he and those that were with him were carried to drink in the Cellar by the Lord Caw∣field, (both of them being too much addicted to that which the World calls good Fellowship.) After some time Sir Phelim O Neal fires a Pistol, which was a Signal agreed on, and immediate∣ly
thirty Irish entred and surprized the Castle, taking the Lord, his Mother, Lady, and Chil∣dren, with the rest of the Family Prisoners; and after three or four days murdered the Lord Cawfield, the rest hardly escaping with their Lives. But now the Commissioners of Parlia∣ment having by their prescribed Lines, within which all were obliged to inhabit, withdrawn Provisions from the Enemy, who could not be supplied without hazard of their Lives, thought fit as a further means to reduce them, to set a Sum of Money upon the Heads of the Princi∣pal of those who yet persisted in their Rebel∣lion, upon some twenty, others forty, and up∣on Sir Phelim O Neal a hundred Pounds, to bring him dead or alive. This was such an In∣couragement to look after him, that one of the Country People having notice that he was in an Island in the North, gave Intelligence thereof to the Lord Cawfield, who having brought toge∣ther a Party of Horse and Foot, entred the Island in Boats, and seized him there. From thence he carried him to Dublin, where divers of his Cruelties to the English being proved against him, he was sentenced by the Court of Justice to be put to death, and his Head to be set upon the Gate that stands at the Foot of the Bridge, which was put in execution accordingly. Thus the Enemy by the Blessing of God up∣on the Counsels of the Parliament, and Endea∣vours of their Armies, was every where dis∣persed and conquered, and the Nation likely to
attain in a short time that measure of Happiness which humane things are capable of, when by the Ambition of one Man the Hopes and Ex∣pectations of all good Men were disappointed, and the People robbed of that Liberty which they had contended for at the Expence of so much Blood and Treasure. General Cromwel had long been suspected by wise and good Men; but he had taken such Care to form and mould the Army to his Hu∣mour and Interests, that he had filled all Places either with his own Creatures, or with such as hoped to share with him in the Sovereignty, and removed those who foreseeing his Design, had either the Courage or Honesty to oppose him in it. His pernicious Intentions did not discover themselves openly till after the Battel at Worcester, which in one of his Letters to the Parliament he called The Crowning Victory. At the same time when he dismissed the Militia, who had most readily offered themselves to serve the Commonwealth against the Scots, he did it with Anger and Contempt, which was all the Acknowledgment they could obtain from him for their Service and Affection to the Publick Cause. In a word, so much was he elevated with that Success, that Mr. Hugh Pe∣ters, as he since told me, took so much notice of it, as to say in confidence to a Friend upon the Road in his return from Worcester, That Crom∣wel would make himself King. He now began to dispise divers Members of the House whom
he had formerly courted, and grew most fami∣liar with those whom he used to shew most Aversion to; endeavouring to oblige the Royal Party, by procuring for them more favourable Conditions than consisted with the Justice of the Parliament to grant, under colour of quiet∣ing the Spirits of many People, and keeping them from engaging in new Disturbances to rescue themselves out of those Fears, which many who had acted for the King yet lay un∣der; tho' at the same time he designed nothing, as by the Success was most manifest, but to ad∣vance himself by all manner of means, and to betray the great Trust which the Parliament and good People of England had reposed in him. To this end he pressed the Act of Oblivion with so much Importunity, that tho' some Members earnestly opposed its bearing date till after some Months, as well in Justice to those of that Party who had already fined for their Delinquen∣cy, that others as guilty as themselves might be upon an equal foot with them, as that the State might by that means be supplied with Money, which they wanted, and that such who had been plundered by the Enemy, might receive some Satisfaction from those who had ruined them, yet nothing could prevail upon the Gene∣ral; and so the Act was passed: The Parliament being unwilling to deny him any thing for which there was the least colour of Reason. But tho' he had gained this Point, and eager∣ly coveted his own Advancement, he thought
it not convenient yet to unmask himself; but rather to make higher Pretences to Honesty than ever he had done before, thereby to en∣gage Major General Harrison, Col. Rich, and their Party, to himself. To this end he took all occasions in their Presence to asperse the Par∣liament, as not designing to do those good things they pretended to; but rather intending to support the corrupt Interests of the Clergy and Lawyers. And tho' he was convinced that they were hastning with all Expedition to put a Period to their sitting, having passed a Vote that they would do it within the space of a Year, and that they were making all possible Prepa∣rations in order to it; yet did he industriously publish, that they were so in love with their Seats, that they would use all means to perpe∣tuate themselves. These and other Calumnies he had with so much Art insinuated into the Belief of many honest and well meaning Peo∣ple, that they began to wish him Prosperity in his Undertaking. Divers of the Clergy from their Pulpits began to prophecy the Destruction of the Parliament, and to propose it openly as a thing desirable. Insomuch that the General, who had all along concurred with this Spirit in them, hypocritically complained to Quarter-Master General Vernon, That he was pushed on by two Parties to do that, the consideration of the Issue whereof made his Hair to stand an end. One of these, said he, is headed by Major General Lambert, who in revenge of that Injury the
Parliament did him, in not permitting him to go into Ireland with a Character and Conditi∣ons sutable to his Merit, will be contented with nothing less than their Dissolution: Of the other Major General Harrison is the Chief, who is an honest Man, and aims at good things, yet from the Impatience of his Spirit will not wait the Lord's leisure, but hurries me on to that which he and all honest Men will have cause to repent. Thus did he craftily feel the Pulse of Men towards this Work, endeavour∣ing to cast the Infamy of it on others, reserving to himself the appearance of Tenderness to Ci∣vil and Religious Liberty, and of skreening the Nation from the Fury of the Parties before∣mentioned. This Mine of his was not wrought with so much Privacy but it was observed by some dis∣cerning Men of the Parliament, especially by those who had the Direction and Management of the War with Holland. These Men endea∣voured to countermine him two ways: First by balancing his Interest in the Army with that of the Fleet, procuring an Order from the Parliament, whose Ear they had upon all occasions, by reason of the Impor∣tance of the War with the Dutch, to send some Regiments of the Army to strengthen the Fleet; and secondly by recommending, as an easie way to raise Money in that Exigency, the Sale of Hampton-Court, and other Places, that were esteemed as Baits to tempt some ambitious
Man to ascend the Throne. The Parliament having ordered these things to be done, the General, sensible of the Design, and of the Con∣sequences of suffering the Army to be new-moulded, and put under another Conduct, made haste to execute his former Resolutions, railing to Col. Okey and other Officers of the Army against divers Members of the Parlia∣ment▪ affirming that little Good could be ex∣pected from that Body where such Men had so great an Influence. At the same time he made the most solemn Professions of Fidelity to the Parliament, assuring them, that if they would command the Army to break their Swords over their Heads, and to throw them into the Sea, he would undertake they should do it. Yet did he privately engage the Officers of the Ar∣my to draw up a Petition to the Parliament, That for the Satisfaction of the Nation they would put that Vote which they had made for fixing a Period to their sitting, into an Act; which whilst the Officers were forming and de∣bating, the General having, it seems, for that time altered his Counsels, sent Col. Desborough, one of his Instruments, to the Council of Offi∣cers, who told them, that they were a sort of Men whom nothing could satisfie; That the Parliament were more ready to do any Good than they to desire it; That they ought to relie upon their Word and Promise to dissolve them∣selves by the time prefixed; and that to petition them to put their Vote into an Act, would ma∣nifest
a Diffidence of them, and lessen their Au∣thority, which was so necessary to the Army. The General coming into the Council whilst Desborough was speaking, seconded him; to which some of the Officers took the Liberty to reply, that they had the same Opinion of the Parliament and Petition with them, and that the chief Argument that moved them to take this Matter into consideration, was the Inti∣mation they had received, that it was accord∣ing to the Desires of those who had now spoken against it, and whose latter Motion they were much more ready to comply with than their former. Thus was this Business stifled for the present, none being so well able to lay the Evil Spirit as those that had raised it. But either the General's Ambition was so great, that he could not forbear ascending the Throne till the time limited by the Parliament for their sitting was expired, or his Fears hastned him to the Accomplishment of his Design, lest the disinterested Proceeding of the Parliament, who were about to leave the Nation under a Form of Government that provided sufficiently for the Good of the Community, might work the People into a greater Aversion to his selfish De∣sign. Certain it is that he vehemently desired to be rid of this Parliament that had performed such great things, having subdued their Ene∣mies in England, Scotland, and Ireland; esta∣blished the Liberty of the People, reduced the Kingdom of Portugal to such Terms as they
thought fit to grant; maintained a War against the Dutch with that Conduct and Success, that it seemed now drawing to a happy Conclusion; recovered our Reputation at Sea, secured our Trade, and provided a powerful Fleet for the Service of the Nation. And however the Ma∣lice of their Enemies may endeavour to deprive them of the Glory which they justly merited, yet it will appear to unprejudiced Posterity, that they were a disinterested and impartial Parlia∣ment, who tho' they had the Sovereign Power of the three Nations in their hands for the space of ten or twelve Years, did not in all that time give away amongst themselves so much as their Forces spent in three Months; no, not so much as they spent in one, from the time that the Parliament consisted but of one House, and the Government was formed into a Commonwealth. To which ought to be added, that after so many Toils and Hazards, so much Trouble and Loss for the Publick Good, they were not unwilling to put an end to their Pow∣er, and to content themselves with an equal share with others, for the whole Reward of their Labours. Of this Cromwel was very sensi∣ble, as well as of their great Skill and Experi∣ence in the Management of Publick Affairs, and of the good Esteem they had acquired amongst the most discerning part of the Nati∣on, and therefore was very desirous to lay them aside with as little Noise as might be. To this end, after he had resolved not to suffer the
Act for their Dissolution to be finished, he would needs perswade them to be the Instru∣ments of their own Destruction, by putting a Period to themselves, and at the same time in∣vesting a certain Number with the Supreme Authority, not doubting when they had so done, to find Pretences enough to disperse any such, well knowing that when the face of Ci∣vil Authority was once taken away, the Power would naturally fall into the hands of that Per∣son who had the greatest Interest in the Army, which he supposed to be himself. This made him join with Major General Harrison, being confident that when he had used him and his Party to dissolve the present Government, he could crush both him and them at his pleasure. And tho' it was no difficult matter to discover this, yet those poor, deluded, however well-meaning Men, would not believe it. But all were not so blind, for divers Members of the Parliament whom he endeavoured to cajole into a good Opinion of his Design, being very sensi∣ble of the great Mischiefs that must necessarily ensue from such Courses, resolved either to dis∣swade him from them, or endeavour to coun∣termine him therein. To this end they had se∣veral Meetings with Cromwel, at one of which, when he and his Party laboured to shew that it was impossible for the Parliament, consisting, as they said, for the most part of Men interest∣ed in the Corruptions of the Law and the Cler∣gy, to effect those things that good Men ex∣pected
from them, Major Salloway desired of them, that before they took away the present Authority, they would declare what they would have established in its room; to which it was replied by one of the General's Party, That it was necessary to pull down this Go∣vernment, and it would be time enough then to consider what should be placed in the room of it. So both Parties understanding one ano∣ther, prepared to secure themselves. The Parliament now perceiving to what kind of Excesses the Madness of the Army was like to carry them, resolved to leave as a Lega∣cy to the People the Government of a Common∣wealth by their Representatives, when assem∣bled in Parliament, and in the Intervals thereof by a Council of State, chosen by them, and to continue till the Meeting of the next succeeding Parliament, to whom they were to give an ac∣count of their Conduct and Management. To this end they resolved, without any further Delay, to pass the Act for their own Dissoluti∣on; of which Cromwel having notice, makes haste to the House, where he sat down and heard the Debate for some time. Then calling to Major General Harrison, who was on the other side of the House, to come to him, he told him, That he judged the Parliament ripe for a Dissolution, and this to be the time of doing it. The Major General answered, as he since told me; Sir, the Work is very great and dange∣rous, therefore I desire you seriously to consider
of it before you engage in it. You say well, replied the General, and thereupon sat still for about a quarter of an hour; and then the Questi∣on for passing the Bill being to be put, he said again to Major General Harrison, This is the time I must do it; and suddenly standing up, made a Speech, wherein he loaded the Parlia∣ment with the vilest Reproaches, charging them not to have a Heart to do any thing for the Publick Good, to have espoused the corrupt Interest of Presbytery and the Lawyers, who were the Supporters of Tyranny and Oppressi∣on, accusing them of an Intention to perpetu∣ate themselves in Power, had they not been forced to the passing of this Act, which he af∣firmed they designed never to observe, and thereupon told them, that the Lord had done with them, and had chosen other Instruments for the carrying on his Work that were more worthy. This he spoke with so much Passion and Discomposure of Mind, as if he had been distracted. Sir Peter Wentworth stood up to answer him, and said, That this was the first time that ever he had heard such unbecoming Language given to the Parliament, and that it was the more horrid in that it came from their Servant, and their Servant whom they had so highly trusted and obliged: But as he was go∣ing on, the General stept into the midst of the House, where continuing his distracted Lan∣guage, he said, Come, come, I will put an end to your prating; then walking up and down
the House like a Mad-man, and kicking the Ground with his Feet, he cried out, You are no Parliament, I say you are no Parliament; I will put an end to your Sitting; call them in, call them in: Whereupon the Serjeant attending the Parliament opened the Doors, and Lieute∣nant-Colonel Worsley with two Files of Mus∣queteers entred the House; which Sir Henry Vane observing from his Place, said aloud, This is not honest, yea it is against Morality and Common Honesty. Then Cromwel fell a railing at him, crying out with a loud Voice, O Sir Henry Vane, Sir Henry Vane, the Lord de∣liver me from Sir Henry Vane. Then looking upon one of the Members, he said, There sits a Drunkard; and giving much reviling Lan∣guage to others, he commanded the Mace to be taken away, saying, What shall we do with this Bauble? here, take it away. Having brought all into this Disorder, Major-General Harrison went to the Speaker as he sat in the Chair, and told him, That seeing things were reduc'd to this pass, it would not be convenient for him to remain there. The Speaker answered, That he would not come down unless he were forc'd. Sir, said Harrison, I will lend you my Hand; and thereupon putting his Hand within his, the Speaker came down. Then Cromwel applied himself to the Members of the House, who were in number between 80 and 100, and said to them, It's you that have forced me to this, for I have sought the Lord Night and Day, that
he would rather slay me, than put me upon the do∣of this Work. Hereupon Alderman Allen, a Member of Parliament, told him, that it was not yet gone so far, but all things might be re∣stored again; and that if the Soldiers were commanded out of the House, and the Mace returned, the Publick Affairs might go on in their former Course: But Cromwel having now passed the Rubicon, not only rejected his Ad∣vice, but charged him with an Account of some hundred thousand Pounds, for which he threat∣ned to question him, he having been long Trea∣surer for the Army, and in a Rage committed him to the Custody of one of the Musqueteeers. Alderman Allen told him, That it was well known that it had not been his Fault that his Account was not made up long since; that he had often tendred it to the House, and that he asked no Favour from any Man in that matter. Cromwel having acted this treacherous and im∣pious part, ordered the Guard to see the House clear'd of all the Members, and then seized up∣on the Records that were there, and at Mr. Scobell's House. After which he went to the Clerk, and snatching the Act of Dissolution, which was ready to pass, out of his Hand, he put it under his Cloak, and having command∣ed the Doors to be locked up, went away to Whitehall. This villainous Attempt was much encou∣raged by Neiuport and the other Ambassadors lately arrived from Holland, with Instructions
to conclude a Peace; who finding the Parlia∣ment supported by the Affections of the People, because acting for their Interest, and therefore not to be forced, much less cheated into an un∣just and disadvantageous Agreement, instigated Cromwel to take the Power into his hands, well understanding that he would soon be necessita∣ted to make Peace with them upon what Terms they should think fit; in the mean time resol∣ving to interrupt our Trade, and to put the Nation to a great Expence to maintain a Fleet for the Guard of the Seas, which they knew the People would be unwilling to keep when they should perceive that it served only to up∣hold and strengthen a Tyranny. They also had made Preparations to send over Money, Arms, and Men, with Lieut. Gen. Middleton, to enable the Mountaneers of Scotland to give Di∣sturbance to the English Interest there. Cromwel being returned to Whitehall, found the Council of War in Debate concerning this Weighty Affair, and informed them, that he had done it, and that they needed not to trouble themselves any further about it. Some of the Officers of the Army well af∣fected to the Publick Cause, and not of his Juncto, of whom were Col. Okey and others, repaired to the General, to desire Satisfaction in that Proceeding, conceiving that the way they were now going, tended to Ruin and Confusi∣on. To these, having not yet taken off his Mask, but pretending to more Honesty and Self-denial
than ever, he professed himself resolved to do much more Good, and with more Expedition than could be expected from the Parliament: Which Professions from him put most of them to silence, and moved them to a Resolution of waiting for a further Discovery of his Design, before they would proceed to a Breach and Di∣vision from him. But Col. Okey being jealous that the End would be bad, because the Means were such as made them justly suspected of Hy∣pocrisie, enquired of Col. Desborough what his meaning was to give such high Commendations to the Parliament, when he endeavoured to dis∣swade the Officers of the Army from petition∣ing them for a Dissolution, and so short a time after, to eject them with so much Scorn and Contempt; who had no other Answer to make, but that if ever he drolled in his Life, he had drolled then. We who were in Ireland being not so well in∣formed of these Clandestine Practices, and no less confident that the Principles of some Men who joined in this Attempt were directed to the Good of the Nation; and that tho' some might be such arrant Knaves as to have other Designs, yet trusting that an impossibility of accomplish∣ing the same would oblige them to fall in with the Publick Interest, and not to be so very foo∣lish to attempt the setting up for themselves, tho' we could not but have some Doubts of the ill Consequences of these things, yet thought our selves by the Rules of Charity obliged to
hope the best, and therefore continued to act in our Places and Stations as before, Cromwel having interrupted the Parliament in the morning of the 20th of April, 1653. came in the afternoon to the Council of State, (who were assembled to do their Duty at the usual place) accompanied with Major-General Lambert and Col. Harrison, and told them at his entrance; Gentlemen, If you are met here as private Persons, you shall not be disturbed; but if as a Council of State, this is no place for you; and since you can't but know what was done at the House in the Morning, so take notice, that the Parliament is dissolved. To this Serjeant Brad∣shaw answered; Sir, we have heard what you did at the House in the Morning, and before many Hours all England will hear it: But, Sir, you are mistaken to think that the Parliament is dis∣solved; for no Power under Heaven can dissolve them but themselves; therefore take you notice of that. Something more was said to the same purpose by Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Love, and Mr. Scot; and then the Council of State percei∣ving themselves to be under the same Violence, departed▪ Soon after Cromwel had thus barbarously treated the Parliament, and effaced the Civil Authority, he sent for Major Salloway and Mr. John Carew, to whom he complained of the great Weight of Affairs that by this Ʋndertaking was fallen upon him; affirming, that the Thoughts of the Consequences thereof made him to tremble,
and therefore desired them to free him from the Temptations that might be laid before him; and to that end to go immediately to the Chief Justice St. Johns, Mr. Selden, and some others, and en∣deavour to perswade them to draw up some Instru∣ment of Govennment that might put the Power out of his hands. To this it was answered by Major Salloway; the way, Sir, to free you from this Temptation, is for you not to look upon your self to be under it, but to rest perswaded that the Power of the Nation is in the Good People of Eng∣land, as formerly it was. Cromwel perceiving by this Answer that he was better understood than he could have wished, fell upon another Expe∣dient before he would openly discover himself, appointing a Meeting of the Chief Officers of the Army to be at Whitehall, in order to consi∣der what was fit to be done in this Exigency. Major Gen. Lambert, Col. Harrison, and di∣vers other Officers, were at this Assembly, where Major Salloway, tho' he had then no Command, was desired to be present. Major Gen. Lambert moved that a few Persons, not exceeding the Number of 10 or 12, might be intrusted with the Supreme Power: Major Gen. Harrison was for a greater Number, in∣clining most to that of 70, being the Number of which the Jewish Sanhedrim consisted; but after some Debate it was resolved that out of each County and City in England, Ireland, and Scotland, a certain Number of persons, as near as might be proportionable to their Payments
toward the Publick Charge, should be nomi∣nated by the Council of Officers to be sent for to meet at Westminster, on a certain day, where all the Authority of the Nation should be de∣livered into their hands by an Instrument sign∣ed and sealed by the General and the Officers, obliging themselves to yield Obedience to their Orders. The Gentlemen who were summoned, met at the time and place appointed, where after they had heard the General's Harangue, in which he seemed to acknowledge the Good∣ness of the Lord in that he saw that day where∣in the Saints began their Rule in the Earth, &c. they went into the House wherein the Parlia∣ment used to sit, where they voted themselves to be the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Many of the Members of this Assembly had manifested a good Affection to the publick Cause; but some there were among them who were brought in as Spies and Trapanners; and tho' they had been always of the contrary Party, made the highest pretensions to Honesty, and the Service of the Nation. This Assembly therefore being composed for the most part of honest and well-meaning persons, (who having good Intenti∣ons, were less ready to suspect the evil Designs of others) thought themselves in full possession of the Power and Authority of the Nation, and therefore proceeded to the making of Laws relating to the publick; amongst others one concerning the Plantation of Ireland, settling
the Lands there upon the Adventurers and Soldiers, together with an Act for Mariners; one for Payment of some Publick Debts, with divers others. They also made some Progress in the Reformation of the Law, having ap∣pointed a Committee to that end. In Ireland we disbanded some of our Forces to the Number of about 5000 Horse and Foot, and summoned a Council of Officers to adjust the Arrears of the Soldiers, and to put them into possession of the Land assigned for their Satisfaction; who judging that it would not hold out to satisfie the whole, rated the best Land of each County according to its intrinsick Value, reserving the worst to be equally distri∣buted amongst them, when the Arrears should appear to be satisfied on the foot of the new Valuation. The County of Dublin was in this Estimate rated at 1500 l. for 1000 Acrees; the County of Wexford at 800 l. the County of Kilkenny at 1000 l. All which Counties being within the Province of Lempster, were rated by the Act at 600 l. for 1000 Acres. Instructions were also given to the Committee for stating the Accounts of the Arrears of the Soldiers, by which those who were disbanded in Con∣naught, had their Arrears assigned in Lands about Slego, those in Munster in the County of Cork, &c. Those who had been for some time with the Lord Inchequin, and therefore thought fit to be disbanded, had their Arrears assigned (upon my Desire) together, about Collen, in
the County of Kilkenny, that they might be the better able to defend themselves, and assist their Friends upon occasion. Col. Theophilus Jones's Regiment was reduced, his own Troop and some others appointed to compleat mine, and Col. Jones to be Major of my Regiment in the room of Col. Warden, who was disband∣ed. The Pay of some of the Officers of the Ar∣my was also reduced, but yet they now re∣ceived the Pay of seven days per Week, where∣as before they had but four; but the General Officers who had been paid seven days for a Week, had some ten Shillings, others five Shil∣lings per day abated of their Pay; amongst whom it fell heavier on me than any other; for as my Work was double both as a Commissioner of Parliament, and Lieutenant General of the Horse, so were my Expences also, being ob∣lig'd to keep a more plentiful Table than any other of the Commissioners, and more than twenty Horses continually in my Stable ready for Service: but indeed could I have seen our Victories employed to the Good of the Com∣monwealth, I should have been satisfied without any other Encouragement: And I can clearly make it appear, that during the four Years I served in Ireland, I expended 4500 l. of my own Estate more than all the Pay that I re∣ceived. The Commissioners for the Management of Affairs by Sea having not finished the Time li∣mitted
by the Parliament for their acting, nor clearly seeing to what Extremities things would be driven, continued to act in their Station; which they did with that Diligence and Vi∣gour, that since the late Engagement in the Downs they had equipped a very considerable Fleet, and furnished it with all sorts of Provi∣sions, Amunition and Men. This Fleet was commanded by Dean and Monk as Admirals, by Penn as Vice-Admiral, and by Lawson as Reer-Admiral. On the 2d of June, 1653. ear∣ly in the Morning they Attacked the Dutch Fleet commanded by Van Tromp, Evertson, De Witt, and De Ruyter, on the Coast of Flanders. Lawson who commanded the Blue Squadron, charged through the Dutch Fleet with forty Ships, which Storm falling principally on De Ruyter's Squadron, Van Tromp bore up to his Assistance; which when our Admirals, who were both on the same Ship, perceived, they engaged Tromp with the Body of the Fleet, and the Fight continued till three in the After∣noon, at which time the Wind coming up con∣trary to the English, the Dutch fled, and were pursued by the lightest of our Frigats. The next Morning the two Fleets found themselves again near each other, but for want of Wind could not come to engage till about Noon, at which time the Dispute began, and continued very hot on both sides till ten at Night. Our Fleet charged the Dutch with so much Resolu∣tion, and put them into so great Disorder, that
tho' their Admiral fired on them to rally them, he could not procure more than twenty Ships of his whole Fleet to stand by him, the rest making all the sail they could away to the East∣ward. But the Wind blowing a fresh Gale from the Westward, ours pursued them so ef∣fectually, that they sunk six of their best Ships, and blew up two others that were in the Body of their Fleet, taking eleven of their biggest Ships, and two others, with thirteen hundred Prisoners, among whom were six of their prin∣cipal Captains; and had not the rest of their Fleet sheltered themselves between Dunkirk and Calais, where it was unsafe to expose our great Ships by reason of the Sands, we had probably taken or destroyed most of the rest. The Hollanders were much superiour to the English in number of Ships; but such was the Courage and Conduct of our Men, that we lost but one Ship in the Fight, had but one Captain killed, except Admiral Dean, which indeed was a great loss, and about one hun∣dred and sixty private Men killed and wounded. Our Fleet having put their Prisoners on Shoar, and left some of their Ships to be resitted, re∣turned to the Coast of Holland, where they took many Prizes. The People in Holland seeing themselves as it were besieged by the English Fleet, constrained the Magistrates by their Clamours, to send their Fleet again to Sea, which they reinforced with divers great Ships, and some Fireships, so that they made up in all,
one hundred and forty Sail. The English Fleet were little more in number than ninety, yet resolved to fight the Enemy; and accordingly detaching the lightest of their Frigats, assisted by some greater Ships, they engaged the Dutch, and maintained the Fight till they were sepa∣rated by the Night. The next day little was done, but on the day after they fought again; and tho' many of our Men were sick of the Scurvy, and that the Dutch had Fireships, of which we had none, the Wind also entirely fa∣vouring them, yet did the Fight continue in equal balance till two or three in the Afternoon, about which time their Admiral Van Tromp was killed with a Musket-ball, as he walked upon the Deck with his Sword drawn. This so discouraged the Enemy, that they made all the haste they could away towards the Texel, and were pursued with that Diligence by ours, that the Ship of Cornelius Evertzen was sunk, with about thirty more, as we were informed by the Prisoners taken or saved from perishing. The Victory was great, but cost us dear, for we lost eight of our brave Captains, whose Names were, Graves, Peacock, Taylor, Crisp, Newman, Cox, Owen and Chapman, with about four hundred Men. We had also about seven hundred wounded, and amongst them five Commanders, yet we lost but one Ship in this Fight. Our Admiral having put his Prisoners with the wounded Men on shoar, and taken in Provisions, returned with the Fleet to the Coast
of Holland, where many of the Officers of the Enemies Fleet and others ingenuously acknow∣ledged that the Hand of God was against them, and that they ought not to contend any lon∣ger with us. The English Fleet being now absolute Ma∣sters of the Sea, no Ship could stir out of the Texel without their Permission. The Dutch were willing to impute their ill Success to the Treachery and Cowardice of their Officers; but so it was, by the Blessing of God upon the Endeavours of the Parliament and their Fleet, that since the beginning of the War we had taken, sunk and destroyed, between fourteen and fifteen hundred of their Ships, of which many were considerable Men of War. Their Seamen generally declined the Service, neither had they a sufficient number of Ships to put to Sea, tho' they had been furnished with all other Accommodations. In short, Matters were brought to that pass, that Myn Heer Nieuport, one of the Ambassadors from Holland, demand∣ed of some of the Parliament▪Party what they intended to do with them, endeavouring by all means possible to persuade them that the Ruin of the Dutch would be prejudicial to them∣selves. Our Friends plainly told him, that they desired nothing but a Coalescence with them, and then would be as ready to promote the Good of Holland as their own. To this the Ambassador replied, that he would engage his Masters should send us a Blank, and that what
Conditions soever we should think fit to write on it, they would subscribe. Soon after they sent Ambassadors to treat in good earnest con∣cerning a Peace, which they were the more necessitated to do, by reason of some Divisions amongst themselves on account of the Prince of Orange's Interest. But this Attempt proved in∣effectual, and they not able to prevail as long as the face of Authority remained in England, without consenting to the Coalescence. For many of the present Assembly acting with Sin∣cerity for the Publick, and therefore little sus∣pecting the Treachery of others, resolved whilst they had opportunity to be doing their Duty, and to discharge the Trust committed to their care, according to the best of their Judgment, for the Good of the Common∣wealth. They issued forth Orders for regu∣lating the Excise and Customs, and enlarged the Powers of the Committee established for Trade. They made all necessary Preparations for carrying on the War by Sea, and declared General Robert Blake, General George Monk, Major General Desborough, and Vice-Admiral Penn, to be the four Generals of the Fleet of the Commonwealth, impowering them with some others to manage the Affairs of the Admi∣ralty for six Months. They also gave Order to prepare an Act to erect a High Court of Justice for proceeding against such as should surprize or betray any of the Fortresses, Ma∣gazines, or Ships of the Commonwealth into
the hands of the Enemy; and also against those who should, contrary to the Laws alrea∣dy made, proclaim any to be King of England or Ireland, whereby it is manifest they suspect∣ed the Design on foot, tho' their Jealousy did not at all defer, but rather hasten the execution of it. The perfidious Cromwel having forgot his most solemn Professions and former Vows, as well as the Blood and Treasure that had been spent in this Contest, thought it high time to take off the Masque, and resolved to sacrifice all our Victories and Deliverances to his Pride and Ambition, under colour of taking upon him the Office as it were of a High Constable, in order to keep the Peace of the Nation, and to restrain Men from cutting one anothers Throats. One Difficulty yet remained to obstruct his De∣sign, and that was the Convention, which he had assembled and invested with Power, as well as earnestly solicited to reform the Law, and reduce the Clergy to a more Evangelical Constitution. And having sufficiently alarmed those Interests, and shewn them their Danger from the Convention, he informs them farther, that they cannot be ignorant of the Confusion that all things are brought into by the immo∣derate Zeal of those in Authority, and to what Extremities Matters might be reduced, if per∣mitted to go on; possibly said he, to the utter Extirpation of Law and Gospel from amongst us; and therefore advised that they would join
their Interests to his, in order to prevent this Inundation. His Proposition was readily em∣braced by the corrupt part of the Lawyers and Clergy, and so he became their Protector, and they the humble Supporters of his Tyranny. But that his Usurpation might seem less horrid, he so contrived it by his Instruments, that some of the Convention must openly manifest their Disapprobation of their own Proceedings, and under divers specious pretences put a period to their sitting. To this end it was agreed by Mr. Rouse, Chairman to that Assembly, and the rest of Cromwel's Junto, to meet earlier in the House than was usual, which was done accord∣ingly on the 12th of December, 1653. hoping by surprize, to obtain a Vote for their Dissolu∣tion. Being met, Col. Sydenham, Sir Charles Wolsely and others, according to their Instru∣ctions, bitterly inveighed against the Transacti∣ons of the Convention, and particularly charged them with a Design to destroy the Army, by not making a sufficient and timely Provision for their Pay. They alledged, that tho' they had Voted them a Sum of Money, yet having re∣solved to raise it by way of a Pound-rate, it would take up so much time to bring it in, that the Army must either starve by want, or op∣press the Country by Free Quarter. A second Ground of their Invectives was taken from a Motion made that the Great Officers of the Ar∣my should serve without Pay for one Year. They accused them also of endeavouring to de∣stroy
the Clergy, the Law, and the Propriety of the Subject, instancing in their denying a Right of Presentation to the Patrons of Eccle∣siastical Benefices: In general, that they had not a frame of Spirit to do Justice, which they would have made out by their not relieving Sir John Stawell, when he made his Application to them. Thus they endeavoured to cajole the Clergy, Lawyers, Cavaliers, and all Interests, except that which they should have had most regard to. They thought to have prevented any De∣bate about their Design, by meeting so early in the Morning; but they were deceived, and enough found in the House to answer their Ob∣jections. To that concerning the Army it was said, That the Pound-rate was found to be the most equal way of raising Money, and there∣fore resolved upon by them; not at all doubt∣ing that it would come in soon enough for the Soldiers Supply: That they thought it reasona∣ble and just, that the Great Officers of the Ar∣my who were possessed of plentiful Estates, and had received all their Arrears, should abate somewhat of their Superfluities, and serve for a little time freely, as well as those who were em∣ployed in Civil Affairs, whose Labour and Ha∣zard was as great, and both equally concerned in the Publick Good; especially considering how much this Conduct would contribute to the Ease and Satisfaction of the People, who could not be ignorant that there were now no pressing
Occasions of Charge or Danger, the Enemy be∣ing every where entirely subdued. To what had been done in order to a Reformation of the Law and Clergy, it was answered, That as they conceived there was great need of it, so they had been told that they were called toge∣ther principally for that end; and that if they had done any thing too much therein, the Gen∣tlemen who blamed them for it were very unfit so to do, having themselves been the Men that pressed them continually to go much farther than they had done. To the Objection con∣cerning Presentations, they said, that the Me∣thod used therein seemed to them too unreason∣able to be continued, it being in effect to give a Power to the greatest of the Parish, who were not always the best, to prescribe what Religion they pleased to the Parishioners, by presenting a Person, howsoever unfit for that Office, to be their Minister. Lastly, in answer to the Charge of denying Relief to Sir John Stawel, it was an∣swered, that the Consideration of that Matter was before them, and that they would not fail to act as his Case deserved. The Debate thus spun out, the House began to fill, so that Crom∣wel's Party despairing to carry their Design by Vote, broke off in an abrupt manner, saying, that it was not a time to Debate, but to do something that might prevent those Inconve∣niences which they pretended did threaten them. Then Mr. Rouse, who was of the Plot, descending from his Chair, went out of the
House, and with the rest of the Cabal repaired to Whitehall, where they subscribed a Writing, taking notice of the Power with which the Ar∣my had intrusted them, and of the sense they had of their own Inability to bring any thing to Perfection for the Good and Settlement of the Nation: and that therefore they resigned that Power into the hands of Cromwel, from whom they had received it. The other part of that Assembly, who came with honest Minds and sincere Intentions to perform their Duty and to serve their Country, kept their Places in the House, and would not quit them till they were removed by a Guard of Soldiers sent by Cromwel to that end. And it seems remarkable, that tho' this Body of Men had not a clear Authority according to the Na∣tional Constitution, and were called together with a Design of rendring them odious, as well as to scare the Lawyers and Clergy into a Com∣pliance with Cromwel; yet many being con∣vinced of the Rectitude of their Intentions, were brought over daily to approve their Acti∣ons. And as this treacherous and unworthy Resignation of the Power to Cromwel could not be carried by a Vote in the House, so I have been informed that the major part of those who were Members of that Assembly, could never be persuaded to sign the Paper for that Resignation, tho' importuned to it by all Politick and De∣vilish Arguments imaginable. This Convention, who derived all the Au∣thority
they had from Cromwel, being dissolved, after they had driven the Clergy and corrupt part of the Lawyers into his Net, as had been designed, all Men were full of Expectation what step he would take next to advance him∣self. And because all honest Men who stood near the Centre of his Actions had lost all hopes of Good from him, he began to court and ca∣jole those that were at a distance, whom he hoped the more easily to surprize, as less ac∣quainted with his treacherous Designs. Amongst others I received a Message from him by one of my Relations, to assure me of his Friendship and Intentions to do as much for me as for any Man. After a few Days, a Council of Field-Officers was summoned, where Major General Lam∣bert having rehearsed the several steps and de∣grees by which things had been brought to the present state wherein they were, and pressed the Necessity incumbent upon the Army, to provide something in the room of what was lately taken away, presented to them a Paper intituled, An Instrument of Government, which he read in his place. Some of the Officers be∣ing convinced that the Contents of this Instru∣ment tended to the sacrificing all our Labours to the Lust and Ambition of a single Person, be∣gan to declare their Unwillingness to concur in it. But they were interrupted by the Major General, and informed that it was not now to be disputed, Whether this should be the Form of
Government or not, for that was already resol∣ved, it having been under consideration for two Months past: Neither was it brought before them with any other Intention than to give them Permission to offer any Amendment they might think fit, with a Promise that they should be taken into consideration. The Council of Officers perceiving to what Terms they were restrained, proposed, that it might be declared in this Instrument, that the General of the Ar∣my should, after this first time, be held uncapa∣ble of being Protector; (for that was the Title given by this Instrument to the Chief Magi∣strate, tho' some were said to have moved that it might be King) That none of the Relations of the last Protector should be chosen at the next succeeding Election; and that a General Coun∣cil of all the Commission Officers who were a∣bout the Town, should be summoned to consi∣der thereof. To these Propositions they could obtain no other Answer, than that they should be offered to the General, which was the Title they yet gave to Cromwel. At the next Meet∣ing of Officers, it was not thought fit to con∣sult with them at all; but they were openly told by Major General Lambert, that the Gene∣ral would take care of managing the Civil Go∣vernment; and then having required them to repair to their respective Charges, where their Troops and Companies lay, that they might preserve the Publick Peace, he dismissed them.
Thus was this important Business that so highly concerned the Nation, and in some mea∣sure all Europe, in a clandestine manner carried on and huddled up by two or three persons; for more they were not who were let into the Secret of it, so that it may justly be called a Work of Darkness. This Instrument appoint∣ed the Legislative Power to be in the Represen∣tative of the People and the Protector; That a Parliament should be chosen every three Years, which should sit five Months, if they thought fit, without any Interruption: That their first Meeting should be on the thirteenth of Septem∣ber next ensuing: That the Members of whom the Parliament was to consist, should be chosen by the People: That whatsoever they would have Enacted, should be presented to the Pro∣tector for his Consent; and that if he did not confirm it within twenty days after it was first tendered to him, it should have the Force and Obligation of a Law; provided that it extend∣ed not to lessen the Number or Pay of the Ar∣my, to punish any Man on account of his Con∣science, or to make any Alteration in the Instru∣ment of Government; in all which a Negative was reserved to the single person. It provided also that all Writs should issue out in the Pro∣tector's Name: That most of the Magistrates should be appointed, and all Honours conferred by him: That he should have the Power of the Militia by Sea and Land: That in the In∣tervals of Parliament the Nation should be go∣verned
by the Protector and his Council, who were not to exceed the Number of one and twenty, nor to be under thirteen. The first persons nominated to be of his Council were Major General Lambert, Col. Desborough, Mr. Henry Lawrence, Sir Charles Wolsely, Col. Wil∣liam Sydenham, Mr. Francis Rouse, Philip Vis∣count Lisle, Col. Philip Jones, Col. Montague, Mr. Richard Major, Walter Strickland Esq; Sir Gilbert Pickering, Major General Skippon, and Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, in all fourteen. It was observed, that in the choice of this Coun∣cil, such were put in for the most part who had been principal Instruments in the Interruption of the late Assembly, and leading Men in the Resignation of that Power into the Hands of Cromwel; and because nothing of Honour or Conscience could be presumed to oblige them to be faithful to Cromwel and his Government, tho' they took an Oath to that purpose, he as a publick Robber having possessed himself of the Purse of the Nation, distributed a thousand Pounds a Year to each of his Council. He al∣so established a Commission for the viewing and taking care of all Forests, Fees and Lands be∣longing to the late King, Queen, and Prince, under pretence of improving them to the Ad∣vantage of the Commonwealth, but indeed in order to convert them to his own profit. The Management of the Treasury was put into the Hands of Col. Desborough, Montague, and Sy∣denham, who were his Creatures; to whom
was added Mr. William Masham, a worthy Gen∣tleman, and a Member of Parliament, placed there by Cromwel, upon Information that he had divers Relations of considerable Interest in the Clergy-Party, together with a numerous Family, and small Estate during his Father's Life, which Considerations prevailed with the said Gentleman to accept of that Employment. Things being thus prepared, the Mayor and Aldermen of London were required to attend at Whitehall in their Scarlet Gowns, whither when they came, the Design was imparted to them, and they being under the Power of an Army, were forced to contribute to this Pa∣geantry, by accompanying Cromwel to West∣minster-Hall. The Commissioners of the Seal, the Judges, and Barons of the Exchequer, march∣ed first, the Council of the Commonwealth following them, and then the Mayor, Sheriffs, and the Aldermen of London in their Robes. After them came the General with a great num∣ber of the Officers of the Army, Major Gene∣ral Lambert carrying the Sword before him into the Court of Chancery; where after the Gene∣ral had heard the Instrument of Government read, and taken the Oath as directed in the Close of the said Instrument, Major General Lambert kneeling, presented him with a Sword in the Scabbard, representing the Civil Sword; which Cromwel accepting, put off his own, in∣timating thereby that he would no longer rule by the Military Sword, tho like a false Hypo∣crite
he designed nothing more. The Com∣missioners delivered the Seals to him, and the Mayor of London the Sword, all which he re∣stored again, with an Exhortation to use them well; and having assured them that he would not have undertaken this Charge, but to make use of it for the good of the Publick, he re∣turned to Whitehall in the same manner and order as he came. His Council having taken their places, issued out Orders to all Counties and considerable Corporations for the proclaim∣ing Oliver Cromwel Protector of the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and care was taken to alter all legal Writs and Process from the Title of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, to that of Protector. A Declaration also was published impowering all those who stood lawfully invested with any Office of Judicature, or with the Power of the Admiralty on the 20th of the present Decem∣ber, to continue in their Imployments till farther Order. The News of this great Alteration of Af∣fairs was very unwelcome to us in Ireland, be∣cause contrary to the Oaths which had been taken, and especially to the Engagement, whereby all that took it, promised Fidelity to the Commonwealth of England, as it was established without a King or House of Lords: which Engagement having subscribed both with Hand and Heart, I was resolved to use my best Endeavours, either to oppose this U∣surpation,
or at least not to do any thing that might contribute to the strengthning of it. To this end, when it was pressed by some Court-Parasites amongst us, that seeing things were brought to this pass, and that there was now no other Face of Authority in being; therefore to prevent the Designs of our Enemies, the Com∣missioners of Parliament should proclaim Crom∣wel Protector in Dublin, and other parts of Ire∣land: I objected against it as a thing evil in it self, tending to the betraying of our Cause, and contrary to an Act of Parliament; that if it were but dubious whether it were evil or no, we ought at least to expect an Order from those who had the Power in their Hands, which as yet we had not received. By this means I hindred the proclaiming of him in Ireland for more than a Fortnight, tho' continually ear∣nestly pressed to a Compliance. But a Day being appointed for the Consideration of that Affair, the Commissioners with three or four chief Officers, of whose Integrity and Abili∣ties we had the best opinion, met in Lieut. Ge∣neral Fleetwood's Chamber in the Castle, where after near five hours Debate, and the Question put, the Votes were found to be equal on both sides. In that instant of time Mr. Roberts the Auditor-General coming thither upon some particular Business of the Army, Lieut. Gene∣ral Fleetwood being well acquainted with his flattering Spirit, and earnestly desiring to have the thing done, gave him Liberty to declare
his Opinion; which, when he had done in the Affirmative, the Lieut. General took his Con∣currence (he being a General Officer) to be a Decision of the Controversie. So it was resol∣ved to be done, and an Order directed to be drawn up for that purpose, which the Com∣missioners endeavoured to perswade me to sign; but I positively refusing so to do, they ordered it to be signed by their Secretary in the name of the Commission; which way was taken, that it might not appear that any of the Com∣missioners Hands were wanting to the Procla∣mation. At this Ceremony there was but a thin Appearance, some Captains and inferior Officers; but no Colonel nor General Officer, except Sir Hardress Waller and one Col. Moore were present. The Herald at Arms, who made Proclamation, was clothed in black; but the Artillery, which was at the Command of Lieut. General Fleetwood, wasted some of the Powder belonging to the Publick, the Re∣port of which was very unwelcome Musick to me, who desiring to be as far from this Pa∣geantry as I could, rode out of Town that Afternoon. Having done what I could to obstruct the Proclamation of that, which was called an Instrument of Government, imposed upon the People by the Military Sword, contrary to many Oaths and solemn Engagements, as well as to the Interest and Expectations of the Peo∣ple, I thought my self obliged in Duty to act
no further in my Civil Capacity as Commissio∣ner of Parliament, lest I should seem by acting with them, to acknowledge this as a lawful Authority: To that end I forbore to go to Cork-house, which was the usual place where the Commissioners of Parliament met; but Lieut. General Fleetwood by great Importunity did once prevail with me to be present there, and to give my Advice in some things that ab∣solutely concerned the Peace of Ireland; after which time I never gave any Vote amongst them, or set my Hand to any of their Orders, tho' pressed to do it by divers honest and well-meaning Men. But because I was always ready to call in question my own Judgment, when different from knowing and conscientious Persons, I consented that a Day might be ap∣pointed to consult with them touching my Duty in this Conjuncture. The most weighty Ar∣guments which were then used to perswade me to continue in my Imployments were, That supposing Cromwel to be a Tyrant, to have no just Call to his present Imployment, and a wicked Man, as most of them were so ingenu∣ous to acknowledge him to be; yet they de∣clared themselves to be of opinion, that a good Man might act under him; and for proof of this they urged the Example of Cornelius, who was a Centurion under Nero. To this I an∣swered, That tho' in an evil Government al∣ready established, an honest Man may take an Imployment, and bless God for such an Op∣portunity
of doing good, yet our Case seem∣ed to me to be very different, the Dispute ly∣ing now between Tyranny and Liberty; and that I durst not in any measure contribute to the support of Tyranny against the Liberty of my Country. Another Argument much pres∣sed was, that by declining my Station I should neglect an occasion of doing some good, and lay a necessity upon those in Power to employ others, who might do mischief. To this I replied, That it was not lawful to do the least Evil for the attaining the greatest Good; and that I apprehended it to be an evil thing to for∣tifie Cromwel in his Usurpation; that I hoped I shd do more good by my open Protestation against his Injustice, and declining to act under him, than by the contrary means: For should all Men who continued well affected to the In∣terest of the Commonwealth, refuse to act in the present state of Affairs, there could be no way thought of, in my opinion, more probable to reduce the Usurper to his right Senses; who not daring to trust such as had acted against him, must of necessity by this means be left destitute of Instruments to carry on his un∣just Designs. A third Argument was, That I should wait to see how he would use his Power, which if he improved to evil ends, I should then find many others to join with, who would be as ready to oppose him as my self. To this also I answered, That I was fully convinced of the Injustice of his Underta∣king;
that he had betrayed his Masters, under colour that they would not reform the Law and the Clergy; and that having called an Assembly in order, as he pretended, to accom∣plish that Work, he had now broken them also for endeavouring to do it; that as soon as he had made the corrupt Interests of the Nation sensible of their Danger, he had contracted an Alliance with them, and was become their Pro∣tector; That it could not be reasonably expect∣ed that he should do any thing towards their Reformation, because every step he should take towards the lessening of their Credit, would tend to the weakening of his own Au∣thority; and that he was no less necested to be a Vassal to them, than he designed the rest of the Nation to be Slaves to him. Tho' for these and other Reasons I durst not act in my Civil Capacity, yet I was unwilling to decline the Exercise of my Military Authority as Lieutenant General of the Horse, having re∣ceived my Commission from the Parliament, which I resolved to keep, till it should be forced from me, and to act by it in order to attain those Ends for which I received it, the principal whereof were, to bring those to Ju∣stice who had been guilty of the Blood of ma∣ny thousands of English Protestants, and to restore the English who remained alive, to the Lands which had been taken from them by the Irish. And tho' much of this Work was al∣ready effected; yet it was no less a Duty to
bring it to perfection than to begin it, and to defend our Country-men in a just Possession, than to gain it for them. Neither was it im∣possible that as one had made use of the Mili∣tary Sword to destroy the Civil Authority, so others might have an opportunity to restore it by the same means. One of the first important Affairs of Crom∣wel's new Government, was to make Peace with the Dutch, which the low Condition they had been brought into by the good Conduct of the Parliament made them earnestly to desire. In the Articles some seeming Provision was made for bringing those to Justice, who had been guilty of the Blood of the English at Amboyna, if they could be found. The Dutch also un∣dertook to reimburse to our Merchants the Losses they sustained by the Seizure of twenty two Ships in Denmark; the Duty of striking the Flag to the English in the Narrow Seas was acknowledged, and compliance promi∣sed with the Act of Parliament, whereby all foreign Commodities were forbidden to be brought into England save in English Bottoms, except by such Vessels as properly belonged to that Country where those Commodities should grow. By another Article it was agreed, that the Enemies of the respective Nations should not be protected by either of them; but there was no provision made by this Treaty for the Coalescence so much insisted upon during the Administration of Affairs by the Parliament.
The Lord Whitlock, who had been sent Am∣bassador to the Crown of Sweden by the Par∣liament, acquainted the Queen with the late Change of Government, producing Letters of Credence from Cromwel, and owning him as his Master; upon which he was received as kindly as formerly by the Queen, who signed the Articles agreed upon by the two Nations, to the great satisfaction of both. Cromwel having thus all clear before him, and no Enemy in the Field, except only in the Highlands of Scotland, a considerable Army by Land, and a powerful Fleet at Sea, all the Soldiers fully paid, with a Month's Advance; the Stores sufficiently supplied with all Provi∣sions for Sea and Land, three hundred thou∣sand Pounds of ready Money in England, and one hundred and fifty thousand Pounds in the Treasury of Ireland; he removed from the Cock-pit, which House the Parliament had as∣sign'd him, to take possession of Whitehall, which he assigned to himself. His Wise seemed at first unwilling to remove thither, tho' after∣wards she became better satisfied with her Grandeur; but his Mother, who by reason of her great Age was not so easily flattered with these Temptations, very much mistrusted the Issue of Affairs, and would be often afraid, when she heard the Noise of a Musquet, that her Son was shot, being exceedingly dissatisfied, unless she might see him once a day at least: But she shortly after dying, left him the Possession
of what she held in Jointure, which was reported not to exceed sixty Pounds by Year, tho' he out of the Publick Purse expended much more at her Interment, and amongst other needless Ceremonies, caused many hundred Torches to be carried with the Hearse, tho' she was buried by day-light. The Usurper endeavouring to fix himself in his Throne by all ways imaginable, gave Direction to the Judges, who were ready to go their several Circuits, to take especial care to extend all Favour and Kindness to the Cava∣lier Party. He himself restored Col. Grace, a notorious Irish Rebel, to his Estate; and sent a Letter in favour of the Lord Fitz-Williams, who had been Lieutenant General in Preston's Army in Ireland: But he dealt otherways with those whom formerly he had most courted, summoning Major General Harrison, Col. Rich, Mr. Carew, and others, before the Council; requiring such of them as had Commissions from him to surrender them, upbraiding Ma∣jor General Harrison with his Carriage to him, and charging him with coveting his Employ∣ment when he was sick in Scotland. And be∣cause they refused to engage not to act against him and his Government, he sent them to seve∣ral Prisons. Major General Harrison was or∣dered to be carried to Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight, Mr. Carew was sent to Pendennis in Cornwal, and Col. Rich confined to the Cu∣stody of the Serjeant at Arms. Soon after Mr.
Rogers, Mr. Feak, and Mr. Symson, Ministers, having publickly declared against his Usurpati∣on, both by printing and preaching, were also imprisoned. So having changed his Interest, and taken off his Masque, he sent his second Son Col. Henry Cromwel into Ireland, to feel the Pulse of the Officers there touching his com∣ing over to command in that Nation, where he arrived attended only by one Servant; and landing near my Country-House, I sent my Coach to receive him, and to bring him thi∣ther, where he staid till Lieut. General Fleet∣wood, with several Officers, came with Coaches to conduct him to Dublin. Having made what Observations he could of Persons and Things in Ireland, he resolved upon his Return; of which having given me advice, I desired him to take my House in his way; and to that end dined with him on the Day of his Depar∣ture at the Lieutenant Generals in the Castle. After Dinner we went together to my House at Moncktown, where after a short Collation walking in the Garden, I acquainted him with the Grounds of my Dissatisfaction with the present state of Affairs in England, which I assured him was in no sort personal, but would be the same were my own Father alive, and in the Place of his. He told me that his Father looked upon me to be dissatisfied upon a di∣stinct account from most Men in the three Na∣tions; and thereupon affirmed that he knew it to be his Resolution to carry himself with all
Tenderness towards me. I told him that I ought to have so much Charity for his Father, to beleive that he apprehended his late Under∣taking to have been absolutely necessary, being well assured that he was not so weak a Man to decline his former Station, wherein his Power was as great, and his Wealth as much as any rational Man could wish to procure to himself nothing but Envy and Trouble. I supposed he would have agreed with me in these Senti∣ments; but he instead of that acknowledged the Ambition of his Father in these Words: You that are here may think he had Power, but they made a very Kickshaw of him at London. I replied, that if it were so, they did ill; for he had deserved much from them. Then I pro∣ceeded to acquaint him with my Resolution not to act in my Civil Employment, and my expectation not to be permitted to continue in my Military Command; to which he answer∣ed, that he was confident I should receive no Interruption therein. I told him I could not foresee what his Father would do; but inclined to think that no other Man in his Case would permit it. To this I added, that the Reason of my drawing a Sword in this War, was to re∣move those Obstructions that the Civil Magi∣strate met with in the discharge of his Duty; which being now accomplished, I could not but think that all things ought for the future to run in their proper and genuine Channel: For as the extraordinary Remedy is not to be
used, till the ordinary fail to work its proper effect, so ought it to be continued no longer than the necessity of using it subsists; where∣as this that they called a Government had no other means to preserve it self, but such as were violent; which not being natural, could not be lasting. Would you then, said he, have the Sword laid down? I cannot but think you be∣lieve it to be as much your Interest to have it kept up as any Man: I confessed I had been of that Opinion whilst I was perswaded there was a necessity of it, which seeming to me to be now over, I accounted it to be much more my Interest to see it well laid down, there being a vast difference between using the Sword to re∣store the People to their Rights and Privi∣leges, and the keeping it up for the robbing and despoiling them of the same. But Company coming in, and the time for his going on board approaching, we could not be permitted to continue our Discourse; so after we had taken leave of each other, he departed from Ireland, and upon his Arrival at Chester, was attended by many of the late King's Party; and amongst others by Col. Molson, who enquiring of him how he left Affairs in Ireland, he answered very well, only that some who were in love with their Power must be removed. In the mean time, Cromwel so ordered mat∣ters at London, that he procured himself, his Officers, and Council, to be invited by the City to Dinner, which was managed with all pos∣sible
state. He and the rest of his Company rode on Horseback through the City; the Mayor and Alderman met him at Temple-Bar, where the Mayor, as an acknowledgement of his Authority, delivered the Sword to him, and he (as Kings use to do) restored it to him again. He was harangu'd by the Recorder, and the Mayor riding bareheaded, carried the Sword before him, the several Liveries in their Gowns standing on each side of the Streets where he passed. Commissary General Reynolds, and Col. Whalley, led a Troop of three hundred Officers to Grocers-Hall, being the place ap∣pointed for the Entertainment; which being ended, he bestowed a Badge of his Usurpation in conferring a Knighthood upon Alderman Thomas Viner, then Mayor of London. This was principally contrived, to let the World un∣derstand how good a Correspondence there was between him and the City of London; yet a∣mongst discerning Men it had a contrary effect, who knew it to be rather an act of Force than of Choice in the City, as appeared in the great Silence and little Respect that was given him in his Passage thro' the Streets: And tho' he, to invite them to it, rode bareheaded the grea∣test part of the way; and tho' some of his Crea∣tures had placed themselves at the entrance of Cheapside, and began to shout, yet it took not at all with the People. About this time Cromwel having resolved up∣on a foreign Expedition, drew out five or six
thousand Men, by which Artifice he not only alarm'd foreign States, but also engaged all the Reformade Officers to his Party, who otherwise would have been ready to join with any Party against him. Col. Venables was chosen to com∣mand this Army; and tho' the particular Design of these Preparations was not certainly known, yet it was soon suspected to be against some of the King of Spain's Territories. Vice Admiral Pen commanded the Fleet that was to transport them, which consisted of sixteen or seventeen Men of War, besides the Vessels of Transpor∣tation. When they arrived at the Barbadoes, they made Ploclamation there, that whosoever would engage in the Undertaking should have his Freedom, whereupon about two thousand Servants listed themselves, to the great damage of the Planters. The Spanish Ambassador be∣ing informed that the Fleet was gone towards the West-Indies, and that the Storm was likely to fall upon some of his Master's Territories, made application to Cromwel, to know whether he had any just ground of Complaint against the King his Master; and if so, that he was ready to give him all possible Satisfaction. Cromwel demanded a Liberty to Trade to the Spanish West-Indies, and the repeal of the Laws of the Inquisition. To which the Ambassador repli∣ed, That his Master had but two Eyes, and that he would have him to put them both out at once. The Goods of our Merchants trading in Spain were seized for want of timely notice
to withdraw their Effects from thence. And one Major Walters with others concerned with him in the Transportation of Irish Souldiers in∣to the Spanish Service, lost thirty thousand Pounds, which remained due to them from the King of Spain. The Fleet being arrived at Hispaniola, whe∣ther thro' any difference between Col. Venables, who commanded the Army, and Vice-Admiral Pen, who commanded the Fleet, or for what other Reason, is not easie to determine, they neglected to land their Army near the Town, as was advised by many of the Officers, and as they might easily have done, with great pro∣bability of taking the Town, which most of the Inhabitants had deserted: But the Army having landed far from the Town, were upon their March towards it, when the Forlorn was attacked at the Entrance of a Wood by forty or fifty Fellows, who were employ'd to kill the wild Cows of that Country. This incon∣siderable number of Men put the Forlorn to flight; and they retreating in great disorder, struck the whole Army with such a panick Fear, that they began to shift for themselves, and could not be prevailed with, either by Promises or Threatnings to keep their ground. Which being observed by Major General Haines, and five or six Officers more, they resolved either to put a stop to the pursuit of the Enemy, or not to out-live the Disgrace: Thereupon they made a stand and fought them, till the Major
General and most of the rest were killed. Du∣ring this time our Forces rallied, yet could not recover Courage enough to charge that incon∣siderable Enemy; and those very Men, who when they fought for the Liberties of their Country, had performed Wonders, having now engaged to support the late erected Tyranny, disgracefully fled when there was none to pur∣sue them. The Expedition against Hispaniola proving unsuccessful, they shipped themselves, and soon after arrived at the Island of Jamaica, belonging also to the Spaniards; which being but meanly fortified, the Inhabitants, who lived for the most part together in the principal Town, ran away, and betook themselves to the Woods, leaving what they could not car∣ry away to be plunder'd by the Army. Col. Venables being disabled by Sickness to per∣form the Functions of his Office, was permit∣ted by the Council of Officers to return into England; and Vice-Admiral Pen suspecting he would lay the whole Blame of that Af∣fair on him, obtained leave also: And being both arrived, they were heard at Whitehall one against the other; where the Accusations of both seemed to be of more weight than the Defences of either of them. So Pen was com∣mitted to the Tower, and Col. Venables con∣fined to his Lodging, the Distemper that was upon him excusing him from a stricter Impri∣sonment.
According to the Promise contained in the Instrument of Government, it was resolved to issue out Writs for the Election of Members to serve in an Assembly at Westminster, who were to be chosen, not by small Boroughs, and two for each County, as formerly, but in such manner as had been agreed upon by the Par∣liarment in the Rule for chusing successive Re∣presentatives, which indeed was much more equal and just. And because it was provided by the same Instrument, that thirty Members should be sent by Ireland, and the same Num∣ber by Scotland, to sit in the House, Letters were sent by Cromwel and his Council to the Commissioners there, acquainting them with that Clause in the Instrument of Government, and desiring their Advice touching the ensuing Election. Some of the Commissioners in Ire∣land were of Opinion, That if the Proprietors should chuse, they would return such as were Enemies to the English Interest, and therefore proposed that for this time Cromwel and his Council should nominate the thirty who were to be chosen for that Nation. This Question coming before the Commissioners before the arrival of the new Set nominated by Cromwel, tho' I resolved to intermeddle as little as might be, yet this Advice seemed so strange to me, that I could not forbear to desire of them, that seeing we had no more of Liberty left but the Name, they would at least retain the Form, in hopes that in time Men might become
so sensible of their own Interest as to be enabled thereby to recover the Efficacy and Substance of it, especially since it was most probable that by the Influence of those in Power, the same persons would be chosen that they desired. To this they agreed; and having proportioned the Cities and Counties for the Election before the issuing out the Writs, a private Junto was held by Lieutenant General Fleetwood, who agreed upon the persons that they would have chosen for each Place, which they had a great Advantage to effect, having nominated and fit∣ted the Sheriffs and other Officers for that pur∣pose. The Court-party endeavoured to pro∣mote the Election of such as would center in a∣doring the Idol lately set up, however different in Opinions about other Matters. The Clergy in some parts proved so strong, that they car∣ried it against those agreed on by the Court; but both Parties concurred in the decrying all such who would not sacrifice the Cause of the Publick to the Ambition of Men. In England they better understood the Design that was car∣rying on, insomuch that many persons of known Vertue and Integrity were chosen to sit in this Assembly, in particular the Lord President Bradshaw, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Thomas Scott, Mr. Robert Wallup, and divers others. When the time appointed for the Meeting of this Assembly was come, Cromwel went in a Coach to Westminster, accompanied by his Horse and Foot Guard, with many Officers of the
Army on Foot; where being arrived, his first Business was to appear in his Kingly Garb at the Abby, there to hear a Sermon with the Members of that Assembly before they went about their other Affairs. Which done, he went into the Painted Chamber, where he en∣tertained the Members with a tedious Speech, wherein he endeavoured to make it appear, that things were brought to this pass, not by his Contrivance, but by the over-ruling Hand of God; assuring them, that he was much rejoiced to see so free an Assembly of the People met to∣gether, and that he resolved to submit himself to their Judgment. But notwithstanding these specious pretences, he caused the Lord Grey of Grooby, Mr. John Wildman, Mr. Highland, and others, who had always manifested a constant Affection to the Commonwealth, to be ex∣cluded from the House. And tho' many undue Methods had been used at the Elections to pro∣cure those to be chosen who were Enemies, and to keep out many who were known Friends to the Common Cause; and tho' they saw themselves under the Power of one who they knew would force his way to the Throne, yet they appeared in a few days not to be for his purpose, but resolved, at the least, to lay a Claim to their Liberties. For whereas the Court-Party would have obliged them to approve at once the whole Instrument of Government which they had framed, the Assembly took it in pieces, and referred the Consideration of it
to a Committee, where the first Question fallen upon was, Whether the Supreme Legislative Pow∣er of the Nation shall be in a single Person and the Parliament. In this Debate Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Scott, and many others, espe∣cially the Lord President Bradshaw, were very instrumental in opening the Eyes of many young Members who had never before heard their Interest so clearly stated and asserted; so that the Commonwealth-Party increased daily, and that of the Sword lost ground. Cromwel being informed of these Transactions by his Creatures, and fearing to have that great Question put; lest he should be deposed, by a Vote of this Assembly, from the Throne which he had usurped, caused a Guard to be set upon the Door of the House early in the Morning, and sent to the Mayor of London to acquaint him with the Reasons of what he was about to do, to the end that he might prevent any Disorders in the City. The Members coming at the usual hour were refused the Door, and required to attend him in the Painted Chamber; where he taking notice of what was under Debate in the House, contrary to the Priviledge of a Parliament, (as he would have this thought to be) told them, that being called by virtue of the Instrument of Government to that Assembly, they were bound up by the In∣dentures themselves, upon which they were re∣turned, from altering the Government by a sin∣gle Person and a Parliament; and that the
Country having owned him by Electing a Par∣liament called by his Writ, and that the Judges with the Justices of Peace having acted by vir∣tue of his Authority, he was resolved not to permit that point to be called in question, ac∣quainting them, that no Person should be ad∣mitted, for the time to come, to sit as a Mem∣ber in that Assembly, till he had subscribed an Acknowledgment of the Government by a single Person and a Parliament. Some of those who had been chosen Members of this Conven∣tion, had already declined the House, upon ac∣count that Cromwel and his Council had ex∣cluded from their places divers Persons who had been constantly faithful to the publick In∣terest; but so soon as this visible Hand of Vio∣lence appeared to be upon them, most of the Eminent Assertors of the Liberty of their Coun∣try withdrew themselves, being perswaded they should better discharge their Duty to the Nation by this way of expressing their Abhor∣rence of his Tyrannical Proceedings, than by surrendring their Liberties under their own hands, and then treating with him who was possessed of the Sword, to recover some part of them again. However this Engagement was signed by about one hundred and thirty Mem∣bers within a day or two, and some days after several others subscribed it, and took their Places in the House, where a Debate arising touching the said Recognition, they passed a Declaration, that it should not be intended to
comprehend the whole Government contained in the forty two Articles of the Instrument, but that only which required the Government of the Commonwealth to be by a single Person and successive Parliaments. And to this the major part consented, hoping that by their compliance with him, in making Provision for his Safety, and the Government of the Nation during his Life, he would have been satisfied therewith, and in Gratitude would have judg∣ed the People after his Death to be of Age and Wisdom sufficient to chuse a Government for themselves. This great Point touching the single Person being thus over-ruled, they ap∣plied themselves to the Consideration and De∣bate of the remaining Clauses of the Instru∣ment of Government. They declared that he should be Protector during his Life, and limited the Number of Forces to be kept up in England, Scotland, and Ireland, with Provision for the Paiment of them. They agreed upon the Number of Ships that they thought necessary for the Guard of the Seas, and ordered two hundred thousand Pounds a Year for his own Expence, the Salaries of his Council, the Judges, Foreign Intelligence, and the Recep∣tion of Ambassadors. They also Voted a Clause to be inferred, to declare the Rights of the People of England, and particularly that no Money should be raised upon the Nation but by Authority of Parliament. And whereas by the Instrument of Government it was provided,
that if the Parliament were not sitting at the Death of the present Protector, the Council of Officers should chuse a Successor; they re∣solved, that nothing should be determined by the Council after his Death, but the calling of a Parliament, who were then to consider what they would have done. Besides these things, I can remember no remarkable Variation from what was formerly set down in the Paper cal∣led the Instrument of Government, except this additional Vote, That no one Clause of this should be looked upon as binding, unless the whole were consented unto. Which they did, lest Crom∣wel should interrupt them, and taking what made for his own Advancement, reject what was advantageous to the Commonwealth. Much time was spent, and pains taken, to ef∣fect this within the time limited, so that hard∣ly any private Business was done all that time, except an Order given to the Exeise-Office for satisfying an old Debt pretended by Col. John Birch, one of their Members, a nimble Gen∣tleman, and one who used to neglect no Op∣portunity of providing for himself. The Usurper, that he might make way for his Posterity to succeed him in his Greatness, changed the Title of Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood from that of Commander in Chief, to that of Deputy of Ireland, to continue till such time as it should be thought fit to recal him from thence, and to establish his Son Harry in his Place. In order to this a Commission was sent
to Fleetwood from Cromwel, wherein those who were before called Commissioners are now stiled only his Counsellors. Having thus mo∣delled the Government of Ireland, he began to apply his Care to that of Scotland; and know∣ing Monk to be a Soldier, and faithful enough to him, as long as he would gratifie his vicious, covetous, and ambitious Inclinations, he en∣trusted him with the Command of the Forces, and made him one of the Commissioners for Civil Affairs in that Nation. But that he might balance him with some of another Tem∣per, who might be a Guard upon his Actions, he sent Col. Adrian Scroop to be one of the Commissioners there also, having first caused the Castle of Bristol, whereof he was Governour, to be slighted, not daring to trust a Person of so much Honour and Worth with a Place of that Importance. He likewise sent thither Col. Whetham with the same Character, who hav∣ing been one of the late Assembly, as well as Governour of Portsmouth, and understanding that a Design was on foot to make Cromwel King, had in the House applied to him the Say∣ing of the Prophet to Ahab, Hast thou killed, and also taken Possession? By which words it ap∣pearing that this Gentleman was not for Oli∣ver's turn, he removed him from Portsmouth, and sent him to Scotland to be one of the Com∣missioners there also. The Lord Broghil was made President of the Council in Scotland, with an Allowance of two thousand Pounds a Year,
with a Promise from him, who never kept any but such as suted with his corrupt ends, that his Service should be dispenced with after one Year, and yet his Salary to continue. In Holland the Party of the Prince of Orange having long obstructed the signing of the Arti∣cles agreed upon between that State and Crom∣wel, the States General sent Myn Heer Bever∣ning Ambassador into England, to assure Crom∣wel, that if the Provinces did not agree to the Articles within eight days, he had Power from the States General to sign them in their Names. But before this Peace was concluded, the King of Scots Party had obtained Succours to be sent to their Friends in Scotland, who were aug∣mented to the Number of about five thousand Horse and Foot, having received fifteen hun∣dred Foot, two hundred Horse, and great Numbers of Arms brought to them by seven∣teen Holland Ships; so that it was thought fit to take Lieutenant General Monk from the Fleet, the War at Sea being now over, and to send him to take care of Affairs in Scotland; but chiefly to keep the Officers there from draw∣ing to a Head against Cromwel's Usurpation. Lieutenant General Middleton, with about one hundred Men more, for the most part Officers, five hundred Arms, and one hundred and fifty Barrels of Powder, landed also in the North of Scotland. To oppose these Forces we sent fif∣teen hundred Men from Ireland under Lieute∣nant Col. Braine, into the Mountains of Scot∣land,
who contributed very much to the sup∣pression of them. Monk being arrived in Scotland, divided his Army into several Bodies, the two principal of which were commanded by himself and Col. Morgan. With these they pursued the Enemy so closely, that at a Council of War held by them in the County of Murray, they made a Resolution to disperse themselves upon every Alarm, and to meet again at a Rendezvouz to be agreed upon. This being resolved, they advanced towards the Quarters of Col. Braine, where they were warmly received, and forced to retire. Middleton, to avoid the pursuit of ours, dispersed his Foot into inaccessible Quar∣ters, and drew together about six hundred Horse at Kennagh; whereby Monk perceiving that his Design was to tire out our Forces, de∣clined following him so close, endeavouring to drive him upon Col. Morgan, whom Monk had informed of the Enemies March. Middleton seeing himself no farther pursued, stayed at Kennagh; whereupon Monk having received Advice of the Approach of Col. Morgan's Par∣ty, advanced with his Forces towards the Ene∣my, who retiring towards Badenorth, and be∣ing about to take their Quarters that Night at Loughary, found themselves engaged at a nar∣row Pass by Col. Morgan, who designed to quarter at the same place. Middleton endea∣vouring to retire, was obstructed by a Morass; and being hotly pursued by Col. Morgan's
Forces, and much harassed by difficult Marches, was soon routed, many of his Men were killed, and many taken Prisoners; four hundred of their Horse were taken, together with the Charging and Sumpter Horses of Middleton himself, who being wounded in the Action, saved himself with much difficulty on Foot. His Commission, Instructions, and divers Let∣ters written to him and his Friends, by their King, were taken also; and had not such as fled been favoured by the bad Ways and the Night, very few had escaped. The News of this Defeat coming to the Enemies Foot, who were in Number about twelve hundred, they immediately disbanded themselves, and divers of the Enemies principal Officers came in and submitted, and amongst them the Earl of Glencarne, Lieutenant Col. Maxwel, Lieutenant Col. Herriott, the Lord Forester, and Sir George Monroe. Yet notwithstanding this low Condi∣tion of that Party in Scotland, the Clergy re∣fused to observe such Fasts as were appointed by the Government in England, and instead of them, appointed others by their own Authority, wherein they exhorted the People, amongst other things, to seek the Lord, to preserve the Ministry among them, to forget the Offences of the House of the Stewarts, and to turn from his People the sad Effects of a late Eclipse. A Fleet commanded by General Blake was sent into the Mediterranean, to require satis∣faction from the Grand Duke of Tuscany, for
Injuries done to our Merchants, and for enter∣taining and harbouring Prince Rupert's Fleet; in which Expedition he not only procured the Satisfaction demanded, but rendred the Power of England so formidable not only to all Italy, but even to the Grand Seignior himself, that they expressed a greatier readiness to preserve the Friendship of the English than ever they had done before. In the mean time Cromwel having assumed the whole Power of the Nation to himself, and sent Ambassadors and Agents to Foreign States, was courted again by them, and presented with the Rarities of several Countries; amongst the rest the Duke of Holstein made him a Pre∣sent of a Set of gray Frizeland Coach-Horses, with which taking the Air in the Park, attend∣ed only with his Secretary Thurlow, and Guard of Janizaries, he would needs take the place of the Coachman, not doubting but the three pair of Horses he was about to drive would prove as tame as the three Nations which were ridden by him: and therefore not contented with their ordinary pace, he lashed them very furiously. But they unaccustomed to such a rough Driver, ran away in a Rage and stop'd not till they had thrown him out of the Box, with which fall his Pistol fired in his Pocket, tho' without any hurt to himself; by which he might have been instructed how dangerous it was to intermeddle with those things wherein he had no Experience.
The Representative sitting at Westminster, tho' garbled as he thought fit, proving not suf∣ficiently inclined to serve his Designs, but rather in prudence yielding to the strength of the present Stream, in hopes the People might in time recover their Oars, and make use of them for the publick good; he grew impatient till the five Months allowed for their sitting should be expired; during which time he was restrained by that which he called The Instru∣ment of Government, from giving them Inter∣ruption. And tho' they differed not in any ma∣terial point from that Form of Government which he himself had set up, unless it were in reserving the Nomination of his Successor to the Parliament; yet did the Omission of this one thing so inrage him, that he resolved upon their Dissolution. They had prepared all things to offer to him, and had been very cau∣tious of giving him any just occasion of Offence, well knowing that in case they had given him the least pretence of Dissatisfaction, he would have laid all the blame at their Door; and therefore they prudently left the settling of the Church Government, and the Liberty that was to be extended to tender Consciences (an En∣gine by which Cromwel did most of his work) to the consideration of the next Assembly: Whereupon he wanting wherewith justly to accuse them, unless it were for too much com∣plying with him to the prejudice of the Com∣monwealth, after he had perused the Form of
Government which the Assembly had agreed upon, and tendred to him for his Consideration; the five Months of their Sessions, according to the Soldiers account of twenty eight Days to the Month, being expired, they were order∣ed to attend him on the 23d of Januar. 1654, in the Painted Chamber, where he made up with Words and Passion what he wanted of Matter to charge them with, accusing them of endea∣vouring to bring all things into Disorder and Confusion, by raking into the particulars of the Instrument of Government, which he ex∣tolled very highly. He charged them with neglecting to make provision for the Army, and necessitating them thereby to take Free Quarter, to the great dissatisfaction of the Country, if it had not been prevented by the Care, and at the Expence of the Officers. In this and in many other particulars he very much preferred the Wisdom and Prudence of the Long Parliament, which was the part he proposed now to act, having determined to cry down this. And because he could not ac∣cuse them of any Practices against Liberty of Conscience, he charged them with their Prin∣ciples, and imputed to them all those Discon∣tents and Designs, which were on foot by se∣veral Parties against the present Government, affirming that if they had not their Rise from some that sat among them (which he thought he should make appear) yet they grew like Shrubs under their Shadow. And that he
might obviate that Objection, which his own Conscience told him was the true reason of his Dissatisfaction with what had been agreed on in this Assembly, he told them that their not settling the Government on him and his Heirs was not the reason why he refused to consent to what they presented to him, For, said he, so fully am I convinced (in the Judgment I now am) of the Injustice of Hereditary Go∣vernment, that if you had offered me the whole Instrument of Government with that one alteration in favour of my Family, I should have refused the whole for the sake of that; and I do not know tho' you have begun with an unworthy Person, but hereafter the same Method may be observed in the Choice of Magistrates, as was amongst the Children of Israel, who appointed those that had been most eminent in delivering them from their Enemies abroad to govern them at home. In which Excuse three things seem remarkable; First, that tho' in the Judgment he then was Hereditary Government was unjust, yet he re∣served a Liberty to alter his Opinion, if he should find Persons and Things inclining that way. Secondly, in declaring this to be his present Opinion, he flattered the Ambition of Major General Lambert, and kept him in ex∣pectation of succeeding him, and so secured his Assistance in carrying on his wicked Design. In the third place, by designing that the Gene∣ral should be always chosen Protector, it ap∣pears
that he would have had the Nation to be perpetually governed by the Military Sword. Thus did this wise Man (as he would be thought) weaken his own Interest, and lose the Affections of the People: For as by his Interruption of the long Parliament, he disob∣liged the most sober part of the Nation, so by the Dissolution of this Assembly he opened the Eyes of the rest, who had been hitherto made to believe that he was necessitated to that extraordinary Action, because they would not do those good things for the Nation which were expected from them; and by this re∣proachful dismission of the Convention, which consisted for the most part of Men of mode∣rate Spirits, and who had gone in the Judg∣ment of the most discerning Men, but too far in compliance with him for the purchase of their present Peace, he made a considerable part of those who had been Friends to him, ir∣reconcilable Enemies, and sent the Members into their respective Countries to relate to their Neighbours and those that sent them what an unreasonable Creature they had found him. Having dissolved the pretended Representa∣tive called by his own Authority, he began by Bribes to corrupt others to his Interest; and to this end ordered the Arrears of Col. Hewetson for his English Service to be paid in ready Mo∣ney, and his Irish Arrears to be satisfied out of forfeited Lands in the County of Dublin, at the
rate of the Adventurers in such places as he should choose. He ordered two thousand Pounds to be paid out of the Treasury to Mr. Weaver in lieu of what the Parliament had setled upon him out of the forfeited Lands in Scotland, and ten thousand Pounds in ready Money to Major General Lambert in considera∣tion of one thousand Pounds by Year out of the said forfeited Lands given to him by the Parliament, not regarding how he lavished a∣way the Publick Treasure, so as he might pro∣cure such Instruments as he thought would be subservient to his unjust Designs. By this time many began openly to discover their Discontents, and particularly the Friends of the Scots King, who tho' he saw clearly his Game playing by this Usurper through the Di∣visions he made amongst those, whose Interest it was to be united in opposition to him; yet being impatient of delay, and not caring how many he sacrificed, so as he might with more expedition recover the Exercise of his Power, he sent over divers Commissions for the raising of Horse and Foot, and prevailed with some young Gentlemen of little Consideration and less Experience to accept them, and to engage against a victorious Army commanded by one, who spared not the Purse of the Common∣wealth to procure Intelligence. By which means he caused a great number of Arms that were provided for the execution of this Design to be seized, and imprisoned divers Persons
concerned in it; wherein he made use of one Baily a Jesuit, who discovered his Kinsman one Mr. Bagnal, Son to the Lady Terringham, to∣gether with his own Brother Capt. Nicholas Baily, accusing them both of accepting Com∣missions for raising a Regiment, which Mr. Bagnal upon his examination did not deny. But notwithstanding this Discovery, so confi∣dent were these young Men of Success, that they still carried on their Plot, and appointed a Day for the execution of it. Cromwel sus∣pecting they might have some Grounds for their Confidence, dispatched Commissary Ge∣neral Reynolds to Ireland with Orders to cause some Forces to be imbarked for England, and accordingly about two thousand Foot and three hundred Horse were ordered to be sent over to his assistance; the Foot to be command∣ed by Col. Sadler, and the Horse by Major Bol∣ton. This Party being drawn to the Water∣side, some of the private Soldiers, whether from any Scruple of Conscience, or from an unwillingness to leave their Wives, Children, and Plantations in Ireland, I cannot say, re∣fused to imbark, tho' Lieut. General Fleetwood with several Field-Officers of the Army were present; alledging that they had listed them∣selves to fight against the Rebels of Ireland, and in prosecution of that Obligation were rea∣dy to obey all Commands; that they knew not against whom they should be drawn to engage in England, possibly against some of their best
Friends, and therefore desired to be excused from that Service. The Officers resolving to compel them by Force to go aboard, called a Court Martial upon the Place, where they condemned one of the most active to Death, and ordered one entire Company to be cashier∣ed; both which Orders were immediately put in execution, by breaking the Company, and hanging the Man upon the Mast of one of the Ships: At this Execution Col. Hewetson, who had been lately obliged in the matter of his Arrears, as a Mark of his Gratitude gave order that the poor Man should be hanged higher than was at first designed. The Cavalier Plot was still on foot in Eng∣land; and tho' divers of them were imprisoned, and many Arms seized, yet it was still resolved to attempt something. To this end a Cartload of Arms was conveyed to the place of Ren∣dezvouz agreed upon for the Northern Parts, where it was reported the Contrivers of this Design were to be headed by the Lord Wilmot. But receiving some Alarm upon their first meet∣ing, and fearing lest the regular Forces should fall upon them before they were sufficiently prepared for their Defence, they dispersed themselves, and left their Arms behind them. The only considerable Party that appeared were those at Salisbury, which they had an opportu∣nity of doing under colour of going to the Assizes. They consisted of about one hundred and fifty Horse, and drew together in the
Night, and were ordered to seize the Judges there in Circuit, the Sheriff of the County, and such other Persons as they should suspect to be Enemies to the Design. Col. Wagstaff was said to be their Commander; but Col. Penrud∣dock, a Gentleman of that Country, appeared most forward in giving out the necessary Or∣ders and Directions. Capt. Hugh Grove, and Mr. Jones of Newton, with several other Gentle∣men of those parts, were amongst them. They proclaimed Charles the Second to be King of England, &c. seized the Judges, and having taken away their Commissions, set them at liberty. They carried the Sheriff Mr. Dove away with them to Dogtown, to which place they thought sit to retire, apprehending more danger at Salisbury, their Forces not at all an∣swering their first Expectations. From thence they marched as far as Blandford in Dorsetshire, but so few joined them in their way, that at their arrival there they exceeded not the num∣ber of two hundred Horse. Most Men looked upon them as flying, divers of their own Party stealing from them as fast as others came to them; and those that staid with them, did so rather to secure themselves, and obtain better Condi∣tions, than from any hopes of succeeding. What they did served only to alarm the Army, some Troops of which pursued them into Devonshire, where they were fallen upon by Major Ʋn∣ton Crook▪ and defeated. Divers of them were taken Prisoners, and amongst them Col. Pen∣ruddock,
Mr. Jones, and Capt. Grove. Major General Wagstaff, Mr. Mompesson, and several others escaped, and went privately to their own Habitations; but upon Information given that they were concerned in this Plot, they were seized and secured in order to Trial. The Prisoners taken in the Fight pretended Articles for Life from Major Crook, alledging that otherwise they would not have delivered themselves on so easie Terms; but the Major absolutely denied any such thing: So that a Commission of Oyer and Terminer was issued for their Trial, and Mr. Attorney General Prideaux was sent from London to prosecute them. The Chief Justice Rolls was nomina∣ted in the Commission to be one of their Judg∣es, but he refused to act therein, on account that the Prisoners had done a particular Injury to him in seizing his Person at their first rising, and therefore he thought himself unfit to give his Judgment in their Case, wherein he might be thought a Party concerned. Some of them were condemned at Salisbury, and some at Exe∣ter, of which number were Col. Penruddock and Capt. Grove; and in aggravation of their Crimes it was urged, that this was their second Offence of this kind, and that it was committed against much Favour and Kindness, not only in that they had been permitted to compound for their Estates at a reasonable rate, when they had forfeited all, but also that an Act of Oblivi∣on had been granted to them and their whole
Party, whereby they were put into a condition of enjoying the Advantages of all the Victories of those to whom they had been Enemies. To this they answered, That they did not rise against those who had extended that Favour to them, but against a Person who had dissipated those Men, and established himself in their Place. And I cannot tell by what Laws of God or Man they could have been justly con∣demned, had they been upon as sure a Foun∣dation in what they declared for, as they were in what they declared against. But certainly it can never be esteemed by a wise Man to be worth the scratch of a Finger to remove a single Person acting by an Arbitrary Power, in order so set up another with the same unli∣mited Authority. Col. Penruddock and Capt. Grove were executed by beheading, according to the Sentence pronounced against them; but Mr. Jones of Newton-Tony being allied to Crom∣wel, was pardoned after he had been found guilty by the Jury, and Major Crook was ordered to have two hundred Pounds by year out of Mr. Monpesson's Estate for his good Service in the suppression of this Party. The Usurper was not a little startled at this Insurrection, suspecting that so small a Num∣ber would not have appeared without more considerable Encouragement; and therefore tho' he had lately so meanly stooped to court the Cavalier Party, and thereby highly provoked his ancient Friends to a just Jealousie and In∣dignation,
he resolved now to fall upon them, and to break through all their Compositions, e∣ven the Act of Oblivion it self, in the obtaining and passing of which he had so great a hand. To this end he commanded a tenth part of their Estates to be levied, in order as he pre∣tended to maintain those extraordinary Forces which their turbulent and seditious Practices obliged him to keep up. In defence of which Oppression I could never yet hear one Argu∣ment offered that carried any Weight, either with respect to Justice or Policy: for having by his Treachery and Usurpation disobliged those with whom he first engaged, he seemed to have no other way left to support himself, but by balancing his new with his old Ene∣mies, whom by this fresh Act of Injustice he rendred desperate and irreconcilable, they be∣ing not able to call any thing their own, whilst by the same rule that he seized one Tenth, he might also take away the other nine parts at his pleasure. And to put this detestable Project in execution, he divided England into Cantons, over each of which he placed a Bashaw under the Title of Major General, who was to have the Inspection and Government of inferiour Commissioners in every County, with Orders to seize the Persons, and distrain the Estates of such as should be refractory, and to put in execution such further Directions as they should receive from him.
In the Army there were not wanting some that still retained an Affection to the Cause of their Country, which appeared more particu∣larly in a Petition to Cromwel, signed by many of them, containing things so suitable to the Desires of honest Men, that it proved on that account very unwelcome to the Usurper. A¦mongst others Col. Okey endeavoured to per∣swade the Officers of his Regiment to stand by him in the prosecution of the ends of it, but was interrupted in that Design by his Major, for whom he had not without difficulty ob∣tained that Employment. It was also pre∣tended, that Major General Overton, with some Officers of the Army in Scotland, design∣ed to seize upon Monk, and to march with that Army to London for the Restitution of the Par∣liament: Upon suspicion of which he was seized and sent Prisoner to London, where he was committed to the Tower. About three hundred of the Petition afore∣said, together with another Writing called the Memento, were sent into Ireland in a Box di∣rected to me, and accompanied with a short Letter without any Subscription: Which Pa∣pers, when I had perused, and found them to contain such Truths as were very proper to prepare the Minds of Men to embrace the first Opportunity of rescuing themselves from the present Oppression, I thought it my Duty to procure them to be dispersed as much to the Advantage of the Publick as I could. Where∣in
I was particularly assisted by Capt. Walcot, one of the faithful Officers of my Regiment, and divers others of my Friends. I acquainted Lieutenant Col. Brayfield with my Design, and sent some of the Papers to Major Davis, who was then at Dublin, but resided usually in Con∣naught, thinking him to be a proper Person to be employed to disperse them in that Province. The said Major Davis having received the Pa∣pers, came to me, and desired to know if they came from me. I answered him, that tho' I wished my Name might have been concealed, yet that Question being put to me, I durst not deny it; and having further informed him of the Reasons which moved me so to do, he de∣clared himself to be fully satisfied with them. But it afterwards appeared, that upon the first receipt of those Papers, he had acquainted Mr. Roberts, the Auditor General therewith, pre∣suming him to be well affected to the Com∣mon Cause; which proving otherwise, the said Roberts inform'd Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood of what he knew. The Lieutenant Ge∣neral having also had advice that I had dis∣coursed with Lieutenant Col. Brayfield in the Castle-yard, and suspecting it might be upon the same Business, sent for Major Davis and the said Lieutenant Colonel to examine them, who confessed so much of the matter, as was a ground for him to dispach a Messenger to me, in order to enquire concerning the Truth of it. The Person imployed was one Major Wallis,
who coming to my House at Moncktown, in∣formed me, that Lieutenant General Fleetwood had received Information that I had dispersed some of the late Petitions and Memento's. To which I answered, that seeing the thing which I desired to carry on privately was not concea∣led, I should not decline to affirm, that my Conscience obliged me not to smother so much Truth as those Papers seem'd to me to contain. He then told me, that the Lieutenant General desired to speak with me about that Matter; and I promised to attend him the next Mor∣ning. Accordingly I went to him, and after some Conference concerning the Papers, he produced an Order from Cromwel and his Coun∣cil to this effect: That whereas I had declared my self dissatisfied with the present Government, he the said Lieutenant General Fleetwood was required to take care, that my Charge in the Army might be managed some other way. He ad∣ded, that he had received the said Order some Months since, but would not communicate it to me till now, when upon the distribution of these Papers he durst not conceal it any longer, lest he should be accounted a Confederate with me. I replied, that if my Life as well as my Employment had been at stake, I durst not have omitted what I thought to be my Duty in this Particular: That having no Power to dispute their Pleasure, I should at present look upon it as a Law to which I must submit. Some time after, Mr. Benjamin Worseley was sent
to acquaint me, that Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood had been in expectation of hearing from me touching my submission to the Order he shewed me, either by Letter, or the surrender of my Commission. I answered, that I thought neither of them necessary; and hoped that my Retirement into my own Country, which I suddenly designed, might be sufficient. But it was determined that I should not so easily quit the Publick Stage: For the next Morning I was desired to attend the Lieutenant General, which accordingly I did, and found eight or ten of his Advisers with him. The Design of their Meeting was to perswade me either to de∣liver up my Commission, or to engage under my Hand, not to act by virtue of it, till I should first receive Commission so to do from Cromwel, or Lieutenant General Fleetwood. To the first I answered, That I durst not deliver my Com∣mission to any other Power save that of the Parliament, who had entrusted me with it; and that it was all I had to justifie me for doing ma∣ny things wherein the Lives of Men had been concerned. To the Second I could by no means consent, because I durst not tie my own Hands from acting by virtue of it, when I should be justly call'd upon so to do. Being returned to my House, doubtful what the E∣vent of this Contest might be, and desirous to have good Advice before I proceeded any far∣ther, I sent to four or five Officers, of whose Integrity I had a good Opinion, to ask their
Judgment in this case. The Result of our Conference was, That I should in a Letter to Lieutenant General Fleetwood, state the Justice of my Call to the Employment whereof I was possest, and the Conditions on which I received my Commission, being particularly solicited to it by Cromwel himself, when he appeared in the shape of a Commonwealths▪man: The Autho∣rity that gave me my Commission; the pre∣sent Defection from that Authority and Com∣mon Cause, which Cromwel as well as I had en∣gaged to maintain; the Duty incumbent upon me to disperse the said Books, because the Sub∣stance of my Dissatisfaction was contained in them; withal to declare what I would be sa∣tisfied with, if it might be attained; and if that could not be, how far I thought my self obliged to submit. A Letter to this effect be∣ing drawn up by me, with the Advice of the Officers above-mentioned, I sent it to the Lieu∣tenant General, and some time after received a Message from him to acquaint me, that ac∣cording to a late Order brought to him from England, I must either deliver my Commission, or be sent Prisoner thither. I told the Messen∣ger, that I could not comply with his Demand, tho' I should be sent Prisoner to Rome; but that the Commission lay in a Cabinet in my Closet, where he might find it if he thought fit to break open the Door, and take it away. But he having no other Orders than to demand the Delivery of my Commission, departed
without it. A Day or two after Mr. Miles Corbet came to my House by order of the Lieu∣tenant General, and shewed me the Letter that Cromwel had sent to require him to demand the Surrender of my Commission, and in case of refusal to secure my Person in Ireland, or to send me Prisoner to England. He used what Arguments he could to induce me to a Compli∣ance, which when I had heard, I set down in writing my Answer, to be delivered to Lieu∣tenant General Fleetwood, which was in sub∣stance to let him know, That I looked upon my Commission to be of no more danger to them, than if it was actually taken from me, and can∣celled at the head of the Army, but that I was not willing, by a voluntary Submission, to own the Justice of the present Order, because I had received the said Commission from the Parlia∣ment to serve as an Officer in their Army, in order to the execution of Justice upon those who had murdered and oppressed the English Protestants; and that I durst not consent to be withdrawn from that Duty by any save that Authority alone which had placed me in that Station: That if I had received my Commissi¦on immediately from the General, I should not willingly return it at his Pleasure in this Con∣juncture, as well in regard to the Duty I owed to the Publick, as to the Army: That it could be esteemed nothing less than a wilful betray∣ing of that Cause for which I had contended in conjunction with the Army, if I, who had been
honoured with an Employment in a War raised for the Defence of Liberty against the Arbitra∣ry Power of a single Person, should voluntarily submit to what was proposed. For since the whole Authority of the Three Nations was as∣sumed by the Army, if I should acknowledge the entire Disposal of all things relating to that Army to reside in the General, what would this be but to declare my Consent to give up the Power of the Parliament, Army, and Nation into his hands? However, to avoid Extremi∣ties, as far as I was able, I proposed that if a Council of the Officers who were about Dub∣lin might be called, and that upon a full hear∣ing and debate of the matter they should de∣clare it to be my Duty, I would submit, as to the Higher Powers, having none at present to appeal to from them but God. This Expedi∣ent being not approved, the Lieutenant Gene∣ral sent Mr. Miles Corbet again to me, with a Proposition, that I would chuse either to go to London, or to be confined in Ireland. In an∣swer to which, and upon consideration of the Discomposure of my Affairs in England, by reason of a great Debt left upon my Estate at my departure thence, not likely to be lessened by my Absence; and being very desirous to come to a speedy Trial for my Refusal to de∣liver my Commission, I made choice of the for∣mer. Mr. Corbet then told me, that a Man of War should be prepared for my Transportati∣on, provided I would give my word to appear
before Cromwel, and not to act any thing against him in the mean time, to which I consented. For tho' I durst not engage to disable my self from acting, whilst nothing was objected a∣gainst me, lest I should thereby not only have given away my own Liberty, but also make an ill Precedent for other Men; yet being now accused of a pretended Crime, I was contented to pass my Parole to appear as desired, and in the mean time not to act against him. When the Lieutenant General perceived that I was re∣solved on my Journey, he desired me to put off my departure for two Months, pretending that things being in some disorder in England, he feared Cromwel might apprehend a necessity of using me with more Severity than he wished; and to soften this Delay, gave a Warrant for the payment of a Sum of Money to me for de∣fraying my Expences whilst I staid, together with those of my Journey to London. And in∣deed what he said concerning the Disorders of England, was not without ground, things run∣ning every day more and more into Confusion, the Cavaliers being enraged to see the Throne usurped, and those who had hazarded all for their Country finding themselves cheated, Custom and Excise raised without Authority of Parliament, and Taxes imposed to no other end than to support the Pride and Insolence of a single Person. Some there were that openly opposed these Oppressions, and amongst others Mr. George Cony a Merchant, who having re∣fused
to pay Custom, it was violently taken from him, and he thereupon sued the Collector at the Common Law. But Cromwel resolving to put a stop to such dangerous Precedents, caused the Counsel for Mr. Cony, who were Serjeant Maynard, Serjeant Twysden, and Mr. Wadham Windham, to be sent to the Tower, where they had not been above three or four Days, when they unworthily petitioned to be set at liberty, acknowledging their Fault, and promising to do so no more, chusing rather to sacrifice the Cause of their Client, wherein that of their Country was also minently con∣cerned, than to endure a little Restraint, with the loss of the Fees for a few days. By this means, when the Cause came to the next hear∣ing, Mr. Cony was necessitated to plead for him∣self, which he did in as short a manner as he could, referring it wholly to the Judge, whe∣ther that Tax being not authorized by Parlia∣ment, ought to be paid by the Law of the Land; and declaring that he would abide by his Judgment therein. Serjeant Rolls, then Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, tho' a con∣scientious Man, and a Lover of Civil Liberty, yet not daring to determine it for him, said, that something must be allowed to Cases of Necessity. To which Mr. Cony replied, That it was never wont to be a good Plea in Law, for a Man to make Necessities, and then to plead them. But the Judge wanting Courage, would not give Judgment against the Usurper;
and being too much an honest Man to give it for him, he took time till the next ensuing Term, to consider what Rule he should give in the case. In the mean time, upon conside∣ration that his continuance in that Station was like to ensnare him more and more, he desired, by a Letter to Cromwel, to have his Quietus; and Serjeant Glyn was appointed to succeed him in his Employment, as a fitter Instrument to car∣ry on the Designs on foot. The new Chief Justice, before he came to sit on the Bench, took care to have this Business accommodated with Cony, who lost his Reputation by withdraw∣ing himself from a Cause wherein the Publick was so much concerned. Sir Peter Wentworth; a Member of the Long Parliament, caused also a Collector in the Country to be arrested and prosecuted at his Suit, tho' he could hardly procure an Attorney to appear, or Counsel to plead for him. Cromwel having received no∣tice of this Prosecution, sent a Messenger with an Order to bring him before the Council; where being examined concerning the Ground of his Proceeding, he told them, that he was moved to it by his constant Principle, That by the Law of England, no Money ought to be levied upon the People without their Consent in Parlia∣ment. Cromwel then asked him, whether he would withdraw his Action or no? To which he replied, If you will command me, I must submit; and thereupon Cromwel having com∣manded it, he withdrew his Action. Some
time after taking the liberty in a Discourse with him to reprove him for that Retractation, he made me this Answer, That no Man could have done more than he did to the time of his appearing at the Council, and that if he had then failed in any thing, it must be attributed to his Age of threescore and three Years, when, said he, the Blood does not run with the same Vigour as in younger Men. It having been discovered that the Lord Grey of Grooby had given to a Person a Copy of the Memento which I had before dispersed in Ireland, he was sent for to London, and committed Prisoner to Windsor-Castle for the same. The next Term he sued for a Habeas Corpus, which the Chief Justice, according to Law, granted him, but the Governour of Windsor-Castle refused to give Obedience to the Order of Court, and so rendred it ineffectual to him, insomuch that he could not obtain his Liberty till he had given a pecuniary Security not to act against the Go∣vernment, which he chose to do rather than to engage his Parole, thereby hazarding only the Loss of so much Money, and preserving his Honour and Integrity. Col. Sexby was also suspected to have had a hand in the dispersion of the Petitions and Memento's before-men∣tioned; and thereupon was sent for in order to be secured, which he having notice of, fled, but was pursued so close, that his Man was taken with his Portmanteau. Cromwel being disap∣pointed of taking him, pretended on the ac∣count
of ancient Friendship to pass by what he had done, and proposed to imploy him as his Agent to those of Bourdeaux, who had applied themselves for Succour against the oppressing Ministry of France. The Colonel being un∣der necessity, accepted of the Employment, and Cromwel ordered him a Sum of Money to sup∣ply his present Occasions, with Letters of Ex∣change for more at Bourdeaux. Being thus fur∣nished, he went over to France, where his Busi∣ness being betrayed to the Magistrates of Bour∣deaux, they gave order to seize his Person; but he having received advice of their Intenti∣ons, made his Escape by Night over the Wall of the Town, and departed from that King∣dom. In Ireland it was thought fit to disband some part of the Army; yet rather to free themselves of some of the discontented Party, than that Nation of the Charge. In order to this, a List was produced lately sent from England, ap∣pointing what Regiments of Horse and Foot should be broken. Of these mine was to be one, tho' care was taken that those of my Re∣giment, or any other, that would sail with any Wind, should be provided for; and it must be acknowledged, that they were so just to allow both Officers and Soldiers their full Arrears out of the forfeited Lands in each County, ac∣cording to the Rates that had been set upon them by the General Council of Officers, where∣in the Goodness and Conveniency of every
County was estimated and equally balanced. The Arrears of my Regiment fell by Lot to be satisfied in the County of Wexford, where I ordered Capt. Walcot, my Captain Lieutenant, with my Cornet and Quarter-master, to act for me, which they did; and my Proportion in the said Land, yielded me about one hundred pounds the first Year, and afterwards near 200. It was reported to be farther improvable; but I never saw it, and know not whether I ever shall. My Lieutenant Colonel having had his Arrears with the rest of the Regiment, was ac∣cused of saying that this Distribution would prove invalid without an Act of Parliament, and the Crime aggravated by one, who infor∣med at the head Quarters as if he designed to excite the Soldiers to a Mutiny; whereupon he was sent for, and committed to Custody till he gave assurance of his quiet and peaceable Beha∣viour. The Design of seizing the Riches of the Spaniards in the West-Indies, having proved unsuccessful, and instead of bringing Gold or Sil∣ver home, much was transported from hence thither, where many of our Men daily perish∣ed thro' want and the excessive Heats of that Climate; yet it was resolved to keep Jamaica, of which place Col. Fortescue was made Go∣vernour, and Commander in Chief of the For∣ces there, after the return of Col. Venables. Amongst others that died, there was one Mr. Winslow, who had been designed to be Gover∣nour
of some Place, when they could get it. In this Expedition one Mr. Gage a Priest died also, who was reported to have been a princi∣pal Adviser of this Undertaking. Colonel For∣tescue continued not long in his Employment before he died also: After whose Death Colonel Edward Doily was made Commander in Chief, and he falling to plant, made a shift to get a Subsistence, which was but a poor return for the Expence and Loss sustained in this Attempt. And as Cromwel was thus prodigal of the Lives of English-men abroad, so was he no less of our Liberties at home; for not contenting him∣self with the Death of many of those who had raised Arms against him, and Seizure of the Goods of that Party, he transported whole Droves of them at a time into foreign parts, without any legal Trial. In the number of those that were sent away was Mr. William Ashburnham, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and others, to whom may be added Lieut. Col. John Lil∣burn, who contrary to all Law, and after an Acquittal by a Jury, had been formerly bani∣shed. And now to prevent Major General Overton from the Benefit of a Habeas Corpus, for which Cromwel was informed he intended to move, tho' he had no reason to alledge why it should be denied him; yet he sent him in custody to Jersey with the hazard of his Life, and to the great prejudice of his Estate. Major John Wildman was also seized upon, and it was pretended that he was taken dictating to his
Servant a Declaration for levying War against Oliver Cromwel. The Citizens of London were made acquainted with it, and the said Major brought to London by a Guard of Horse, and committed Prisoner to the Tower. Oliver having felt the Pulse of the Army in Ireland, as was observed before, resolved to send his Son Harry thither, that being on the Place, he might be the more able to fix the Soldiery to his Interest. In his Journey to Ireland with his Wife and Family, he was every-where caressed by the Cavalier Party, and particularly enter∣tained by Col. Mosson in North-Wales, where the Health of his Father was drunk by the said Colonel. After some time spent in those parts, he put to Sea; and upon his arrival in the Bay of Dublin, the Men of War that accom∣panied him, and other Ships in the Harbour, rung such a Peal with their Cannon, as if some great good News had been coming to us; and tho' the usual place of landing for those who come in Ships of War was near my House, yet he and his company went up in Boats to the Rings-end, where they went ashore, and were met there by most of the Officers Civil and Military about the Town: The end of his coming over was not at first discovered, and conjectured to be only to command in the Ar∣my as Major General under Lieut. General Fleetwood. The two Months agreed on at the desire of the Lieutenant General for my Stay in Ireland being expired, he renewed his Request
that I would again defer my Journey to Eng∣land for two Months longer, to which I con∣sented, not doubting that it proceeded from his Friendship to me. But the last two Months drawing near to an end, I began to prepare for my Journey; which being observed, an Order, pursuant to Instructions from England, was brought to me by Col. Thomas Herbert, Secre∣tary of the Council, requiring me to remain in Ireland. The Secretary told me, that he had it in Commission from Lieut. General Fleet∣wood, to acquaint me, that upon his own ac∣count, and notwithstanding this Order, he would take upon him to give me permission to go in∣to England for setling my Affairs there, if I would engage to return within six Months, and not act against the present Government during that time. Tho' I thought my self very ill used, not on∣ly by being denied the opportunity of coming to a speedy Trial for not delivering my Com∣mission at the Command of the General, but al∣so by being prevented to take care of my pri∣vate Affairs without these Fetters; yet I let him know, that I would attend the Lieutenant General the next Morning concerning this matter: Which having done according to my Promise, he pressed me to comply with his Re∣quest, with the general Argument of the Duty that lay upon me to submit to the higher Powers. I answered, that as I conceived it was yet in dis∣pute who were these higher Powers, whether the
Government of a Commonwealth, or that of a single Person; that I knew not whether with∣in the time prefixed by him for me to engage not to act, I might have an opportunity so to do, and therefore durst not engage to the con∣trary. He demanded of me what I judged an opportunity to justifie me in such an Underta∣king? To which I replied, Such an appearance of good Men, as might probably balance the Power of the single Person: I took the Liber∣ty also to tell him, that he himself had already justified that Principle by his own Practice in acting against the King: But, said he, we had the Authority of the Parliament for our Justi∣fication. But what, said I, have you to coun∣tenance you in your Actions now for a single Person against the Parliament, which I may not have to justifie me in acting with another Power against this single Person? and for any thing I know, the same Parliamentary Autho∣rity that commissioned us all to act against the King, may within that time authorize me to act against the present single Person. Two or three Conferences and Messages passed be∣tween us upon this Business, the result of all which was, that I promised to render my self a Prisoner to Cromwel, who might farther dispose of me as God should permit him: But this Offer not proving satisfactory, the Council se∣conded their former Order, and required me not to go out of Ireland without their farther Directions. Finding my self thus surrounded,
and well knowing that this Hardship was impo∣sed upon me by Order from Whitehall, and that what the Lieutenant General had proposed, was out of Affection to my Person, I thought my self obliged to use my utmost Endeavours to secure him from suffering for his Civility and Friendship to me: To that end I proposed that tho' I could not engage positively not to act during six Months, as was desired, because whatever Opportunity might be offered, I should then have my Hands tied during the said time; yet I would promise not to act within that time against the present Government, un∣less I had first surrendred my self to the General, or Lieut. General Fleetwood, and desired of them to be freed from this Engagement. Lieutenant General Fleetwood consented to this Proposition, professing his readiness to comply with my Desires in what he could; and accordingly this Agreement being drawn up to our mutual Satisfaction, together with his Permission for my Departure to England, was signed by him at the Phoenix, in the presence of Mr. Corbet, then Chief Baron in that Nation. The next Day Col. Lawrence came to me, and after some Discourse, told me, that by reason of some Op∣position which the Lieutenant General had met with in my Affair, he had sent him to desire of me, that notwithstanding what had passed be∣tween us, I would respite my Journey for a Fortnight or three Weeks longer, in which time he doubted not to clear my way for me.
I presently suspected from what Corner the Wind blew, but knew not how to help my self for the present. The next Morning Mr. Cor∣bet sent me a Message, to desire that I would meet him on the Road betwixt my House and Dublin; which having done according to his Appointment, he acquainted me more particu∣larly with what had happened, telling me that Col. Cromwel was so enraged at the Form of our Agreement, that he had written to his Father concerning it, insomuch that if I should venture to go, he doubted I might be obstruct∣ed by the way, which would not only be troublesome to me, but dishonourable to the Lieutenant General. He assured me also that Lieut. General Fleetwood would take such care to represent the matter in England, that all Obstacles to my Passage might be removed in a short time, and desired of me that I would not have the worse Opinion of him for not performing at present what he had promised. In answer to Mr. Corbet, I let him know, that I found my self so much disposed to the contrary, that whereas once I thought the Lieu∣tenant General could have done more for me if he would, now I clearly perceived he had done more on my account than he could well answer. It now began to be publick that Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood was suddenly to depart for England, tho' it was given out that his Business there was only to advise in some particular Affairs,
and that he should speedily return to Ireland. At his Departure he was accompanied by Col. Cromwel and his Lady, the Council, the May∣or and Aldermen of Dublin, with most of the considerable Persons then about the City. They brought him as far as my House, which stood near the place of embarking, where after a short stay he went on board, and departed for Eng∣land, leaving me with a permission to transport my self into England, which was to take effect about a Month after, requiring all Persons to permit me to pass without Interruption. He promised me likewise that in the mean time he would take care to remove all Difficulties that might hinder me, and that it should be the first Business he would do after his arrival at London. Some time after, I understood by a Letter from my Father Oldsworth, that Lieut. General Fleet∣wood had assured him that I would suddenly be in England, and that he had left me a Passport as sufficient to that purpose as he could give, or I needed; which being spoken by him after he had been with his Father Cromwel, made me presume he had cleared the way for me. Having received this Advice, I prepared for my Jour∣ney, and waiting on Mr. Corbet to take my leave of him, I shewed him the Lieut. General's Pass, and that Clause in my Father Oldsworth's Let∣ter which related to it. He told me that Col. Cromwel, who was then in his Progress, had sent a Message to him that he should acquaint
me with a second Order lately brought from England, to require positively my Stay in Ire∣land; but withal added, that being unwilling to be employed in such unwelcome Messages to his Friends, he had made his Excuse to the Colonel by Letter, which he presumed was accepted by him, because he had heard no∣thing of it since that time, and therefore de∣clared, that he mentioned it not to me as a Person commissioned so to do, but only as a Friend. I told him that I should take no notice of it, but proceed on my Voyage, as I had before designed, having already hired a Vessel to that end. He then desired that I would stay till the return of Colonel Cromwel, which would cer∣tainly be within two or three days, lest it should be suspected that he had advised with me about my Departure. I being unwilling to bring any prejudice upon him, consented to defer my Journey till the return of Colonel Cromwel, and endeavoured to attend him on the Day of his coming to Town: But he arriving late in the Night, I found my self ob∣liged to go home without speaking to him, by reason of a Humour fallen upon one of my Legs, which had been hurt by a Horse; so that I was constrained to put my Wise to the trouble of making my Excuse; who ac∣quainting him with my Condition, and shew∣ing him the Lieutenant General's Pass, with the Clause in that Letter before mentioned, as∣sured him that the Composure and Settlement
of my Estate in England necessarily required my presence there. He told her that he knew no∣thing to hinder my passage, and that a Man of War was ready in the Harbour for our Trans∣portation; and desiring her to dine, promised that after Dinner they should go together to Cork-House, to speak with Mr. Corbet her Hus∣band's old Friend, as he favoured me to call him, and that the work should be done. My Wife accordingly went with him full of Ex∣pectation, that the Business she came about would be effected; but after he had consulted with Mr. Corbet, he told her, that though I had the Lieut. General's Pass, yet because he had since received a Command for my stay, he could not give Order for my Departure: That if she would go, she should have a Ship of War to transport her, which she excused, unless I might have permission to go also. Then said she, tho' you will not grant a Warrant for my Husband's going, I hope you will not order his stay. No indeed, said Col. Cromwel, I shall not, tho' I think it would be much better for him to stay; tho' what I speak is as a Friend, and not as one in Authority. Upon consideration of these Particulars: 1st. That I had the Lieutenant General's Or∣der, who was then the Chief Officer in Ireland, together with Mr. Corbet's Advice for my go∣ing, who was one of the Council, in case I were not ordered to stay, and also Col. Crom∣wel's Promise, who was Principal in Command
upon the place, that he would not detain me, I resolved to go aboard. And having written a Letter to Col. Cromwel, to assure him that the end of my going to England was to settle my discomposed Family and Estate, I ordered it not to be delivered to him till the next Day a∣bout Noon, and endeavoured to get on board with my Wife and Servants on that Day; but the Wind blowing hard, and the Weather be∣ing very bad, no Boat could be procured that would adventure to Sea. At last I prevailed not without difficulty with the Master of one of the largest Herring-Vessels that was in the Bay to carry me and my Family to the Ship which was to transport me, and lay about a League and half from the Shoar. We depart∣ed between two and three in the Afternoon, and were accompanied to the Ship by about two hundred People of the place, so that it could not be justly said, as it was afterwards, that I stole away privately, the Road by which the Vessel must necessarily pass, being also within sight of Dublin. Being arrived on board the Man of War which lay ready for us, we weighed Anchor about eleven a Clock that Night, and recovered the Harbour of Beauma∣ris by next Day at Noon, about which time my Letter to Col. Cromwel was according to my Order delivered to him by my Servant. The Weather was so tempestuous, that we durst not adventure to land till the second Day after our Arrival, when the Wind somewhat
abating, we went a-shoar, where the Gover∣nour of Beaumaris met us, and furnished us with Horses to carry us to the Town. We ob∣served him to look a little melancholy, yet sus∣pected not the reason of it. But after Dinner the Governour, as civilly as he could, acquainted me, that one Captain Shaw, who was then in Town, had brought him an Order from Col. Henry Cromwel, and the rest of the Council in Ireland, to detain me there till the Pleasure of his Father should be known concerning me. I desired a sight of the Order, and found it to be directed to the Governour of Beaumaris, Che∣ster, or any other Garrison, or Commander of any of the Forces, &c. and signed by Henry Cromwel, ...... Pepis, Matt. Thomlinson, and Miles Corbet. Capt. Shaw excused himself for being employed in this Message, and told me, that the Day after I left Ireland, he being just then arrived from England, and very weary of his Journey, went to bed, where he had not been above an Hour, before he was sent for by Col. Cromwel, and told, that being informed of my Departure for England, which was ex∣presly against an Order received from his Fa∣ther, he had immediately summoned a Coun∣cil, where it had been agreed to send after me, and to secure me wheresoever I should be over∣taken, and that he had pitched upon him as a fit Person to be employed in this Business, and to attend his Father and the Lieutenant Gene∣ral with an account of it. He said he had en∣deavoured
to get himself excused, but neither his Weariness by reason of his great Journey, nor any other Arguments would prevail with Col. Cromwel. I told him, that those who re∣solved to worship the Rising Sun, must not re∣fuse to run upon more ungrateful Errands than this, even towards the best of their Friends, and therefore could not suppose that any Re∣spect which he expressed to have for me should prevail to excuse him from this Employment: However, that I thought Lieutenant General Fleetwood, whom I knew to be the Person he hoped to advance himself by, would not take it well that he should be instrumental in offer∣ing this Affront to his Authority, he being Chief Governour of Ireland, and I on my Journey by his Passport and Permission, who I hoped understood his own Power. The Lord Fitz-Williams, a civil Person, tho' a Papist, and one who had been Lieutenant General to Preston when he commanded an Army of Irish Rebels, came over with us from Ireland, and being rea∣dy to take Horse for London, was pleased to give me a Visit before he went, wherein he not only expressed himself very sorry to see me un∣der Restraint, but assured me of his readiness to use his utmost Endeavours with his Highness the Lord Protector, as he thought fit to call him, in my behalf. I gave him my Thanks for his Civility, but thought it a strange Revo∣lution of Affairs, that the Interest of a Gentle∣man who had been Lieutenant General in the
Army of the Irish Rebels, should be so much greater than mine in the General of the Army of the Commonwealth. Capt. Shaw being rea∣dy to depart for London, and desiring to know if he could do any Service for me there, I gave him a Letter for Lieutenant General Fleetwood, which was to let him know what had hapned since his Departure, wherein I thought him to be much more concerned than my self; and that being his Prisoner, and coming upon his Permission, the Affront was wholly done to him, tho' the suffering part fell to my share. In the Evening I was conveyed to a Widow's House in the Town, where I had the Conve∣niency of a Chamber and Dining-Room, with a Sentinel placed at the Stairs-head. With great Impatience I expected the Return of the Post from London, hoping that the Matter would be so presented by Lieutenant Gene∣ral Fleetwood and Capt. Shaw, that I might have my Liberty. But the Usurper, whose Jealou∣sies increased with his Guilt, being informed of my Landing, dispatched an Order to the Go∣vernour of Beaumaris, to this effect, That where∣as Lieutenant General Ludlow was stoln out of Ireland, he should take care to keep him in strict and safe Custody, and not to permit any to speak with him. Upon the Receipt of this Order, the Governour, resolving to make his Fortune by any means, proposed to imprison me in the Castle, the Air of which place is so unheal∣thy, that the Soldiers dare not lodge there;
and it is observed, that few Prisoners who have been confined there have ever recovered from the Distempers which they contracted. I told him, that being in his Power, I could not resist; but the Warrant requiring no such thing, a time might come wherein he might be called to account for what he now did. Whereupon he thought fit to let me remain at my Lodg∣ings, but permitted no Man to come to me save my own Servants, and of those not above two. One cause of this Severity toward me, as I conjecture, was, that I might not have an Op∣portunity of speaking with the Officers of the Irish Brigade, lest I should have put them in mind of their Duty, who having served Crom∣wel's turn in assisting to suppress the late At∣tempts against him, were now returning for Ire∣land, and lay at Beaumaris in expectation of a Wind. Neither did their Cruelty extend only to me, but Col. Cromwel having notice that Col. Kempstone, who Married my Sister, had assisted me in my going away, and had not given advice to him of it, committed him to Prison where he was used with equal Severity as my self, tho' he alledged in his justification that he knew not that I was guilty of any Crime, nor that I was forbidden to depart from Ireland; and tho' he did not know of any Ne∣cessity I had of a Pass for my going, yet he well knew that I had one from Lieutenant General Fleetwood, the Chief Officer of Ire∣land, and that he only accompanied me
to the Water-side, as a hundred more had done. To prevent any false Representation of the State of my Business, I gave an account of it to my Friends in Ireland, as well as to those in England. Some of my Letters were inter∣cepted, and in one of them was found an Ex∣pression to this effect: Tho' I know not of any Crime whereof I am guilty, yet I am worse used by those with whom I have engaged, than by those against whom I fought; for when I was made Pri∣soner by the latter, no Person was denied the Li∣berty of coming to me, and I was permitted in publick to give my Reasons in justification of the Proceedings of the Parliament; but the present Powers being as it seems more conscious of their own Guilt, will not permit me either to see or speak with any of my Friends. After I had been six Weeks a Prisoner, Capt. Shaw returned to Beau∣maris with an Order for my Discharge, on con∣dition that I would sign an Engagement which he brought ready drawn, to oblige my self never to act against the present Government. He told me, that Lieutenant General Fleetwood suspect∣ing my unwillingness to sign any such Paper, had desired Col. John Jones to accompany him to me, and either to perswade me to subscribe it, or to accommodate the Business as well as he could. Accordingly Col. Jones came to me with Col. Sadler, who commanded the Irish Brigade before-mentioned, and who had been long in the Town, tho' he durst not come to
me before this time. Upon the perusal of this Engagement, which was proposed as the con∣dition of my Discharge, I soon came to a Re∣solution, that I would not sign it, if my Life as well as my Liberty had lain at stake; acquaint∣ing them with the Reasons of my Refusal, and with the Engagement given to Lieutenant Ge∣neral Fleetwood, by which I stood obliged to render my self a Prisoner either to Cromwel or himself, which I was ready to perform. Col. Sadler said, That it was highly reasonable, and as much as could be expected from me; and ad∣ded, that he was confident the Difference be∣tween Cromwel and me was grounded upon Mistakes, he having heard him express great Affection to me, with Protestations that he wished me as well as any Man in the three Na∣tions. I thought it not convenient to take much pains to undeceive him, but was rather willing he should believe that he spoke in ear∣nest, tho' indeed he loved no Person living any farther than he served to promote his Ambiti∣tion; for how could it be expected that one who had sacrificed his Conscience and Honour, as well as the Cause of his Country, to the Idol of his Pride, should scruple to trample under foot any Man that stood in his way? One of the Company endeavoured to perswade me to sign the Paper as it was drawn, reserving to my self those Explanations which I had before pro∣posed, or else to look upon my self as free from any Obligation, being under a Force. To
which I answered, That I thought it below a Man to be compelled to any Act against his Conscience, with an intention to violate the same; and that to reserve any Explanations to my self, as it had been against my Practice, so was it contrary to my Principles, unless the Go∣vernour would consent to accept my Subscrip∣tion to the Engagement with such an Explana∣tion as I was willing to make. Thus despairing to obtain the Liberty of pursuing my Journey at that time, I prepared to send my Wise to settle my Affairs as well as she could; and the Company being gone to Dinner, I wrote Let∣ters to my Friends and Relations; when on a sudden Col. Jones and Col. Sadler came up to tell me that the Governour was willing to dis∣charge me if I would sign the Engagement with such an Explanation as I had proposed. Here∣upon I desired the Governour not to do any thing out of respect to me, that might not con∣sist with the Duty of his Place, or prove to be to his Prejudice, my Explanation being in my Opinion an absolute Repeal of the Engagement as soon as I had rendred my self. He replied, he had considered of it, and was willing to ac∣cept of it, if I would sign it. Whereupon the Company desired me to draw my own Expla∣nation, which I did to this effect, viz. I look upon this Engagement now tendred to me for my Subscription by the Governour of Beaumaris, by Order from, &c. to be no longer of any force than till I have rendred my self a Prisoner at White∣hall,
and in that Sense I only subscribe it. Having drawn and signed two Copies of this Explana∣tion, and procured them to be attested by Co∣lonel John Jones, Colonel Sadler, and Captain Shaw, I delivered one of them to the Gover∣nour, and kept the other my self, and then signed the Engagement. Capt. Shaw informed me that Lieutenant General Fleetwood had been much concerned for my Restraint, and had ex∣pressed himself highly displeased with him for undertaking that Imployment; that he had used all possible Diligence for my Liberty, in which he had met with great Opposition; in particular, that Major General Lambert had endeavoured to perswade him that I was of such Principles, and such a Spirit, as not to de∣serve my Liberty, tho' I cannot remember that our Familiarity had ever been so great as to ena∣ble him to give a Character of me. Having thus cleared my way, I departed from Beaumaris, and passing over Penman-Maur I ar∣rived at Conway the first Night. From thence in two days I reached Wrexham, where after we had been treated two or three days by Col. Jones, my Coach which I had sent before from Ireland being brought to us, we set forward on our Journey for London; but the ways being extremely bad, by reason of a Frost which yet was not able to bear the Coach, it was near three a Clock before we came to Whitchurch, tho' it was not above twelve Miles. But being desirous to reach London if possible that Week,
fearing if Cromwel should hear of my being on the Road, he would send to stop me, we tra∣velled till nine a Clock that Night, and the next after till twelve. The next day we came to Coventry about four in the Afternoon, where Col. Whalley commanded as Bashaw, or Major General. After some refreshment we conti∣nued our Journey, and by the help of the Moon-light and the Snow that lay on the Ground, we reached Dunchurch a little after twelve; there we rested till about three, and then set forward toward Tocester, where we arrived by six that Night, and between one and two the next Morning we began our Jour∣ney for London: But at Stony-stratford the Coach breaking, my Wife and I, with two or three Servants, took Horse, and about six of the Clock in the evening of the 10th of December, one of the shortest days of the Year, we came to Westminster, having travelled fifty Miles that day. The same Night I waited on Lieu∣tenant General Fleetwood, to acknowledge his Care of me, and to acquaint him with the Con∣dition on which I had my Liberty to come up, and with the explanation upon which only I had signed the Engagement proposed to me, and desired of him that the whole Matter of Fact might be plainly stated to his Father-in-law, and that I might be now accounted free from that Engagement, according to the Ex∣planation. He told me, he was glad to see me there, and would take care to acquaint his
Highness, as he called him, with what I had said, and to represent it as much as might be to my advantage. The next Wednesday after my arrival about eight in the Evening, Crom∣wel sent a Gentleman, one Mr. Fenwick, to let me know that he would speak with me. I found him in his Bed-Chamber at Whitehall, and with him Major General Lambert, Col. Sydenham, Mr. Walter Strickland, Col. Monta∣gue, and soon after came in Lieutenant General Fleetwood. The first Salute I received from him was to tell me, that I had not dealt fairly with him in making him to believe I had sign∣ed an Engagement not to act against him, and yet reserving an Explanation whereby I made void that Engagement; which if it had not been made known to him, he might have relied upon my Promise, and so have been engaged in Blood before he was aware. I told him, I knew not why he should look upon me to be so considerable; neither could I apprehend how it had been possible for me to deal more fairly and openly with him than I had done: For I had told his Governour at Beaumaris, that if my Life as well as my Liberty had been at stake, I could not sign the Engagement simply, and therefore had resolved to continue there, had not the Governour himself expressed a Desire to accept of my Subscription with that Explanati∣on. And because I accounted it to be in effect a Repeal of the Engagement, I had told him so and desired him to do nothing out of re∣spect
to me that consisted not with his Duty; notwithstanding which, the Governour told me, he was free to accept my Subscription, so that I knew not but he might have received In∣structions so to do. No, said Cromwel, he had none from me. That was more, said I, than I knew; and if you had not notice as well of the one as the other, it was not my fault, for I had acquainted you with neither; and those who informed you of the one, I presumed had made you acquainted with the other also. He then objected to me, that I was stolen from Ire∣land without leave: To which I made answer, That tho' I knew no cause why I should either be detained in Ireland, or obliged to ask leave to depart, yet to avoid all pretence of Excepti∣on against me, I had taken care to procure even that too, as far as it was possible, having a Passport for England from Lieutenant General Fleetwood, the Chief Officer of Ireland, with the Advice of Mr. Corbet, one of his Council, for my coming, and his Son Harry's Promise not to obstruct me in my Journey. He next asked me, wherefore I would not engage not to act against the present Government, telling me, that if Nero were in Power, it would be my Duty to submit. To which I replied, that I was ready to submit, and could truly say, that I knew not of any Design against him. But said I, if Providence open a way, and give an Opportunity of appearing in behalf of the Peo∣ple, I cannot consent to tie my own Hands be∣fore-hand,
and oblige my self not to lay hold on it. However, said he, it is not reasonable to suffer one that I distrust to come within my House, till he assure me he will do me no Mis∣chief: I told him, I was not accustomed to go to any House, unless I expected to be welcom; neither had I come hither but upon a Message from him, and that I desired nothing but a lit∣tle liberty to breathe in the Air, to which I conceived I had an equal Right with other Men. He then fell to inveigh bitterly against Major Wildman, as the Author of the Petition from the Army before-mentioned, reviling him with unhandsom Language, and saying, he de∣served to be hanged; and that he must secure me also, if I would not oblige my self never to act against him. I told him I had gone as far as I could in that Engagement which I had given to Lieutenant General Fleetwood; and if that were not thought sufficient, I resolved with God's Assistance to suffer any Extremities that might be imposed upon me. Yes, said he, we know your Resolution well enough, and we have cause to be as stout as you; but I pray who spoke of your Suffering? Sir, said I, if I am not deceived, you mentioned the securing my Person. Yea, said he, and great Reason there is why we should do so; for I am ashamed to see that Engagement which you have given to the Lieutenant General, which would be more fit for a General who should be taken Prisoner, and that hath yet an Army of thirty thousand
Men in the Field, than for one in your conditi∣on. I answered, that it was as much as I could consent to give, and what Lieutenant General Fleetwood thought fit to accept. Then begin∣ning to carry himself more calmly, he said that he had been always ready to do me what good Offices he could, and that he wished me as well as he did any one of his Council, desiring me to make choice of some Place to be in, where I might have good Air. I assured him, that my Dissatisfactions were not grounded upon any Animosity against his Person; and that if my own Father were alive, and in his Place, they would, I doubted not, be altogether as great. He acknowledged that I had always carried my self fairly and openly to him, and protest∣ed that he had never given me just Cause to act otherwise. When Cromwel had finished his Discourse, some of those who were present, began to make their Observations, and particularly Col. Mon∣tague thought it worthy his notice, that I had intimated, If Providence should offer an Occasion, I was ready to act against the present Government; but the rest of the Company seemed ashamed of what he said. Major General Lambert then desired to know from me why I could not own this as a lawful Government: Because, said I, it seems to me to be in substance a Re-establish∣ment of that which we all engaged against, and had with a great Expence of Blood and Treasure abolished. What then, said he, would
you account to be a sufficient Warrant for you to act against the present Authority? I answer∣ed, When I might rationally hope to be sup∣ported by an Authority equal or superior to to this, and could be perswaded that the said Au∣thority would employ its Power for the Good of Mankind. But who shall be Judge of that, said he? For all are ready to say they do so, and we our selves think we use the best of our En∣deavours to that end. I replied, that if they did so, their Crime was the less, because every Man stands obliged to govern himself by the Light of his own Reason, which Rule, with the Assistance of God, I was determined to ob∣serve. Col. Sydenham said, we might be mis∣taken in Judging that to be a Power giving us a just and rational Call to act, which may not be so. I told him, that we ought to be very care∣ful and circumspect in that particular, and at least be assured of very probable Grounds to be∣lieve the Power under which we engage to be sufficiently able to protect us in our Under∣taking; otherwise I should account my self not only guilty of my own Blood, but also in some measure of the Ruine and Destruction of all those that I should induce to engage with me, tho' the Cause were never so just. This Discourse being ended, I was desired to withdraw into the next room, where Lieu∣tenant General Fleetwood came to me, and la∣boured to perswade me to engage, as was de∣sired, tho' but for a Week. I made answer,
that I was not willing to do it for an Hour; then, said he, you shall engage to me. I told him I looked upon my self already obliged by the Conditions of my late Engagement, far∣ther than which I could not go; and thereupon returned to my Lodging, in order to imploy my leisure about my private Affairs during that time. The Design against the Spaniards in the West-Indies having been, as was before related, unsuccessful, it was resolved to send three thou∣sand Men from Scotland and Ireland to rein∣force the Party in Jamaica, which from twelve thousand Men was now reduced to little more than three thousand. The Officers of this Reinforcement were to be of such as were accounted dissatisfied with the present Posture of Affairs, and therefore thought unfit to re∣main here. Amongst the Officers of the Scots Regiment was a Lieutenant Colonel, I think it was Lieut. Col. Brain, who some time before had been cashiered for his Affection to the Commonwealth, which was now esteemed the Common Enemy. But not having gained by his faithful Services any competent Subsist∣ence, as mercenary Officers generally know how to do, he was driven to the necessity of accepting the Command of that Regi∣ment. According to their Instructions they set sail for the place of Rendezvouz, where they were to meet those Forces that were ordered to join
them from Ireland. But a violent Storm ari∣sing in their Passage, this Colonel, with about three hundred Men, was cast away, the rest being driven on the Coast of Ireland. Great endeavours were used in Ireland to perswade Lieut. Col. Walker, an honest Man and a good Officer, to undertake the Command of those Forces that were ordered to be sent from thence; but he perceiving the Design, and being throughly sensible that this Offer was not made to him from any Affection to his Person, or sense of his Services, refused to bite at the Bait, tho' it was gilded as much as might be, by advancing a considerable Sum, and satisfying the Arrears of those that went, out of the forfeited Lands in such places as they should chuse. Upon his refusal, Major Moor accepted the Imployment with the Title of Co∣lonel; but on condition that after he had con∣ducted the Men to Jamaica, he should have liberty to return, which he did after many Difficulties and Hazards of his Person. Capt. Chester, a stout Man, and one who at a Gene∣ral Council of Officers had openly expressed his Discontent against the Usurpation, was also perswaded to engage in his Service, and lost his Life in the Expedition. Cromwel perceiving he could not compass his Designs again Spain by his own Power, entred into an Alliance with the French, who by the Treaty with him, obliged themselves not to permit the Sons of the late King to remain in
any part of France; which Article was punctu∣ally performed. For such is the Mystery, or ra∣ther Knavery of those Governments that are framed to support an Arbitrary Power, that they will not scruple to sacrifice the best Friends and nearest Relations when they stand in the way of their Designs. This Confederacy was dearly purchased on our part; for by it the Balance of the two Crowns of Spain and France was destroyed, and a Foundation laid for the future Greatness of the French, to the unspeak∣able Prejudice of all Europe in general, and of this Nation in particular, whose Interest it had been to that time accounted to maintain that Equality as near as might be. In the mean time the Major Generals carried things with unheard of Insolence in their seve∣ral Precincts, Decimating to extremity whom they pleased, and interrupting the Proceedings at Law upon Petitions of those who pretend∣ed themselves aggrieved; threatning such as would not yield a ready submission to their Orders, with Transportation to Jamaica or some other Plantations in the West-Indies; and suf∣fering none to escape their Persecution, but those that would betray their own Party, by discovering the Persons that had acted with them or for them. And here I cannot omit to mention a Farmer in Barkshire, who being de∣manded to pay his Tenth, desired to know of the Commissioners, in case he did so, what Se∣curity he should have for the other nine parts:
and answer being made that he should have Cromwel's Order and theirs for the Enjoyment of the rest; he replied, that he had already an Act of Parliament for the whole, which he could not but think to be as good Security as they could give. But, said he, if Goodman such a one, and another whom he named of his Neigh∣bours, will give me their Bond for it, I know what to say to such a Proposal; for if they break their Agreement, I know where to right my self; but these Sword-men are too strong for me. A Squadron of our Ships cruizing off the Coast of Spain, met with and fought 5 Ships re∣turning thither from the West-Indies, which had on board a Spanish Marquiss, who with his Fa∣mily and great Wealth acquired in his Govern∣ment there, was coming back to Spain. The Spaniards defended themselves as well as they could; but the Marquiss thinking it impossible to escape, set fire to the Ship wherein he was, and with most of his Family was burnt in her. Of the other four one was sunk in the Fight, another made her escape, and two were taken, on board of one of which was the Son of the said Marquiss. It was reported that in the two Ships taken, there was found about three Mil∣lions in Bullion, which was brought in triumph by Carts from Portsmouth to London, in order to be coined at the Tower. The Siege of Dunkirk being undertaken by the French, their Confederate Cromwel sent a
Body of Men in number about six thousand, for the most part Foot, to their Assistance. The Cavalier Party under the Duke of York joined themselves to the Spaniards, who en∣deavoured with an Army to relieve the Place; and having sent a Party to possess themselves of a Sand-Hill, so galled the English from thence, that they resolved, if possible, to remove them from that Post. The Ground was so deep and loose, that they could not without extreme difficulty march up the Hill; yet at last they effected it, and having put the Spaniards to flight, pursued them to their main Body: But having engaged themselves too far, and being over-powered by great numbers of Horse and Foot, (the French leaving the whole stress of the Fight upon them) they were in danger of being entirely cut off; which being perceived by Major General Drummond a Scots Officer, who served with the English as a Volunteer, he rode up to the French Horse, and by re∣proaching them with Treachery and Negli∣gence, procured a Party of Horse to be sent to their Succour. Upon the arrival of this sea∣sonable Relief, the English took fresh Courage, renewed their Attack, and killed a great num∣ber of the Enemy; many of those that were killed on the Enemies side were English and Irish, that fought under the Duke of York. And as it was confessed by all present, that the English who took part with the French, beha∣ved themselves with more Bravery than any in
the Field that day; so it was observed that those of the Cavalier Party, who had joined with the Spaniards, behaved themselves worst. Soon after this Battel the Town of Dunkirk was surrendred to the French, and delivered into the hands of the English, as it had been a∣greed between Cromwel and Cardinal Maza∣rine. It being thought fit to fortifie divers Places of Importance in Scotland, Cromwel appointed a considerable Sum of Money to be expend∣ed on the Works of Ayre, Dundee, Leith, St. Johns-town, Sterling, &c. and had so balanced the several Interests in his Councils there, that tho' Monk generally favoured the more loose and vitious Party amongst the Scots, yet there were not wanting some who supported an honester sort of Men, that were not willing to permit their King to return without Con∣ditions. The Lord Broghil had been of great use to moderate these two Parties; but being much afflicted with the Gout, and the Air of Scotland not agreeing with his distemper'd Bo∣dy, he desired Cromwel to grant him leave to return to Ireland according to his Promise, the Year of his Residence in Scotland being now ex∣pired. Cromwel not willing to comply with his Desires in this particular, dispatched In∣structions to his Son Henry in Ireland by all means to procure a Petition from the discon∣tented Party, against the Lord Broghil's return thither. To this end Sir Hardress Waller sus∣pecting
that the Presence of this Lord might eclipse his Greatness, became an earnest Solici∣tor to Adjutant General Allen, and Quarter∣master General Vernon, to join in a Petition to that effect. But they perceiving the Design, not only refused so to do, but plainly told him that they were ready to join in a Petition for his coming, it being impossible to be worse with them than now it was. This Discourse being reported to Col. Henry Cromwel with an Insinuation, that it was to be suspected that there was some Design carrying on by the Lord Broghil and the dissatisfied Party in Ireland, he sent an account of it to his Father, and desired that he would not by any means permit him to return thither. Divers Conspiracies that had been formed against the Government of the Usurper being already defeated, and the Authors of them for the most part punished, he was prevailed with to permit Major General Harrison and Mr. Carew, whom he had sent to remote Con∣finements, to be Prisoners at their own Habi∣tations; and accordingly he ordered Major Strange to go to Carisbrook Castle, and to bring the Major General from thence to his House at Highgate: where when I was acquainted with his arrival, I went to make him a Visit, and having told him that I was very desirous to be informed by him of the Reasons that moved him to join with Cromwel in the Interruption of the Civil Authority; he answered that he had
done it, because he was fully perswaded they had not a heart to do any more good for the Lord and his People, Then, said I, are you not now convinced of your Error, in entertaining such Thoughts, especially since it has been seen what use has been made of the usurped Power? To which he replied, Upon their Heads be the Guilt, who have made a wrong use of it; for my own part, my Heart was upright and sin∣cere in the thing. I answered, that I conceived it not to be sufficient in matters of so great Im∣portance to Mankind, to have only good In∣tentions and Designs, unless there be also pro∣bable means of attaining those Ends by the Me∣thods we enter upon; and tho' it should be granted that the Parliament was not inclined to make so full a Reformation of things amiss as might be desired, yet I could not doubt that they would have done as much good for us, as the Nation was fitted to receive; and there∣fore that extraordinary Means ought not to have been used, till it had been clearly evident that the ordinary had failed, especially since it could not but be manifest to every Man, who observed the state of our Affairs; that upon the suppression of the Civil Authority, the Power would immediately devolve upon that Person who had the greatest Interest in the Army. His second Reason for joining with Cromwel was, because he pretended to own and favour a sort of Men, who acted upon higher Principles than those of Civil Liberty. I re∣plied,
that I thought him mistaken in that also, since it had not appeared that he ever approved of any Persons or things farther than he might make them subservient to his own ambitious De∣signs; reminding him that the generality of the People that had engag'd with us having acted up∣on no higher Principles than those of Civil Liber∣ty, and that they might be governed by their own Consent, it could not be just to treat them in another manner upon any pretences what∣soever. The Major General then cited a Pas∣sage of the Prophet Daniel, where 'tis said, That the Saints shall take the Kingdom and possess it. To which he added another to the same effect, That the Kingdom shall not be left to a∣nother People. I answered, that the same Pro∣phet says in another Place, That the Kingdom shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High. And that I conceived, if they should presume to take it before it was given, they would at the best be guilty of doing evil, that good might come from it: For to deprive those of their Right in the Government, who had contended for it equally with our selves, were to do as we would not that others should do to us: That such Proceedings are not only unjust, but also impracticable, at least for the present; because we cannot perceive that the Saints are clothed with such a Spirit, as those are required to be to whom the King∣dom is promised; and therefore we may easily be deceived in judging who are sit for Govern∣ment,
for many have taken upon them the Form of Saintship, that they might be admit∣ted to it, who yet have not acted sutably to their Pretensions in the sight of God or Men: for proof of which we need go no further than to those very Persons who had drawn him to assist them in their Design of exalting them∣selves, under the specious Pretence of advan∣cing the Kingdom of Christ. He confessed him∣self not able to answer the Arguments I had used; yet said, he was not convinced that the Texts of Scripture quoted by him were not to be interpreted in the Sense he had taken them, and therefore desired a farther Conference with me at another time, when each of us might be accompanied with some Friends to assist us in the clearing of this Matter. I consented to his proposal, and so we parted; but from that time forward we had not an opportunity to discourse farther upon this Subject. About the same time Mr. Peters, who still kept fair with those at Whitehall, made me a Visit; and in our Conversation about the Pub∣lick Affairs I freely told him my Opinion con∣cerning the Actions of Cromwel, endeavouring to make him sensible not only of his Injustice, but great Imprudence, thus to sacrifice the Common Cause to his Ambition, and by every step he had lately taken to strengthen the hands of the Common Enemy, whereby he would undoubtedly open a way for the Return of the Family of the late King, who would not fail
to do all that Revenge could inspire them with: Whereas if he had made use of his Power to establish the just Liberties of the Nation, or could yet be perswaded so to do, he might live more honoured and esteemed, have the Plea∣sure and Satisfaction arising from so generous an Action, when he died, and leave his own Family, together with the whole Body of the People, in a most happy and flourishing Condi∣tion. He confessed that what I had said was most true, but added, that there was not a Man about him who had Courage enough to tell him so: That for his part he had observed him immediately after the Victory at Worcester to be so elevated, that he then began to fear what was since come to pass; and that he told a Friend with whom he then quartered in his re∣turn to London, that he was inclined to believe Cromwel would endeavour to make himself King. The Usurper having governed as he thought long enough by virtue of the Instrument of Government, which tho' drawn up by himself and his Creatures, was now thought to lay too great a Restraint upon his ambitious Spirit; and resolving to rest satisfied with nothing less than the Succession of his Family to the Crown, he attempted to make himself King. To this end he thought it necessary to call a Parliament; and that he might engage the Army to assist him in all Parts to procure such Men to be chosen as would be fit for his purpose, he pretended
that this Assembly was called only in order to raise Money for the Paiment of the Army and Fleet, to confirm the Authority of the Major Generals, and that of the Instrument of Go∣vernment. By this means he obtained his De∣sires in a great measure, especially in Scotland and Ireland, where all kinds of Artifice, and in many places the most irregular Courses, were taken to get such Men returned as were pro∣posed by the Court. But knowing the People of England not to be of so mercenary a Spirit; and that as they were better instructed in the Principles of Civil Liberty, so they were not wanting in Courage to assert it, he used his ut∣most Endeavours to disable and incapacitate such Men from being chosen, whom he thought most likely to obstruct his Designs. In order to this he summoned the Lord President Brad∣shaw, Sir Henry Vane, Col. Rich, and my self, to appear before him in Council: Which we all did except Sir Henry Vane, who told the Mes∣senger he should be at his House at Charing-Cross on a certain day. Cromwel, as soon as he saw the Lord President, required him to take out a new Commission for his Office of Chief Justice of Chester, which he refused, alledging that he held that Place by a Grant from the Parliament of England to continue quamdiu se bene gesserit. And whether he had carried him∣self with that Integrity which his Commission exacted from him, he was ready to submit to a Trial by twelve English Men, to be chosen
even by Cromwel himself. Col. Rich being pressed to give Security not to act against the Government, and refusing so to do, was sent Prisoner to Windsor-Castle. Then I drew near to the Council-Table, where Cromwel charged me with dispersing treasonable Books in Ireland, and with endeavouring to render the Officers of the Army disaffected, by discoursing to them concerning new Models of Government. I ac∣knowledged that I had caused some Papers to be dispersed in Ireland, but denied that they justly could be called Treasonable. And tho' I knew not that it was a Crime to debate of the several Forms of Government, yet that I had not done any thing of that nature lately to the best of my remembrance. He then said, that he was not ignorant of the many Plots that were on foot to disturb the present Power, and that he thought it his Duty to secure such as he suspected. To this I replied, that there were two Duties required by God of the Magistrate, i. e. that he be a Terror to those that do evil, and a Praise to such as do well; and whether my Actions were good or bad, I was ready to submit to a legal Trial: That I was ignorant of any other way to secure the Magistrate from being afraid of the People, or the People from the Dread of the Magistrate, unless both will do that which is just and good. You do well, said he, to reflect on our Fears; yet I would have you know, that what I do, proceeds not from any Motive of Fear, but from a timely
Prudence to foresee and prevent Danger: That had I done as I should, I ought to have secured you immediately upon your coming into Eng∣land, or at least when you desired to be freed from the Engagement you had given after your arrival; and therefore I now require you to give assurance not to act against the Govern∣ment. I desired to be excused in that Particu∣lar, reminding him of the Reasons I had for∣merly given him for my Refusal, adding, that I was in his Power, and that he might use me as he thought fit. Pray then, said he, what is it that you would have? May not every Man be as good as he will? What can you desire more than you have? It were easie, said I, to tell what we would have. What is that, I pray, said he? That which we fought for, said I, that the Nation might be governed by its own Consent. I am, said he, as much for a Governmeent by Consent as any Man; but where shall we find that Consent? Amongst the Prelatical, Presbyterian, Independent, Ana∣baptist, or Leveling Parties? I answered, a∣mongst those of all sorts who had acted with Fidelity and Affection to the Publick. Then he sell into the Commendation of his own Go∣vernment, boasting of the Protection and Quiet which the People enjoyed under it, saying that he was resolved to keep the Nation from being imbrued in Blood. I said, that I was of Opini∣on too much Blood had been already shed, un∣less there were a better account of it. You do
well, said he, to charge us with the Guilt of Blood; but we think there is a good Return for what hath been shed; and we understand what clandestine Correspondences are carrying on at this time between the Spaniard and those of your Party, who make use of your Name, and affirm that you will own them and assist them. I know not, said I, what you mean by my Party, and can truly say, that if any Men have entred into an Engagement with Spain, they have had no Advice from me so to do, and that if they will use my Name I cannot help it. Then in a softer way he told me, that he de∣sired not to put any more Hardships on me than on himself; that he had been always ready to do me all the good Offices that lay in his Pow∣er, and that he aimed at nothing by this Pro∣ceeding but the Publick Quiet and Security. Truly Sir, said I, I know not why you should be an Enemy to me who have been faithful to you in all your Difficulties. I understand not, said he, what you mean by my Difficulties. I am sure they were not so properly mine as those of the Publick; for in respect to my outward Condition I have not much improved it, as these Gentlemen, pointing to his Council, well know. To which they seemed to assent, by rising from their Chairs; and therefore I thought not fit to insist farther on that Point, contenting my self to say, that it was from that Duty which I owed to the Publick, where∣of he expressed such a peculiar Regard, that I
durst not give the Security he desired, because I conceived it to be against the Liberty of the People, and contrary to the known Law of England. For proof of this I produced an Act of Parliament for restraining the Council-Table from imprisoning any of the free-born People of England; and in case they should do so, requiring the Justices of the Upper Bench, upon the Application of the aggrieved Party, to grant his Habeas Corpus, and to give him considerable Damages. To this Act I suppo∣sed he gave his free Vote, assuring him, that for my own part I durst not do any thing that should tend to the violation of it. But, said he, did not the Army and Council of State commit Persons to Prison? I answered, that the Council of State did so, but it was by vir∣tue of an Authority granted to them by the Parliament; and if the Army had sometimes acted in that manner, it had been in time of War, and then only in order to bring the Per∣sons secured to a legal Trial; whereas it is now pretended that we live in a time of Peace, and are to be governed by the known Laws of the Land. A Justice of Peace, said he, may com∣mit, and shall not I? He is, said I, a legal Officer, and authorized by the Law to do so, which you could not be, tho' you were King; because if you do wrong therein, no Remedy can be had against you. Therefore if I have offended against the Law, I desire to be referred to a Justice of the Peace, that I may be pro∣ceeded
with according to Law; but if I have done nothing to deserve a Restraint, that then I may have my Liberty. Whereupon being commanded to withdraw into a Room next to the Council-Chamber, I heard Major General Lambert to advise that I might be peremptorily required to give the Security demanded. But Cromwel said, that the Air of Ireland was good, that I had a House there, and therefore he thought it best to send me thither. Immediate∣ly after Mr. Scobel, one of the Clerks of the Council, came to me, and acquainted me, that I might return to my Lodging; where I had not been a quarter of an hour before Mr. Strick∣land, one of the Council, came to me, and pressed me earnestly to comply: But I told him, that having contended for the Liberty of others, I was not willing to give away my own, and to be made a Precedent to the preju∣dice of my Country-men, because it was the pleasure of those that had the Sword to have it so. Why, said he, was it not the Sword by which you kept Warder-Castle, and by which you acted during the whole course of the late War? I had, said I, the Authority of the Par∣liament to justifie me in so doing. He answer∣ed, But they governed by the Sword. To which I replied, that indeed they made use of the Sword to remove the Obstructions that were in the way of the Civil Government, and ex∣ercised that Power to vindicate and establish the Law of the Land; and that I was heartily
sorry to see one who had been so forward in the Cause of the Publick, not to discern any Diffe∣rence between a Sword in the hands of a Par∣liament to restore the People to their ancient Rights, and a Sword in the hands of a Tyrant to rob and despoil them thereof. Here our Discourse was interrupted by a Messenger who came from the Council with an Order from them, to require me to give the Security of five thousand Pounds within three days after the Date of the Order, not to do any thing preju∣dicial to the present Government; and in case of failure, to be taken into Custody. Upon the receipt of it I told the Messenger, that having no Power to resist, I must submit to their Pleasure. A day or two after the expi∣ration of the Time limited by the Order for giving the demanded Security, which I had not done, Serjeant Dendy came to me with another from the Council, signed by Henry Lawrence President, requiring and authorizing him to take me into Custody. Having shewn me the Order, he desired me to make choice of a Chamber; but after some Discourse with my near Relations, who were then present, he was contented to let me remain at my Lodgings. So having promised to return in a day or two, and in the mean time to advise with Lieutenant Ge∣neral Fleetwood, he went away. The next day Cromwel diverting himself with Hunting at Hampton-Court, asked my Brother Thomas Lud∣low, who was in the Company, if he were not
angry with him for committing me? And my Brother answering, that it was not fit for him to judge concerning his Actions: He thereup∣on assured him, that he wished me as well as any of his own Children: That his desiring me to give Security for my own Carriage to the Government, was designed by him as well for my Good as for his own Security, and that he would have him to engage for me; to which he most readily consented. The Morning fol∣lowing, my Brother came to me, and having acquainted me with what had passed between Cromwel and himself, I gave him thanks for his kind Offer; but withal told him, that I would by no means desire that of him which I was not willing to do my self. Besides, I told him, that should it be granted that the thing were fit for him to do, yet it might prove a Snare to him, and lay an Obligation upon him to gratifie the Usurper in another way. How∣ever, after this Discourse of Cromwel to my Bro∣ther, and the Conference of my Relations with Serjeant Dendy, I ventured to accompany my Father and Mother Oldsworth, with my Wife, into Essex, where we spent the remaining part of that Summer. My stay there did in some measure answer the Design of Cromwel, which was to keep me out of my own Country, where he doubted I might obstruct the Electi∣on of such Persons as the Court had resolved by all Methods to procure to be returned. But there was no need to fear my intermedling in
that particular, at such a time; and if I had, it should have been only to give a publick Testi∣mony against any Election at all, the Long Par∣liament being still in being, tho' under a present Force. Besides, it was manifest that the de∣signed Assembly was to be called for no other end than to strengthen the Sword, and to ad∣vance the corrupt Interest of him that called them together; and if it should happen that they had either the Courage or Honesty to at∣tempt any thing for the Service of the Publick; I was assured their Endeavours would be rendred fruitless by a sudden Dissipation. Sir Henry Vane, according to his Promise, be∣ing come to his House near Charing-cross, the Council sent a Messenger thither to require him to attend them, which he did, and was there charged by Cromwel with Disaffection to the Government, which he had demonstrated by a late Writing published by him, with a seditious Intention. The Paper was called, A Healing, Question proposed and resolved, and contained the State of our Controversie with the King, the present Deviation from that Cause for which we engaged, and the means to unite all Parties in attaining the accomplishment of it. It was written upon an Invitation given in a Declara∣tion published by Cromwel for a General Fast, wherein it was desired that the People would apply themselves to the Lord to discover that Achan which had so long obstructed the Settle∣ment of these distracted Nations. When it
was finished, he shewed it to Lieutenant Gene∣ral Fleetwood, who seeming to approve it, de∣sired to take it with him, and promised to com∣municate it to Cromwel, upon the first Opportu∣nity that should be offered. Sir Henry did not disown either his Dissatisfaction with the pre∣sent State of Affairs, or the Publication of the Discourse before-mentioned. So that Cromwel thought fit to require him, by a day limited, to give Security not to act against him. Which time being expired, he appeared again before the Council, and delivered into Cromwel's own hand another Paper, containing the Reasons of his disapproving the present Usurpation, and a friendly Advice to him to return to his Duty, with some Justification of his own Conduct with relation to the Publick. But notwith∣standing all this, and divers Reasons alledged by him to excuse himself from giving the de∣manded Security, he was sent Prisoner to Ca∣risbrook-Castle in the Isle of Wight. The Pre∣sident Bradshaw, notwithstanding what had passed, resolved to go his Circuit as Chief Justice of Chester, unless he should be prevented by Force. But it was thought more advisable to permit him to execute his Office, than by putting a stop to his Circuit, to make a Breach with those of the Long Robe, whose Assistance was so necessary to the carrying on of Crom∣wel's Design. Yet that neither he, nor, if possible, any other Persons who had continued faithful to the Commonwealth, might be
chosen Members of the approaching Assembly, Letters were dispatched to all Parts of England to give notice that it would be resented, if such Persons were elected; one of which was pub∣lickly read at the Election for Chester, to deter Men from appearing for the President. In Wiltshire a more numerous Party appearing for me than was expected, they were assured by some Creatures of Cromwel that I was a Priso∣ner in the Tower, and by one who had former∣ly served under me, that I had declared to him that I would not be chosen. Yet for all this the People persisting in their Resolution to elect me, the Deputy Major-General of the County demanded of them, whether they in∣tended to have a new War, that they designed to make choice of me? By such Arts the Emissa∣ries of the Court caused the Elections in most Places to be decided in favour of such as pleased them. For my own part, tho' I had resolved not to stand, for Reasons which I mentioned be∣fore, and on that account had not directly or indirectly spoken or written to any Person to appear for me; yet I must acknowledge I was not dissatisfied that so considerable a Number of my Country-men were not afraid to own and accept that Service (how small soever) that I had done in the Common Cause. The Court finding by the Lists they had received, that notwithstanding all their Menaces, Promises, and other Artifices, divers Persons were chosen whom they knew to be no Favourers of the
Usurpation, resolved to clear their hands of them at once. And to that end, under colour of a Clause in the Instrument of Government, that none should be admitted to Places of Pow∣er and Trust, but such as were Men of Since∣rity and Integrity, they gave an Exclusion to Sir Arthur Haslerig and Mr. Scott, with as many more as they thought fit. By this means, and the refusal of others to take out their Per∣missions to sit from Cromwel and his Council, as was required, lest they should seem to counte∣nance such a detestable Imposition and open Breach of Privilege, it came to pass that a∣bout a hundred of those who were elected by the Country, were excluded from the Discharge of their Trust, whilst those for Ireland and Scotland, who were chosen by and for the Sword, were admitted without any scruple. Those that were excluded presented a Petition to the sitting Members, acquainting them, that being chosen by the Country to serve with them, they were ready to discharge their Du∣ty, but were prevented from doing the same by the Power of the Sword, and refused Ad∣mittance into the House by a Guard of Soldi∣ers. After the Petition had been read, a Com∣mittee was sent to inquire of Cromwel and his Council concerning the Reasons of that Pro∣ceeding, who returned with this Answer: That if the Persons complaining would address themselves to them, they should be relieved if there was Cause. With this Answer these
Men who would be accounted an English Par∣liament acquiesced, leaving their Privileges un∣vindicated, and the Merit of Elections to Par∣liament to be adjudged by Men without doors. Then they proceeded to prepare divers Bills, which tended chiefly to gratifie the Soldiery, and such Persons as had received Grants of Land from Cromwel and his Council, which were confirmed to them. Yet for all this Harmony there were sometimes bitter Reflections cast up∣on the Proceedings of the Major Generals by the Lawyers and Country Gentlemen, who ac∣cused them to have done many things oppres∣sive to the People, in interrupting the Course of the Law, and threatning such as would not submit to their Arbitrary Orders, with Trans∣portation beyond the Seas. On the other hand the Major Generals insisted vehemently with the Assembly to confirm the Instrument of Go∣vernment, and to establish their Authority in particular: and when it was proposed by some who were unwilling to settle such an Arbitrary Power by a Law, that to compose these Diffe∣rences an Act of Indemnity should be granted for what was past, one of the Major Generals had the Insolence to say, They would not thank them for that; for whilst they had their Swords by their sides, they could protect and indemnifie themselves. So confident was the Soldierty grown, that they durst openly avow themselves to be our Lords and Masters. But the Lawyers and others of the Assembly having
privately received Encouragement from those who were more powerful than the Major Gene∣rals, desisted not from endeavouring the Sup∣pression of their Authority, loading them with many heavy Accusations, for which they had given but too just Cause. Yet the Major Ge∣nerals, confident of the Strength of their Party, moved for a day when the Instrument of Go∣vernment, and the Confirmation of their Pow∣er, should be debated; which having obtained, and the time come, they moved that the whole Instrument might be confirmed at once; but that being rejected, it was debated in Parts. When the Power of the Major Generals came under Consideration, all Men were in great Expectation concerning the issue of it. It was supposed that Cromwel, who had erected their Authority, and engaged them in those Actions for which they were now become odious, would support them against all Attempts; be∣cause there appeared now no way so probable to maintain his own Power, as by keeping the Army firmly united to him. But Ambition had corrupted his Understanding to that degree, that he made no scruple to sacrifice these Men, who, to say no worse, had enlarged their Con∣sciences to an extraordinary size in the execution of his Orders, to those who in requital of the Favour had promised to make him King. Hi∣therto he had given good Words to the Major Generals; but when their Power came to be debated, Mr. Cleypole his Son-in-law first stood
up, which was unusual for him to do at all, and told the House, that he could but start the Game, and must leave those who had more Experience to follow the Chace; and therefore should only say, that he had formerly thought it necessary in respect to the Condition in which the Nation had been, that the Major Generals should be entrusted with the Authority which they had exercised; but in the present State of Affairs he conceived it inconsistent with the Laws of England, and Liberties of the People to continue their Power any longer. This Mo∣tion was a clear Direction to the Sycophants of the Court, who being fully perswaded that Cleypole had delivered the Sense, if not the very Words of Cromwel in this Matter, joined as one Man in opposing the Major Generals, and so their Authority was abrogated. Soon after Col William Jephson, one of the Members that served for Ireland, moved in the House, that Cromwel might be made King; but Matters not being throughly concerted, it had no other effect than to sound the Inclinations of the Assembly. Cromwel having notice of this Motion, as he had of every thing that passed, reproved the Colonel gently at Table for it, telling him, that he wondred what he could mean by such a proposition. To which the other answered, that whilst he was permitted the Honour of sitting in that House, he must desire the Liberty to discharge his Conscience, tho' his Opinion should happen to displease.
Whereupon Cromwel clapping him on the Shoul∣der said, Get thee gone for a mad Fellow as thou art. But it soon appeared with what Madness he was possessed; for he immediately obtained a Foot Company for his Son, then a Scholar at Oxford, and a Troop of Horse for himself: and not long after was sent Agent to the Crown of Sweden, with a considerable Allowance ap∣pointed to defray the Expences of his Journey thither. Many Objections being made in the House against the Instrument of Government, Crom∣wel, who was vehemently desirous to be a King, began to think it altogether insignificant to that purpose, and that it would be more conducing to his Design if a new Form were drawn up, and presented to the Assembly for their Appro∣bation. Accordingly it was prepared by his Creatures, and brought into the House by Mr. Pack an Alderman of London, where it was without much difficulty read, and appeared to be a Shoe fitted to the Foot of a Monarch, tho' at present a Blank was left for the Title of the single Person, who with Two Houses was to have the Supreme Legislative Power. Those who were of the Major Generals and Soldiers Party finding that Cromwel was aban∣doning them to espouse another Interest, struck in with those who still retained some Affection to the Commonwealth; and all together per∣ceiving that these new Measures had been ad∣vised by the Craft of our old Enemy, to make
use of Cromwel's Ambition as the only probable means to reduce us to our former Servitude, fell so furiously upon Pack for his great Presumpti∣on in bringing a Business of that Nature into the House, in such an Unparliamentary way, that they bore him down from the Speaker's Chair to the Bar of the House of Commons. But this heat being soon over, the Lord Brog∣hil, Serjeant Glynn, and others, who were ac∣quainted with Cromwel's Design, endeavoured to perswade the House to debate the new Form, telling them, that being Masters of their own Resolutions, they might retain as much of it as was good, and reject what was not so. By this means they brought it to be debated; and tho' they received some Opposition therein, yet when it came to be put to the Question, they carried all before them, and grew so hardy to move that the Blank left for the Insertion of the Title of the Chief Magistrate might be filled up with the Name of KING. This Motion, tho' earnestly opposed by Lieutenant General Fleetwood, was carried also, and the Name voted, together with the filling up the two Blanks left for the Two Houses, with the words, House of Commons, and Other House. The latter of these was resolved to consist of seventy Persons to be nominated by Cromwel, and to be approved by the Assembly then sit∣ting. But Cromwel being acquainted with that Resolution, and disliking it, as unreasonable that Gentlemens Names should be canvassed,
and it may be their Persons reflected on in a publick Assembly, he obtained it to be left to him to appoint whom he should think fit to compose that Other House. He told them also, that the Provision made for his Expence, and for maintaining the Army and Fleet, was not sufficient, and thereby procured a grear Sum of Money to be added to that which at first they designed. Yet for all this he scrupled to take upon him the Title of King, as a thing scanda∣lous and of great hazard; tho' at the same time he vilified the former Instrument of Govern∣ment to the last degree; and after having so highly magnified it when it was established, he compared it now to a rotten Plank, on which if a Man set his Foot, it will break and leave him. The Assembly well understanding that the Cause of his Delays was either to be impor∣tuned to the thing, or to get time to perswade the Army to be of the same Opinion with him∣self, appointed a Committee of their own Mem∣bers to give him their Reasons for accept∣ing this Title. Amongst others the Lord Brog∣hil much pressed that Passage brought by the Apostle in the Dispute concerning the Abolition of the Jewish Worship by the new and living Way revealed in Jesus Christ, illustrated by the Wife that was put away, who might yet be re∣taken by her former Husband, if she was not married to another; applying this Similitude to the present occasion, as if there was no other way to keep out Charles Stuart, but by filling
his Place with another King. Mr. Lenthall's Argument was very Parliamentary and ratio∣nal, had it been rightly applied; for he pressed him to accept of it, because it was proposed to him by the Parliament, as he was pleased to call it, whom he said he ought not to deny. But he was now arrived to that height of Vanity, that tho' the Design of this Argument was only to perswade him to accept that which he desired above all things in the World; yet conceiving it below his Grandeur to acknowledge such a Prerogative in the Parliament alone, he ex∣pressed his Dislike of it. And tho' he owned that the Reasons they had offered had much weight in them, and that he was convinced there was no evil in the thing, yet he could not think it expedient to accept their Offer, be∣cause he found that many of the good People of the Nation were dissatisfied with it. With this Answer he dismissed them for the present, and appointed them to attend him again. In the mean time, he endeavoured by all possible means to prevail with the Officers of the Army to approve his Design, and knowing that Lieu∣tenant General Fleetwood and Col Desborough were particularly averse to it, he invited him∣self to dine personally with the Colonel, and carried the Lieutenant General with him, where he began to droll with them about Monarchy, and speaking slightly of it, said it was but a Feather in a Man's Cap, and therefore won∣dred that Men would not please the Children,
and permit them to enjoy their Rattle. But he received from them, as Col. Desborough since told me, such an Answer as was not at all suta∣ble to his Expectations or Desires. For they assured him, that there was more in this Mat∣ter than he perceived; that those who put him upon it were no Enemies to Charles Stuart; and that if he accepted of it, he would infallibly draw Ruine on himself and Friends. Having thus sounded their Inclinations, that he might conclude in the manner he had begun, he told them they were a Couple of scrupulous Fel∣lows, and so departed. The next Day he sent a Message to the House, to require their At∣tendance in the Painted Chamber the next Morning, designing, as all Men believed, there to declare his Acceptation of the Crown. But in the mean time meeting with Col. Desborough in the great Walk of the Park, and acquaint∣ing him with his Resolution, the Colonel made answer, that he then gave the Cause and Crom∣wel's Family also for lost; adding, that tho' he was resolved never to act against him, yet he would not act for him after that time. So after some other Discourse upon the same Subject, Desborough went home, and there found Col. Pride, whom Cromwel had Knighted with a Faggot-stick; and having imparted to him the Design of Cromwel to accept the Crown, Pride answered, he shall not: Why, said the Colonel, how wilt thou hinder it? To which Pride re∣plied, Get me a Petition drawn, and I will pre∣vent
it. Whereupon they both went to Dr. Owen, and having acquainted him with what had happened, they perswaded him to draw a Petition according to their Desires. Whilst this was doing, Cromwel having reflected on his Discourse with Col. Desborough, and being in∣formed that Lambert and divers other Officers were dissatisfied with his Design, sent a Mes∣sage to put off the Meeting in the Painted Chamber, and to desire that the House would send a Committee to conser with him about the Great Business that was then depending; in∣tending thereby to gain time in which he might be fitting the Officers for his Design. But the House being risen before his Message arrived, and so out of a Capacity to appoint any to come to him, the old Committee that had been for∣merly appointed to that end, thought sit by vir∣tue of their general Instructions to wait on him to know his Pleasure. Accordingly they came to Whitehall, where they attended about two Hours, and then a Barbary-Horse being brought into the Garden for him to see, gave him an occasion to pass through the Room where the Committee was attending. As he was passing by without taking the least notice of them, one of the Messengers put him in mind that they had attended very long; which he slightly ex∣cusing, told them, that he thought the House being risen before his Message came to them, had not impowered any Persons to come to him. It was answered, That they came to
him upon the general Instructions which they had formerly received from the House: Upon which he told them, he would send to them some other time. The next morning the House being in great Expectation of a Message to ap∣point the Time and Place for the Acceptance of what they had prepared, some Officers of the Army coming to the Parliament-Doors, sent in a Message to Col. Desborough, to acquaint him that they had a Petition which they de∣sired him to present to the House. But he knowing the Contents of it, and conceiving it unfit for him to take publick notice of it before it was presented, acquainted the House, that certain Officers of the Army had a Petition to present to them. Which having done, and every one supposing that the Desires of the Officers were conformable to their own, Crom∣wel's Party concluding that no part of the Army durst appear for the crossing his Design, it was generally agreed that they should be called in, and have leave to present it with their own hands. Lieutenant Colonel Mason was chosen by the rest of the Officers to deliver the Petiti∣on, which when he had done, and the Officers withdrawn, it was read. The Contents of it were to this purpose: That they had hazarded their Lives against. Monarchy, and were still ready so to do, in Defence of the Liberties of the Nation: That having observed in some Men great Endeavours to bring the Nation again under their old Servitude, by pressing their General to take up∣on
him the Title and Government of a King, in order to destroy him, and weaken the Hands of those who were faithful to the Publick; they there∣fore humbly desired that they would discountenance all such Persons and Endeavours, and continue stedfast to the Old Cause, for the Preservation of which they for their parts were most ready to lay down their lives. This Petition was subscribed by two Colonels, seven Lieutenant Colonels, eight Majors, and sixteen Captains, who with such Officers in the House as were of the same Opi∣nion, made up the Majority of those relating to that part of the Army which was then quar∣tered about the Town. It's difficult to deter∣mine whether the House or Cromwel was more surprized at this unexpected Address; but cer∣tainly both were infinitely disturbed at it. As soon as the notice of it was brought to Crom∣wel, he sent for Lieutenant General Fleetwood, and told him, that he wondred he would suf∣fer such a Petition to proceed so far, which he might have hindred, since he knew it to be his Resolution not to accept the Crown without the Consent of the Army; and therefore desi∣red him to hasten to the House, and to put them off from doing any thing farther therein. The Lieutenant General immediately went thither, and told them that the Petition ought not to be debated, much less to be answered at this time, the Contents of it being to desire them not to press the Protector to be King, whereas the pre∣sent Business was to receive his Answer to what
had been formerly offered to him, and therefore desired that the Debate of it might be put off, till they had received his Answer. To this the House having consented, they received a Mes∣sage from Cromwel, that instead of meeting him in the Painted Chamber, which was the place where he used to give his Consent, they would meet him in the Banquetting-House: So the Members came to Whitehall, and Cromwel with great Ostentation of his Self-denial refused the Title of King. The Grand Design of the Usurper having miscarried, the People were full of Expecta∣tion to see what Form of Government the Men of the Sword would erect next. For as Cromwel had used all imaginable Art and In∣dustry to throw Dirt on all that had preceded, and most of all on the Instrument of Govern∣ment, which he was once so fond of, and yet now alledged that it neither provided for the Safety of the Governours or Governed: So the present Assembly had openly declared a∣gainst the Family of the Stuarts. But the Resti∣tution of the Commonwealth being the thing that was principally dreaded by these self-in∣terested Men, it was so contrived and carried, that the House shall present their humble Pe∣tition and Advice to him again, with the sole Alteration of the Word King into that of Pro∣tector. This Resolution was the more easily obtained, because the Commonwealth's Men had been, under various frivolous Pretences de∣nied
their Places in the Assembly; so that those only, who were for a Protector with an Army, or those who were for King Oliver with an Army, were the Persons that were permitted to dispute within those Walls. And now Crom∣wel having manifested his Weakness, as well as his Ambition in the late Intrigue, was glad to take what he could get, and without any dispute agreed to what was proposed to him by the Assembly: Which being done, the time was appointed for vesting him with the Authority which was to be conferred upon him, and West∣minster-Hall was the place where the Solemni∣ty was performed. The Aldermen of London and the Judges, rather moved by Fear than Affection, were prevailed to be present; and Sir Thomas Widdrington, who was Speaker of the Assembly, was ordered to administer an Oath to him, and to present him with a Sword, a Scepter, and a Bible. The pretended Pro∣tector was cloathed with a purple Robe lined with Ermins, the Train of which was held by the Son of the Lord Roberts. Of all the Nobility the Earl of Warwick was the only person that accompanied him; and because he would still retain a Form of Godliness, he ap∣pointed Mr. Lockyer to preach before him at his return to Whitehall. The next Day after this Solemnity, a Feast was prepared for the Assem∣bly and Officers of the Army, at which it was observed Major General Lambert was not pre∣sent, whereby it was suspected that he was
declining in favour for obstructing Cromwel's Design of being King: For as I have been in∣formed by a Person deserving Credit, the Ma∣jor General did take the Liberty, when that Question was on foot, to tell Cromwel, that if he accepted the Crown, he could not assure the Army to him. By the Humble Petition and Advice, for so was this new Instrument called, among o∣ther things it was provided, that an Oath should be taken by those of the Assembly and Council, not to do any thing against the present Government, and to be true and faithful to the Protector, according to the Law of the Land. This Oath Major General Lambert refused, whereupon Cromwel sent for him, and told him that he was well assured his Refusal proceeded not on account of this new Authority; for he might remember that he himself did at the first press him to accept the Title of King: And therefore if he was now dissatisfied with the present Posture of Affairs, he desired him to surrender his Commission. To this the Major General answered, that having no suspicion that it would then be demanded of him, he had not brought it, but if he pleased to send for it, he should deliver it, which two or three days after was done; and so his Pay as Colo∣nel of a Regiment of Horse, as Colonel of a Re∣giment of Foot, and as Major General of the Army, was struck off, together with ten Pounds by day, which was the General's Pay,
and which Cromwel allowed him, to keep him firm to his Interest. But Cromwel did not think it safe to disgust him intirely, and therefore thought it expedient to allow him a Pension of two thousand Pounds by Year, to keep him from any desperate Undertaking. Sir Henry Vane being still a Prisoner in Carif∣brook Castle, an Order was sent thither from the Council to bring him from thence, and to permit him to enjoy his Liberty, which was done, and he arrived at London in a short time after, where he met with another kind of Per∣secution: For Cromwel perceiving that the for∣mer Method had proved unsuccessful, private∣ly incouraged some of the Army to take pos∣session of certain Forest Walks belonging to Sir Henry Vane near the Castle of Raby, and also gave Order to the Attorney General, on pre∣tence of a Flaw in his Title to a great part of his Estate, to present a Bill against him in the Exchequer. This was designed to oblige him to expose his Title, which if they could get done, they doubted not, by the Craft of the Lawyers, to find some defect in it, whereby it was hoped he would be forced into a Compli∣ance; yet at the same time he was privately informed that he should be freed from this, or any other Inquisition, and that he should have whatsoever else he would desire, in case he would comply with the present Authority. The Assembly having provided Supplies for the Army, and referred other things to the
Conduct of Cromwel, adjourned themselves for some Months, during which time Cromwel endeavoured to make up a Collection of Men of all Interests to fill that which was called the Other House. The principal part of them were such as had procured their present Posses∣sions by their Wits, and were resolved to en∣large them by selling their Consciences for the purchase of his Favour. With these were joined some of the Antient Nobility, together with some of the Gentry, who had considerable Estates derived to them from their Ancestors; such were Mr. Pierpoint, Mr. Alexander Pop∣ham, Sir Richard Onslow, Thomas Honywood, Mr. Edmund Thomas, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, and others. He sent also a Summons, in the form of the Ancient Writ directed by the Kings of England to such as they called to the Lords House, to Sir Arthur Hasterig, who had al∣ways appeared a zealous Assertor of the Pub∣lick Liberty. Sir Arthur having received the Summons from the Messenger, who brought it to him into the Country, dismissed him, without declaring his Resolutions concerning it. Mr. William Lenthal, who had been Speak∣er of the Parliament, was very much disturbed that a Writ was not sent to him to enable him to sit in the other House. He complained, that he who had been for some Years the first Man of the Nation, was now denied to be a Mem∣ber of either House of Parliament; for he was uncapable of sitting in the House of Commons
by his Place as Master of the Rolls, whereby he was obliged to sit as Assistant in the Other House. This grievous Complaint coming to the Ears of Cromwel, he sent him a Writ, which so elevated the poor Man, that riding in his Coach through the Strand, and seeing Mr. Lam∣bert Osbalston, formerly Master of the School at Westminster, whom he knew to be a great Lo∣ver of Sir Arthur Haslerig, he aked him what Sir Arthur designed to do in answer to the Writ which he had received? and Mr. Osbalston answering that he knew not what the Inten∣tions of Sir Arthur Haslerig were concerning it; he replied, I pray write to him, and desire him by no means to omit taking his Place in that House, and assure him from me that all that do so, shall themselves and their Heirs be for ever Peers of England. The time for the meeting of these venerable Assemblies being come, none of the antient Nobility, except the Lord Eure, adventured to come into the Other House. The Earl of Warwick himself, tho'he ventured to Marry his Grandson to one of Cromwel's Daughters, would not be perswaded to sit with Col. Hew∣son and Col. Pride, whereof the one had been a Shoomaker, and the other a Drayman; and had they driven no worse Trade, I know not why any good Man should refuse to act with them. Divers of the Gentry did not appear, yet others, and particularly such as were rela∣ted to those in Power, were prevailed with to be of this Assembly.
The Door of the House of Commons, for so they would have it called, was now opened, and the Guard removed, and every Member admit∣ted that took the Oath prescribed by them be∣fore their Adjournment: Most of the Members, who had been formerly excluded, took the Oath also, and were admitted to sit in the House, where the Addition of these last, together with the Removal of those of the Other House, who were for the most part taken out of this, made a considerable Alteration in that Body. Great Expectations were raised to see what Course Sir Arthur Haslerig would take, who being chosen by the People to sit in one Assem∣bly, and by Cromwel to sit in another, had not yet declared his Intentions in that Matter. He came to London as privately as he could, but the Court having notice of his Arrival, sent Col. Howard to his Lodgings the next Morning to feel his Pulse; which he, suspecting some∣thing of that Nature, avoided by going early abroad; and coming to the Door of the House of Commons, procured some of his Friends to give him the Oath; then he took his Place in the House without any dispute, as did also Mr. Scot, with divers others who had been formerly excluded by Cromwel and his Council. There they began to call in question all that had been done in the former Sessions, ground∣ing their Arguments on the Force that was upon that Assembly, whereby a great Number of those who had as good a Right to it there
as any others, were peremptorily refused to sit. Eight or ten Days were spent in these Debates; and in the mean time some Petitions were car∣rying on, and subscribed by many thousands, to be presented to those who sate in the place where the Parliament of England ought to be. Cromwel was not a little startled at these Pro∣ceedings, suspecting that part of the Army, especially those that were quartered about St. James's, were engaged therein; therefore to prevent that which he feared, and which his Conscience told him he had deserv'd, he took the Inspection of the Watch at Whitehall for seve∣ral Nights successively in his own Person. And the Alarm from abroad increasing daily, he resolved upon the Dissolution of this Assem∣bly, intending as soon as they were dismissed, and the Power devolved upon him again, to curb that Spirit of Liberty that had lately ap∣peared, and to remove such Officers from their Commands in the Army, whom he suspected to have had any hand in their late Counsels. Whilst he was deliberating about the best means of effecting this Design, fresh Informa∣tion was brought him concerning the Diligence of his Adversaries in all Parts; which quickened him to that degree, that he would not stay for one of his own Coaches, but taking the first that was at hand, with such Guards as he could presently get together, he hurried to the Other House. Whither being come, he imparted his Intentions to dissolve that Assembly to Lieut.
General Fleetwood; who earneastly endeavour∣ing to disswade him from it, he clapped his Hand upon his Breast, and swore by the Living God he would do it. Then he sent for the Judges, and they being come, dispatched a∣nother Message to the Assembly to attend him presently. Many of them declined to come, and those that appeared were very ill treated by him for obstructing that Work, which he said was so well begun, in order to the Settle∣ment of the Nation. On the other hand, he assured those whom he had called to his Other House, that notwithstanding all the Practices that had been used against them, they should continue to be Lords, and so dismissed both the Assemblies to follow their own private Af∣fairs. Cromwel having thus resumed the Power into his own Hands, made use of it to remove from the Army such as he suspected to have obstruct∣ed his Design; and beginning with his own Regiment of Horse, he sent for Col. Packer, who was the Major, and Capt. Gladman, who commanded his own Troop, with the rest of the Captains of that Regiment to attend him: Whither being come, he demanded of them if they were willing to promise Fidelity to the present Government, and to fight against those that should oppose it. They answered they were ready to fight against Charles Stuart, and that Interest; but they could not engage
against they knew not whom, and for they knew not what. But he provoked with this Answer, dismissed them from their Com∣mands, and placed Men that would obey without reserve in their room. By this and other means he lost the Affections of great numbers of Men, that would have been useful and faithful to him against the Fami∣ly of the late King. And it being well known that he could not subsist at all without at least a Mock-Parliament, Mr. Henry Nevil, a hear∣ty Assertor of the Commonwealth Interest, ha∣ving been much injured by the Sheriff of Bark∣shire in the last Return for that County, com∣menced a Suit against the said Sheriff, in order to deter others from the like foul Practices for the future: But not being willing so far to ac∣knowledge the present Authority, as to prefer his Action upon the Instrument of Government, he was advised by Serjeant Maynard, Mr. Al∣len of Grays-Inn, and some others, to bring his Action of the Case against the Sheriff. On the day of Tryal Mr. Nevil desired Sir Arthur Hasterig, Sir James Harrington, Mr. Scot, my self, and some other Members of the Long Parliament, to be present in the Court; where after all the Objections made by the Sheriff's Counsel against the Delaration it self, and a∣gainst the Damages pretended by him for not being returned, were over-ruled by the Court, they proceeded to hear the Witnesses on both
sides; which being done, the Chief Justice St. Johns declared to the Jury how heinous a Crime it was for a Sheriff, who being but a Servant to the Country, should presume to impose upon them such Members as he pleased to serve in Parliament, which was the Bul∣wark of the Peoples Liberties; adding farther, that if such Practices should be allowed, the People would be out of hope to be relieved from their Grievances. Then the Jury retired, and having considered the Depositions of the Witnesses, and also what was said to them by the Chief Justice, they returned into Court, and found the Sheriff guilty of the Charge, and adjudged him to pay 1500 l. for Damages to Mr. Nevil, and one hundred Pounds to the Commonwealth. This Verdict was very grateful to those who wished well to the Pub∣lick, not only on the account of Mr. Nevil, who had entred into this Contest to vindicate his Country from Oppression; but because it was hoped it would prove a means to deter other Sheriffs from doing the like for the future. But now the Chief Justice having, as he thought, sufficiently pleased the popular Inte∣rest by what he had said concerning the Rights of the People, began to contrive means to gra∣tify his Master Cromwel, by whose Order the Sheriff had acted; and to this end upon the motion of the Sheriff's Counsel, granted an Ar∣rest of Judgment, and appointed a day in the next Term to hear what could be said on each
side. In the mean time the Sheriff, and those who had promised to support him, applied themselves to Cromwel to interpose his Autho∣rity in this Matter, charging Mr. Nevil with many false and malicious Aspersions, whilst the Sheriff improving the Opportunity, con∣veyed away his real and personal Estate: En∣deavours were likewise used to take off Mr. Nevil, by compounding the Business; but he preferring the Advantage of the Common∣wealth before his private Interest, refused to hearken to any Overtures, till the Judgment was Recorded for an Example to Posterity, and then declared himself resolved to deal with the Sheriff as became him. The state of Affairs in Ireland was little diffe∣rent from that of England, and the Army there as much disaffected to Cromwel's Design of being King, as those of that Profession at home; so that Col. Henry Cromwel who had before court∣ed the Sectarian Party, and shewed much re∣spect to Col. Zanchy, now began to caress Ma∣jor Markham, Mr. Winter, and others of the Presbyterian Interest, desiring them to joyn in an Address to his Father to stand by and defend him against his Enemies. To which they an∣swered, that if they knew who they were, they could be positive in their Answer; but being altogether ignorant of the things they were required to engage for, and of the Per∣sons they were to engage against, they could by no means consent to his Proposal. In the
mean time Cromwel was not unmindful of se∣curing the Fleet to his Interest; and therefore suspecting that General Blake was dissatisfied with his Proceedings, joined Col. Montague who was intirely his Creature, and Col. Des∣borough in Commission with him; the latter only bearing the Name, and managing with other Commissioners the Maritime Affairs at home. It was easily perceived that Montague was sent to Sea with Blake to gain Experience in those Affairs, and to endeavour to get an In∣terest in the Seamen, that the Credit of Blake might be the better balanced, or his Person totally laid aside: But it pleased God that this Work was in a short time done to their Hands, General Blake falling sick a little after of a Dis∣temper, whereby he died. The Loss of this great Man was lamented by Cromwel much in the same manner as that of the Lord Deputy Ireton, and that also of General Deane had been. Cromwel having been disappointed, as I for∣merly mentioned, in his Endeavours of procu∣ring a Civil Authority to countenance his Ar∣bitrary Power, made it his Business so to balance all Interests, that they should not dare to oppose him, for fear of bringing themselves into a worse condition than that wherein they were. To this end he gratified such of the Presbyterian Party as were the most complying, and courted divers of the Nobility, particularly the Earl of Warwick, whose Grandson was ad∣mitted
to be a Suitor to his youngest Daughter. But because that this Alliance was not at all grateful to some Persons about him, he con∣trived to appear averse to the Match; and then by the Management of Sir Edward Sydenham it was brought about that the young Couple were married without the knowledge of their Parents: for which Contrivance Sir Edward was for a time forbidden the Court. Notwithstanding these and many other Ar∣tifices used by him to support his Usurpation, continual Designs were set on foot against him. Some Fifth-Monarchy-men, to the number of about three hundred, expecting extraordinary Assistance from Heaven, had formed a Design to dethrone him; but these he slighted on ac∣count of the Smallness of their Number, and having some Spies amongst them, who gave him Intelligence of all their Measures, he suf∣fered them to go on till the Night before that wherein they had appointed to Rendezvouz. At which time he sent a Guard of Soldiers, who seized the Principal of them as they were con∣sulting about the manner of putting their En∣terprize in execution. Their Declarations were also taken with them, and their Standard which had in it a Lion Couchant with these words, Who shall rouse him up? These Men being for the most part Tradesmen, were carried Priso∣ners to the Gate-house, where they lay long in a miserable Condition. Soon after this some Persons that used to meet in Coleman-street, to
deplore the Apostacy of the Times, and parti∣cularly that of Whitehall, were seized by the Lord Mayor's Officers, pursuant to Cromwel's Orders, as they were coming out from their Meeting-place. Amongst these was a Cornet whose Name was Day, and who being charged with saying that Cromwel was a Rogue and a Traitor, confessed the Words; and to justify himself said, that Cromwel had affirmed in the pre∣sence of himself and divers other Officers, that if he did oppress the Conscientious, or betray the Liberties of the People, or not take away Tithes by a certain time, now past, they should then have Liberty to say he was a Rogue and a Traitor: He moved therefore that he might be permitted to produce his Witnesses, who were then present, to the particulars before∣mentioned. But the Matter was so ordered, that he and some others were fined and impri∣soned for their pretended Misdemeanours. Ano∣ther Plot much more dangerous was about the same time carried on by the Royalists, and dis∣covered to him by his Spies. The Persons con∣cerned in it he used with more Severity, be∣cause he accounted them to be of a more formi∣dable Party, and therefore referred them to be tried by those Persons whom his last Assembly had nominated to be a High Court of Justice. The Prisoners were Dr. Hewet, Sir Henry Slings∣by, and Mr. Mordaunt, with some others of the meaner sort. The general Charge against them was for endeavouring to levy War against the
Government on the behalf of Charles Stuart. The particular Charge against Dr. Hewet was for dispersing Commissions from the Son of the late King, and perswading divers to raise Forces by virtue of the same. That against Sir Henry Slingsby was for attempting to debauch some of the Garrison of Hull to the Service of Charles Stuart, and delivering a Commission from him to them. The Prisoners of less Note were charged with a Design of firing the City in se∣veral Places, at the time appointed for their Party to be in Arms. Dr. Hewet being brought before the Court, moved that he might be tried by a Jury, and demurred to the Jurisdiction of the Court. But the Court over-ruled his De∣murrer, and told him, that unless he would plead to his Charge, they would cause his Re∣fusal to be entred, and proceed against him as if the Fact were confessed. This being twice said to him, he was required the third time to plead: To which he answered, that if the Judges would declare it to be according to Law for him to plead, he would obey: but he was told that the Gentlemen then present were his Judges, and that if he would not plead, they would Register his Contempt the third time, and upon his Refusal did so. Mr. Mordaunt admonished by his Example, pleaded not guilty; and after a full hearing of the Witnesses on both sides, the Court acquitted him by one Voice: Then Sir Henry Slingsby was called to the Bar, and the Witnesses on each side being heard, he
was pronounced Guilty, tho' in the Opinion of many Men he had very hard Measure. For it appeared that he was a Prisoner at the time when he was charged to have practised against the Government; that he was a declared Ene∣my, and therefore by the Laws of War free to make any such Attempt: Besides it was alledg∣ed that the Persons whom he was accused to have endeavoured to corrupt, had trapan'd him by their Promises to serve the King in de∣livering Hull, if he would give them a Com∣mission to act for him, which Commission was an old one that had long lain by him. But all this being not thought sufficient to excuse him, he was adjudged to die. The rest of the Pri∣soners were also condemned, and Sentence of Death being pronounced, Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewet had the Favour of being be∣headed; and the others, being Men of a lesser Figure, were hanged. Cromwel's Daughter and Favourite Mrs. Cleypole, laboured earnestly with her Father to save the Life of Dr. Hewet, but without success: which Denial so afflicted her, that it was reported to have been one cause of her Death, which happened soon after with the concurrence of an Ulcer in her Womb. The Usurper, as he was thus prodigal of English Blood, so was he no less profuse of the Publick Treasure, in procuring Intelligence from the Royal Party abroad. To which end he employed one Henry Manning, Son to one Col. Richard Manning a Papist, and formerly a
Colonel in the late King's Army, where he lost his Life. This Gentleman he furnished with a considerable Sum of Money, and sent him to the place where the Son of the late King then resided: where when he arrived, he informed the Exiles, that he was sent thither from some Friends in England, that desired to have their Names concealed. But having with him such good Credentials as ready Money, part where∣of he gave to Charles Stuart, and distributed several lesser Sums to his necessitous Followers, he was easily admitted amongst them. It hap∣ned at that time, that a Gentleman who had served the late King, desired leave from Crom∣wel to travel, which he obtained on condition he should not see the King, which he promised. Accordingly when he arrived at Colen, if I mistake not, that was the place, he sent a Mes∣sage to the King, that he might be permitted to wait on him at night, which was granted; and having discoursed fully concerning the Af∣fairs he came about, he took leave, and receiv∣ed a Letter which he sewed within the Crown of his Hat. Upon his return to England he came with Confidence to Cromwel, and being demanded by him if he had punctually per∣formed his Promise? He answered, that he had. But said Cromwel, Who was it that put out the Candles when you spoke to Charles Stuart? This unexpected Question somewhat startled him; but Cromwel proceeding, asked him, What he said to him? To which the Gentleman
answered, that he said nothing at all to him. Then said Cromwel, did he not send a Letter by you? The Gentleman denying that also, Crom∣wel took his Hat, and having found the Letter, he sent him immediately to the Tower. From thence he took the first favourable Occasion to acquaint Charles Stuart with all that had hap∣ned to him relating to this Affair, assuring him, that one of the three Persons who were in the Room with him at the time above-mentioned, must necessarily have betrayed him. Upon this Information Manning's Study was searched, and his Correspondence being discovered, leave was obtained from the Duke of Neuburg to execute him within his Territories, and accord∣ingly he was shot to Death. But tho' Manning's Action was base and perfidious, as proceeding from a domestick Servant, yet by what Law he was executed I confess my self utterly igno∣rant. After the Death of Mrs. Cleypole it was ob∣served that Cromwel grew melancholy, and also distempered with divers Infirmities, particular∣ly a malignant Humour in his Foot; which hin∣dring him from the Exercises of walking or riding abroad, he obliged his Physicians to en∣deavour to disperse it, which they endeavour∣ing to do, drove it upwards to his Heart. By this means he became desperately sick; and as some about him had for a long time deceived others, so they now endeavoured to impose up∣on God himself. For Dr. Goodwin, his Crea∣ture
and Trencher-Chaplain, used this Expressi∣on in his Prayer during the time of his Sick∣ness; Lord, we beg not for his Recovery, for that thou hast already granted, and assured us of, but for his speedy Recovery. At this time I was in the County of Essex, and according to a former Resolution I had taken, went to London to attend my Father Oldsworth, and to bring him into the Country, whether he designed to come with my Mother Ludlow. On the Monday Afternoon I set forward on my Journey, the Morning proving so tempestuous that the Horses were not able to draw against it; so that I could reach no farther than Epping that Night. By this means I arrived not at West∣minster till Tuesday about Noon, when passing by Whitehall, notice was immediately given to Cromwel, that I was come to Town. Where∣upon he sent for Lieutenant General Fleetwood, and ordered him to enquire concerning the Rea∣sons of my coming in such haste, and at such a time. The Lieutenant General accordingly de∣sired by a Message that I would come to him the next Morning, which I did, and under∣stood from him that Cromwel suspected I was come with a Design to raise some Disturbance in the Army, and that he was desirous to know the occasion of my Journey. I assured him, that as it was not in my Power to cause any Commotion in the Army, so neither was it in my Thoughts at this time; and that I came to Town in order to bring our Family together in∣to
the Country, according to a Resolution taken a Month since, and before I heard of Cromwel's Indisposition. He then told me, that the Pro∣tector had been ill, but that it was now hoped he was recovering. I said, that I wished him so well, that I was not desirous he should die in the way he was in at present, and assured him, that I should be glad of the Prolongation of his Life, if he would employ it to the Pub∣lick Good, which ought to be more dear to us than Life it self. At Whitehall they were unwilling to have it known that he was so dangerously ill; yet by reason of a Clause in the humble Petition and Advice (which was the Rule of Government they pretended to act by) that the Protector should have Power to nominate his Successor, the Commissioners of the Great Seal attended for signing the Declaration of the Person to be appointed to succeed him. But whether he was unwilling to discover his Intentions to leave the Succession to his Son, lest thereby he should, in case of recovery, disoblige others, whom he had put in expectation of that Pow∣er; or whether he was so discomposed in Body and Mind, that he could not attend that Mat∣ter; or lastly, whether he would have named or did name any other, is to me uncertain. But certain it is that the Commissioners were not admitted till the Friday following, when the Symptoms of Death were apparent upon him, and many Ministers and others assembled in a
Chamber at Whitehall, praying for him, whilst he manifested so little Remorse of Conscience for his betraying the Publick Cause, and sacri∣ficing it to the Idol of his own Ambition, that some of his last Words were rather becoming a Mediator than a Sinner, recommending to God the Condition of the Nation that he had so infamously cheated, and expressing a great Care of the People whom he had so manifestly de∣spised. But he seemed above all concerned for the Reproaches he said Men would cast upon his Name, in trampling on his Ashes when dead. In this Temper of Mind he departed this Life about two in the Afternoon; and the News of his Death being brought to those who were met together to pray for him, Mr. Sterry stood up and desired them not to be trou∣bled. For, said he, this is good News; be∣cause if he was of great Use to the People of God when he was amongst us, now he will be much more so, being ascended to Heaven to sit at the right hand of Jesus Christ, there to intercede for us, and to be mindful of us on all occasions. Different were the Effects that the Death of Cromwel produced in the Nation: Those Men who had been Sharers with him in the Usurped Authority were exceedingly troubled, whilst all other Parties rejoiced at it; each of them hoping that this Alteration would prove advan∣tagious to their Affairs. The Commonwealths∣men were so charitable to believe that the Sol∣diery
being delivered from their Servitude to the General, to which they were willing to at∣tribute their former Compliances, would now open their Eyes and join with them, as the on∣ly means left to preserve themselves and the People. Neither were the Cavaliers without great hopes that new Divisions might arise, and give them an Opportunity of advancing their Minion, who had been long endeavouring to unite all the corrupt Interests of the Nation to his Party. But neither the Sense of their Duty, nor the Care of their own Safety, nor the just Apprehensions of being overcome by their irreconcilable Enemy, could prevail with the Army to return to their proper Station. So that having tasted of Sovereignty under the sha∣dow of their late Master, they resolved against the Restitution of the Parliament. And in or∣der to this it was agreed to proclaim Richard Cromwel, eldest Son to Oliver, Protector of the Commonwealth, in hopes that he, who by fol∣lowing his Pleasures had rendred himself unfit for Publick Business, would not fail to place the Administration of the Government in the hands of those who were most powerful in the Army. Accordingly the Proclamation was published in Westminster, at Temple-Bar, and at the Old Exchange, with as few Expressions of Joy as had ever been observed on the like occa∣sion. This being done, the Council issued out Orders to the Officers of Civil Justice to act by virtue of their old Commissions till new ones
could be sent to them: And that nothing might be omitted to fortifie the new Government, va∣rious means were used to procure Addresses from all Parts, which were brought in great Numbers from the several Counties of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland, as also from divers Regiments of the Army. One of the first Acts of the new Government was, to order the Fu∣neral of the late Usurper: and the Council hav∣ing resolved that it should be very magnificent, the Care of it was referred to a Committee of them, who sending for Mr. Kinnersly Master of the Wardrobe, desired him to find out some Precedent by which they might govern them∣selves in this important Affair. After examina∣tion of his Books and Papers, Mr. Kinnersly, who was suspected to be inclined to Popery, recommended to them the Solemnities used up∣on the like occasion for Philip the Second, King of Spain, who had been represented to be in Purgatory for about two Months. In the like manner was the Body of this great Reformer laid in Somerset-house: The Apartment was hung with Black, the Day-light was excluded, and no other but that of Wax-Tapers to be seen. This Scene of Purgatory continned till the first of November, which being the day preceding that commonly called all Souls, he was removed into the great Hall of the said House, and represented in Effigie, standing on a Bed of Crimson Velvet covered with a Gown of the like coloured Velvet, a Scepter in his
Hand, and a Crown on his Head. That part of the Hall wherein the Bed stood was railed in, and the Rails and Ground within them co∣vered with Crimson Velvet. Four or five hun∣dred Candles set in flat shining Candlesticks were so placed round near the Roof of the Hall, that the Light they gave seemed like the Rays of the Sun: By all which he was represented to be now in a State of Glory. This Folly and Profusion so far provoked the People, that they threw Dirt in the night on his Escucheon that was placed over the great Gate of Somerset∣house. I purposely omit the rest of the Pagean∣try, the great Number of Persons that attend∣ed on the Body, the Procession to Westminster, the vast Expence in Mourning, the State and Magnificence of the Monument erected for him, with many other things that I care not to re∣member. The Necessities of the Government daily in∣creasing, it was thought expedient to call a Par∣liament, as they termed it. Whereupon the Council being summoned, three Questions were debated among them. 1st. Whether the Elections should be made by the Counties, Cities, and considerable Towns, according to the Distribution agreed on by the Long Parliament, and practised by Cromwel in his time; or whether they should be made by the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, according to the ancient L of the Land.
The 2d was concerning the thirty Members to serve for Ireland, and thirty for Scotland; whether, or how, they should be chosen, there having been as yet no Distribution of Powers to elect, as it was ordered there should be in the humble Petition and Advice. The 3d was touching the Writs of Summons to be issued to those of the Other House. For the first, the Council learned in the Art and Mystery of the Law, advised, That see∣ing there was a Clause in the Petition and Ad∣vice, that all should be done according to Law, it was the most safe way to issue out the Writs of Election according to the ancient Form; and this Method after some Debate was resolved upon, principally because it was well under∣stood that mean and decayed Boroughs might be much more easily corrupted than the nume∣rous Counties and considerable Cities. The Motion for proceeding according to Law pre∣vailed with them also in reference to the Writs for Members to serve in the Other House, which were accordingly issued out in the same Form with those that had been formerly sent to the Peers. The second Question touching the Members for Scotland and Ireland was long de∣bated, the most prudent being of opinion, that since Writs were to go out in the ancient man∣ner to elect Members to serve for England in Parliament, there could be no pretence for those of Scotland and Ireland  sit with them:
However, the Majority concluded that Mem∣bers should be chosen for Scotland and Ireland, as had been practised in the time of Cromwel, with this Proviso, that they should not be ad∣mitted to sit as such, till the Consent of those chosen for England were first obtained. The time of Election drawing near, the Court used their utmost Endeavours to procure such Men to be chosen as were their Creatures, and had their Dependencies on them, in which they had no small Advantages. For besides the Power of discountenancing and punishing those that were not their Friends, they had all the Pre∣ferments as well Military as Civil in their Dis∣position. The Officers of the Admiralty and Navy had a great Influence not only upon the Cinque-Ports, but also upon all Sea-Towns whatsoever, and could press at their pleasure any Inhabitant to serve at Sea, and thereby ruin both them and their Families. The She∣riffs, who generally were Men chosen for such Purposes, contributed no little Assistance to their Design, by disposing the Writs to whom they pleased, and making themselves Judges of the Fitness and due Qualifications of all those who should vote at the several Elections. In the mean time divers Persons who conti∣nued unshaken in their Zeal and Affection to the Commonwealth, met at the House of Sir Henry Vane, where they consulted what would be most proper for them to do in case any of them should be elected to serve in the approach∣ing
Assembly: And after mature Deliberation, resolved that if they should be fairly chosen, and that no unjust or dishonourable thing were re∣quired of them, they should accept the Employ∣ment, and therein use the best of their Endea∣vours to serve the Publick, being perswaded that it is the Duty of a good Man at all times and in all places, when an Opportunity offers it self, to be useful to his Country. Neither did they think that their Presence and Assi∣stance in such an Assembly could by any means be interpreted to be an Acknowledgment that they were a Parliament, in prejudice of the Right of the Long Parliament, which tho' un∣der a Force, yet was never legally dissolved. In consequence of this Resolution, Sir Arthur Ha∣slerig, Mr. Thomas Scot, Mr. Weaver, Colonel Kendrick, and divers others of known Affecti∣on to the Commonwealth, being chosen to serve, sat in the Assembly. President Bradshaw was returned by the Sheriff for the County of Chester; but some of that County having re∣turned another Person, he was not present at their first Meetings, the Assembly having made an Order, That in case of a double Return, neither of the Competitors should sit till the Matter should be heard and decided. Great Endeavours were used by the Court to prevent the Election of Sir Henry Vane; and tho their Officers refused to return him at Hall and Bri∣stol, at both which places it was said he had the majority, yet at last he was chosen and return∣ed
for the Borough of Whitchurch in the Coun∣ty of Southampton. The people of this place were advised to this Choice by Mr. Robert Wal∣lop; at which the Court Faction were so enra∣ged, that they had sent a menacing Letter to him, which was subseribed by most Justices of the Peace for the County, to let him know, that they would oppose his Election for the Shire, if he persisted to recommend Sir Henry Vane to the Choice of the People. But Mr. Wallop de∣spising their Threatnings. continued to assist Sir Henry Vane, and was chosen for the County in despite of them. Those that governed at Whitehall, had or∣dered an Oath to be administred to all such as should be admitted to sit in the House, where∣by the Members were to oblige themselves not to act or contrive any thing against the Pro∣tector. This Oath I was unwilling to take, and therefore declined going into the Assem∣bly; but being one day walking in Westminster-Hall, and meeting Sir Walter St. Johns, who was one of the Persons appointed to administer the Oath, he asked me why I came not to the House? I told him, that tho' I had heard di∣vers Arguments for taking the Oath, yet my Doubts not being fully satisfied by them, I had hitherto abstained. Whereupon he desired me to meet him in the Lobby the next Morning, promising to carry me in with him, which, said he, will create a Belief in the House that I have given you the Oath. Accordingly I attended,
but not finding Sir Walter there, I went in, and the House being at Prayers, I stood amongst the rest of the Members till they were ended, and then went up to the Speaker's Chamber, where, and in the Gallery, I sat with as much privacy as I could. Thus I continued to do for about a Week, when News was brought, to the great mortification of the Court, that Sir Henry Vane was chosen to serve in this Assem∣bly for the Borough of Whitchurch, as was mentioned before. Sir Henry being come to Town, and informed that I sat in the House, he was pleased to make me a Visit, and to en∣quire by what means I had procured admissi∣on, for he had been acquainted with my Scru∣ples touching the Oath. I assured him, that my Doubts remained still unsatisfied; but that I had ventured to go into the Assembly, where I sate as yet without any interruption. Within a day or two a Member informed me of an In∣tention in some to complain to the House against me, for sitting amongst them without the Qualification of the Oath: To which I an∣swered, That it was no more than I expected. And accordingly one of the Members called Bodurdo, the same day pressed to be heard touching a Matter which, he said; concerned the very Being of the House; having been in∣formed that there sat a Person amongst them, who had not taken the Oath required to be administred to every Member before his ad∣mission. He therefore moved the House to en∣quire
into it, and to give order that all Men that sat there might be upon an equal foot. This Motion was opposed by some, who alledged that it was of far less Importance than many other things that were before them. But Mr. John Trevor, a leading Man of the Court-Party, seconded the former Motion, tho' with much Civility and Respect, urging that he could not but think it very seasonable, and of Consequence, considering the Worth, as he was pleased to say, of the Person concerned. So the Debate was entred upon, and divers gave their Opinions that the Oath should be peremptorily required. But Mr. Weaver and some others opposed them, alledging, that for the most part Oaths proved only Snares to ho∣nest Men, it being generally observed, that those who were least conscientious in keeping an Oath, were the most forward to take it. Col. Eyres also informed the House, that he had sat in the Long Parliament without taking the Oath then prescribed, and that he was fully perswaded that my Omission therein proceeded not from a Spirit of Opposition, but from a real Scruple of Conscience; that his Case had formerly been the same with mine; and tho' no Man could question my Affection to that Parliament, yet I had moved the House in his behalf, and was the Person nominated by them to bring him into the House without taking the Oath. This Debate continuing for two or three hours, was at length interrupted by the
discovery of a Person sitting in the House, who had not been elected so to do: His Name was King, and being called to the Bar, the House demanded of him whether he were a Mem∣ber? To which he answered, that he knew not whether he were or no. For meeting with an Alderman of London, who asked him if he were chosen, he demanded of him the Reason of his Question: Whereupon the Alderman saying that he had seen the Name of one King upon the List of Returns, he came down to the House, and had continued so to do, that he might not be wanting in his Duty. This Man being ordered to withdraw, many of the Mem∣bers willingly left the Debate, and others did so too from their great Zeal against him, sup∣posing him to be a dangerous Person, because he had been observed that Morning in the Speaker's Chamber to approve and promote a Paper which was there delivered, tending to shew the Wickedness of the Designs that were carrying on by the Court-Faction, and the Ne∣cessity incumbent on the Assembly to restore the Commonwealth. So the Merits of this Person having been debated also, and the House being informed by one of the Members serving for the City of London, that the Man was distem∣pered in his Head to that degree, that his Rela∣tions were often obliged to bind him hand and foot, they contented themselves to send him to Newgate for a day or two, and then ordered him to be discharged. By this means the As∣sembly
was diverted from resolving to impose the Oath; and tho' they were much inclined to get rid of my Company, yet partly by finding so great opposition, and partly by discovering that there were some of another Interest which they liked better, that had not taken it, they were discouraged from resuming that Debate for the future, tho' they did sometimes mention it by way of Reflection, when I moved any thing displeasing to them. All Men were in great expectation what the Resolutions of the House would be concerning the Government. The sounder part of them were very desirous to secure themselves in the two essential Points which had been the ground of the Quarrel between the King and the Parlia∣ment, viz the Militia and the Negative Voice, and to establish them in the Representative of the People, before they should enter upon any other Business. But whilst these important Matters were under consideration, Mr. Thur∣loe, a Member of the Assembly, and Secretary to Mr. Richard Cromwel, presented them with a Declaration ready drawn, wherein was con∣tained an Acknowledgment of the said Richard Cromwel to be Protector, and the Petition and Advice to be the Rule of Government for these Nations. This Action was by impartial Men esteemed to be a great Injury to the Assembly; but he had a sufficient Strength amongst them to carry him through whatsoever he thought fit to undertake, and therefore he was not only
defended for what he had done, but it was re∣solved that the Declaration should be received and debated. Hereupon it was moved that the Instrument might be produced, wherein, according to the Petition and Advice, the Suc∣cessor ought to be nominated, and the Great Seal affixed; but they having no such thing to shew, over-ruled that Motion. Not being able to obtain this, and being extreamly desirous to place the Militia in the Parliament, and to make void any Pretence to a Negative Voice in a single Person, as well as to do some other things for the Peoples Safety and Welfare, the Court-Party refused to consent to any thing of that nature for the present, craftily insinuating and making large Promises, that such things as were necessary should be done hereafter at a more convenient Season. In the next place it was desired, that since it appeared the present Power had no legal Foundation, and that it would be most safe for the Protector to derive his Authority from a right Source, the Words in the Declaration of Recognizing him might be altered for Agnizing him; that so his Right might appear to be founded upon the Consent of the People represented in this Assembly. But this Proposition, tho' inforced with many weighty Reasons, was rejected as the former had been, tho' it was thought convenient to di∣vide the House upon it. Upon this Success the Court presuming to carry all before them, grew unmeasurably insolent, and all that could be
done was only to lengthen out their Debates, and to hang on the Wheels of the Chariot, that they might not be able to drive so furiously. By this means time was gained to infuse good Principles into divers young Gentlemen, who before had never been in any Publick Assembly, in hopes that tho' for the present their previous Engagements should carry them against us, yet upon more mature Deliberation they might discover where their true Interest lay. Neither were our Endeavours without Success, for ha∣ving frequently held the House nine or ten days in Debate before they could come to a Question, many Gentlemen who came to Westminster pre∣possessed in favour of the Court, confessed that the Reasons of the Commonwealth Party were so cogent, that they were not able to resist them. And because all Parties had confederated against us, we, in order to lessen their Num∣bers, impeached divers of them for having been of the King's Party, by which means we procured some of them to be expell'd, and frighted away some others who knew them∣selves to be in the same Condition. The Court to requite us brought Mr. Marvin Touchet a Pa∣pist, and Brother to the Lord of Castlehaven, to accuse Mr. Villars, who had voted with us, of serving in the King's Army; and tho' it ap∣peared that he was forced so to do by those who had the Government of him, he being then but sixteen Years of Age, and that he came into the Parliament's Quarters as soon as he had an op∣portunity,
yet all that could be said proving not sufficient to excuse him, he was likewise voted out from the House. The next thing we endeavoured was to remove the Scotish and Irish Members, who had intruded themselves into the House, and to have the Question put, Whether those Members chosen by Scotland ought by the Law of the Land to sit as Members of this Parliament. The Reasons used to justify the wording of the Question in this manner were: 1. That there was no colour by the ancient Law of the Land for their sitting as Members of the Parliament of England, having always been a distinct Kingdom from it. 2. That there had been no distribution of Powers to elect, as was required by the Humble Petition and Ad∣vice. The Court would by no means permit the Question to be put in the manner before-men∣tioned, but moved that it might be thus propos∣ed in the following Words, Whether the House thought fit that those returned frow Scotland should sit as Members of this Parliament: By this means turning a Question of Right into a Question of Conveniency. However, because our Question was first proposed, we insisted that it might also be first put; and likewise moved, that those sent from Scotland and Ire∣land being the Persons concerned in the Questi∣on, might be ordered to withdraw, and not be permitted to sit Judges of their own Case: and this we thought we might with more rea∣son demand, because their own Party had al∣ready
waved the Legality of their Election by the Form of Words they had used in the Ques∣tion they proposed: But the pretended Mem∣bers for Scotland and Ireland, except only Mr. Swinton who modestly withdrew, as they had debated their own Case with much confidence, so by the support of that Court they resolved to decide it in their own favour. When we saw our selves thus overpowered by Violence and Number, we had the Question put for leaving out the Words, By the Law of the Land, which being carried in the Affirmative; and therefore to be entred in the Journal, we let fall Words in the House to insinuate that they were not a Legal Parliament, having no coun∣tenance from the Authority by which they acted: And as to their prudential way of ad∣mitting the Scots and Irish on the account of Conveniency, we said it would weaken all that should be done by this Assembly, whose Acti∣ons would be weighed and duly considered by those that should come into Power, when they were gone: That the Laws of this Assembly, tho' it were granted that they were a Legal Parliament, would not bind the People of Scotland, who are not governed by the Com∣mon Law of England, and therefore that it was unreasonable that those chosen by that Nation should have any part in making Laws for the People of England; and that it was in∣tolerable, that they who had fought against a Commonwealth should be consulted with in
the framing of our Constitution, and so vote us out of that with their Tongues, which they could never fight us out of with their Swords. But all our Arguments were answered by calling for the Question, which they carried by a great number of Votes, as they did also that for ad∣mitting those returned for Ireland. The Court having overcome these Difficul∣ties, doubted not to obtain the Establishment of their House of Lords, which they called the Other House; and therefore moved for recognizing them also. The Commonwealths∣men proposed that the Assembly would first take into their consideration the Powers where∣with the Other House should be vested before they proceeded to the Recognition of them, lest our qualifying them with the Title of a House, and our Approbation of the Persons that were to fill it, might be a means to pro∣cure them more Power than otherwise we should think sit to give them. But the Court-Party alledged that the Other House being al∣ready constituted, it was no more in the Power of the Commons to alter their Establishment; than in the Power of the New House to make any Change in that of the Commons. Then we endeavoured to shew them the unreasona∣bleness of imposing such a House upon the Nation, telling them, that in ancient times those that came to Parliament sate there by virtue of the Lands they possessed, and that he who had twenty Fees, each of twenty Pounds
yearly Rent, might demand his Place in the House as an Earl; and that whosoever was possessed of thirteen Fees, whereof one third part was military, had a Right to sit in the same House as a Baron: That this Method continued till the greater Barons finding them∣selves overvoted, withdrew into a distinct House. But King Henry the Third having ob∣tained a Victory against the Barons, deprived them of their ancient Usages, and permit∣ted none of them to come to Parliament with∣out a Writ of Summons from him. We shewed them that the House of Lords an∣ciently consisted of Persons, on whom the Commons had their Dependance; and be∣ing for the most part Retainers to them, were clothed in their Liveries: But the Ballance be∣ing now altered, and the greatest part of the Lands of England devolved upon the Com∣mons, they instead of wearing the Lords blew Coats, did now give Wages to most of those who pretended to be Members of the other House. But notwithstanding all that could be said, the Confederacy for them was strong enough to carry all before them, the Cavalee∣rish Party, who were very numerous, joining with them, in expectation that it might prove a good step towards the Return of the former Peerage: So the Question was put, Whether This House should transact with the Other House, and carried in the Affirmative. We then de∣sired, that seeing This House was undeniably
more Honourable in the Members of it than the Other, and much more in relation to those whom they represented, that the Members of This House might not go to them with Mes∣sages as formerly, unless the Members of the New House would respectively come to us with their Messages; or, that the Masters in Chancery, who were accustomed to be the Lords Messengers, might be divided between the two Houses for that purpose: But this al∣so was denied, and we were told, That a Fea∣ther might hinder the Motion of a Clock as well as a piece of Iron. The Subject of our first Transaction with the Other House was touch∣ing a Declaration for a Fast, which, by some Expressions in it, of taking Shame to our selves for neglecting to settle the Government of the Church, and having permitted so many erroneous and heretical Opinions to be divulged, with o∣thers of a like nature, discovered plainly in what Mint it was forged. This Declaration being agreed to, it was ordered to be carried to the Other House for their Concurrence by one Mr. Grove, who was accompained by divers young Gentlemen, and many of the Cavalier-Party, all of them attending like so many Lac∣keys at the Bar of the Other House, whilst the Ceremonies of presenting it were performed; which were the same that had been formerly used to the Peers on the like Occasion. Those of the other House were wonderfully pleased with this Application to them, having waited
near three Months for it, and having no busi∣ness to do, had consumed great store of Fire to keep them warm at the Publick Charge: Yet upon the Debate, they found not so great a Unanimity as in the receiving it; for Mr. Cromwel's Party and the Presbyterians fell vio∣lently upon the Independents and some of the Army, concerning some Clauses therein insert∣ed, as they said, by those of their Party. These Divisions were not confined within the Walls of that House, but broke out in the Army it self; the Officers every where discovering their Jealousies one of another. They were divi∣ded into Three Parties, and neither of them much superiour to the Other in number. One Party was known to be well affected to the Commonwealth, and consisted chiefly of the following Officers, viz. Col. Ashfield, Col. Lilburn, Col. Fitz, Lieut. Col. Mason, Lieut. Col. Moss, Lieut. Col. Farley, Major Creed, with divers Captains and other inferior Officers. A second Party was known by the Title of the Wallingford House, or Army-Party, who had advanced Mr. Richard Cromwel in expecta∣tion of governing all as they pleased: Of these were Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Col. Des∣brough, Col. Sydenham, Col. Clark, Col. Kel∣sey, Col. Berry, Major Haines, Treasurer Blackwel, and some others. The Third Party was that of Mr. Richard Cromwel, who having cast off those who had taken the pains to ad∣vance him, joyned himself to Men that were
more suitable to his Inclinations; such were Col. Ingoldsby, Col. Gough, Col. Whalley, Col. Howard, Col. Goodrick, Lieut. Col. Keins, with many others, and more particularly those that were Officers in the Scots and Irish Forces. But his Cabinet-Council were the Lord Broghil, Dr. Wilkins, and Col. Philip Jones. The Differences between these Parties being already very great, were yet much increased by the following Accident. Col. Whalley, whom Richard had lately made Commissary Gene∣ral of the Horse, meeting with Col. Ashfield in Westminster-Hall, and discoursing with him concerning the Other House, about which their Sentiments were very different, the Com∣missary General fell into such a Passion, that he threatned to strike the Colonel, who thereupon daring him to do it, Whalley chose rather to make his Complaint to Mr. Richard Cromwel, Col. Ashfield being summoned to appear, the pretended Protector threatned to cashier him as a Mutineer, for speaking in such a manner to a General Officer of the Army. But the Colonel desiring a fair and equal Hearing by a Council of Officers, he was ordered to attend again. At the time appointed it was contrived that Col. Gough, Col. Ingoldsby, Col. Howard, Lieut. Col. Goodrick, and other Creatures of the Court should be present to decide the mat∣ter in dispute, who unanimously enjoyned Col. Ashfield to acknowledge his Fault, and to ask the Commissary General's Pardon for the same:
But their Endeavours herein proved ineffectual, for the Colonel denying that he had offended the Commissary General, refused to desire his Pardon. Another thing happened about the same time that proved very disadvantageous to the Interest of Mr. Richard Cromwel: For a certain Inferiour Officer having publickly mur∣mured at the advancement of some that had been Cavaliers to Commands in the Army, he was carried to Whitehal to answer for the same. Mr. Richard Cromwel, besides other reproachful Language, asking him in a deriding manner, whether he would have him prefer none but those that were Godly? Here, continued he, is Dick Ingoldsby who can neither pray nor preach, and yet I will trust him before ye all. Those imprudent, as well as irreligious words, so clearly discovering the Frame and Temper of his Mind, were soon published in the Army and City of London, to his great prejudice. And from this time all Men among them who made but the least pretences to Religion and Sobriety, began to think themselves unsafe whilst he go∣verned, and thereupon soon formed a Resolu∣tion to use their utmost Endeavours to divide the Military from the Civil Power, and to place the Command of the Army in Lieutenant Ge∣neral Fleetwood. The Wallingford-House Party finding them∣selves abandoned by Mr. Richard Cromwel, and being very desirous, if not to get the whole Power into their Hands, yet at least to preserve
what they were already possessed of, and to render themselves formidable, desired to renew a Correspondence with the Commonwealths Men, and to that end ordered Col. Kelsey, one of their Members, to let me know that If I would go to Wallingford House, I should meet with a friendly Reception from the Lieutenant General and the rest of the Company. Ac∣cordingly I went thither, and perceiving them to agree that the Measures then taken would inevitably bring in the Common Enemy, I could not forbear telling them that tho' I was heartily sorry for the said Consequences such a Revolution might bring upon the People of England; yet with respect to themselves, they had merited whatsoever had already happen'd, or was justly to be feared, in that they had ad∣vanced a single Person over us, when it was in their Power to put us into a full Possession of our Liberties. However, that I presumed it was not yet too late, if they would resolve to joyn themselves to that part of the Army who were well-affected to the Commonwealth, and who in conjunction with them would in all appearance, be enabled to restore that Go∣vernment, which had cost the Nation so much Blood to establish. I told them that it would be convenient to give some Earnest of the Sin∣cerity of their Reconciliation with us in order to recover that Trust and Confidence from the Commonwealth-Party, which was necessa∣ry to our present Undertaking; and to that
end proposed that they would support and de∣fend Col. Ashfield, who was like to suffer for his Affection to the Commonwealth. They acquainted me, that they had already appeared for the Colonel, and promised to do him the best Offices they could in his Affair, yet ex∣pressed an unwillingness to ruin some of their Friends who were of Mr. Cromwel's Party, and particularly named Col. Whalley. I replied that if Col. Walley was so good a Man to de∣serve that consideration from them, I perswad∣ed my self he would not oppose them; but if he were otherwise, they could not justly be thought worthy of the Honour of being im∣ployed in the Rescue and Deliverance of their Country, who should suffer themselves to be so much governed by private Interests and En∣gagements. Nothing more of moment passed between us in this Conversation, except that they desired to keep a good Correspondence with us, and to that end moved that they might see Sir. Henry Vane and Sir Arthur Hasle∣rig, or at least be made acquainted with their Opinion concerning the Publick Affairs, and receive their Advice touching their future Pro∣ceedings. I told them it was my Opinion, that those two Gentlemen were too prudent to appear publickly in a matter of this nature, before full satisfaction that those of Wallingford House were in earnest, and had done some∣thing that should put them past all Retreat: yet I promised them to inform my self concerning
their Sentiments, and to advertise them from time to time what measures they should think most proper to be taken. The next day I ac∣quainted Sir Henry Vane and Sir Arthur Hasle∣rig with what had passed, and they approved the way that was proposed, and promi∣sed that when they saw it seasonable they would be ready to assist them in all things tending to the Publick Service. With this Answer I went to Col. Sydenham, and desired him to impart it to the rest of the Company at Wallingford House; and then asking him con∣cerning their Proceedings, he told me they designed to procure a General Council of Offi∣cers to be called, which if they could effect, he hoped it would be of great advantage to their Affairs. After two or three days, some of the principal of the Party finding Mr. Cromwel a∣lone, took the opportunity to perswade him of the Necessity of calling a General Council of Officers, in order to present something to the House for the Regulation and Maintenance of the Army: he not suspecting their Design, consented to the Proposition, and having issued out an Order to that purpose, a General Coun∣cil of Officers met. Both Parties endeavoured to take advantage of this Meeting, and the lightest Vessels being usually most noisy, the Irish Officers first moved that the Council would petition the House, that the Protector might be declared General of the Army, as the only means to put an end to the Divisions
that were amongst them: But this Motion found so little Approbation, that the Court Party began to doubt of their Success at this Meeting, and had much more reason so to do, when they heard the Hum that was given upon a Proposition made to this effect, That it would be more advantageous to the Army, and more conducing to the good of the Na∣tion, if the Military and Civil Power might be placed in different Hands, that the one might be a Ballance to the other. The Tem∣per and Inclinations of the Council being thus tried, they were adjourned to another day. In the mean time the Party of Wallingford House beginning to appear more publickly, Col. Des∣borough and Col. Sydenham sent an Officer to desire me to give them a Meeting in the Cham∣ber where the Committee for the Army usual∣ly sate, and to bring with me two or three Persons, in whose Affections to the Publick I had the most confidence. Accordingly I made choice of Col. Dixwel, and my Cousin Mr. Wallop, and with them went to the Place ap∣pointed, where our Discourse tended chiefly to give reciprocal Assurances of our Resolution to join together in order to promote the Publick Good, promising to use our Endeavours to re∣move all Doubts and Scruples that might re∣main in any of us, that by a mutual Trust and Confidence in each other, we might be the better enabled to prevent the Return of the Common Enemy. The second time the
General Council of Officers met, they went a step farther, and declared their apprehensions, That the Common Cause was likely to be ruined by that Subtilty and Artifices of those who had never been able to do it by open Force; and therefore desired that the Command of the Army might be intrusted to the Care of some fit Person, in whom they might all confide. This Propo∣sition found so general an Approbation, that it was impossible for the Courtiers, to resist the Stream, and so the Meeting was adjourned to another Day. In the mean time Mr. Cromwel and his Party were exceedingly alarm'd at these Proceedings; and not daring to trust to their own Authority in this matter, they contrived it so as to engage the Parliament in their Defence. Accordingly some Members of the Commons House charged the Council with mutinous Words there spoken against the Government, and against the Resolutions of the Parliament it self. This Accusation was so well seconded, that the House resolved to dissipate the Storm, and to that end passed a Vote, That the Officers, of the Army should no more meet as a General Coun∣cil. Yet for all this, they met again at the time appointed, in order to proceed in their Design: But the House having notice of it, and being very desirous to enable Mr. Cromwel to make their Vote effectual, declared him to be Gene∣ral of their Army, authorizing him to disperse the Officers to their respective Charges, to re∣move from their Commands such as should dis∣obey,
and to place others in the room of them. They also voted it to be High Treason in the Officers to meet in Council contrary to their Order, and promised to cause the Arrears of those that should yield Obedience, to be forth∣with paid, with assurances to take care of them for the future. Mr. Richard Cromwel having notice of these Votes, immediately went to the place where the Council of Officers was assembled; and having informed them of what had passed, he told them that he expected their present Obedience. The Officers not being then prepared to dispute his Commands, with∣drew themselves; but the chief of them con∣tinued their Meetings in a more private man∣ner, making use of all means imaginable to oblige Mr. Richard Cromwel to a Compliance with them: but he relying on the Strength of his new Friends, refused to hearken to them; so that they perceived it to be high time to pro∣vide for the Security of themselves. Information being given at Court, that something extraordi∣nary was in agitation, the Protector Richard sent a Message to Lieut. General Fleetwood to come to him; but the Messenger returned without-an Answer. Then he ordered some of the Guard to be sent for him, but they desired to be excused. The Lieutenant General having notice of this Design, retired to St. James's, where many Officers of the Army resort∣ing to him, it was concluded between them, that the whole Army should rendezvous at
St. James's. The News of this Resolution being brought to Mr. Cromwel, he also appoint∣ed a Counter-Rendezvouz to be at the same time at Whitehal. Accordingly Col. Gough sent Orders for his Regiment to march to Whitehal; but the Major had already prevailed with them to draw to St. James's. Three Troops of Col. In∣goldsby's Horse marched also to St. James's, with part of two more; so that he had only one entire Troop of his Regiment to stand by him. Col. Whalley's Regiment of Horse for the most part left him, and went off to St. James's, which he see∣ing, opened his Breast, and desired them to shoot him. Col. Hacker's Regiment of Horse being drawn up near Cheapside, Mr. Cromwel sent a Message to the Colonel, with an Order to re∣quire him forthwith to march to Whitehal; but he excused himself, and said that he had re∣ceived Orders from Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood to keep that Post. Many also of Richard's own Guard went to St. James's, and most of those that staid with him, declared they would not oppose any that should come to them by Order from Lieutenant General Fleetwood. Thus here was a General without any Army, and divers great Officers without Souldiers; who having boasted of their Interest in the Army, and having thereby led the House into their late rash Proceedings, now being utterly disappointed in their Hopes and Expectations, knew not what to advise, or what to do. A∣bout Noon Col. Desborough went to Mr. Ri∣chard
Cromwel at Whitehal, and told him that if he would dissolve his Parliament, the Offi∣cers would take care of him; but that, if he refused so to do, they would do it without him, and leave him to shift for himself. Ha∣ving taken a little time to consider of it, and finding no other way left to do better, he con∣sented to what was demanded. This great Alteration was made with so little noise, that very few were alarm'd at it. The next Morn∣ing the House met, and divers Members made extravagant Motions rather, as was supposed, to vent their own Passions, than from any hopes of Success: For whatever were the Re∣solutions that had been made by the Court-nto, they could not suddenly be brought to a Vote, because the contrary Party was con∣siderably increased by this change of Affairs. Few of the House knew of the Resolution ta∣ken to put a Period to them, or if they did, were unwilling to take notice of it; so that when the Usher of the Black Rod, who attend∣ed the other House, came to let the Serjeant at Arms know that it was the Pleasure of the Protector that the House of Commons should attend him at the other House, many of them were unwilling to admit the Serjeant into the House to deliver the Message; but the Com∣monwealth Party demanded, and obtained that he should give the House an account of what the Gentleman of the Black Rod had said to him. The Assembly being under this Con∣fusion,
adjourned themselves till eight of the Clock the next Morning, but care was taken to prevent their meeting again by publishing a Proclamation, declaring them to be dissolved, by setting a Padlock on the Door of the House, and by placing a Guard in the Court of Re∣quests, with Orders to refuse admittance to all those that should demand it. The Army hav∣ing broken this Assembly, were not so una∣nimous in resolving what step to take next. The chief of them were most inclined to patch up some Agreement with Mr. Richard Cromwel, if they could effect it with advantage to them∣selves. In the mean time they permitted the ordinary Course of Justice to run in his Name, whilst they themselves disposed of the Offices of the Army at their Pleasure; removing such as had appeared active against them at the time of their general Rendezvous, and filling the Vacancies with their own Creatures. They took Major General Lambert into their Coun∣cils, and restored him, together with Col. Packer, and Capt. Gladman, to their several Commands. Sir Charles Coot went post for Ireland to carry the News of this great Altera∣tion to Col. Henry Cromwel, and to consult what might be done to continue their Reign. Col. Henry Ingoldsby hastned after him on the same account; and soon after their arrival, all possible care was taken to maintain themselves. To that end Sir Charles Coot was sent into Con∣naught, Lieutenant Col. Flower into Ʋlster, the
Lord Broghil into Munster; and the Troops they most confided in were ordered to march towards Dublin. This being done, a Council of Officers was called together by Col. Crom∣wel, and a Proposition made to them that they would declare themselves ready to stand by and defend Mr. Richard Cromwel; which they declined to do at that time, desireing to see what Course would be taken by the Army in England, before thy should declare themselves. In England there were not wanting some who endeavoured to support this tottering Govern∣ment; but finding themselves hopeless of Suc∣cess in or about London, they resolved to act their parts farther off. In order to this, they made choice of the North, principally by rea∣son of the Neighbourhood of Scotland, where the Forces were commanded by Colonel George Monk, a Person of an ambitious and covetous Temper, of loose, or rather no Prin∣ciples, and of a vicious and scandalous Con∣versation. The chief Instruments made use of in this Design were the Lord Falconbridge and Col. Howard, who, tho' they had attended on Lieutenant General Fleetwood before they began their Journey, to assure him of their Resolutions to acquiesce, yet had both tam∣pered with their Regiments, in order to fit them to their purposes, and also held a Corre∣spondence with Col. Monk, who was not a little suspected by the confederated Officers of Wallingford-House.
The Wallingford-House Party, who had thus possessed themselves of the Supreme Power, were every day pressed from all Parts, and espe∣cially from the City of London, to restore the Long Parliament, as the only means to satisfie the People, and to establish an equal and just Government amongst us in the way of a Com∣monwealth. Neither were there wanting di∣vers Officers of the Army, who positively de∣clared that they would not rest contented with any thing less. Besides, the Commonwealth-Party had absolutely refused to hearken to any Propositions of Accommodation with Mr. Rich. Cromwel, and great Endeavours had been used by the Son of the late King in conjunction with the Presbyterians, to raise Tumults and Insur∣rections in England. To which may be added, the great Probability that appeared of a Peace to be concluded speedily between France and Spain, who would then be at leisure to assist the Common Enemy. These things being seri∣ously considered by those of Wallingford House, and finding themselves destitute of all other means to supply the Necessities of the Army and Navy; they were compelled at last to ad∣mit the Debate of the Restitution of the Long Parliament, amongst other Propositions that were under their Consideration. They also restored some Officers to their Commands who had suffered for their Affections to the Parlia∣ment; and amongst others Col. Okey and Col. Saunders, who had been cashiered by Oli∣ver
Cromwel on that account. The Proposition of restoring the Parliament met with great Op∣position from many of those that had tasted the Sweetness of Power and Profit under the late Usurpation of the Cromwels, and who feared a more equal Distribution of things; and there∣fore they every where affirmed, that there was not a sufficient Number of Members left to make up a Parliament. Hereupon Dr. John Owen having desired me to give him a List of their Names, I delivered him one; wherein I had marked those who had sat in the House since the Year 1648. and were yet alive, amounting to the Number of about one hundred and sixty. The Doctor having perused it, carried it to those at Wallingford House; who for the Reasons be∣fore-mentioned appointed a Committee of their Associates to treat with some Members of that Parliament, in order to a clearing of some Par∣ticulars which seemed most considerable to them, before they should proceed to a final Determi∣nation in this great Affair. The Place of Meet∣ing was Sir Henry Vane's House at Charing-Cross; the Persons of and from the Army were Major-General Lambert, Col. John Jones, Col. Kelfey, Col. Berry, &c. Those of the Parliament were, Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Hasterig, Major Salo∣way, and my self. The Things demanded by those of the Army were, 1. To be secured by an Act of Indemnity for what was past.
2. That some Provision of Power might be made for Mr. Richard Cromwel, as well as for the Paiment of his Debts, and future Sub∣sistence in a plentiful manner, they having pro∣mised to take care of him in these Particulars. 3. That what should stand in need of Regu∣lation both in the Law and Clergy, should be reformed and amended. 4. That the Government of the Nation should be by a representive of the People, and by a select Senate. For the first, it was thought reasonable that something of that nature should be done, as well to gratify those who would contribute to our Return, as for our own future Peace and Quiet. Touching the second Proposition concerning a Provision to be made for Mr. Richard Crom∣wel, we said, that tho' the Parliament and Na∣tion had been greatly injured by the Interrupti∣on they had received; yet seeing those who were at present in possession of the Power had engaged to make some provision for him; we were contented for our selves, that those Debts which he had contracted on the Publick Ac∣count should be paid. that so he might be ena∣bled to subsist comfortably: But that we could by no means consent to continue any part of his late assumed Power to him, neither could we believe that such a Proposition would ever be hearkned to by the Members of the Parliament if they should come together.
The third Proposition was easily agreed to, all of us declaring that we would use the ut∣most of our endeavours to rectify and reform whatsoever should appear to be amiss either in Church or State. In the fourth Proposition we found a greater Difficulty, not being all of the same Opinion with respect to that part of it relating to the Senate. Whereupon finding that out of a De∣sire to avoid any thing that might prove an Ob∣struction to the Return of the Parliament; or possibly from an Inclination in some, to the thing it self, there was an Intention by a general Si∣lence about that Matter, to give them hopes of our Compliance: Therefore that they might have no just occasion to say hereafter, that we had dealt doubly with them, keeping fair in that particular before our Admission, and after we were admitted, declaring against it; I thought it my Duty to let them know, that If by a select Senate they understood a lasting Power, co-ordinate with the Authority of the People's Representative, and not chosen by the People; I could net engage to promote the Esta∣blishment of such a Power, apprehending that it would prove a means to perpetuate our Dif∣ferences, and make it necessary to keep up a Standing Force to support it. But if they pro∣posed to erect such an Authority only for a short time, and in order to proceed with more Vigour to an equal and just establishment of the Commonwealth, I presumed it might be
very useful, and that the People would readily acquiesce when it should be evident that it was designed to no other end than to prevent them from destroying themselves, and not to enslave them to any Faction or Party. After four or five hours Debate concerning these Particulars, we desired them to consider that whatsoever had been said by us in this Conference, ought only to be taken as proceeding from private Men▪ and that we durst not presume to pro∣mise any thing on the part of the Parliament. However we encouraged them to hope, that if we four joyned in proposing any thing in the House for the Publick Good, we might proba∣bly bring it to effect. At the Conclusion of our Conversation Major General Lambert affured us, that he would represent to the General Council what had passed between us as fairly, and with as much Advantage as we could de∣sire. After three or four days the same Com∣pany met again at the same place, where those that were employed by the Council of Officers, declared the Resolution of themselves, and of those they represented, to be, That the Parlia∣ment should be restored, and thereupon pressed us that the Members might meet with all possi∣ble Expedition, being perswaded that Delays in a Matter of such Importance, might hazard the Success of all. Therefore it was resolved that notice should be given to such Members as were in Town to meet on the Thursday fol∣lowing at Mr. Lenthal their Speaker's House,
and that the Officers of the Army should come thither, and there acquaint us with the Desires of the Army. At the time appointed, about Sixteen of us went to the Speaker's House, and having informed him of the Cause of our coming, he began to make many trifling Ex∣cuses, pleading his Age, Sickness, and Inability to sit long Soon after the Committee from the General Council came, and Major General Lambert, in the Name of the rest, acquainted the Speaker, That in order to reconcile our Diffe∣rences, and to unite all those that were well af∣fected to the Publick, it was the Desire of the Army, that the Parliament would return to the Discharge of their Duty according to the Trust reposed in them by the People of England; pro∣mising to stand by them, and serve them to the utmost of their Power. The Speaker, who had been lately at Court, where they had pre∣vailed with him to endeavour to render this De∣sign, which they feared above all things, in∣effectual; and on the other hand, being unwil∣ling to lose his late acquired Peerage, renewed his former Excuses, with this Addition, that he was not fully satisfied that the Death of the late King had not put an end to the Parliament. To this it was answered, That by a Law made by an undisputed Authority, the Parliament could not be dissolved without their own Con∣sent, which had never yet been given. And therefore they desired him, as he valued the Peace and Happiness of the Nation, to send his Let∣ters
to such Members as were about the Town, requiring them to meet the next Morning in the Lords House, in order to resume their Places in the House of Commons so soon as they might make up a Quorum. He replied, that he could by no means do as we desired, having appointed a Business of far greater Im∣portance to himself, which he would not omit on any account; because it concerned the Sal∣vation of his own Soul. We then pressed him to inform us what it might be: To which he answered, that he was preparing himself to participate of the Lord's Supper, which he re∣solved to take on the next Lord's-day. Upon this it was replied, that Mercy is more accepta∣ble to God than Sacrifice, and that he could not better prepare himself for the aforesaid Du∣ty, than by contributing to the Publick Good. But he resolving to perform some part of his Promise to Mr. Richard Cromwel, would not be perswaded to send Letters to the Members, as it was desired. So that we found our selves obliged to tell him, that the Service of the Pub∣lick had been too long obstructed by the Will of single Persons; and that if he refused to issue out his Letters to the Members, we would cause it to be done by other means: And there∣upon gave Orders to such Clerks as we then had there ready for that purpose, to draw Di∣rections for the Messengers who were to sum∣mon the Members, and to divide the List a∣mongst them, in such a manner as might best
provide for the Expedition of the Business. In the Morning about thirty Members being come, and the Number increasing continually, the Speaker, who had appointed his Spies to bring him word whether we might probably make up a House or not, being informed that we wanted not above three or four; notwistand∣ing the Salvation of his Soul, thought it time to come to us, and soon after the requisite Number was compleated. About twelve a Clock we went to take our Places in the House, Mr. Lenthal our Speaker leading the way, and the Officers of the Army lining the Rooms for us, as we passed through the Painted Chamber, the Court of Requests, and the Lobby it self, the principal Officers having placed themselves nearest to the door of the Parliament-House, every one seeming to rejoyce at our Restitution, and promising to live and die with us. The same day, the House appointed a Commitee of Safety, with Authority to seize and secure such as might justly be suspected of any Design to disturb the Publick Peace and also to remove such Officers of the Army as they should think fit, and to fill their Places with others, till the Parliament should take farther Order therein. The Persons constituted to be of that Commit∣tee were Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Col. Sydenham, Major Saloway, Col. John Jones, and my self. These were of the House, and to them were joyned from without, Major General Lambert,
Col. Desborough, and Col. Berry. The time appointed for the Duration of their Power was, if I mistake not, eight days, by which time it was supposed the House would be able to constitute a Council of State, to take care of Affairs of that nature. The Parliament re∣ferred to the Committee to give notice to Fo∣reign Ambassadors residing in England, and to the Ministers of this Nation employed in Fo∣reign Parts, of their Return to the Exercise of their Authority. They likewise directed them to inform themselves what Alliances England had abroad, and to report the State of that Af∣fair to the House. They impowered them al∣so to make Inquiry into the Miscarriages of Officers during the late Confusions, to remove such as they found guilty, to put others in their Places, and then to lay the whole Matter be∣fore the Parliament for their Approbation. To the Members of the House who were of the Committee, they added Mr. Scott; and then ordered them to take a view of all the Civil Officers of the Nation, authorizing them to displace those that should be found unfit to serve, and to place others in the room of them, and to report what they had done to the House. Writs and all Proceedings at Law were directed to run as formerly in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England. And lest the Judges who were Members of the House might by their Influence there, prevent the intended Re∣formation of the Law, it was resolved that no
Member of Parliament should be a Judge in any Court. Information being given to the Com∣mittee that Col. Norton Governour of Ports∣mouth had let fall some Expressions of Discon∣tent, they knowing the Place to be of great Importance, sent down Col. Whetham, who formerly had been Governour thereof, to take possession of the Government of it; at which tho' the Colonel was much disturbed, yet in a Let∣ter to me written by him soon after; he assured me he should be very well satisfied, if we would proceed to the Settlement of an equal Commonwealth. A Committee for the Sea-Affairs was also appointed by the Parliament, who being informed of the Disaffection of some that managed the Business of the Admiralty to the Present Government, the House was ear∣nestly pressed to pass a Vote for excluding them from that Employment; but at last they were prevailed with to refer it to the Committee which they had already appointed for nomi∣nating Officers, to propose some for that Charge. The Committee having resolved to acquaint the Persons they designed to propose to the Parliament, with their Intentions before∣hand, demanded of Col. Kelsey if he would ac∣cept of it, and easily obtained his Consent; tho' they told him they could not promise him any other Salary than what he should merit by a diligent Performance of the Duties of the Place. The same Proposition being made to Col. Clark; he told them, he would consider
well before he would engage so far with the present Authority. This Carriage of the Co∣lonel caused me to suspect that the Army had still some Design on foot, more than appeared openly; and I was the rather induced to this Suspicion by this Relation to Thurloe the late Se∣cretary, and his Familiarity with Col. Desbo∣rough; especially considering that the way was still open to reconcile themselves to Mr. Richard Cromwel, who yet remained at Whitehall with∣out making any Preparations for his Removal. The Officers also under colour of enquiring into the Miscarriages of the late Governments, and modelling the Affairs of the Army, had fre∣quent Mettings, wherein greater care was taken to maintain their own Faction, than to provide for the Publick Service. It was very evident by the Lists of Officers presented by them to the Committee, that the Wallingford-house Party was not so averse to the Creatures of Mr. Richard Cromwel, as they were to those who had been Sufferes on the account of the Commonwealth. So that Major General Over∣ton, Col. Rich, Col. Alured, and Capt. Bremen, were not without great difficulty received into the Service. The Regiment of Horse that had been commanded by Col. Howard was given to Sir Arthur Haslerig, and a day or two after, it was proposed that I should be Colonel of that which had been commanded by Col. Gough; Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway ear∣nestly pressing me to accept of it. But being
unwilling to intermeddle with any Employ∣ment of Advantage under the Parliament, that I might give my Voice in the House with more Freedom and Impartiality; I desired to be ex∣cused. Having taken this Resolution, Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig came to me and told me, that un∣less I did accept it, he would quit the Regiment he commanded; which he protested to have taken, not with a Design to make any Advan∣tage of it, being resolved not to receive any Pay; but only to have a Right to be present at the Councils of War, whereby he might be enabled to do some Good, and possibly to pre∣vent more Mischief. Having weighed these things, and considered that our greatest Dan∣ger was likely to arise from the Army, the Principal Officers of which had been debauched from their Duty by Oliver Cromwel, and had learn'd their own Strength when they obstruct∣ed his Design to be King; That they had placed his Son in the same Power after his Death, and pulled him down again upon their Dislike of his Government; I consented to un∣dertake the Command of the Regiment that s offered to me. The Parliament having many important Affairs under their Considera∣tion, were not yet at leisure to constitute a Council of State; and therefore continued the Powers granted to the Committee of Safety for a longer time; and declared their Intentions to be, that the Nation should be governed in the way of a Commonwealth without a King,
single Person, or House of Lords. They also ordered that Whitehal should be cleared with all convenient speed for the use of the Publick; that care should be taken of the Goods and Fur∣niture belonging to it, and that the Committee should take care that Mr. Richard Cromwel might have notice of these their Resolutions. In the mean time the Parliament took into their Consideration what Powers and Instructions were requisite for the Council of State, and voted their Number to consist of Thirty one, whereof Twenty one to be of the Parliament, and Ten to be of such persons as were not Mem∣bers of the House. And the better to shew the Consideration the Parliament had for some eminent Persons, who were not of their Body, and principally for the Officers of the Army, it was first agreed, That the Lord President Bradshaw, the Lord Fairfax, Major General Lambert, Col. Desborough, Col. Henry, Sir An∣thony Ashley Cooper; and Sir Horatio Townsend, should be Members of the Council. The next Morning the Parliament proceeded to the Ele∣ction of Twenty one of their Members to be of the Council of State, according to their former Resolution, and chose Sir Arthur Hasterig, Sir Henry Vane, Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood, Major, Sa∣loway, Col. Morley, Mr. Thomas Chaloner, Col. Algernon Sidney, Mr. Henry Nevil, Col. Wal∣ton, Col. Dixwel, Mr. Wallop, Chief Justice St. Johns, Mr. Thomas Scott, Col. Thomson, Mr. Robert Reynolds, Col. Sydenham, Col.
John Jones, the Lord Commissioner Whitelock, Sir James Harrington, Col. Downes, and my self. Then to compleat the Number of ten, who were to consist of Persons that were not Members, they chose the Lord Warriston, Sir Robert Honywood, and Mr. Josias Berners. The Officers of the Army were not at all pleased with this Election, perceiving they should not be permitted to act Arbitrarily, as they desired, and therefore seldom came to the Council; and when they condescended to come, carried them∣selves with all imaginable Perverseness and In∣solence. They scrupled to take the Oath to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, in oppo∣sition to Charles Stuart, or any single Person, which the Parliament had appointed to be taken by every Member of the Council before he took his Place. And because they were a shamed to own themselves dissatisfied with the Sub∣stance of the Oath, they pretended to be un∣willing to take any; yet professing a Readi∣ness to promise as much as the Oath required. This Distinction seemed very nice to most of us; but that there might be no Difference about Ceremonies, the Parliament was pre∣vailed with to grant Liberty to the Council to alter the Engagement into such a Form as might give them Satisfaction. Notwithstand∣ing all which Condescention they were hardly perswaded to take it, and when they had done it, they seldom came to discharge their Duty at the Board. Things being in this posture, the
Enemies to the Government thought it a pro∣per time to attempt something before a good Agreement might be made between the Parlia∣ment and Army: In order to which great Numbers of Arms were brought up by them in London, whereof Notice was given to a Com∣mittee of the Council of State. A Chest filled with Arms was sent to the House of one Mr. Overbury of Glocestershire, of which he gave notice to Capt. Crofts, who commanded the County-Troop; and the Captain having caused the Trunk to be opened, found in it ten Case of common Pistols, one fine Pair with the Name of one Harman Barns the Maker upon them, together with a compleat Suit of Armor. The Committee of the Council of State sent for the said Harman Barns, and upon Examination found him to have been Gun-smith to Prince Rupert, and so confused in his Answers, that we thought it necessary to secure him and his Arms, amounting to the Number of two hun∣dred Carabines, and as many pair of Pistols ready fixed, besides a great Number unfixed; tho' he had affirmed to us that he had no more than thirty pair of Pistols in his House. The Cavalier Party having boasted to divers Persons that Mr. How of Glocestershire had given to them Assurances of his Service; the Committee sent for him to appear before them, which he did, and in his Examination acknowledged; that he had a certain number of Arms in his House, which he had purchased at the time of the late
Dispute between Richard's and the Common∣wealth Party, that he might be ready to serve the Publick on that occasion, if there had been any necessity; and had given assurance to Sir Arthur Haslerig and me of the same good Inten∣tions. Hereupon tho' I could not but justify the Committee in sending for him, on account of the Informations we had received; yet I thought my self obliged to do him Justice, and accordingly informed the Committee, that on the day of the Dissolution of Richard's Con∣vention, Mr. How came to me in Westminster Hall, and assured me of his Affection to the Commonwealth, and that whensoever I should signify to him that there was occasion for his service; he would be ready to hazard both Life and Estate in the defence of it. The Coun∣cil being satisfied with this Testimony, gave present Orders for his Discharge. In the mean time the Wallingford-House Party not forget∣ting their Design, drew an Address to the Par∣liament, and presented it by the Hands of the chief Officers of the Army, that so it might either have a greater Influence upon the House, or, if it prevailed not there, that it might be a means to unite them all against the Parlia∣ment. The principal Heads of the Address were, that those who had acted under the late Power might be indemnified by an Act of Parliament; that Lieutenant General Fleetwood might be appointed Commander in chief of the Army; that the Debts of the Protector might
be satisfied, and that he might have ten thou∣sand Pounds by year added to his Revenue; that the Government of the Nation might consist of a Representative of the People, and of a select Senate; that care might be taken for the Paiment of the Army; and that Liber∣ty of Conscience might be secured to all such who professed Faith in Jesus Christ, and were not scandalous in their Conversation. The Parliament gave them for answer, That they would take their Desires into their speedy con∣sideration, and give them satisfaction therein as far as should be possible. And that for the future, no Man might have an opportunity to pack an Army to serve his Ambition, as had formerly been practised; a Bill was prepared and brought in, constituting the seven Persons following, viz. Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Major General Lambert, Col. Desborough, Col. Berry, Sir Henry Vane, and my self, to be Commissioners for the No∣mination of Officers to be presented to the consideration and approbation of the Parlia∣ment. Another Bill was brought in to consti∣tute Lieut. General Fleetwood Commander in Chief, and it was resolved that his Commission should continue during the present Session, or till the Parliament should take farther Order therein; and in stead of authorizing the Lieu∣tenant General to grant Commissions to such Officers as should be appointed by the Parlia∣ment, it was ordered that the said Commissi∣ons
should be subscribed by the Speaker, and received from his Hands, by which it was en∣deavoured to bring the Military Sword under the Power of the Civil Authority, as it ought to be in a free Nation. But observing that these things were greatly disliked by the Officers, and knowing how much it import∣ed the very being of our Case to main∣tain a good Correspondence between the Par∣liament and Army, I earnestly pressed the House not to insist upon the Restrictions be∣fore-mentioned, especially considering that they consisted rather in Form than Substance: For tho' the time of a Commission be not expresly limited; yet it can last no longer than during the pleasure of those that give it, and if it should happen to be used to the Destruction of those from whom it was received; it actu∣ally puts a Period to it self. Neither could it be thought very material, whether a Com∣mission was signed by one Person to another, so long as it was derived from the same Autho∣rity. Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway were of the same Opinion, but Sir Authur Haslerig, Col. Sidney, Mr. Nevil, and the Majority of the House, carried it for the said Limitations and Restrictions; and many of the House began to entertain a hard Opinion of me on the ac∣count of this Moderation, as if I had espoused the Interest of the Army against the Parlia∣ment. The two Acts being passed, it was ordered that notice of them should be given
to the Army, and that the House expected that the Commander in Chief, with the rest of the Officers approved by the Parliament, should take their Commissions from the hands of the Speaker as he sate in the Chair. Hereupon a Council of Officers being summoned to Col. Desborough's House to consult about this Affair, Sir Authur Haslerig desired me not to fail to meet him there. The Council being met, di∣vers Officers, and especially those of the first Rank, openly manifested their discontent a∣gainst the Clauses before-mentioned; Major General Lambert saying that they implied a Diffidence of the Army, and that they had no assurance that the Parliament would continue them in their Imployments, which, he said, was contrary to the Promises made to them, before the Restitution of the Parliament. It was answered, that no private Persons either could, or had promised more than to use their Endeavours in the House to procure certain things to be done, and that whatsoever had been so promised by any of us, had been fully effected by the Parliament: For they had con∣tinued the Commands of the Army in such Hands as had been agreed on; neither was there any colour for them to suspect any Inten∣tion to alter the same. They were told that the Parliament could not justly be blamed, if, they endeavoured to preserve their Authority, that had been so eminently violated of late; that it was our Duty to judge favourably of
the Actions of the Parliament, and especially since they had given such evident Demonstra∣tion to the World that they designed not to perpetuate their Authority by a late Vote that had passed with the two Acts complained of, That the Parliament should be dissolved in the Month of May next ensuing: Whereby they had engaged themselves, as they tendered their own Preservation, to make a speedy Provision for the settlement of the Government, and the Security of the Common Cause, in which the Officers of the Army were as much concerned as any Persons whatsoever. We desired them to consider well of how great importance it was to the People of England to preserve a good Corres∣pondence between the Parliament and the Army at this time, when the Common Enemy had no hopes left but in our Divisions; that they would not gratify their Enemys; nor discou∣rage their Friends, by entertaining groundless Suspicions and Jealousies of those whose In∣terest was the same with theirs. But notwith∣standing all that could be said, the Dissatifacti∣on of the chief Officers, who had another Game to play, still remained, and their Confi∣dence to carry all before them was so great; that Col. Desbrough openly said, that he account∣ed the Commission he had already, to be as good as any the Parliament could give, and that he would not take another. Yet for all this ruf∣fling Insolence of the chief Officers of the Ar∣my, who thought they could have influenced
all the rest; Col. Hacker with the Officers of his Regiment came the next Morning by the Perswasions of Sir Arthur Haslerig, to the Parlia∣ment-House, and received their Commissions from the Speaker according to the Directions of the Act. The next day, I was attended by the Officers of my Regiment, and we altoge∣ther received our Commissions in the same man∣ner. The Ice being thus broke by Col. Hacker and me, the rest of the Officers began to con∣sider better of the matter, and divers of them growing more moderate, came also, and took out their Commissions. Lieutenant General Fleetwood received three Commissions, where∣of one was for a Regiment of Horse, another for a Regiment of Foot, and the third appoint∣ing him to be Commander in Chief, with the Limitations above-mentioned, and a Clause requiring him to obey such Orders as he should receive from the Parliament, or the Council of State. Mr. Richard Cromwel not removing from Whitehal, tho' he received a Message to that end, Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Scot and I, according to the command we had from the Parliament; attended him there, and received for answer that he would do it with all conventient speed. But the Parliament being impatient of his Delays, sent the Chief Justice St. John's, and another Person to require him to give them a positive Answer touching his Removal, which he did to their satisfaction;
declaring his Acquiescence in the Providence of God, and his Resolution, not only to submit to the Authority of the Parliament, but also to use the best of his Endeavours to perswade all those in whom he had any Interest to do so likewise. The Parliament having received his Answer, ordered 20000 Pounds to be presently paid him to enable him to remove, and passed a Resolution to pay those Debts, which it was said he had contracted on the Publick Account. The Army in Ireland being informed that the Parliament was returned to the exer∣cise of their Authority, sent over Commissio∣ners to them to propose divers things relat∣ing as well to the Civil as Military Govern∣ment of that Nation. The Council of State having heard their Propositions, prepared such of them as they thought reasonable for the consideration of the Parliament; in particular, those concerning the establishment of the Ar∣my in the posession of those Lands which had been assigned them in Paiment of their Arrears; as also to confirm the Adventurers and others in the possession of theirs, as far as might con∣sist with the Rules of Justice. Then the Par∣liament proceeded to put the administration of Affairs there, into such Hands as they could best confide in, declaring the Government should be again managed by Commissioners, as it had been formerly; and having nominated the Per∣sons to serve in that Imployment, they order∣ed the Council of State to draw up Instructi∣ons
for them, and to report them to the House, together with whatsoever else they would think necessary to be done there. They resolved that Col. Henry Cromwel should be required to come over to give an account of the State of Things in Ireland, and empowered the Com∣missioners, or any two of them, to take care of the Safety of that Nation till farther Order. The Committee of Safety having dispatched a Messenger to our Fleet in the Sound before the Election of the Council of State, to ac∣quaint them with the Restitution of the Parlia∣ment; the Officers of the several Ships assem∣bled, and sent an Acknowledgment of their Authority, with all possible Demonstrations of Satisfaction. Notwithstanding which, being highly sensible of how great Importance the Sea-Affairs are to this Nation; we ordered six Frigats to be equipped with all Diligence, and gave the Command of them to Lawson, making him at the same time Vice-Admiral of the Fleet. And this we did, as well to prevent an Invasion from Flanders, with which the Cava∣lier Party threatned us, as to ballance the Power of Montague's Party, who we knew was no Friend to the Commonwealth. We treated also with Myn Heer Nieuport, Ambassador from the States of Holland, that a good Corre∣spondence might be mantained between the two Commonwealths, and that an Accord might be made between the two Kings of Den∣mark and Sweden, who were then Enemies, by
the Interposition of the two States, who agree∣ing upon equitable Terms, might be able to impose them on the Refuser. And this we were in hopes to accomplish the rather, because neither the Dutch nor we pretended to any more than a Freedom of passing and repassing the Sound, which could not well be; if the Command of it were in the hands of either of those Princes. The Dutch Ambassador seemed very desirous to finish the Treaty, but by seve∣ral Demands which he made in the behalf of their Merchants, delay'd it so long, that our Agent in Holland had already concluded an Agreement with the States; whereby the two Commonwealths became engaged to compel that King, that should refuse to accept of the Conditions which they thought just and reaso∣nable. In order to put this Resolution in exe∣cution, the States of Holland appointed their Plenipotentiaries, and we on our part did the same, sending thither Col. Algernon Sidney, Sir Robert Honeywood, and one Mr. Boon a Mer∣chant, to that end. The Parliament having taken some measure of Care of foreign Affairs; began to make provision for the better executi∣on of Justice in England, and established Judges i the Upper Bench, Common Pleas, and Ex∣chequer; but designing the Reformation of the Practice of the Law; they for the present no∣minated no more than were sufficient to make a Quorum in each Court. The Lord President Bradshaw, Serjeant Fountain, and Serjeant Tyr∣roll,
were made Commissioners of the Broad Seal. And that the Justices of the Peace throughout England might be fitly qualified for that Employment, the House referred to the Committee of Nominations for Civil Offices, the Consideration of that Matter; but finding this Work to be full of Difficulty, and attend∣ed with much Envy; the Parliament ordered the Members for each County to agree on a List of such Persons as they should think most proper for that Office, and to set their hands to each List. And in case of any Difference of Opinion, the House, upon hearing both Par∣ties, determined the Matter. Col. Zanchey, Col. Laurence, Mr. Auditor Roberts, and Major Wallis, by the Advice of Lieutenant General Fleetwood, drew up a List of Officers for the Army in Ireland, and presented it to the Com∣mittee of Nominations, and agreed to make it their Request, that I might be appointed Com∣mander in Chief of those Forces; whether from an Opinion that I should thereby be ren∣dred less able to oppose their Designs, than by continuing my Attendance in Parliament; or that none of their Grandees could be spared from their Cabals at Wallingford-house, is uncer∣tain. But true it is, that no Man was less des∣rous than my self, that I should have that Com∣mand; well knowing the Envy and Difficulties that accompanied it, and having ample Expe∣rience how much easier it was to undertake great Employments, than duly to perform the
Functions of them. Yet finding the Officers of Ireland, the Committee of Nominations, the Council of State, and the Parliament all con∣curring to design me for that Post; I thought my self obliged in Duty to accept it: Tho' I was resolved not to suffer my self to be banished thither, as I had been formerly by Oliver Crom∣wel; but to return to England as soon as I should have done what might be necessary, for the Se∣curity of that Country; to contribute my En∣deavours towards the Settlement of a just and equitable Constitution of Government at home; and to prevent those Mischiefs which I per∣ceived the Ambition of the Army to be bring∣ing upon us. Having opened my self freely concerning these Particulars to Sir Henry Vane, it was obtained, that the Parliament after they had voted me to be Commander in Chief of the Forces in Ireland, passed likewise an Order; That when I had put the Affairs of that Coun∣try into a posture of Security, I should have Liberty to return to England. It was my De∣sign at the next sitting of the Committee of Nominations to move them to propose that Sir Henry Vane might succeed me as Colonel of that Regiment which the Parliament had en∣trusted me with; that he might thereby be ena∣bled to discover and prevent the ill Designs of the Army. But the Prebyterian Party in the House, immediately after the Parliament had appointed me for the Service of Ireland, moved that Col. Herbert Morely might be made Colo∣nel
of my Regiment, and carried it. Divers Officers who had faithfully served the Com∣monwealth, and amongst them Col. Rich, were restored to their Commands, tho' not without Difficulty: And that Major General Lambert might be altogether inexcusable, if he should act against the Parliament, they granted him a Regiment of Horse and one of Foot. Then they gave Order for raising a Troop of Horse for their own Guard, and gave the Command of it to Col. Alured, who had been a great Suf∣ferer on the account of the Commonwealth, and very active for the Restitution of the Par∣liament. The Troop consisted of about one hundred and thirty chosen Men, nominated by the Committee, and approved by the House. Col. Alured scrupled to accept it, thinking it not equivalent to a Regiment of Horse which he had commanded; tho' the Pay was appoint∣ed to be the same. Being in this Disposition, he came to me, and having proposed his Doubts; I took the liberty to inform him, as well as I could, of the Honour and Usefulness of that Employment; and having assured him that if it were offered to me, the Circumstances of my Affairs permitting, I would prefer it before any other Command; he was contented to ac∣cept it. Our Treasury was so low, through the male-Administration of the late Govern∣ments, that tho' our Plenipotentiaries to the two Northern Crowns had received their In∣structions; yet they were obliged to stay a
Fornight longer before they could receive the Sum of two thousand Pounds which had been ordered for the Expences of their Voyage; the Taxes coming in but slowly, and the City of London terrified with the Reports of an expect∣ed Insurrection, being very backward in ad∣vancing Money. Yet considering the great Importance of the Town of Dunkirk to the Trade and Navigation of England; the Parlia∣ment took the first occasion they could to send one Month's Pay for the Garison there, to Col. Lockhart Governour of that Place, with In∣structions to go on with the Fortifications, and to have a vigilant Eye as well upon the French as the Spaniard. They ordered him to draw the Regiments that had been lent to the King of France as near  the Town as he could, being under some fears that they might be either de∣tained by the French, or obstructed in their Return by the Spanish Forces. And having re∣ceived Information that the Treaty between those two Nations went prosperously on; they gave him Commission, when he had provided for the Security of Dunkirk, to go to the French Court as Agent from the Parliament; and if he found Encouragement from Cardinal Maza∣rin; to take upon him the Title and Character of Ambassador, and then to repair to the Place where the Treaty was carrying on between the two Crowns. Col. Lockhart, according to his Instructions, having put all things into a good Condition at Dunkirk, and drawn the English
Regiments out of the French Quarters, de∣parted for Paris, and being atrived, was very well received by the Cardinal, and from thence went to St. John de Luz, which was the Place of the Treaty. In the mean time the Parlia∣ment being very desirous to restore the Trade with Spain to this Nation, and being informed from Flanders, that the Spanish Ministers were willing to come to an Accommodation with us; caused divers Subjects of Spain, whom Crom∣wel had made Prisoners, to be released, and would not suffer any Act of Hostility to be u∣sed against those of that Nation. The Act of Indemnity had been read twice, and the House was as desirous to dispatch it as their Affairs would permit; yet the necessary time spent in the Debate a Consideration of it, was made great use of to incense the Army against the Parliament: Divers warm Motions were made for excepting some Persons from the benefit of it, who had gotten great Estates by their compliance with the Usurpation of Oliver Cromwel, and abetting the advancement of his Son, and also to except those who had so Places, and received Money for them; but the Chief Justice St. John's had such an Influence upon the House; that he procured a Clause to be inserted in the Bill to indemnify him for such Offices, as he had sold in Cromwel's time; which Partiality I appeared against so earnestly, that I made him thereby my declared Enemy, tho' I never had expected any sincere Friendship
from him, because he knew me to be zea∣lous for the Regulation of the Practice of the Law, and himself an Obstructer of all Endea∣vours to that end. The two Commissions of Major General Lambert being prepared and signed by the Speaker, he attended at the Door of the House in order to receive them; and being admitted, he was informed by the Spea∣ker, That the Parliament having a good opini∣on of his Abilities and Fidelity, had intrusted him with the Command of one Regiment of Horse and one of Foot, for which he then by their Order delivered the Commissions to him. The Major General answered, That as his own Inclination and Interest led him to pro∣mote the Service of the Parliament, so the Obligation they laid on him by so great a Trust should doubly excite him to Fidelity and O∣bedience to their Commands. And I hope he t intended what he promised, tho' he after∣wards proved an Instrument of much Disor∣d and Confusion amongst us. Mr Henry Nil, a Person of singular Affection to the Commonwealth, moved the House that Lieu∣ General Fleetwood might be made Ran∣g of St. James's Park, and this he did that  occasion obliging the Army might be o∣ed; which Motion was readily consented  by the Parliament: And indeed the Lieute∣nant General, had he not been too much influ∣enced by his Wife's Relations, who pretending that he had injured his Brother-in-Law by con∣tributing
to lay him aside, continually pressed him to irregular Proceedings, in order to make him some satisfaction, might have proved a Person as fit to command the Forces in Chief, as the Parliament could have chosen: Tho' I am not able to see how he could have served him better, unless peradventure by not consenting to his Advancement to the Protector∣ship, than to procure him to be removed with so little Detriment to himself and Reflection on his Family; considering how great a Trust his Father had betrayed, what Dishonour he had brought on the Nation, what Hardships he had put upon many good Men, to the hazard of that just Cause which had cost so much Blood and Treasure of the People. At this time the Opinions of Men were much divided concerning a Form of Government to be established among us. The great Officers of the Army, as I said before, were for a se∣lect standing Senate to be joyned to the Repre∣sentative of the People. Others laboured to have the Supreme Authority to consist of an Assembly chosen by the People, and a Coun∣cil of State chosen by that Assembly to be vested with the Executive Power, and account∣able to that which should next succeed, at which time the Power of the said Cou should determine. Some were desirous to have a Representative of the People constantly sit∣ting, but changed by a perpetual Rotation. Others proposed that there might be joined to
the Popular Assembly, a select Number of Men in the nature of the Lacedemonian Ephori, who should have a Negative in things, where∣in the Essentials of the Government should be concerned, such as the Exclusion of a single Person, touching Liberty of Conscience, Al∣teration of the Constitution, and other things of the last Importance to the State. Some were of opinion, that it would be most condu∣cing to the Publick Happiness, if there might be two Councils chosen by the People, the one to consist of about three hundred, and to have the Power only of debating and proposing Laws; the other to be in number about one ousand, and to have the Power finally to re∣olve and determine: Every Year a third part  each Council to go out, and others to be osen in their places. For my own part if I may be permitted to declare my Opinion, I ould willingly have approved either of the  latter Propositions; presuming them to be  likely to preserve our just Liberties, and to der us a happy People. Some Members of the Council of State pro∣osed at the Board, that the Parliament should e moved to appoint twenty of their own Num∣ber, and ten of the Principal Officers of the rmy to consider of a Form of Government to be reported to the Parliament; and if they should approve it, that then the whole Army should be drawn out and declare their Con∣sent to it: which Proposition, tho' it seemed
then to find a general Approbation, yet pro∣ved abortive, and the Parliament themselves passed a Resolution that on every Wednesday the House should go into a grand Committee to consider of that matter. In the Act of Indemnity a Clause had been inserted to restrain the Favour of the Parliament in regard of those who under the Usurpation had received exorbitant and double Salaries, to the great discontent of divers considerable Persons, who feared they might be concerned in it. In particular, Major General Lambert meeting me the next Morning after the Act was paed, most bitterly exclaimed against i, saying amongst other things, that tho' there was no Security given by the Act to indemnity them for what they had done, yet the Parlia∣ment had taken care to make them liable to be questioned for whatsoever they had received. To which I answered, that in my opinion, all the Souldiers were indemnified for what they had received, and that if the Parliament should ever make use of that Clause, it would only be against those who had enriched themselves by the Ruin of the Commonwealth, and had opposed e Return of the Parliament to the exercise or their Authority; that I perswaded my self he could not think that such a sort of Men deserved the our and Consideration of the Paent equa with those who had contribud toward their Restitution. Ha∣ving said this, Sir Arthur erig joined us
and the Conversation continuing on the same Subject, Sir Arthur affirmed, That the Act was as full and comprehensive as could justly be desired; but the Major General said that it signified nothing, and that it left them still at Mercy. You are, said Sir Arthur, only at the Mercy of the Parliament, who are your good Friends. I know not, said Lambert, why they should not be put at our Mercy as well we at theirs. These Words, as they sounded very harsh to my Ears, so they did confirm me in the suspicion I had of the Design that was then on foot: and tho' Sir Arthur Haslerig contented himself only to shake his Head, because divers Officers were there present; yet meeting me t next Morning in the Speaker's Chamber,  told me, that if the two Regiments had not b already given to Major General Lambert,  should never have them with his consent. The Order requiring Col. Cromwel to come over from Ireland, and to give an account of irs there, being signified to him, he retired  House called the Phenix, belonging to the hief Governour of Ireland, leaving Col. Tho∣ Long in the Castle of Dublin; whether with an intention of keeping it, I am not as∣sed: But the Commissioners suspecting the worst, and being very desirous to be possessed of it, imployed Sir Hardress Waller to surprize the Place, who finding the Power of Col. Crom∣wel to decline, and that of the Parliament to increase, was very willing to attempt it, and
being ready to enter by a Postern into the Castle, the Place was immediately surrendred to him. Col. Cromwel perceiving it to be to no purpose to stay longer in Ireland, departed for London, and being arrived, acquainted me with the time that he designed to attend the Council of State, and desired me that I would be present; but I could not, For the House of Hampton-Court having been ordered to be sold that day, which Place I thought very conveni∣ent for the Retirement of those that were em∣ployed in Publick Affairs, when they should be indisposed, in the Summer-Season; I resol∣ved to endeavour to prevent the Sale of it, and accordingly procured a Motion to be made at the sitting down of the House to that end, which took effect as I desired. For this I was very much blamed by my good Friend Sir Hen∣ry Vane, as a thing which was contrary to the Interest of a Common-wealth: He said that such Places might justly be accounted amongst those things that prove Temptations to Ambiti∣ous Men, and exceedingly tend to sharpen their Appetite to ascend the Throne. But for my own part, as I was free from any sinister De∣sign in this Action; so I was of opinion, that the Temptation of Soveragin Power would prove a far stronger motive to aspire by the Sword to gain the Scepter, which when once attained, would soon be made use of to force the People to supply the Want of such an Ac∣commodation. Col. Henry Martin moved at the
same time that the Chappel belonging to Somer∣set-house might not be sold, because it was the Place of Meeting for the French Church, and this Request was also granted; but the House it self was sold for the Sum of ten thousand Pounds. Then it was moved that Whitehal might be also sold, and it was said that three∣score thousand Pounds might be had for it, in order to erect new Buildings on the Ground where it stands, but nothing was done farther in this matter. And now I began to think it time to hasten my Journey to Ireland, where my Station was assigned to me for some time; and in order to my Departure, I received four Commissions from the hands of the Speaker, as the Parlia∣ment had directed. By the first I was appoint∣ed Commander in Chief of all the Forces in Ireland; the second was for a Regiment of Horse; the third was for a Regiment of Foot, and by the fourth I was made Lieutenant Ge∣neral of the Horse. Which last Commission being read before the Committee of Nomina∣tions by Sir Arthur Haslerig, who in this whole Affair of regulating the Army had served the Parliament for Secretary without any Salary; Col. Desborough desired that it might be ex∣plained how far it should extend, suspecting that it might intrench upon the Command of the Horse in England and Scotland, which some thought he designed for himself. But Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig declined to give him any other
Answer than that it was well enough. In this Commission a Clause was inserted, which had been omitted in the other three, because not thought of before, requiring me to obey not only such Orders as I should receive from the Parliament and Council of State, but also all such as should be signified to me from time to time from the Commissioners of the Parlia∣ment for the Affairs of Ireland. This I was so far from disliking, that I procured another Order to be made, that the Pay of the Army should be issued out by the Commissioners, and that no Moncy, except only for Con∣tingencies, should be issued out by the Com∣mander in Chief. Having prepared my self for my Journey, I took leave of the principal Officers of the Army, and on that occasion most earnestly requested of Lieutenant Gene∣ral Fleetwood, Major General Lambert, Col. Desborough, Col. Sydenham, Col. Berry and o∣thers, that as they valued the good of the Pub∣lick and their own Safety, they would be care∣ful not to violate the Authority of the Parlia∣ment, who I perswaded my self were more ready to do any thing that might tend to the Preservations of our Liberties than we were to ask it: And at my parting with Sir Arthur Hasterig, Sir Henry Vane, Mr. Henry Nevil, Mr. Scot, Major Saloway, and the rest of my good Friends that were Members of the Par∣liament; I took the liberty to beg of them not to put any unnecessary Hardships upon those
of the Army, but rather to gratify them in whatsoever they could, that if after all the Condescensions and Favours of the Parliament to them, they should be so unjust and ungrate∣ful to offer Violence to the House, they might be left inexcusable in the sight of God and Men.  Being on my way to take Shipping for Ire∣land, accompanied by Col. John Jones, and be∣ing come as far as Whitchurch, one Capt. Whet∣way of Chester met us there, and informed us of a Design to rise in and about that Country by the Presbyterian and Cavalier Parties in con∣junction; who gave out that Sir George Booth, the Earl of Darby, the Lord Cherbury, and o∣ther Persons of Quality and Estate were con∣cerned with them. We, according to our Du∣ty, immediately gave an account of what we had heard to the Council of State, and desired them to inquire into the matter. Then we proceeded in our Journey, and being arrived at Holy-head, we found a small Vessel carrying about ten Guns, sent thither by the Commissio∣ners of the Parliament to transport us to Ire∣land, they having at that time no Ship of greater Force on that Coast. Here we met my Cousin Roger Ludlow, who was then new∣ly landed from Ireland, but finding us ready to set sail, he returned thither with us. At our Arrival within the Bar of Dublin, we found Mr. Justice Cook and my Brother-in-law attend∣ing with their Coaches; by which means we had an Opportunity to go that Evening to my
House at Monckton. The next Morning be∣fore I could get out, the Major and Aldermen of Dublin came to welcome me into the Coun∣try, and to pay the usual Civilities. And at the Rings-end I found the Guard that had for∣merly attended Col. Cromwel, drawn up by the Order of Sir Hardress Waller, with Col. Theo∣philus Jones at the Head of them, all of them expressing their Readiness to serve me, and so accompaned me to the City. Being arrived at Dublin, I went immediately to wait on the Commissioners of Parliament who were then sitting, and had been debating touching the manner of their Deportment towards me, the Result of which they informed me was, That each of them should successively take the Chair for one Month; that they would desire me to give them my Assistance when the Affairs of the Army would permit; that I should fit with them when they sat as Commissioners, in the next Place to the Chair-man; and that in all other Places I should have the Precedency. I returned them my Thanks for the Honour they did me, and earnestly desired to be ex∣cused in the last Particular, having always de∣clared it to be my Opinion; that the Military ought to submit to the Civil Power. But they told me, that since it had been so resolved, they would not permit me to speak any more about it. Then I delivered to them a Warrant from the Council of State, authorizing Mr. Blackwel and Mr. Standish the Deputy Trea∣surers
for Ireland, to charge by Bill of Exchange or otherwise the Treasurers of War in England with thirty thousand Pounds for the Service of Ireland. Which having done, I went into ano∣ther Room, where the Officers of the Army were appointed to be, and gave them an ac∣count of the Return of the Parliament to the Exercise of their Authority; by whose Wisdom and Justice so many things had been formerly done for the Advantage and Glory of the Eng∣lish Nation; and by whose Care and good Oe∣conomy they themselves had been provided for, in such a manner as had never been practised in later times, nor indeed could reasonably be ex∣pected from any other Persons than from those, who as they are called the Fathers of the Coun∣try, so they have the Tenderness and Affection of Parents for all those who take care to deserve their Kindness and Protection. I assured them of their good Intentions for the Publick Happi∣ness, and to them in particular: And that as they were passing an Act to secure to the Sol∣diers the Possessions of those Lands that had been assigned to them for their Arrears, so they would take care to cause their Armies to be constantly paid for the future: That the Par∣liament themselves had appointed such Officers to be placed over them, as had given Demon∣stration of their Affections to the Publick in the late times of Defection. I also informed them that the Parliament had done me the Honour to appoint me to be Commander in Chief of
their Forces in Ireland, as they might more fully understand by the Commission it self, which I then ordered to be read in their Pre∣sence: and that done, I proceeded to tell them, that being sensible of my own Imperfections, and the great Weight and Importance of my present Employment, I had neither directly nor indirectly endeavoured to obtain it; but considering that my Superiors by virtue of their Authority, at the Desire of divers Officers commissionated by this Army, had called me to the Exercise of it, I was resolved to endea∣vour faithfully to discharge the Duty of my Station, and to adventure the utmost Hazards for the Publick Good, wherein I doubted not of their cheerful and ready Assistance. The Officers seeming well satisfied with what I had said, I dismissed them for that time. Soon after my coming to Dublin we received Advice by a Message from England, of an In∣surrection against the Parliament under Sir George Booth, and that Chester was seized for the King. Upon which I caused the Officers to meet, and taking into our Consideration how we might best preserve the Peace of Ireland, and prevent the like Mischiefs there, we im∣mediately dispatched as many Officers as could be spared to their respective Charges. And because we were under the greatest Apprehen∣sions for the Northern Parts, where the Scots and other disaffected Persons were in great Numbers, we sent Major Dean, an active and
good Officer, to command some Troops of Horse▪ that were in those Parts. We resolved also to send for the Lord Broghil, with Major Warden and Major Pourden, two of his Offi∣cers, and to require them to give Satisfaction touching their Acquiescence under the present Government. And that I might contribute what I could towards quenching that Fire that had broken out in England, having received In∣formation in my late Journey through part of Wales, that the small Garisons of Denbigh, Beau∣maris, Carnarvan, and Holyhead, were under∣mann'd, I sent over one hundred Foot to be distributed amongst them. Which small Sup∣ came so seasonable, that it not only pre∣nted the Enemy from rising in those Parts; ut enabled the Governours of those Forts to  out Parties to bring in Provisions for the Garrisons, of which they stood in great need. l. Edmond Temple being at Chester when the urrection began in those Parts, was seized by the Rebels, and carried before Sir George Booth, who finding that he was going to em∣bar for Ireland, permitted him to proceed in  Voyage. At his Arrival he gave us an ac∣count that Col. Croxton who was Governour of Chester finding it in vain to endeavour to keep the Town, had made use of the time he had to provide all things necessary to maintain the Castle till Relief could be sent. He acquainted  also, that three or four hundred of the Ene∣mies Horse had marched into the Town of
Chester; that Sir George Booth was their Com∣mander in Chief, and that the principal Persons who had engaged with them were, the Earl of Darby, the Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Mr. Lee of Limehouse, and Capt. Morgan. He added, that being asked by Sir George Booth, if he had not heard of any Rising in other Parts, and having informed him that he had found all quiet on the Road from London, Sir George seemed much surprized and discouraged, saying, that other Promises had been made to him. By the next account we received from Eng∣land, we had notice that a Party of Horse had appeared in Dbyshire, tho' by the Vigilance and Courage of  Friends in that County, they were speedily dispersed or taken▪ We were likewise informed tha the Earl of Sta∣ford had been at the Head of a Party, accord∣ing to a Promise he had made to Sir George Booth; but finding them not considerable he had either surrendred himself or been seized without any Opposition. In Staffordshire, from whence the Enemy expected at Assistance their Designs were prevented by the Diligence of Col. Crompton and Capt. Batthurs, who had secured the principal Persons that were sus∣pected in that County. Col. Massey was seized at a Gentleman's House in Glocestershire, with some Ammunition; and by that means their Designs in the West were disappointed. And tho' there appeared about threescore Horse with one Basset near Bathe, and about the same
Number near Malmesbury; yet wanting the Colonel to head them, and being informed of the March of the County-Troop against them, they dispersed themselves. Some of these, with others from the Borders of Hampshire, went and joined the Body that was commanded by Sir George Booth. Sir Thomas Middleton, who had made me a Visit when I was going to Ireland, and had assured me of his Resolution to continue stedfast in the Interest of the Com∣monwealth, did, either through Dotage, be∣ing almost fourscore Years of Age, or through the Importunity of others, or the natural De∣pravity of his own Heart, appear at the Head or the Cavalier Party at Wrexham, and there waving his Sword about his Head, caused Charles Stuart to be proclaimed King in the Market-Place. Which encouraged the Enemy so much, that they immediately sent out a Par∣ty to possess themselves of Shrewsbury; but tho' the Male-contents were very numerous in that Town, and ready to join with them, yet Capt. Waring with the Militia-Troop, in conjunction with many well-affected Persons that went to him from Wrexham, and some others which he got together on a sudden, prevented their De∣sign, and secured that Place for the Parliament. This was a great Disappointment to the Ene∣my, not only because it kept their Friends in those Parts from rising, but in a great measure obstructed their Correspondence with the Western Counties. However it being reported
that Coventry had declared for them, they re∣ceived fresh Incouragement, and hoped that it might prove an occasion to divert the London Forces from advancing towards them, and were not without expectations of a Party to appear for them in or about London. Neither were their hopes in this particular without Foundation: For the Presbyterian Party did so greatly favour this abominable Design, where∣in the whole Popish Party was likewise en∣gaged, that many of them, tho' they could not be drawn to join in the dangerous part of acting against the Parliament, yet openly denied their Assistance to suppress the Enemy. Of this sort was Col. Fotherby who commanded the Forces in the County of Warwick, and had faithfully served the Parliament to this time, yet now re∣fused to act for them. So that old Colonel Purefoy, who had one Foot in the Grave, was obliged to undertake that Employment in those Parts, wherein he used such Diligence, and succeeded so well, that he kept the City of Coventry and the adjacent Country in the Obe∣dience of the Parliament. And tho' the Con∣tagion had infected many within the City of London, yet the Vigilance and Diligence of the Parliament prevented it from manifesting it self in an open Revolt, by a timely seizing or fright∣ing away such as were most dangerous to the Publick Peace. The Messenger that had been sent to Ireland from the Council of State, brought Orders to me for one thousand Foot
and five hundred Horse, to be sent to their As∣sistance in England. And tho', considering the Posture of our Affairs, the Suspicion we had of the Scots, the Number of the Irish, and that Spirit of Revenge they were possessed with, together with the Condition of our own Forces, who had been debauching for some Years from the Interest of the Commonwealth, we seemed rather to stand in need of Relief from England, than to be in a Capacity of sending any thither; yet having received such Orders from our Supe∣riours, we thought it our Duty to obey them. And therefore by the Advice of the Field-Offi∣cers, it was resolved to draw together those Forces that lay most convenient for Transpor∣tation; and that the Publick Service might not suffer by any Delay that could be avoided, the Commissioners of Parliament caused an Em∣bargo to be laid upon all the Vessels then in the Harbour. Lieutenant-General Fleetwood having in a Letter to me, desired, that Colonel Zanchey might command the Forces to be sent from Ire∣land, I readily consented to it, having no Su∣spicion of any Design concealed under that Re∣quest; and being informed by Colonel Axtel, that he also had some important Affairs in England, which he had left unsettled; I appointed him to command the Foot. Lieutenant-Colonel Walker, Major Rawlins, Major Bolton, and Major God∣frey, were the rest of the Field-Officers. I or∣dered, that the Party to be transported to Eng∣land, should be drawn to Dublin; and as soon
as a considerable Number of them were arrived there, Orders were dispatched for their Tran∣sportation, on assurance that the speedy Landing of our Forces from Ireland, would tend to the Discouragement of our Enemies, and great En∣couragement of our Friends. Having drawn the first Party, which was to be imbarked, to the Water-side, consisting of about four hun∣dred, we caused two Months Pay to be ad∣vanced to them; one to enable them to pay their Debts in Ireland; the other was put into the hands of Lieutenant-Colonel Walker, who commanded them, to be delivered to them as soon as they should arrive in England. The Officers, and Souldiers, undertook the Service with all imaginable Cheerfulness; and one of the Vessels that was appointed to carry Captain Jacomb, and his Company, not being able to ap∣proach so near the Shoar, as to make it conve∣nient for the Souldiers to embark, the Captain put himself into the Water, which his Men seeing, they soon followed his Example, and all together, with the Sea almost up to the Shoul∣ders, marched through to the Ship. They had a very favourable Passage, and landed seasona∣bly in England: For it happened, that the Third Day after their Arrival, Lieutenant Colonel Walker took up his Quarters at a Town in Car∣narvan-shire, where many disaffected Gentle∣men, and others, of those Parts, had appointed to Rendezvous the next Day: But fearing he might ruine th Country, if they appeared in
Arms, they quitted their Design, and kept them∣selves at home. The Parliament, though they had resolved to send some Forces against Sir George Booth, yet they were doubtful to whom they should com∣mit that Province. And whilst that Matter was under their Consideration, some Persons of the King's Party, addressed themselves to the Wife of Colonel Lambert, endeavouring to per∣swade her, to solicite her Husband, to be the In∣strument of the King's Return, with large Offers of whatsoever Terms he would de∣mand. She acquainted the Colonel with their Propositions; but he having resolved to play another part, discovered the whole Intrigue to Sir Henry Vane; who having communicated it to Sir Arthur Haslerig, and knowing there had been some late Differences between the Colonel, and Sir Arthur, he perswaded them to renew their former Friendship, with Promises on each part, to unite their Endeavours in the Service of the Parliament. By this means chiefly it was, that Colonel Lambert was soon after appointed to Command those Forces, that were designed to suppress the Insurrection in Cheshire. In this Conjuncture, the Parliament sent an Order to Colonel Monk, who then commanded their For∣ces in Scotland, to send them two Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse; but he excused himself, under colour of the Enemies Strength, and In∣clination to revolt, tho' there were not wanting some, who then thought, that his Engagements
with the Common Enemy, were the true Reasons of that Refusal. And it is certain, that a Gentle∣man from the King had been with him; and tho' what passed between them was not made publick, yet since he did not seize him, as it was his Duty, but permitted him to return safely from whence he came, he may justly be suspected even then to have betrayed those whom he pretended to serve. The second Party I sent for England, was com∣manded by Colonel Axtel; and the third by Colonel Zanchey, to whom I gave also a Com∣mission to command the whole Brigade of Horse and Foot, requiring him to take all Advantages against the Enemy, to relieve our Friends, and to obey all such Orders as he should from time to time receive from the Parliament, the Council of State, Colonel Lambert, or me. Thus the whole Number of the Forces demanded by the Parlia∣ment was shipped off within ten Days after I had received their Order, tho' some of them were quartered at a great distance from Dublin; and both Horse and Foot landed very seasonably in England, tho' not without a sad Loss: For the Ship wherein Major Bolton, and Major Rawlins, with above thirty private Soldiers, had embarked, sprung a Leak in her Passage, and sunk down. The Irish Brigade being joined, and arrived at Chester, they sent to Colonel Croxton, to let him know, that if he should be driven to Extremity before any Relief should come to him from Lon∣don, they had resolved to attempt it themselves.
On the Sixth of August, 1659, Colonel Lam∣bert, at the Head of Three Regiments of Horse, one of Dragoons, and Three Regiments of Foot, marched from London, against Sir George Booth, and his Party, who were about Four thousand in Number. The Enemy had possessed them∣selves of the Town of Warrington, and had placed a Party of about Three hundred to de∣fend it, having lodged their Main Body on the other side of the River, and posted a good Number of Men to keep the Bridge against ours. At this place the Forces on each side met, and the Enemy began the Action, by sending out a Party to skirmish with an advanced Par∣ty of Colonel Lambert: But being repulsed, and retreating beyond the Bridge, their Body of Horse, consisting of about Seventeen or Eighteen hundred, one half whereof they reported to be Gentlemen, began to run before our Horse could come up to charge them, leaving their Foot to be cut in pieces, except only about thir∣ty or forty of their Horse, commanded by Ca∣ptain Morgan, who endeavouring to secure their Retreat, was killed in the Action. Many of their Foot escaped by leaping over the Hedges, and hiding themselves: But their surest Protection was their having engaged against those that were more ready to save, than destroy them: So that tho' the whole Force of the Enemy was entirely defeated, yet there were not above For∣ty of them killed. About Six or Seven hundred of their Horse, in scattered and broken Parties,
fled to Chester; but not thinking themselves safe there, they went into North-Wales, and the Town was delivered up to Colonel Lambert. Sir George Booth, after his Defeat, put himself into a Woman's Habit, and with two Servants, hoped to escape to London, riding behind one of them. The single Horseman going before, went to an Inn on the Road, and, as he had been ordered, bespoke a Supper for his Mistress, who, he said, was coming after. The pretend∣ed Mistress being arrived, either by alighting from the Horse, or some other Action, raised a Suspicion in the Master of the House, that there was some Mystery under that Dress. And thereupon resolving to make a full Enquiry into the Matter, he got together some of his Neighbours, to assist him, and with them en∣tred the Room where the pretended Lady was. But Sir George Booth suspecting their Intenti∣ons, and being unwilling to put them to the Trouble of a farther Search, discovered him∣self. Whereupon they took him into their Custody, and sent him up to London, where the Parliament committed him Prisoner to the Tower. From the sad Consideration of these, and other unsuccessful Attempts, the Cavalier Party, and those that sided with them, began to despair, and to give their Cause for lost, unless by Divisions amongst our selves, we should ren∣der our Victories useless to us: Which fell out sooner than they expected. For the Officers of the Army, whom nothing would satisfie
less than an Absolute Tyranny over the Nati∣on, notwithstanding the solemn Engagement they had taken before the Parliament, at the time when they received their Commissions from the Hands of the Speaker, and all their Expressions of Sorrow for their former Aposta∣sie, so often repeated in their last Declarations; these wretched Men, I say, contrary to their Faith, and the Duties of Common Honesty, resolved to destroy the Parliament, and in imi∣tation of their late Master, Oliver, to sacrifice the Common Cause to their insatiable Ambition. In order to this, Lieutenant-General Fleetwood moved the House, at the time when they had received the Account of Sir George Booth's De∣feat, that they would appoint Colonel Lambert to be Major-General of their Army; and this was done, upon certain Assurance, that Sir Arthur Haslerig, and other Members, would endeavour to obstruct it; whereby they doubted not the Colonel would be so far disobliged, as to be rea∣dy to joyn with them in their detestable Design. And it succeeded according to their Expectati∣ons: For Sir Arthur Haslerig, well knowing, that in a free Commonwealth no Man ought to be trusted with too great Power, and especially such as had made very ill use of it before, pre∣vailed with the Parliament to declare, that they would not create any more General Officers than those that were so already; which Me∣thod they took, that they might not seem to put a Negative upon him in particular. The
Lieutenant-General having attained his end in the first Motion, was encouraged to move again, that seeing the House had not thought fit to do as he had proposed, they would be pleased to pre∣sent the Sum of Five hundred, or a Thousand Pounds to Colonel Lambert, as a Mark of their Favour, to be conferred on him in consideration of his late Service. This Proposition was most willingly entertained, Sir Arthur Haslerig con∣curring with those who were for the greater Sum; which was paid to him accordingly. But the Parliament's Refusal to gratifie him with the Title before-mentioned, was aggrava∣ted to that degree, that he, together with many Officers more, amongst whom he had an Inte∣rest, became most implacable Enemies to the Parliament. In the mean time a Committee was sent to examine Sir George Booth in the Tower, touching the Design wherein he had been engaged, and the Persons that had promised to join with him. He confessed to have received a Commission from the King, and that many of the Nobility and Gentry had promised to ap∣pear with him; whereof he discovered some, and desired more time to recollect himself concerning others. During these Transactions, I had endeavoured as well as I could, to dispatch those Affairs in Ireland, which were entrusted to my Care. I had delivered out new Commissions to the Offi∣cers there, and had disposed of several Com∣mands, that were either vacant by the Refusal
of some, to take the Engagement enjoined by the Parliament, or in the hands of Persons dis∣affected to the Government. I had furnished the Garisons with Provisions and Ammunition for three Months, and setled a Militia in each County, as considerable as the Army it self; consisting, for the most part, of Men that had Experience, and had readily engaged to be true and faithful to the Common-wealth. This Work was attended with many Difficulties; for I found divers of the Officers guilty of ha∣bitual Immoralities, many of them accustomed to detain the Pay of the private Soldiers, and most of them debauched in their Principles by the late Usurpation of the Cromwels. I endea∣voured to clear the Army of such as were most guilty, and thereby hoped to reform the rest. I also appointed fit Persons to enquire into the Principles, and Practices, of the private Soldi∣ers, as well Horse as Foot; and upon full In∣formation, dismissed such as appeared incorri∣gible, and placed others in the room of them, of whom we had better hopes, together with as ma∣ny of those as we could find, who had been ca∣shiered on account of their Affection to the Parlia∣ment. Upon the News of our Success against Sir George Booth, Colonel Lockart, our Ambassador at the Pyrenean Treaty, began to be courted by the Spaniard, as he had been before by the French; and our Plenipotentiaries met with good Success in their Mediation for an Agree∣ment
between the two Northern Crowns; and the Dutch not daring to attempt what they had designed for the King of Denmark, the two Kings were in a fair way to a Peace, tho' the King of Sweden had expressed his Discontent, that the two Commonwealths should form Conditions to be imposed upon Crowned Heads: But being told by Col. Algernon Sidney, that the Friendship of Eng∣land was not to be obtained on any other Terms, he seemed to acquiesce. But to return from my Digression. In the Month of September, 1659, a Petition came to my Hands, that had been addressed to the Parliament, from the Officers of that Bri∣gade which was commanded by Colonel Lambert, and signed from Derby; wherein they aspersed the Parliament, for not endeavouring to suppress the late Rebellion, with such Vigour as they ought, for not punishing those who had been engaged in it, and for not rewarding the Offi∣cers who had defeated the Enemy. They pressed for a Settlement of the Government after their own Mode, in a Representative of the People, and a select Senate. And for the better Discovery of their Arbitrary Designs, they demanded, that Lieutenant-General Fleet∣wood might be made Commander in Chief of the Army, without any Limitation of Time; Colonel Lambert appointed Major-General, Co∣lonel Desborow Lieutenant-General of the Horse, and Colonel Monk Major-General of the Foot. To which they added, that no Officer of the Ar∣my
should be dismissed from his Command, unless by a Court Martial. Copies of this Pe∣tition were sent by Colonel Zanchey into Ire∣land, accompanied with Letters, to desire, that it might be communicated to the Officers there, and their Concurrence procured. Being sensi∣ble of the ill Effects that might arise from this wicked Attempt, if it should succeed according to their Hopes, amongst the Officers in Ireland, I summoned as many of them as were quarter∣ed near Dublin, to meet there; and being met, I endeavoured to convince them of the Defor∣mity and Hazard of this Design of the Army, desiring them to remember how successful they had been, whilst they contained themselves within their proper Station, and how all their Attempts had miscarried, when they intermed∣dled with those Things that did not belong to them; and that they would not forget how well the Army had been paid, as long as the Par∣liament had the Management of Affairs; and how much they had been in Arrears, since that time. I shewed them, that the Parliament could not fail of coming to a speedy Determi∣nation, touching the Settlement of a Just and Equal Government, since they had declared, that a Period should be put to their sitting, in the Month of May, next following: That the Na∣tion would never endure to be governed by the Sword: That it was a meer Calumny to say, that the Parliament had not contributed their Endeavours, towards the suppression of the late
Tumults; for nothing could have been at∣tempted against the Enemies, but by their Or∣ders: That it was manifest they had gratified those who had been instrumental in that Service, having freely given the Sum of a Thousand Pounds to Colonel Lambert, and Two hundred Pounds to Lieutenant-Colonel Duckenfield; and that no private Soldier, who had been con∣cerned in that Action, might remain unreward∣ed, they had given the Personal Estate of Sir Thomas Middleton, amounting to about Three thousand Pounds, to be distributed amongst them. I endeavoured to perswade them, that the Commission granted to Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, was as full and ample as could justly be desired; he being thereby appointed to con∣tinue in his Command, 'till the Parliament should find cause to the contrary: That if they had re∣fused to make more General Officers, it was be∣cause they knew it to be unnecessary and dan∣gerous; and that Colonel Lambert, without the Title of Major-General, had done as good Ser∣vice, as if he had been graced with that Additi∣on. Then the Council of Officers entred up∣on the Debate of the Heads of the Petition; from Point to Point, and after mature Delibera∣tion, unanimously declared their Dislike of it, and their Resolutions to acknowledge the Su∣preme Authority of the Nation to be in the Par∣liament, and to stand by them in the Prosecu∣tion of the Common Cause wherein they had been employed. And because a Petition to that
effect could not be immediately drawn, I sent away the said Resolutions that very Day to Sir Arthur Haslerig, with a Promise of a far∣ther Declaration as soon as possible, resolving not to neglect this Opportunity, out of a belief that our Proceedings might be of use, as well to encourage our Friends, as to discourage our Enemies in England. It may be observed, that in this Conjuncture Colonel Monk sent also Let∣ters to the Parliament, declaring his Resolution not to join in the dangerous Counsels of the Army; but to keep the Officers that were under his Command, within the Rules of Modesty and O∣bedience. The Army not unmindful of their Grand Design, perswaded some of their Friends in the Parliament, to move for an Order to conti∣nue Alderman Ireton, then Mayor, and one of their Confidents, in that Office for the next suc∣ceeding Year. And the Parliament seemed at the first inclined to grant their Request, having perceived great Discontents amongst the Citi∣zens of London, at the time of the late Insur∣rections: But the Spirit of Sedition being much allayed since the Suppression of the Rebels, the City petitioned the Parliament to permit them the Enjoyment of their Priviledge to elect their Mayor, promising to employ that Favour, and all that they had, for their Service. Where∣upon they were permitted to proceed in that Affair according to Custom; and Sir Thomas Allen, a Man of a moderate Spirit, being chosen,
they invited the Parliament, and chief Officers of the Army, to a splendid Entertainment, at Dinner. By this time I had almost compleatest a List, for new Modelling the Army in Ireland, in or∣der to be presented to the Committee of No∣minations; and thinking it necessary, before my departure for England, to remove such Persons as gave the greatest cause of Suspicion, I filled their Places with those, in whom I might best confide, and who had given evident Proof of their Affection to the Publick. There remain∣ed another Business of the greatest Importance, and wherein I found it difficult to come to a Resolution, and that was to appoint a Person to Command the Forces in Ireland in my Absence. My Inclinations led me to lodge that Power with the Commissioners of the Parliament: But Lieutenant-General Fleetwood pressed me so earnestly against it, that I was prevailed with to lay aside that Thought. 'Tis pro∣bable, that the Lieutenant-General was unwil∣ling to have it discovered, that such an Office might be managed by more than one, lest it should tend to the diminution of his own Pow∣er, he being Commander in Chief of the Forces in England, and Scotland. But the Parliament having made no distinction amongst the Colo∣nels, by any superiour Titles, I was much em∣barassed how to proceed. Colonel Zanchy was the eldest Colonel, and most earnestly desired the Employment; but when I considered his
Carriage, in the contriving, abetting, and pro∣moting that base Petition lately sent from Der∣by, by the Officers of the Army, to the Parlia∣ment, as I mentioned before, I could not think him to be a Man proper for so great a Trust. Sir Hardress Waller had been Major-General of the Foot, one of the late King's Judges, and of good Ability and Experience in War: But he having complied with every Party that had been uppermost; and especially having not yet re∣ceived the Parliament's Confirmation for the Regiment he commanded, I durst by no means entrust him with the Command of the entire Forces. After much Deliberation, I resolved, as the best Expedient I could find, to nominate Colonel John Jones to Command the Forces of Ireland in my absence; he being a Member of Parliament, one of the late King's Judges, and one of the Commissioners of Parliament for the Administration of the Civil Government in Ireland: By virtue of which Qualifications, I hoped he might be approved by the Parliament, acceptable to the Officers of the Army, and steadfast in the Defence of the Common Cause. Having taken this Resolution, and being wil∣ling to keep a good Correspondence with the Army in England, I informed Lieutenant-Ge∣neral Fleetwood with my Intentions, desiring, that if he approved my Choice, he would pro∣cure the Parliament to be moved to give their Approbation. But he having, it seems, cast off his Respect to the Parliament, returned me
in answer, that I was sufficiently authorized by my Commission to constitute one to com∣mand in Chief during my Absence; and that I had made, in his Opinion, a very good Choice. All this while I had not acquainted Colonel Jones with my Resolution touching him, nor intend∣ed to do it 'till the time of my Departure drew near, and 'till I had prepared the Officers of the Army to give him their Assistance in the Execution of his Charge. To this end I dis∣coursed with Sir Hardress Waller, and freely told him the Reasons why I had not appointed him to command in Chief, assuring him, that I had committed that Employment to one of the Com∣missioners of the Parliament, in a great measure, out of Respect to him, that I might not be ob∣liged to lodge it with Col. Zanchey, who tho' he was a younger Officer, yet being the first that was commissionated by the Parliament, expect∣ed it of course. Sir Hardress seemed well sa∣tisfied with what I had said, and promised his hearty assistance to Colonel Jones. There was no necessity to labour so much to give Satisfaction to Sir Charles Coote, in this particular: For he seemed to aim at nothing more, than to keep his Government in Connaught, of which Province he was President by Act of Parliament, and to have his Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse continued to him. I assured him of my Endeavours, that all those things might be con∣firmed to him by the Parliament, in hopes that he would employ them in the Defence and Pre∣servation
of that Authority, under which he had done so many Services, and from whom he had received so many Marks of favour. This he promised to do, and added, that he was fully convinced that his Interest was wholly invol∣ved in the Preservation of the Parliament, all that he enjoyed being derived from their Au∣thority; and that as he had opposed the late King in his Arbitrary Designs, so he would continue to act in conformity to those Actions, well knowing that if the Son should happen to prevail, the English Interest would be lost in Ireland, and the Irish restored to the Possession of their Lands, according to an Agreement passed between them. So having given me these Assurances, he took his leave, in order to re∣turn to his Government. The Petition before-mentioned that had been agreed on by the Officers of the Army at Dar∣by, coming to the knowledge of the Parliament, with the Endeavours that were used to procure Subscriptions to it; some, who knew it to be a Contrivance of Col. Lambert, moved that he might be sent to the Tower: and it had been well, either that the Motion had better succeed∣ed, or that it had never been made. But it ended only in passing a Vote to disapprove the Petition and the Proceedings thereupon, and to require Lieutenant General Fleetwood to send Letters to all Parts to obstruct any farther Pro∣gress therein. One of the said Letters was sent to Ireland, which in effect was answered before
it came, we having drawn up a Petition in con∣sequence of our Vote, which I mentioned be∣fore; wherein, after we had asserted our Cause, desired a just and equal Magistracy, and the Reformation of such things as should be found amiss in Church and State; we assured the Par∣liament of our Readiness to lay down our Lives in their Service, and in the Prosecution of those great Ends. This Affair being dispatched, Col. Lawrence, who I am perswaded was ac∣cessary to the Design carried on at Wallingford-House, suspecting that whilst I staid in Ireland, the Army the could not be wrought upon by that Faction; advised me to hasten my Depar∣ture, telling me that Ireland being now settled, I might do more good in England, where my Assistance might be wanted. I suspected not the Sincerity of his Counsel, and having divers Reasons to move me to it, I prepared my self for my Journey, and with much difficulty pre∣vailed with Serjeant Steel, who had supplied the Place of Chancellour during the Usurpation, to remain in Ireland; tho' he earnestly desired to go over with me about some affairs relating to his Office: But I thought it might prove too great a Discouragement to our Friends, if we should both leave them together, and therefore promised him to endeavour that nothing might pass the Parliament relating to the Courts of Justice in Ireland, till he should be heard con∣cerning it. These things done, I acquainted Col. Jones with my Resolution, who after some
Expressions of Modesty and Gratitude accept∣ed the Imployment, and promised to apply himself with all possible Fidelity and Diligence to the Discharge of it. Upon which Promise and Acceptance, I went to the Commissioners, and desired their Approbation. But Col. Thom∣linson who was one of them, either from a be∣lief that I had not Power to constitute a Depu∣ty, or resenting that he was not the Person, or at least joined in the Commission with Col. Jones, moved the rest of the Commissioners not to in∣termeddle in that Affair, tho' without effect. For it was carried against his Opinion at the Board, and Col. Jones approved, in virtue of a Clause in my Commission, authorizing me to depute whom I thought fit for leading and con∣ducting the Army. In consequence of this, they passed an Order to confirm my Choice, and to require all Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels and other inferiour Officers, &c. to yield Obedience to him, in the execution of the Commission which he had received from me. Then I cal∣led a Council of Officers, and informed them that the Commissioners of Parliament and my self had impowered Col. John Jones, of whose Fidelity to the Publick, and peculiar Affection to them, they had large Experience, to com∣mand the Army during the time that their Service might detain me in England; desiring them to afford him the best of their Assistance in the execution of that Trust, which they unanimously promised to do. Before my De∣parture,
the Mayor and Aldermen of Dublin having formed the Militia of that Place, where∣of both Officers and Souldiers had taken the Engagement, they were desirous to give some Publick Expression of their Affection to the Commonwealth; and to that end on the day I designed to imbark, they drew their Forces into the Field, consisting of about twelve hundred Foot, and one hundred and twen∣ty Horse, that I might view them, and report to the Parliament their Readiness to serve the Publick. Accordingly the Commissioners in their Coaches, and I with the Officers of the Army on Horseback, took a View of them, as they were drawn up on the College Green, be∣ing all very well equipped, and drawn up in good Order, and indeed so exact in the performance of their Exercise, that one would have thought them to have been long in the Service. Here they repeated their Resolutions to serve the Cause of God and their Country with the utmost of their Endeavours, and pro∣mised to live and die with us in the Assertion of our just Rights and Liberties. When they had finished their Exercise, I took leave of each Officer at the Head of his respective Com∣pany, and went that Evening to my House at Moncktown, in order to imbark for England. The Commissioners of the Parliament did me the Honour to accompany me about half a Mile out of Town, and the Officers of the Ar∣my would have attended me to my House.
But because it was late, I would not permit Sir Hardres Waller and the rest of the Officers to go further than half way. The next Day after I had signed such Commissions and Orders as I thought necessary, and was ready to go on board, Col. Jones, Sir Hardress Waller, with most of the Officers about Dublin, and my good Friend Chief Justice Cook, came down to me, and accompanied me to the Sea-side, where we took leave of each other with mutual Recom∣mendations to the Direction and Protection of Almighty God. The next Day I arrived in the Road without the Bay of Beaumaris, and there meeting with some Vessels coming from Chester, I inquired of them if the Irish Brigade were yet put to Sea for Ireland, having been assured that the Council of State had given Orders for their Transportation. They informed me that the said Brigade had lain long at the Water∣side, in order to imbark, and had prepared ma∣ny Vessels to that end; but that all the Ships were now discharged upon Orders received from Col. Zanchey for those Forces to march for London. This Information gave me occa∣sion to suspect what was soon after confirmed to me; For at my Arrival in the Bay, which was in the Evening, the Governour of Beau∣maris and another Officer came to me on board, and informed me that the Army had offered Violence a second time to the Parliament, and resumed the Power into their Hands. This a∣stonishing News put me into a Doubt whether
I should return to my Command in Ireland, or continue my Journey to London. On the one hand, I considered that those who were under my particular Care and Conduct being in Ire∣land, my Presence might be necessary amongst them, to excite them to the performance of their Duty. On the other side, when I called to mind that I had done as much as I could to secure their Service to the Parliament, that I had brought a Declaration from them to that purpose, and left the Chief Command in the hands of a Person who had great Reasons to move him to be faithful in his Charge, I was inclined to go forward in my Journey. And when I considered the Mischiefs likely to follow upon a Breach between the Parliament and Ar∣my, which I concluded would inevitably prove the Ruin of both; and that it was not impos∣sible that I might contribute something towards a Reconciliation: In conclusion knowing that in my way I should have an Opportunity of conferring with the Irish Brigade; I resolved to continue my Journy, and the next Morning as I passed the Ferry at Conway, I perceived a Person riding Post towards us, who coming nearer, appeared to be one Col. Barrow, dispatch∣ed from the Council of Officers at London; with a Message to me and the rest of the Officers in Ireland, to give us an account of their Proceed∣ings, and what satisfaction they could con∣cerning them. He delivered to me two Let∣, one from the Council of Officers directed
to me, and to be communicated to the Army in Ireland: The other from Lieutenant-General Fleetwood to my self. In that from the Officers, they endeavoured to put the best Gloss they could upon their late Action, pleading the Force of Necessity in their excuse, and protest∣ing to improve every Opportunity to promote the Publick Good, with this Expression insert∣ed, That they had been necessitated to obstruct the sittting of the Parliament for the present. That from Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood was much to the same purpose, desiring me to exercise my Charity to them, and labouring to clear his own Integri∣ty in the late Transaction. Col. Barrow also endeavoured to perswade me that the Parlia∣ment had on many Occasions manifested such a Spirit of Imposition, as was become in∣tolerable; that they had designed to ruin their most ancient and best Friends; and that the Offi∣cers had taken the Power into their own Hands, only to employ it to the full satisfaction of all honest Men. I told him that tho' I should be extremely glad to see it so employed, yet when I considered how grossly the Nation had been formerly abused under the same Pretences; I had not the least Expectation of it, being well informed that all their Discontents had no other Foundation than the Experience they had, that the Parliament would not permit the Officers of the Army to be their Superiors, and the Sword to tyrannize over the Civil Power. After I had spent about an Hour with Col. Barrow in
Conversation touching this Affair, I found no Cause to alter my Resolution concerning my Journey, but was rather confirmed in my Opini∣on, that my Endeavours to adjust the Diffe∣rences between the Parliament and Army might prove successful; and therefore having perused the Letter from the Officers at London, which was to be communicated to those in Ireland, I delivered it again to Col. Barrow, with another for Col. Jones, wherein I desired him to take all possible Care, that the common Enemy might not be able to take advantage from this sad Con∣juncture to disturb the Publick Peace. Then I proceeded in my Journey towards Chester, and being arrived within three Miles of that Town, I found the Officers of Horse belonging to the Irish Brigade, who gave themselves the trouble to wait my coming, and accompained me to the City, where the Foot were drawn up, and had lined the Streets to the Place where I was to lodge. The next Day being Sunday, I staid there, and taking that Occasion to speak with the Officers of the said Brigade, together with Col. Croxton Governour of Chester, I told them freely my Thoughts concerning the late precipitate Enterprize of the Army, and, as I was able, endeavoured to convince them of the Imprudence and Injustice of it; deli∣vering for my Opinion, that the late Address, contrived at Darby, had given Birth to this unna∣tural Attempt, as it was it self the Offspring of Pride and Ambition: That it was apparent the
Army had not put this Affront upon the Parlia∣ment for having omitted the performance of their Duty in relation to the Publick, but meer∣ly on account of themselves and their own pri∣vate Interest, having expressed their Resent∣ment in the most outragious manner against the Parliament, for not advancing some Officers of the Army to such Powers and Titles as had for∣merly proved fatal to the Government; tho' they might have seen by the late Success of Col. Lambert, that Victory is not entailed upon empty Titles. During this Conference there was not one word said in excuse of the late hor∣rid Act committed by the Wallingford-house Party, but only by one Capt. Winckworth a Creature of Col. Zanchey; all the rest seeming to be convinced of the Truth of what I had said, affirming that they had been surprized, and prevailed upon to sign it, without having sufficiently weighed the Consequences it might produce. In particular Lieutenant Colonel Walker, the chief Officer then upon the Place, assured me, that it being suddenly presented to him with a Letter from Col. Zanchey, he had too hastily signed it; but after better Conside∣ration, he had resolved to stop the Paper at the Post-house, which he had done if it had not been dispatched away sooner than he expected. Whilst I was at Chester there came a Mes∣senger from the Officers of the Army at Lon∣don with Letters for those in Ireland, which he presented to me, as they were directed. Up∣on
the perusal of them I found my former Sus∣picions justified, and that the Army would be contented with nothing less than to have the Government established in a Court-Martial. To this end they had agreed, that Lieutenant General Fleetwood should be Commander in Chief of all the Forces of the Commonwealth; Col. Lambert Major General of the Army; Col. Desborow Lieutenant-General of the Horse; Col. Monk Major General of the Foot; and that all Officers of the Army who should by their Subscriptions testify their Submission to this Agreement, should be confirmed in their Com∣mands, from thence never to be discharged, unless by a Court-Martial: That all Officers to be presented to any Command that should be vacant by Dismission, Death, or otherwise, should be nominated by Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Sir Henry Vane, Major General Lam∣bert, Col. Desborow, Col. Berry, my self, or any three of us; and to receive their Commissi∣ons from Lieutenant General Fleetwood, who also was to grant new ones to those that were already possessed of any Military Command. We were informed also by this Messenger, that the Council of Officers had agreed upon one and twenty Persons, with whom they pretend∣ed to entrust the Administration of all Civil Affairs, under the Title of a Committee of Safety, resolving to obey them so long as they would do what should be prescribed to them. This Number, tho' filled up with Men of al∣most
all Parties, yet was so craftily composed, that the Ballance was sufficiently secured to those of their own Faction. The Names of the Committee were as followeth; Lieutenant Ge∣neral Fleetwood, Major General Lambert, Col. Desborow, Sir Henry Vane, Major Saloway, the Lord Warriston, Col. Tichburn, Commissioner Whitlock, Col. Berry, Mr. Walter Strickland, Col. Hewetson, Mr. Cornelius Holland, Sir James Harrington, Alderman Ireton, Col. Sydenham, Mr. Serjeant Steel, Mr. Henry Brandriff, Col. Monk, Sir Gilbert Pickering, one Person more, and my self. Notwithstanding all this bad News, I resolved to pursue my Journey; and having viewed the Castle of Chester, exhorted the Officers of the Irish Brigade to persist in their Resolutions of Fidelity to the Parliament, and written to the Officers in Ireland to the same purpose; I departed from thence on Mon∣day about Noon, the Streets being lined with Soldiers as at my Arrival. The Horse accom∣pained me about three Miles on my way, and there I found another Troop waiting to attend me to Whitchurch, where I lay hat Night. But the next Morning, having permitted them to accompany me about a Mile from the Town, I dismissed them with Thanks for their Af∣fection, and extremely pleased to be freed from such Ceremonies; admiring how it should come to pass that so many Men delight in nu∣merous and magnificent Trains, which, be∣sides the Trouble it put, others to, mustneces∣sarily
render those for whose Service they are designed, less useful and easy to themselves. At Coventry I found some of the Forces that had been in the Service of the King of France, and lately brought to England by order of the Par∣liament, upon the Insurrection of Sir George Booth's Party. I discoursed with the Officers concerning their Duty in this Conjuncture, and exhorted them to continue stedfast in their Obe∣dience to the Parliament, which they promised to do. The next Night I lay at Northampton, and was informed by some Passengers who came from London, that Col. Monk, had de∣clared against the late Proceedings of the Army. Which News was so welcome that I could not give intire Credit to it, till it was confirmed to me the next Night at Dunstable, and the Day after by my Wife, who came to meet me at St. Albans. Being arrived at London, I went to Lieutenant General Fleetwood, who endeavour∣ing to perswade me to go into a Council of Officers that was then assembled at Wallingford-house, to consider of Letters brought from Col. Monk, I desired to be excused from intermed∣ling in their Consultations, being very ill sa∣tisfied with their Proceedings, accounting them to be founded upon a selfish bottom, and there∣fore not likely to produce any Good to the Pub∣lick. He requested me to put a charitable Con∣struction on their Actions, making solemn Pro∣testations of his own Integrity, and adding, that whatsoever Opinion I might have con∣ceived
of them, I should certainly find that Monk's Intentions were neither sincere nor ho∣nest. To which I replied, that tho' I knew not what Designs he might have to carry on, yet it ought to be confessed that his publick Decla∣ration had a better appearance than theirs, who demanded nothing less than a Government by the Sword. By him and others whom I con∣versed with, I was fully acquainted with the Grounds and Causes of this second Violence offered to the Parliament, which had been de∣signed soon after their Restitution, when the Grandees of the Army perceived they would not be governed by them; and had been more speedily put in execution, if the late Tumults of the Cavaliers and Presbyterians had not caused it to be put off till they were suppressed. The Parliament on their part being sensible of their Danger, were not wholly negligent of the means to prevent it; tho I cannot say they gave no Advantages to the Faction of the Army, by disgusting the Sectarian Party, and falling in with the corrupt Interests of the Lawyers and Clergy, wherein the Army did not fail to out∣bid them when they saw their time. But Sir Arthur Haslerig supposing that a Conjunction with these Men would contribute much to de∣ter the Officers from any Attempt against the Parliament, closed with them, and thereby dis∣satisfied many of the Commonwealth-Party. Neither did it a little contribute to this Disor∣der, that Sir Arthur, who took upon him to
be the principal Manager of Affairs in Parlia∣ment, was a Man of a disobliging Carriage, sower and morose of Temper, liable to be trans∣ported with Passion, and to whom Liberality seemed to be a Vice. Yet to do him Justice, I must acknowledge, that I am under no man∣ner of Doubt concerning the Rectitude and Sincerity of his Intentions. For he made it his business to prevent Arbitrary Power wheresoe∣ver he knew it to be affected, and to keep the Sword subservient to the Civil Magistrate. To this end he had procured many Officers to be chosen into the Army, with whom he hoped to ballance that Faction that appeared every day more and more amongst them. He had recom∣mended Col. Fitz to the Parliament for Lieute∣nant of the Tower, and took care on all Occa∣sions to oblige Col. Monk, who commanded the Forces in Scotland. He presumed upon the Fi∣delity of the Fleet and Forces in Ireland, on ac∣count of the past Services of those that com∣manded them, and their former Opposition to the Usurpation of Cromwel. He had procured a Guard of chosen Horse commanded by Major Evelyn, to attend the Parliament, and was as∣sured of Col. Morley's Regiment, with those of Col. Hacker, Col. Okey, and some others that lay in or near the Town. In the mean time the Officers at Wallingford-house had not been idle, and accounting it lawful for them to do whatsoever they had power to do, they agreed on that Petiton which I mentioned before to
have been sent from Darby, and privately sent it down thither to be signed and dispersed, and then to be returned to London, as if it had been drawn at Darby, and by no means to be pre∣sented to the Parliament, unless it were first approved by Lieutenant General Fleetwood, and signed, at his Recommendation, by the Offi∣cers about London. The Lieutenant General having received this pernicious Paper, being one Morning at a Committee in the Speaker's Chamber before the House was sat, shewed it to Sir Arthur Haslerig, acquainting him how it came to his hands, pretending his Dislike of it, and a Resolution to put a stop to it. Sir Arthur said not much to him concerning it, either sus∣pecting him to be in the Plot, or thinking that if speedy care were not taken, it would be past all Remedy: And therefore procured the Speaker immediately to take the Chair, and to send for the Members from the Committee into the House. Which being done, he obtained an Order for shutting the Door, and bringing the Keys to the Table, alledging that the Busi∣ness which he had to impart to the Parliament required that Care. Then he communicated to them the Petition it self, which being read, he aggravated the Heniousness of the Attempt, and moved that Col. Lambert, who command∣ed that part of the Army amongst whom it was said to have had its beginning, might be accused of High Treason, and commited to the Tower; and that one Major Creed and Col.
Zanchey might also be taken into Custody. The major part of the House, finding their very Be∣ing struck at by this Combination, seemed very ready to agree with those who were the most zealous for the Suppression of it. But the Lieutenant General affirming, that, according to the best of his Information, the Petition had been begun and carried on by the inferiour Offi∣cers of the Brigade, without the Knowledge or Consent of Col. Lambert: That it was not to have been presented to the Parliament without the Approbation of himself, and the rest of the Officers about London; and that he had taken a Resolution to suppress it; the House inclined to more gentle Methods, and contented themselves with passing a Vote, to express their Dislike of the said Petition, requiring those of the Army to forbear any farther prosecution of it, and commanding Lieutenant General Fleetwood to issue out his Letters to that effect to the several Quarters of the Army, which he did accord∣ingly. But for all this a Council of Officers was summoned to meet at Wallingford-house; and tho' it was pretended to be only in order to declare their Acquiescence in the Resolution of the Parliament, yet the Officers fell into De∣bates of the utmost Rage and Madness, Col. Lambert, who was present, sitting still as a Person altogether unconcerned, and not reprove∣ing them in the least for their Excesses. The Result of all was, that a Committee of the Council of Officers was directed to prepare an
Address to the Parliament, wherein after the specious Promises of Obedience they desired that those who should hereafter misinform the House, as had been done in their Case, might undergo the Censure of the Parliament: That a Commander in Chief might be constituted without limitation of Time: That no Officer might be displaced unless by a Court-Martial: That the Act of Indemnity might be enlarged: That the Revenue of Mr. Richard Cromwel might be augmented, and that his Debts might be paid; with other Particulars, most of which were as absurd for the Army to ask, as for the Parliament to grant. However, the Parliament being willing to leave no means unattempted that might give Satisfaction to the Army, taking hold of that Clause in the Address wherein they had promised Obedience, gave them Thanks for their Affection expressed therein, and promised to take the Particulars of the Peti∣tion into their speedy and serious Considerati∣on, to do therein according to Justice, and as far as they could to their Satisfaction. In pur∣suance of this Promise the Parliament proceed∣ed to the Consideration of the several Parts of the Address, and had made a good Progress in it; when Col. Okey communicated to them a Letter subscribed by Col. Lambert, Col. Desbo∣row, Col. Berry, Col. Clerk, Col. Barrow, who were of a Committee nominated by the Coun∣cil of Officers, which had been sent to him to encourage Subscriptions to the Petition lately
read in the House. By which Proceeding it was manifest, that they intended the Petition to be the Ground on which they designed to unite the Army against the Civil Authority. The Parliament finding that the ways of Com∣pliance which they had been taking served only to encourage the Army to Mutiny and Rebelli∣on, resolved upon sharper Counsels. And to that end, having caused the Door of the House to be locked, and fully informed themselves of the Matter of Fact, they voted the Commissi∣ons of those who had subscribed the said Letter to be void. They voted the Commission of Lieutenant General Fleetwood to be void also, and placed by an Act the Power of Command∣er in Chief of all the Forces in England and Scotland in the seven following Persons, viz. Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Col. Monk, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Col. Walton, Col. Morley, Col. Overton, and Me. Then they caused the Speaker to demand of Lieutenant General Fleetwood, who was present in the House, if he would submit to this Resolution of the Par∣liament; to which he answered, that he would. They also declared, that no Tax should be laid or levied upon the People, unless by Act of Par∣liament; under the Penalty due to those that are guilty of High Treason. This Business, tho' carried with as much Privacy as it could be, yet came to the notice of the Officers without doors, who being surprized at the Resolution of the Parliament, and convinced that the least
Delay might prove dangerous, used all possible Diligence in drawing together their Party, and preparing themselves for their designed Work. In the mean time the Parliament ordered the Regiments of Col. Morley and Col. Moss to march forthwith to Westminster for their Secu∣rity, and sent for the rest of the Troops that were about the Town to draw down to them also with all convenient speed. In pursuance of which Order, Col. Okey endeavoured to bring down his Regiment of Horse, but the greatest part of them deserted him. For most of the old Officers whom Cromwel had by his Example corrupted with the horrid Vices of Ambition and Treachery, found it easy to delude the in∣ferior Officers and private Souldiers, who had either utterly forgot their Trades, or were un∣willing to return to an industrious Life, into a compliance with any Design, in order to get a living. Col. Lambert was the Person that made the first Attempt against the Parliament's Guard, endeavouring at the Head of a Party of Horse to break in upon that part where Col. Morley was posted with his Regiment. But the Colonel advancing and assuring him, that if he persisted, he would fire upon him, Lam∣bert answered, I will then go the other way, which he did, after he had given Order to block up the Avenues by the Mill-Bank with Carts and other Impediments, to prevent the Guards of the Parliament from sallying out upon them by that way. The Army had also placed a
Party of theirs in King-street, and in the Church-yard near the Abby, some of Col. Mor∣ley's Regiment having already possessed them∣selves of the Old Palace-yard. In this posture they continued all Night. The next Morning that Guard of the Army which lay in the Church-yard advanced with one Major Grimes at the Head of them towards those of Col. Morley's Regiment, who were in the Palace-yard: Of which Motion the Colonel being in∣formed, drew out those that he had with him, and hastned to their Relief. Both Parties being come within Pistol-shot, and each of them rea∣dy to fire, those of the Army began to invite Col. Morley's Men to go over to them, desiring them to remember that they had hitherto fought together, and that it was unreasonable now to become Enemies. In like manner Col. Morley's Party endeavoured to perswade those of the Army to join with them in the Defence of the Parliament, who they said had been always successful in the Administration of Publick Af∣fairs, and to whom the Officers of the Army had so lately promised Obedience, when they received their last Commissions: who had al∣ways taken effectual care for their constant Pay, and who were the only Authority that could do so for the future. The chief Officers at length interposing, it was agreed, that both Parties should for the present retire to their for∣mer Stations. On the other side, Col. Lambert being advanced near that Party which was
commanded by Col. Moss, demanded of them if they would suffer nine of their old Officers, who had so often spent their Blood for them and with them, to be disgraced and ruined with their Families. The Colonel answered, that tho' that should be the Case, yet it were much better that nine Families should be de∣stroyed, than the Civil Authority of the Nation trampled under Foot, who designed not the Ruin of any, but only to remove from their Commands nine Officers, who by their sediti∣ous Carriage had rendred themselves unworthy of that Trust. But Col. Lambert's Oratory was more prevalent with the Person that com∣manded the Parliament's Guard of Horse, who perceiving that divers of his Men had left him, and revolted by the treacherous Perswasions of one Cathness his Lieutenant, dismounted in the Head of his Troop at the Command of Lam∣bert. Some of Col. Moss his Regiment went off also, each Party using their Rhetorick to bring over as many as they could. On the other part some came over to the Parliament's Party, and particularly three intire Companies of Col. Sydenham's Regiment. But at last the Army gained their Point, and placed Guards both by Land and Water, to hinder the Members of Parliament from approaching the House, tho' Sir Peter Wentworth being rowed by a Crew of able Watermen, broke through their Guard on the River, and got into the House. In the mean time the Speaker endeavouring to pass in
his Coach through the Guards of the Army was stopped near the Gate of the Palace-yard by Lieutenant Colonel Duckenfield; and being de∣manded whither he was going, the Speaker an∣swered, to perform his Duty at the House: Then turning himself to the Souldiers, he told them, that he was their General, and expected their Obedience. But these Men having re∣solved to destroy the Civil Authority, and to set up the Sword in the room of it, forced his Coachman to drive back, and as he passed by Wallingford-house, would have compelled him to drive in at the Gate, telling the Speaker, that he must go to Lieutenant General Fleetwood. But the Speaker commanded the Coachman to drive home: and having told the Officers, that if Lieutenant General Fleetwood had any busi∣ness with him, he might come to his House, they desisted from giving him any farther Trouble at that time. During those Disorders, the Council of State still assembled at the usual Place; and at one of their Meetings Col. Sydenham, who was one of them, made a Speech, wherein he endeavoured to justify these Proceedings of the Army, under∣taking to prove that they were necessitated  make use of this last Remedy by a particular Call of the Divine Providence. But the Lord President Bradshaw, who was then present, tho' by long Sickness very weak and much extenu∣ated, yet animated by his ardent Zeal and con∣stant Affection to the Common Cause, upon
hearing those Words, stood up and interrupted him, declaring his Abhorrence of that detesta∣ble Action, and telling the Council, that being now going to his God, he had not Patience to sit there to hear his Great Name so openly blasphemed; and thereupon departed to his Lodgings, and withdrew himself from Publick Employment. The Army having resolved to finish the Work, appointed a select Number of Persons, consisting for the most part of them∣selves and their Creatures, to have the Admi∣nistration of Civil-Affairs, calling them, as I said before, A Committee of Safety: and knowing that it was of great Importance to secure the Forces in Ireland and Scotland to their Interest, they dispatched Col. Barrow, formerly mentio∣ned, to Ireland, and Col. Cobbet to Scotland, on that Design. The News of this great Change being brought to Ireland, was at first received with great Sadness and Discontent; but after three or four days, when Col. Barrow had given As∣surances of Favour and Advancement to divers Officers, he easily perswaded many of them that the Army would make use of their Power o good Ends. Yet so much Dissatisfaction re∣mained in the major part of them, that the Co∣lonel could not obtain any publick Approbation from them of the Proceedings of the Army in England: Only they sent a Letter inclosed in one to me, and directed to the Council of Offi∣cers at London, advising them to be very cir∣cumspect
in their Actions, lest they should hap∣pent to split as formerly upon the Rocks of Pride and Ambition. At the same time I re∣ceived Letters from Sir Hardress Waller, Col. Cooper, and other Officers, to inform me, that those who had the Management of Affairs in Ireland, endeavoured on all occasions to impose upon them, and therefore earnestly desired my Presence there. Col. Cobbet had not so good Success in Scotland: For Col. Monk, who had another Part to play, having secured to him∣self the Fidelity of most of his Officers who had been with him for many Years, and by the particular Favour of Sir Arthur Haslerig, had not been altered by the Committee of Nomina∣tions, seized Col. Cobbert with some Officers that he suspected might oppose his Designs, and sent them Prisoners into one of the Islands. After that he declared for the Parliament, and writ three Letters, whereof the first was di∣rected to the Speaker, the second to Lieute∣nant General Fleetwood, and the third to Col. Lambert▪ In that to the Speaker he assured him, that he would expose himself and the Forces with him to all hazards for the Restitu∣tion of the Parliament to the Exercise of their Authority, in obedience to the Commission he had received from them. In his Letters to the Lieutenant General and Col. Lambert, he endea∣voured to perswade them to use their Interest and Power to restore the Parliament, declaring his own Resolution in that Matter. I also re∣ceived
a Letter from him, wherein he acquaint∣ed me with his Intentions touching the Parlia∣ment, and desired my Assistance therein. In this Confusion of things it was brought about, chiefly by the Interest of Sir Henry Vane with Col. Lambert, that the said Sir Henry Vane, Major Saloway, and my self, should meet and confer with Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Col. Lambert, Col. Sydenham, and Col. Desborow, concerning the present Condition of Affairs. Accordingly we met in one of the Council-Chambers at Whitehall, where Col. Lambert in the first place demanded of me, If I could give him my hand. I answered, that tho' according to my Information his part in the late Action appeared to me very unwarrantable; yet if it might make me more capable of serving the Publick, and recommend my Endeavours for the Peace of the Nation, and the Reconciliati∣on of the Differences amongst us, I could not only give him my Hand but my Heart also. Then he laboured to justify his late Proceedings, protesting that he had no Intention to interrupt the Parliament till the time that he did it, and that he was necessitated to that Extremity for his own Preservation, saying, That Sir Arthur Haslerig was so enraged against him, that he would be satisfied with nothing but his Blood. I endeavoured to take him off from that Opini∣on, by telling him, that being assured of Sir Ar∣thur's sincere Affection to the Commonwealth, I could not think that he would do any thing to
the Prejudice of those that were Friends to it. I told him also, that according to my Notion of things, the Aim and Design of Sir Arthur Haslerig was good, even in that matter whi had been the first occasion of Difference be∣tween them concerning new Titles and Pow∣ers, which had proved so fatal to the Parlia∣ment in former time, and which he thought very unsafe under an equal and moderate Go∣vernment. I assured him that Sir Arthur had a Personal Respect for him, which he had mani∣fested on several occasions, particularly I de∣sired him to remember that he had prevailed with the Parliament to grant him the Command of two Regiments, and sided with those Mem∣bers who were for the greatest Sum to be given him in acknowledgment of his Service in Che∣shire. In conclusion, I told him that Sir Arthur was well known not to be of an obliging Car∣riage; and therefore if ever he had been used too roughly by him, it would become him to pardon it, and to charge it upon his Temper, especially since he had not spared the best of his Friends, of which I gave him divers Instances, some of which related to my self. After this Discourse the Officers declared to us their Reso∣lution to do great things for the Publick Good, and pressed us earnestly to come amongst them to their Committee of Safety: but we desired to be excused, till such time as the Common Cause might be secured to the satisfaction of good Men, and therefore agreed upon another
Meeting, wherein this Affair might be fully debated. In the mean time I endeavoured to moderate the Warmth of some of the Parlia∣ment-Party, and to bring them to desire a Re∣conciliation with the Army, that by that means the Publick might be preserved from Ruin; and to this end a Meeting was appointed be∣tween Mr. Scot, Col. Morley, Mr. Say, my self, and one Person more, whose Name I have forgot; where after much debate on that Sub∣ject, I shewed them the Address which I had brought from all the Officers in Ireland, as well General as Inferiour, to whom it had been ten∣dered, and informed them that the Irish Bri∣gade had assured me at Chester, that they would continue faithful to the Parliament, and had acknowledged their Error in sign∣ing the Petition from Darby. Hereupon they desired me to publish the Address from Ireland, together with what had passed between the Irish Brigade and Me, supposing it might be of great Service in that Conjuncture. I told them I would consider of it, and that for the present I had nothing to object against the Publication of those Papers, except my Fear, that by so doing I might so far exasperate the Army, as to render all my Offices to recon∣cile them to to the Parliament utterly ineffectual. When the Company was separated, and Mr. Scot and I going away together, he earnestly pressed me to improve the Opportunity which he said I had in my hands, to be highly service∣able
to the Publick, which if I neglected, I should repent it as long as I had an Hour to live. I told him that I thought he laid too much Weight on my Interest: But yet desired him to inform me what he thought it my Duty to do. He said that I ought by all means to declare against the Proceedings of the Army, and to join with Monk in opposition to them. I replied, that tho' I knew not what the Design of Monk might be, yet I had entertained a charitable Opinion of him, by reason of his Declaration for the Parliament: But that it was my Judgment, that if either the Parlia∣ment or the Army should entirely prevail one against the other in this Juncture, it would hazard the Ruin of both; and therefore I thought my self obliged in Duty to use the ut∣most of my Endeavours to bring them to a Reconciliation, before I should think of decla∣ring my self. For as there was no appearance that the Army could long subsist without a due Provision for their Payment, which the Parlia∣ment only could make to the Content of the People, especially since the passing of the Vote against levying Money unless by their Autho∣rity; so also it was necessary for the Parliament to have the Assistance of the Army in the great Work they had before them, to establish a just and equal Government in the Nation. After this I waited on Mr. Lenthal the Spea∣ker of the Parliament, and gave him also an Account of the State of Affairs in Ireland, and
that I had many things to offer to the Parlia∣ment from that Nation, which I hoped speedi∣ly to do, when he should return to the Chair of the House; to which end I assured him I would imploy all my Interest, being fully con∣vinced of the Injustice of the Army in the late Violence, and that no Authority but that of the Parliament can render any Form of Go∣vernment agreeable to the People. I acquaint∣ed him also with the Sentiments of the Irish Brigade, with all which he declared himself much satisfied; and having given me a Relation of his own Gallantry towards those of the Ar∣my that had mutined against him, as before∣mentioned, I took my leave for that time. Some of the Council of State writ Letters to Col. Monk to incourage him in his Resolutions for the Parliament; and Lieutenant General Fleetwood sent one Capt. Lloyd with an Answer to that which he had received from the Colonel, and to promise on his part all the Advantages that he could desire. Col. Jones, Sir Hardress Waller, and about six or seven Officers more drew up an Answer to Monk's Letter directed to me in Ireland, and sent it to me at London for my approbation, together with the Letter it self. Having perused both, I perceived a great Al∣teration in many of the Officers of Ireland, and a great Defection from their Duty. For in their Answer they manifestly took part with the Army, and required Monk to desist from his Undertaking, charging the Blood that might
be shed in this Quarrel on his Head, with much more to the same effect. With these Letters I received others from Col. Cooper and Maj. War∣ren, complaining of the said Breach, and of the Hardships which they said were put upon them by those whom I had intrusted with the Com∣mand of the Forces, and earnestly pressing me to return to them. I thought my self obliged to an∣swer these Letters, and in that to Col. Jones I ex∣pressed my Dissatisfaction with what he and some others had written to Col. Monk, wherein they had espoused the Interests of the Army, contrary to the Trust they had received from the Parli∣ament and me, which thing deserved the more blame, because the Army had as yet declared for no other Government than that of a Court-Martial; whereas Col. Monk, whatever his Designs might be, had hitherto asserted the Au∣thority of the Parliament. To the same pur∣pose I writ to Col. Cooper and Major Warren, advising them to be careful not to join them∣selves to a Faction in opposition to the Civil Authority of the Nation; and sent Orders to Col. Cooper, who was a good Officer, and very acceptable to the best sort of People in the Northern Parts, to command the Forces there, and to be vigilant on all occasions to promote the Publick Service: And tho' the Letters which had been sent to Ireland by the Council of Offi∣cers at Wallingford-House were for the present laid aside; yet being informed that Endeavours were used privately to make them take effect,
and to engage those Forces to the Faction of the Army, I went to Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood, and desired him, that to prevent setting the Army in Ireland together by the Ears, the Proceedings in that matter might be let fall, telling him that if they absolutely required the Officers there to subscribe their Confederacy, it would come to pass that many of them would lay down their Commissions, and thereby a way would be open to fill their Places with corrupt and scandalous Persons, who might not only prove the Causes of great Disorders in that Country, but also would be so fixed in their Stations, as not easily to be removed again, it being one of the Articles of their Papers, that no Officer should be displaced but by a Court-Martial. The Lieutenant General a∣vowing that he had not forseen either of those Inconveniences, promised to desist from any farther Prosecution of that matter. In the mean time the Officers at Wallingford-House were not negligent, and having drawn up an Engagement, as I said before, they re∣quired those of the Army who desired to con∣tinue in their Imployments, to subscribe it. By this means Col. Okey, Col. Morley, Col. A∣lured, Lieutenant Col. Farley, and divers o∣thers who were not of their Faction, were re∣moved from their Commands; tho' Col. Moss and Col. Rich were permitted to continue in their Charges without subscribing. Col. Rich was the more willing to retain his Regiment, that he might be the better acquainted with
the Designs of the Army, and have more Op∣portunities of rectifying the Mistakes of such Officers, who tho' honest and well meaning Men, yet might happen to be deluded by the plausible Pretences of their Superiors. But that which principally perswaded him to continue amongst them, was the Interest and Friendship which he had with Vice Admiral Lawson, who commanded the Fleet at that time, and who very much depended upon the Advice of the Colonel for the Measures he should take to serve the Publick. Their Committee of Safety also nominated Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Com∣missioner Whitlock, Sir Henry Vane, Major Sal∣oway, Co▪ Tichburn, and Me, to consider of a Form of Government for the three Nations, and to report our Opinions to them. And tho some of us were very unwilling to have any part in an Affair of this nature, yet seeing we were now under the Power and Government of the Sword, we resolved to procure the best Settlement we could get, if we could not ob∣tain such a one as we desired, hoping at least to procure the Regulation of what was most amiss. And therefore we had several Metings on this Subject, wherein we agreed upon the princi∣pal Points in dispute. But the greatest Diffi∣culty was in what manner the Result of our Debates should receive a Sanction. The Army-Party desired that the Forces on foot in the three Nations should be drawn together, and that they, with such of the People who would join with them, should give their Consent to
the Form agreed on in a Publick Assembly. This I could not approve, but resolved, if we could come to any Agreement, to procure it to be laid before the Parliament for their Approbation, or never to assent to it. During these Transactions, Colonel Monk ha∣ving received the Answer of Colonel Jones, and other Officers in Ireland, to the Letter he had written to them, and not liking the Contents of it, seized Major Barret, by whom it was sent; and resolving to March for London with all possi∣ble Expedition, he fell upon new Modelling his Men; wherein he had Two notable Advantages, the one from divers of his Officers, who being of the Wallingford-House Party, voluntarily sur∣rendred their Commissions to him, whose Pla∣ces he immediately filled with his own Crea∣tures: The other from the late Act of Parli∣ament, whereby he was constituted one of the seven Generals, appointed to command the Ar∣my, by virtue of which Authority he under∣took so to regulate his Forces, as might be most for his purpose. Before his Departure from Scotland, he procured a Sum of Money from the Scots, with which he paid his Soldiers, and thereby obliged them the more to his Service, especially at this time, when they knew the Army in England were in want of it, and knew not well how to Raise any, having inter∣rupted the Civil Authority, by whom alone Money may rightfully be Raised. The Army-Party being informed of his Design, resolved
to draw a Body of their Troops together to be sent against him, with Orders, if possible, to possess themselves of Newcastle, a place of great Importance to the City of London, and to Fight him if an Opportunity should be offered. Four thousand Foot, and Three thousand five hun∣dred Horse were appointed for this Service, together with the Irish Brigade, Commanded by Colonel Zanchey, who notwithstanding his late Carriage, came with great Confidence to me, to receive my Orders; but I was very reserved to him in that particular, knowing how instrumen∣tal he had been in promoting the present Dis∣orders. The Committee of the Army intrust∣ed Colonel Lambert with the Command of these Forces, who having dispatched his Orders to the Souldery that were Quartered in the North to draw together, and to seize on the Town of Newcastle, went himself by Post for that Place. Before his Departure, he desired those who had been appointed to consider of a Form of Go∣vernment, to proceed in their Consultations, and to send the Result of them to him, promi∣sing to give his Assent and Approbation to it. But some of us earnestly pressed that we might come to an Agreement before he began his Jour∣ney, assuring him that it would very much tend to facilitate his present Undertaking, especially if the Establishment designed might be so just and equal, that a good Man might reasonably ad∣venture his Life in the Defence of it; where∣as on the contrary, if things were left uncer∣tain,
and no Form of Government agreed upon, Men would not easily be perswaded to engage for a Party, against those who at least pretended to act for the Civil Authority. He acknowledg'd the Force of these Reasons, but could not be prevailed upon to stay till it should be perfected, tho' he de∣sired it might be sent after him with all possible Expedition. In the mean time Colonel Jones, and those Officers who were in and about Dublin, sent Lieu∣tenant Colonel Dobson to be their Agent in Eng∣land, and to inform them of publick Affairs. He had been used ill by Oliver, and unjustly remo∣ved from his Command; which being Repre∣sented to me when I was there, I advanced him to be a Field Officer: But being a Man of slender Ability, and little acquainted with Publick Affairs, he was easily deluded by the fair Pretences of the Wallingford-House Party, and became their Creature, rather than the Agent of those that sent him. And now Colo∣nel Jones despairing to prevail upon the Council of Officers, whilst together, to subscribe the De∣sign of governing the Three Nations by a Coun∣cil of War, dispersed them to their respective Quarters, and sent the Wallingford-House Paper to be Subscribed by them, when they could not have an Opportunity of Consulting together, accompanied with Letters from himself to press them to it: And having declared openly, that if they refused to Subscribe, the Army in England would find a way to detain the Pay that had
been assigned to them by the Parliament; ma∣ny of those who had signed an Engagement to the Parliament, which I had carried over to England, and therein expressed their Sorrow for the Interruption of the Civil Authority, together with their firm Resolution to adhere constantly to them for the future, were now brought in to sign an Engagement directly con∣trary to the former. Of which being informed, I thought my self obliged to write to Colonel Jones, and other Officers of the Army, and to expostulate with them concerning the Foulness of these Practises, that were not only contrary to their late solemn Promises, and pretended Sor∣row for their former evil Compliances, but also tending in a high degree, to set up the power of the Sword upon the Ruines of the Civil Autho∣rity. Colonel Jones in his Answer excus'd him∣self, as not having foreseen the Inconveniencies of the foresaid Paper, affirming that he had only permitted it to be promoted at the incessant Importunities of others; but yet he expressed some discontent that I should lay so heavy a Charge upon him, who had undertaken his Imployment at my Desire, and had managed it according to the best of his Understanding. He concluded, that he earnestly desired I would return to my Command, and ease him of the Burden that was upon him. About the same time Serjeant Steel, one of the Commissioners in Ireland, being nominated of the Committee of Safety, took that opportunity to go into England,
as he had long desired to do, by whose Depar∣ture the Affairs of Ireland suffered much, he being generally esteemed to be a Man of great Prudence and uncorrupted Integrity. At Lon∣don he refused to Act in the Committee of Safe∣ty; and tho' he sometimes went to Wallingford House, and Discoursed with Lieutenant General Fleetwood and some others, about things rela∣ting to a future Establishment, yet he always declared his Opinion to be, that the Parliament were the only proper Judges of that Matter, and used the best of his Endeavours that they might be restored to their Authority. After his Departure, the Commissioners of the Par∣liament in Ireland sell in with the Party of the Army, and altered their Title in the Orders and Commissions Signed by them, from that of Commissioners of the Parliament, to that of Commissioners of the Common-wealth; and being informed that the Garison of Ayre in Scot∣land had discharged their Governour, and de∣clared for Monk, they ordered a Ship of War to cruise on that Coast, to prevent their Cor∣respondence with the Northern Parts of Ireland. Colonel Lambert being now in the North of Eng∣land, and his Forces in Possession of Newcastle, divers Messages passed between him and Colo∣nel Monk, the latter always declaring his Reso∣lution, as he had done before to the Generals Commissioned by the Parliament, to be assist∣ing to them in settling the Government on the Foot of a Common-wealth, without a King,
single Person, or House of Lords: And seeing that the Army had begun to treat with him, he nomi∣nated Col Wilkes, Col. Knight, and Lieutenant Col. Clobery, to be Commissioners to adjust the present Differences with those of the Wallingford-House Party. The Irish Brigade, tho' Colonel Zanchey and others endeavoured to perswade them to join heartily with those of the Army, had not quite forgot our Discourse at Chester, and therefore they resolved not to engage against Monk, till they might see, that what they were about to Fight for, was worth the Hazard they were to run. To this end they signed a Paper in the Nature of an Association, whereby they obliged them∣selves to live and die together; one of the principal Officers informing me by a Letter, that if Colonel Lambert designed to advance him∣self, he must chuse another Pole to climb by than the Irish Brigade, who were fully resol∣ved not to assist him in such an Attempt. Lam∣bert being made acquainted with the foresaid Paper, concluded that the Jealousy they had of him arose from the Influence I had upon that Brigade, and thereupon wrote to Sir Henry Vane, desiring him to procure a Letter from me to them, to remove that prejudice which they had entertained against him. Accordingly Sir Hen∣ry Vane came to me, and having assured me that Colonel Lambert had rather been made use of by the Wallingford-House Party, than that he had been in any manner the principal Contriver of
the late Disorders, and that he would be an Impediment to them in their Design of advan∣cing a single Person; I consented to desire our Brigade, that they would be careful to inform themselves well before they should determine what Course to take, that they might not, out of a Jealousy of one Person, contribute to the Advancement of others, who might possibly prove to be worse. Upon the Receipt of my Letter, which I sent to one of the principal Officers amongst them to be Communicated to the rest, they marched nearer to the Forces of Colonel Lambert, who thereupon sent me a Let∣ter of Thanks, acknowledging that I had exer∣cised my Charity to him in an extraordinary man∣ner, considering the late Transactions; protest∣ing that he designed not the Violence that was of∣fered to the Parliament, and was wholly inno∣cent from promoting that Petition which had a tendency to it; that he knew not of any Inter∣ruption to be given to the House, till the Day it was put in Execution; and that he had no further Design therein, than to preserve himself from Destruction, which he conceived was intended against him. He concluded with Assurances that he would take all Opportunities to advance the Good of the Common-wealth, and desired my Friendship no farther than he should act in order to that end. About this time I went to Sir Arthur Haslerig, whom I knew to be of a most ri∣gid and inflexible Spirit, and endeavoured as well as I could, to perswade him of the
Necessity incumbent on us all to lay aside our private Animosities, and to unite our whole Strength to preserve the Vessel of the Com∣mon wealth from sinking. I desired him to entertain a better Opinion of Sir Henry Vane, and some other Persons than he seemed to have, assuring him, that it was impossible to prevent that Ruine which threatned us, but by a hearty Reconciliation, and a solid Union amongst our selves. I acknowledged his Care of the Publick in the endeavours he had used to hinder the Accumulation of extraordinary Powers and Titles upon any Person, and to render the Sword subservient to the Civil Magistrate. But I could not forbear to acquaint him, that in my poor Opinion, he had not taken the right way to that great end, having lately estranged him∣self from his ancient Friends, and fallen in with the Lawyers and Clergy, putting those, who would have been his principal Strength in times of necessity, into despair of receiving any good from him, and relying upon Men whose Principles and Practises are inconsistent with a just and equal Government. I agreed with him that nothing could recover us from the present Confusions, but the Restitution of the Parlia∣ment to their Authority; tho' I thought my self obliged to add, that if he and others should re∣turn to the Exercise of their Power with a Spi∣rit of Revenge against those that had wronged them and the Publick, and not rather contri∣bute their utmost to reconcile all those whose Interests were involved in that of the Common∣wealth,
they would certainly ruin themselves, and every one that wished well to the Parlia∣ment and the Common Cause. Sir Arthur seemed so sensible of the Truth of what I had said, that he assured me, if ever he returned to sit in Parliament, and thereupon shewed him∣self Revengeful to any Man, he would permit me to spit in his Face. In the mean time many Members of the Parliament had frequent Meetings with their Friends to consult about the most proper means to be used for their Re∣stitution, to which I was never called, they having conceived a Suspicion that I had too much sided with the Army. And on the other side, those of the Army were jealous of me, as indeed they had more Cause, for my Adhe∣rence to the Parliament. For I had openly de∣clared my Dissatisfaction with their late Pro∣ceedings, and my Doubts of the Sincerity of their Protestations to improve their Power to the Publick Advantage. I had refused to be present at their Committee of Safety, or in that of Nominations, tho' consisting of the same Persons the Parliament had formerly appointed, excepting only Sir Arthur Haslerig. And be∣ing one day in the next Room to that where they used to sit, and Lieutenant General Fleet∣wood, with others, pressing me to go in, telling me, that they wanted one to make a Quorum, and that the Officers to be approved were ho∣nest Men, and such as I esteemed; yet I utter∣ly refused to have any thing to do with them.
But Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway did prevail with themselves to act with them in their Commit∣tees, and to discharge the Office of Commissioners of the Navy, to which they had been nominated by the Parliament, and continued by the Officers of the Army. It being resolved by the Members of Parlia∣ment, to open a way, if possible, for their Re∣turn to the House, they prevailed with Colonel Whetham, then Governour of Portsmouth, to admit Sir Arthur Haslerig, Colonel Walton, and Colonel Morley, with some Forces into that important Place: Who thereupon immedi∣ately declared for the Parliament, and issued our Orders for more Forces to come to their Assist∣ance. They also dispatched Letters to Monk to warrant his Undertaking, and invited the Fleet to join with them. The Commissioners that had been appointed by Colonel Monk, to treat with those of the Army, had no small part in pro∣moting this Diversion of the Forces of the Ar∣my; yet to colour their Designs, they endea∣voured at the same time to lay asleep the Wal∣lingford-House Party, and to make them believe that they designed nothing more than a good Understanding with them. By which Arti∣fice they caused him to neglect those means which they had in their Hands to reduce Monk, and his Party, who were not to be compared with the Forces of the Army, either for Num∣ber, Experience, or Unanimity. For tho' by his solemn Protestations, and publick Declarati∣on
of his firm Resolution to adhere to the Par∣liament, and their Cause, against a King, single Person, or House of Peers, he had deluded di∣vers of those who were at a distance from him, and who from their Enmity to the Faction of the Army, were ready to trust any that might probably rescue them from that Servitude; yet those who approached him nearer, and under∣stood him better, finding him on all Occasions to encourage the most vicious, and to prefer Men of Monarchical Principles, though of the most scandalous Lives, to all the Offices that became vacant, saw so clearly into the Drift of his Design, that most of the Officers who had any Sence of Religion, or common Honesty, abandoned him, and joyned themselves to Colonel Lambert; and after them, about Three hundred Horsemen, leaving their Horses and Equipage behind them, did the same. But this proved very prejudicial in the Consequence to the Pub∣lick Service: For those Officers that deserted Monk, gave him an opportunity of filling their Commands with his own Creatures; whereas, if they had continued with him, they might have had a considerable Influence upon the whole Party, to make use of as Opportunities had offered. The Horse likewise that aban∣doned him, made room for others, who were mounted and equipped without Expence, and composed of such as were fit for his purpose. Yet for all this, the Treaty went on between  the Army, and seemed to draw near
to a Conclusion, it being agreed that he should have one part of a Sum of Money that had been appointed to pay his Forces: That he should be one of their Committee for the No∣mination of Officers to such Places as should be vacant in the Army: That a Representative of the People should be called with all conve∣nient speed; and to that end Commissioners should be appointed by the Military Power of the three Nations, to consider and agree upon the Qualifications of such as might be elected, and sit as Members. Accordingly those en∣trusted by Monk, nominated Mr. Scot, Sir James Harrington, and Colonel Thompson, on their part: Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, Sir Henry Vane, and Major Saloway, were appointed for the Ar∣my, or Wallingford-House Party: And on the part of the Forces in Ireland, Colonel Barrow, and Lieutenant-Colonel Dobson were joyned with me, to be Commissioners, to consider of the Qua∣lifications of the Persons to be elected, as afore∣said. A General Council of Officers was also appointed to meet at White-Hall, on a certain Day, and to consist of two Persons of each Regi∣ment in the three Nations, to be chosen by the Officers of the several Regiments. It was desired also, that the Fleet would send their Deputies to this Assembly, who were to prepare Mat∣ters for the Consideration of the Representative that they pretended to call. I was altogether a Stranger to these Counsels, the Articles ha∣ving been drawn up by a private Junto; yet I
know not how, I was perswaded to be present when they were read to the Council of Offi∣cers for their Approbation, where I absolutely refused to consent to any part of it, except that whereby two of each Regiment in the three Nations were proposed to meet in a General Council. Which I accounted to be the most probable way of finding out the true Sence of the Armies, into whose Hands the Power was most unhappily fallen, and much less disho∣nourable, if not more safe, than to continue lon∣ger under the Servitude of the Faction at Wal∣lingford-House, who had presumed to give Law, both to the Parliament, and the Army. I cannot omit, that at this Meeting, some Persons having moved, that the Commissioners from Monk might be required to produce their Pow∣ers, that it might appear whether he would stand obliged to what should be agreed, they could not be perswaded to shew any Orders from him to that purpose; and yet Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, and his Cabinet-Council, were contented to treat with them, tho' they had ne∣ver seen any Commission that they had. And now it began to be suspected, that the Design of Clobery, and the rest of the Commissioners, was only to prolong the Treaty in which they were engaged, that the Forces of the Army might be kept from attacking Monk, which he was afraid of, having found his own Party waver∣ing and doubtful. They well knew, that if they could spin out the Time in Treaty, 'till the
expiration of the Taxes that had been laid by the Parliament, which would happen in the Month of January next ensuing, the Army would then be driven to great Straits for want of Money, wherewith Monk's Forces had been supplied by the Scots. Of this Sir Henry Vane was very sensible, and gave both Army and Parliament for lost, when they began to treat. But the chief Officers of the Army having al∣ready parted with their Honesty, by driving on their own private Interest, were now resolved to shake hands with their Reason also, and sent down to Scotland one Doctor Clarges, Brother to Monk's Wife, and a known Royalist, with a Commission to perswade him to an Accommo∣dation with them. They dispatched also some Forces for the Reduction of Portsmouth, but gave the Command of them to such as were either little acquainted with their Soldiers, or inclining in their Affections to the Parliament. And tho' they knew not how to procure Money for the Payment of their Standing Army, they raised the Militia in divers parts, and gave out Commissions for Horse and Foot to be levied, promising to pay all. Some of them earnestly solicited me to raise two Regiments, one of Horse, and another of Foot; but I told them, they had already as many as they could pay, and I feared more than would be well employ∣ed. They endeavoured all this while to keep fair with Sir Henry Vane, Major Saloway, and me, making large Protestations of the Sincerity
of their Intentions, and the great Designs they had to promote the Service of the Publick, hoping that by our continuing to come amongst them, it would come to pass that those who had a good Opinion of us would extend it also to them and their Actions. But they were ob∣liged to discover themselves more openly on the following occasion. The Parliament had ma∣nifested before the last Interruption, an Inclina∣tion to ease the People of the Payment of Tithes, and in lieu of them to appropriate a certain Sum of Money for the Maintenance and Encouragement of the Ministry, to be distri∣buted in a more equal manner than had been formerly practised; hoping, if this could be ef∣fected, that the Clergy would no longer have any other Interest to promote than that of the whole Commonwealth, nor be a distinct Party from the People. It was well known also to the Lawyers, that they still retained the Design of regulating the Practice of the Law, and re∣lieving the People in that particular. These two Parties therefore being equally concerned to perpetuate the Abuses practised amongst them, became equally sensible of the common Dangers. And in order to prevent it, Whit∣lock, and St. Johns for the Lawyers, with Do∣ctor Owen, and Mr. Nye, for the Clergy, who at this time had frequent Meetings in the Savoy, entred into a private Treaty with the principal Persons of the Wallingford-House Party, and of∣fered to raise a Hundred thousand Pounds for the
Use of the Army, upon assurance of being pro∣tected by them in the full Enjoyment of their respective Advantages and Profits; with this farther Condition, that they should oblige them∣selves not to hearken any longer to the Advice of Sir Henry Vane. Whereby we were left destitute of Hope, to see any other Reformation of the Clergy, than what they themselves would con∣sent to; any other Regulation of the Law, than the Chief Justice, and the Commissioner of the Seal would permit; or any more Liberty for ten∣der Consciences, than the Lord Warriston would be pleased to grant, who representing the Scottish Interest, made up the third Estate of our Refor∣mation. I began now to think all my time lost that I had spent in endeavouring to reconcile our bro∣ken and divided Counsels, and had no hopes left, but from the General Council of Officers, which was to consist of two Persons to be nominated by each Regiment in the three Nations, as I said before. In order to this Meeting, War∣rants were signed and issued out for their Electi∣on, to the Armies in England and Ireland; and Monk's Commissioners departed for Scotland, to procure, as they said, all Things to be done there, according to their Agreement. But Monk kept himself upon the Reserve, and in∣stead of making good what his Commissioners had promised, he desired time to consider of the Articles of the Treaty, and required an Expla∣nation of several Particulars therein contained:
So that much time was spent in Messages be∣tween him and Lambert. Amongst others, Col Zanchey was sent to tempt him with Pro∣mises and Offers of Advantage; but he having struck a Bargain in another Place, made use of Zanchey's Presence only to keep the Army-Party in expectation of his Compliance, thereby gain∣ing time, which he knew would shortly bring the Affairs of the Army to the last Extremities. He gave out no Orders to the Regiments that were with him to elect Members for the Gene∣ral Council of Officers, as had been agreed by his Commissioners, but formed new Difficulties every day to avoid confirming the Treaty; and under pretence that Col. Wilkes, one of his Commissioners, had too much inclined to the Interest of the Army, he dismissed him from his Command. Notwithstanding which, such Folly and Stupidity had seized those of the Army, that upon loose and general Promises of Compliance they continued thier Correspon∣dence with him. The Time fixed for the Meeting of the General Council of Officers be∣ing come, tho the Deputies from Ireland were not arrived, nor any from the Army under Col. Lambert; and tho it was well known that none were chosen to represent the Forces with Monk in Scotland, yet those of Wallingford-House re∣solved to act as if they had all been present. I had written to some of the Officers in Ireland, that if they should take a Resolution to send any Persons to this Council, they would do
well to make choice of such as were most in∣clined to the Restitution of the Parliament; but that, as to my own particular, I was not willing to have any thing to do amongst them. Notwithstanding which I soon received a Let∣ter by the hands of Col. Salmon from the Offi∣cers in Ireland, to desire me to act for them at the General Council; which having imparted to some of my Friends, and they concurring to encourage me to it, I would not refuse to serve them. Being in the Council, I did what I could to procure the Restitution of the Parliament, wherein I was much assisted by Col. Rich. Five or six days we spent in a Debate concerning the Form of Government, which had been drawn up, as I said before, expecting the Arrival of those that should be chosen for Ireland, Scot∣land, and the Army in the North of England. During which time Col. Rich and I took fre∣quent Occasions of informing the Officers con∣cerning the Publick Affairs, desiring them to be cautious of engaging themselves in any De∣sign, of which they might have Cause after∣wards to repent, and exhorting them to contri∣bute their Endeavours towards settling such a Government as all good Men might concur in, and live happily under. We met with such Success in our Discourses with the Officers, that tho the Wallingford-House Party had influenced the Elections as much as they could, and under pretence that the Fleet was at too great a di∣stance, and divided into too many Squadrons to
be in a capacity of chusing in due time, had caused the Committee of the Admiralty to no∣minate whom they pleased to serve for the Fleet, yet they found their Wheels to move so slowly, that to facilitate their Business they were obliged to send away divers Officers to their Commands, under colour that their Pre∣sence was necessary in their respective Stations, by reason of the Dangers that threatned them from all Parts; when indeed, the true Reason of their Dismission was taken from the Dissa∣tisfaction they began to shew with the Pro∣ceedings of the Chief Officers. By these and other means it came to pass, that the Grandees of the Army resolved to spend no more time in the Debate touching the Form of Government, and therefore desired a Conference with Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway, who being un∣willing to meet them without me, prevailed with me to accompany them to Wallingford-House; where Lieutenant-General Fleetwood expressed great Uneasiness on account of the Publick Distractions, and desired them to ad∣vise him what measures to take to remove the present Difficulties, and to prevent greater Mis∣chiefs which seemed impending over us. These Gentlemen suspecting the Designs of Fleetwood and his Party, kept themselves on their Guard, and in an ironical manner told him, that the most certain way to cure all things would be to set up Richard again. Just as I thought, said Fleetwood, it has happened, that the coming of
my Lord Richard to Hampton-Court would give an Occasion of Jealousy, and then protested that his Removal thither proceeded from him∣self, that he had not been advised to it by them, and that they had no Intention to set him up again. We believed what we thought most reasonable concerning his Removal to that Place. But to that of his Restitution, Major Saloway asked them, whether things might not be brought to that pass as to make it necessary, tho they intended it not? which Fleetwood de∣nying, the Major pressed him farther, and de∣sired to know from him, if it were not possi∣ble that the Necessity of our Affairs might ob∣lige us to a Compliance with Charles Stuart. Thus they stood upon their Guard on both Parts, not adventuring to trust one another; that mutual Confidence by which they had done so much being intirely lost. However that I might not be wanting on my part, I told them with my usual Freedom, that the Restitu∣tion of the Parliament seemed to me to be the only Remedy to recover us from our present Distempers, and to prevent the fatal Conse∣quences of our Divisions. To this the Lieute∣nant General answered, that according to an Agreement made between them and Major Ge∣neral Lambert before his Departure, nothing could be done in that Matter without mutual Consent; and so we parted with as little Satis∣faction on either side as we brought with us. From them I went to the Council of Officers
who were then assembled, and was much sur∣prized to find them debating whether a New Parliament should be called, and ready to go to the Question; which I doubted not would pass in the Affirmative, having observed that it met with little Opposition, except from Col. Rich. And tho' I had but little hope to obstruct the Design, yet that I might discharge my Du∣ty, I took the liberty to lay before them the In∣justice and Vanity of such a Resolution, endea∣vouring to prove that as they had no Authority to warrant them in that Attempt, so neither would it be of any Advantage to the Nation if it should succeed. I desired them to consider how great an Enterprize they were about o undertake, without any sufficient Authority to justify them in it: That they could not pre∣tend to any from the Parliament, and that it was as evident they had none from the Nations, no not from the Military part of them, the Depu∣ties from Scotland and Ireland being not arrived, nor any from the Army in the North of Eng∣land: That at least one third part of the Offi∣cers present were against their Design; and that it seemed to me to be an unaccountable Pre∣sumption for two thirds of about a fourth part of the Army to undertake to put a Period to the Civil Authority. I endeavoured to perswade them that the Design was as vain and foolish as unwarrantable and unjust; for by this means they would utterly disoblige the Parliament and all their Friends, who were very numerous:
That Monk having declared against them alrea∣dy, and the greatest Number of their own Body disapproving the thing, it would come to pass, that all things would be brought into a miserable Confusion; and it may be the Com∣mon Enemy would find means to return, and utterly destroy the contending Parties. But their Resolution being already taken, in conse∣quence of the Agreement they had made with the Clergy and Lawyers, we could obtain no more than a Respite of the Conclusion of this Debate till the Afternoon. Going out of the Council, I desired Col. Desborow, whose Interest I knew to be very great with the rest, that he would desist from the farther prosecution of this Design, representing to him, as well as I could, the Confusions and Mischiefs that would inevi∣tably ensue upon it. To which he answered, that the Parliament had deceived them twice, and that they were now resolved to put it out of their Power to do it again. In the After∣noon the Debate was reassumed; and a Motion being made that they would take the Restitu∣tion of the Parliament into their Consideration, Col. Desborow, to keep his Word, did what he could to asperse the Parliament, saying, that they had not performed any part of the Pro∣mises that had been made for them before their first Return to the House, having made no Provision for the Lord Richard, as he called him, nor granted a satisfactory Indemnity; but by the Insertion of divers oblique Clauses
had rendred it absolutely ineffectual: That they had taken no care to secure a Liberty to tender Consciences, nor to provide for the Publick Safety by establishing a Select Senate: That they had manifested their Unworthiness not on∣ly in these Negatives, but had also positively declared their Intentions to ruin the Army, by removing the Principal Officers, and placing others in their Commands who were of a diffe∣rent Spirit and Principles, and by drawing up one part of the Army against the other, in or∣der to destroy both. For which Reasons he declared his Opinion to be, that to reinvest those with Authority who were so manifestly unfit for that Trust, would prove the worst of all the Expedients that could be proposed. To this Discourse I thought my self obliged to make some Answer, and therefore took the Freedom to say, That the Parliament being Men, were liable to Passions, and subject to Imperfections, but that it might be said with∣out Immodesty, that they had been chargeable with as few as any of their Predecessors, and possibly fewer than those that had pretended to succeed them: That they were the only Num∣ber of Men that had any legal Call to the Su∣pream Authority: That God had eminently appeared for them, and wonderfully assisted them to subdue all those that had opposed them both at home and abroad: That they had been so frugal of the Publick Purse, that upon the first Interruption by Cromwel, a vast Sum was
found in the Treasury, tho their Armies and Fleets had been fully paid, and their Maga∣zines plentifully furnished with Naval Stores. How these Advantages had been improved by those that had usurped their Authority, was well known; and how the Armies and Fleets had been paid, they themselves were the best Judges. At the Return of the Parliament to the Exercise of their Authority, in the place of those vast Sums they had left in the Publick Coffers, they found a Debt of two Millions and four hundred thousand Pounds contracted by those who had taken upon them the the Ma∣nagement of Affairs. I desired them to ob∣serve how unjustly the Parliament was accused of breaking their Promises, who had promised nothing: That some of us indeed as private Men had engaged to promote certain things in the House at the Request of some Officers of the Army; but at the same time we acquainted them, that we could not answer for any thing except our own sincere Endeavours in that Af∣fair. And yet I appealed to themselves, if the Parliament had not done those things, in which we had promised our Endeavours, having un∣dertaken to pay more than thirty thousand Pounds for Mr. Richard Cromwel, whereby he would be left in the clear Possssion of about eight thousand Pounds a Year, besides Woods, Plate, Jewels, and other things of Value: having passed that very Clause for Liberty of Conscience which had been brought in by the
Officers themselves in their Address; and ha∣ving indemnified the Souldiery in as full and ample manner as could be desired, with respect to their past Actions, not only Military but Civil also; with this only Reservation, that the Parliament might, if they should find Cause, call to account such as had received Bribes and exorbitant Salaries, which was only designed as a Check upon those who had been and still were Enemies to the Commonwealth. As to what related to the Chief Officers of the Army, I told them it had been made good to a tittle; for they had continued Lieutenant Gene∣ral Fleetwood to be Commander in Chief of all their Forces in England and Scotland: But if it was their Intention that he should be Com∣mander in Chief of the Parliament also, I con∣fessed my self perswaded that it never had en∣tred into the Head of any of those Persons be∣fore-mentioned, to engage for that; and there∣fore what the Parliament did in causing him and the rest of the Officers to take their Com∣missions from them, and inserting a Clause in that of the Commander in Chief, that it should continue during this Parliament, or till their farther Order, was no way contrary to the Pro∣mise of the said Gentlemen. Neither could it be a just Ground of Exception to those of the Army, if their Intentions were such as they ought to be; for the Parliament being em∣barqued in the same Vessel, would find it ne∣cessary, as well for their own Security as for
that of the People, to leave the Sword in faith∣ful Hands at the time of their Dissolution, which they had fixed by a Vote of the House. And since they still insisted upon their Select Senate, I desired them to remember that I had declared in the Conference my Opinion to be, That if such a thing could be made use of for a time to preserve our Cause by an Extraordinary Power, I thought I should not be against it without better Information; but if they designed there∣by to erect a Military Power, in equal or supe∣riour Authority to the Civil, I should oppose it to the utmost of my Ability: And had farther added, that I was fully perswaded I therein delivered the Sense and Intentions of the great∣est part of the Parliament. To this they could make no Reply, being conscious of the Truth of what I said; but having made an Agree∣ment with the Clergy, as I said before, that used to meet at the Savoy, they resolved to pur∣sue it, and concluded, that considering the pre∣sent posture of Affairs, a New Parliament should be called, as the most probable means to recon∣cile all Differences. They agreed also with the Ministers, that their Maintenance by Tithes should not be taken away till another Revenue as ample and certain should be settled upon them: That some Provisions should be made for those who differed in Faith and Worship from the Established Church; but that the Quakers and some others, whose Principles, they said, tended to the Destruction of the Civil Cociety, should not be tolerated at all.
Whilst the Army was thus employed, the Parliament Party was not wanting to pro∣mote their Interest, and to that end form∣ed a Design to get the Tower into their hands. Colonel Fitz, who was then Lieu∣tenant of the Place, had consented that Co∣lonel Okey, with three hundred Men, should lie dispersed about the Tower, prepared for the Enterprize, promising that on a certain day he would cause the Gates to be opened early in the Morning, to let him pass in his Coach; which Opportunity Col. Okey with his Men taking, might easily seize the Guards, and possess him∣self of the Place: and their Attempt might have succeeded, had it not, by I know not what Accident, been discovered to the Lord Mayor, who informed the Army of it the Night before it was to be put in execution. Whereupon Col. Desborow, with some Forces, was sent thither, who changed the Guards, seized the Lieutenant of the Tower, and left Col. Miller to command there till farther Order. Another Party appeared for the Parliament in Wiltshire, under the Command of Major Croke; who having told divers of my Friends in that County, that the principal Reasons of his Dissa∣tisfaction with the Proceedings of the Army had been taken from what I had said in the late Council of Officers, he prevailed with divers of them to side with him, and so marched to∣wards Portsmouth, in order to join Sir Arthur Haslerig and Col. Morley, who had already
possessed themselves of that Place, and declared for the Restitution of the Parliament. About the same time Hurst-Castle was secured for the Parliament, whereby the Cummunication of those in the Isle of Wight with England being rendred very difficult, they declared for the Parliament also. The Fleet began to incline to the same Counsels, and dispatched a Messenger to Sir Arthur Haslerig at Portsmouth, to assure him, they would do nothing in opposition to them. In this Conjuncture the Parliament Party resolved to send Col. Walton  was one of them, to communicate the present State of Affairs to Col. Monk, and to advise him what measures he should take. In the mean time the Wallingford-house Par∣ty, as if infatuated by a superiour Power to procure their own Destruction, continued ob∣stinately to oppose the Parliament, and fixed in their Resolution to call another. On the other side, I was sorry to find most of the Parliament Men as stiff, in requiring an absolute Submissi∣on to their Authority, as if no differences had happened amongst us, nor the Priviledges of Parliament ever been violated, peremptorily in∣sisting upon the intire Subjection of the Army, and refusing to hearken to any Terms of Ac∣commodation, tho' the Necessity of Affairs seemed to demand it, if we would preserve our Cause from Ruin. Therefore, tho' I had resolved to depart with all convenient speed to my Charge in Ireland, yet I was induced to de∣fer
my Journey for some time, at the Solicita∣tion of my Friends, who perswaded themselves that I might have Interest enough with both Parties to procure an Accommodation between them. To that end I took all occasions to mo∣derate the Spirits of the Members of Parlia∣ment; and that I might not render my self suspected to the Officers, I continued to fre∣quent their Councils, which I was the more willing to do, because the Irish Brigade that was with Col. Lambert had signified to the Council of Officers that they had chosen me with Lieutenant Col. Walker, and two Gentle∣men more whose Names I cannot recollect, to represent them at their Meetings. At this time Col. Lockart Governour of Dun∣kirk finding his Work at an end abroad by the Conclusion of a Peace between the Crowns of France and Spain, returned to England; and coming to wait on Sir Henry Vane one day at his House, it was my fortune to be there at the same time. In the Conversation we had, he very much lamented the Divisions that were among us, affirming that if they had not pro∣ved an Obstruction to him in his Negotiations, we might have had what Terms we could have asked either from France or Spain. The Army having resolved, as I said before, to call a new Parliament, and many Difficulties arising amongst them touching that matter, they referred the Consideration of it to their Committee of Safety, who having spent some
time in the Debate, reported as their Opinion to the Council of Officers, That the best way to be taken for summoning a Parliament would be to act therein according to antient Custom, directing only some few Qualifications to be ob∣served as well in the Electors as in the Persons to be elected. Which when I perceived, and that no Rules for Qualifications could possibly be given and executed within the time appointed for the Parliament to meet, and that the Design of the Army tended manifestly to have such a Parliament as would permit the Men of the Sword to possess themselves of the Supream Authority; or if they should refuse to be brought to that, then, being a Creature of the Army, they should be dismissed with Scorn, and the Power resumed by the Military Men: For the prevention of these Mischiefs I proposed to the Council of Officers, that the Essentials of our Cause might be clearly stated, and decla∣red inviolable by any Authority whatsoever; and that in case any Difference should hereafter arise between the Parliament and the Army touching those Particulars or any of them, a certain number of Persons of known Integri∣ty might be appointed by this Council finally to determine the matter. The Council having without much difficulty agreed to this Propo∣sition, I presumed to proceed farther; and being fully perswaded that if such a Power were con∣ferred upon honest and disinterested Persons, it would give more satisfaction to good Men,
and better provide for the Publick Safety, than to have the final Decision of all things left to a Mercenary Army, I adventured to give in a List of one and twenty Persons for that Ser∣vice, who should be called Conservators of Li∣berty. Then we went upon the Debate of such Particulars as should be referred to their Cognizance and Judgment, which were as followeth: 1. That the Government should not be al∣tered from a Commonwealth, by setting up a King, single Person, or House of Peers. 2. That Liberty of Conscience should not be violated. 3. That the Army should not be diminished, their Conduct altered, nor their Pay lessened without the Consent of the major part of the Conservators. Having proceeded thus far, it was resolved to put the Names of the Persons contained in the List, to the Vote of the Council for their Approbation, which was done in this manner. Every one of the Council having received two small Pieces of Paper, in one of which was written an N for the Negative, and in the other an A for the Affirmative, when the Can∣didate's Name was proposed, every Man put which of those he pleased, into a Hat; which done, the Papers were taken out, and being found to agree for number with the Persons
there present, if the greater number of Papers were marked with the Letter A, then the Per∣son proposed was accounted to be chosen, other∣wise to be omitted. I had contrived it so that the Names of the first seven or eight Persons of the List were Officers of their own Party, except Major Saloway and Sir Henry Vane, by which means chiefly it came to pass that the two last passed without Opposition: But then they made a Breach upon the Order, and ha∣ving put my Name to the Question against my Will, I was approved. Which when they had done, Lieutenant General Fleetwood propo∣sed Col. Tichburn, one who had lately moved to set up Richard Cromwel again, and after him the Lord Warriston, who had publickly declared against Liberty of Conscience, with Mr. Strick∣land, Sir Gilbert Pickering, and two or three more, all of their Faction, and procured them to be chosen in the room of Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Wallop, Col. Walton, Col. Morley, Mr. Henry Nevil, and Col. Monk, who were next in order upon the List, and with whom I de∣signed to balance the Wallingford-House Party. But by putting in these Creatures in their Pla∣ces, it was evident they designed nothing less than to draw the whole Power into their own Hands; and lest we should doubt of their Intentions, they gave an Exclusion to Col. Rich, tho present, and a considerable Officer in the Army, because they suspected him not to fa∣vour their Arbitrary Designs. Here my Pati∣ence
began to leave me, and I told them openly that seeing they intended only to carry on a Faction, and to govern the Nation by the Sword, I resolved to have no more to do with them, and thereupon refused to give in my Bil∣let upon the Names of the six or seven Persons that were last proposed: but they compleated their Number, and in the next Publick Intelli∣gence caused the Names of those one and twen∣ty Persons, whom they had elected to be the Conservators of Liberty, to be published to the World, with notice of their Resolution to summon a new Parliament, thinking thereby to please the People: but they were mistaken, for no Man that loved his Country could approve of it. And the Cavalier Party conceived such Hopes of their own Affairs, that they grew impatient of any further Delays, and designed the Destruction of the Army by open Force. To that end divers of their Party, who had fled to Parts byond the Seas, returned secretly to London, and entred into the Confederacy. The time of putting their Design in execution was agreed, and the Places of Rendezvous being ten in number, all in and about the City, were appointed: But it happened again that the Ar∣my received Information of the Conspiracy the Evening before it should have been execu∣ted, and being alarmed at the Danger, they immediately sent divers Parties of Horse and Foot to take possession of those Places which were appointed by the Enemy for their drawing
together; by which means they seized some of them, who at twelve a Clock the same Night were already come together compleatly arm'd on a part of the Temple near the Wa∣ter-side. Others of the same Company got o∣ver the Walls, and escaped in Boats. They took also at an Inn in London thirty Horses with Saddles and Hosters, and as many Men ready to mount them. Many more of the Conspirators were taken at the several Places of Rendezvouz, where the Army had placed their Guards; and some of them confessed that the Officer who commanded the Party that was placed near Pauls Church had promised to join with them; which was not improbable, he be∣ing one of those who having never engaged in our Cause, was advanced by Oliver Cromwel as his Creature, and sent to Dunkirk, from whence he had been lately recalled by the Ar∣my, whose Ambition he had throughly second∣ed by his Votes in the Council of Officers. And tho' this Storm was by the Vigilance and Care of the Army pretty well dispersed; yet their insolent and arbitrary Actions gave birth to other Clouds that threatned them with Ruin more than the former. For soon after, the Officers that commanded the Fleet published a Declaration against the Arbitrary Proceedings of the Wallingford-House Party, rehearsing the Particulars for which they had engaged in the Publick Service, and declaring their Resolution to continue faithful to those Engagements.
This Declaration came out somewhat earlier than was intended, by reason of the Arrival of Col. Okey and Mr. Scot in the Fleet, who were obliged to go thither for Protection from the Power of the Army, the former being known to have had the principal Share in the Design of seizing the Tower for the Parliament: The other was not only suspected to have been con∣cerned in that Affair, but also to keep Corre∣spondence with the Generals at Portsmouth, and with Col. Monk in Scotland. The Army ho∣ping to quiet the Fleet with fair Words and large Promises, dispatched Col. Barrow to them, supposing him to be a proper Person to be imployed to lay them asleep, because they knew he had the good Opinion of Vice Ad∣miral Lawson, and indeed not undeservely; for he was a Man of Probity; and tho he had been in some measure seduced by their Subtle∣ties, yet he was not a Confident of their Junto. But the Vice Admiral was too well acquainted with the pernicious Designs of the Army, to be cajoled into a Retractation of what he had done. The Cavalier Party about London finding themselves disappointed in their Design of de∣stroying the Army by an Insurrection, attempt∣ed to do it another way, and to that end en∣couraged the Apprentices to meet in great Mul∣titudes to petition the Aldermen and Common Council, that they would use their Endeavours to procure a Free Parliament to be speedily cal∣led,
well knowing what the Consequence of that would be in the present Conjuncture of Affairs. Many Men of the King's Party, and of desperate Fortunes, intermixed themselves with them, and inflamed them to such a height of Violence, that the Army thought it necessa∣ry to send a Regiment of Foot to suppress them under the Command of Col. Hewetson; who when he was come into the City, was affron∣ted to his Face, his Men fired upon from the Windows, and Stones thrown on them from the Tops of the Houses; and as they proceed∣ed in their March were so pressed by the Mul∣titude, that the Soldiers to preserve themselves from their Violence, were obliged to fire upon them, and having, killed three or four of their number, the rest dispersed themselves for that time: But Tumults were now become so fre∣quent in the City, that the Army-Party found themselves obliged to send considerable Guards thither almost every day, to suppress them; one of which being commanded by Col. Des∣borough, carried themselves to roughly towards divers eminent Citizens, that they greatly dis∣gusted the whole City. The Aldermen and Common Council not thinking it covenient o∣penly to patronize these Disorders, agreed upon a Paper to be presented to the Council of Offi∣cers, wherein having disowned the late Tu∣mults, they complained of the killing of their Men, and of the Guards that were kept in the City, desiring that they might be withdrawn,
and the Guard of the City left to the Civil Magi∣strate, who could not otherwise undertake to se∣cure the Peace, and that a Free Parliament might be forthwith called. This Paper was brought to the Council of Officers by divers Members of the Court of Aldermen and of the Com∣mon Council; and being read, it was resolved by those of the Army, that if the Aldermen and Common Council would declare against the Family of the Stuarts, and promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth without a King, single Person, or House of Lords, they would withdraw their Souldiers, and leave the City to be guarded by it self. They acquaint∣ed them also that they had already resolved to call a Parliament: and for the farther Satisfacti∣on of the Aldermen and Common Council, they appointed six of their own number, where∣of they constrained me to be one, to confer with them touching the Reasons of these Re∣solutions, and of the late Proceedings of the Army in the City. We met at Whitehal, and after Col. Desborough had spent some time in shewing the necessity of sending part of the Army to secure the Peace of the City, and had made large Protestations of the Army's Friend∣ship to them, I took the Liberty to say, that those who were Members of the Army could best inform them of their own Intentions in the late Proceedings in the City, wherein I should not intermeddle; but having this Op∣portunity, and being a Well-wisher to the
Commonwealth, I would take upon me to put them in mind, that we had all been engaged together in the defence of our Rights and Li∣berties against Arbitrary Power; that the City had been eminently instrumental in assisting the Parliament and Army to carry on that weighty Affair, whereby they had acquired Honour to themselves, Esteem amongst good Men, and Satisfaction in their own Minds. But withal it ought to be considered that by this they had highly incensed and vehemently provoked the Common Enemy against them, who tho they might caress them for the present, and make them the most solemn Promises of future Kind∣ness, would never forget the Aid and Support they had afforded to the Parliament during the whole Course of the late War; but would certainly take a time to be revenged on them to the utmost. Wherefore I desired them, as they tendred the Peace of the Nation, and the Preser∣vation of their Persons and Estates, that they would not suffer themselves to be deluded by our Common Adversaries, and seduc'd by spe∣cious Pretences to promote that Interest, which prevailing, would not only render all the Blood and Treasure that had been spent in asserting our Liberties, of no use to us, but also force us under such a Yoke of Servitude, that neither we nor our Posterity should be able to bear. Divers of them seemed much surprized at this Discourse, because they had taken other Reso∣lutions: yet others, and particularly Alder∣man
Fowke, expressed their Approbation of what I had said, and declared their Resolution to act accordingly, provided they might be assured not to be governed by an Army, in which I as∣sured them my Judgment concurred with them, which my Actions should always demonstrate. And as I did upon all Publick Occasions endea∣vour to perswade our divided Parties to unite for their Common Safety, so I am not sensible that I neglected any private Opportunity to bring about that End. Therefore when I waited on Lieutenant General Fleetwood, which fre∣quently happened, I never failed to exhort him during this unhappy Breach, that he would use his Endeavours for the Restitution of the Parliament. About which being one day some∣what earnest with him, and having acquainted him, that finding my good Offices between the Parliament-Men and the Army, were likely to prove ineffectual, I was resolved to go to my Station in Ireland. His Lady over-hearing these last Words from her Chamber, and being in∣form'd that I was alone with the Lieutenant Ge∣neral, she came into the Room where we were, and with Tears began to lament the present Condition of her Husband, who, she said, had been always unwilling to do any thing in oppo∣sition to the Parliament; assuring me that he was utterly ignorant of the Contrivance of the Officers at Darby, to petition the Parliament in so insolent a manner, and had not had any part in their Proceedings upon it afterwards: That, as
to herself, she had always solicited him to comply in all things with the Orders of the Parliament; and that fearing the Consequences of the Peti∣tion from Darby, she had taken the Original, and locked it up in her Cabinet, where it still was. She desired me to defer my Journey to Ireland, till Differences should be composed be∣tween the Parliament and the Army, saying, that she knew I had an Interest in both, which she hoped I would improve for the good of both, and not forget to do what good Offices I could for her Husband, who she said had always ex∣pressed a great Friendship for me. I confess I was moved with the Discourse of the Lady, and could have been contented to put off my Journey for Ireland some time longer, if I had not clearly seen it impossible to adjust the Diffe∣rences between our contending Parties. For the Army instead of hearkning to an Accommo∣dation, had not only resolved to call a new Par∣liament, but also published a Proclamation to appoint the Day and Place of their meeting. Besides, I was under no small Apprehensions that Disorders might arise amongst the Officers in Ireland, which was my peculiar Province, and therefore I resolved to hasten my Depar∣ture, and acquainted the Lieutenant General that my Resolution was fixed, at which both he and his Lady seemed much troubled. The next Morning I went with Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway to the Chamber of the Horse-Guard at Whitehal, where the principal Offi∣cers
used to meet, in order to take leave of them, and to let them know how much we were dissatisfied with the Measures they had taken: But when we came there, we found them under great Confusion, by reason of the certain Information they had received, That the Fleet had unanimously declared for the Restitution of the Parliament. This News had wrought such an Alteration in them, that they expressed to us their Readiness to comply with the Desires of the Fleet, so it might be done upon convenient Terms, and earnestly im∣portuned Sir Henry Vane, and Major Saloway to go down to the Fleet with some of their Party to treat with the Commanders at Sea about the Affair. Sir Henry Vane, who was always ready to promote the Service of the Publick, accepted the Imployment without any Hesita∣tion, tho' the Weather then was extreme sharp, it being in the midst of Winter, and he distem∣pered with a great Cold: To him were joined Major Saloway and Col. Salmon, with Powers from the Officers of the Army, to treat with those of the Fleet; where after they had spent four or five Days in that Negotiation, they returned to make their Report to those who had desired them to undertake that trouble, which to the best of my remembrance was to this effect: That at their first coming on board, Mr. Scot de∣clined to speak with them, and Col. Okey used them more roughly; but that by the Perswasi∣ons of Vice Admiral Lawson they did at last con∣sent
to a Conference, where they appeared ve∣ry averse to any Proposal of Terms to be made with the Parliament before their Readmission, insisting upon the absolute Submission of the Army to the Authority of the Parliament. Another Difficulty arose touching the Com∣missioners to be appointed by the Fleet to treat with an equal Number of the Army, about the Restitution of the Parliament; and the Vice Admiral having proposed Sir Henry Vane, Ma∣jor Saloway, Mr. Scot, and himself, for that purpose, Mr. Scot excepted against Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway, as Persons that had too far espoused the Interest of the Army. But the Prudence and Moderation of Vice Admiral Lawson removed these Obstructions, and pre∣vailed with Mr. Scot to comply. The Officers of the Army gave Thanks to Sir Henry Vane and rest of the Commissioners for their La∣bour and good Service, which made me con∣ceive some hopes of a speedy Accommodation, since there now seemed little more remaining to be done by the Army, but to nominate their four Commissioners, for which they took time till the Afternoon. But so ripe were these Men for Destruction, and so abandoned of every reasonable Thought, that they knew not how to make use of this Opportunity; and instead of naming Persons to treat about the Restitution of the Parliament, they used all the Arts imagi∣nable to prevail with the Council of Officers to vote a new Parliament to be called, wherein
they succeeded so much, that one of the Princi∣pal of them told me in the Afternoon, that he had altered his Opinion, and was fully con∣vinced that the Restitution of the Parliament was the very worst Remedy that could be ap∣plied to the Distempers of the Nation. After they had taken this Resolution, I resolved up∣on my Journey for Ireland with all Expedition; and having made the necessary Preparations for my Departure, I went into the Chamber where the Council of Officers accustomed to meet, and there freely told them, That the Measures they had resolved to take, if pursued, would certainly bring Ruin on themselves, and possi∣bly on the People of England. Hereupon Col. Desborow took me aside, and proposed for an Expedient, to make choice of sixty Persons of the best and ablest of the old Parliament, to be the Select Senate that should have a Negative upon the Representative. To which I an∣swered, That I hoped the Members of the Par∣liament aimed only at the Promotion of the Pub∣lick Good, and not at the Advancement of themselves to Places of Power; but if that could be supposed to be the Disease of any of them, yet the late Experience they had of the Uselesness and Vanity of the other House, who made themselves only the Objects of Scorn and Pity, would be sufficient to caution them against treading in their steps, and entering into a Con∣test and Competition with those that represent∣ed the whole Nation, without any other Sup∣port
but that of the Army, of whose Unfaith∣fulness they had already made such evident Dis∣coveries. The same day in the Evening Lieu∣tenant Col. Walker, whom I had desired to go to Wallingford-House, and to bring me an Ac∣count of their last Result before my Depar∣ture, came to me with News that they had again changed their Measures, and finally re∣solved upon the Restitution of the Parliament, pretending for the Reason of this great Altera∣tion, that Lieutenant General Fleetwood had been extremely disturbed in his Mind the Night before, in contemplation of the Mischiefs that were likely to ensue if they should proceed up∣on their former Resolution. But most Men believed that the true Reasons of this sudden Change were taken from the Submission of their Forces that had been sent to besiege Ports∣mouth, to the Generals of the Parliament, who had possessed themselves of that Place; where∣of they having received an Account, began to despair of subsisting any longer in opposition to the Parliament. The manner of their deser∣ting the Service of the Army was thus: They generally thought the Differences between the Parties not sufficiently important to warrant any Actions of open Hostility, especially the Horse, who in the Absence of the Colonel were commanded by Major Bremen, Major to Col. Rich his Regiment. He having sounded the Inclinations of the Souldiers, and informed divers of them of their Duty, gave Advice of
his Proceedings to the Colonel, who perceiving the Officers of the Fleet, and many of those of the Army, to desire the return of the Parlia∣ment, went down privately from London to his Regiment. Being arrived before Portsmouth, and finding both Horse and Foot prepared for his Design, he gave notice of his Intentions to Sir Arthur Haslerig and the rest of the Com∣manders in the Place, who having caused the Gate to be opened, Col. Rich with the Forces that had hitherto lain before the Town as Ene∣mies, marched in and joined themselves to the Parliament's Generals. The next Morning af∣ter the News of this Event was brought to Lon∣don, the Army-Party summoned a Council of Officers, consisting not only of the Standing Forces, but also of the City-Militia, and pro∣posed to them an Instrument to sign, whereby they should engage to stand by each other, not∣withstanding the Return of the Parliament. The Officers seemed unwilling to subscribe the Paper, and therefore it was not peremtorily required; but being permitted to give their Ap∣probation by Votes, they passed it without ma∣ny Negatives, Whilst this Matter was under debate, Letters were brought to Lieutenant General Fleetwood, which after he had read, he called me aside, and acquainting me with the Contents of them, he delivered them to me, and desired I would keep them private. The Substance of them was, that a Party of the Army in Ireland had possessed themselves of
the Castle of Dublin, seized on Col. Jones who commanded in my Absence, taken the Commissioners into Custody, and published a Declaration for the Parliament, of which a Copy was inclosed in the Letters. Therein they declared the Reasons of their Proceedings to be grounded on their Desires to relieve the Nation from the Government of the Sword, which they saw was endeavoured to be esta∣blished not only in England, but also in Ireland, even by those who had lately signed an Address to the Parliament, and sent it over by their Commander in Chief, as they were yet pleased to call me. They acknowledged the Guilt of those who had offered Violence to the Civil Au∣thority, and their own Unworthiness, so far as they might have contributed to keep them from the Exercise of their just Power, promising to yield Obedience to their Commands for the fu∣ture, and declaring their Resolution to join with the Generals at Portsmouth, Col. Monk, and Vice Admiral Lawson, in order to procure the Restitution of the Parliament. Having read this Declaration, and finding it to agree with my Sense of the Publick Affairs, and signed by my Brother-in-law Col. Kempson, with many others of known Integrity, I could not refuse to give it my Approbation: But when I had considered that it was also sub∣scribed by Col. Theophilus Jones, who upon all Occasions had shewed himself a principal In∣strument of Mischief amongst us, and by Col.
Bridges and others, who had been very active to support the Usurpation of the Cromwels, I became doubtful what Judgment to make of it. However, having seen things brought to an issue in England, I concluded it to be my Duty to hasten to my Charge in Ireland, that if their Intentions were just and honest, I might encou∣rage and assist them; and if I should find them otherwise inclined, that I might endeavour to reduce them to their Duty. Therefore having taken leave of my Friends and Relations, I de∣parted from London, and being on my way to Chester, in order to imbark for Ireland, I received Letters by a Messenger sent on purpose from my Brother Kempson, by which I understood that the Surprizal of Dublin had been princi∣pally contrived and carried on by Col. Bridges, Lieutenant Colonel Warren, Major Warden, Major Warren, Capt. Joyner, and Col. Theo∣philus Jones: That the Pretence of their meet∣ing together at Dublin was to petition for a Ge∣neral Council of Officers, that the Sense of the Army there touching the Publick Affairs might be fairly collected and represented. Those who had the immediate Managment of things in Ireland having refused to grant their Request, the Officers above-mentioned resolved to put their Design in execution; and having gained the greatest part of a Foot Company that was quartered in the Armory near the Iron Gate of the Castle, they ordered three of the private Souldiers who were best known to the Sentinel
that was upon the Guard, to desire him to open the Gate, and to let them in to do some Business which they pretended to have in the Castle. But so soon as the Sentinel had opened the Gate, the three Souldiers secured him, and immedi∣ately after the rest of their Confederates, with Major Warden at the Head of them, rushed in and surprized the Guard. Being thus possessed of the Castle, they seized upon Col. John Jones, and sent Major Warren to take into his Custody Mr. Corbet and Col. Thomlinson, the other two Commissioners, which he did as they were coming from the Church. My Brother Kempson was at this time in my Lodgings in the Castle, and heard nothing of this Action, till some of the principal Persons concerned came to him, and acquainted him with what had passed, desiring him to join with them, which he thought fit to promise. Then they sent to Sir Hardress Waller, giving him an account of their Success, and desired his Assistance, tho he had not been made acquainted with their De∣sign. My Brother also informed me, that tho he had contributed towards drawing up the De∣claration of this Party to be best Advantage he could for the Publick Interest, yet he was so unsatisfied with the Spirit and Principles of these Men, that he was very hardly perswaded to sign it. The Horse that were in the Town had for the most part joined with this Party; but a Company of Foot of Col. Lawrence his Regiment being got together upon this Alarm,
and solicited to declare with them for the Par∣liament, made answer, That they knew not what Parliament they meant; but that they were resolved to be faithful to the Parliament, and to me their Commander in Chief. In these Words most of the Forces in Ireland af∣terwards declared; and Sir Hardress Waller de∣sired my Brother Kempson to let me know, that he had carried his Life in his Hand, and ha∣zarded all in this Affair for my sake. And that there might be no want of Protestations, Ma∣jor Warden himself told my Brother, that tho' I thought him a Cavalier, yet I should find him as faithful to the Commonwealth as any Man. Yet for all this my Brother acquainted me, that he much doubted the Sincerity of their Intentions, and the rather, because Sir Charles-Coote had seized Galway, and turned out Col. Sadler the Governour of that Place; that he had imprisoned Major Ormisby, an Offi∣cer of Courage and Honesty, and had drawn together a considerable Body both of Horse and Foot, consisting chiefly of the English-Irish. Therefore he concluded that I would lose no time, but hasten to them with all possi∣ble Expedition. Having received this Account of the Affairs of Ireland, and being perswaded that Sir Arthur Haslerig was like to have a great Influence upon the Publick Counsels, I sent him a Copy of my Letter, and earnestly desired him to take care not to be seduced by fair Pro∣mises and specious Pretences, to strengthen the
Hands of those in whom he never had found, nor was like to find any just Grounds of Con∣fidence. Before my Departure from Chester I made a Visit, and took leave of Col. Croxton Governour of that Place, who, as he had always done, gave me all possible Demonstration of his Affection to the Commonwealth. From thence I went to Beaumaris, where I found a Ship of War carrying about thirty Guns, com∣manded by Capt. Aldworth. And tho I had no Order from any superiour Powers, yet the Captain promised, if he could get out of the Harbour, to set sail for Ireland the next Morn∣ing. Which having done according to his Pro∣mise, we cast Anchor the day after in the Bay of Bullock over against my House at Monck∣town. But not thinking it prudent to go ashore till I had farther informed my self of the State of Affairs, I writ a Letter to Sir Hardress Waller, and the rest of the Officers, to acquaint them, that the Parliament being again restored to their Authority, according to their Desires expressed in their Address and late Declaration, wherein I concurred in Judgment with them, I was come over to join with them, and to afford them my Assistance to accomplish those things for which they had declared. This Letter I sent to them by our Deputy-Advocate; and when the Boat went off, Capt. Aldworth caused his Guns to be fired, which gave notice to those at Dublin of my Arrival. At the Return of the Boat my Brother Kempson, accompanied by
divers Officers, came on board and informed me, that the Affairs of Ireland were in a much worse Condition than at the time he had writ∣ten to me in England, by reason of the Preva∣lency of Sir Charles Coote, who with one or two more influenced the whole Council of Officers as they pleased; and that all those who had been displaced for Debauchery or Disaffection, had joined with him: By which means divers Officers of known Affection to the Publick had been obliged to quit their Posts, and yield their Garisons to his Creatures: That Col. Brayfield Governour of Athlone, having refused to sur∣render that Place to Sir Charles Coote, he had drawn his Forces before it, and by tampering with some of the Garrison, and falsely affirm∣ing that the Governour would deliver them up to him, he had prevailed with them to set open the Gates of the Castle, and to betray their Governour into his hands: That upon this En∣couragement he had marched to Dublin with a considerable Body of Horse, amongst whom he had distributed a great Sum of Money to secure them to his Interest: That the like Suc∣cess had attended divers others of his Associates in several Parts of that Country, particularly that Col. Edmund Temple had possessed himself of Carlo, whereof Col. Pretty was Governour: That Capt. Lisle had dispossessed Lieutenant Colonel Desborough of Drogheda; and that Major Wilson had seised Limerick, whereof Col. Nel∣son had been made Governour by me: That
Major Stanley, whom I had permitted upon his Request to stay in the Citadel of Clonmel 'till his Wife, who was ready to lie down, should be brought to Bed, had made use of the Oppor∣tunity to possess himself of that Place: That Col. Cooper, whom I had entrusted to command some Forces in the North, had fallen sick upon the late Change, and was since dead; and that his Lieutenant Colonel had been seized by a Party of his own Souldiers, and brought Priso∣ner to Dublin, where a Sum of Money was given to them for that Service: And that Lieu∣tenant Colonel Fowke, with the Assistance of the Cavalier Party, had seized upon Youghal. My Brother also informed me, that Sir Charles Coote and those who had seized the Power into their hands, had prevailed with the Council of Officers to pass a Vote, not to receive me as Commander in Chief, 'till the Pleasure of the Parliament should be signified to them, pre∣tending me to be an Enemy to the Parliament, and in the Interest of the Army. In the mean time Col. Phair Governour of Cork, Col. Saun∣ders Governour of Kinsale, Col. Richards Go∣vernour of Wexford, and Lieutenant Colonel Arnop Governour of Inniskillin, had declared for the Parliament, but refused to obey the Or∣ders of those at Dublin. In this Confusion were the Affairs of Ireland, two Parties contending and accounting each other Enemies, and yet both declaring for the Parliament. Having re∣ceived this Information, and being fully con∣vinced
of the ill Intentions of this Party, how∣ever they sought to disguise their Actions under the specious Pretext of Affection to the Parlia∣ment, since I could not do what I desired for the Publick Service, yet I resolved to endea∣vour to act as I ought, in the discharge of that Trust which the Parliament had reposed in me. And that end I writ Letters, and directed them to the Commanders of Garisons, and to the Officers of Regiments, of whose Fidelity I had the best Assurance, acquainting them with the Return of the Parliament to the Exer∣cise of their Authority, Assuring them of my constant Affections to the Parliament, and my Resolution to adhere to them, requiring the Commanders and Officers of the respective Ga∣risons and Regiments, as they valued the Cause of God and their Country, to continue faithful to the Parliament, and to withdraw from those, who under pretence of declaring for the Parlia∣ment, had usurped the Power, which they de∣signed to use for their Destruction, and for the Re-establishment of Arbitrary Power amongst us. Therein I also ordered them to draw into considerable Bodies, if possible, and to defend themselves against those who should adventure to attack them; and if they should be over∣power'd, to draw towards Munster, where I would endeavour, with what Force I could get together, to give them my Assistance, pro∣mising to justify them in their Refusal to obey any of those who derived not their Authority
from the Parliament, or Me. These Letters I put into the hands of one Mildmay, who had accompanied my Brother Kempson to me, with Orders to deliver them as they were directed, which he promised faithfully to perform. The next Morning one of my Servants, whom I had sent to buy some Provisions for us, returned on board, and informed me, that as soon as those at Dublin had received notice of my Arrival, they sent a Party of Horse to my House, with Orders to seize me; who not finding me there, had marched towards the Sea side, where they lay privately, in hopes to surprize me at my Landing. Notwithstanding which our Boat, being well manned and armed, came back safe to the Ship with some Provisions. The next day we saw a Vessel coming from England, which proving to be the Packet-Boat, I open∣ed the Mail, and found therein more plainly what I suspected before, especially in one of the Letters to Col. Theophilus Jones, wherein some mention being made of the Affairs of Charles Stuart, it was thus corrected, But no more of that till the next Summer. This Letter with some others I kept, and permitted the Master of the Packet-Boat to carry the rest to the Town. About Noon Capt. Lucas came to me on board, with an Answer to the Letter I had sent the day before to the Officers at Dub∣lin, wherein they expressed great Joy for the Restitution of the Parliament, and acquainted me with the Resolution of their Council of
Officers concerning me, on suspicion that I had taken part with the Army against the Parlia∣ment. They also informed me, that they had dispatched a Message to the Parliament's Gene∣rals, for Orders from them, or the Parliament, for their future Conduct, desiring in the mean time that I would, for avoiding Inconveni∣encies, retire into England, protesting them∣selves ready to obey me as their Commander in Chief, so soon as the Pleasure of the Parliament, or their General's, should be signified to that purpose. This Messenger gave me also the Copy of a Letter from Col. Monk to Col. John Jones, which, he said, had been found amongst the Colonel's Papers at the time when he was seized, by which Monk endeavoured to per∣swade him of his Affection to the Cause of the Commonwealth, with a solemn Profession of his Resolution to be true and faithful to the Parliament, and to oppose to the death the set∣ting up a King, single Person, or House of Lords. Capt. Lucas being ready to return to Dublin, I gave him my Reply to the Answer he brought me from the Officers, appealing to their own Consciences for my Adherence and Affection to the Parliament, telling them, that the Duty of my Charge would not permit me to return to England in such a Conjuncture: That I had received my Commission from the Parliament, and did not find that it enjoined me to obey the Commands of those, who for the most part had no Commissions from them:
That I was resolved to prosecute, as far as I was able, the Ends of my Commission for the Service of the Parliament, by whom I was en∣trusted; requiring them to forbear any Opposi∣tion against me, as they would answer for the Blood that might be shed in the Dispute. I ac∣quainted Capt. Lucas with the Substance of my Letter; who thereupon proposed, that seeing I was confident of my good Intentions, and that both my self and those at Dublin aimed at the same thing, I would go to them, and by satisfying their Scruples, adjust the Differences between us. But I told him, that I was too well informed of their Principles and Designs to put my self into their hands. Then, said he, you do not think us to be for the Parlia∣ment? No indeed, said I; and it is most ma∣nifest to me, that the Design of those who now govern the Council of Officers, tho at present it be covered with Pretences for the Parliametn, is to destroy both them and their Friends, and to bring in the Son of the late King. Perceiving the Passage to Dublin to be barr'd against me, and being disappointed of some far∣ther Provisions that I had sent for; the Enemy, for such they had declared themselves to me, not permitting them to be brought on board, I resolved to try if I could find Reception from any other Garison on the Coast, hoping that the Parliament would in a short time take off the pretended Objection against me, that I was an Enemy to them. Or if they should so far
abandon the Care of their own Safety, to leave the Power in the hands of these Usurpers, I should yet have the Satisfaction of having done all that I could to discharge the Trust they had placed in me. But before I departed from the Bay of Dublin, I dispatched a Relation of my Wife to England by the Packet Boat, with Letters for the Parliament, wherein I gave them the best Account I could of the State of Affairs in Ireland, and desired their Instructi∣ons how to govern my self in so nice a Con∣juncture; assuring them, that as I had never been solicitous to procure the Employment wherein their Favour had placed me, so I could be well contented to withdraw from that publick Station if they should think fit to recal me from it. To these Letters I added others for Sir Arthur Haslerig and Mr. Scot, with Co∣pies of some of the Letters which I had inter∣cepted coming from England for those at Dub∣lin. Having dispatched the Packet-Boat, we set sail for Duncannon, where I had placed one Capt. Skynner to command, in whom I had great Confidence, and the next Morning about eight or nine of the Clock we were in view of the Shoar near Wexford. Being come within a League of Duncannon, and not knowing in whose hands that Place might be in this strange Revolution of Affairs, I sent a Messenger to Capt. Alland, whom I had made Governour of the Fort at Passage, to be informed by him of their Condition. The next Morning our Mes∣senger
returned with the Captain and two or three more, who acquainted me, that tho no means had been left unattempted to procure the Fort of Duncannon to be delivered to those at Dublin, that Capt. Skynner had constantly re∣fused to obey any Orders not proceeding from the Parliament or Me. He also informed me, that Col. Richards Governour of Wexford, Col. Phair Governour of Cork, and Col. Saunders Governour of Kinsale, had acted in the like manner, and that he had hopes that those of Waterford would also declare for me, having promised so to do when I should arrive. But that the Person I had intrusted with the Com∣mand of Kilkenny had been frighted out of his Government; and that Lieutenant Col. Hurd, who had been removed for his vicious Life and Disaffection to the Publick, was got into the Place. Being informed of these Particulars, I landed the same day in the Evening at Dun∣cannon, where I was received with great De∣monstrations of Joy by Capt. Skynner the Go∣vernour, and the Garison, who at my Arrival fired their Guns round the Fort, and were an∣swered by those from our Ship of War that lay in the Harbour, by which means those of Wa∣terford had notice of my Landing. Doubting what the issue of things might be, I took a view of the Place; and having perceived that the Garison was not sufficiently provided either with Men or Provisions, I took the best Care I could for their Supply. To this end one of the
Officers having engaged to bring in the greatest part of a Foot Company in the Regiment of Col. Stephens, I sent him out with Orders to that purpose. I dispatched a Messenger also to my Tenants at Bally-Magger, which lay not far from us, to desire them to furnish me with Corn, Beef, and other Necessaries. I revictu∣alled our Men of War, whose Provisions were almost spent, and borrowed divers Sums of Money of my Friends in the Parts adjacent, which I knew to be of singular Use in case of Extremity. Having done this, I sent Letters to Col. Leigh, Governour of Waterford, and to the rest of the Officers there, acquainting them with the Restitution of the Parliament, and with my Arrival at Duncannon, in order to promote their Service, wherein I required them to afford me their Assistance. I wrote Letters also to Col. Puckle Governour of Ross, to the same effect, and dispatched others to Col. Richards, Col. Phair, and Col. Saunders, to encourage them to continue to act as they had hitherto done. From Waterford I had a civil Return to my Message brought by some of their Officers, who came to make me a Visit; but I could not get a positive Answer from them to the Contents of my Letter. And I still insisting that they would declare them∣selves, they sent one Capt. Bolton and three other Persons to me, desiring that I would satis∣fie them touching the Objection that had been given out against me, that I was an Enemy to
the Parliament; which having done, as I might well, they departed in appearance well satisfied. In the mean time Col. Temple with some Horse was ordered to block up the Fort of Duncannon; and having possessed himself of the Ways lead∣ing to it, one of his Parties stopped some Coun∣try People that were bringing some Black Cattle for the use of the Garison; which having per∣ceived, I ordered a Party of Foot, being alto∣gether destitute of Horse, to go by a short Way, and to post themselves in a Pass through which they were to return: and tho they came too late to recover the Cattel, yet they prevail∣ed with divers of the Party to come to me into the Fort, where they assured me that they had been brought before us merely in obedience to their superior Officers, and were much troubled at the Differences amongst us; they acknowledged that they had long served under me, and were more willing to continue to do so still, than to serve under any other Person; and that understanding that both the contending Parties waited for the Signification of the Par∣liament's Pleasure concerning the Publick Af∣fairs, they promised to withdraw from the Fort, and to come no more against us. By which it may farther appear how unwilling the Forces on both sides were to come to any open Acts of Hostility, it being not easy for Men in an ordinary Station, unacquainted with Publick Counsels, and of ordinary Capacities, so soon to discern the way to their Duty through
the specious Pretences of each Party. But the Cabal at Dublin resolving to carry on their wicked Design by Force, if they could not do it by Fraud, displaced by their own usurped Authority all the Field Officers of the Ar∣my, except Major Ed. Warren, with most of the other Officers that the Parliament had com∣missionated, filling their Places with the most vicious and disaffected Persons they could find. Which having done, they caused a Report to be published, that Sir Charles Coote with a con∣siderable Force would come to besiege me in Duncannon, whereby they obtained this Ad∣vantage, that our Enemies in Waterford were incouraged to appear openly, and our Friends, uncertain of the Event, would not venture to declare themselves. Besides, Col. Leigh their Go∣vernour began now openly to side with those at Dublin, either from his Malice to me for repro∣ving him formerly for his Zeal in supporting the Usurpation of Cromwel, or from a selfish Prin∣ciple that was natural to him, of joining always with the rising Party; tho being an Anabaptist, he might have considered, that he was not likely to find much Favour with the Grandees at Dublin. The Enemy, as had been before reported, drew down before Duncannon; and Capt. Scot, Son to Mr. Scot a Member of the Parliament, whom I have had occasion frequently to men∣tion, sent a Letter to inform me, that being ap∣pointed by the Officers at Dublin to reduce the
Place to the Obedience of the Parliament, he was come thither to that purpose. Having read his Letter, I wrote an Answer to it, and communicated them both to the Officers and Souldiers of the Garrison. In my Answer I told him that we were really for that, which they only pretended as a Colour to worse Designs; that I acted by the Authority of the Parliament, and should endeavour faithfully to discharge my Duty; requiring them forthwith to depart, and return to the Obedience of those to whom they owed it, as they would answer the con∣trary to God and Man. I desired the Captain to communicate my Answer to those that were with him, as I assured him I had done his Let∣ter to the Officers and Souldiers of my Garrison. Whilst these things were doing, Sir Charles Coote, Col. Theophilus Jones, and the rest of the Cabal at Dublin, sent one Capt. Campbel to Col. Monk, to acquaint him with the Progress they had made; upon which he caused the Cannon at Berwick to be fired in testimony of his Joy, and sent back the Messenger to them with Let∣ters of Thanks for their good Service, desiring them not to restore the Commissioners of the Parliament, whom they had seized, to the exercise of their Authority: But as I afterwards understood by some of Coote's Party, he men∣tioned nothing concerning me in his Letters, not knowing, as I presume, but that I might be in a condition to retard, if not totally obstruct his Grand Design, as probably I had done, with
the Blessing of God, if the Parliament had not abandoned me, and their own Interest at the same time, by the influence of Monk's Party in the House. The Junto at Dublin being very desirous to remove me from the Post where I was, called a Council of Officers, and having drawn up a Letter to justify their Proceedings against me, they procured it to be signed and sent to me from the Council, endeavouring therein to defame me with all possible Malice, charging me with neglecting the Duty of my Imployment in Ireland, when upon the late Interruption of the Parliament I had rather chosen to continue my Journey to London, than to return to the discharge of my Office; accu∣sing me for divers Passages in my Letters which they had intercepted; in one of which, having called Col. John Jones, Dear Friend, they would have it interpreted, that I thereby approved his Correspondence with the Wallingford-House Party: And in another having expressed my Desire to moderate things between the Parlia∣ment and the Army, they improved it to a very great Crime, alledging that Men ought to obey, and not to capitulate with the Parliament; adding, that when I saw I could do no more in opposition to the Parliament, I had refused to wait their sitting, and departed for Ireland a Day or two before their Restitution, where I had endeavoured to serve the Army by my Interest in the disaffected Party; that finding Dublin to be secured for the Parliament by those
who obeyed their Orders, and would obey me as their Commander in Chief, if the Parlia∣ment thought fit to continue that Power to me, I had not only refused to return to England till their Pleasure in that Affair might be known, but also had endeavoured by all hostile means to get the Power into my hands, at the same time neglecting my Duty in Parliament, which they said I might have been doing, had not my Miscarriages rendred me uncapable of that Honour. Having perused this Letter, I thought my self obliged to answer it, as well to clear my self from these Calumnies, as to prevent the Effect it might otherwise have amongst unwary Men, which was especially to be regarded in this Conjuncture, because they had taken care to print and disperse their Libel against me. I told them in my Answer, that they well knew that in my Letters to Col. Jones, which they had intercepted, I had expressed my Dislike of his Correspondence with the Army, tho ha∣ving received Civilities from him, and because he had his Sword in his Hand, I thought it not imprudent to keep fair with him, which was probably the reason why they themselves were not more plainly dealt with by the Parliament: That notwithstanding their Pretences of Obe∣dience to the Parliament, I wished I might not see the Day when they should positively re∣fuse to obey their Commands, to the destru∣ction of their Authority, and the Advancement of a contrary Interest; tho, to serve the pre∣sent
turn, they now blamed me for endeavour∣ing, in the midst of the Confusion that the Ambition of the Army had brought upon us, to moderate things so, that their Authority might have been restored, and the Publick Cause preserved from Ruin: That the Reasons of my not returning to my Command upon advice of the late Interruption were; first, because I knew it to be the Interest of the Par∣liament and the Army to unite, both being in a certain way to ruin, if they did not; and that therefore I was incouraged to attempt it: And in the next place, because I had seen the Letter which was sent from the Officers at London to those in Ireland, wherein they had declared that they had only obstructed their Sitting for a while: Thirdly, I hoped at my Departure I had left the Affairs of Ireland in good Hands; and at the worst, I was perswaded it must of necessity follow the Fate of England. Lastly, I doubted not that by fixing the Irish Brigade, which was in England, to the Interest of the Parliament, I should contribute more to their Service, than by the best Regulation that could be made of the Forces in Ireland: That the Cause of my last Return to Ireland was taken from the knowledge I had of the Persons that had assumed the Power into their Hands, and the Duty that lay upon me to use the best of my Endeavours to put a stop to those malignant Designs, which I had reason to believe their Principles would lead them to carry on: That
they must pardon me, if I followed not their Advice of returning to England, when I was in the Bay of Dublin, having it not in my In∣structions to obey them; and being as fully satisfied of their Intentions to make use of their Power, under pretence of serving the Parlia∣ment, to undermine and destroy their Friends, as I was that my own Endeavours were directed wholly to their Service, and that it was my Duty, as far as I could, to prosecute the Ends of that Commission with which they had intrust∣ed me. Before I had sent away this Letter, I received the astonishing News that the Parli∣ament had sent to the Officers at Dublin an Ac∣knowledgment of their Service, in declaring for them; and about a Week after the said Officers sent a Letter to be delivered to me, signed by William Lenthal, Speaker of the Parliament, to desire me by their Order to attend the Par∣liament, with an Account of the Affairs of Ire∣land, that upon consideration thereof, such a Course might be taken, as might secure the Publick Interest there. Letters to the same ef∣fect were written, as I was informed, to Col. John Jones, Col. Thomlinson, and Mr. Miles Cor∣bet, Commissioners for the Parliament in Ire∣land. By these Letters I perceived that the Parlia∣ment was reduced to a dishonourable Compli∣ance with those who had got the Ascendant over them; and therefore having received their Comands to attend them, I resolved to do it as soon as I could, hoping by the Account I
should give them, to awaken their Care, and if they were not wholly infatuated, perswade them to make a timely Provision against the Dangers that so visibly threatned them with sudden Destruction. The Enemy thought I would have surrendred the Fort of Duncannon into their Hands, and to that end used many Ar∣guments to induce me to it; but I refused to hearken to that Proposition, and acquainted them, that the Letters I had received rather im∣plied the contrary; and that if the Parliament were as sensible as they ought to be of their In∣terest, I doubted not that Duncannon might prove a good Landing place for an Army from England, to reduce those in Ireland to their Obe∣dience. In the mean time I had caused two or three Vessels to cast Anchor under the command of the Castle, resolving to make use of one of them for my Transportation to England; and finding a Dutch Bottom, commanded by a French-man, to be most convenient for my pur∣pose, I agreed with the Master of her for my Voyage, Before I departed, Capt. Scot, Major Barrington, and some others of those that had blocked us up, desired to speak with me, which I agreed to, and amongst other Discourse that deserves not to be mentioned, many of them, and in particular Capt. Scot, tho they had de∣clared for the Parliament, endeavoured to justi∣fy the Attempt of Sir George Booth, reviling Sir Arthur Haslerig, and divers others who were Members of the Parliament: and being
asked whether they would fight against Charles Stuart, if he should appear at the Head of an Army, they refused to explain themselves in that particular: And yet these Gentlemen would be thought to be the only Champions for the Parliament. Capt. Scot accompanied me to the Water-side, where taking leave of Capt. Skinner the Governour and the rest of the Offi∣cers and Soldiers of the Garison, I command∣ed the Governour in his Presence, not to sur∣render the Fort to any Person that should not be authorized to receive it by the Parliament or me, wherein I doubted not he would have the Assistance of the whole Garison, which they unanimously promised. As soon as I was im∣barked, Capt. Skinner caused all their Cannon to be fired to testify their Respects to me; and the Wind being very fair, we immediately set fail for England. The next Morning we found our selves in view of the Isle of Lundy, and I would willingly have landed at Minhead, but the Seas went so high, that we were obliged to put in at Milford Comb; where having provi∣ded Horses for my self and Company, we went to Barnstaple, and lay there that Night. The day following we passed over Axmore, which was covered with Snow, and with much difficulty arrived that Night at Lay∣stock, where I was informed that Monk was come to London, and had brought the se∣cluded Members into the House, which Re∣port had preceded the Action; for it was
not yet done. But we were assured from bet∣ter Intelligence, that the Parliament, upon con∣sideration of Sir Henry Vane's compliance with the Army during the late Interruption, had discharged him from being a Member, and commanded him to retire from London; and that having reproved Major Saloway for what he had done of the same nature, they had committed him to the Tower during the Plea∣sure of the House. We were also informed that they had granted time to Lieutenant Gene∣ral Fleetwood, Col. Sydenham, the Lord Com∣missioner Whitlock, Mr. Cornelius Holland, and Mr. Strickland, to clear themselves touching their Deportment in that Affair. I was not a little disturbed at this News, conceiving that the Removal of such eminent Pillars of the House, as some of these were, would put the whole Fabrick into apparent Danger of Ruin; but being always desirous to think well of their Proceedings, I perswaded my self that these Measures were the Result of the extraordinary Zeal of some Men, to vindicate the least appearance of any Breach that might be supposed to have been made upon the Pri∣vileges of the Parliament. As I was seriously reflecting on these Particulars, one of my Ser∣vants brought me the Paper of Publick Intelli∣gence, wherein I not only perceived the former Relation to be confirmed, but also found that the Parliament had received a Charge of High Treason against Me, Mr. Miles Cor∣bet,
Col. John Jones, and Col. Thomlinson, pre∣sented by Col. Bridges, Major Edward Warren, and Capt. Abel Warren, and subscribed by Sir Charles Coote; of which, tho I had heard some flying Report whilst I was in Ireland, yet I could not suppose them so abandoned of all Shame, as to pursue such a Design: But they had learned, that to calumniate abundantly was the way to get something to stick. And here I confess, if I had entred upon the Pub∣lick Service on the account of my own private Advantage, I should have been totally discou∣raged, and perhaps have made the best Provi∣sion I could for my own Safety; but being conscious to my self that I had acted upon bet∣ter Principles, I concluded that the Parliament, who knew my Innocence, would not fail to do me Justice against my malicious Enemies. Thereupon I used all possible Diligence in my Journey, taking Post-Horses to that end; inso∣much that a Person who knew me, meeting me on the Road, said, that those who were under an Accusation of High Treason, were not ac∣customed to make such haste to present them∣selves. Being arrived at London, I went not that day to the Parliament, being informed that the House was rising; and because I was desirous to learn as much as I could concerning the State of Publick Affairs, to which I had been so long a Stranger. The most remarkable Transactions that had passed in my Absence were these following: That Lieutenant Gene∣ral
Fleetwood finding himself deserted by most part of the Army, had sent the Keys of the Parliament-House to the Speaker, with notice that the Guards were withdrawn, and that the Members of Parliament might attend the Discharge of their Duty: That Lieutenant Colonel Miller, who was in possession of the Tower, had sent also to the Speaker, to ac∣quaint him that he and his Garison were ready to receive his Orders: That the Forces about the Town had been mustered in Lincolns Inn Fields by Col. Alured and Col. Okey, where, after they had declared for the Parliament, they marched by the Speaker's House in Chancery-Lane, and saluted him as their General as he stood at his Door: That the Speaker had sent Col. Bret and Col. Redmain, who had been dis∣charged for their Zeal to the Usurpation of Cromwel, to command the Irish Brigade; tho it was well known that Brigade was Officer'd with such as were so zealous for the Parliament, that they had refused to engage against Col. Monk, because he had declared for them, and had marched off intirely from the Army of Col. Lambert: That Sir Arthur Haslerig and the rest of the Officers from Portsmouth com∣ing into London by the Bridg, had passed through the City, where they had been recei∣ved with so much seeming Joy and loud Ac∣clamations, that Sir Arthur was observed in particular to be so elevated, that for some time after he could scarce discern his Friends from his
Enemies; whereof my Wife had some Experi∣ence: For she going to give him some account of me and of Affairs in Ireland, found him much altered in his Carriage to her, saying that God and Man having owned them, they must imploy those that would own them. To which she replied, that he seemed to mistake what she had said, and assured him that she was well informed, that as I had never soli∣cited for Publick Imployment in better times, so I was very remote from any such Thoughts in this Condition of things. This Height of Sir Arthur Haslerig lasted but a few Days; for tho the Clergy and Lawyers, with other dis∣affected Persons, had hitherto kept fair with him, and in appearance reverenced him above all others, that by his Assistance they might be able to prevail against the Army, or Wallingford-House Party; yet so soon as they were free from their Fears, and understood their own Strength, they refused to be any longer con∣trolled by him, turning out of the House and out of the Army whomsoever they pleased: Which false Measures taken by him, he began to perceive when there was no Remedy left. Fifteen hundred old Officers were removed from their Commands in the Army by the Committee appointed for that purpose, and as many brought in to supply their Places, who were for the most part either unknown to the Souldiers, disaffected to the Cause, or igno∣rant of Military Affairs. The Rules by which
the Committee for placing and displacing went by, were, as every Man had been known to favour or oppose the Army Party, without any consideration of the Reasons that led them to the one or the other; which yet had been convenient, because many had carried it fair to the Army, only that they might be the bet∣ter enabled to make them sensible of their Duty, and more easily prevail with them to return to the Obedience of the Parliament: And many had rail'd at and opposed the Army, with no other design than thereby to necessitate both the Parliament and the Army by their Disuni∣on, and the Confusions that would naturally ensue thereupon, to return to their former Ser∣vitude. In the mean time Monk having left four Regi∣ments in Scotland to secure that Country, and divided his Forces into two Brigades, one of which he commanded himself, and Col. Mor∣gan the other, began his March for England on the first Day of January, and on the second took his Quarters at Willar, where he received Letters from the Parliament. On the fifth he came to Morpeth, and found there some Persons sent to him by the Common Council of London, with Orders to desire him to use his Interest to call a Free Parliament. The next Day he entred Newcastle, and thence dispatched one Gumble, whom he had entertained as his Chaplain, with Letters to the Parliament and Council of State, wherein Protestations of Duty and Fidelity
were not wanting. Divers Lawyers of the Parliament, with some others, gave a Meeting to Monk's Messenger at the Speaker's House; and several Citizens did the like at the House of one Mr. Robinson: at both which Meetings, Gumble was assured that they and their Parties would be favourable to Monk's Design. Ha∣ving in a few Days dispatched the Business he came about, he returned to his Master, with an account of the Success of his Negotiation. He found him at Mansfield in Nottinghamshire; and having acquainted him with the Divisions at London, and with the Inclinations of the City, Monk marched the next day to Nottingham, where he staid ten days. In his March he removed many Officers from their Commands, placing in their room Persons of ruined For∣tunes or profligate Lives, making no distincti∣on between those that had continued in their Obedience to the Parliament, and those who had declared against them. In particular, he discharged from their Imployments divers Offi∣cers of our Irish Brigade, who had been the most zealous for asserting the Civil Authority, and filled their Places with such as had been dismissed for their vicious Lives or corrupt Prin∣ciples. Wherein his Deportment was so vi∣sible, that Col. Martin in the Parliament-House resembled him to one, that being sent for to make a Sute of Clothes, brought with him a Budget full of Carpenters Tools; and being told that such things were not at all fit for the
Work he was desired to do, answered, it mat∣ters not, I will do your Work well enough I warrant you. Yet for all this the Pretences for a Commonwealth went never more high than at this time: For besides an Injunction laid up∣on all commissionated Officers to engage to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, the Parliament appointed an Oath, containing the Abjuration of the Family of the Stuarts, to be taken by the Members of the Council of State, before they might act therein. But none were more forward to publish their Resolutions of adhering to a Commonwealth-Government than Monk himself, who in a Letter to some of his own Countrymen of the Western Parts, that had addressed him for the Restitution of the Secluded Members, told them that he could not do it, because it was not only con∣trary to his own frequent Declarations, but di∣rectly opposite to the Interest of a Common∣wealth, as well as to that of the Army; a thing not to be done by him, or born by them, being a total Reversing of all that had been done for the last twelve Years in England, Scot∣land and Ireland, and tending to charge the Nation with all the Blood that had been shed during that time. He said it would unsettle the Possession of Deans, Chapters, Delinquents, Crown and Rebels Lands; and in fine, if we should suffer Monarchy to return amongst us, after so long a Fruition of a Commonwealth, we should be driven to a worse Condition than
ever, and put past all hopes of appearing to de∣fend our Liberty any more. He advised them therefore to acquiesce in the Authority of the present Parliament, who, he assured them, were most ready to hearken to all reasonable Propositions touching the good and happy Set∣tlement of the Nation. And that this Answer might be taken notice of by all Men, he caused it to be printed and published. The Parliament being willing to encourage him in the good Resolutions he professed to have taken, sent Mr. Thomas Scot and Mr. Luke Ro∣binson, Members of the House, to be Com∣missioners from them to him. Mr. Scot had kept a long Correspondence with him, and af∣ter the last Interruption had published some of his Letters, wherein Monk declared his Resolu∣tion to live and die with the Parliament, with∣out a King, single Person, or House of Lords. These two Persons were in appearance much courted by Monk, who pretended to be wholly directed by their Advice. And when the Com∣missioners for the City of London, or the Gen∣try of those Parts where he passed, applied themselves to him▪ for the Restitution of the secluded Members, he referred them to the Judgment of the Parliament, to whom, he said, he was resolved intirely to submit. He also solicited Sir Arthur Haslerig and some the is of the House, that the Sectarian Party might be removed out of the Army, sending a List of the Names of all those who had been con∣tinued
in their Employments by the Army during the late Interruption; and pretending that a Commonwealth could not possibly be established whilst such Men were in Power. What he did relating to the Affairs of Ireland was carried more covertly, and coloured with the Name of Sir Charles Coote. And because he knew I had some Reputation with Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig and the Commonwealth-Party of the House, he made use of Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Mr. Weaver, Mr. Justice St. Johns, Mr. Robert Reynolds, and some others, to ob∣tain what he desired in that matter. These Gentlemen were informed that the Council of State, notwithstanding all the Arts that had been used to calumniate me, had agreed upon a Report to be made to the Parliament, that Sir Hardress Waller, Lieutenant Colonel Walker, and Major Godfrey, might be intrusted in con∣junction with me, with the Management of Affairs in Ireland. They knew also that the two last would be ready to do any honest thing that I should advise; and therefore fearing lest the Parliament might agree with the Council of State upon the Report, they procured the De∣bate to be adjourned for three days, within which time they so ordered the matter, that Col. Bridges and the two Warrens presented to the Parliament the Charge of High Treason against the Commissioners and me, as I men∣tioned before. Whereof Monk's Party in the House made such Advantage, as not only to
refuse their Concurrence with the Council of State in their Report concerning me, but also by the help of the Lawyers Rhetorick, who were my professed Adversaries, on account of my Endeavours to reform the Practice of the Law, passed a Vote to require me to deliver the Fort of Duncannon into the hands of the Prose∣cutors; some of them moving, that in case of Refusal I should be declared a Traitor, and sent for in Custody. Which perhaps might have passed also, if Mr. Henry Nevil, who singly had the Courage to defend me in that Conjuncture, had not spoken in my behalf, desiring them not to entertain a Jealousy of a faithful Servant, upon Informations unproved, nor to do any thing to the Prejudice of my Re∣putation, till I should beheard; when, he doubted not, I would make appear, that I had always endeavoured to promote their Service. But I was not the only Person born down by this Torrent. Sir Arthur Haslerig himself ha∣ving parted with Sir Henry Vane and Major Sa∣loway, his most able and best Friends, began to lose ground, and all that he said in the House or elsewhere, to go for nothing. And tho they could find out no colour to remove him, as they had done the other two; yet having already rendred him insignificant in the Parliament, they resolved he should have as little Power in the Army. To that end it was contrived that Monk should write to the Parliament, that for their greater Security, the Forces that were in
and about London, amounting to about seven or eight thousand Horse and Foot, might be removed to a farther distance, to make room for those that he had with him, presuming to name to the Parliament some particular Regiments which he principally insisted to have removed, amongst which Sir Arthur Haslerig's Regiment of Horse was one. And so tame was the Par∣liament grown, that tho' it was most visible he designed their Ruin, yet on his bare Word and empty Protestations, they not only trusted him, but obeyed him as their Superiour, and ordered all that he desired to be put in execution. Not∣withstanding this unhappy posture of Affairs, thinking it my Duty to clear my self of the Aspersions cast upon me, and to improve the small Interest I had left, for the Service of the Publick Cause, I resolved to take my place in Parliament: And in order thereunto, being ac∣companied by Mr. Henry Nevil, I attended Sir Arthur Haslerig at Whitehall, where I gave him a short Account of my Actions since I had last seen him, of my Endeavours in Ireland to serve the Publick, of the State of Affairs there, of the Principles and Practices of those that had assumed the Power in that Country, and of the Readiness of the Souldiers and most of the Offi∣cers in that Army, to have served the Parliament faithfully and usefully, if they had been true to themselves and their own Interest. I also ac∣quainted him with the Sense I had of the late severe, if I might not say unjust, Proceedings
against me, which seemed to me to be such a Requital of my faithful Services, that if I ex∣pected my Reward from Men, I should rather chuse to serve the Great Turk. But that I might not be wanting to my self, and in order to justify my own Innocence, if I could do no farther Good, I had resolved to go to the Par∣liament-House the next Morning, desiring his Advice and that of Mr. Nevil for my Govern∣ment when I should come thither. Sir Arthur was unwilling to enter into any Discourse con∣cerning what had lately passed, saying, it was too late to recal things now: And then told us how his Enemies thought to ensnare him, by Monk's Motion to the Parliament for removing his Regiment from London; thinking thereby to create a Difference between him and Monk; wherein he had disappointed them by desiring their Removal himself, contrary to their Ex∣pectation, entring into a prolix Commendation of Monk, and assuring us that he was a Person on whose Fidelity they might safely rely. And if I may be permitted to deliver my Sense touch∣ing this Discourse of Sir Arthur Haslerig, I con∣jecture it proceeded partly from an Apprehen∣sion that things were already gone so far, that he doubted whether he could put any stop to them; and partly from some Sparks of Hope that Monk could not be such a Devil to betray a Trust so freely reposed in him. For he kept a constant Correspondence with Sir Arthur, and in all his Letters repeated the Engagements of
his Fidelity to the Parliament, with Expressi∣ons of the greatest Zeal for a Commonwealth-Government. In the Conclusion it was agreed between us, that when I came into the House I should sit as privately as I could, and observe the Temper of the Members, before I should put them upon the Consideration of my Affair. Accordingly I went to the House, and tho they had used me in the manner I have related, yet they treated me very civilly, some of them telling me in a jesting way, that it was not usu∣al for Men accused of High Treason to be so well received in that Place. Having taken out a Coppy of the Charge exhibited against the Commissioners and Me, I found the Commissi∣oners to be charged with altering their Title during the late Interruption, from Commissioners of Parliament, to Commissioners of the Common∣wealth; and that they had sent a Ship of War to prevent any Relief to, or Correspondence with the Garison of Ayre in Scotland, who had declared for the Parliament. Besides which, Col. John Jones was accused for taking part with the Army against the Parliament, not on∣ly in the Particulars aforesaid, but also in his Answer to the Letter written by Monk to me, on supposition that I was then in Ireland, to in∣vite me to a Conjunction with him for the Resti∣tution of the Parliament: And likewise for promoting a Subscription to the Government of the Army amongst the Officers in Ireland. As for me, I was charged with assisting the Army
in England, and doing Acts of Hostility by Sea and Land against those in Ireland who had de∣clared for the Parliament. Whereupon I moved the House that they would be pleased, accord∣ing to their Order, to hear me touching their Affairs in Ireland, and to permit me to justify my self, which I did the rather that I might have an opportunity to procure that mischie∣vous Order for the Surrender of Duncannon to be recalled, hoping that it had not yet been put in execution. But all that I could obtain was, to have a day appointed when I should be heard. Mr. Miles Corbet, who arrived in England some days before me, was so terrified with the Pro∣ceedings of the Parliament against Sir Henry Vane and Major Saloway, together with the Name of a Charge of High Treason against himself, that he had never appeared publickly since his arrival, till upon some Discourse with me he took Courage, and went with me to the House. In the mean time Monk was come to Bar∣net, and being expected at London the next day, Orders were issued out for the Old Regiments of the Army to march from the Town; which so disgusted them, that many refused to march till their Arrears were paid. This Mutiny be∣gan at Somerset-house, where one whole Regi∣ment was quartered, who were joined by di∣vers Parties of the rest. The Cavaliers and Presbyterians of the City hoping to improve this Opportunity, invited them to join with the
City, as they termed their Party there, pro∣mising them their whole Arrears, constant Pay and a present Gratuity, giving them some Mo∣ney in hand as an Earnest of the rest. The Souldiers took their Money, but withal threat∣ned them, that unless they departed immedi∣ately, they would fire upon them, declaring their Resolution to continue faithful to the Par∣liament. Hereupon the Council of State, that they also might cut the Grass from under their own Feet, sent Orders to Monk to hasten his March, and with all Diligence to come to their Releif. These Male-contents were very nu∣merous, amounting to more than two thousand Foot; and about the same Number of Horse were ready to join with them. But no consi∣derable Person appearing at the Head of them, their new Officers, who laboured the whole Night to satisfy them, prevailed with them to march the next Morning, upon promise that their Arrears should be paid at the next Quar∣ters. The following day Monk marched to London in the Head of his Party, which for the most part were quartered about Whitehall, where Lodgings had been provided for him: and immediately some Members of Parliament were sent to congratulate his Arrival. The same Evening I met Vice-Admiral Lawson at Sir Hen∣ry Mildmay's Lodgings at Whitehall, and know∣ing him to be familiarly acquainted with Monk, I desired that we might make him a Visit toge∣ther, which he readily consented to. We found
him alone in the Prince's Lodgings; where ha∣ving congratulated the Success of his Attempt to restore the Parliament to the Exercise of their Authority, I took the Freedom to tell him, that having an Opportunity put into his hands to free these Nations from the Danger of being oppressed, as they had lately been, by the Power of the Sword, I hoped he would improve it to the Publick Advantage, by giving his Assist∣ance to the Parliament in settling the Govern∣ment upon so just a Foundation that it might be supported for the future by the Love and Af∣fections of the People. He answered, that as God had owned him in his Work, so he de∣sired that he alone might have the Glory: That it was true, Factions had been carried on; but that he was fully resolved to promote the In∣terest of a Commonwealth. Which Resoluti∣on when I had commended, and encouraged him as well as I could to continue, he said, We must live and die for and with a Common∣wealth. Then I told him, that I had met late∣ly with one Mr. Courtney, who said he was his Relation, and having drunk too much at the Inn where I lay in my way to London, boasted that his Cousin Monk would do great things for the King; but that upon my objecting his Pub∣lick Declarations and Protestations to the con∣trary, he began to doubt, and said, that his Cousin being a Man of Honour, he feared he would be as good as his Word. Yea, said Monk, if there were nothing in it but that, I
must make good my Word, and will too. I presume, said I, that the Answer you have lately Published to your Country-mens Letter, hath given them all Satisfaction concerning you. He replied, that he hoped it had. These and many other Protestations of Zeal to the Com∣mon Cause, with many Professions of Friend∣ship to our selves, wer received from him at that time; wherewith Vice Admiral Lawson was so satisfied, that he said to me after we had parted from him, that since the Levite and the Priest had passed by and would not help us, he hoped we had found a Samaritan that would do it. The Parliament having notice of Monk's Ar∣rival, sent a Message to him by Mr. Scot and Mr. Robinson, to desire his Attondance at their House the next day: Whither being come, a Chair was ordered for him, but he refused to sit, contenting himself to stand behind it unco∣vered, laying his Hand upon the Chair. The Speaker, as he had been ordered, gave him the Thanks of the House for the Service he had done, extolling him above all the Worthies of former and later Ages. To whose Rhetorick he answered, that as to what was done, he de∣sired God might have the Glory, in that he had wrought Deliverance by so weak an Instru∣ment. After which he informed the House, that in his March many Applications had been made to him by all sorts of Persons for a Free Parliament; and that he had acquainted them, that the end of his March being to free the Par∣liament
from the Power of those who had im∣posed on them, he doubted not they would take all possible Care of the Publick Good. Then he put them in mind of their Resolution to fill up the House, which he said would tend much to the Satisfaction of the Nation. He desired that Fanatical Persons, as he called them, might be removed from Places of Trust, and undertook to answer for the Fidelity of those who had assumed the Power in Ireland, conclu∣ding with Professions of the utmost Zeal and Faithfulness to their Service. Thus he gave the Parliament good Words, for which they heaped their Favours upon him; they voted one thousand Pounds per Annum to be setled on him. And that nothing might be wanting to compleat this Scene, Monk's Wife took especial care to treat the Wives of the Members that came to visit her, running her self to fetch the Sweetmeats, and filling out Wine for them; not forgetting to talk mightily of Self-denial, and how much it was upon her Husband's Heart, that the Government might be setled in the way of a Commonwealth. In the mean time, the Secluded Members had their Meetings with those of the same Faction in the City; and some of those that sate in Parliament were earnest Promoters of their Return to the House, of whom was Col. Lassels, and Col. Richard Ingoldsby, who had been two of the King's Judges. But the Person I most wondred at was Col. Hutchinson, who having exceeded most of the
Members of the High Court of Justice in Zeal for putting the King to Death, at this time acted a very different part, pressing the House with an unbecoming Importunity, to proceed against Sir Henry Vane, for not removing into the Coun∣try according to their Order; when it was well known he was so much indisposed, that he could not do it without the apparent Hazard of his Life. Many Alarms were given to the Parliament by their faithful Friends, in printed Discourses, and other ways, whereby they were put in mind that the Enemies Quarrel was not so much against Persons as Things; and, as one termed it, not against Ludlow and Rich, but against the Cause it self. They were ad∣vised to accept the Assistance of their old Ser∣vants, and to incourage them in their Fidelity, as the only means to preserve themselves and the Commonwealth from certain Ruin: But they were deaf to all salutary Counsel, and re∣solved to finish the Work with the new Instru∣ments which they had chosen. To that end they proceeded on the Bill for filling up the House, which by wise Men was thought a most dangerous Expedient in that Conjuncture, un∣less Monk should prove more honest than they could believe him to be. The City of London also took upon them in their Common Council to receive Petitions from the adjacent Counties touching the Payment of Taxes, and other Publick Affairs; presuming not only to call in the Petitioners, and to give them Thanks for
their good Affections; but also passed a Vote that they would pay no Taxes, but such as should be imposed by a Free Parliament. The Council of State having received a particular Account of the Proceedings in the City, sent for Monk, to consult with him con∣cerning the best Means to put a stop to these Disorders: and some of them moving that the Common Council should be forbidden to sit, some few of the most active seized, the Gates of the City taken down, the Portcullaces wedged, and the Posts with their Chains pulled up; Monk said, that if they did no more, that would serve for nothing, because the Damage might be soon repaired. He added, that the Disaffection of the City was so great, that they would never be quiet, till some of them were hanged; and that it was absolutely ne∣cessary for the present to break in pieces their Gates and Portcullaces, to burn their Posts, and to carry away their Chains to the Tower; offering himself, if they would command these things to be done, to see their Orders put in execution. Hereupon the Counci rdered him to March in∣to the City with his Forces early the next Morning, before the Occasion of his coming amongst them should be known. Various Re∣ports were published touching the Design of his March into the City, and many suspected that he had already declared for the King. But when the House was met the Council of State made their Report to us, and informed us of
the unwarrantable Proceedings of the Com∣mon Council, and of their own Resolutions and Orders concerning them; in the Execution of which they assured us Monk had by that time made a considerable Progress, having al∣ready pulled up the Posts with their Chains, taken down the Portcullaces and the Gates of the City, which he had begun to cut in pieces, and seized some of the most active of the Com∣mon Council. The Parliament having heard the Report of the Council of State, approved what they had done, and ordered Fifty Pounds to be given to Monk to defray the Expence of his Dinner that day, he having refused to Dine at the Charge of the City, tho' earnestly im∣portuned to it by divers Citizens. All things going so well that Morning, both in the Army, and in the Parliament, Sir Arthur Haslerig was again so elevated, that coming into the House in the Afternoon, he broke out in the presence of divers Members into these Expressions, All is our own, he will be honest. But it was not long befor his Wine was turned into Water: For as soon as the House was sate, a Letter was presented to the Speaker from Monk, the Con∣tents whereof made them easily perceive that his Zeal to their Service began to cool. There∣in he acquainted them with what he had done in prosecution of the Orders he had received, and that he wanted Tools and Instruments to finish the Work, having already spoiled all those that he had brought with him to cut the
Gates and other Defences of the City in pieces; that the Mayor and Citizens had promised Obe∣dience to the Parliament for the time to come, and therefore he desired they would respite the Execution of what remained of his Instructions; hoping that what had been done would be a sufficient Admonition to the City for their future good Behaviour. The Parliament un∣derstanding the Tendency of this Letter, were highly offended with Monk for presuming to neglect and dispute their Commands; and be∣ing resolved to do as much as they could in this matter to preserve their Authority, they dis∣patched a Message to him, requiring the exact Performance of the Orders he had received. Upon the receipt of these second Orders, Monk seemed much disturbed, but yielded little or no Obedience to them, and lay that Night in the City. The Day following he returned with his Forces to Whitehall, and about two days after sent a Letter to the House, directed to the Speaker, and subscribed by himself and some of his Officers; wherein they complained that the Parliament had put them upon the late disobliging Work in the City to render them odious to the Citizens; that they continued to favour the Fanatick Party, by not prosecuting those that had acted with the Army in the late Committee of Safety, and by permitting Sir Henry Vane and Col. Lambert to stay in Town, contrary to their own Order for their Removal; that they admitted Men to sit with
them in the House, who lay under Accusations of High Treason (meaning Mr. Miles Corb and me, tho' not naming us;) that on the con∣trary they shewed a backwardness to repose any Confidence in those who were their truest Friends, upbraiding them with refusing to ap∣prove some Officers that had been presented to them, and delaying to grant Commissions to others whom they had approved. They also reflected upon the Parliament for not making Provision for the Army, nor minding the Pub∣lick Work, putting them in mind of the Vote for their Dissolution in May following; and adding some threatning Expressions, in case they should not issue out Writs for filling up the Parliament, according to their Promise. After the reading of this Letter from Monk, I perceived most of the Members who had any Af∣fection to their Country to be much dejected. But the Parliament having divested themselves of their own Strength, and abandoned all into the hands of Monk, tho' no Man had ever be∣fore presumed to address himself to them in so insolent a manner, yet they took his Letter into consideration, and resolved to give him as much Satisfaction as they could with any colour of Justice. To that end they quickened their Committee to bring in their Report touching those that had acted in the late Committee of Safety: They ordered Sir Henry Vane to depart the Town by a certain Day, and that Col. Lam∣bert should render himself within a limited
time. They also resolved to issue out Writs of Summons for recruiting the House; but be∣ing fully perswaded that the Charge of High Treason against me was groundless and frivo∣lous, they omitted to make any Order concern∣ing it. However, being desirous to procure some Relief for those whom I had left at Duncannon, and to endeavour that the Forces in Ireland might be put into good hands, I hoped that if I should move to be heard, I might at the same time have an opportunity to press the two last things, which I esteemed very necessary in that Conjuncture: I desired therefore that since I conceived my self aimed at in one part of Monk's Letter, the Parliament would be pleased to hear me in vindication of my Innocence: But I could not obtain a present Hearing, my Case being put off till a farther time, and then de∣layed from day to day, till the Dissipation of those who should have been my Judges. Sir Henry Vane, according to the late Order, was preparing to leave the Town; of which having notice, I went to make him a Visit at his House, where he told me that unless he were much mistaken, Monk had yet several Masques to pull off, assuring me for what concerned him∣self, that he had all possible Satisfaction of Mind as to those Actions God had enabled him to do for the Commonwealth, and hoped the same God would fortify him in his Sufferings, how sharp soever, to bear a faithful and constant Testimony thereto. Monk having alarm'd the Parliament by
the foresaid Letter, and either not daring to trust himself at Whitehall, or thinking London a fit∣ter Place to pursue his design in, he retired with his Forces into the City, where he muster∣ed his Men, and was splendidly entertain'd at Dinner by the Mayor and others. Hereupon the Parliament, who endeavoured by all means to give him Satisfaction, sent Mr. Thomas Scot and Mr. Luke Robinson, who had been their Commissioners to him, as I mentioned before, to assure him of their good Intentions towards him: But he having now fortified himself by the Conjunction of the City, began to treat them in a manner much different from his for∣mer Carriage, not admitting them without difficultly to his Presence; and when he conde∣scended to speak to them, his Discourse tended always to the same purpose with his Letter, aspersing the Proceedings of the Parliament, and amongst other things reproaching them with their Favour to me, as Mr. Scot after∣wards informed me: Insomuch that he who had so lately undertaken to the Parliament for Monk's Integrity and Fidelity to their Service, began to lose all hopes of him. Yet for all his insolent Carriage to the Parliament and their Commissioners, his Party in the House had the confidence to move that he might be made General of their Forces, the time limited by Act of Parliament for commissionating him with others to command the Army in England and Scotland being almost expired. Many Ar∣guments
were used to that end, tho those which were most pressed were taken from the consi∣deration of the present Posture of their Affairs. But the Parliament still retaining some Sparks of that Courage with which they had been formerly animated, and having found by sad Experience what Miseries they had brought up∣on the Nation and themselves by trusting Crom∣wel and others too far, chose rather to perish by the hands of an Enemy, if Monk should resolve to be so, than by the Delusions of a pretended Friend: and therefore having reject∣ed the Proposition to make him General, they passed a Vote that their Armies in England and Scotland should be governed by Commissioners, the Number of them to be five, and any three of them to make a Quorum. But that they might avoid as much as possible to give him the least just Cause of Discontent, they first agreed that he should be one of the said Commissi∣oners. Then they proceeded to the Nomina∣tion of the rest, and chose Sir Arthur Haslerig, tho he earnestly pressed them to excuse him, Col. Morley, and Col. Walton. These four being elected, it was visible that the Balance of the Commission would be in the fifth Man that should be chosen, Monk having in a manner de∣clared himself our Enemy, and Col. Morley be∣ing sufficiently known to be of a temporizing Spirit. Hereupon Monk's Party in the House moved that Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper might be the fifth Commissioner, and on the other side the
Commonwealth Party had resolved to use their Endeavours for Major General Overton: But upon consideration of the Differences that had been between him and Monk, whereby they feared he would not pass, they laid aside that Resolution, and agreed to put up Col. Alured. Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper being first named, was first put to the Question, and by the Ma∣jority of Votes excluded. Col. Alured being next proposed, the Question was carried for him to the great Satisfaction of the Common∣wealth Party. Whereupon sitting by Col. Martin in the House, and being perswaded of the Integrity of the Major part of these Com∣missioners, I desired him to move that the Command of the Forces in Ireland might be inserted in this Commission, which, upon his Motion, was ordered accordingly; and the Act being but short, was read thrice, and passed before the rising of the House: And this I did, because I found no other probable way open to force the Power in Ireland out of the hands of those that had usurped it. Tho these Proceed∣ings did not a little disturb Monk, yet he endea∣voured to disguise his Dissatisfacton, and be∣gan again to court the Members of Parliament more than before, whilst with the Advice and Assistance of his Party in the City, he was forming a Militia there, and nominating Offi∣cers to command them, who were chosen for that purpose, rather on account of their Dis∣affection to the Parliament than any other good
Quality to be found about them. Having re∣ceived Advice of these Transactions, I ac∣quainted Sir Arthur Haslerig with my Informa∣tion, and desired him to think of some speedy Remedy, proposing that he would cause our scattered Forces to rendezvouz forthwith: But Sir Arthur was so deluded by the Hypocrisy of Monk, that he assured him he had given him all the Satisfaction both by Words and Letters, that a Man could give touching his Integrity to the Parliament, shewing me and divers o∣ther Members of Parliament, two Letters, which he had lately received from him, where∣in were many Expressions of his Zeal for the Establishment of a Commonwealth, with ear∣nest Desires that there might be no Difference between them touching the Way, seeing they were both intirely agreed in the same End. Monk had taken up his Quarters in the City, at the House of one Col. Wall, where I resol∣ved to make him a Visit, in order, either to take him off from that Prejudice, which by a Clause in his Letter to the Parliament he seem∣ed to have against me, or to make a more per∣fect Discovery of his Intentions; supposing that, being a Member of Parliament, he durst not attempt to seize my Person, or if he did, that such an open Violation of the Priviledges of Par∣liament would awaken them to provide for their own Safety. I found the House where he lodged as full of Soldiers as it could well be, and passed through several Guards before I
came to the Chamber, where he received his Visits. He was at the time of my coming in a private Gallery, conferring with Mr. Edmund Calamy and others of the Clergy. When he had taken leave of them, I was admitted, and at first perceived him to be very shy of me: But after I had acquainted him that the Cause of my Visit, was in order to undeceive him; and to remove, if possible, the Prejudices he seemed to have against me, he suddenly chan∣ged his Countenance, and treated me with great Familiarity. Whereupon I told him, that having always endeavoured to assert the Autho∣rity of the Civil Magistrate, in opposition to the Tyranny of the Sword, I was unwilling to have any Difference with him, who had de∣clared for the same things: I assured him that I had publickly disapproved the Answer of Col. Jones to that Letter which he had sent to Ireland, directed to me, on supposition that I had then been in that Country. I acquainted him with what I had done to preserve the Irish Brigade from joining with the Army-Party, and how I had prevailed with them to engage to me under their Hands not to fight against him, upon notice that he had espoused the Cause of the Parliament. I acknowledged that I had displaced one of his Relations in Ireland, not out of the least Disrespect to him; but accord∣ing to a Rule which I conceived to be most just, that those might be restored to their Offi∣ces in the Army, who had been removed for
their Affection to the Commonwealth, which was the Case; his Kinsman having been made Cornet of Major Dean's Troop, and Cornet Whalley displaced for the reason before menti∣oned. Hereupon Monk said that what I had done was most just, and that he never took any thing ill from me, either upon that or any other particular account. I then desired to know what reason he might have for entertaining any hard Thoughts of me: to which he replied, that he had nothing to object against me but my Favour to the Fanatick Party in Ireland. I told him that the Party he meant had not acted as if they had been of the same Opinion; for having signed an Address to the Parliament, whereby they engaged to be true and faithful to the Civil Authority, and delivered it into my Hands, to be presented on their part; the same Men, notwithstanding their publick En∣gagement and particular Promises to Me, had immediately after my Departure signed an Agreement with the Army, thereby rejecting the Civil Power, and consequently Me, whom the Parliament had intrusted to command their Forces in Ireland: That as I had never thought the Profession of Religion to be alone sufficient to qualify Men for Imployments, if they want∣ed Affection to the Commonwealth; so I could not imagine which way Religion should inca∣pacitate Persons for the Publick Service, who were not deficient in their Fidelity and Zeal for the Common Good. Yea, said he, we must live
and dye together for a Commonwealth. I hearing him say so, told him, that I was informed he was much pressed to restore the Secluded Mem∣bers; who being highly enraged, would not fail to bring all things into confusion, and possibly endeavour to bring in the King. It may be, said he, that they will attempt it, but they say they will not; and I assure you, tho I bear as much respect to Parliaments as any Man, yet if I should observe a Parliament to be about such a thing, I would interrupt them therein. Having spent about half an Hour with Monk, I took leave; and as I went from him, I perceived one of his Footmen to stand at the Door of the Room where we had discoursed, who I suppose was placed there by his Master's Order, to prevent me from dealing with him, as his Conscience told him he deserved. He accompanied me to the Foot of the Stairs, and there parted with me, not without great shew of Respect and Civility; notwithstanding which it was manifest to me through all his Disguises, by the Persons he favoured and advanced, by the Company he kept, and by the Course he steered, that he was not bound to that Har∣bour he pretended; and could I have prevailed with the Majority of the Parliament to be of the same opinion, he should not have carried on his Design so smoothly: But into such a desperate Frenzy were we fallen, that many of the House, either thro Fear, or for what other reason I cannot tell, discovered themselves
daily to be Favourers of him; who had by this time so far advanced his Affairs, that he resolved to pull off another Mask: and to that end desired some sitting Members of the House to give a Meeting to some of the Secluded Members; in order, as he pretended, to give them Satisfaction touching the Justice of their Exclusion: wherein he owned himself to be throughly satisfied, affirming to Sir Arthur Haslerig and others, that he did this only to answer the vexatious Importunity of the Se∣cluded Members. By this means he prevailed with Sir Arthur and some others to meet them at the Time and Place appointed, where the Secluded Members, and especially Mr. Annesley, reflected so undecently upon the Proceedings of the Parliament since their Exclusion, that Sir Arthur hastily rose up, and designed to leave the Company: But Monk in a droling way, desired him to be patient till he should mode∣rate Annesley, which, he said, he knew well enough how to do. Upon this Sir Arthur Haslerig sate down again, but the other proceeding in the same manner, he lost all Patience, and ri∣sing up, he departed from the Conference: Mr. Scot, Mr. Robinson, Col. Morley, and Mr. Rawleigh staid there till the Discourse was ended, and so did the Chief Justice St. Johns, who not discovering himself to be of either Party, sate observing on which side the Balance would fall, as if he had been still to choose. If the Parliament had not been wilfully blind,
these things would have proved sufficient to open their Eyes. But to leave them without the least colour of Excuse, it happened at this time that Advice was brought to them from Ireland, that those who had usurped the Power there, for whose Fidelity Monk had engaged, and who moved not a Step without his Orders and Directions, had published a Declaration against them: The Contents of it were more insolent than those of the Letter which Monk had sent to the Parliament before he retired into the City: for after they had reproached them with the Favours they extended to Men accused of High Treason, and the Discouragements they laid upon those who had been sent to England to prosecute them, they openly told the Par∣liament they could no longer own them for an Authority; and therefore desired that a Free Parliament might be called, to put an end to the Confusions which their Miscarriages had brought upon the Nation. It was matter of Amazement, that such a Declaration should be published by Men that pretended to act by the Authority of the Parliament; but it was not procured without Opposition: For when Sir Charles Coote and Col. Theophilus Jones, who were the principal Confidents of Monk on that side, had prepared their Paper, and a Party to back it; Sir Hardress Waller, who had been one of the late King's Judges, fearing the Conse∣quence of such Practices, moved that the Council of War might be adjourned into the
Castle: But not being able to carry that Point, he communicated his Design to as many as he thought fit, and making an Excuse to go out of the Room, he hastened away, and retired into the Castle. Major Stanley, Lieut. Colonel Warren, and some others went immediately, and joined themselves to him; and amongst them it was resolved to send out a Party to seize Sir Charles Coote and his Adherents. But he having notice of their Intentions, had a Party of his Creatures ready; and being ac∣companied by Col. Theophilus Jones, mounted on Horseback at the Head of them, riding up and down the Streets of Dublin, and declaring for a Free Parliament, which Language was by that time sufficiently understood to be for the King. They were followed by a great Rabble of the People, and thereby so incoura∣ged, that they formed a Design against the Castle; and having posted their Guards upon all the Avenues, they sent a Summons to Sir Har∣dress Waller to deliver the Place into their Hands. The Governour in his Answer to the Summons endeavoured to convince them of the Injustice of their Attempt, reminding them of the De∣clarations they had lately made to be true and faithful to the present Parliament; desiring them to consider how much it was their Interest to adhere to them, since it was under their Au∣thority that they had acted for so many Years past against the late King and his Family, and that their Titles to the Possession of the Lands
forfeited by the Rebels were founded upon the same Power. Having dispatched this Answer to Sir Charles Coote, he clothed all the Souldiers out of the Stores, and distributed a Sum of ready Money amongst them, to secure their Fidelity, with Promises of a farther Gratuity, if they would stand by him: But Sir Charles Coote found a way to treat with some of the Garison; and after two or three days, by large Offers and advantageous Terms, prevailed with them to deliver their Governour and the Castle into his Hands. By the Expulsion of Sir Har∣dress Waller out of the Army, two Regiments fell into the hand of those that had seized the Goverment in Ireland, for which Sir Charles Coote had some difficulty to find Colonels, having already disposed of two to himself; one to his Brother Richard Coote, another to his Brother Chudleigh Coote, a fifth to his Brother Thomas Coote, and a sixth to his Cousin St. George. Which unequal Distribution was so resented by some of his own Party, that Major Barrington moved at one of their Councils of War, that a more equal Hand might be kept in the disposal of Imployments. Whereupon Sir Charles Coote, after he had severely repri∣manded the Major, discharged him from his Command in the Army. In the mean time, Monk had desired the Mayor of London to assemble the Common Council, (tho' the Par∣liament had dissolved them) and in defiance to their Authority attended on them at Guildhall,
excusing himself for what, he said, he had been constrained to do in the City by Order of the Council of State, and assuring them that he was much troubled for that rigorous Work. He declared himself ready to expose his Person to all Dangers for their Service, and that he had not forgot the kind Letter they had sent him whilst he was yet in the North: That he was then of the same opinion with them, but was obliged at that time to conceal it, till he might have an opportunity to discover his Sentiments with better advantage. He also acquainted them that he had sent a Letter to the Parliament, that they would fill up the House, and put an end to their sitting by the sixth of May. By this means he gave such En∣couragement to the Cavalierish Party, that the Rabble of them, as he passed by from Guild∣hall, cried out for a Free Parliament; and per∣ceiving him not displeased with their Insolence, they made Bonfires in London and Westminster for roasting the Rump, as they presumed to call that Parliament, who in the five Years time that they governed without interruption, had raised the Glory of the Nation from the Dust wherein it had been buried by the Negligence and Corruption of the preceding Governments, and had rendred the English Name formida∣ble to all Europe. This riotous Disorder, how pleasing soever it was to Monk, yet it could not be properly charged upon him, because he had given no publick Order for what had been done,
and therefore he continued to declare as loud as ever how faithful he would be to the Common∣wealth. And tho Sir Arthur Haslerig was in∣formed of the foregoing Particulars, and many other things that seemed fully to discover Monk's Design: and tho' I earnestly importu∣ned him to improve the little time that remain∣ed to prevent the threatned Ruin, by a speedy Reunion with our old Friends, by adjourning the Parliament to the Tower, and by drawing our dispersed Forces together; yet he would not be perswaded to any thing of that nature, persisting still in his Opinion that all would be well, and that Monk would be honest. And that he might have no Pretext to be otherwise, Sir Arthur doubting by reason of the Corre∣spendence that continued between Monk and the Secluded Members, that, in case the Writs for filling up the Parliament should not be issued out by the time prefixed, he would take ad∣vantage of that Failure to bring them into the House, laboured diligently with the Parliament that it might be done to his satisfaction, and accordingly the Bill was passed within the time limited. But the Secluded Members being grown confident of attaining their ends by an∣other way, deported themselves at a much higher rate than they were accustomed to do; Major Harlow, who was one of them, taking the Liberty to say openly in Westinster-Hall, that they would have their Footmen chosen to supply their Places. Sir Gilbert Gerrard also
brought an Action against Col. Alured for de∣nying him Admission to the House after the last Restitution of the Parliament; but the Colonel having acted by order of the Par∣liament, they ordered the Process to be stopped. Yet so low were the Affairs of the Parliament, and their Authority so little regarded, even in Westminster Hall, that Sir Robert Pye, who had been committed to the Tower by their Or∣der, suing for his Habeas Corpus at the Upper Bench, and Judg Newdigate demanding of the Counsel for the Commonwealth what they had to say why it should not be granted, the Coun∣sel answered, they had nothing to say against it. Whereupon the Judg, tho' no Enemy to Mon∣archy, yet ashamed to see them so unfaithful to their Trust, replied, that if they had nothing to say, he had; for that Sir Robert Pye being committed by an Order of the Parliament, an inferior Court could not discharge him. The House having agreed to all things necessa∣ry for issuing out Writs to elect Members for fil∣ling up the Parliament, ordered a Warrant to be signed by the Speaker, whereby the Commissi∣oners of the Seal should be authorized to send out Writs according to Custom: But he refu∣sed to do it, pretending, that if he should sign any Warrant to that purpose, he might be sued at Law by every individual Person in whose room any-other should be elected, and there∣fore desired that the House would pass an Act to enable their Clerk to sign the Warrant; or
that the Commissioners of the Seal might issue out their Writs of Summons upon a general Act to be passed to that end. It was answered, that the Duty of his Place obliged him to per∣form the Commands of the House; that having received their Order in that Affair, he was thereby fully indemnified, and that he signed not the Warrant in his Personal, but in his Politick Capacity. But he would receive no Satisfaction, persisting positively in his Refusal, and submitting himself to their Pleasure, if they should think fit to send him to the Tower, or to choose another Person to be Speaker in his Place. Whereupon the House condescended to pass an Act to empower the Clerk to sign the Warrant to the Commissioners of the Seal: tho for my own part, I was for taking the Speaker at his Word, and placing another Per∣son in the Chair; and instead of sending Mr. Lenthal to the Tower, to have adjourned our selves thither; but I could prevail with few to be of my opinion. This Business being thus passed, and my Doubts increasing touch∣ing the Event of these things, I earnestly desi∣red the House, that I might either be presently heard concerning the Affairs of Ireland, and my own Conduct there; or that a short Day might be appointed when they would hear me with∣out any farther Delay: alledging for the Rea∣son of my Importunity, that tho my Ene∣mies in that Country had by their late Actions manifested to all the World that their Enmity
to the Parliament was much greater than to me; yet being uncertain what sort of Men might soon have the principal Influence in that House, I could not believe they would think it convenient that a Charge of High Treason, how frivolous soever, should be transmitted to them against one of their old and faithful Servants. Mr. Thomas Scot thinking my Dis∣course to reflect upon his Son, who had com∣manded the Forces before Duncannon, addressed himself to the Speaker, and said; That tho he would not undertake to answer for all who had opposed me in Ireland, yet he might affirm that one of them was their faithful Servant. To which I replied, tho contrary to the Order of the House, all things there also beginning to fall into confusion, That I could not positively say who that one was that the Gentleman who spoke last meant, but should suppose he intended his Son, whom I assured them they could not think to be such a Person as he had represented him, unless they esteemed the Insurrection of Sir George Booth to have been for their Service, he having attempted to justify the Lawfulness of it in my Presence. Upon this dispute, the Speak∣er presuming he should be well seconded, ven∣tured to discover his Malice also against me, reminding the House of an Order they had made for the Surrender of Duncannon, to which he said, he knew not that any Obedience had been yielded; and therefore thought it necessary the House should be assured of that,
before any Order were made upon my Motion. In this Disorder and Confusion the House rose about six in the Evening. The Council of State sat late that Night, and received Advice that the Secluded Members designed to force themselves into the House the next Morning: Thereupon they sent a Message to Monk, to ac∣quaint him with the Information they had, and required him to prevent it, if it should be attem∣pted. He returned for an Answer to the Council, that he was well assured no such thing was de∣signed; but for their Satisfaction, and to hinder it if endeavoured, he would not fail to double the Guards that were to attend the Parliament. But for all this the Secluded Members, attended by divers of Monk's Officers, went early the next Morning to Westminster, and were admit∣ted into the House by the Guard he had placed there, who were more ready to defend than oppose them; and Monk having thus violated his Promises, and abused the Trust reposed in him by the Publick, took up his Quarters again at Whitehall the same Morning. Being inform'd of these Transactions, I resolved for my own part to give no countenance to the Secluded Members, by sitting with them who had no Right to any Place in Parliament, having been expelled the House by more than a Quorum of lawful Members. But that notice might be taken, that I had not withdrawn my self from the Service of the Publick; nor was at the Head of any Forces, as was given out,
I thought convenient to pass sometimes through Westminster-Hall, where Mr. George Montague, who knew I declined to come to the House, meeting me, and asking me the reason of it, I answered, that having done as much as I could to serve the Commonwealth, and seeing an Impossibility of contending against the pre∣sent Torrent, I had resolved to absent my self from the Place where the Parliament used to meet, that I might publickly disown the Autho∣rity of those who had violently possessed them∣selves of the House, and not seem to consent to the Confusions they were bringing upon us. He replied, that in his opinion the Con∣ditions upon which the Secluded Members had entred the House, were more dishonoura∣ble than those upon which others were gone out, and that he was not willing to sit among them, they having engaged to make Monk Gene∣ral of all the Forces by Sea and Land, to settle a constant Maintenance for the Army, to appoint a New Parliament to be chosen; and when these things were dispatched, to put a Period to themselves within a day or two at the most. Yet some of the lawful Members of Parliament, either through Fear or Curiosity, or some other Motive not known to me, went into the House and sat amongst them. Another part of them, being about seventeen in number, whereof di∣vers were of the Council of State, went to Monk to be informed from his own Mouth of the Reasons of these Proceedings. He received
them with no less Civility than formerly; and having understood from them the occasion of their coming, he made as solemn Protestations of his Zeal to a Commonwealth-Government as he had ever done; desiring them to believe that the Permission he had given to the Seclu∣ded Members to enter the House, was only to free himself from their Importunity, and that he would take effectual care to prevent them from doing any hurt in that Place. But these Gentlemen having resolved to try him to the utmost, demanded farther if he would join with them against Charles Stuart and his Party: In answer to which, he applied himself to Sir Ar∣thur Haslerig, who was one of them, and said, Sir Arthur, I have often declared to you my Resolution so to do: then taking off his Glove, and putting his Hand within Sir Arthur's, he added; I do here protest to you in the Presence of all these Gentlemen, that I will oppose to the utmost the setting up of Charles Stuart, a single Person, or a House of Peers. After this he began to ex∣postulate with them touching their Suspicions, saying; What is it that I have done in bringing these Members into the House? Are they not the same that brought the King to the Block? tho' others cut off his Head, and that justly. The Secluded Members having forced them∣selves into the House, took upon them the Au∣thority of a Parliament, making Votes and en∣acting Laws as they pleased, which Power they had hitherto constantly denied to be in a
House of Commons alone: but we must be∣lieve the Case to have been much altered upon their return; and that a House of Commons alone, without a King or House of Peers, might do any thing for betraying the Publick Cause, tho it could not have any colour of Autho∣rity to justify them in doing the least thing for the security of it. In pursuance of these Principles, they passed an Act to make Monk Ge∣neral of all the Forces belonging to the Parlia∣ment in England, Scotland and Ireland, both by Sea and Land, only they joined Col. Montague with him in the Office of Admiral; which tho Monk resented as a Violation of the Treaty he had made with the Secluded Members, yet he thought not convenlent to insist upon the Al∣teration of that Particular. They continued the Customs and Excise, and laid other Taxes on the People, borrowing great Sums of the City of London on the Credit of their Acts. Monk took away Col. Walton's Regiment of Horse, and gave it to Col.—Howard; and having made choice of two hundred Horse for his own Guard, he appointed Col. Philip Howard to command them. He disposed of Col. Rich's Regiment to Col. Ingoldsby; but before the Order could be put in execution, Col. Rich hoping he might prevail with his Men, as he had done formerly, to declare for the Lawful Authority, he went down to the Quarters where they lay. At his Arrival most of them pro∣mised to remain faithful to him; but when
Col. Ingoldsby came down, partly by his own Interest amongthem, they having been under his command in the time of Cromwel, and partly by the Torrent of the usurped Authority, which then ran that way, he prevailed with the greatest part of them to desert their Colo∣nel; who finding himself abandoned by most of them, yielded the rest to him, and de∣clared his Resolution to acquiesce. Capt. Wal∣cot, who had been an Officer in my Regiment, and by me preferred to be Captain of a Troop of Horse when I sent our Brigade into England, having gained an Interest in the Officers and Souldiers by his good Conduct, and supposing to find amongst them the same Affection to the Good Old Cause they had always manifested since their Arrival in England, went towards Chester, where they were quartered; and being arrived within twelve Miles of that place, he sent a Letter to Major Woodward, of whose Fidelity to the Parliament he thought himself sure, to acquaint him with his Resolu∣tion of going to them. But so great a Change had the late Turn wrought in Mens Minds, that the Major gave Capt. Walcot's Letter to Col. Redman, who by Monk's Order then com∣manded our Irish Brigade, and who immedi∣ately dispatched a Party of Horse to seize the Captain; which having done in obedience to the Order they had received, rather than from any Inclination to such an Imploiment, they
gave him an Opportunity to make his escape. Cap. Walcot coming afterwards to London, went to Monk, and having delivered his Opinion freely touching the Publick Affairs, and the Usage he had lately met with, Monk fell into a violent Passion against him; but soon recol∣lecting himself, he treated him in a more civil manner, and gave him a Pasport to return into Ireland, where his Family and Estate lay, sup∣posing thereby to render him less able to assist his Enemies, than if he should continue in Eng∣land. The Secluded Members having forbid∣den the Council to sit, chose one to supply their place; which was composed of Mr. Denzil Hol∣les, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Mr. Crew, Mr. Swinfen, Sir William Lewis, Sir William Waller, Col. John Birch, Col. George Monk, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Col. Norton, Mr. Knightly, Col. Her∣bert Morley, Sir Harbottle Grimestone, Mr. Ar∣thur Annesley, Sir Richard Onslow, Chief Justice St. Johns, Serjeant Brown, Col. Brown, &c. This New Council was vested with large Pow∣ers of imprisoning such as they suspected, and doing other things sutable to the Designs then on foot. Sir Hardress Waller obtained of them, by means of his Kinsman Sir William Waller, a Permission to come over to England, and to be brought before them; where having subscribed an Engagement to acquiesce, and to appear upon Summons, he was discharged from Custody. But Sir Charles Coote, who was well acquainted
with the Bottom of Monk's Design, and con∣scious to himself how much he had exasperated the King's Friends in Ireland, by his constant Opposition to them, having added to all the rest the Execution of one Stuart, that was re∣lated to the Royal Family, thought he could never do things horrid enough to those of his own Party, in order to reconcile himself to the other: Therefore that he might give them what Assurances he could that he was wicked enough to be imployed and trusted by them, he sent a Party of Horse and seized the Chief Justice Coke, to make some amends to His Sacred Ma∣jesty by that Sacrifice. The grand Design of destroying the Commonwealth being so far ad∣vanced, Monk caus'd a Declaration to be drawn in the Name of the Officers about London, and recommended to the rest of the Officers in the three Nations, declaring it to be their Duty and Resolution to submit to the Authority that was over them, and to obey such Orders as they should receive from them: which when they were upbraided with, as a thing contrived to betray the Publick Cause, many of the Officers shewed themselves so sensible of the Conse∣quences of it, that they earnestly pressed that a Council of War might be called; making use of some Reasons to perswade their Gene∣ral to it, but indeed to unite themselves to each other, and in a publick manner to express their Resolutions to lay down their Lives for the
Common-wealth. But Monk being informed of their Design, Dispersed them to their re∣spective Commands, to which they tamely submitted, notwithstanding the big Words they had spoken without doors. Hereupon the Se∣cluded Members suspecting Sir Arthur Haslerig to have had a principal hand in raising this Spirit in the Officers of the Army, sent to him to take his Place in the House where the Parliament ought to sit, which to that time he had not done. Sir Arthur finding it impossible to re∣sist the Stream, being accompanied with divers Members, went in to them; where, as I have been informed by some that were then present, he did not behave himself with that Courage and Resolution that usually attended him, but pleaded in his excuse the Reverence he always had for the Authority of Parliaments, and en∣deavoured to justify himself touching any Vio∣lations that had been made against it, assuring them of his Intention to acquiesce under the present Power. Major General Lambert also, who had hitherto concealed himself in hopes of finding an opportunity to appear at the Head of some Party, and thereby to prevent the De∣sign of Monk, finding that the Army had for the most part submitted to the Authority of the Secluded Members, surrendred himself to the New Council of State, in hopes of better Terms from them than he could have promised himself from the former, who he thought
would have been more likely to resent the Force he had put upon the Parliament: But they con∣trary to his Expectations requiring him to give Security for his quiet Deportment, upon his re∣fusal so to do, committed him to the Tower. Most of the Common-wealth-Party were ve∣ry sensible of the dangerous Condition of their Affairs; and that they might not be altogether wanting to their own Preservation, and to the Service of the Publick, some of the principal Persons among them had divers Meetings; at one of which I took the liberty to make the following Propositions: That seven of the Coun∣cil of State, and three of the Generals that had been appointed by the Parliament, should sign such Orders as were necessary for putting our Design in execution: That the Regiment of Col. Moss which lay in Kent and not far from London, and another which lay in the Borough of Southwark Commanded by Lieut. Col. Farnly, consisting in all of more than 2000 old Soldiers, of whose Integrity and Affection we had good Assurance, should be ordered to march to the Tower to join with Col. Morley's Regiment which was already there, and would be ready to receive them, having sent to me to let me know that the Tower should be at my Com∣mand whensoever I pleased to desire it: That the Commanders of these Forces should take with them Provisions for six Months, giving Tickets for the Quantity so taken payable by
the Parliament of England: That the Militia of London which had been listed during the Government of the Parliament, should be au∣thorized to meet as there should be occasion, to assist the Forces in the Tower: That four or five places of Rendezvouz should be appoint∣ed for the Forces of the Army that lay scattered up and down in several Parts of the Nation; and that Officers should be agreed upon, to ap∣pear at the Head of them: That the Souldiers both Horse and Foot, should have the liberty either to follow their old Officers, or to appoint new: That those Officers who should prevail with the major part of their Men to follow them, should continue in their respective Posts; and that those that appeared heartily to promote this Design, tho they could not perswade the greater part of their Souldiers to follow them, should have Provision made for them equal to their Merits: That the Country-Militia, both Horse and Foot, should be authorized to draw together, and be impowered to seize and disarm such Persons in the respective Coun∣ties, as were known Enemies to the Common∣wealth: That the Fleet should be ordered to de∣clare at the same time, and to send one or two thousand Seamen to the Assistance of those in the Tower; which I conceived they might do without danger to the Nation, because the Ene∣my we were to contend with, was intestine and not from abroad. I acquainted them that Vice-Admiral
Lawson who commanded the Fleet had declared his Resolution to continue faithful to the Parliament, which could not well be doubted by any that would reflect upon his former Con∣duct, he having taken the Oath for abjuring the King's Family, and being one of the Council of State. To this was added, that all Persons who should act by the Parliament's Authority in this Service, should be justified in so doing; that the Governours of Garisons should be re∣quired to refuse Obedience to any power which was not derived from the Lawful Authority of the Parliament, whose place the Secluded Mem∣bers had now usurped; and that a Declaration should be forthwith prepared, to shew the Grounds and Reasons, together with the Neces∣sity of these Proceedings. Some of those that were present promised to advise with their Friends of the Council of State, and hoped that a Quorum of them as well as of the Generals might be found, to put the things in execution that should be agreed on. But we being ripe for the Correction of Heaven, nothing could prevent it, our Enemies succeeding in all their Attempts, and all our Endeavours proving ab∣ortive. In the mean time, the Companies of London made a great Entertainment for Monk, where the Bargain they had driven with him was ratified and confirmed by dissolute and un∣becoming Debauchery; for it was his Custom not to depart from those Publick Meetings, till
he was as Drunk as a Beast. After Dinner a Per∣son was introduc'd, who in Verse addressed him∣self to Monk for the Return of the King, which he heard without reproof; tho at the same time he protested to Col. Okey who went to take leave of him in order to repair to his Command, and desir'd to be satisfied of his Intentions touching Charles Stuart, That he would oppose him to the utmost; and gave him his Hand be∣fore all the Officers then present, as a Pledg of his Sincerity. The Secluded Members being convinced that the Sword was likely to prove the best Title they should find to their Authority, prepared an Act to settle the Militia in such hands as they might safely trust, and took into their Consideration how to settle the Sum of one thousand Pounds a Year upon Monk, which had been voted to be given him by the Parliament. The thing in dispute was, Whether the said Settlement should be secured to him out of the King's Lands at Hampton-Court, as he himself had desired of the Parliament, that he might lay them more pro∣foundly asleep; or whether a Sum of ready Mo∣ney should be paid to him in lieu of it. Divers of the Members of Parliament were for making good their former Order upon Hampton Court; and several of the Secluded Members hating the Traitor, tho they accepted the Treason, con∣curred with them, that so the Grant might be rendred useless to him. But his Party amongst
them was so great, that tho it was carried to be out of the Lands at Hampton-Court, yet in conclusion they obtained a Vote, that twenty thousand Pounds should be paid to him out of the Publick Treasury, instead of it. The Irish Officers also, who had assumed the Civil as well as the Military Power, pre∣sented him with a Pair of Spurs, and a Hilt for a Sword, all of Gold; together with a rich Hatband and an embroidered Belt, to manifest their acknowledgent and acceptance of his good Service in betraying the Publick Cause. The Lord of Lauderdale, with other Scots who had been taken Prisoners at the Battel of Wor∣cester, and continued in Custody from that time, was set at Liberty; and the Secluded Members gave order also to discharge Sir George Booth from his Imprisonment, if he would en∣gage to make his appearance upon Summons; which he thinking to be injurious to him, who had endeavoured to do no more than they them∣selves were attempting, refused the Condition, but was soon after released, without entring into any Obligation. The new Council of State being informed of some Designs against the usurped Power, issued out Warrants for apprehending divers Officers of the Army; and having some Jealou∣sy of others that were Members of Parliament, they procured an Order of their House, to au∣thorize them to seize any Member who had
not sate since the coming in of the Secluded Members, if there should be occasion. And tho these Men could thus trample upon the Pri∣viledges of that Body, whereof they pretended to be Members; yet to shew how zealous they were for Presbytery, they ordered Copies of the Covenant to be fairly drawn, and hung up in every Parish-Church throughout England. The Lords perceiving which way things were turning, solicited Monk that they might take their Places according to antient Custom in the House appointed for their sitting, alledg∣ging, that nothing done by the Commons with∣out their Assent could justly be esteemed Legal. But it was not yet time for Monk to discover himself so openly, before the Army was better prepared, and the new Militia settled: And therefore he not only gave a positive Denial to their Demand, but placed a Guard of Soldiers upon their House, to prevent the Lords from acting the same part that the Secluded Com∣mons had done. Major General Overton still continued in his Government of Hull, and suspecting Monk to be an Enemy to the Commonwealth, had hitherto refused to yield obedience to his Orders. Whereupon the Secluded Mem∣bers being well informed of the importance of the Place, from the time they had ordered it to be kept by Sir John Hotham, against the late King, impowered Monk to use all
means to remove the Major General from that Command. Monk, in pursuance of their Di∣rections, prevailed with Col. Alured, who was one of the Generals appointed by the Parlia∣ment, to go down to Hull, and to endeavour to perswade Major General Overton to quit the Place. Accordingly he went down, and ha∣ving acquainted the Major General with the Reason of his Journey, was presently put into the possession of it. It was matter of wonder to me, that Col. Alured, in whom the Common∣wealth Party had reposed so great Trust, would suffer himself to be imployed in such a Message to one of the most faithful Servants of the Parliament. But I was somewhat more satis∣fied when Major General Overton came to London, where he assured me that Col. Alured had neither said nor done at Hull any thing un∣becoming an honest Man; but that upon the News of the Intrusion of the Secluded Members, the Cavalier Party in the Town had so increa∣sed, and his own Souldiers split into such Divi∣sions, that he had no hopes left of keeping it. At this time it was disputed, whether the Se∣cluded Members should agree upon a Settle∣ment, or whether it should be left for a Parlia∣ment to do: Some were for calling in the Lords who sate in the Year 1648, that they, together with the Commons, might enter into Treaty with the King for a future Establishment, which should be grounded chiefly upon the Concessi∣ons
made by the last King in the Isle of Wight. But Monk being earnestly desirous to bring back the King without any Conditions, in hopes thereby to procure a Recompence equal to the Greatness of his Treachery, prevented the Success of that Proposition; which part he act∣ed so openly, that divers of the Secluded and other Members of Parliament resolved to imi∣tate him: and tho all of them had engaged the Nation in a War against the King, had contri∣buted the utmost of their Endeavours to carry it on, and called in the Scotish Nation to assist them in it; yet upon a Debate whether those of the King's Party should be admitted to e∣lect Members for the succeeding Parliament, it was, to the astonishment of all Men but themselves, carried for the Affirmative. Ha∣ving done this, they ordered Writs to be issued out in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, excluding such from being chosen who had served the King, which was contri∣ved to lead the People blindfold to their own Ruin, and to put some colour upon the Cheat they were about to impose on them. For they knew that having given leave for the Cavaliers to choose, and by every Step they had taken, manifested their Malice against the Common∣wealth, it would certainly come to pass, that either the Sons of those of the King's Party, or at least such as had privately favoured that Interest, would for the most part be chosen in
that Conjuncture, when the Common-wealth Party were under the greatest Discouragements, and could not appear with Safety under the u∣surped Authority. They understood also that tho it should happen, contrary to the Exclusion before mentioned, that those who had been actually in Arms for the King should be chosen and returned to sit in the House, yet we were not likely to procure them to be ejected at such a time as this; having not been able, without the greatest difficulty, to cast out, even from Richard's Convention, those that had been in Arms against us. The Secluded Members not thinking them∣selves secure, till they had put the Militia into the hands of such as were Enemies to the Com∣monwealth, passed an Act to that purpose, and ordered it to be printed and published: Where∣at the Officers about Monk were so offended, that tho they had lost all Affection to the Pub∣lick Cause, yet suspecting that the forming such a Militia, and intrusting it in the Hands of Commissioners that were known to be Fa∣vourers of the King's Party, might prove in∣jurious, if not destructive to the Army, by bringing in the Son of the late King without them, they applied themselves to Monk, and earnestly desired that in consideration of his own and their Danger, he would prevent the Execution of the said Act. whereupon he sent a Letter to the pretended Parliament, to
let them know, that being informed of the Disaffection of the Commissioners nominated in the Act they had passed touching the Militia, he desired them to forbear the Execution of it, lest the Persons they had intrusted therein might erect such a Power in opposition to the Army, as might be sufficient to bring in Charles Stuart. The Letter being read in the House, caused a great Perplexity amongst them, many not knowing what Judgment to make of it, and some of them fearing that Monk would de∣ceive them at last. But others understood him well enough; and therefore, notwithstanding his Letter, Mr. Prynn went to the Printer, and procured the Act to be immediately made publick, knowing it to be the desire of Monk that it should be so. Yet that they might cor∣respond with him in his Deceit, they sent Sir William Waller and one more, to give him satisfaction concerning the Particulars of the Act, which he pretended to scruple. They acquainted him, that tho there were many Per∣sons nominated in the Act, who might be wil∣ling to do as was suspected, yet that by it none were permitted to act as Commissioners, but such as should own the Justice of the Parlia∣ment's Cause against the King to the Year 1648, by subscribing a Paper to that purpose. They also informed him, that the said Commis∣sioners were not to appoint any Colonels or Cap∣tains to act in the Militia, before they should
be approved by the Council of State. Monk, being willing to receive satisfaction, ha∣ving sent the forementioned Letter only at the Importunity of the Officers, resolved to be contented with this Answer; tho' all Men saw how little Conscience the Ca∣valier Party made of signing any Paper, in order to promote the Interest of their Fa∣ction. The Act for the Militia being passed, the Command of all the Forces and Garisons set∣tled on Monk, and the Fleet in his Power in conjunction with Col. Montague, the pretended Parliament authorized their Council of State to provide for the Publick safety on all Emer∣gencies, and to dispose Affairs as they should think fit till the meeting of the next Parliament. Which being done, and the House ready to pass the Act for their Dissolution, Mr. Crew who had been as forward as any Man in beginning and carrying on the War against the last King, mo∣ved, that before they dissolved themselves, they would bear their witness against the horrid Murder, as he called it, of the King. This unexpected Motion prevailed with many then present to deny their Concurrence to that Act against the King, tho not to reflect in the same manner on those who had been concerned in it: And one of them concluding his Dis∣course with protesting that he had neither Hand nor Heart in that Affair, Mr. Thomas Scot, who
had been so much deluded by the Hypocrisy of Monk, as I have already related, in abhor∣rence of that base Spirit, said, That tho he knew not where to hide his Head at that time, yet he durst not refuse to own, that not only his Hand, but his Heart also was in it: and after he had produced divers Reasons to prove the Justice of it, he concluded, that he should desire no greater Honour in this World, than that the following Inscription might be engra∣ven on his Tomb; Here lieth one who had a Hand and a Heart in the Execution of Charles Stuart late King of England. Having said this, he and most of the Members who had a Right to sit in Parliament withdrew from the House; so that there was not the fourth part of a Quorum of lawful Members present in the House, when the Secluded Members, who had been voted out of the Parliament by those that had an undisputed Authority over their own Members, undertook to dissolve the Parlia∣ment, which was not to be done, unless by their own Consent; and whether that Con∣sent was ever given, is submitted to the Judgment of all impartial Men. This Face of Authority being vanished after a full Dis∣covery of the Malignity of their Intenti∣ons, I supposed the Cruelty of their Coun∣cil of State would not fail to increase with their Fears; and therefore, tho I continued to pass some times thro Westminster Hall, that they
might see I was not withdrawn; yet I did it not so frequently and publickly as I had done, chan∣ging my Lodging from the House of one Friend to that of another; and when I lay at my own House, taking the best care I could do to secure my self from being surprized. In the mean time, a considerable Party of those who had been engaged against the King, resolved to raise a Sum of Money to pay such Troops as should be willing to draw together against Monk and his Partizans; and that two of their number should be bound for the peaceable Deportment of Major General Lam∣bert in the penal Sum of five thousand Pounds, so much being demanded by the Council of State; which Bond, if it should come to be forfeited, and the Persons bound constrained to pay the Money, it was agreed that the said Sum should be discharged out of the Publick Stock. Mr. Slingsby Bethel was imployed by the most eminent Persons concerned in this Design, to communicate their Resolutions to Sir Arthur Haslerig, whom he attended at his Lodg∣ings to that purpose, and found him in a most melancholy posture, sitting in a Chair, and leaning his Head upon both his Hands. Mr. Bethel asked him the reason of his trouble; and received for Answer, That having been with Monk that Morning, and pressing him to give him some assurance of his Care of the Com∣monwealth, reminding him of his Oaths and
Protestations of Fidelity to the Cause, Monk had treated him in an unusual manner, and de∣manded how he could expect any thing from him, whom he had endeavoured to make less than he was before he marched to London? Sir Arthur added to the rest of his Discourse to Mr. Bethel, We are undone, We are undone. Thus he that had abandoned his old Friends to support the Interest of Monk, and would not be perswaded of the Malignity of his Designs, whereby he had lost many Opportunities of re∣covering all, was at last deserted by him, and almost driven to despair. Mr. Scot also informed me, that he had lost all hopes of getting such a number of our Council of State together, as should be necessary to put in execution the De∣sign which I had proposed; and that, having notice that the New Council of State had re∣solved to seize his Person, he designed to retire into the Country, as well to secure himself, as to endeavour to be elected into the ensuing Convention, which by the Vote of the Secluded Members was to be called a Parliament. These things put me in further doubt of my own Safety, and moved me to provide for my self as well as I could. To that end I seldom lay at my own House, after Mr. Scot's Departure from London; and finding my self deprived of all means to serve the Publick, and expecting the utmost Extremities that Malice could invent against those that had faithfully served their
Country, I resolved also to withdraw my self from the Observation of the Usurpers, and to go into the Country. In pursuance of this Re∣solution I departed from London, accompanied by my Wife in a small Chariot drawn by two Horses, having sent two Servants before well mounted to attend him on the Road, with a led Horse for my self, if there should be occa∣sion. The second Day of my Journey early in the Morning we perceived one to ride very hard after us, who coming up to us, proved to be a Person that waited on my Mother, and was sent by our Relations with Letters to in∣form me of what had happened since our De∣parture: That about an hour and a half after we left London, a Messenger from the Council of State came to the House where I lodged, with an Order requiring me to appear before them; assuring my Relations he had the like Orders for summoning Mr. Miles Corbet, Col. John Jones, and Col. Thomlinson, Commissio∣ners of Parliament for the Affairs of Ireland, to attend the said Council: That the Messen∣ger being earnest to know whether I was gone, that he might give the more certain account to those that sent him; my Sister Kempson doubt∣ing they might send after me and seize me, had refused to answer that Question; and that my Mother Oldsworth fearing my Sisters Refusal might increase the Jealousy of the Council of State, and put them upon taking some extream
Measures against me, had prevailed with my Father-in-Law her Husband to wait on the Council the next Morning, and to inform them whither I was gone, and the Cause of my Re∣moval from London. Having received this account, and soon concluding that the Coun∣cil either had already, or would send speedily after me, I mounted my led Horse, that I might be the better prepared to make my Escape, if I should happen to be pursued; and lest they should have way laid me on the Road, I di∣vided my little Company, directing my Wife with the Chariot and two Servants to take the common Road by Bagshot, whilst I with a Groom crossed the Heath, and declined all pub∣lick Roads: So that my Wife and I met not, till towards the Evening I perceived her coming by a private way, which it was necessary to pass before she could reach the House of my Cousin Robert Wallop at Farley, where we had agreed to remain that Night. There we found Mr. Nicholas Love, who had been one of the late King's Judges, and who arrived there just be∣fore us. Soon after our Arrival, Mr. Wallop who had been at a Mannor called Husbands, be∣longing to him, came home, and received us with his usual Generosity and cordial Affection, expressing no less Zeal to the Commonwealth, than when it was in its highest Prosperity. And tho I acquainted him with the State of my Af∣fairs, and with the Proceedings of the Coun∣cil
in relation to me, he earnestly desired me to continue at his House: But I thought it not decent so to do; and therefore after two Nights stay I took leave of him, and went to Sutton, where I lay with as much Privacy as I could, having discovered that the Master of the Inn had been one of the late King's Guard, and passionately addicted to the Cavalier Interest. The next day I went to the House of my Cou∣sin William Ludlow at Clarendon, where I was informed that Mr. Bainton, whom I had pro∣mised to serve in the ensuing Election, had de∣sisted from his Design, and that Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper and Mr. Earnly were likely to be chosen. However to make good my Promise, I sent a Letter to him, to let him know I was come into the Country, and to offer him what Service I could, if he persisted in his Intentions to stand for the County of Wilts. Having dispatched this Message, and doubting the Council of State might send to seize, or at least to summon me, I went privately from Claren∣don to Salisbury, and took up my Lodgings at the House of one Mr. Traughton, a Minister of that City; where after I had been two or three days, I received a Letter from my Fa∣ther Oldsworth, by which I understood he had been with those of the Council of State, and having informed them, that the Design of my Journey into the Country, was in order to settle my Affairs there, they seemed to be well satis∣fied.
He acquainted me also that Mr. Miles Corbet, Col. John Jones, and Col. Thomlinson, had attended the Council in obedience to their Summons, and were not permitted to depart, till they had signed an Engagement to give no Disturbance to the present Power. The con∣sideration of this Proceeding towards them, made me set a higher value on my Deliverance from their Hands, than I had hitherto done. For if I had not left the Town when I did, the Summons from the Council had been served upon me; and if I had not appeared, it would have been taken as a Contempt: but if I had appeared, they would undoubtedly have ten∣dered me the like Engagement to sign, which I could not have done any more than that which was required from me by Cromwel, and so might have been imprisoned, and in all probability detained till the Return of Charles Stuart. The time of the Election drawing near, I sent a Messenger to Mr. Bainton for his last Resolution in this matter, who returned me this Answer, That having had a Meeting with the Gentlemen of the Country at the Devises, he had resolved not to put his Friends to the trouble of appearing for him; judging it the best way rather to swim with the Stream, than to be born down with it. Being thus discharged of my Engagement to Mr. Bainton, I went to Maiden Bradley, and held a Court at Yardenfield, that I might raise what
Money I could amongst my Tenants, by fil∣ling up Estates, and changing Lives: which having dispatched, I went to my Mannor of Knoyle for the same end; and being there, was much importuned by the Inhabitants of the Borough of Hinden, part of the said Mannor, to be one of their Burgesses in the Assembly that was to meet at Westminster. Tho I durst not desire any to confer so great a Trust on me, yet I confess it was no small Contentment to me, that they would manifest their Respects to my Person, and their Remembrance of my Services, whatsoever they had been, in such a Conjuncture, when the Cavalier Party, with what Design may easily be conjectured, had Printed the Names of the late King's Judges, of which Number I had the Honour to be one; and when that Interest was already become so prevalent, that the Heir of the Lord Cottington, tho a Papist and an Ideot, had found a Party sufficient to put him into possession of Founthil-House, which had been given by the Parlia∣ment to the Lord President Bradshaw, and to maintain him therein by open Violence, against the Kinsman and Heir of the said President. Having finished my private Affairs as well as I could, I was willing to have it believed that I was gone to Salisbury, and therefore set forward on that way; but to defeat, if possible the Malice of my Enemies, I went not far be∣fore I quitted that Road; and having sent my
Chariot, wherein my Wife was, to Salisbury, I mounted on Horseback, and passing over the Hills that lie towards Somersetshire, I went to the House of my Brother Strangways at East-Charleton, where I staid about four days as pri∣vately as I could, my Horses being watered within the Walls of the House, and the Servants commanded to be silent concerning me. The time of Election for the Borough of Hinden being come, the Persons in Nomination were Mr. How of Berwick, Sir Thomas Thynne, and my self. All agreed to chuse Mr. How, so that the Dispute lay between Sir Thomas and Me. The number of the Electors was about twenty six, of whom I had nineteen Voices, and was thereupon declared by the Bailiff to be elected with Mr. How, to serve for that Borough. The Indentures were signed, and Writ returned to the Sheriff according to Custom. But the Agents of Sir Thomas Thynne being unwilling to lose all their Trouble and Expence, and guessing upon probable Grounds, that if they could bring the Case before the next Assembly, they should certainly carry it against me, signed another Indenture for Mr. How and Sir Thomas Thynne, making up in Number what they wanted in Quality, taking the Subscriptions of the Rabble, who not on∣ly paid nothing either to the State, Church or Poor, but also received the Publick Alms of the Parish: And to gain these, they were
obliged to descend to the most unworthy Arti∣fices, affirming that I was already fled, and that they should certainly be destroyed by the King, if they elected me. Before I went into Somersetshire I had or∣dered one of my Tenants, of whose Fidelity I had good assurance, to find out some private House where I might remain till I could better discern what course to take. Having made a diligent Inquiry, he came to me with an account that he had found out divers places, whereof I might make choice of that which I should best approve for my Retirement, which accordingly I did, and was received with hearty Affection; and during the time I staid there, enjoyed great Satisfaction in the Conversation of the good Man of the House, who was a Lover of his Country, Possessor of an Estate of about one hundred Pounds by Year in free Land; above Contempt, and below Envy. After I had been with him about eight days, I thought I might without much hazard give my Wife a visit at Salisbury; and accordingly I went thither in the Night, and lay there. The next day being Sunday, News was brought to that place that Major General Lambert had made his escape out of the Tower, and that it was supposed he would be able to draw a considerable part of the Army into a Body speedily. Hereupon, not doubting that the utmost diligence would be used to seize Lambert, and knowing that
those of Salisbury were informed that I was in those parts, I returned to my former Lodg∣ing, where I had not been above two or three days, when the Man that had assisted Major General Lambert in his escape, came to me with a Message from him, to acquaint me that divers Officers of the Army had been with him; that they had agreed upon two places of Rendez∣vous, and had dispersed themselves to their re∣spective Countries, in order to put their Design in execution; that they had received Assurances that the greatest part of the Army would join with them, and therefore desired that I would give Orders for the Forces in the Western Parts to draw together, and that I would meet him at the Head of them in the County of Ox∣ford. But I thought it not prudent to en∣gage my Friends in so publick a manner, till I should see some probability of making a stand, whereof I conceived I might give some guess by Lambert's first Rendezvouz, which was ap∣pointed to be about Daventry. In the mean time I dispatched Messengers to several Officers that commanded the Forces in the Counties of Dorset, Somerset and Wilts, to be ready to march if there should be occasion. I received assu∣rance from a considerable Party about Taunton, that the Castle should be secured for the Pub∣lick Service, and had divers Promises of the same nature from other Places. The Horse that lay at Salisbury began to stagger, and I
doubt not would have been honest if they had seen a Force sufficient to have made it reasona∣ble for them to appear. About eight days after my return from Salisbury, one Major Whitby came to me from Major General Lambert, to acquaint me with his Intentions, and to consult with me, concerning the best way of drawing together the Forces on our side. He assured me that about one thousand Horse were already with Lambert, and that he had good assurance that most part of the Army would join with him. Having received this Information, and being willing to hazard all with Major General Lambert or any other Persons, if I might be satisfied they aimed at the good of the Com∣monwealth, I desired to know what Lam∣bert had or would declare for, it being that I thought the Duty of every Man to inform him∣self of the Justice of the Cause, before he en∣gageth himself in it. Major Whitby answered, that it was not now a time to declare what we would be for, but what we would be against, which was that Torrent of Tyranny and Pope∣ry which was ready to break in upon us. To which I replied, that the best way to prevent those Mischiess, would be to agree upon some∣thing that might be contrary to them, not so much in Name, as in the Nature of it; whereby we might justly hope to engage all good Men to favour and assist us in our Enter∣prize; and that the utmost care ought to be ta∣ken
to convince the Nation of the Sincerity and Justice of our Intentions, especially since all Men knew they had been so lately cheated, by ad∣vancing a Personal instead of a Publick In∣terest, and therefore not likely to be so easily taken with the same Bait again. So having com∣municated to me what he had in trust, and having received my Answer, the Major depart∣ed; and two or three days after an account was brought to me, that Major General Lambert's Party was dispersed, and himself taken Prisoner by Col. Ingoldsby. To which Defeat an Acci∣dent that happened did not a little contribute; for some of Ingoldsby's Party in their March had met Capt. Haslerig, Son to Sir Arthur, and knowing his Troop to be with Lambert, they seized him and brought him to Col. Ingoldsby, where he said, that being dissatisfied with Lam∣bert's Design, he had quitted the Party, and thereby hoped to be set at liberty. But Ingoldsby told him, that unless he would bring off his Troop also from Lambert, his deserting them should be of no advantage to him. He promi∣sed to use the best of his Endeavours to serve him, and thereupon was permitted to return to Lambert. When the two Parties were ready to engage, he brought off his Troop as he had promised to endeavour, which caused such a Consternation in the rest of the Party, that ma∣ny of them went over to Ingoldsby, and most part of those who did not think fit to follow
their Example, shifted for themselves as well as they could, leaving Lambert talking with In∣goldsby, and endeavouring to dissuade him from engaging any farther against him. But Col. Ingoldsby perceiving that Lambert's Party had abandoned him, rid up close to him and required him to yield himself Prisoner, which after a short hesitation he did, desiring Ingoldsby's Lordship, as he called him, to give him leave to escape. Col. Cobbet, Major Creed, and some other Officers were taken Prisoners, and with Major Gen. Lambert committed to the Tower. Thus our Enemies were those of our own House, and it was not the King's Party that could destroy us; which as it ought to be a Sub∣ject of Humiliation to us, so it can be no just Cause of Exaltation to them. Being thus de∣prived of an Opportunity of appearing in the Field for the Service of my Country, I resol∣ved to go to London, and there to wait the Plea∣sure of God, either by acting or suffering in his Cause; where being arrived, I took up my Lodging at the House of a Friend who lived in Holborn, and endeavouring to learn what Major General Lambert designed to have done if he had kept his ground, I was informed that he had prepared two Declarations very different from each other, intending to publish that which might have procured him the greater Party: but because it could not be agreed which of them was most likely to do so, he had
thought fit to publish neither. Hitherto Monk had continued to make solemn Protestations of his Affection and Fidelity to the Common∣wealth-Interest, against a King and House of Lords; but the New Militia being settled, and a Convention, calling themselevs a Parliament, and fit for his purpose, being met a Westmin∣ster, he sent to such Lords as had sate with the Parliament till 1648, to return to the Place where they used to sit; which they did, upon assurance from him, that no others should be permitted to sit with them; which Promise he also broke, and let in not only such as had de∣serted to Oxford, but the late created Lords. And Charles Stuart, eldest Son to the late King, being informed of these Transactions, left the Spanish Territories where he then resided, and by the Advice of Monk went to Breda, a Town belonging to the States of Holland: From whence he sent his Letters and a Declaration to the two Houses, by Sir John Greenvil; where∣upon the Nominal House of Commons, tho called by a Commonwealth▪Writ, in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, pas∣sed a Vote, That the Government of the Nation should be by a King, Lords and Com∣mons, and that Charles Stuart should be Pro∣claimed King of England, &c. FINIS.
