11726 99838776 3164
A Perticuler and true Narration of that great and gratious Deliuerance, that it plea∣sed God of late to vouchsafe vnto the Cittie of Geneua, namely vpon the .xij. of December last in the yeere 1602. printer's or publisher's device AT LONDON Printed for George Potter and Richard Canter, dwelling in the Popes∣head Alley neare the Exchange. 1603.
A true Narration of that great and grati∣ous deliuerance which God gaue vnto the Cittie of Geneua the .xij. day of December last, in the yeare. 1602. SInce the yeare. 1528. that Geneua was freed from the gouernment of their Earle, al Christendome knoweth that sundry, dyuers, and great enterprises haue bin practised and attempted against the sayd Cittie, and that by great persons: some whereof inhabited the Citie, and some were Stran∣gers. And this attempted, to be performed one while by Traytors within, another while by Enemies without: and the same both ouert & couert. Some whereof set themselues onely against the Ecclesiasticall gouernment, other
some against the Pollitique: and others seek∣ing the ouerthrow of both. God notwithstan∣ding alwayes preseruing it as the Aple of his eye, in so much that as Israell heretofore did vpon good respect say, Many a time haue they fought against me from my youth vp. Psal. 129.1.2. So Geneua may at this time well confesse, From my youth vpward they haue attempted a∣gainst mee a thousand mischiefes; but yet they haue not been able to ouercome or destroy mee. Yea, Geneua hath often times found to be true the saying of Dauid. Psal. 34.19. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord deliue∣red him out of them all. Yea, Geneua may testifie vnto vs that to be true, which the Prophet sayth in an other place: Hee that dwelleth vnder the defence of the most high God, shall abide vnder the shadow of the Al∣mightie. Psal. 91.1. especially it may professe it more at this time, then at any time heretofore: It hauing a fresh (by experience) tryed, that the Lord is neere vnto them that are of a contrite heart, and will saue such as be afflicted in spirit. Psal.34.18. For, the Duke of Sauoy hauing resolued to surprise the Towne of Geneua, by scaling the Walles: that he might the more easely attaine vnto it, some few dayes before, sent Maister
Rochette chiefe Presedent of the Senat of Chambery to the Magistrates of Geneua, to let them vnderstand that hee was resolued to liue in peace with them, since it hath pleased the French kings Maiestie to haue comprehended them in the treatize of peace betwixt him and the King: and that they might be sure that hee would obserue it inuiolable in euery poynt. Neuerthelesse the Duke of Sauoy (an olde and haynous enemie vnto Geneua) did depart from Thurin on Tuesday the .vii. of Decem∣ber, and ariued at a Towne called La-Roche, distant from Geneua foure of their Leagues: where hee had three thousand men, some Spa∣niards, some Italians, and some French and Sa∣uoyers: who on Saterday the .xi. of the same month the same night, hauing called vnto him their chiefe Captaines and Leaders, did dis∣couer vnto them his enterprise, exhorting them to behaue them selues valiantly: out of the which, he made choyce of three hundred of the brauest and resolutest of them, to giue the as∣sault. From thence they marched towardes the Citie of Geneua at one of the clocke after mid∣night, where they ariued about two of the clocke in the night: the Duke himselfe stayed some quarter of a League from Geneua. Then Monsieur Dalbigny, who was his Lief∣tenant generall (and the chiefe of this enter∣prise)
demaunded, ministred, and receiued their Oath: That they would liue and die in this execution: he promising to be the first, to do the like with them. Moreouer, hee made them to promise, that they should not defile any Mayden or Woman: nor fall to pillage, till they had receyued the signall from him. This ended, they approched the Walles of the Cittie, beeing fauoured with the darknesse of the night, a thicke mist, and sharpe winde, and caused his men to cast into the Towne∣ditch certaine Faggots: on the which they raysed three Ladders, in a ranke tyed togi∣ther. (It was in a place distant some fiftie Paces from the Sentinell, betwixt the New-gate and the Money-gate.) The first (being a∣bout threescore in number) all Shot, entred the Cittie. One of them faigned himselfe to be the rownd, and went toward the Sentinell for to kill him: who feeling himselfe hurt, slip∣ped downe from the Terrasse (which is a Hill of earth) who beeing also fauoured with the darknesse of the night and thicke mist, came into the Cittie by the Gate (called Tartase) which is commonly open, because it is within the Walles, and gaue the Towne the Alarme. The Citizens hearing it, armed themselues
straight wayes: so that in an instant, all pla∣ces, bastions, and passages were filled. But howsoeuer they vsed all diligence, it was impossible for them to hinder the en∣trance of some three hundred of the Enemie, (which were as hath been sayd) all Captaines and Commaunders, men of authoritie and courage, armed from top to too: as they vnder∣stoode afterwardes by the confession of cer∣taine Prisoners. The Enemie placed themselues in order vpon the Walles of that quarter, in a place distant from the Corps du Gard some two hun∣dred Paces, endeuoring to possesse the New-gate, and so to giue entraunce by their Petart vnto their Men, which stayed without at the Bridge-foote. Comming neare vnto the sayd place with their Petart, he that caryed it, and should haue fyred it, was killed by an Ambúscado. The Gate (where there were but twentie and fiue men of the Citie) was lost and wonne againe three times: yet the Enemie was fi∣nally constrayned to retire, by the meanes of an Italian Captaine called Brandano, comming from the Towne-house of the Cittie with some
thirtie Citizens: who with a great furie and courage, fell vpon them. The Enemie seeing themselues thus put backe, did seeke to get the Gate called Tartase: frō whence they were repulsed by the meanes of the Corps du Garde. From thence they retur∣ned towards the Mony-gate, intending to force it, but all in vaine: for the Portcullis was let downe, and the Chaines vp, and fiue hundred Citizens were appoynted to guard the hart of the Cittie. In the meane time, those of the Citie assaul∣ted their Enemies through the houses which were neare vnto the Walles of the Cittie: but the Enemie gaue great resistaunce, and came still vp by the Ladders, to the number of three hundred: whereby their courage encreased much, and fought valiantly; crying-out as loud as they could (but especially a Trumpetter standing vpon the Walles) Viue LE'spaigne, viue Sauoye: God saue Spaine and Sauoy: the Towne is wonne. They forced two Houses neare the Wall with two Petarts, and many of their chiefest Men thereby entred the Houses, meaning thereby to gaine the place called La Monnoye: but sodainely they were constrayned to retire,
with losse of men: For one hundred and fiftie Harcobussiers, Musketters, and Pike-men of the Cittie, were sent to succour them: yea, the Women came with Halbards and Swordes, all resolute to die, or to repulse the Enemie, ere he should waxe stronger: which thing succee∣ded well. For the Enemie hauing perceiued that by the discharging of a Canon, that was on the Bulwarke of the New-gate, being char∣ged with Chaynes and Nayles, one of their Ladders beeing broken, and betwixt thirtie and fourtie of their men (which were comming vp) sore maymed, were greatly astonished, and none of them durst afterwards come vp: Those which were got into the Cittie, were also much amazed, and began to flye, hearing the sound of the Retraite, running downe with more haste then they came vp: a part of them did fall head-long downe into the Ditch: the rest, beeing an hundred, or sixscore, were either killed, or sore hurt: except thirteene, who being taken aliue, refusing to confesse any thing, were hanged the same day, notwithstanding their offering of great Ransome. The fight dured from three of the clocke to fiue. At the breake of the day the Enemie retired to Bonna and Roche.
Monsieur Dalbigny was at the foote of the Ladder, making shew to come vp: but seeing al succeeded not wel, feygned to haue a qualme come ouer his stomacke, and so retired him∣selfe. Amongst the prisoners that were hanged, were Messieurs de Sonas Schaffardon, and Dar∣tinac: their sentence was, that hauing in open peace attempted against the Cittie, they were not to be esteemed as Prisoners of Warre, but as Robbers and Martherers: and that there∣fore they deserued death. Then was there a Galhouse of purpose set vp on the Bulwarke of the New-gate, whereon they were hanged in the afternoone the same day. The dead (besides these thirteene) were a∣bout foure score, besides those which were drowned in the Ditch: and many sore maimed. Among the dead, was the sonne of the Mar∣quesse De Lullin, the sonne of the Marquesse De Trefort, Monsieur de Cornage & de La Tour, Liue-tenant and Aancient-bearer to Monsieur Dalbigny. The heads of all the dead men were cut off, and set on Poles vpon the Walles where they first entred: their bodyes were cast into the Rhosne.
The Enemie retired themselues to a Vil∣lage called Etrenblieres, distant some League from Geneua, carying many of their dead and maimed men: amongst the which were the Baron De La Valdisaire, Generall of the Foot∣men, and many others of Commaund: and be∣ing ariued at Roche, and making a reuiew of their men, found betwixt three and foure hun∣dred of them wanting. The Duke caused foure Captaines (beeing Spaniards) to be hanged, for not executing their charge, in assaulting of the towne on the other side: which being done, he himselfe rode post to Thurin. Those of the Cittie lost some sixteene men: amongst whom, was Monsieur Canal, one of the Priuie-counsel, being three score and tenne yeares olde, Captaine Vandell, Marke Cambi∣ago, Peter Cabriol, Masster Nicholas, Masson, Bandieres, Debolo, and some others: and some twentie hurt. The Cittie was presently relieued with three hundred Swytsers of Berna, being their neighbours and confederates, looking dayly for more: Praysing the Lord for this great and wonderfull deliuerance: a singuler conti∣nuance of his mercy, that hee laughing at their
complots, had taken the cause of his people into his owne hands: and as a iust Iudge, dis∣comfiting their Enemies, hath made them sinke downe into the Pit, which they had pre∣pared for those that know the Lord, and trust in him. Let therefore Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord is mercie and great redemption. OF all this Narration there is a double vse, and he that hath a sanctifyed hart, shall (no doubt) profit by it therein. First, wee may see what affiance or trust is to bee giuen to the wordes and promises of the Popish and Spanish faction: of the which, the Sauoyard is not one of the least limbes or mem∣bers: and that should mooue vs not to bee so readie to relie or rest vpon their fayre wordes and speaches, as some would haue vs, but to carry our selues (if not suspitious of them, yet warily with them: and the rather, because it is a receiued maxime amongst them, and as one would say, an ouerruled case) that Fayth is not to be held with Heretickes, such as they (vniustly) hold vs to bee. Secondly, wee may behold that great re∣garde, and more then fatherly care that the Lord hath to preserue and defend them, that with godly sinceritie and singlenesse of hart, walke in the obedience of his whole trueth:
and that should on the one side prouoke vs to bee more zelous of his glory, then in these cold and carelesse dayes many men would haue vs, and wee are in deede. And on the other side, it should stirre vs vp with confidence of hart, and assurance of hope, wholly to depend vpon him: who, though for the tryall of our Fayth, the proofe of our Patience, the punish∣ment of our Sinnes, and sundry other causes, best knowne to his owne Wisedome, hee ap∣poynt vs to bee sundry wayes exercised, yet will together with the temptation, make an issue out of the same, and prouide a way for vs to escape, as shall bee most for his glory, and our good: And this should bee no meane com∣fort vnto vs, in the dayes of our tryalles and tribulations. FINIS.
