12133 99839104 3500
THE STRANGE DISCOVERY: A Tragi-Comedy. Written By J. G. Gent. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery-lane, joyning to the Roles. 1640.
The Prologue. HOw's this, The strange discovery, may some say, Tis likely we shall see some glorious Play Of Christopher Columbus, and his brother, Whose navigable paines did first discover America.That unknowne world, thinking the far fetch'd sceane, To be Peru, and th' Indies, but to wane Your expectations from this goldn dreame, Our Author bad me tell you, that the scope Of his intendd travell's Aethiope, There he begins, there ends, but as he passes To and againe, toucheth at many places, As Egypts fertile soile and learned Greece, Yt as hroicke Jason sought the fleece In divers coasts, but in the stately Ile Of Colchos gate it by Medeas guile, So he in Aethiopia stteth downe The period of his plot, which but a frowne Of yours will ruinate, your gracious eyes, Raise to the height of Jasons enterprise. The History is candid, crown'd with praise, So let the play be too, our Poet prayes. The persons of the Play. HYdaspes, King of Aethiopia. Prsina, his Queene. Cariclea, their daughter. Syfimethres, a Gymnosophist Embassadour for the King, Caricles, Apollos Priest. Calasiris, Isis Priest. Aristippus, a Citizen of A∣thens. Dmeneta, his wife. Cnemon, Aristippus sonne. Thisbe, Demenetas maid. Arsinoe, a Courtezan. Nebulo, Caricles man. Nebulona, his wife. Theagines, a Thessalian Cap∣taine. Arsace, wife to the Deputy of Aegypt. Cibile, her Chamberlaine, nurse, and bawd. Aura, Cibiles mayd. 4 Iudges, Magistrates of Persia. Besides messengers and attendance.
THE STRANGE DISCOVERY, A Trage-Comedie. Actus primi Scena prima. Enter Caricles, sometimes Apollos Priest at Delphos in the habit of a Pilgrim. Caric. WHat course shall aged Carcles now take After his weary travells? shall I here Resolve to lay my bones, and Egypt make The finall period of my pilgrimage? No, I must bid Catadupíce adieu So famous for these sluces of faire Nile, And since the surfeit which I tooke of sorrow For my deare daughters sad untimely death, Is well digested in this breast of mine, And change of aire hath wrought a change of mind; I am resolv'd to stately Greece to wend And breath my last breath where I breath'd my first, 'Tis so determin'd;— Enter Nebulo his man. Honest Nebulo, My man draw neare, I'm in a humour now To change some words with thee;—so oftentimes— aside. We see wise men for recreations sake,
Consult with Fooles, and honest men with Knaves.— aside What course doth thy fond braine advise me to? Neb. To no other but to a home course Sir, I must tell you plainly, I like not these extravagant ones you take of travelling the world thus; I'm sure I have paid deare for those idle hu∣mours of yours, witnesse my body, brought to a meere Anato∣mie by travell and fasting; me thinkes, a wise man, as you are, should not have such wandring thoughts in his mind: well Master, resolve to leave this place, and returne to Delphos our native habitation, or I shall soone resolve to leave you, and goe there without you. O the smoake of mine owne poore chim∣ney at home, and the beloved smoke of my wife, would both smell to my nose now so comfortable, as a perfume made of Arabia spices; adiew, I can stay no longer from pretty Nebu∣lona without the lash of her just displeasure; I come my chickin, I come, be ready to receive me, I know thou languishest all this while for want of my company. Caric. Nay prethee stay a little longer and heare me; wilt thou leave me now at last, and frustrate the good opinion I have alwaies had of thy simple plainnesse and constant service? have patience awhile, and I will accompany thee in thy journey; as for thy wife Nebulona (if that trouble thee) I shall rectifie her in the truth of al thy actions. Who knockes there? go see, and bring me word before you grant entrance Nebulo. Exit, & redit Nebulo. Who is it now? Nebul. A very sweet fac'd Gentleman, so sooty as the Di∣vell himselfe, I believe some Embassadour sent from Pluto and the fiends. Caric. What e'r he be admit him. Enter Sisimethres, Legate of Aethiopia. Sisimet. God save you reverend Father. Caric. Welcome Sir, Although I have not seene your face before That I can well remember. Sisimet. May be so. But I have seene you often in this towne Walking the streets, and read the character
Of gravity and wisdome ciphered in Your aged face, wherein I thinke my judgement Nothing deceives me; and I doe suppose You are an aliene here as well as I, No naturall Egyptian. Caric. I confesse I am a stranger borne, and should be glad To know your name, your countrey and your businesse. Sisimet. I shall obey you, for my countrey, first 'Tis Aethiopia underneath the line, My name Sisimethres imployed now As Legate from my soveraigne King Hydaspes, Unto the Deputy here, to forbid him To meddle with the mines, out of whose bowells The Smaragds digged were, which appertaine To none but to the crowne of Aethiopia: Now Sir you know me, be not scrupulous To let me understand so much of you, Something doth prompt me strangely, that you have Some neer relation to the gods, or else My Genius doth deceive me. Caric. Understand then, You doe not erre in your imagination, I am a Grecian borne, and sometimes Priest Unto Apollo in that sacred City Of Delphos, which Parnassus lofty tops, As with a wall, encompasseth about, And sweet Castalius pleasant springs refresh, There was I borne and bred, and exercis'd The office I was call'd to by the gods. Sisimet. Most venerable Priest, and holy Father, Let me beseech you tell me what mischance Drove you from thence to these remoter parts? Caric. The great misfortune that I had at home. Sisim. I wonder at it, pray relate the manner. Caric. When you have heard my story to the end, Your wonder will forsake you. Sisimet. Then resolve me
Caric. Upon your better knowledge and acquaintance I shll, till when excuse me. Sisim. I'll not presse you Beyond good manners; Sir, I saw you buy Some herbs and roots that grow in India And Aethiopia for your use last day; If so you please, I can produce you such As ne'r were better. Caric. Pray Sir let me see them, Sysimethres take from under his arme a little bagge, and shewes Caricles precious stones in stead of roots. You must for these, good Sir, seeke other chapmen, The Margaritas, the Smaragds, Hiacinths, Are for a Princes use, and not for mine: Each one alone is ransome for a King, My whole estate cannot buy one of them. Sysim. But though you cannot buy them, you can take them (I trow) if freely given you, can you not? Caric. 'Tis true, I can receive them, but I marvell Why you should mocke me thus? Sysim. I mocke you not By all the Gods, but meane uprightly in't, I will not onely give you these, but if You will be pleas'd to take it at my hands Bestow a richer gift, to which compar'd, These are but drosse and rubbish. Caric. Ha ha ha. Sysim. Why laugh you Sir? Caric. Is't not a matter which Deserveth laughter, when you promise things Of such a prise, and yet assure me more; You cannot meane uprightly. Sysim. Ttrust me, but sweare That you will use this gift as I shall teach you, And I'll performe my promise of the other. Nebul. Accept it Sir, if you be wise; 'tis not good, nor re∣ligious to refuse any mans courtesie.
Caric. You tempt me shrewdly Sir. Sysim. Let me prevaile, And bind me still your servant. Caric. You have won me To what you would. Sysim. Then take an oath, and sweare To follow my directions, so confirme it. Caric. By great Apollo, then whose Minister I was at Delphos, I shall not digresse From what you shall instruct me touching this. Sysim. It is sufficient, and I build upon Your faith, your trust and your religion; Here fellow, take this bag, and keepe it for Your honoured Master. Nebul. But more honoured bag, Would I might keepe thee for my selfe, I then Should make an Idoll of thee — aside. Caric. What's your pleasure, That I should doe in lieu of this reward? Sysim. I cannot now acquaint you, for some reasons Best knowne unto my selfe, give me your hand To meet me without faile tomorow morning At Isis Temple, thence I shall conduct you Unto my lodging, and in secret tell The summe of my request. Carie. I shall not faile you. Sysim. Adieu, untill we meet— Exit Sysimethres. Caric. Apollo keepe thee In his safe custodie. I marvell much Whence this unlook'd for kindnesse should proceed, I'll see the issue on't, what e'r betide me, It may be that the gods have pre-ordain'd I shall once more be happy, and in lieu Of all my passed sorrowes, reape the fruit Of long expected comfort, sure my mind Is much illuminated with the thought Of some good fortune, and refresh'd as if The spirit of Pitho were infus'd into me
By heavenly inspiration; I'll obey My Genius, for oftentimes the gods by signes Will have that mortalls understand their mindes. Exit. Actus primi Scena secunda. Enter Demeneta, and young Cnemon her sonne in Law. Demen. MY pretty boy, how dost thou? where hast thou beene so long absent from my imbraces; come hither, let mee solace my selfe a little with thee, let mee kisse thee my sweet heart, my heire, my owne life. Cnem: Had ever any one a kinder stepmother— aside. Mother, you make too much of mee, I am not able to deserve your love in so high a straine, my duty cannot countervaile it. Demen. How prettily hee speakes, I cannot chuse but kisse thee for it. Cnem. What a close and hot kisse was that? I like not this behaviour, would I were delivered hence, please you give mee leave to goe about my exercises? Dem. What exercises? Cnem. My bookes and studies at the Schoole, I shall be shent else by my Tutor. Dem. Come, thou shalt not leave me. Cnem. Will you have me prove a truant then? Dem. No, but a student in a better art; hast thou ever read Ovid de arte amandi, or Ovids amorous Epistles? Cnem. Never. Dem. O, I would have thee study that booke above all other, there are very good rules, and worth the observation truly, if thou errest in any thing therein written, I will be thy Mistresse to instruct thee, follow my rudiments good sonne. Cnem. But I have heard 'tis a ribaldrous booke, and cor∣rupteth youth to all wantonnesse. Dem. That is but a fantasie, a mere untruth; it was made by the Poet for youthfull recreation and pastime, none but Stoicall old men will invey against them, who envie that in others which they cannot enjoy in themselves.
Cnem. I understand not your Philosophie. Dem. Would thou didst, and wert well entred in my book and science; but where is thy father and my husband Ari∣stippus? Enter Aristippus. O, my deare husband, where have you lingred so long; you are too blame indeed to leave me so solitary, I must chide you for it, truly, had you tarried never so little longer, I should have died for sorrow. Arist. My sweet wife Demeneta, I have a jewell of thee, thy extreme love to me is confirmed in thy affection to my sonne Cnemon, vertuous woman. Demen. I love him I must confesse, as well as if he were mine owne sonne, or better. Arist. I know thou dost my love; never was a man happier in his choice, I thinke. Demen. Cnemon, sit on my lap pretty boy. Cnem. No, I know my duty better. Demen. I will have it so; the very picture of his father. Cnem. Pray mother excuse me, this is no fit place for me. Demen. There is not a prettier or wittier boy in Athens, but 'tis no wonder, that old men beget alwaies the finest chil∣dren, 'tis most commonly seene. Arist. I know your vertue, and therefore will dispute with you a little upon this subject, and aske you this question: how could you, a young woman, affect me an old man? Demen. How could I not Sir; your wisdome, stayednesse and understanding were such motives to my affection, as I would not change my old man for the youthfull'st cavalere of all Greece; I hope for all your age, to have a hopefull off-spring from you, such another as Cnemon, you can doe it i'faith, old Aristippus. Arist. My girle, how thou dost revive my decayed spirits to heare thee talke thus! I will straine hard for this, but I will answer thy expectation. Demen. Thankes sweet husband, let me hang upon your necke, pretty gravity, how well it becomes him, who could chuse but love such a man intirely; pox upon smooth faces,
and young lusty gallants, there's more trouble with them a bed, when a gentlewoman would sleep and take her rest; they are al∣waies disturbing of her, when by a man of some yeeres and ex∣perience we may lie as quiet as we will; would all women were of my opinion, we should cut the combes then of these lustie gamesters. Arist. Indeed young men are very inconstant in their love, and changing from one unto another, whereas an old man perseveres to the end in his devotions. Dem. True, true, my love, your words are oracles, Were I now as I seeme, how should I wrong Youth, beautie, nature, and rebell against them — aside. Arist. My dearest love, though loth, I am inforc'd To leave you for some houres, the state of Athens Sent for me, to repaire unto the Senate At ten a clocke about affaires of weight, 'Tis now about the time; farewell my sweetest. Dem. You shall not goe, come, come, you doe not love me, Else could you not be so unkind my deare, To kill your loving wife with your departure. I doubt I shall not live till your returne. Arist. Come prethee, leave this off, and be assur'd I will not stay two houres. Dem. On that assurance I doe dismisse you, but if you exceed The time, you're like to find me turn'd a coarse; sticke to your promise. Arist. I'll not faile you sweet.— Exit Aristippus. Dem. Where goe you Cnemon? Cnem. No where, but to waite Upon my Father to the Senate-house, And instantly returne. Dem. See that you doe, And you shall not repent it, Exit Cnemon. I must gaine him Unto my will by faire and gentle meanes, By promises and gifts, by sweet allurements And strong inticing words, by pleasing him
With what he likes best, this will take his youth (I make no doubt) and bring me to his bed. I burne for love of him and must be quench'd, Old Aristippus I have fool'd and made Believe I love him, but it is not so. I have brought him to my owne lure so th He stoops unto my beauty; now if I Can but enjoy my Cnemon, I am then Mistris of my designe, and a chiefe Artist In this sweet trade; let fooles burne in their fire Of modest love, i'le on to my desire. Exit. Actus primi, Scena tertia. Enter Caricles, Sysimethres and Nebulo. Sysim. Prethee honest friend Shall I intreat thee to go forth and bid The pretty girle without in the next room To come here to me. Nebul. Yes sir that I shall, I love to be imploy'd a messenger To pretty mayds, is she so beautifull▪ Sysim. O wondrous faire and beautifull. Nebul. I'le then Usher her safely in, and kisse her too. Exit Nebulo, enters againe with Cariclea. Sysim. See here the second gift I meane to give you: More pretious then the first, you told me sir You had a daughter once, but rap'd by death. Here is another for you, use her well. Caric. I am amaz'd to see so rare a beauty, Such an Angel-like creature. Sysim. Cease your wonder; The mother of this beautious girle which here Standeth before us for a certaine cause Which you shall learne hereafter, laid her forth Clad in such weeds as commonly is us'd For such a purpose, so committing her
To fortunes doubtfull chance, but I by hap Finding her tooke her up, for tis not lawfull That we neglect a soule when once it hath Entred a humane body, (being a precept Amongst the wise men with us, to be whose Unlearned scholler I was once judg'd worthy) Beides even in the infants eyes appear'd, Something which bred both wonder and delight. With her I found this bag of precious stones Whih I gave you of late, and a silke cloth Wrought full with letters in her mother tongue, Wherein contayned was her whole estate; Her mother as I ghesse procur'd the same, Which ater I had read, I knew from whence and what shee was, and herefore carryed her Into the Land farre distant from the City Delivering her to certaine honest shepheards To bring her up, with charge that they should not Reveale her unto any; for those things That were found with her I detain'd with me, Least for them she might suffer any danger, And thus at first this matter was kept close. Caric. But what befell her after pray goe one. In processe then of time this princelie maid Growing and as she grew encreasing still More faire then any women else besides (For beautie surelie cannot e conceald Though under ground but would from thence appeare) I fearing least her fortune should be knowne And I brought unto danger, su'd to be Sent in embassage to the Deputie Of Egipt and abtained it, therefore come I And bring her with me, full of zealous care To set her busines right and in good order. Caric. Leave that to me. Nebul. But chiefly unto me, I'le be her guardion too. Caric. What will you have me doe concerning her?
Direct me, and i'le punctualle observe it. Sysim. As touching her, first I commend her to you, (And to the gods who hitherto have kept her,) On such conditions as by oath you'r bound To see perform'd, that is that you will use her As a free woman ought to be, and give her In marriage to a free man, as you doe Recevie her at my hand, or rather of Her mother who hath left her to your charge: I hope you will performe all things according Unto your oath, and answer the opinion I have of your good manners, which I finde By some few dayes experience to be Greekish indead; this much I had to say Before I executed my commission Concerning my embassage, other secrets Belonging to the maid, i'le tell you them To morrow in more ample manner, if You please to meet me about Isis temple. Caric. Expect me there then; but I cannot brooke So long a time to see the Virgin mask'd In so obscure a manner. Sysim. Now I cannot Stay to discover what I know of her; The Deputie of Egypt hath appointed This day for hearing of me: farewell both. Exit Sysim. Caric. Can you speake Greeke my pretty sweet heart, can you?she smiles upon him but saies nothing. No, can you speake Egyptian? neither sweet? Nebul. I'le undertake to teach her both the tongues So I may be her tutor. she frownes upon him. Caric. Nebulo Thou seest I have another daughte ow, She shall be called faire Cariclea Deriv'd from Caricles which is my name. Nebul. Would I had such a daughter too, she should not Have then so course a name, all men should call her. The pretty Nebuletta; Nebulo,
Then Nebulona, then neate Nebuletta, A sumptuous pedegree, how sweet it runnes! Caric. Thy house would flourish then, were she thy daughter. Nebul. Above the clouds, the gods would lodge themselves Beneath my roofe, and powre downe plenty on me In golden showers to rest in Danaes lap. Caric. What growne so high conceited Nebulo? Nebul. Something inspir'd my braine, I know not what sir, But now i'm come unto my selfe againe, 'Twas but a toy that tooke me. Caric. I believe it, Many such toyes doe take thee in the head: Get me a maske, I must convey this damzell Muffled home to my house. Nebul. She need not be Asham'd to shew her face, it may procure her A husband by the way for ought you know; You shall but wrong her much in doing so. Caric. Sirrah away, dispute no more, but doe it. Exit & redit with a maske, they muffle her. Nebul. 'Tis pitty faith methinkes to use her thus, 'Tis such a pretty thing. Caric. Come you must goe With me my daughter deare where you shall be Us'd and respected as my native child: When I have understood (harke Nebulo Her's newes for thee) by good Sysimethres My daughters furher state, we'll hye forthwith To Greece and Delphos, and put on againe My first religious habit; to your shrines Ye gods we'll offer sanctified minds. Exeunt. Actus primi, Scena quarta. Enter Demeneta and Thisbe her mayd. Demen. When sawest thou Cnemon, Thisbe? This. Know you not That Pallas high feast call'd Quinquatria
This day was celebrated here in Athens, One with a ship by land, (as is the manner) Was consecrated, Cnemon was imployd, Clad in his robes, and on his head a crowne, To sing the usuall hymne due to her praise I saw him busie in the ceremonies. Dem. Is this the day? by Iove I knew it not, Else had I beene spectator of the sight, Chiefly to see my Cnemon in his office, Could I be angry with him, I should chide him For not acquainting me. This. He did it neatly; I would not for my maiden-head have miss'd So rare a sight, not for ten maiden-heads. Dem. Are all the rites and ceremonies done? I faine would see yet the conclusion. This. Mistresse, tis to late; see Cnemon there return'd in all his robes. Enter Cnemon in his robes crowned, Demeneta runnes to him and takes him in her armes. Dem. My young Hippolitus, and my deare Theseus, Welcome, O welcome to me. Cnem. Heavens defend me From this lewd Phaedra— aside. Mother what dee meane To burne me thus with kisses? Dem. Burthen thee With blisses too I can, my pretty boy, If thou wilt love thy mother. Cnem. In what nature Require you that? if as it ought to be, That children love their Parents, I agree. Dem. As Ʋenus with Anchises sported once In Ida grove, so let mee sport with thee; Dost understand me now? Cnem. You are too bold, Too impudent. Dem. Nay, prethee doe not frowne, This night I must enjoy thee, and thou me,
Thy fathers absence doth invite us to it; I will maintaine thee like a Princes sonne, Glittering in gold, and our sweet furtive sports Keepe from the sunne and knowledge of the gods, No one shall know it. Cnem. Hence incestuous woman, Think'st thou to make me wrong my fathers bed, And to commit an act so foule as incest? Tempt me no more; by heaven, by earth and all Th'immortall gods, I'le die a thousand deaths Ere thinke a thought on't, much lesse yeeld unto it, Your damned wit, nor quaint inticing words Shall not prevaile, my hate exceeds my love. Exit Cnemon in a rag3. Demen. Am I despised thus, and my hot love Requited with disdaine, as cold as ice, By such a youngling? he shall know the difference Betweene a womans favours and her frownes, And curse too late his foolish modesty: Goe Thisbe to the Castle, tell my husband I am not well, intreat him to come to me With all the speed he can. This. I shall sweet Mistresse.— Exit Thisbe. Demeneta a lies down upon the bed, faining her selfe sicke. Dem. What raging fires still burne me? how I am Divided in my selfe tweene love and hate, two mighty passions combatting together? Love would prevaile, if reason might be judge, But love is too unreasonably harsh: Hate therefore execute thy proper function, Enflame my breast with rage and high disdaine Against this brat that gave me the repulse, Inspire my study in his Tragedie. Enter Aristippus and Thisbe. Arist. How fares my sweet heart, that she keepes her bed? Dem. Deare husband, very sicke and in ill case. Arist. The gods forbid, that sound doth strike me dead; What ailes my dearest wife? tell me the cause
Of this your sudden sicknesse. Dem. Nothing Sir, I know no cause at all. Arist. Come, come, you must not Conceale your griefe, but lay it ope unto me, I doe beseech my love. Dem. Since you are so Importunate to know it, understand The goodly young man, sonne unto us both (To you by nature, but to me by love) Whom I (the gods know) held as deare unto me As you, when he perceiv'd by certaine tokens I was with child by you (which thing I kept Hid from your knowledge till I knew my selfe The certainty) and waiting for your absence, When I in wonted manner councell'd him To leave his whores, and to avoid his cups (Which things I knew he lov'd, but would not tell you, Lest I should run into the ill suspition Of stepmother) whilest I in gentle manner Told him these things, I will not speake the worst, Nor in what sort he did revile us both, But last of all, he spurn'd me on the belly, Which hath procur'd this my disease and paine. Arist. O villaine, I will scurge him even to death; Thisbe, goe call him hither. Exit Thisbe, Then presently enters Cnemon, Aristippus falls presently a buffetting of him without speaking a word, then calls his servants and scurgeth him with rods. Cnem. Deare father, I beseech you let me know The cause of this your anger and my stripes So cruelly laid on mee. Arist. Oh cleanly dissembler, Thou wouldst indeed know thy owne fault from me. Hee beats him afresh. Cnem. Yet now at length, Sir, let me understand What I have done, that thus provokes your wrath, The gods doe know my innocence.
Arist. Base wretch, Thy innocence; would she belie thee thinkst thou, That lov'd thee better than her selfe? away, Get out of my sight, I will not heare thee speak. Exit Cnemon. My dearest Demeneta, cheere your selfe, Strive to forget the paine. Dem. I'm in bad plight, So that I doe not onely feare the life Of that I goe with, but mine owne, besides, These accidents are dangerous to women; Yet, Sir, it griev'd me that you tooke so sharpe A punishment of Cnemon, for all this I cannot chuse but love him. Arist. That's thy vertue, But banish him thy thoughts as I will doe, Hence forth as most unworthy of our love; Come sweet, you shall remove from hence into A fitter roome, I'le send a Doctor to you. Exit Aristippus. Dem. You doe mistake my pulse, whose veines doe swell With rage and furie, and shall live in paine, Untill I be reveng'd. This. My Mistresse knowes How to deceive old Dotards with false shewes. Exeunt. Actus primi Scena quinta. Enter Nebulo solus, frisking for joy. Nebul. WEe shall fall downe the river Nile to night, and hoise saile for Greece, brave newes, comfortable newes, my heart capers within me for joy, that I shall see my countrey againe; my Master is sore troubled for blacke Sysime∣thres his constrained flight, which hath defeited their appoin∣ted meeting and conference touching Caricleas fortunes, but haste our journey the sooner, there's my comfort. I left him cursing the Deputy, and invoking the god Apollos wrath to plague him for dismissing the Embassadour so suddenly, with such deadly threatenings to depart the Kingdome. Alas, poore maid, I pity thee, that by this meanes thou shalt not be able to
knowe who begot thee nor who brought thee forth, but all's one, thou wilt soone learne to be begotten, and to bring forth by instinct of nature and thy owne experience. Catadupice adiew adiew, adiew gentlemen; when you see us next, twill be in Delphos; away, away, away, merrylie, merrily. Exit. Finis actus primi. Actus secundi, Scena prima. Enter Calasiris Isis priest at Memphis. Am I the goodesse Isis priest, and burne In these unlawfull fires? shall Rhodopis With her Ʋenerious charmes subdue my heart, And make me breake that temperance of life Which I have hitherto preserv'd unspotted? What shall I doe? I cannot stand the push Of these strong passions, yet I am resolv'd Nere to commit the act, nor so to staine My priesthood with dishonour; Isis temple And secret places shall not be defil'd By Calasiris, no i'le rather bannish My selfe from sight of cursed Rodopis, Least staying here I should be forc'd to doe So vile a deed; I am resolv'd to leave This statelie City Memphis suddenly, I'le give it out, my iourney is for Thebes To see my eldest sonne call'd Thiamis. VVith this pretence I shall unquestion'd goe, But there's a City sacred to Apollo In Greece hight Delphos, there i'le bend my course (For tis a Colledge where wise men resort Free from the concourse of the common people) To visit my old friend priest Caricles. When whorish beautie and vaine pride display Their gaudie colours, wise men shun the way. Exit.
Actus secundi, Scena secunda. Enter Demeneta and Thisbe. Dem. Thisbe my wench, thou must be secret unto all my commands. This. As your owne heart could wish, as your trusty cabinet. Dem. I am confident of thee; thou know'st how I lov'd that proud boy Cnemon, what proffers I made him, what fa∣vours I bestow'd upon him, and all to winne him to my imbra∣ces, yet how scornfully and scurvily he refused me, with what disdaine he left me; I am now resolv'd no longer to sollicite my love but to execute my revenge; I have devis'd a dainty plot against him, which will take according as I would wish, follow thou my directions. This. I will not digresse a haires breadth mistris. Dem. Then thus I schoole thee, make a shew that thou lov'st Cnemon exceedingly, entice him to thee with beckes and amo∣rous glances, he'll soone be caught with these baites, especially having heretofore long nibled upon thy beauty; frequent his bed often, be not asham'd, it shall be for thy great advancement, and whereas thou art now a bondmaid, thou shalt be made free forever. This. I am your creature in all things, especially in matters of this nature. Dem. When thou hast done this which I command thee, I will instruct thee farther. Exit Demeneta. Manet Thisbe a little. This. I waite your pleasure. I must give Cnemon good coun∣tenance, well, I must entice the young man, well, I must lie with him too, very well; faith these are no harsh commands, it shall never grieve me to be imployd in such worke, would my mistris had no harder labour for me, this is a taske of pleasure; I have a warrant now for what I shall doe; I durst not yeild to Cmon before when he attempted me, now let him come with his stoutest artillery, I will stand the charge vali∣antly. Enter Cnemon. Cnem. Faire Thisbe are you here? why now I like you,
You smile upon me, and your countenance Darts amorous glances which before cast frownes, Now you appeare like Ʋenus. This. Courteous Cnemon, Although at first I did deny your suit, Impute it not to want of love, but place And oportunity, besides the doubt And danger which the action brings with it If once discover'd, made me to commit So grosse an errour. Cnem. Will you be reform'd Upon mature counsell? This. You shall see I will not be refractory to ought You shall advise me, I doe know your mind, Cnem. Come with me then and learne to kisse and smile, You know the backe way to my chamber sweet. Cnem. I do, and will attend you, there wee'l meet. Exeunt. Actus secundi, Scena tertia. Enter Caricles and Calasiris. Caric. Welcome to Greece my worthy friend and brother, And in the fittest time, because I shall Need your assistance in the perfecting A businesse which concernes me, you are wise And can perswade, when reason is your theame. Cala. What I can doe, our long acquaintance sir And brotherhood in travell and vocation, VVils me to render it unto your service; VVherein can I be usefull to my friend? Caric. In this, you know last night I did relate Cariclaes story, how I did receive her And brought her from your Egypt here to Greece, where in a short time she hath learn'd our tongu, And so farre passeth she all other beauties That she attracteth all mens eyes to gaze VVith admiration on her, as well strangers
As Greekes, so that where e'r shee be conversant, Either at home, or in the Temples, or At publique exercises, all mens eyes Are fix'd upon her with as great devotion As if she were the image of some goddesse Lately created; that which grieves me, is She loathes to heare of marriage, and resolves To live a maiden still, and so becomming Dianas servant, for the most part doth Apply her selfe to hunting and to shooting; I had a great desire to marry her Unto my sisters sonne, a fine young man, Well manner'd, and faire spoken; but I cannot, Either by prayer or promise, or by force Of argument perswade her thereunto: In this I crave your helpe, deare Calasiris, Use some point of your wisedome to perswade her To know her nature, that she is a woman, And that she would not so degenerate From all those of her sex; this I beseech you To doe for great Apollos sake, and all Your countrey gods. Calas. In this point, Caricles, I'le doe my best indeavour. Enter Nebulo. Nebul. Master, come Away for shame, the captaine of the Aenians Embassage stayeth for you at the gate For to begin the sacrifice. Calas. Pray Sir, What are those Aenians? what their holy message? What sacrifice make they? Caric. They are the noblest Of all Thessalia, this same sacrifice They send to Pirrhus, stout Achilles sonne, Every fourth yeere (at such time as the feast Agen is kept unto Apollo here) For here was Pirrhus massacred before Apollos altars by enrag'd Orestes,
This message is more honourably done Than any of the rest, because they say The Captaine is sprung from Achilles line. Indeed, such is the beauty of his person And brave majesticke carriage, as confirmes He is some goddesse sonne. Calas. I faine would see him. Caric. You shall, and his brave order'd sacrifice, Cariclea too, my daughter, must be there To day by custome, at the funerall pompe Of Neoptolemus, but you have seene her Before. Calas. Yes, and done sacrifice together. Caricles. Come, you must goe unto the Temple with us To helpe me in this ceremonious worke. Calas. Lead on, I'le follow, if I'm prompted right, Strange things will happen after this rare sight Exeunt. Actus secundi Scena quarta. Enter Cnemon and Thisbe. Cnem. Thisbe my love, we must act closely, and with great circumspection, lest we be discovered by the mischievous De∣meneta, who (as thou say'st) hates me more now than she lov'd me before. This. You talke simply Cnemon, if you count it a dangerous matter for me being a bond-maid, bought with money, to be taken a bed with you; what punishment thinke you her wor∣thy, who is a free-woman, and lawfully married to a husband, yet playeth false, and beareth a man too many. Cnem. I judge her worthy of death, but who is the person, prethee? This. Your vertuous stepmother, my Mistresse Demeneta, now you may be reveng'd upon her by discovering it to your father Aristippus. Cnem. I can scarce believe it. This. To confirme my report (if you please) I will delive the adulterer unto you in the very act. Cnem. You shall doe me a courtesie then.
This. VVith all my heart, not onely for your sake who have been injured by her before, but for mine owne also, who, for that she hath me in jealousie, am used of her very extreamely, wherefore if thou be a man apprehend him. Cnem. Else let me die in scorne and infamie, Ile kill them both, for ne're shall it be said, That Cnemon knew his fathers bed defil'd And durst not be reveng'd, assist my hand Infernall furies, Thisbe lead the way That I may doe the deed ere see the day. Exeunt Actus Secundi, Scena quinta. Enter Aristippus and Demeneta. Demen. 'Tis late 'ith night, sweet husband, let's to bed, I cannot have too much of your imbraces, The envious day will interrupt our sport, Me thinks we married were but yesterday. Aristip. Conceiv'st thou so, that doth proceed from love, But I am old, and thou a sprightly lasse. Demen. You wrong your selfe, you are a lusty man, For were you old the dull effects of age Would then appeare, but I have had experience Of your performance, Cnemon, I believe, Your sonne is not so active in his trade. Aristip. If it be so, then sure the youthfull heat Of thy faire body hath infused life Into my withered vaines, more powerfull then Medeas charmes, when she stir'd up fresh blood In the decayed body of old Aeson. Enter Cnemon with his sword drawne followed by Thisbe, a candle carried before, he comes hastily to the bed. Cnem. Where is the villaine, the most worthy lover Of this chaste dame? his father leapes out of the bed, and falls on his knees before him. Aristip. My sonne, have pitty on thy fathers age, Spaire his white haires, take not away his life That gave thee thine, and brought thee up with care,
We doe confesse we wrong'd thee, yet the fault Was not so great that it should merit death; Asswage thy fury, and put up thy sword, Imbrue not in thy fathers blood thy hands. Cnemon in amaze lookes round about him for Thisby, who had conveyed her selfe away, and being thus astonished, his sword fell out of his hand, which Demeneta straightwaies tooke up. Dem. Did I not tell you this before, sweet heart, To looke unto this princoks pride and hate Who would no doubt, if time had serv'd his turne, Attempt some mischiefe to destroy us both. Aristip. You told me so indeed, but I believ'd not; Now I do finde it true, which to prevent I'le raise my house and bind him fast, to morrow I'le carry him before the people to Be judg'd for his offence; let nature goe In parents, when sonnes prove unnaturall so. Exeunt. Actus secundi, Scena sexta. Enter Nebulo and Nebulona. Nebulo. Nebulona my pretty chickin, how faires thy body? didst thou not thinke me lost long agoe? Nebulona. I gave you for dead in good faith, and was in the humour once to marry another man? Nebulo. Why sure thou wert not, thou dost but jest I know. Nebulona. Truely I was, nor could you blame me for it if I had; is it not a torture, thinke you, for a woman, to stay seven yeeres without her husbands company? Nebulo. Methinkes my browes begin Acteon-like to bud already, they are very knotty, I pray God thou hast not graft something there, I begin to suspect it shrewdly by diverse signes and tokens, how comes your belly so high wife? Nebulona. 'Tis nothing but a timpany I am sometimes trou∣bled with. Nebulo. I do believe thee, how long is it since you perceiv'd it to grow upon you? Nebulona. About two moneths since, the Doctor tells me I
shal be free of it very speedily. Nebulo. He is a foole, I am a better Doctor then he, thou shalt goe with it this foureteene weekes yet or thereabouts; come you are a whore, and have abus'd my honest bed; Ile have you before the Justices to be punish'd for thy offence. Nebulona. Spare me prethee gentle Nebulo, and hearken to my counsell a little, since thou art a cuckold (as I doe not deny it) choose whether thou wilt weare the hornes in thy fore∣head, and so all men see them, or put them into thy pocket, and no man see them, I leave it to thy owne discretion. Nebulo. Why then I am a cuckold it seemes? Nebulona. I cannot say against it truely, and speake the truth, if I should, this marke of thy fortune here deepely stamped would bewray me, be not so foolish now as Vulcan was, to make a proclamation of thy forked order. Nebulo. Did Ʋulcan do so? Nebulo. Yes, but afterwards he repented it for he forg'd an artificiall net, with which he caught his wife Venus and Mars a bed together in carnall copulation, then called all the gods and goddesses to be spectators of his owne shame. Nebul. But what said they when they saw it? Nebulona. They commended Mars, but condemned Ʋulcan for being the publisher of his owne disgrace. Nebul. But twas a shame for Mars to be caught so. Nebulona. The gods wish'd every one of them if that were a shame, to be shamed in the same manner. Nebulo. but how did Venus ake this? Nebulona. In scorne of the smith, and in revenge of this trick hath made his head as hard as his anvile. Nebulo. Thou hast devis'd a pretty story in thy owne de∣fence, i'st best to follow thy counsell, and say nothing, or stirre this bad thing and make it stinke the more? Nebulona. You may do what you please, but I have told you the best course. Nebulo. Let it be so then; I have travelled well I trow, and to good purpose, at may returne home to father a child, of which I did not beget so much as the least finger or the least toe; if this be the fruits of travelling, God keepe me from it
hence forward, and all good folkes besides; come Nebulona we are friends, do so no more, and all is forgotten. Nebulon. Not, if you stay at home and warme my bed, But if you leave me, then have at your head. Exeunt. Actus secundi, Scena septima. Enter the sacrifice to the tombe of Pirrhus in the manner of a He∣catombe led in by the Thessalians, who had each of them a white garment knit about them, these were entertayned by so many virgins of Thessalia standing in a ring with their haire loose about their eares; the maydes were divided into two companies, those who were in the first carryed flowers and fruite, the other carried in backets other fine knackes and perfumes, at the sound of musicke and a song made fit and agreeable to the musicke, they danced, the song was made in praise of Thetis. The Song. O Nereus god in surging seas, we praise thy Thetis. daughter deare, Whom Peleus at commandement of Jove did make his pheere: Thou art the goddesse we adore in Sea a glimpsing starre, Who stout Achilles didst bring forth a very Mars in warre, And Captaine good unto the Greekes, thy glory scales the skies; To thee did thy red-headed wife cause Pirrhus rough to rise, The Trojans utter overthrow, but stay to Greekish host, Be thou good Pirrhus unto us a favourable ghost, Who here in grave intombed liest in Phoebus sacred ground, Bow downe thy eare to th' holy hymnes that we to thee do sound,
And this our City suffer not in any feare to be, Of thee and Thetis is our song, Thetis all haile to thee. The song ended, enters Theagines Captaine of the Thessalians, very richly apparelled, followed by many gallants, who guarding him as he went, at last encompassed him round about; the maides overcome with the beauty of Theagines could not moderate their passions but began to cast flowers and fruit upon him, with that enters Cariclea most sumptuously adorned according to the manner, her haire was neither all bound up, nor all looe, but the most part thereof that grew behind, hanged over her shoulders; that which grew from the crowne of her head downe to her fore∣head, being of a yellow colour, was crowned with a garland of young Laurell; in her left hand shee bare a guilded Bow and a Quiver of arrowes hanged on her right shoulder, and in her other had she bare a taper burning: after the young men had gone three times about Neoptolem is sepulture in their bravery, the women cryed out pittiously, & the men made a strange noise, with that Theagines speakes to Caricles. Theag. Most sacred Priest of this high Deity We make request unto you to begin This sacriice to Neoptolemus. Caric. The sacrifice indeed belongs to me, But you ir, as the Captaine o this charge, And sacred messge, ought to take the taper Of her there, who of all those ceremonies Is pesedent, and burne the alter of; This is the order and our Countrey fshion. Theagnes takes the taper with a great deale of reverence from the hand of Cariclea, and sets fire to the Alter, bt first he was in a maze at the exceeding beauty of Cariclea, and she as much ta∣ken with his, then they both smiled a little and blush'd and then became pale againe: in conclusion he fll in love with her, and she with him. Theag. So burnes my heart as doth this Alter here,
The taper that did set my heart a fire Was faire Caricleas beauty. aside. Cariclea. How my soule Could sacrifice to faire Theagines.aside. Caricles. Great god of Delphos in whose sacred temple We celebrate these funerall obsequies Of great Achilles sonne, vouchsafe to send A happy ômen which may crowne this worke Of our devotion offered at thy Altar. The Oracle speakes touching Theagines and Cariclea. Ye men of Delphos sing of her, and her rare beauties praise, Who now in grace begins to grow, but fame shall end her daies, Who leaving these my temples here, and sailing surging streames Shall come at length to contries scorch'd with Phoebus burning beames, Where they as recompences due that vertues rare doe gaine In time to come ere it be long White miters shall obtaine. After this answer of the god Apollo, the pompe is broken up, and Exeunt. Actus secundi, Scena octava. Enter the iudges and people of Athens, then Aristippus And Demeneta with Cnemon bound. 1 Iudg. Cnemon stand forth, who doth accuse him here? Aristippus steps forth, and strewing ashes on his head, saith: Aristip. I brought not up my sonne ye men of Athens To see him come unto this end, but rather To be a staffe to stay my age upon; As soone as he was borne his education VVas good and civill, when he did attaine
To riper yeeres, I set him to our schooles And Academies there to study arts, And Mathematicke sciences, besides, According to the lawes of this our City, Made him free denison, yet notwithstanding He hath not onely cast behind his backe These favours of my love, but diversely Both injur'd me, and beaten this good woman, Who by our lawes is now my second wife; And not content herewith, one night he came Unto us with a drawne sword in his hand (When we in bed suspected no such thing) In mind to kill us both, and was no farther From being a paracide but that by chance His sword by sudden feare fell out his hand, Which Demeneta my good wife tooke up: Therefore I flee to you most learned Judges, And though I might by law of this our Senate Slay him with my owne hands, yet I appeale Unto your justice, and commit my cause To your grave censures, counting it more fit To punish this my sonne by publike lawe Then private bloodshed. With that Aristippus weepes, Demeneta faining teares also. Demen. Cnemon, i'me sorry for thee pretty boy, In an ill hower wert thou brought to the world; Unhappy creature. Cnem. Grave and learned senate Vouchsafe to heare me speake. 2 Iudg. We will not heare thee, But answer to this question we propound, Came you unto your father with a sword Drawne in your hand, or no? Cnem. I not deny But I came with a drawne sword in my hand, But I will tell you how, please you to heare me. 3 Iudg. He hath confess'd ynough, he ought not speake more for himselfe.
1 Iudg. Let us proceed to sentence. 2 Iudg. I judge him worthy to be ston'd to death. 3 Iudg. I to be hang'd. 4 Iudg. This is my sentence, fathers, That he be cast headlong into the dungeon. Cnem. O cruell stepmother, and most unkind, For thy curs'd sake am I so ill intreated Against all equity and justice too, Thou kil'st me contrary to course of Law. 1. Iudg. Your sentence is too hard and too severe, Let him not die, but be for ever banish'd. 2 Iudg. Let him be ston'd. 3. Iudg. Nay hang'd. 4. Iudg. nay cast into The dungeon. 1. Iudg. since we differ conscript fathers, In our opinions, I doe thinke it fit It be referr'd unto the peoples voyces. 2. Iudg. I doe assent unto it. 3 Iudg. So do I. 4. Iudg. And I. 1. Iudg. Then people give your voices, shall young Cnemon Die or be banish'd! The people. banish'd, banish'd, banish'd. 1. Iudg. Then Cnemon, this must be thy punishment, Perpetuall exile from thy native land Never to be revok'd, which if infring'd By thy presumption, then expect to have No mercie from the senate, but a grave. Breake up the Court. Exeunt, Actus secundi, Scena nona. Enter Caricles, and Calasiris. Caric. Saw you my onely joy, and the sole honour Of Delphos, faire Cariclea my daughter? Calas. This was not sir the first time that I saw her As often as the people made resort
Unto the temple I was present with her, And more, we have done sacrifice together, And when she doubted any point depending, On divine matters, or on humane learning; She would have me instruct her in the truth. Cric. How did you like her at the sacrifice? Did she set forth that brave sight any thing? Calasiris. You aske me a strang question Caricles, As if you doubted, whether the bright moone Did passe the lesser starres. Caric. The people prais'd Theagines the young Thessalian captaine, Attributing the second place to him. Calasires. Yea, and the third too, but they all acknowledge Your daughter carryed it away, and was The verie eye of the solemnitie. Caric. Come will you goe with me to visite her I doubt the concourse of so great a troope Hath preiudic'd her rest. Calasir. though my affaires Call me another way, yet il'e dispence VVith them how great so ever and important To waite on you and her exeunt Actus secundi, Scena decima. Enter Cariclea love sicke, she lyeth upon her bed Cariclea. O cruell power of love! why dost thou triumph In lovers restles paines? what glorie can Be added to thy deitie in seeking The overthrow of my poore libertie? Take here this tribute of my teares, these sighes, Sent from a gentle heart, convaey them hence That they may meet Theagnies, and flow With his as from one fountaine, from one head. To her enters Caricles and Calasiris, Caricles embraceth her Caric. What ailes my sweet, my deare Carcilea, Tell me my daughter.
Cariclea. Nothing but my head Doth ake a little, and I faine would sleepe. Cariclea faines her selfe asleepe. Caric. What should this meane good Calasiris thinke you, VVhat disease hath she tane? Calasir. You need not marvell At this, for I believe some enuious eye Hath over look'd her. Caric. I must laugh at this, Then you beleive as commonlie men doe, That there is witch craft Calasiris. Yes as I beleive That anything is true, and for this cause, The emptie aire that is about us round On everie side, entring in by our eyes, Our mouth, our eares our nostrills, all our pores, Carrying such outward qualities with it As tis indew'd with, doth ingraffe a like Infection in the man who hath receiv'd it; As when a man hath enviously beheld Something that's excellent forthwith the aire Is filled with that poisonous qualitie, VVhich entreth into that is neere at hand, This same aire being a slender suble thing Pierceth even to the bones and very marrow, And by that cause hath envie beene the meanes Or that disease, which by a propper name VVe call bewitching. Caric. Your wise reasons beare Some probility I must confesse. Cala. Consider Caricles how many have Gotten the plague, although they never touch'd Nor saw, nor eate, nor lay wih the deseas'd, Bt being with them in the selfesame aire, Let love be argument and proofe of this, VVho taketh its beginning from the object Or what it sees, and so as if it were Some privy passage by the eyes hath entrance
Into the heart, and this is probable, For seeing of all other pores and sences The sight is capable of most mutations, And so the hottest, it must needs receive Such like infections as are round about it, And with a hot spirit entertaine loves changes, As for examples sake, I will produce Out of the holie bookes some reasons for it Gathered from natures sole consideration; You know the bird Charadrius doth heale Those persons whose disease is the kings evill, Which bird doth flie away assoone as any Diseased with this griefe hath spied her, And turnes her taile to him, and shuttes her eyes Not (as some say) because she would not help them But that by looking on them she by nature Drawes that disease unto her, therefore wiselie Declineth such a sight as present perill, Caric. You have discuss'd this doubt right sagelie Sir, I would my daughter once might feele and finde What love doth meane, I would not then conceive That she were sick, but in her perfect health, But nothing lesse then this is to be thought Hath happened to her, who contemnes all love, But rather seemes to be bewitch'd indeed; Deere Calasiris for our friendships sake Shew some point of your wisedome to dissolve This witchchraft, and if possible to bring her Into a good opinion of my nephew. Enter Nebulo with a bastinado in his hand. Nebulo. Sirs what dee meane to make such tarriance? The∣agines hath made such a feast, and all the good cheere will be eaten before you come, for shame come away, there are none of the ghestes wanting but you who are the principall, if you will be such fooles to misse it, you may, but i'le not follow your foolish example. Calasiris. This fellow cals us rather o a battle Then to a banket.
Caric. 'Tis his rustieke manner; O what a loty fellow Bacchus is When he is well wash'd! but come let us goe Least with his cudgell honest Nebulo Doe drive us forward. Nebulo. Well firs you may jest, But I meane earnest if I misse the feast. Exeunt. Finis actus secundi. Actus tertii, Scena prima. Enter Aristippus solus in a melancholy humour. Aristip. How have I plai'd the foole and rob'd my selfe In hastie passion of my onelie sonne; Repentance when it comes too late doth argue An inconsiderate iudgment; O my Cnemon Would thou hadst kill'd me ere I banish'd thee, For death is better sure then banishment; Nere shall I see my boy, well for this fault I will do penance, penance on my selfe; Athens adiew and all the Citie pleasures Forsake me quite; my solitarie manour Farre in the countrey where no people comes Shall be my habitation day and night Where I will eate my heart out. Exit Aristippus. Enter Demeneta and Thisbe. Demen. Oh my Cnemon, My prettie boy, more deere then my owne life, How I lament thy chance and my mishap. This. Comfort your selfe deere mistris I beseech you. Demen. Peace foole, my griefe is more then can be cur'd By any words of comfort, no man knowes What a sharpe corsive it was to my heart, More fervent is my love now he is absent. This. Fie, fie, forget him, thinke upon his pride And high disdaine against you, thinke he doth Deserve this punishment and greater too.
Demen. How readie thou art Thisbe to doe mischiefe, Thou art the fire brand that hast kindled this Combustion in my heart, thou hast not beene A helpe unto me, but a hinderance In the fruition of my love, by thee And by thy meanes I hve lost my onely joy, And yet for all this thou dost still incense me To run on in this way; most wicked wretch. This. Well I perceive your mind, she thinkes to make me Support the fury of her franticke fits, But I shall overreach you sure in wit, And lay the saddle on the right horse backe, aside. Why do you thus accuse your trusty servant? You know I did but what I was commanded, Nor ere did any thing without your warrant, If this thing happen'd not as you would have it, Ascribe it not to any fault in me, But rther, as you justly may, to fortune; If you will have me yet devise some way To remedy your present griefe and sorrow, You shall perceive how ready my good will Shall be at your commands. Demen. What remedy Can possibly be found, since he that can Ease me, and none but he, is separated At such a distance from me? and besides Th'unhop'd for lenity of those which gave Sentence against him hath destroyd my hopes. I would he had suffered death, for then in me Hd quenched beene the flames of burning love. Hope that is past removes griefe from the heart, And when despaire possesseth troubled minds They inermit all sorrow building on Th'impossibility of their enjoying; But as it is methinkes I see and heare Cnemon complayning of my cruelty, And how by unjust guiles I did ensnare him; Sometimes me thinks he comes to me as if
I should enjoy him, othertimes I bend My course to him where ere he lives remote; These things enflame me, these things make me mad, But O ye gods, I have as I deserve; Why did I not with good will seeke to win him Rather then by deceit and craft compell him? Why did I not most humbly sue unto him Rather then wrong him like an enemy? It may be at the first he did deny me For maiden modesty, and feare to foule His fathers sheets, but had I persever'd Unto the end, he might have beene allur'd To condescend by faire meanes to my will; But O my Thisbe tell me, tell me quickly What remedy is that thou wouldst devise For me and saist is easie? This. Mistris this: All men suppose that Cnemon is departed The towne of Athens and the territory As he was judg'd to doe, but I know well (Who have search'd all things meerely for your sake) That he remaines here still in secret manner With one Arsinoe whom I thinke you know, Shee playes well on the Virginals, with her He lyeth every night, for this faire maid Won with his love, and pitying his distresse Receiv'd him in, and promiseth as soone As all things are provided for her journey, To goe away with him. Demen. O happy wench, Happy Arsinoe is thy destiny, Though banishment or death with such a partner; But what doe these thinges ought aduantage me? This. Much, i'le pretend I am in love with Cnemon, And will desire for old acquaintance sake, Arsinoe would be pleas'd to suffer me In stead of her to lie with him one night, Which if I can obtaine, it shall be yours,
You shall enjoy him in Arsinoes stead, And ile provide before he go to bed He shall have wine sufficient, least our plot Should be discover'd; if you have your wish, Rest then contented to give o're your love, For in most natures it is easily seene That such love whose beginning's violent After the first experiment decayes And waxeth cold, but graunt it burne a fresh Within your bosome (which ye gods forbid) Tis but to make a new voiage, & seeke out A new way to atchieve it. Demen. I approve, And praise thy rare inuention deerest Thisbe; Faile not to put this plot in execution, And I shall well reward thee. This. Feare it not, I crave but three dayes to bring this about. Demen. Tis granted; if thy wit can worke my pleasure, How I shall love my Thisbe beyond measure!Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena secunda. Enter the banquet, after Theag. Caric. & Calasi. with attendance. Theag. Welcome my honoured friends, and holy fathers To my poore Table here, please you to sit And eate of what the gods have sent us. Caric. Sir, Superabundant are your cates and dainties, Faire Cleopatra that luxurious Queene Might revell here, and be contented too, We that are Priests use to such dainty fare Whose lives are squar'd by rules of temperance. Theag. We will not cause you breake those rules, nor swerve From your religious order, but sometimes A little Wine will much enflame your zeale To holy duties, reverend Caricles I must begin to you. drinkes to him.
Caric. Theagines, I must returne you thanks. Theagines on a sudden falls into musing, sighes, and chan∣geth his countenance sometimes red, sometimes pale, and gapes withall, as if he were not well. What meaneth this variety? I thinke Some envious eye hath look'd upon him too, Methinkes Cariclea and Theagenes Haave one disease. — softly to Calasires Calas. By Isis that they have One and the same disease, thus it appeares: Since he next to your daughter was the fairest Of all the shew at that brave sacrifice. Theagenes begins to recollect himselfe. Theag. Sirs, pardon my stupidity and dulnesse, A little fit of passion did possesse me, But now tis past, here worthy Calasiris, I drinke a health to the faire president Of our late funerall pomp. Calas. Excuse me Sir, I drinke no healths, yet thanke your courteous proffer. Theag. Refuse Caricleas health? Caricles. Sir, be not angry, This man ne'r drinketh wine, nor eats the flesh Of any living thing. Theag. That's strange, how comes it? Caricles. He's an Aegyptian, borne at holy Memphis, And Isis Priest, whose custome is t'abstaine From wine and flesh as things unlawfull. Theag. Then Bring me some water, wise and reverend man, Pardon my ignorance which knew it not; Now Sir to you in your owne element, And let this table make a lasting league Of amity betweene us. Calas. Let it be so, Worthy Theagenes, for I doe much Desire that combination. Theag. Ere you goe
Please you to see a dance in armour, call'd Pyrricha, which we use in Thessalie. Caricles. What pleaseth you doth please us. Theag. Sound musicke then. The Thessalian youths with Theagenes their Captaine, dance Pyrricha in armour, with a gracefull dexterity, which ended, the Priests take their leaves, and bid Theagenes adieu. Caricles. Thanks for our worthy entertainment Sir. Theagenes embraceth Calasiris very often, and at parting whispereth him something in the eare.—Exeunt all. Actus tertii Scena tertia. Enter Calasiris solus. Calas. 'Twas not a dreame or such like fantasie, As oftentimes invades and creepes into The mindes of men, when Morpheus shuts their eyes, That tooke me last night napping in my bed: No, twas no dreame, but a true apparition. I saw Apollo, and Diana both Appeare before me, and with them they brought Theagenes and faire Cariclea, Apollo gave me him, Diana her, With this command, goe take these young folkes with thee, And haste thee home unto thy native countrey, Tis time, for so the Destinies command, Love them as if they were thy naturall children, And when thou comst to Egypt, leade them further, Where it shall please us gods to give direction; With that they vanish'd, and a token gave That it was not a dreame, or a false vision: Immortall powers, your hests I will obey, If you vouchsafe to point me out the way. one knockes. Who's there? Theag. 'Tis I, Theagenes your friend. Calas. Theagenes, the 'brave Thessalian Captaine, Most welcome Sir, what businesse was of force To make you stirre so earely?
Theag. Reverend Father, A stirring one which keeps my thoughts awake, And banisheth sweet slumber from mine eyes, Hath made me breake your morning meditations, And though I suffer beyond thought of man, Yet blush I to reveale my griefe for shame. Calas. Come, come, I know your griefe, although you are Asham'd to tell it me, I know it well, For nothing from my wisedome can be hid, And from the knowledge of the gods my son. Calasiris casteth some account upon his finger, as if he would prophesie. Young man, thou art in love, nay, start not backe, Thou art in love with faire Cariclea. Theagines embraceth him about the necke. Theag. Thy prophesie is true, I am in love With faire Cariclea, save me learned man; For without helpe I cannot live a day, So much this mischiefe workes upon my heart; I never till now knew the effects of love, Nor ere saw woman that I thought deserv'd To be beloved, before Caricleas beauty Made me a slave to Cupids cruelty. Calas. Weepe not Theagines, be of good cheere; For since you have recourse to me for helpe, My wisedome shall prevaile above her strength, Although shee be perverse, and easily Will not be drawne to love, I'le try all meanes For your sake whom I love, and use all art I can to breake her nature, be but bold, And doe as I shall shew you. Theag. With my soule, And if you doe this, I am yours, and all I have at your command.— one knockes. Calas. Who's there, be gone Theagines, to morrow morne I'le meet you In great Apollos Temple and talke more.— Exit Theagines. Enter Nebulo. O, is it you Sir Nebulo, what newes
Bringst thou I prethee? Neb. What dee take me for, a newes Carrier? I would you should know it, I am none such, I have not to doe with other mens businesse nor their wives, I would they had not to doe with mine, but tis no mater for once, there is promised a refor∣mation, I hope all will be amended, let it passe; but to the point now. Calas. I, to the point Nebulo by all meanes. Neb. And then to the businesse afterward. Caricles. Why, didst thou not meane the businesse when thou mention'dst the point? is it not all one in the sense? I conceive it so, else thou art more learned than I am. Neb. No, tis not all one, the point is one thing, and the busines another, we must first handle the point, before we come to the businesse; for your better understanding, I will make it plainer. Calas. Thou art a very learned Doctor sure, in matters of this nature. Neb. I hope so, yet my wife hath gone beyond me I'le be∣sworne, by many degrees. Calas. But Nebulo, prethee what wouldst thou have with me? how doth thy Master, and my good friend Caricles? Neb. In health, but doggedly out of tune, hee will be with you presently, so much he bid me tell you, and something else, but I have forgottn it, so much businesse I have to thinke of. Enter Caricles. Calas. My dearest friend and brother, welcome to me, Why doe you looke with such a sullen cheere? Methinks you're very sd and melancholy. Caricles. I am indeed, and I have reason for it. I come to crave your counsell what to doe, But first depart and leave us Nebulo. Neb. Wherefore I pray? well, there will be a sweet coun∣sell now I am excluded, I should be loth to change heads with either of them for all my hornes.— Exit Nebulo. Caricles. My daughter, Sir, since yesterday, the race Was run in armour tweene Theagenes And stout Ormenes, hath beene wondrous sicke, And the last night did never sleepe one winke.
Calasiris. Who won the garland Sir? Caric. Theagines, Cariclea as the custome is did hold The prize, and he receiv'd it at her hand, She still growes worse and worse, deere Calasiris, Imploy your skill and wisedome to restore her, I know tis easie for you if you please To heale her, who, you say, is but bewitch'd, For I believe tis not impossible For holie Priestes to bring to passe strange things. Calas. Let's goe then if you please unto the maid, And by recommendation strive to make Me more familiarlie acquainted with her, That she the bolder may sustaine my cure. Caric. Content, Apollo graunt a good successe Unto thy worke, and Aesculapius. Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena quarta. Enter Aristippus and Thisbe. This. Master I doubt not but my sudden comming Appeareth strange as being unexpected, The cause whereof I will relate unto you Without more circumstance, or vaine preambl; I come here to accuse my selfe unto you; And to receive such punishment as your Discretion shall thinke fit for my offence; By me sir you have partly lost your sonne, I doe confesse I was an accessary, Though much against my will; when I perceiv'd My mistris liv'd not well, but wrong'd your bed, Not onely provident to shun the danger Might light upon my selfe for keeping counsell (If it should come to light by any other) But chiefly sorrowfull for your mis-hap, Who should in recompence of all your kindnesse Vnto your wife, reape such disgrace from her, I came one night to my yong master Cnemon, (My selfe not daring to acquaint you with it)
And told him there was one who us'd to play The lecher with my mistris, he enrag'd, Thinking that then they were in bed together, Tooke suddenly his sword into his hand, And notwithstanding that I told them then They were not at their sport, he would not heare me, But thinking that I had repented of Bewraying it, ran like a mad man forth Unto your bed-side with intent to kill Th'adulterer, what followed sir you know: Now to confirme that this I say is true, If so you please, this night ile shew your wife My mistris Demeneta with her friend A bed together in a neighbours house Without the City. Aristip. If thou canst doe this, Ile make thee free, and pardon all thy faults, For I suppose I should revive againe So I reveng'd were on my enemy; I had such a suspition in my head That she was false, but kept it to my selfe, Because I wanted cleere proofes to convince her, But what must I doe Thisbe, tell me wench? This. You know the garden where the monument Of Epicures doth stand, there come a little Before the night and stay for me; adiew. Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena quinta. Enter Arsinoe and Thisbe. Ars. My old acquaintance welcome, welcome Thisbe. This. Thanks good Arsinoe, will you teach me now A lesson on the Virginals? Ars. You jeere me, I faine would learne of you: but prethee tell me What businesse brought thee hither? This. I will tell thee, You know Feledemus the dauncer Ars. Yes.
This. We too must daunce la volta here to night, Let's have a chamber and a bed made ready Sweet sister, for I've promis'd him this night He shall come first, and I will follow after, Assoone as I to bed have brought my mistris. Ars. All things shall be according to thy wish, My better halfe. This. But when he comes I pray you Be out the way, for he is very shame-fac'd As being a novice in this art. Ars. Is he Not entred yet? This. Not yet I can assure yee, His flower is yet to spend and strength of youth. Ars. That flower thou soone wilt crop, and wast the seed. This. In time I may, at night expect me sister. Ars. Ile waite you home. This. If this my plot doe hit Nere was the like devis'd by womans wit. Exeunt. Enter Demeneta, and Thisbe againe with a candle. Thisbe. Come mistris, let me make you unreadie instantlie, all that I promised you is done, I will goe fetch young Cnemon unto you who is making merrie here by, and returne suddenlie, lye downe, take your pleasure and say nothing. Exit Thisbe. Enter Thisbe followed by Aristippus. This. Bind the adulterer fast master. With that she ran to the doore and made it give so great a crash as she could, crying out in this manner: O wonderfull thing, the villaine is fled, take heed sir that you be not againe deceived. Arist. Peace be of good cheere, I have this wicked and mis∣chievous woman which I most desired. O thou much hated of the gods, I have thee And all thy shame about thee, come thou shalt With me unto the City, to receive What punishment the lawes allot to such As live unchast, and wrong their husbands bed, Which is no lesse then death.
Aristippus dragges her along, but she pulling herselfe out of the old mans hands, fell suddenlie of purpose into a pit made in the stage, and so ended her life. Aristip. See Thisbe, is she dead? This. Oh yes, her necke Is broaken sir. Aristip. Then hath thy punishment Prevented what the law should have inflicted; Ile to the people and declare this matter, And with my friends consult what meanes to use For to call home my sonne from banishment, Whose truth and innocence doth open lie By this unheard of strange discovery. Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena sexta. Enter Cariclea, she lieth downe upon the bed indispos'd, her kinsfolk weeping about her, then enter Caricles and Calasiris. Caric. My child, my daughter deare, tell me thy father The cause of thy disease, have a good heart, This wise man Calasiris is requested By me to finde some remedy to cure thee, And he can well performe it as a man Of heavenly knowledge, and a sacred priest. My most endeered friend, you shall doe well To suffer him to exercise his art And holy spels for your recovery, For I perceive thou art ore-look'd my child. Caric. Sir tis my duty to obey your will In all things you command me. Calas. Then depart Deare Caricles, and all the rest avoyd The roome, we must be private here together, Fetch me a little Laurell and a stoole Having three feet, some fire and frankincense, And let no man disturbe us till I call. It shall be done forthwith, heavens crowne your worke. Exeunt all but Cariclea, and Calasiris.
Calasiris begins to burne frankincense, to mumble with his lips, to lay lawrell upon her from top to toe, to gape & make strange gestures, while Cariclea, wagged her head oft and smiled. Caric. Father you are deceived in my griefe, You cannot ghesse at it for all your art. Calas. Nay daughter say not so, but cheere your selfe, For what doth vex you is a malady Common, and easie to be cur'd by me; Thou wert o're-look'd not onely at the pompe Of Pirrhus funerall rites, but at the race In armour too when you were overseer, And gave the prize unto the conquerour; Theagenes was he that overlook'd you, Whose want on eye was alwaies fixt upon Your splendant beauty object of his sight. Caric. Whether he daign'd to looke on me or no Apollo have him in his custody; But whence is he, and what's his pedegree? Calas. He's a Thessalian borne, and as you hear'd Descended from Achilles, who although He have bewitch'd you with an envious eye, He suffers more than you by the reflex Of your Sun-burning eyes upon his heart. Caric. Why do you wrongfully accuse the man Of witchcraft, who hath done no harme at all, There's no such matter, tis some other sicknesse. Calas. Then tell me daughter, and conceale it not If you desire to find a remedy, I am no stranger to you but your friend, and old acquaintance of your loving father, I am of your profession too, a priest, I'le keepe your counsell, and be bound by oath To helpe you what I can; all griefes are cur'd In the beginning, but if left alone At length they grow incurable; declare Your minde at full. Caric. I love Theagines. Calasiri. I knew so much before, he loves you too,
I'le be your faithfull friend and true assistant. Enter Caricles, with Acestinus a skilfull physitian. Caric. Deere friend what have you done? what newes have You to tell me that is good? Calasir. All shall be well Cariclea shall be heal'd to morrow morne Of her infirmitie, I now will leave you To prosecute my busines for her health. Caric. Adiew deere friend, the gods reward thy paine. Heere Acestinus, lies the sicklie patient Exit Calasiris. You are well read in physicke, feele her pulse And give your wise opinion. Acstin. fairest maid Where doth your paine lie most? She turn'd her face from him, and repeated with a loud voice this verse of Homer, Achilles is the bravest man of all the Greekish rout. Acst. Her state of heart I finde Priest Caricles, My labour is in vaine, no physicke can Restore her to her health. Caric. The gods forbid, Why say you so, must my deare daughter die Without all hope of her recovery? Acst. Peace make not such adoe, but here me speake. Our art sir, doth extend no further then He drawes Caricles aside. To cure distempered bodies, if the mind Diseased be without the bodies sicknesse, We have no helpe for that, the maids disease Les in the mind, her bodie's in good state, No humours doe abound there, no headach, No fever burnes her, all is free within. Caric. What then should be the cause of these her fits, Utter what yu perceive doth trouble her, I doe beseech you, skilfull Acestinus. Acestin. Tis love doth trouble her, which who knowes not Is an affection and griefe of the heart, Doe you not see her eyes swolne in her head Rouling one every side, her visage pale,
Her halfe distraction, how she uttereth What ere comes in her minde, and sleepes but little; In briefe I doe perceive that she hath lost The moisture of her body, and indeed Just amplitude thereof, my counsell is You finde her out a man and that with speed. Exit Acestinus. Caric. A man, heavens grant she be enclin'd that way, Then Calasiris hath plaid well his part; How fares my daughter now, what sicknesse hast thou? Shall I send for more Doctors yet? Caric. Tis needlesse, Send none to me but Calasiris onely, He hath the art to ease me, and none else. Caric. Ile send him to thee, sleepe Cariclea, Untill he come: if Alcamenes love Possesse her heart, thanks to the gods above. Exeunt. Actus tertii, Scena septima. Enter at one doore Theagines, at another Calasiris. Theag. My worthy friend most opportunely met. Calasi. What, beautifull Theagines! Theag. How can he Be beautifull that pleaseth not Cariclea? Calasir. No more, you make me angrie thus to doubt My skill by which she is entrap'd in love, And longs to see you. Theag. What is that you say? Doth faire Cariclea wish to see me father? Why doe you then detaine me here, and not Conduct me to her?Theagines offers to run forth, Calasiris catcheth him by the cloake, and holds him fast. Calas. Nay sir stay a while, Though you are very nimble of your feet, You must not thinke this matter must be handled As if it were a prize for every man That list to get it, take my counsell first; Know you not that her father Caricles Is the chiefe man in Delphos? that the lawes Give present death to such as steale a maid
Without their friends consent? be wise my sonne. Theag. The matter were not great although I dy'd After I had enjoyed Cariclea, Death for her sake is life, but Calasiris If you thinke good, let us demand her of Old Caricles her father for my wife, I doe suppose my blood is high ynough To be commixt with his. Calas. We shall not speed, Not that he thinkes you any way unworthy, But 'cause she's promis'd to his sisters sonne By him in marriage. Theag. O ye gods above, It cannot be, nor shall it by your leaves, Theagenes, and none but he shall wed Cariclea, who ere presumes to touch My goddesse but my selfe, shall sure repent it, This hand is not benum'd, nor this sword blunt But it can take revenge. Calas. It shall not need, Theagines be patient, be but rul'd By me, and we will bring all things to passe According to your wish; now leave me here Alone to project on your good, be carefull You be not seene oft-times to talke with me, But when you come, come private and alone To shun suspition. Theag. Farewell reverend Father. Exit Theagenes. Enter Caricles. So efficacious is your wisdome sir, So forceable our friendship, as it hath wrought That effect I wish'd upon my daughter, Cariclea is in love and quite subdu'd By strong affection, who before was stubborne Unto so sweet a yoake. Calas. I knew my charmes Were of sufficient force to doe the feate, But can you tell aswell what man she loves
As that she is in love? Caric. No by Apollo, Would Alcamenes were the man she lov'd My sisters sonne, I have indeavour'd it All that I can to make her fancy him. Calas. Tis best you bring him to her, and so try The aime of her affection, mutuall sight Of lovers kindleth sparkes which else would die Rak'd up in ashes of forgetfulnesse. Caric. Ile take your counsell. Calas. And returne with newes How you have sped. Caric. Ile give you a relation. Exit Caricles. Calas. I must convey them hence, this taske is laid Upon me by the gods, but where I know not. The Oracle is mysticall and darke, I cannot well interpret what it meanes, We must begin our voyage by sea it seemes, As may be gathered by the Oracle Where it is said, and sayling surging streames Shall come at length to countries scorch'd with Phoebus burning beames. If I could by any meanes get the Fascia now, which was laid out with Cariclea, wherein Caricles said he hard all the maide estate was notified, I should be instructed more particularly what I ought to doe, and whether the Ladies of destiny would send us. Enter Caricles. Now brother what successe? Caric. Oh wofull newes, My daughter seemes distracted, such a strange Infirmity doth seise her, when I brought My nephew Alcamenes to her fight Freshly apparel'd, as if Gorgons head Appear'd, or some more fearefull thing, she cri'd With a loud voice, and turn'd her countenance From him and me, withall she put her hand Unto her throat, threatning to kill her selfe And bound it with an oth, if we departed
Not suddenlie the chamber, which we did In Lesse time then she spake it, least she should Put that in execution which she said; Now Calasiris once againe I come Most humbly to beseech you that you will not Suffer the maid to perish, nor her father Be frstrate o his purpose. Calasiris. Caricles, Tis true your daughter is distract in mind, For she is moved wich the multitude, Whch I have brth'd her of purpose with, They are not of the least but such as should Force he to doe what she abhorred most Aswell by nature as decree of minde, But I suppose some god doth take in hand To hiner this designe and strive to crosse My ministers, therefore tis requisite And time you shew me that same Fascia You said was found with faire Cariclea Amongst her costlie iewells, for I feare Least that it be enchaunted stuffe and wrought With such things as doe now exasperate Her minde, by reason that some enemie Assoone as she was borne had this ordain'd To keepe her from all love and thought of marriage That she might die, and leaue behind noe issue. Caric. Tis probable; it may be so indeed. Come goe with me, and I will shew you all What in the Fascia is contain'd and written, I understand it not, character Is Aethiopian, and the letters are Not common, but such as the princes use Of Aegypt in their holie businesses. Calas. I understand the Aethiopian tongu, Which unto thee I must interpret wrong. Exeunt. Finis Actus tertii.
Actus quarti, Scena prima. Enter Calasiris, Theagines and Cariclea. Calas. Come let's away my children, let's away, Why do we linger here? the gods commands Must be obeyd, all things are ready for Our secret flight, a ship for Memphis bound Waites us without, the wind comes gently from Th'adjoyning shore, and stayes to swell the sailes With pride till you imbarke, see here the Fascia, Which by a slie devise from Caricles I have obtain'd, nothing doth hinder us To meet this long wish'd opportunity, If you have got your jewels, deerest jewell, From your supposed father. Caric. Calasiris. I have them all, but how gat you I pray The Fascia from old Caricles, for when He had receiv'd me from Sysimethres, Who brought me up, he brought me here to Greece I know not how, and tooke the Fascia from me, Which in a chest he did preserve and keepe. Calas. How I came by it you shall know hereafter, But can you tell me what it doth containe? Caric. How should I as being never told by any? Besides although I oftentimes had seene it, I could not understand the character, Pray sir, interpret what it doth containe. Cala. It doth declare your parents and your Countrey, And all your fortunes, thus I read it to you Verbatim as it stands, give your attentions. The Fascia. Persina Queene of the Aethiopians to her daughter, onely in sorrow by what name soever she shall be called, doth write in haste this lamentation contayned herein, as her last gift. My daughter, the sunne being authour of our stoke, is witnesse that for no mis-deed, I have cast thee forth, and concealed thee from
thy father Hydaspes sight, yet I would have my selfe excused to thee, if thou happen to live, and to him that shall finde thee if the gods procure any, and therefore I declare the cause of thy exposi∣tion, after king Hydaspes had beene married to me ten yeeres, and we had never a child, we happened one time to rest us after dinner in a gallerie where hung rare pictures and images, amongst which were those of Perseus and Andromeda portrayed as when he first redeem'd her from the rocke, at this time your father lay with me, swearing that by a dreame he was commandd so to doe, and I by and by perceived my selfe to be with child: but thou wert borne white which colour is strange among the Aethiopians. I knewe the reason, because I looked sted fastlie upon the picture of Andromeda naked, and by that meanes, conceived a thing like to her, yet I deer∣mined to rid my selfe of shamefull death (counting it certaine that thy colour would procure me to be accused of adulterie, and that none would believe me when I told them the cause) and to commit thee to the unstablenes of fortune, which is a great deale rather to be wished for then present death, or to be called a bastard: and tel∣ling my husband that thou wert straight dead, I have privilie layd thee forth with the greatest riches that I had for a reward to him that shall find thee and take thee up: above all thinges remember that thou seeke among thy jewels for a certaine ring, which thy father gave me when we were first made sure, in the hoope whereof is a princelie posie, the stone is a Pantarbe of secret vertue, consecra∣ted in the place where it is set. The gods preserve thee my deerest daughter, and grant us a happy meeting. Theag. A strange but blest discoverie hast thou made Of faire Caricleas royall pedegree (Right reverend father) which before lay buried Deepe in the obscure vault of ignorance. Now princelie virgin raise thy glorious head Above the clouds, and give thy conquering beautie Command to pull the thunderer from his seate To serve thee here on earth or in Olympus Where thou shalt please to dwell, and rest not here, Let Mars be fetter'd, Mercurie a slave, And bright Apollo dazled with the sight
Of beames more splendant then his owne, fall downe And worship thy appearance, offering thee His throne to sit upon. Calas. Theagenes, Fie, be not such a vaine Idolater The gods may plague you for it. Theagines. plague me for Adoring queene Caricles deity? They are unjust then, for themselves commit The same Idolatry aswell as I. Calas. That's but your superstitious jealousie. Thinke you the gods will rivall you, or love A mortall Virgin? fie 'tis blasphemy. Theag. They have done so, or else the Poets lie, Witnesse Europas bull, and Laedas swans Faire Danaes shower, and Daphnes transformation; If their poore beauties had that operation To worke such strange effects in heavenly powers, How much more force, nay violence thinke you Hath hers, to whose compard, theirs are like glasse To sparkling diamonds. Caric. My dearest friend, Forbeare these candid raptures of your wit, Not my desert, and enter into thought Of what concernes us most. Theag. Agreed my goddesse. Calas. No more dispute then, but forthwith to sea. Delphos adiew, the fates call us away. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena secunda. Enter Arsace and her old baud Cibile. Arsa. So sweet a man as thy description makes him? Cib. Nothing inferiour Madame, but beyond it; His body is a Temple stately built, Where Ʋenus comes and offers turtle doves To gaine his liking. Arsa. Such a majesty Accompanying that sweetnesse too?
Cib. As if They wedded were together, hand in hand Walking in so delectable a mansion. Arsa. So active and broad shoulder'd as thou saist, So tall and portly? Cib. Every way provided To satisfie your pleasure. Arsa. Thou hast kindled A fire within me; but what Countrey ownes This wonder of a man? when landed he At Memphis shore? who brought him, canst thou tell? Cib. He came with Calasiris from some parts Of Greece, as I am given to understand, And landed here last night. Arsa. Where doth he lodge? Cib. In Calasiris house without the Temple. Arsa. Thou must devise some way to bring him to me, And lodge him in our palace, for I have An itching humour to enjoy the man. Cib. Let me alone, I am your Ingineer To worke your pleasure. Arsa. But who is the maid Thou saist did beare him company, and was So neere his bosome? Cib. I suppose she is Hi sister or his wife. Arsa. Is she faire as he? Cib. I never saw one fairer, such a beauty As would have made Iove stoope, and shaken off His Eagles borrowed shape, to force a kisse From her Nectorious hand. Arsa. Thou mak'st me jealous With praises of my rivall. Cib. Let not that Trouble your thoughts, he cannot be so foolish, That when so great a happinesse shall be Offer'd unto him as the love and liking Of faire Arsace Oromdates wife,
Egypts great Deputy, but reverently Kneele downe, and worship such a change in love. Arsa. If thou canst bring, deare nurse, this thing to passe, Thou shalt at once cure two diseases in me, Fell love and jealousie. Cib. I doubt it not; What mad man but will be content to change His Brasse for Gold, his Copper for rich pearle? Both which he shall enjoy, enjoying you. Arsa. O what a sugred time have I to use My sweet disports now that the Deputy My husband is imployed in the warre Against Hydaspes King of Aethiopia About the Smaragd mines, pray heaven they end not Before my pleasures period. Cib. Never feare it. You shall have time ynough to bathe in blisse. Arsa. See Cibile who knocks there. one knocks. Cib. Calasiris And the faire parties. Arsa. Heavens! conduct them in. Enter Calasiris, Theagines and Cariclea. Calas. All haile unto the Palace of my Prince, Madame it may seem strange unto your Highnesse, That I presume to bring these strangers with me To kisse you Princely hands; I make no doubt But when you shall be well informed of Their birth and breeding, it wil plead my pardon. Arsa. What need this complement? you'r welcome sir, So are your friends, when did you ever know me Unkind to strangers, or inhospitable To such as these▪ whose outward lookes declare Their inward minds, and speake their noble parts? So elegant a grace and stately beauty, As shineth in their countenances cannot Proceed but from some Princely pedegree, Pray r speake whence you are? Theag. Most beautious Lady,
Please you to understand, we are of Greece, Descended of a Noble family, Which ne're produced yet unworthy branches, Let it suffice (I doe beseech your Grace) We open it no further; we have beene Rob'd on the sea by pyrates, but redeem'd By Noble Calasiris, and brought here To Memphis stately City. Arsa. Is this Lady Your sister, or your wife? Theag. My sister Madame, Tost equally with me by fortunes blasts. Arsa. but now those stormes are past, and you are in A quiet harbour: pleasant calmes appeare. Sir, I must rob you of your ghests. Calas. I durst not Deny you Madame, though I must confesse I should to any other. Arsa. Cibile, Prepare their lodging neere our owne, and let No costly furniture be wanting there, Cib. It shall be done with speed. Arsa. My noble ghests, I know not if you would retire alone Into your private chambers, travell doth Require repose, please you to follow me, Ile be your glad conductor. Caric. O I feare This kindnesse is some love plot on my deare. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena tertia. Enter Thisbe sola. This. What sly evasion to put off thy guilt Is left thee now poore Thisbe? what device To shun the severe justice of the Law? All will be now discover'd, and my plots Returne upon my selfe, the heavens are just In sending Cnemon home from banishment
To punish me in cheering of himselfe, Canst thou behold his face, or speake one word In thy defence, when he stands forth t'accuse thee Before the people? O what shame, what curses Breath'd from a generall mouth will weigh thee downe Even to Avernus gulph; I feele the weight Of my offences poised in the scale Of sad despaire; O thou incendiary Of all this mischiefe, saith my guilty thoughts, Thou murtheresse of thy mistris, hie thee hence To the infernall shades, where never light Appeares, but gloomy darknesse covers all Under her sable mantle, there finde out Medea, Clitemnestra, Pasiphe, Long since condemn'd for murther to this place, Companions of thy shame; why lingrest thou Upon the earth? is not thy sinne compleat. And ripe for hell? yes, yes, I know it is, I know it is, my sad despairing thoughts, Ile follow your suggestions, gentle violl Reserv'd for such a use, this kisse from thee Shall crosse the sentence of the Lawes decree. She drinks poyson. Enter Aristippus and Cnemon. Arist. Hold, hold thy hand, drinke not the poison downe▪ Thou desperate woman. This. Not to gaine a crowne, Tis done, and past prevention. Arist. Thisbe yet Make thy confession, and subscribe thy hand, That innocent Cnemon die not. This. Write it then. Cnemon writes. I Thisbe doe confesse yong Cnemon was Unjustly banish'd, I and Demeneta Did forge that plot against him, for the which We have our condigne punishment. Cnem. Tis done, now put your hand to't she signes it. Dying Thisbe.she dies. Arist. Sonne tis ynough to cleare thee of all things
Can be objected; i'le forthwith declare This matter to the people, and produce Thisbes confession, strengthned with her han, Come with me Cnemon. Cnem. See the wretched state O false accusers, and their posonous fate. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena quarta. Enter Theagines and Cariclea, to them presentlie Cibil. Cibile. My children great Arsace recommends Her love unto you, who hath seat me here To serve you in all things that you command, I'm proud to be imployed in your service Who am a Grcian too, and borne in Lesbos: Most beutifull yong man cheere up thy selfe, I bring thee joyfull newes, Arsace loves thee, Arsace she whose favour kings have kneel'd for, Doth kneel to thee petitioning thy love With rich oblatios both of pearle and gold. Caric. O heavens, my prophesie is too too true, My iealousie foresaw this. Theag. Tell Arsace My sister and my selfe both kisse her hands And doe returne her humble thanks for all Her noble fauours, but that she doth love me I thinke it strange, whose husband is a man So farre beyond my ranke as put in ballance With worthles me, it would not brooke the triall. We know you are her hands, her eyes, her eares, Her minde, her all, for countries sake perswade her (I doe beseech you) to remove her thoughts Upon some worthier person; all that we Desire is oney this, that she would please To send us backe againe to Calasiris, And never bring strange banish'd, restlesse lives Unto so high and excellent a fortune. Cib. My sonne be rul'd by me, be not so foolish To shun this happinesse that courts thee now,
Imbrace it, least hereafter thou repent Thy over-sight; thou shalt have rule and riches, Dalliance, and all the fruits of flourishing youth, If thou but condescend unto her will; But if thou dost deny, know that she hath A high and Princely stomack, which nere brooks, Affronts of such a nature. Theag. Tempt me not, But tell your mistris I despise her lust As much as prize her love, you shall obligue us Unto you in a bond of love and kindnesse To get us leave from her hence to depart To seeke our fortunes. Cib. Obstinate young man, That wilt not see thy good, Lady perswade Your brother to some reason, you may hap To worke upon his nature, and prevaile; I leave you to your selves. Exit Cibile. Caric. Theagines, This is no honest dealing, I perceive; Was it for this she sent us from her table Such curious viands, and such costly cates? Was it for this she did adorne our chambers With stately hangings wrought with sundry colours, Which came from Sidon and faire Lidia? Was this her wicked end? would that we were A hundred leagues from this accursed place, Or that we never had beheld her face. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena quinta. Enter Arsace and Cibile. Ars. But will he not be wonne? Cib. Not all the art I have can worke him to it. Ars. Doe my favours Make no impression in him? Cib. Yes of thankes, No otherwise, he craves leave to depart,
A signe he doth not like his entertainment. Arsa. hou mak'st my hot blood cold within my vaines As if an ague ceaz'd me; how depart, Ere he get ot my power, I am resolv'd T'enjoy him, or destroy him. Cib. A right course Yor wit hath found out mistris, my advise Is this, that once more you sollicit him By faire intreaty and perswasive meanes To win him that way, but if he stand out And stubbornly refuse to grant your suit, Let him be ti'd unto cold fare hard lodging, And give him up unto your Eunuches hands To be scourg'd and tormented, for yong men Regrd not when they are intreated faire, But when enforced, then they stoope and yield. Arsa. Tis well advis'd, but how can I endure To see that body bleed? Cib. Madame you are Too pityfull, if that an eye-sore be To see him scourg'd, you may refrain the sight, I know twill mollifie his haughty stomacke To your desire. Arsa. First try all meanes, before You put this last devise in execution; But Cibile what cause or colour have we To hold them prisoners, or detaine them here Against their wills? Cib. We'l give it out, they came As spies from King Hydsps army hither, To view the strength of Memphis. Arsa. Excellent. How shall we handle faire Cariclea His beautious sister? Cib. Sister, I believe Shee is his mistris rather, for such dalliance As I have seene betweene them argueth love Of a more fervent nature; I have come,
And found them kissing with such ardency, As if they faine would have their soules to meet, And at their mouths salute. Arsa. O strange discovery! If this be true, hence may proceed the cause Of my repulse and his unkind deniall; Sift out this businesse further, and observe Their lookes, their gestures, give an eare unto Their privatest discourse, for this concernes My businesse mainely; if Cariclea prove A barre to my desires, we must remove her. Goe presently and know the young mans mind, If he will yield yet, but if he refuse, Let Euphrates the Eunuch punish him With yrons to pull downe his lofty heart. So farre I'm gone, pursuing my desire, Hell shall not make me now backe to retire. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena sexta. Enter two Iudges, then Aristippus and Cnemon. Arist. Although I doe not doubt most learned Judges, That your grave judgements would acquit my sonne Without more proofes then by the sequele of This businesse doth appeare, yet to the end To make his innocence the more perspicuous Which hath so long striv'd to breake through this cloud Of falshood and deceit, I here have brought you Thisbes confession, and her hand subscrib'd For confirmation of it, please you see What it containes. the Iudges read it. 1 Iudg. When did she write this? Arist. Presently upon Her poisonous draught, her conscience prompting her Unto so good an action. 2 Iudg. Was't voluntarily done without constraint? Arist. Yes, for what force hath power to worke upon The setled resolution of a person Whom death is ready for to seise upon?
I came free from her, the confession was Her owne invention, and the hand her owne. 1 Iudg. But will you sweare to tis? Aristip. I will, and safely. By all the gods tis true, else let me be Strucke with their thunder for my perjury. 2 Iudg. It is ynough, we doe acquit your sonne, Long may he live the comfort of your age; So now dismisse the people, it is done. Arist. Thus innocence shines cleerer then the sun. Exeunt. Actus quarti, Scena septima. Enter Arsace and Cibil. Ars. Now will he bend or breake, yeeld or endure More punishment? how doe his fetters please him? How doth he beare his stripes? Cib. With patience And manly fortitude beyond beliefe, Takes glory in his sufferings, and becomes More unrelenting now then heretofore. Ars. What a strange nature hath this savage man, Will nothing worke upon it? cannot love Perswade him, nor the force of punishment Compell him to humanity? some Tigresse Or she Wolfe in the forest was his nurse. Is there no hope he will relent in time? Cib. Our labour's lost in the attempting it, He hath Cariclea still before his eyes, Lodgeth her in his heart, his mouth express'd it; I heard him to exclaime thus, deare Cariclea, My love, my life, my heart, thy onely name Makes me despise my torments, and in thee I'm comforted what ever fall to me; Whereby I'm confident she is his wife, Or secret mistris, wherefore if you please, Lets (as the proverbe saith) cast our last anckor, And seeke some meanes to rid her of her life, For when he knows she's dead, tis very likely
He'll change his minde, when hope of love is gone. Arsace. Thy counsell pleaseth me, and i'le command This stoppe to be removed presentlie. Cibile. How, will you doe it without course of Law Or ordelie proceeding, who will doe In this pointe your commandment? for although All things are subject to you, yet the laws Are free, and will not let you kill without The judgment of the Persian magistrates; Besides we should be carefull how we did Accuse the maid, least we should not be able To proe what we doe lay unto her charge. Ars. How then shall we contrive it? Cib. Dintily, By a more sure and farre more safe a way, By a strong subtle cuppe of deadlie poison, The plot is layd alreadie, and the potion Pepar'd, I stay but onely for the patient T'administer it. Ars. Is any gone to call her? Cib. Yes, Aura madame. Ars. Well i'le leave you then, Strong physick's best for stubborn natur'd men. Exit Arsace. Enter Cariclea, with Aura weeping, and servants. Cib. Why doe you weep, sweet heart? 'twill mar your beuty, Your brother shall not long be kept in prison; Be not so foolish to consume and pine Away for sorrow, know Theagines This night shall be releas'd, and come unto thee, Therefore be merry; 'twas his foolish fault And disobedience to my mistris service Made him to be committed; nicety Is naught in yong folkes, but all is forgotten, (Partly at my request) and liberty Granted unto him, this was the occasion I sent for you, that you might be partaker Of this glad newes, therefore rouse up your selfe, And now at length eate something; Aura lay
The table, I have made some meate, I hope Will comfort your weake stomacke, sure you are Too blame to fast so long. Caric. But is this true That you have told me? you so often have Deceiv'd me with untruths as I scarce dare To credit any thing you say unto me. Cib. By all the gods tis true, which if it be not, Let me be poison'd at this table heere And be a sad example; more this day Your busines all shall be dispatch'd, so that You shall not need to take more care heereafter, If by refrayning from your meate you doe not Destroy your health and die, pray eate a little. Caric. On confidence that this is true I will. they sit downe and eate. Cib. Aura give me some wine, Cariclea health Remember good Theagines. Aura mistaks and gives the poison'd cupp to Cibile, she drinks, but powres halfe of it on the ground when she tasted what it was, looking cruellie upon Aura, the poison suddenlie workes and she begins to fall, Cariclea supportes her. Cib. I will not have thy helpe, false wretch, I will not th'ast poison'd me, beare witnesse all heere present That see me die, I lay my death on none But her and this queane Aura, so informe Arsace that she may revenge my death. she dies. Caric. See heere the iustice of the heavens displaid To mortall view in this strange accident; This cup, this poisonous cup was meant to me By wicked Cibile, but yet it fell By some mistake to her owne lot to drinke it. Arsaces servants binde Cariclea and Aura. What doe you meane to binde me a weake maid, I'le goe without constraint where you will lead me If't be before Arsace, though I die I care not so Theagenes be by. Exeunt.
Actus quinti, Scena prima. Enter Hydaspes and Sysimethres, with attendance. Hydasp. Thus farre have we march'd by the bankes of Nile, And conquer'd Philae, and the Smaragd mines, Thus farre hath fortune favourd our attempts, And sterne Bellona set our conquering feet Deepe in the bosome of th' Egyptian Land; Are we not now reveng'd Sysimethres For thy uncivill barbarous entertainement, When we imploy'd thee our Embassadour To Oroondates Deputy of Egypt? How thinke you, doe they not repent the wrongs And disrespect they gave thee, contrary Unto the lawes of Nations? doe they not Wish that they had surrender'd to our Crowne Those lands we justly challeng'd for our owne? Sysim. I thinke they doe, and curse their arrogance That hath brought home the warres unto their dores; It cannot choose but vex their very soules To see so fruitfull and so faire a soyle, Their native Country, over-runne and spoyl'd By the incursions of a hostile army. Hydasp. Tis fit they suffer for their usurpation; But where lurkes Oroondates since his flight In our last battaile, no newes yet of him? Sysim. Fame gives it out, he is within this towne Of Syene with the remnant of his army. Hydasp. Will not the Towne yet come to composition? Will it hold out yet longer notwithstanding Our water-workes to drowne them? Sysim. Royall sir, As soone as we had cut the banks of Nile And let the river in upon the towne, Th'inhabitants began to see and feele Their misery, for suddenly the water Encompassed faire Syene round about
That it became an Iland, and by sinking Into the earth below the walls foundation, The weight above began to shake as if It would have fallen downe in every place; Then suddenly arose a piteous cry Amongst the people of the towne, imploring The gods assistance, and the Deputy It seemes by this extreamity constrained First caused letters tyed to a stone As messengers to be shot to our campe Out of a sling, and archers from their bowes Sent their swift winged arrows to speak for them, But both fell short and perish'd in the water; At last when we by signes perceiv'd their mindes, As holding up their hands in token of Submission, and sometimes behinde their backes, In token they were ready to receive Bandes so they might finde mercie, we sent out Some bootes to talke with them, who brought us word They would surrender to your royall hands The towne of Syene, if you would be pleas'd To grant some poore conditions. Hydasp. What ae they? Sysim. First Oroondates makes request that he And all his souldiers without interruption May march forth as best suiteth their profession, With all their martiall habiliments And armes about them, next to be convoy'd to Elyphantina with your royall guard; Else he would rather die then live to be Condemned as a traitor to his king, For yielding up the City and betraying The armie, and besides be put to death With rackes and tortures. Hydasp. What a foole is he To make his owne conditions, or to argue Of such a matter? doth he not conceive He is not in his owne power, but in ours,
To live or die, why what a madnes is it For conquered men to argue of conditions? But tis not noble to destroy a number For one mans folly, goe Sysimethres, Take heere our seale and signe their articles, Fr pitty workes upon a noble spirit. Exit Sysimethres. Hydasp. If I could entertaine ambitious sparkes Within my royall breast, or never enter Into examination with my selfe Of right or wrong, (as many politicians And proud usurpers doe not) what should let me From adding this large kingdome to my owne, Stretching my Empire to the mouth of Nile; But iustice sets downe limits to my thoughts, Boundes my ambition in, so that I dare not Advance one foote beyond it, sacred goddesse, Divine Astrea, though all kings rebell And pay no reverence to thy deitie, Hydaspes shall adore thee, and his might shall never be more potent then his right. Exit. Actus quinti, Scena secunda. Enter the Persian magistrates as judges with Arsace, then enters Caricles with Aura bound, they sit. 1 Magist. Is this faire maid the prisoner? Arsa. Faire without, but foule within. 2 Magist. Tis pitty vice should beare A semblance of faire vertue, or be mask'd Under so sweet a vaile, Sure by her lookes 3 Magist. I should not judge her guiltie. Arsa. That's a rule Deceives us, for the choicest fruites of all Ofttimes have rotten cores, and underneath The fairest Howers lurke most the foulest snakes. That cannot hold, Bring forth the prisoners; You are accus'd for poysoning Cibile,
How doe you answer this? Caric. Who's my accuser? Arsa. My selfe, and these my servants, who were present When the old woman dy'd, and heard her name Thee, ad that other guilty of her death; Canst thou deny the fact? Caric. Ile answer thee Proud dame, if my Theagines live yet, I say, I am not guilty of this murther, But if by thy most damnable attempts His purer soule hath left the earthly prison Of his faire body, I declare my selfe Guilty of this and whatsoever else Thy malice can invent, I was the woman That poison'd then thy nurse, who train'd thee up To all those goodly vertues of thy mind; I doe desire to suffer, kill me straight That I may meet my lover, who so stoutly Resisted thy foule lust, and lewd enticements, Choosing to die rather then condescend. Arsa. Base queane, how durst thou take unto thy selfe Such liberty of speech? judicious sirs. And magistrates of Persia, understand That this she saith is false touching my honour; I take the gods to witnesse that when first This woman and her friend came to the Palace, I entertain'd them as became the state Of greater persons, and so long continued My favours to them till by open proofe I found they came as spies to Memphis sent From King Hydaspes army, then indeed I did begin to draw backe my affection, Many more things inciting me to doe it Which I forbeare to speake of, but in briefe Although I lov'd this maid so as to make her My bosom-friend, and my most deare companion, She hath repaid me as you see, and poison'd My trusty woman, is't not to be doubted
Her purpose stretch'd yet further, even to me? Caric. I doe confesse yet once againe, I poison'd Thy nurse, and would have done so much to thee Had I not beene prevented. Aura. O Cariclea, Unhappy maid, why dost thou wrongfully Accuse thy selfe, and draw on death upon thee? Heare me right grave and most impartiall Judges, There is no fault in her, I onely, I Gave Cibile the poison by mistake, Which was prepared for this vertuous mayd By that old beldame, this is true, or else Ye gods hurle downe your thunder on my head. 2 Magi. But how came this mistake? make it more plaine. Aura. Old Cibile my mistris did prepare This cup for faire Cariclea, I was forc'd To have a hand in't too; when I should give The poison'd cup unto Cariclea, And Cibile the other, I know not Whither being troubled with so strange a deed Or hastily cal'd on by Cibil, I chang'd the cups, and poison'd the old woman. Arsa. This is a forg'd devise, believe it not, This woman is a traitor, and conspires With them in all their plots, as privie to them. 3. If she that cals herselfe Cariclea. Be guiltlesse of this businesse, what should make her To cast herselfe into the jawes of death By her so free confession of the fact? Aura. Sir I believe she's weary of her life, And being in desperation e're to see Much lesse t'enjoy her husband, without whom Life seemes a burthen hastens on her death. 1. Madame you must produce some witnesses, Or we shall cleere the prisoners. Arsa. Here are five Will be depos'd they heard Cibile charge These two here with her death.
2. What say you friends. Dare you sweare this? All 5. We dare and will, by Isis, And all the gods tis so. 3. Then we must passe Sentence according to the law, which most Depends on witnesses, your doome is death, Carry these two forthwith unto the fire, Caric. O sunne, and earth, and all you blessed creatures That are above or underneath this round Terrestriall ball, you that doe take revenge On such as worke impiety, beare witnesse I die an innocent, and willingly Submit my selfe to death, for to avoyd Th' intollerable griefes that burthen me; Vouchsafe to take me gently to your hands, And speedily inflict your punishments Upon this whore Arsace, who hath plotted This mischiefe to no other end and purpose But to take from me my Theagines.Exeunt. Actus quinti, Scena tertia. Enter Caricles solus, Nebulo listning. Caric. Cariclea rap'd, O gods how can it be; Where is your justice then? where our reward For serving at your altars, when you suffer Your sacred temples to be rob'd and spoyld Of its chiefe jewell, and my life, Cariclea? O sacriledge unheard of! can you sleepe And winke at this? or is your anger to me Implacable, and therefore to torment My heart the more, you seeme not to regard it? Was't not ynough, O cruell powers, to kill My daughter at her Nuptiall, and my wife For griefe thereof, but to augment my sorrow Beyond the bounds of reason, give consent Unto Caricleas rape, who was my joy, My onely comfort, heart, yea life and all?
Well I will once more put on pilgrimes weedes. Nebu. Ha, what was that? a dreadfull sound me thought More pilgrimages? stay but listen yet. Caric. And goe in quest of thee throughout the world, First to Thessalia, where that thiefe was borne That stole thee hence, then unto Memphis City Where Calasiris that false priest remaines. Nebu. I am confirm'd in horror, tis too true He'll travell once againe, but soft attend. Caric. And if I finde thee not, ile travell further, Even to the utmost bounds of Aethiopia, Where I suppose thy parents live and raigne. Nebu. To Aethiopia, what strange land is that (I marvell) oh, oh now I doe remember Sysimethres was borne there as he said; Nebulo discovers himselfe. We shall be blacke a divels if we goe there. Caric. What Nebulo, my trusty friend and servant, Prepare thy selfe to accompany thy master. Nebu. Where sir, unto the temple of Apollo? Caric. Beyond the seas I meane. Nebu. Beyond the seas; He's mad I thinke, or hath some worse disease. aside. Caric. I heare you sir, it seemes your growne a Poet You rime so well. Nebu. I care not who doth know it. Caric. Raptures still flow upon thee more and more, Nebu. But this bad newes of yours doth vex me sore, That you will crosse the seas, the bare conceit, Will keepe me seven daies without taste of meat. Caric. Why that is profitable, saves thy purse. Nebu. But hurts my body sir, and that is worse. Caric. Why th'art a second Ovid, all he saies Doth flow in verse. Nebu. Then I shall weare the Bayes. Caric. But Nebulo no more of this, you are content to accom∣pany me this journey, are you not? Nebu. Good sir, do not rge me to it; you know how willing I should be to wait upon ye, did not one thing crosse it.
Caric. What's that thy wife? Nebu. You have hit the marke, tis dangerous (I can tell yee) for me to goe abroad and leave her at home▪ I had woefull experience on't after our last peregrination. Caric. What did she make thee a cuckould in thy absence? Neb. I know not, but she dub'd me knight of the forked order. Caric. Why that honour is for terme of thy Life man; thy staying at home cannot take it away, nor thy going abroad adde unto it. Nebu. No, doe they not rise by degrees? I suppose yes, as in this manner, from Knight to Lord, from Lord to Earle, from Earle to Duke of the forked order, and so forward: but my ambition is not to climbe so high, therefore i'le stay at home and prevent that promotion. Caric. fie, prevent thy honour? Nebu My Nebulona will heape ynough such honours on my head, If I follow your counsell, but I tell you againe I am not ambitious so to be promoted, yet notwithstanding, so well I love you, that rather then you shall goe alone, i'le once more adventure my fortune. Caric. Spoken like a right honest man, come let's away then withall expedition. Delphos and Greece farewell, your priests hard fate Denyes him still t'enjoy a setled state. Exeunt. Actus quinti, Scena quarta. Enter Theagines, Cariclea, and Aura. Theag. And hast thou scap'd the fire my deerest love? Miraculous deliverance! let me heare The manner on't related. Caric. Thus it was, After we were condemned to be burnt By foule Arsaces slanderous report For poisoning Cibile, a blazing fire Was made, and we two cast into the same, And whereas it was thought by everie one The fiercenesse of the flame would soone consume us, It prov'd cleane contrarie, for we stood in
The middst of it untouch'd, for everie side It gave us way, and never sing'd our cloaths, Although Arsace with a threatning voice Commanded the tormentors to lay on More wood and reed, yet all prevailed not, For no hurt would approach us, which the whore Arsace seeing, presently declar'd Before the people with an open voice That we were witches; though good Calasiris Did what he could to free us from her hands, We by her guard were apprehended, and Brought here againe to thee my deare, for which I'm glad that we may suffer both together. Theag. I have not heard a stranger miracle, This doth proceed from favour of the god, And their unbounded justice. Caric. It should seeme so, But still to be tost on the angry seas Of rigid fortune and ne're see an end Of our sad miseries, should rather argue Their hate and fierce displeasure, if the be not Some secret and more hidden mystery. We mortals understand not, which rstore u, After our sufferings when all hope is fled, Unto a happier state and peacefull being. Theag. Oh sweet, let not the sence of misery, Make you offend the gods thus, but be patient. Caric. Twas a rashly spoken, and I doe repent it, My deare Theagines; now I remember A dreame I had last night, but had forgotten Till now to tell it you, thi was the verse. By vertue of Pantarbe let feare of fire removed be: An easie thing to Persaetis, though else right strange to see. Theag. The gods are good to us, for I likewise Am made a Poet by remembring now An answer which last night some spirit gave m Who seem'd to say this,
To morrow shalt thou with the maid escape Arsaces hand, And soone be brought with her into the Aethiopian land. Caric. That Oracle hath but a sad constrution, Which thus I dare interpret, Aethiopia Is meant that land that is beneath the ground, That with the maid is meant with Proserpine, And the escaping of Arsaces band Doth signifie the soule and bodies parting. Theag. Still how you erre! calamity hath made you Forget your selfe, and alwaies doubt the worst, Turning all things to a sinister sense, The Oracle is plaine, you are the maid The gods do point at, whom I shall convey Out of Arsaces power into your Land Of Aethiopia, but how this shall be Effected, unto us doth not appeare, Yet it is credible the gods can doe it; We must leave tht unto their secret workings. Now what your verse should meane I cannot ghesse, Which doth containe so many contrarieties, For Pantarbe, in its true signification, Is taken for all fearefull, yet it would not Have you to feare the fire. Caric. I doe believe This ring preserv'd us both from force of fire, Wherein is set a pretious stone calld Pantarbe, And round about some holy letters written; My Fascia, if you doe remember well, Did mention such a one among my jewels; And to be briefe, I thinke that stone containes Some heavenly vertue which withstandeth fire. Theag. But then, how was't that Aura perish'd not? She had no Pantarbe to defend her. Caric. No But I still held her alwaies in my hand Whereon my ring was.
Theag. This is probable; But now what other Pantarbe have we left To shun the next daies danger, for Arsace Will not end here, but practise still new mischiefe. Aura. Despaire not, but rely upon the promise The gods made you last night. Caric. Distressed Aura, What wilt thou doe? Aur. Run on, in the same fortune That you doe, be it life or be it death. With that enters an Officer from the Campe of Oroondates, to fetch Theagenes and Cariclea. Officer. Be not afraid, I come not to destroy you As you suppose, but to deliver you From hence; my Lord and Generall Oroondates Hath sent me hither from the campe, to bring you Unto him, for the fame of your rare beauty And vertue in resisting his wifes lewdnesse, Hath wrought so much upon his disposition As he desires your presence, come with me, Delay breeds danger, I have fifty horse Shall safe convoy us to the camp, the way Is cleere. Theag. Lead on then, we are bound to obey. Exeunt. Actus quinti, Scena quinta. Enter Arsace sola. Arsa. Ye sterne Eumenides, and direfull powers Of the infernall kingdomes, muster all Your troops together by a generall summon, For I doe cite you to the court of hell, My grievances beget this invocation; Have I so long serv'd you, and bent my thoughts To your low centre? have my actions beene As lewd as you would wish them, and as blacke As you your selves, and could you suffer me To faile in this atchievement of my lust? So much your instigation? is this justice?
Justice that is a word not knowne in hell; Is this injustice? no, then are you rebels To your owne lawes, I doe insist on this: What other doctrine preach your ministers But foule injstice, rapes, impieties, Adulteries, murthers, slaunders, ignominies, False accusations and the like, all which My life hath practis'd? yet ye punish me With justice ne're till now heard in your courts: You thought it just Cariclea should escape The poison'd cup, and afterward the fire, You thought it just Theagines and she Should scape my hands, and Oroondates know All my proceedings, cursed fates of mine! Wretched Arsace, wilt thou live and feele Thy punishment augmented by thy shame? Shall the lawes triumph o're Arsaces will? Or Oroondates say he was reveng'd Upon the high and royall blood of Persia For wrong I did him? no, since I have fail'd In my desire, these faes I will withstand, And die by none but by this Persin hand. She fals upon a sword, and kils her selfe. Actus quinti, Scena ultima. Enter Hydaspes, Persina his Queene, Sysimethres with attendance. Hydasp. Persina welcome to our campe, how durst Our fairest Queene adventure forth to see The angry face of Mars? this is no object For Ladies eyes, dame Ʋenus sport's more proper. Pers. Where you are sir, there is my object fixt, Whether at home or here, all's one to me, Besides, where Mars is, there will Venus be. Hydasp. This was a favour we expected not; I must imbrace thee; O Sysimethres, What is there wanting in the curious modell Of this rare Architecture, built by nature, That mortall or immortall eye can see
To adde more beautie to it then it hath? Nothing, I know you'll grant it, then what pitty Thinke you it is, so beautifull a frame And building should containe within it's wombe No living creature, no inhabitant That might support it's ruines, but stand rather For prospect then for benefit? Pers. this pointes At my unfruitfull wombe. aside. Sysim. I graunt it sir, But if the gods have order'd that this house So statelie built by them, this temple rather Shall be reserv'd for their immortall uses, And have forbid that any mortall seed Shall dwell therein: it argueth in you Sinne and impietie so to repine At their decrees and secret operations. Enter a gentleman attendant. Gent. Sir the fore-riders of your royall army Have tane two prisoners the most beautifull'st That ere were seene, a young man and a maid, They waite without attending what's your pleasure. Hydasp. Let them be brought forthwith into our presence, They may be found a fitting sacrifice And an oblation to be offered Unto our gods for this our victorie, Being the first fruites of the warres. Enter Theagines, Cariclea, Aura and Bogoas the officer of Oroondates lead in prisoners. Yee gods The king raiseth himselfe from his throne, And sits downe againe in a studie. Be mercifull unto me! Sysim. What doth aile Your royall majestie, that you remayne In such a studious meditation? Hydasp. I had a dreame last night Sysimethres, That did present unto my fantasie A beautious virgin, such as is this maid Telling me that she was my naturall daughter: But whence are you, and of what countrey borne?
Theag. Great King, I am her brother, she my sister, Both borne in Greece. Hydas. O noble Greece, that still Producest what is good, and at this time Hast given us such faire offerings to present Unto our gods; but O thou beautious maid, Why dost thou hold thy peace, and answerest not Unto my question? Caric. At the sacred altars Of the immortall gods (to whom we are Reserv'd for sacrifices) you shall know Me and my parents. Pers. O sir, what a mayd Have you appointed to be sacrific'd? Ne're have mine eyes beheld a fairer creature; With what a stout and an undaunted courage Beares she her fortune? I am mov'd with pity At her so flowring age, O had my daughter I bare unto you liv'd, she would have beene Almost as old as she, I doe beseech you Spare her, and let her serve me at my table, For I am prompted strangely by my Genius Unto commiseration. Hydas. So am I, Beyond imagination, but you know The Law requires the first fruits of the warre Should be the gods oblation, to the Sunne Therefore we'll offer him, she to the Moone, The gods must be obey'd, the lawes fulfil'd. They all offer to rise, Cariclea fals at the feet of Sysimethres. Caric. Wise, grave, and learned sir, be pleas'd to stay A little longer, for I have a cause Of consequence to plead before the King And Queene Persina, which concernes them too Aswell as me, this matter doth require A speedy judgment, and I heare that you Give sentence on such noble personager; Therefore judge you this plea of life and death, And know it is not just to offr me Unto the gods.
Sysim. Vouchsafe to heare, most gracious Soveraigne, This strange appeale, and what this maid requireth. Hydasp. What judgement may this be? or what have I To doe with her? by what meanes should I come Into her danger? Sysim. Please you to attend, She will declare it. Hydas. But take heed that this You doe, be no true judgment, but plaine wrong, If I that am a King must stand to plead My cause with any prisoner whatsoever. Sysim. Justice and equity ner'e lookes into The person, but the cause, and he speeds best That brings best reasons. Hydasp. But the Law permits You onely to determine controversies Betweene the King and subjects, not with strangers. Sysim. Wise and discreet men doe not measure things By the appearance, but by equity. Hydasp. Well let her speake, since good Sysimethres Will have it so, but it is manifest, She will say nothing to the purpose, but Some forg'd devise to shun the stroke of death. Caric. O Sunne, thou founder of my ancestros High pedegree, and all ye other gods. Ye noble men that here are met together Assist me in this place, and be a witness That what I say is true, and by firme proofes It shall appeare: doe you command, O King, Strangers or your owne subjects to be offer'd? Hydasp. Strangers. Caric. Then it is fit and necessary, You seeke out such, I am no stranger borne, But of this countrey, and your subject too. Hydasp. Thou liest. Caric. You seeme to wonder at small things, But there are greater undiscover'd yet, I am not onely of this Country borne,
But of the royall blood. Hydasp. This woman's mad, Away I'le heare no more such lunacie. Hydaspes turnes from her in anger. Caric. My royall father, I beseech you know Your onelie daughter and despise her not. Hydasp. Sysimethres and grave Gymnosophists, How long shall she abuse my patience? This mayd's distracted, and the feare of death Makes her speake any thing how false soever, How bould and impudent; I know I had Sometimes a daughter, but she dy'd assoone As she was borne, this is a false impostor, Wherefore away with her, and let's delay The sacrifice no longer. Caric. none shall dare To take me hence, unlesse the judges please So to command, for you are not to judge In your owne cause although a King, but must Be subject to the law aswell as others Which priviledgeth you perchance to kill Strangers, but neither this law, nor the law Of nature doth allow you to destroy Your naturall children, for the gods to day Shall by a strange discoverie make you know I am your daughter, though you now disclaime me. All controversies in the law depend One these two pointes especiallie, that is Firme proofe by writings, and sure confirmation By witnesses, both which I can produce To prove I am your child, my witnesse shall not Be common neither, but the judge himselfe, And heer's a writing shall declare both mine And your estate. She gives the Fascia to the Queene, she knowes it and is amazed. Hydasp. What meaneth this Persina, that thy blood Thus comes and goes, and that thy countenance Weares such an alteration? is there ought
Contayned in this writing troubleth thee? Pers. O King, my Lord and husband, I have nothing To say unto it; but take heed, and read it Your selfe, the same shall teach you well and truelie. Hydaspes reads it to the end, then gives it to Sysimet: and the rest. Hydasp. Persina doe you owne this character As your owne hand, and know the birth to be Legitimate and true? Pers. By Sunne and Moone I sweare it. Hydasp. Although you tould me that my daughter dy'd. I yet believe she was exposed forth As heere is mention'd but who was the man That tooke her up and carryed her to Aegypt, How shall I know that he was taken with her, Or this is she, or whether the exposed Be dead or no, besides whether some man When he hap'd to finde this might his good luck Abuse, and make her play this famed part, Mocking the great desire we have of issue By the suborning of some changelinge and Colouring the truth with this devised Fascia. All these doubts must be cleer'd ere I believe. Sysim. I can resolve you in the first, for I Was he that tooke her up, and carried her With me to Aegypt, when you sent me thither Embassadour (you know we may not lye Who are Gymnosophists) I know this Fascia, Written with Aethiopias royall letters. Therefore you need not doubt that it is forg'd. Besides tis signed with Persinas hand; But there are other tokens that I gave To him that did receive you at my hands Can you produce them? Caric. Yes, loe heere they are She shewes Sisimet: and the queene her jewels. Hydasp. What are they? doe you know them? Pers. Yes with wonder. Caric. These jewells were my mothers, but this ringe Was yours, I thinke you know the Pantarbe well.
Hydasp. I doe and all the rest, but whether you Came by them as my daughter, that I know not, You might have got them by some other meanes, For to omit all other needles questions, Your colour's strange and the like never seene In Aethiopia. Sysim. She was also white That I brought up, and with this virgins age Doth correspond the terme of yeeres when she Was forth exposed being seuenteene yeeres, So old seemes this faire mayd. Hydasp. Sysimethres In my opinion you have show'd your selfe An advocate in this cause, not a judge, Beware least while you strive to cleere this doubt, I may suspect Persina hath beene false, For how ist possible that such a thing Sould be in nature, we two being black To have an issue white? this is against All humane sence, and reason naturall. Sysim. The Fascia tells you how this came to passe, Persina in the act of generation Contemplatively eying the faire picture Of beautifull Andromeda, and firing A strong imagination thereupon, Conceived in her wombe the very figure Of Perseus Mistris when she was bound fast Unto the rocke, and he redeem'd her thence, For proofe let that same picture be presented, And then compare them, you shall finde the substance And shadow nothing different but in life. Enter a Gentlman attendant. Gent. Sir there's a strange priest newlie come from Greece Desires he may be heard touching this matter, Who can informe you of the truth of thinges. Hydasp. admit him streight. Enter Caricles with the gentleman. Grave Sir can you declare Ought of this matter, doe you know this mayd
And that young man? Caric. I know them both great King; That maid which shall be found to be your daughte I nourish'd from a child; one of this countrey Gave her to me in Aegypt, and with her Rich costlie jewells, and a Fascia, Wherein was written her high pedegree; With her I went to Greece my native countrey, And being priest unto Apollo there, When I was busie in the rites and customes Belonging to my office, This Thessalian, Who vaunts himselfe borne of Achilles line, Stole her from Delphos, and I understand Pass'd many daungers with her; I forgive him And crave you would be pleas'd to doe so too; For since the gods by diverse signes and tokens Have unto us reveild their sacred willes, And made it plaine by strange discoveries, Strive not to crosse their workings. Cariclea fals at Caricles feete. Caric. O my Father, As deare unto me as those that begat me, Take what revenge you please, lo here I stand T'abide your sentence. Caric. O how largely am I Embraceth her and weepe for joy. Rewarded for my travell! tis ynough. I have beheld thy face yet once againe. Sysim. What Caricles, doe you not know your friend? Have you forgot the Aethiopian Legat?salutes him. Caric. No, no, I have not good Sysimethres, But doe congratulate our happy meeting. Hydasp. We have heard and seene ynough, I'm yet unmov'd; Bring in the picture of Andromeda. Enter the picture of Andromeda, the King for joy and admiration could not speake, the people give a great shout. Sysim. One point is wanting yet, strip up your sleeve Faire maid, there was a blacke spot 'boue your elbow. It is no shame to shew a naked arme
Before your parents for to prove your birth. She showes there a mole, the Queene runs and embraceth her. Hydasp. You strive to wash me white an Aethiopian In hinering this sacrifice, you shall Doe one aswell as tother, for although I now believe she is my naturall daughter Sprung from my loynes (as I have seene it prov'd By many arguments) yet I so much Feare justice and the gods, and owe such love Unto my country, as i'le lay aside All naturall respects, and all regard To the succession of my blood, and offer My daughter to the gods for your behoofe, (As Agamemnon did his Iphigene) Regarding more the publique benefit Then my owne private profit and respect. All the people. Save the blood-royall, save her whom the gods Will have preserv'd, appease the Sunne and Moone With a more lawfull sacrifice. Hydasp. Well since You'l have it s, though loath I am content; And now I turne to thee my daughter deere With armefuls of my love; but what is he That was tane with thee, whom you cal'd your brother? I trow he shall not too be prov'd my sonne. Caric. In that sir pardon me, I did abuse you, He's not my brother, but necessity Compell'd me to dissemble, what he is Himselfe can boldly tell you. Hydasp. Whatsoe're He be, he's destin'd to be sacrificed, Some women too must beare him company. This mayd that waites on you shall serve the turn. Caric. If he be sacrific'd, Ile be that woman, Death must not part us two. Hydsp. The gods forbid, Why say you so? Caic. Because tis fore-decreed
I must both live and die with that yong man. Hydas. I praise your courtesie and gentle nature Unto this Grecian stranger, who hath beene Companion of your journey, but we cannot Breake so the custome of our Country, as To save his life. Caric. Then I must perish with him, For know, O king, (perchance I may not dare To call you father) it is cruelty To spare my body, and destroy my heart, He is my heart, my love, my life, and all, My husband by the destinies appointed, And it is sinne t'oppose the gods decrees. Hydas. What will you counsell me to doe herein, Sysimethres and thou most reverend Priest, I will be guided by your wisdomes wholly In this affaire, Sysim. Through the exercise of joy The wisest men, oft-times we see are blinded. For at the first, great King you might perceive The gods lik'd not this sacrifice which was Ordained, who have every way declar'd Cariclea your daughter, and brought hither Out of the midst of Greece this reverend man, Who brought her up, to fortifie your faith. Moreover it is plaine by many signes And secret revelations that the gods Have fore-decreed this couple man and wife, And to that end have freed them from so many And imminent dangers, therefore let us suffer These divine miracles to sinke into Our understandings, and from this time forward Doe sacrifices more acceptable Unto the gods, who are not pleased with Humane oblations, but the blood of beasts. Hydas. Since things are thus appointed by the will And pleasure of the gods, since this faire couple Have beene preserv'd by fate from many dangers
By Land and Sea, and as should seeme reserv'd For Hymens instigation, ile no longer Resist the will of heaven, heavens send you joy, puts their hands together. And a most plenteous off-spring to succeed you, This is our firme decree, which we'll confirme By sacrifice, and worshipping the gods. O Sunne and Moone, whose sacred deities We most adore, since it is falne out thus By your decrees, that young Theagines And faire Cariclea are made man and wife, Accept their offerings, and vouchsafe to take them Into the order of your holy Priesthood. Theagines, I doe resigne unto thee My office, be thou Priest unto the Sunne, Weare this white Miter. Taks his Miter and puts it on Theagines his head. Pers. And Cariclea thou Weare this of mine, which consecrateth thee Priest of the Moone, adore her Deity. Caric. Now is the god Apollos Oracle Of Delphos verified, which said of them That leaving Greece, and sailing surging streames They should arrive at Countries scorch'd with Phoebus burning beames, Where they as recompences due that vertues rare doe gaine, In time to come ere it be long white Miters should obtaine. Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
