13100 99857129 22807
A DECLARATION Exhibited to the French king by hys Court of Parlyament concerning the holy LEAGVE. Whereunto is adioyned: AN Aduertisement to the three Estates of Fraunce, comprehending a true report of such occurrences as haue passed betweene the house of Guize, in fauour of the holy League: and the king of Nauarre & his adherents for their ne∣cessarie defence. Faithfully translated out of French. Imprinted 1587.
❧ A Declaration exhi∣bited to the King, by his Court of Parlyament. THe members of your Court of Parliament hauing consulted vp∣on the Edicte and Bul which your Ma∣iestie sent to them, doe beseeche you to accept in good part such humble declarations as they desire to geeue you to vnder∣stande of before they verifie, or re∣corde the saide Edict or Bull. For notwithstanding the small accesse that our praiers haue aforetime had vnto your Maiestie doe almost stop our mouthes, by taking awaie all hope of other aunswere then here¦tofore we haue receiued, yet so long as it shall please your Maiestie to continue vs in our offices, wee are boūd to continue in our accustomed fidelitie to the discharge of your con∣science and ours, which nowe with
your maiesties good liking and fa∣uour, wee doe, taking so much the more boldnes in libertie, as the ene∣mies of your estate, doe weene to haue licence to abuse your godlines and deuotion for the couering of their impietie and rebellion. If it had pleased God that those reasons which were debated in your presence concerning the publishing of the Edict of Iulie last past, might haue pearced the eares of that pati∣ence & good affection which your maiestie was accustomed to reserue to the voice of this companie, wee should not now be driuen to this ex∣tremitie: for euen then Sir, you might haue perceiued that those persons who vnder a verie vncertaine hope of reuniting your subiectes to one onelie religion, did paune foorth your authority and conscience to the most assured destruction of your E∣state: That they had not leagued and vnited themselues to anie other ende but to disunite your subiectes from your obedience, wherein through an
espetiall and singular grace of God they remained vnited, notwithstan∣ding their disunion in Religiō. That although their armies are great and terrible, as appeareth by the great mischiefes and oppressions that your people doe beare at their hands, yet wee maie by the experience of that which is past, iudge them to be ouer∣weake to put their purposes in exe∣cution: That notwithstanding they had meanes to doe it, yet your maie∣stie ought not to imploie them, be∣cause the offence which you seeke to correct is tied to the consciences, which are exempt from all power of iron or fire, & may be intreated with other meanes more conuenient to that fatherlie affection which your people haue euermore found in you, considering that euen those men whom so often you haue sought by force to compell, doe now volunta∣rilie offer to submitte themselues to all reason, and vnto that course they haue euermore beene allowed in the church.
But in as much as that that is de∣creede cannot be reuoked, also that the edict which is now vpon the file, is but the execution and conclusion of the former, wee doe not desire to declare vnto you anie other thing, but that it maie please your Maiestie to call to minde that kings are shep∣heards, and the Edices their shep∣heard staues, wherewith they guide their flocke vnder a milde and grati∣ous gouernment, hich is more pro∣fitable to the flock then to the shep∣heard: For your maiese may of your selfe conceiue that the name of an Edict can no waie be accōmodated vnto this bloody prescription which in so expresse termes conteineth the generall cause of the flocke, and so consequentlie the disanulling of the office and authoritie of the shep∣heard. Admitte the whole number of Protestants were reduced into one onelie person, yet is there not that man among vs that dare conclude vpon death against the same, before
the formal determination of his pro∣cesse, Wherby if he were not duelie attaint and conuict of some capitall or heinous crime, such as might con∣demne the offender, we shoulde bee lothe to destroie a good Citizen. Who therefore is he that without a∣nie order of lawe dare dispeople so manie Townes, and destroie suche a number of Prouinces, and so conuert this Realme into ashes▪ Who I saie is he that dare pronounce the worde that shal expose so manie millions of men, women and children to death? Yea and that without anie cause or apparant reason, considering they be not taxed with anie other crime thē heresie: an heresie (if it maie be ter∣med heresie) as yet vnknowen, or at the least vndecided: an heresie which they haue defended euen in your owne presence against the most fa∣mous Diuines in your Realme: an heresie wherin they haue bin borne, and for the space of these 30 yeeres brought vp, by the sufferance of your maiestie, and the late king your bro∣ther
of happie memorie. Euen an he∣resie which they remit to the iudge∣ment of an vniuersall, generall, or Nationall Councel. The breach of the Edict of pacifi∣cation hath brought vs forth so ma∣nie calamities, as there is no tongue able sufficientlie to expresse them: & it were a harde matter to note one sole benefite receiued in exchaunge of the same, except that it hath a far larger scope then was thought for. For those that make so cheape mar∣kets of the Protestants skins, would neuer haue brought you to their o∣pinion, if they could haue imagined the number to haue beene so great as at this daie, now that they are for∣ced to assemble themselues together, it appeareth. And who is hee that with himselfe can conspire the mur∣dering of such a multitude without horror, or that maie consent therto vnlesse he abandon all feeling of hu∣manitie? Consider sir what affection those men can beare to your seruice, when
they thirst so much after your bloud, what fidelitie they bring to the pre∣seruation of this so fraile and aunci∣ent estate, when they soake out that our remainder of force and strength by so vnreasonable bloodletting, that euen those that shalbe the Bar∣bers and Surgeons, shalbe in danger of drowning themselues. For we a∣las, haue at ouer high a price learned that thirtie or fourtie thousand Pro∣testants, armed for the defence of their liues, & of whatsoeuer els they hold dere in this world, cannot be o∣uerthrowen without the losse of ve∣rie neere as manie Catholickes, who marching against their willes to this warfare, can hardlie counteruaile the forces of those whose hope re∣steth in despaire and who haue no∣thing left but courage and weapons. If the Lords vengeance doeth so fiercelie pursue vs, who shal remaine to obeie this Edict? If both parties once come to flesh themselues each vpon other, euen to the vtter destru∣ction and ruine of the one or other
partie, who dare promise himselfe that he shal remaine and enioie the victorie, if it may be termed a victo∣rie after such destruction? or rather, what shall remaine for the plague & famine which alredie doe pleade a∣gainst warre, for the honor of the vt∣ter ruine of your Realme? But what maie the posteritie saie, when it shal heare that your court of Parliament hath propounded the ho¦noring of the articles of a league, as∣sembled against the estate: armed a∣gainst the kinges person: risen vp a∣gainst God himselfe: Yea such a one as spiting nature, commaundeth the fathers to bee no longer fathers to their sonnes: the mothers to be no mothers to their daughters: inuiting one frend to betraie another, & cal∣ling the murderer to the succession of the murdered, with the fatherlie name of your edictes? We will no longer stand vpon the particularities of the iniquities, and wronges, in an infinite number ga∣thered together vnder this forme of
Edict, wherby those that are authors thereof doe hope to be able to winne the Realme, when they haue once put you to lose it. But wee beseech your maiestie not to bee led by their counsailes, which proceede onelie from blinde ambition: but rather as you haue begun, so to folowe the so renowmed exāple of the wisdome & iustice of Salomon, for as he, to the end to trie out the true mother from the supposed, fained to become cru∣ell, so do we likewise hope that your maiestie hauing made shew to com∣municate in the tirannous desires of the league, to the ende to discouer them, will take heede of fulfilling them, and rather make your profite of the same to the preseruation of your naturall and obedient subiects. Wee meane not herein, for to ex∣cuse the taking of Montlymar, and many other places surprised by those of the pretended Religion, neither doe we desire anie thing so much, as that a good peace might restore strength & authoritie to your lawes,
whereby to doe you right: but Na∣ture permitting all men to defende their liues by whatsoeuer meanes, doeth somewhat excuse those that haue beene brought to that necessi∣tie, and contrariwise the sinne of the others is inexcusable, in that, that they counsaile your Maiestie to so pernicious a warfare, onelie vpon li∣courishnes of the confiscation of the Protestants goods, whom with such rigors they haue forced to seeke re∣compence of their losses at your coste, and to confiscate whatsoeuer they maie be able to enterprise vpon your maiestie. As for the Bul, the curat findeth the stile thereof to be new, vnusuall, and so farre from the modestie of former Popes, that it doeth no waie therein acknowledge the order of a Succes∣sor to the Apostles. And because throughout our recordes, or in anye antiquitie we find not that the prin∣ces of Fraunce haue beene subiect to the Popes iustice, either that subiects haue taken notice of their Princes religion,
the Court cannot determine thereupon vntill the Pope can proue his right which he pretendeth in the translation of Realmes established and ordeined by GOD, before the name of Pope came into the world: Vntil hee hath declared vnto vs by what title he entermedleth in the suc¦cession of a youthfull and strong prince, who by the course of nature maie haue his heire in his loines: Be∣fore he hath instructed our Religion, with what apparance of iustice or e∣quitie he denieth the lawe of nations▪ to such as are fallen into heresie, yea against the holie canons and aunci∣ent decrees, which neuer suffer anie to be holden for an heretike, vntil he hath beene freelie heard in his rea∣sons, admonished by sundrie synodes & iudged by a Councell called and freelie gathered together: Hee must teach vs with what kinde of pi∣etie & holines he geueth that which is not his owne, or taketh awaie that that lawfullie belongeth to another: That he stirreth vp the vassals & sub∣iectes
to mutinies against their lords and soueraigne Princes, and ouer∣throweth the foundations of al lawes and polliticke order: To be breefe, he must shewe vs by what authoritie hee enterpriseth to condemne your blood to the fire, & as it were, to send part of your soule into hell. But in as much as this newe Pope in lieu of instruction, doeth in his bul breathe out nothing but destruction and changeth his shepheardes staffe into a flaming or fierie torche, wher∣with vtterlie to destroie those whom if they be straied, he ought to winne again to the flock of the church. The Court can no longer consult vpō the publication of a Bull so pernitious vnto all Christendome, & to the so∣ueraintie of your crowne, euen pre∣sentlie deeming it worthie no other recompence, then the same which one of your Predecessors caused vs to geue to the like Bul sent vnto him by one of this Popes predecessors: and that was to cast it into the fire in the presence of the whole Frenche
Church, inioining his Atturney gene∣rall to make diligent inquisition af∣ter those that had prosequuted the expedition thereof in the Court of Rome, to the ende to minister so se∣uere & speedie iustice against them, that it might serue for an example to all posterities. For who knoweth not that all those suttleties are sued out by al the enemies of this estate, who vnder the name of your heires doe directlie ad∣dresse themselues against your owne person, imagining that alredie by their practises they haue atteined the type of their attempts, and that they haue no more to do but by the cloke to plucke you out of your seate, to the end to take ful possession of that which they haue barked at, and fol∣lowed so long. These things are so euident, and haue been so narowlie searched out, that it were in vaine for vs to abuse your patience with anie larger decla∣rations, whereof we doe not hope a∣nie greater effect or vertue then of
the former. But if it be so that our sinnes haue vtterlie closed vp the eares of your clemencie against iu∣stice, yet doe vs this fauour, to take into your handes againe those officer wherewith it hath pleased your ma∣iestie and the kinges your predeces∣sors to honor vs withal, so shall you be freed from the importunate diffi∣culties which we are forced to make at such Edictes, and our consciences discharged from the curse that God hath prepared for wicked magi∣strates and their Counsailors. The necessitie of your affaires haue manie times heretofore forced vs to winke at sundrie oppressions & per∣nitious inuentions. The opinion which your maiestie had conceiued that those of the pre∣tended reformed Religion woulde habandon the exercise thereof, and that that faction might be oppressed without much bloodshed or destruc∣tiō of this estate, haue yet receiued so much power ouer our aduises as to cause vs to passe the reuocation of
verie manie Edictes, so solemnlie sworne vnto. We doe now to our great grief and confusion perceiue how small profite to you our cowardlines hath brought, how hurtfull it hath beene to all your subiectes: and how shameful to vs and our posteritie. Our patience can no lenger be obedience, but vnexcusable astonishment if it stretcheth anie fur∣ther, or proceedeth to carelesnesse and contempt of all Common welth. It is therefore more conuenient for your maiestie to haue no Courte of Parliament, then to see the same vn∣profitable as we are, & it wil be more honorable for vs to returne priuate into our houses, or in our bosomes to bewaile the publicke calamities with the rest of our fellow Citizens, then to enthrall the dignitie of our offices to the cursed inuentions of the enemies of your Crowne.
An aduertisement to the three Estates of Fraunce, concerning the warre of the League. MY Maisters you were heretofore sufficientlie aduertised yt the league, notwithstāding whatso¦euer it promised, would breede great calamities in this Realme, and yet do smal harm to the king of Nauarre, and his par∣takers. Likewise that it was made properlie against this Realme, and so acknowledged at the first by both the king & all your selues. The K. of N. as he in him selfe feeleth the least harme and you the principall, so is he but the ullor and pretence. The worst is that you had more minde to see it then to preuent it, & to feele it, euen to the quick, then to be∣leeue it. Notwithstanding in deede I know that manie of you haue serued for Cassandras vnto Troy, as hauing small authoritie to turne away y• mis∣chiefe, though wise inough & suffici∣entlie
aduised to foretel it. The authors of this League to the ende the more easilie to induce you to enter into this warre, did propoūd great facilitie therein. It woulde be done in three daies, the best houldes were not to hould out the first sounde of their name. The K. of Na. was by & by stumbled: there wanted no more but the making of his Epitaph: If anie man presumed but once to make mē∣tion of 25. yeres euil spent in this like purpose, that is to say, much time wa∣sted in consuming our selues, it was an offence and prooued heresie, neither wanted there these ordinarie replica∣tions, namelie that the League that now was taken in hand was a farre o∣ther matter, and that these Capteines knewe other sleights, and thus vio∣ence in lieu of reason made them to preuaile. Marke here my maisters the pro∣gresse of their affaires in one yeere, measure by that yeeres worke all the est, notwithstanding their principall eate be vanished in smoke, and the
most part of their choler conuerted in∣to flegme, and thereby you maie bee able to iudge of the successe of that which is to come: for you shall see that as wearied and tired as alreadie we be, wee haue not set forward anie one good step, but that we haue gone backe two for it. After the edict of Iulie which pro∣ceeded by the violence of the league, the Lorde of Mayne tooke vpon him the prouince of Guyenne, and to that ende had beside the forces of the league, al the kings power committed to him, whereby eche one may iudge what armie that was: (for of two rea∣sonable strong armies hee made but one) hee departed possessed with a great masse of monie, and had in a maner dried vp the whole deuotion of the Clergie: he wanted neither ar∣tillerie nor munition. But besides if you will but call to minde either their brags, or your owne imaginations a that time, you shall finde that all the walles in Guyenne mouldered away and vanished in dust: yea euen the
King of Na. wist not where to become to shroud himselfe. And in deed it is most certaine that he was then vnarmed as one that nei∣ther woulde, neither could be persua∣ded that the obedience which he still yeelded to the king, coulde haue tur∣ned to his destruction: hee was armed with sure cōfidence in God the main∣teiner of the right, yea, euen naked a∣gainst armed iniurie, hee thought him selfe sufficiently couered vnder his kings armour, which should haue defended him, sith he had so far hono∣red him, as to acknowledge and take his quarell for his owne. Well the said L. of Mayne cōmeth into Poictou and Xantoigne: he leaueth behind him Rochel, and S Iohn d'An∣gely, Pons, &c, And setting vpon no∣thing (yet were these places neerest the hart of the realme, & occasion fell verie well out, for at that time they were so vexed with ye plague, that the souldiers could scarce a bide to conti∣nue among them) he thence tooke his way through Perigord, where by com∣position,
he tooke the Castle of Mon∣tignac le Conte, a place that had bene as it were the banner of all the former troubles as euerie one knoweth, and the course of his voiage did beare as if hee shoulde haue gone to Bergerac, there to haue tried the first furie of his armie, but he tooke his way by Souil∣lac, where hee passed ouer Dordonne leauing Monfort, Turenne, Saint Cere, places belonging to the Vicount of Turenne vntoucht. Thence he entred into Queacy, where the aduersarie held Figeac, Cadenac, Caearc, and o∣ther places, hee was lodged in the middest of them three whole weekes, hee was desired by the estates of the countrie, vrged by the Bishop of Cu∣horls, & importunatly called vpon by the Seneschall, to deliuer them: yea it is not vnknowen to what words the Lordes of St. Supplice and Camburat grewe vnto with him, vvhen they see all the countrie vvasted and brought into famine, & all vvithout profit, and in deed he did nothing but compoūd vvith tvvo or three gentlemen of the
weakest lodged, with condition that they might exercise their religion in their houses, so that they prosecuted no warre from their holds, sauing that in their owne persons they might do it in anie other place. His excuses were that he would goe clense the riuers and assure the tra∣ficke of the countrie. Also the most trustie he tolde in their eares, that he would surprize & assaile the K. of Na. wheresoeuer hee were. A truantlike stratageme if euer there were anie, which neuertheles was their foundati∣on, as if Fraunce had beene a chesse board, wherin a prince could not haue walked aboue foure steps, & in deede the K. of Nau. hauing as well as hee could furnished such places as hee left behinde him, passed ouer the riuer of Garonne betweene the two armies of the said Duke of Mayne, and the mar∣shall of Matignon which laie not past foure or fiue leagues from him, and so came to Bergerac euen in the face of the Duke of Maynes armie and there aboade a whole moneth togither
without either riuer or brooke be∣tvveene them, and yet had neuer so much as one all arume giuen him, and so finallie went into Xantogne setting forward toward Fraunce, and visiting his gouernment euen to the bankes of Loyre. This did he whō they should haue chased awaie within foure mo∣neths, yea hee whome they shoulde haue brought to the baie, vnlesse hee had resolued speedely to auoide the realme. The marshall of Matignon had be∣sieged Castetz, a house of the L. Faba standing vpon Garonne, when the L. of Mayne came. The said Lord of Mayne vvithout his knovvledge, to the ende to rob him of that small glorie, com∣pounded for xii. thousande crovvnes to haue it yeelded to him, vvhich was an vnusuall matter among souldiers, that a place being beatē & the breach made should be assaulted with siluer. Since that time he tooke S. Bazeill, Montsegur and Castillon, places vn∣knovvne before these vvarres: places neuer mentioned in the most particu∣ler
maps: places of no name but onlie for the resolution of defence, and yet such places, especiallie Montsegur and Castillon, as haue cost him deere eue∣rie vvaie. And it is most certaine that had not the pestilence vexed Castillon more then a man would vveene, hee had bene hardlie set before it, consi∣dering that the Lord of Turenne did succour & refresh it euen in the sight of the said D. of Mayne. This is the summe of al that he hath done in Guy¦enne in one vvhole yere: Where you are also to note that the K. of N. hath increased himselfe with Tayllebourge and Royan, places that be strong both by arte and nature, hauens, yea the mouthes of Charent and Garonne, I speake not of St. Iohn d'Angely Ton∣nay-Charent & others, vvhich besides them are recompence sufficient for Castetz and St. Bazeile. I leaue to saie that Garonne vvhich vvas promised to be opened for the contenting of Tholouze and Burdeaux doe stil remaine shut, yea more strait∣lie then before the vvar: for you must
not thinke that after the taking of St. Bazeile the said Lorde of Mayne durst set vpon Caumont vvhich hauing the riuer betvvene thē stoode in his face, neither Mas and the other places that commande ouer Gàronne, besides that at the same time they fortifid the towne of Meillan, vvhich is more worth then all that he hath taken, as the countrie men knowe well inough, besides also certeine sorts on each side of the water, vvhich since they haue builte beneath Clairac, vvhereby the marchants to whom he had giuen his word to make free the trafick before the last Christmas, forbidding them expresselie vpon paine of death to compounde for the libertie and assu∣rance of the passage for them, and their wares doe finde themselues fur∣ther to seeke then at the first, while in the meane time for want of traf∣fike they haue incurred sundrie losses wherebie diuerse are become Banke∣rupts, haue finally growen to compo∣sition, cursing the League and all the fauourers thereof. But that was it
which marshall Matygnon verie well perceiued, which also howe modest soeuer otherwise, hee coulde not in some of his letters conceale, namelie, that the Duke of Mayne had enter∣prized more vpon Tholouxe and Bur∣deux, meaning by Castle Trompet, then vpon Mas of Verdun or Caumont. Nowe iudge you what likelihoode there is that herafter they maie make anie great account of the rest of Guy∣enne: For all such places as at the entry into the warre, that began about the latter ende of the yeere, might haue wanted victuals, haue nowe at ease made their prouision, euen with their neighbors consents, whether it were, that common necessitie of both parts vrged them to such mutuall offices, ei∣ther els that they abhorre such extre∣mities and detest the miserie of the time: & yet in their notes vvhich they exhibited to the King vvherebie to persvvade him of the easinesse of this affaire, the same vvas set dovvne as an especial mene that they pretended a∣gainst the principall townes, a meane
truelie that holdeth more of the na∣ture of extremitie then of a meane, & vvhich is more, such a meane as they cannot come to againe in tvvo good yeres and more. Neither haue the affaires of the League prospered anie better in other Prouinces. For the L. of Mountmoran∣cye, who in respect of the iniurie that he perceiued to be done to the K. of Nauar, hath associated himselfe vnto him▪ hath brought to his deuotion Lodeue and Pons tvvo Bishoppes▪ Seas, with their Dioceses. He hath fortified both the bankes of Rhosne, Hee hath shotte out his rootes so farre into Pro∣uence that they haue beene forced to graunt to the Gentlemen free exercise of Religion. All that maie be saide to be vvonn in Languedock is the forte of Montesquyon, latelie won rather by tre∣son then strength, vvhich may be coū∣terpeized vvith a number of Fortes of like mettle taken in Prouence, and Marueyolz, which hereafter vvill serue onelie to make all other resolute, in respect that contrary to the promised
faith there were such cruelties & ex∣cesses committed therin that hereaf∣ter wee must seeke to finde out newe names wherwith to describe thē. But the siege of Mas St. Puels alone is e∣nough to counterpeise all the glorie thereof, as beeing the most miserable and weakest place of all L'Aragois, which giuing the repulse to the armie of the L. of Ioyeuse slewe him 32 cap∣teins and 5. hundred Harguebuts, di∣spersed or barred his regiments, and cracked his credite with the men of warre, yea droue him to such an exi∣gent, that in the estates since holdē at Castelnaudarry he resolued to meddle no further therin. As for Daulphine, that prouince which euerie man knoweth (if we re∣spect the contrarie partie) to haue bin the weakest of al other when the tro∣bles began: to be briefe, the prouince wherin the Lord of Mayne thought to haue made ye first triall of his fortune, whereupon also he assured himself of an easie ouerthrow of ye rest, no man is to learn how they suffered Mōlimart a
notable towne be taken, also Ambrū, the metropolitane of the countreie, those two that they thought they had woon to the league, which now the L. of Desdiguires hath made impregna∣ble, besides that they haue let them recouer Dye, Liuron, and other places of whose conquest the Lord of Mayne triumphed and grounded the foun∣dation of his glorie. I leaue sundrie castles in diuers pro¦uinces taken with lesse then ten poūd of pouder, for the which the league would haue rung al their belles, & en∣riched al the mercers of the Pallace, if it had won them with the canon: nei∣ther doe I saie that these small holdes which ye Lord of Mayne soundeth in our cares, doe euerie of them coste a million of golde, besides the liues of the best of our souldiers, whereas the good townes afore mentioned, coste not the K. of Na. and his associates past some Petronel shot, & scarce one man. Also that in all the small bicke∣rings that haue happened (for there haue beene no great battaile) vvee
shal finde that the greatest losse haue fallen vpon the League, so as vve may truelie saie that for one of the preten∣ded reformed Religion there haue di∣ed at the least 30. of the League. To be short, all things considered, vvil a∣nie man be so fond as to exchange Royan & Taillebourg in Guyen, Lodeue and St. Ponsun Languedock, Mountli∣mart, Ambrin and Dye in Daulphine &c. for Montgnac, Castetz, St. Bazeil, Mountsegur and Castillon, the tokens of the victories of the League, the Tro∣phyes of the Duke of Mayne, but cost¦lie and ruinous triumphes, yea I dare wel saie funerall triumphes Now that they haue spit all their fire commeth in a mightie Forreine armie to the succour of the K. of Na. what miracle will the League here bring forth to couer vs? When bee∣fore the King it was alleadged that vndoubtedlie hee shoulde haue ayde from the Princes that professed the same Religion with him, though they shott expreslie at Religion, and that they would needes haue the vi∣sard
pulde of, they had, if wee woulde beleeue them, long beefore seene to that: Concerning the Queene of En∣glànde they should cutte her out so much worke from the Scottish partes euen in her owne Realme, that shee should haue inough to doe, and it is no doubt but they haue kindeled all fire brands, stirred vp all ashes, and blowen at euerie sparke that they might, and yet it hath pleased God to breathe such a blast vpon their purpo¦ses that Englande was neuer so quiet, neuer so stronglie vnited to Scotland▪ neither had euer more euident viewe of Gods blessings either at home or abroade, for that God manie times and freelie hath miraculouslie disco∣uered those practises that the Iesuites stirred vp against the said Q. of Eng∣land her person and estate, and contra wise fauoured her enterprises that she hath taken in hande for the defence of those whom she knew to be wrōg∣fullie oppressed. To the ende to take away al diffi∣culties, they did in a maner enter into
bond to the King, that the K. of Na. shoulde haue no succour out of Ger∣manie. To colour this vaine hope, they alleage those old controuersies vpon some points of religion betweene the French & the Dutch churches, which they promised by their practises to nourish. And now to the contrarie, we see that such polices haue serued on∣lie to reunite their hearts, and ceasse their disputations: that they are most firmelie reconciled together to the ende hencefoorth to make it all one bodie and one cause: that the King of Denmarke, the Princes & Electors of the Empire, the L. of the Cantous of the Swytsers, and the Grisons do finde them selues greeued in the person of this prince, feeling themselues hurt in his woundes, and teinted in his iniuries. As in deed, who would not haue bene moued: who would not perceiue the consequence of that which was fra∣med against him? When for the reli∣gion that they professe, which them∣selues first admitted into their coun∣tries, his state, life and honor, are g∣uen
in praie, himselfe incapable of all dignities and goods? They shoulde haue armed the Germans, one against another: they should haue renued the olde braules betweene the Catho∣licke and Protestant Princes, neither, said they, did they want deuices to de¦uide the Protestantes among them∣selues. Where be now these great pol∣licies? what is become of all these discourses, sith that Germany was ne∣uer at better vnion in it selfe, or more disposed to succour their enemies: or now what wil they doe to that wretch Casimire (for so doe they terme this Prince) who one of these dais (which wil be no nues vnto them) wil march ouer the bellie of the trunke of these goodlie waterboughes, of the eldest of Lorrayne. But if the worst fall out and for the breaking of all, when the Rystres doe come in they wil bring an armie out of Italy that shall consist of the contri∣butions of the Princes of the League. It lieth in an ambush in the Alps euen redie to breake foorth at the time ap∣pointed.
The state of it trotted all o∣uer the Pallace, it was redde ouer the Court of the Loure, But where I praie you doeth it now sleepe? why doeth it not appeare at this neede? nay who knoweth not that to the contrarie the Lords of Venice the most anciēt frends and confederats of this Realme haue offred the king succour against the League, and doe nowe exhort him to peace. That the king of Spayne vpon whom they build all their purposes, sith they haue not perfourmed vvhat they promised, hath left them in the mid vvay and vvith reproch returned their agentes. And vvhat vvill they saie to Pope Sixtus himselfe, vvho hath confessed to the Lord of Mount∣morencie that they had ouerreached him in their declaration published a∣gainst the King of Nau▪ and the Prince of Conde, hee praieth him to pacific matters, euen he vnder whose shadow they sought to prouoke them: The Pope who euen in Auignon, and that by expresse treatie, permitteth to the contrarie partie of Daulphine & Pro∣uence
free accesse, to the end vvith his leaue dailie to dravv thence victuals, weapons, pouder, and all other muni∣tion of warre. This Itilian armie being thus either moulten, or not hauing bene built but in the aire, and contrariwise the dutch armie being in nature and hauing one foote alredie vpon the borders, who seeth not into what extremities tho∣rough their illusiōs they haue brought the people? who perceiueth not what peniworths they make of our calami∣ties? of all our blood? of the kings ho∣nor and of the Realm? But they wil fight with them, and in deede that is one of the greefes pub¦lished in their pamphlets, vz. that in the former troubles the straungers were not fought with vpon the fron∣tiers: Faine would I learne who letted them when in the first troubles the late D. of Guyse commanded ouer the power of Fraunce? In the second the D. of Aumale had an armie vpon the borders to debarre them the entrie, besides the death of the P. of Conde
which fell out n for his purpose: and in the last the D. of Mayne tooke it vpon him, who was 3. moneths be∣fore lodged vpon the passages: who had at leisure chosen out all places of aduantage: who also neuerthelesse in all that long voiage neuer gaue them so much as one allarme. But this is their wonted maner. To the end to haue weapon in hand and to become arbitrators of the affaires, they wil for a time be holden for Protestants. It is for the kings seruice if they be not al∣loued to fight: and when they haue the bridle lt lose, they be the first that seeke excuses, and then doe like verie wel that anie man shal say, it is a dan∣gerous and bad course to hazarde the Nobilitie of France against an armie of strangers yea and in the heart of all Fraunce. To be briefe, wil you see the good that the League hath done generallie in all Fraunce. It hath kindeled the fire both in all the foure corners there of and in the midst also. It hath filled all the best Prouinces and the best
townes with famine, and hath not yet set one step forward in all the preten∣ded enterprize. It promised to roote out all the Protestants, and see they haue now taken more anchore holde. It should driue them into Germanie, and behold it hath brought Germanie into Fraunce. It promised to root out their doctrine, and now marke how it hath brought vs to striue with them who shal haue the staffe, and to make new lottes, and as it were to reenter into a nevv diuision with them, where before they were content with such share and condition, as wee listed to graunt them. Let vs▪ therefore looke whether the League that hath confounded all this Estate, hath at the least done anie par¦ticular good to our estates. They were shrouded, as you all knovv, vnder the thredbare cloke of Common-wealth, (for so doe they tearme it.) They had promised to discharge the people: & gaue out verie loude that they were the verie ofspring of king Lewes the twelft, yea and that it went harde if
they were not Successors to the beau∣tiful surname that he deserued, name∣lie, Father of the people. Hereupon you had warning inough that you should bee more ouercharged then before. That a newe warre woulde bring in nevve impostes. That the League to the end to binde you, gaue you an earnest penie, but vndoutedlie onelie to binde you to the bargaine, and to make you to pay the contract. Marke now therefore at one yeres ende the suttletie of the league Consider what this Commonwealth hath in gendred: Seuen and twentie new Edicts at one clap, which seuen and twentie yeeres could not haue brought forth: Burdē∣some edictes edictes to the whole world. The dregs and scum of all the inuention of the Italian Courtiers. What wanted there more to oppres the poore peo∣ple? to fulfil ye confusion of this realm? In the Estates holden complaint vvas made that multitude of officers in matters of Lavve vvas no other but multitude and delaie of causes, & now behold an increase of presidents, coū∣sailers and other officers in soueraigne
Courtes & presidiall seas: marke the alternatiue receiuers for the spices, in paying rent for the multiplying, mainteining, delaying and enhaun∣sing of processes. Infinite times had the suppression, or ordering of the vn∣brideled number of Atturneies bene propounded, and now we see them not onelie innumerable, but also suc∣cessiue or hereditarie. Novv I saie we maie see our causes that holde mar∣gent and line▪ and passing from hand to hand, from father to sonne in the atturneies, grovve to be perpetuall to our posteritie. Howe much better had it bene to haue let the king alone quiet, vvho at the beginning of this League tended onlie to the reestabli∣shing of the ministration of Iustice throughout his Realme? who so care∣fullie consulted with the principall of his soueraigne Courts what meanes were most conuenient to restore all things into order▪ Long inough had vve perceiued that number of offi∣cers in the deng with the treasurie did breede nothing but losse and di∣minution,
so as the crovvne passing from the poore man, going through so manie treasurers hands, vvas scarce worth a testerne to the kinges purse, which bred the counsel to restore the auncient manner, vvhich was that all the kinges coine should immediatelie be transported into the kings treasu∣rie, so should they spare both the au∣ditor and the accomptes: So might they saue two third parts of the trea∣surie, and by this sauing the K. might without hurting him selfe haue cased his people of one third and more. But vvhat shall we doe now, now I saie that they giue vs newe generalles and generallities▪ that they set vp againe without anie reason the elections which vpon so good reasons had bin suppressed? that they make the offi∣ces of the chambers of accompts he∣reditarie and al other offices saleable? which is as much to saie as to make the treasurie of the Realme patrimo∣niall, hereditarie, and saleable both to the dealers themselues & to those that should iudge of the dealing therein?
These be the goodlie successions that the controuersie of succession, so out of season propounded, haue taught vs. Successions of pleaders and triflers: Successions of theeues & robbers of the Commonvvealth, Successiōs of deuourers, a thousand successors, euē during the kings life, to this Realme seeing they succeede in his treasure. The king before these commotions propoūded the releeuing of his poore people, but novv vve see them redu∣ced into the extremitie of confusion: he purposed to redeeme his demaines, now he selleth them outright: to di∣minish courts and subsidies, hee nowe doubleth them, yea hee selleth them, which he neuer did before: he went about to abolish olde tributes, nowe from time to time he raiseth new, and those of so manie sorts that wee shall neede a Calepine to learne to knowe their names. All these newe charges and oppressions, al these inuentions, are the subtiltie of the League which would not giue the king leisure to be∣nefite his people, as enuying ye wealth,
peace, and restoring of this Realme: enuying the honour that shoulde re∣dound to the king for reestablishing it: and enuying the good affection & loue that hee shoulde winne with his people, by graunting them some re∣lease after so manie labours. Neither thinke but the Capteins of this league doe reape the cheefe commoditie, for besides that one part of these newe E∣dicts is dedicated to the maintenance of the warre that they haue bred, and is guided by their hands, and so conse¦quentlie goeth through their fingers, it is not vnknowen that the Duke of Guyse hath gotten to himself particu∣larlie the edict of tenne sellers of Sea fish, and the edict of twelue sellers of cattel at Paris, the edict that maketh vs the alternatiue receiuers for the spi∣ces, and the edict of amplification to all the seas royall to taxe throughout ye realm. That ye D. of Maine hath also had the Lieutenants of the long robes in euerie prouince, & that they both do participate in ye heredity of offices venall, & of the chāber of accompts:
they that shoulde by a new edict abo∣lish all olde tributes, euen they that (as they protest) should bing againe the world of king Lewes the twelft in to this Realme. It maie bee they haue dealt better with the Nobilitie, for they seeke so much as they maie to itgate their mindes, and peraduenture maie haue restored them into their pristnate e∣minece▪ For they entitle themselues princes of credite and they promised it: Al we that haue tried their armies may know whether gentlemens hou∣ses which before were sacred, were e∣uerles regarded then by their troupes, whether euer Huns, Gotths or Wandals could look for worse dealing thē they haue had of them. Those of ye contrary part (because the League sought to turne all the hatred of the warre vnto the K. vvho was forced thereto) found fauor, bicause also through their frēds they compoūded halfe vvith wares & halfe with warre. The Catholiks con∣trarise because they gathered assu∣rance in themselues, their priuiledges,
seruices and deserts, were as it vvere geuen for a pae, and entreated like enemies and strangers. I saie not that with such extraordi∣narie charges as the comminaltie see∣meth to beare, the nobiliie standeth more charged then they: and that is it wherein wee ordinarilie flatter our selues, for vnder colour that we haue not pide foorth the monie, they per∣suade vs that we paie non▪ as if when a man is let blood, the blood procee∣ded onelie from the arme that is lan∣ced, and not from the higher parts, which are still to supple it: truelie if the farme be spoiled, it is euidēt that it is the gentlemen that loseth: If the customes bee dubbled vpon the mar∣chandize, it is the gentleman that bea∣reth it: he that weareth most silkes dis∣chargeth the custome: he that buieth vp most horses, standeth charged with the edictes of the post. Hee that hath largest walkes of lande, is most charged with the entries of his wines, corne, and flesh, with the dobling of subsidies, with the impost of hostries:
let vs goe farther, hee that hath most lande hath vsually most matters in law, and therefore to speake vpright∣lie, it is we that are charged with new presidēts, councelers, lieutenants, of∣fices &c. It is we that paie the alter∣natife receiuers for the spices, and are to wage the hereditie of the begging atturneies. The launce is first stroken into ye skinne of the pesant, of the mar¦chāt, of ye officer, & of the atturnie, &c The first blood, the first siluer cōmeth from them and out of their purse: but they fill them selues againe out of the higher partes: they licke them selues hole at our cost. For the peasant hath skill inough to enhaunce his labour and fruites: the marchant to cast his accountes & to rayse the price of his marchandize, the officer by perticu∣lers to bring in the graunde sum that he hath disbursed, the atturnie to en∣large his lignes and set a greater rate of his writing and steps. Finallie all of them doe recouer what they haue paide aforehand, and of whome, for∣sooth of the gentleman who sticketh
to his losses, and haue no further or higher degree where to recouer him∣selfe. Concerning our honours, you re∣member that in their protestatiō they shoulde restore each thing into his eminencie, lodge euerie one accor∣ding to his degree, cause the gouern∣mentes to be restored to those from whom they pretende them to bee ta∣ken, &c. And because some men were vexed euen at the heartes to see cer∣teine gentlemen about the K. which through his fauour and good will had at once atteyned to the greatest ho∣nours, this argument did they vse to poyson vs with all: but you maie call to mynde that when the peace was concluded, there was no one word spoken thereof, neither seemed they to restore anie one of those for whose sakes they seemed to take of∣fence. And as for those whome in their vvritinges they so mangled, they haue since most vildlye sought their fauours and endeuoured by all meanes to binde them to them,
and in deede you and they see them both greater and in further auctoritie then euer before. I here meddle not with the kinges choice, I touch not their deserts, I knowe there is no dig∣nitie so great, but is opened to the nobilitie, or to which the arme of ver∣tue can not reach: but onelie I would haue you marke what pretēces they make and howe they doe dallie with vs at pleasure, also that we may know that they vse our displeasures, our mis∣likes and our greefes: and so sone as they haue done with vs, they remem∣ber vs no more. At the least they haue done good to the Cleargie: They haue done some∣what for the Church, their chiefe pre∣tence: the Clergie that pauned foorth themselues and with so good a vvill sould themselues for them. Let vs see, they promised to disperse the Prote∣stantes of Fraunce, and now beholde they haue more firmelie vnited them; Marke how they haue reunited and reconciled them with all other Nati∣ons, Englishmen, Frenchmen, Germains,
Danes, Scots, Swethians and Switzers, see also how they haue made them to associate themselues with our Catho∣like Princes, and the chiefe Lordes of this Realme. The faction of the Reli∣gion groweth to vnion and ours euen manifestlie disperseth it selfe, howe much better had it beene to proceede by holie admonitions, by gentle con∣uersation, and by good examples, meanes peraduentute too gentle for the vnpatient, but at the least health∣some and assured, peraduenture lesse agreeable to the pretended Phisitions of our sicknesse, but at the least pro∣fitable, but at the least nothing dange¦rous to the diseased. What had the Cleargie then gai∣ned? which of all the Bishoppes, not∣withstāding whatsoeuer his charges, cā saie that he hath bene made whole againe? that he is anie thing amended by their armies? Naie to the contra∣rie, haue not the Lords of Ambrun, Lodeue, St. Pens, & others euen of late lost their Bishoprickes? How much of their temporalties must they sell for
the recouerie of them by force? Will not all their affection and heate of pledging, selling and contributing bee first wasted like smoke. But wil you also see that it was but a pretence. The capteins of ye league doe skirmish together as it seemeth: For when there was anie speeche of prea∣ching in France, they wrested foorth the kings Edict expreslie to stoppe it, yet haue they permitted and consen∣ted that the Gentlemen of the contra∣rie part, compounding for their hou∣ses, shal haue free exercise of the Rei∣gion, so that from their saide houses they make no warre against thē. They haue offred the like cōditiōs to other townes, castles and particular persons, They suffer the reistres in the middest of their armies to haue their ministers and sermons, who haue preached in their Churchyards and Churches, yea and celebrated the supper openlie in their campe. That which they permit to some, whie should not the K. permit to all? Wherefore maie not the K. per∣mit that to his Subiectes which the;
so voluntarilie doe suffer in strangers? Wherefore shal that be a te of here∣sie in the king, which in them is zeale of the Church, meritorious or veniall? Wherefore shoulde it bee damnable or mortall to their Superior? These men haue in the end robbed and polluted the holie places: these men haue spoiled and ransommed the preestes and monckes: these men vn∣der pretence of pietie haue commit∣ted 1000 impieties: these men vpon a merriment haue soaked out all our goods & drowned vs in all mischiefes. Of such and so great inconueniences what good can redound to vs? to the commons? to the nobilitie? to the cleargie particularlie or generallie? And who did euer anie mischiefe, at the least if he list to be obstinate in it, but for hope of good. But maie I yet sale more? what good haue they done to themselues? For God hath in such sort cursed their actions that in the meane time while they weene to fee their confraries in the Townes vnder pretence of that authoritie that the
warre granteth them: The best place that they had surprized, are withdraw¦en from their subiection. Agen & Aux¦onne with some other, though newlie bought againe by the K. and restored into the League: And note that vpon the least discontentment this exam∣ple will shortlie bee followed in all other places. What followeth? Sith this League is vnprofitable to it selfe, also that was is hurtfull to all: Seeing that in one and twenty moneths, being in greatest force, it hath done nothing to anie pur¦pose, but in lieu of going forward hath lost ground, what shall wee doe but haue recourse to some other remedie and neuer stande obstinatelie in this: in this corosiue and venemous Anti∣mony which expelleth both good and bad together: and manie times the good rather then the bad: which vn∣der colour of driuing foorth the hurt∣ful humors wil make vs voide blood, and peraduenture our liues in the blood. Truelie we must addresse our selues to our king: hee is a mercifull
Prince and one that loueth his people, ee knoweth that a king dieth in the eath of his Realme: he is vndoubted¦e wounded in vs deeper then ourlues: he wil pitie himselfe in vs and  our woundes. Let vs therefore pri∣atelie open them vnto him & shewe im such as threaten vs. Let vs with pen throate tell him what harme the eague doeth vs. Let vs beseech him ccording to his singular wisdome to nde some remedie, some durable re∣edie, such as maie consist: with the sposition of our bodies: some such medie as our weakenesse can beare: me such remedie as maie conuert & pple the humors, not such as wee∣g to purge, shal wholie ouerthrowe r bodie: Let vs aboue all thinges aie to God to turne the sweete eie of s mercie toward vs: For who is able  beare the rigorous countenance of s iustice? That it maie please him th his spirite to assist our King in ru∣g his Scepter. That he will vouch∣fe to inspire him with good councel d to raise him vp good Counsailers:
to endue him vvith force and courag to heale the humors and to stoppe v the vvounds of this Realme: that to saie, to quench the cursed sub∣tleties of the league, so to re∣store a holie, happie, and permanent peace to this Estare. FINIS. Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffes, for Thomas Cadman. 1587.
