13223 99839741 4189
This Heav'n-aspiring Tree's th'Imperiall State, Whose Branches, shaken by the Hand of Fate, Let fall their rip'ned Monarchs, which appeare The same in Vrns, as on their Thrones they were; Herodian observ'd, and having tooke Their sev'rall Lives, hee weighs them with his Booke; Hee findes them weight; Then recommends their Story To Fame; Fames Trumpet sounds their Shame; their Glory.
HERODIAN'S IMPERIALL HISTORY engraved title page depiction of Herodian depiction of Fate shaking the tree of state depiction of Fame with her trumpet Non ficti pravi{que} tenax  sed nuntia vero London printed for Hen: Taunton and are to be sold at his shop in St. Dunstons Church yard Fleetstreete. 1635
HERODIAN OF ALEXANDRIA His HISTORIE OF TVVENTY ROMAN CaeSARS, and EMPERORS (of his time.) Together with the most Solemne Deification of the Roman Emperors and Empresses. Interpreted out of the Greeke Originall. LONDON, Printed for Henry Taunton, and are to bee sold at his shop in St Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1635.
THE APPROBATI∣ON OF THIS HI∣STORIE, by divers Authors of Eminent place and esteeme. PHOTIVS the Patriarke, in the 99. Chapter of his Greeke Bibliotheke. HERODIAN neither swells with Superflui∣tie, nor omits ought that is Necessarie: In a word, hee is not inferiour to any,  for all Historicall perfections.
HENRY STEPHAN in his La∣tine Dedicatorie Epistle to Sir Philip Sidney (of glorious memory) prefixt before Herodians Greeke Historie. THe reading of HE∣RODIAN'S Historicall Worke, will bee a matter of singular profit and plea∣sure to the Nostri Temporis Aulicis. Courtiers of this Age; for hee represents (as in a glasse) the Emperours of that age, and their Courts; with their Comedies, Trage∣dies, and Trage∣comedies. It is most certaine, that hee was both an Eye-witnesse, and an Eare-witnesse of many things which he writ. No Roman
Historie did ever comprize such Tam mi∣rabiles vi∣cissitudines. wonderfull changes hap∣ning in the Romane Empire, in so small a circle of time. POLITIAN in his Epistle to Pope INNOCENT the 8. HAving bethought my selfe which of all the Hstorians I should translate (according to your H. Com∣mand) I resolved at last on HERODIAN that Excellens rerum scrip∣tor, & qu diu in Pala∣ti versa∣tus Aul▪ af∣fect e{que} e{que} tt, isto∣rian  suis  e▪ &c. excellent Writer, who having long con∣tinued in the Emperors Court, and being very aged, under∣tooke to write the History of his Time: which he hath pr∣formed, not onely eloquently, but withall most frankly and
faithfully. Your Holinesse shall finde in him great varie∣ty of Persons and Actions, many strange things, and fre∣quent Examples of Fortune, Vacillantis reeling (as it were) some∣time one way, sometime another: as also wonderfull wise Counsells, accompany∣ed with unexpected Events; and sage Precepts, delivered in a Stile full of Majesty and Sweetenesse: lastly, a very Magazin of Morality; and (as it were) a Mirrour of hu∣mane Fate: whence all men may select choice Documents conducing to the Weale and advancement of a private and publick Estate.
M. D. WHEAR, the publicke Professour of History in the most noble Vniversity of Quam semper a∣matam, semper ho∣noratam (sic Dvoluistis) habebo. Oxford, in his Booke, De Ratione & Methodo legendi Historias. pag. 35. HERODIAN, a most po∣lite and judicious Au∣thor, hath with singular Elo∣quence described the Acts and Lives of many Caesars and Emperours.
THE NAMES OF the Romane Caesars and Their gold, silver, and copper Coines (with their I∣mages and In∣scriptions) are in the custo∣dy of that noble Anti∣quary Sir R. C. Emperours, whose Acts and Lives are recorded by HERODIAN. Anno Dom. 163. MArcus Aurelius There is yet extant at Rome a stately Co∣lumre erected by him. In his time Bri∣taine received the Christian Faith. Beda Eccl. Hist l. 1. Antoninus, Lucius Verus his son in law. The two first Cōsorts in the Ro∣man Empire Anno Dom. 182. His naked Statue (as hee playd the Gla∣diator) is ex∣tant at Rome in the Frnesian Palace. See the Transumpt o it in M. . Sandys Iournall, pag. 271. Commodus. Anno Dom. 195. So called because hee pertinaciously refused to accept the Empire offered hir by the Senate. X Pertinax. Anno Dom. 195. Iulian. Anno Dom. 196. Niger, in Asia, at once. His Triumphall Arch is yet extant at R No marvell if three stood for the Empire; for (once) there were thirty Princes elected one time, by severall Armies (Zenoba was one of them.) Vid Bed. Severus, in Italy, at once. Albinus. in Britanie, at once. Rep. l. 6. . 5. & P. Mexia in Galten.
Antoninus, Geta, Brothers and Colleagues. Anno Dom. 219. Macrinus, and Diadumenianus Caesar (his Sonne.) Anno Dom. 220. Antoninus, or rather Pseud-Antoninus Anno Dom. 224. Alexander. Maximinus. Quartinus. Anno Dom. 237. Gordian the Father. Gordian the Sonne. Anno Dom. 239. Maximus, In the Greeke, Bal∣binus (sed in Fast Siculis & Capitolinis, Albinus.)Albinus, Colleagues. Anno Dom. 241. Gordian, Nephew to the El∣der Gordian.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The first Booke. The Contents. HErodian's Historicall faith. The rare and choice Occurrents here recorded. A briefe Character of the Emperors insuing. A Summary of the Emperor Marcus his Life and Reigne. The education of Prince Commodus. How Marcus bestowed his Daughters. His Princely Qualities. Herodian a great Statesman. Marcus misdoubts Commodus. His speech on his death∣bed. Hee dies and is generally lamen∣ted. Commodus succeeds. His speech to the Army. His bad Courtiers. Pom∣peianus a grave Counceller. Romane Triumphs. Commodus poasteth to
Rome. The Romanes dearely affect him. His Description. His Entrie in∣to Rome. Perennius a Favourite. Lucilla, Commodus his Sister, con∣spires against him. Perennius his Treason. Iupiters Festivall. Romane Priests honoured. Perennius disco∣vered and beheaded. Maternus re∣bells: his Plot detected. The Mo∣ther of the Gods: her Holiday; and History. The strange river that made men geld themselves. A Plague and Famine at Rome. Cleander a Fa∣vourite. His Treason. He is gene∣rally hated. He armes the Souldiers against the Commons. Fadilla detects him. He is beheaded. Commodus his Cruelty and Credulity. Strange Prodigies. Rome fired. Commodus debauched and infatuated. Liberty, a Goddesse. Commodus, an excel∣lent Archer. Hee fights naked with Fencers before all the People. New-yeares-gifts. New-years-tide solemn∣ly kept. Marcia, Commodus his chiefe Concubine. Philo-Commo∣dus. Marcia and others conspire Commodus Death. Hee is poyson'd and strangled.
HERODIAN'S Induction. OF those which have hi∣therto bestowed their paines in compiling Hi∣storie, and recording the Acts of ancient Time, divers affecting the reputation of Learning, and covering by wel-tuned language to eternize their Fame (lest by silence they should bee lost a∣mong the Vulgar) have beene more carefull to gild and em∣bosse their Discourse, than to mine and search out the Truth: supposing (belike) though theyTruth, the Soule of  delivered many fabulous Narra∣tions of things done so long since, they could not easily bee controlled; and yet neverthe∣lesse, their neat and spruce Com∣positions should bee highly ap∣plauded.
Others againe, transportedPassionate Historians censured. with spleene against some parti∣cular People, or with hatred a∣gainst Tyrants; or else too much addicted to glorifie Princes, Ci∣ties, and privat persons, have not perfectly delineated the Image of Truth. For my owne part, I haveHerodians Historicall Faith. here undertaken to write such a History as is not grounded on vulgar Aires, and vaine Noy∣ses, or on the uncertaine Cre∣dit of forraigne Relations; but of such recent Occurrences as I have  faithfully and industri∣ously collected, and cannot bee unknowne to the moderne Rea∣ders: and I doubt not, but the intelligence of so many rae and memorable Accidents, which have fallen out in so short a time, will be both usefull and delight∣full to After-ages. For if wee
reckon from Augustus, who re∣duced the State of the Romane Common-wealth to a Monar∣chy, wee shall not finde in all those two hundred yeares (for thereabouts it is to Marcus theThe rare and choice Occurrents here recor∣ded. Emperours Raigne) either such change full Successions in the Empire, or such various chan∣ces and events of civill and for∣raigne Warres, or so many Ci∣ties of our owne and of the Bar∣barians conquered: beside earth∣quakes and pestilences, and the lives of Princes and Tyrants so strange and uncouth, that all the Records of Antiquity can hardly parallel: some whereof injoyed their Principality for a longer time, others but a very small while; yea, many of them having scarce accepted the Imperiall Title, the very same day they were elected,
were like wise rejected, and de∣posed from their Imperialitie. Whereupon, the Citie of Rome having in 60 yeares more Em∣perors than for the proportion of the time, there hapned ma∣ny variable and admirable Oc∣currents: for those Princes  Character of the Em∣pers en∣g. which were of riper yeares, and could manage their Affaires with Wisedome and Iudge∣ment, did governe themselves, and their People with great ho∣nour; but the younger sort of them, for want of Education and Experience, ran many wilde courses. Thus disparitie of Yeares and Conditions, was accompanied with diversity of Manners and Actions. The particulars whereof, exactly ob∣serving the Concurrence of the severall Times and Princes, we come now to specifi.
A Summary of Marcus his Life and Reigne. THe Emperour Arelis. Marcus had many Daughters, and but two Sonnes; whereof the younger (called (Ve∣rtssimus) dyed in his childhood; the other, (named Commodus) heThe educa∣tion of Prince Commodus. was very sollicitous to bring up well: to which purpose, he sent farre and neere for many noble Philosophers, giving them great pensions to traine him up in ver∣tue and learning. His Daugh∣ters,The Em∣perors pru∣dent choice of his Son in law. as soone as they were mar∣riageable, hee bestowed on the best men hee could finde among the Senators: For in the choice of his Sonne-in-lawes, hee had not so much respect to ancient Nobilitie or great wealth, as to their Excellence in all Mo∣rall
and Intellectuall Endow∣ments: rightly esteeming the Goods of the Minde to be the only permanent and durable Ri∣ches.His Prince∣ly qualities Hee was indued with all Princely vertues, and of such rare and exquisite knowledge in Antiquities, that hee was not inferiour to any of the Greekes or Romanes in that kinde; wit∣nes his many wise Speeches and Writings yet extant. He was also a Prince of so sweet a tem∣per, and debonaire behaviour towards all men, that he would give  his hand to every one that came to him, commanding his Guard to put backe none that came to see him. In a word, he was the onely Emperour that shewed himselfe a wise man, not onely in Words or Edicts, but in Gravity and Continencie of life. Whereby it came to passe,
that many famous Men for Wisedome and Learning flou∣risht in his time. For Men are very apt to imitate their Princes, for the most part. Now what∣soever he did in peace or warre remarkable, or attempted against the Northerne or Easterne Bar∣barians, is already committed to writing by many excellent learned Men. But those Occur∣rents, which all my time (after Marcus decease) I either saw or heard of (most of which I knew experimentally, in regard I bore diverse  high and honourable offices in the State) it is now my Taske to relate.Herodian an Officer of State. Marcus being now weakened with Age, and worne out and spent with incessant Toyle and Care, suddenly fell (while hee was in Now Au∣stria and Hagae. Pannonia) into a grie∣vous disease. When he saw him∣selfe
past recovery, hee was soreMarcus misdoubts s sonne Commodus. afrayd, left his sonne, who was then but About 18. young, should in the first heat of youth, through his uncontrollable Imperiall power (when hee was gone) abandon good arts and exercises, and be∣take himselfe to drunkennes and intemperance: for Youth is too forward to shake off the yoke of Discipline, and devote it selfe to the bewitching blan∣dishments of sensual  calls S∣lity these aigne good of east. p. 93. delights. Being also a man of  high wise∣dome, and profound judgement, he was much terrifyed at the re∣membrance of many Princes, which came to their soveraignty when they were yong & youth∣full: as, of Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, who was such an Epi∣cure in his Diet and manner of living, that hee richly rewar∣ded them that could invent any
new kinde of pleasure: as also of Alexanders Successors, which were so exorbitant and irregu∣lar in their Governement, that they were a great blemish and dishonour to the Empire. For See Iustin lib. 24. Ptolomy so shamefully excee∣ded the boundes of modesty, that contrary to the lawes of the Macedons, and all the Greekes, hee made love to his owne Si∣ster. And Antigonus, who would needes personate Bacchus; in stead of the Macedonian Coronet and Diadem, did usually weare a Wreath of Iie, and carry a T speare drest with green boughs in stead of a Scepter. The good Emperour was also much trou∣bled with the late Examples of In him the  Nero, who slew his owne mo∣ther, and made himselfe the sff of the Vulr; and of De∣mitian, who was a most horri∣ble
cruell Monster. Revolving therefore in his minde, these Images of Tyranny, hee was grievously tossed twixt Hope and Feare. Moreover, he much distrusted the bordering German Nation, which (yet) he had not wholly at his Devotion, but prtly had Confederated, part∣ly Conquered: whereof many (notwithstanding) had with∣drawne themselves from his O∣bedience, and were onely held in awe with the presence of the Prince. He was therfore in great doubt, lest despising his sonnes Minority, they would presently fall to rebellion; it being the u∣suall gu se of Barbarians, to raise Tumults upon the least Occasi∣on. In these perplexities, hee commands his Kinsemen and principall Lords that werethere, to come unto him; who being
assembled, hee sets the young Prince before them, and lifting up himself a little on his Couch, makes this Speech unto them. The Emperour Marcus his Speech on his Death-bed. IT is no mervell, if you bemoane and lament my present Case; for Men are led by Nature, to compassi∣onate their Kinsmens miseries: and those dolefull things which we see be∣foreObject praesenti movet po∣tentism our eyes, doe most excite our commiseration. But betweene you and me there is a more speciall bond: for knowing how dearely I have lo∣ved and respected you, I may justly challenge your love againe. And now is the fittest  season for me to judge, whether I have deservedly honored you thus long, and taken all occasions to preferre you; and for you to shw your selves gratefull and mindefull
of those Innoblements. You see here my sonne (your Pupill) is now en∣tring the Aprill of his Age; and withall, into such broken Seas, and surging Waves of businesse, that if hee have not good Pilots, hee may soone, by mis-governement, steere a wrong course, and make shipwracke of his Fortunes. Be you therefore as so many Fathers unto him, by your grave Counsells and Instructions. For no Treasure in the World can so assure a Prince, nor the strong∣est Guard so well preserve him as the Good-will and love of his Sub∣jects. The way to raigne long and securely, is not to purchase Feare by Cruelty, but to winne Love by Mildenesse and Clemen∣cie. For they are the best servants to their Soveraigne, and furthest—peragit tranquilla potestas Qud vio∣lent a nequit. from Iealousie and Flatterie, not which are compelled by necessity, but which are gently led by their owne
loving inclinations, nor will they e∣ver stand out in any thing hee shall require of them, unlesse they bee un∣justly and violently oppressed. And it is a poynt of great difficulty, for a Prince, that may live as licentiously as he list, to moderate himselfe, and bridle his owne apptite. Wherefore if you by your prudent Admonitions shall plant in him a care to live well, and often remember him of what he hath now heard, you shall render him a worthy Prince both to your selves, and others; and you shall (thereby) propagate my memory; which this only way you may make immortall. No sooner had MARCVS en∣ded his Speech, but hee swoo∣ned, and became speechlesse; being so sicke and heart-sunke, that hee fell backe into his bed. Which lamentable sight, so mo∣ved all there present, that many
of them cryed out, as they were distracted. But hee lived onely a day and a night longer,Marcus dies and then April. 17. An. Dom. 181. Aetat. 59. deceased: leaving to the present Age, an infinite love to his Majestie, and to the future, an everlasting memoriall of his Vertue. As soone as his death was made knowne, it is incre∣dible what weeping and wailing there was in the Armie, and a∣mong all the Communalty: yeaAnd is ge∣nerally be∣wayled. there was no nation throughout the Romane Empire, but with many teares receiv'd the mes∣sage, and deplor'd their incom∣parable losse in him: some cal∣ling him their good Father; o∣thers, their good Emperour: some their most valorous Com∣mander; Others, their vertuous and temperate Prince. Nor in∣deed, were any of them decei∣ved in him. Somefew dayes af∣ter
the celebration of his Fune∣rall, it was thought fit by the Lords, to present the young Prince to the Army, that hee might speak to them, and (as the manner of new Emperors was) bestow a Largesse of money up∣on them, to presse them (as it were) to his Love and Service. Proclamation therfore was pre∣sently made, that all the Army should assemble together: which done, Commodus comes foorth,Commodus succeeds. and having sacrifised to the Gods, ascends a high Throne e∣rected in the midst of the camp; where, being accompanied with his Fathers Kinsmen and Coun∣sellours, which were very ma∣ny, and excellent learned men, hee speakes to this effect.
Commodus his Speech to the Army. I Make no doubt, but both you and I are alike sorrowfull for our late Calamitie; and that you are no lesse grieved than my selfe. In my Fa∣thers time, I never bore my selfe among you as your Superiour: for he loved us all, as if we had been all one; and did more willingly call me Fellow-souldier, than Sonne: estee∣ming this, to note a participation of Nature; that, of Vaour: yea, when I was an Infant, he would oft carry me in his armes, and deliver me in∣to your hands, recommending mee (as it were) to your tutelage and fi∣delity. I am in good hope therefore of all your loves, seeing the elder sort of you may repute me for your soster∣childe, and my equalls I may well terme my Schoolefellowes in Armes;
so dearely did my Father love us all, as if wee had beene but one; being carefull to traine us up in all kind of Vertuous exercises. And now after him, hath Fortune The Ro∣mane Em∣perours kept the I∣mage of Fortune in their cham∣bers with great vene∣ration. made me your Prince, not by faction (as some of my Predecessors) nor by usurpation. For I onely was borne and bred in the Court, and as soone as I came into the world, was received not into a privat cradle, but vested in Imperiall pur∣ple: so that at the same instant, the* Hinc Por∣phyrogeniti Sunne saw me a Man and a Prince. Which, if you duely consider, you will love me not as a Dative, but a Na∣tive Emperour. And now that my Father is translated to Heaven, into the Society and  Consistory of the Gods; the Rule of the World, and care of humane affaires, is devolved unto Vs: which, what powerfull ef∣fects, or good successe it may produce, rests wholly in you. For if you make a brave end of the Warre, and extend
the Roman Empire to the Ocean, you shall puchase immortall honour, and crowne the Memory of our common Father; who (as you ought firmely to believe) both heares what we say, and sees what we doe. How happy then are wee, that shall have such a Witnesse of our worthy Acts. And whereas the Honourable Services which you performed hitherto, with such prosperous successe, may bee at∣tributed to his Providence and Go∣vernance; your magnanimous At∣chievements under mee your Young Prince, will purchace you a pculiar Trophie, and most noble Testimo∣ny of Loyalty and Valour. Thus shall you procure to my tender Age a glorious esteeme, by your valiant Exployts; and the Barbarians be∣ing curb'd in the beginning of our Reigne, shall for the present not dare to insult, in contempt of our Mi∣noritie; and being terrifyed with
their owne harmes, shall ever here∣after stand in awe of Vs. Having thus sayd, and assured the Souldiers by a Magnificent Donative of Mony, he returned to his Palace. For a short time, he was in all thing directed by his Fathers Friends, who daily assisted him with their prudent Counsels, permitting him only so much recreation, as was con∣ducible to his health. But after a while, divers of his  Court winding themselves into favour, sought by all meanes possible to corrupt this hopefull youngBad Cour∣tiers. Prince. These fawning Paa∣sites, placing their felicitie in Belly-cheere, In Ventre & Venee. and brutish lusts, did ef-soones put him in minde of the Delices of Rome, some∣time recounting to him what brave things were there to bee
seene and heard; otherwhile, extolling the great plenty and abundance of all things there. Further, they shewed how in∣commodious it was, to reside on the bankes of The grea∣test River (after Ni∣lus) in all the Roman Empire Au. Gel. ( Sa∣st.) Ister, which were both barren & unfruitfull, and perpetually subject to Cold and Raine. Will your Majesty (sayd they) still drinke such fro∣zen and muddy waters; while others injoy the warme Bathes, coole Rivers, and dainty Aire of Italy? With these, and the like sugred Allectives, they in∣flam'd the young Emperor with the love of Pleasures. Where∣upon calling his Councell toge∣ther, he told them he had a great desire to see his Native Coun∣trey: but being loth to shew the Reason of that sudden reso∣lution, hee said hee was afraid, lest some of the chiefe Nobles
should seize the Imperial Palace at Rome, which being a strong Castle, he might easily of the  Traine-bands and others, raise a great Armie, and proclaime himselfe Emperour. They hea∣ring him alledge thes Ubra∣ges, in great feare and amaze∣ment lookt on the earth, and knew not what to say▪ at last, Pompeianus the most ancient ofPompeianus a grave Statesman. all, who might best speake, be∣cause of his affinity, having mar∣ryed Commodus eldest sister, said. Pompeianus his Speech. MY deare Soveraigne, it is no marvell if you long to see your Countrey: for there is in all of us a vehement desire to be at home; but yet we checke it not withstanding, be∣cause the Busines in hand doth much more import us: thse domestick con∣tents may with more security hereaf∣ter
be injoyed. As for Vbi Impe∣rator, ibi Roma. Rome, it is there, where the Emperour is. But if wee abruptly breake off the Warre, it will be both dishonorable and dan∣gerous: for so we shall animate the Barbarians, who may thinke that we dismarched for feare of them, rather than any other respect. Now if your Imperiall Majesty will proceede  your Conquests, and extend this North part of your Empire unto the Ocean, in what a glorious Triumph may you enter the City, with the chained and captived Kings and Princes of the Barbarians In the Romane Triumphs, The Cap∣tives went before the triumphant Charriot. Vid. s. Amb. Ser. 62. de Pentecoste. before you? For thus the Romanes in an∣cient Heroicall times, attayned so great renowne. Feare not therefore any domesticke Vsurpers: For the prime Senators are here with you, and all the Military Forces are here ready to defend you. Besides, here is all the Imperiall Treasure. Lastly, the memory of your Father hath con∣firmed
to you, the eternall Love and Loyaltie of all Estates. This strong Disswasive of Pompeianus, did (for a while) somewhat abate the edge of the young Emperour, who reve∣ring his words, and having no∣thing to reply with his Honour, dismist the Lords, saying, hee would better consider of it. But his Courtiers still pressing him with continuall importuni∣ty, hee advis'd no further with his Councell, but instantly sent Letters to Rome, and comman∣ded all to prepare for the Iour∣ney, giving order to certaine Troopes to guard the Banks of Ister, and keepe off the Baba∣rians Incursions. They having received their Charge, did soon subdue many of them; and o∣thers, by rewards they wonne
unto them: which they might casily doe: for the Barbarians being naturally greedy of  cash; and not caring what dangerous Adventures they undertooke, liv'd altogether by spoyling and forraging; or by selling Peace at a deare rate: which Commodus well knowing, and having a huge Masse of Trea∣sure; to the end to leave all things in security, gave them whatsoever they demanded. As soone as it was proclay∣med through the Army, that they must all goe home, there was a mighty hurly-burly in the Campe, every man desiring to quit the Enemies Countrey, and to taste the Delights of the Citie. And when it was cer∣tain ly knowne at Rome, that the Prince would come, all the Ro∣mane People were ravisht with
Ioy, every one conceiving ex∣cellent hopes of their young Emperour, and firmely belee∣ving hee would tread in his Fa∣thers steps. He presently tooke his Iour∣neyCommeds posteth to Rome. with high speed, posting in youthfull bravery in his Cha∣riot through every Citie, (as he passed) being Ro ally recei∣ved, and ertained, with great Magnificence, and generall Ap∣plause: But when he drew neer to Rome all the Romane Peers and Commons (every one stri∣ving to b formost) went out to meet mn with  aurels in their hand, and all kind of Flowers, (as the Season affor∣ded) to welcome their Noble young PRINCE: whom (in truth) they loved most dearely and cordially; in regard hee was borne and bred among
them, being of the most No∣bleThe Ro∣mans dear∣ly affect him. and Imperiall Blood, from three descents. For by his Fa∣ther, hee was descended from the most Honourable Senators: and his Mother Faustina, the Empresse, daughter to Antonius Pius, and Neece (by the Mo∣thers side) to the Emperour Adrian, derived his Pedegree from Trajan her Great Grand∣father. Thus Nobly descended was Commodus, who was not onely  conspicuous for his youthfull Prime, but also for his lovely Feature; being of aHis De∣scription. fine Constitution of body, of an amiable and Majestique Pre∣sence, bright and  sparkling Eyes, yellow and curled Loks, insomuch, that when he walked in the Sunne, his Haire would glister lke Flames of Fie, which made many suppose it
was powdred with Gold. O∣thers conceited, it was a signe of some divine Excellence, and that hee had that glistering Lustre (on his head) from his birth. Moreover the silken downe of his Cheekes began to blossome, and bud forth like Roses in the Spring. This hope∣full and Illustrious Emperour did the Romanes congratulate with passing hearty and affecti∣onate Acclamations, strowing all the way before him with Flowers and Garlands. HavingHis Entrie into Rome. made his entry into the Citie, hee went first to the Temple of Iupiter, and then to the Fanes of the other Gods: Lastly, having solemnly thanked the Senators and Pretorian souldiers, for their singular fidelity, hee repo∣sed himselfe in the Built on Mount Pa∣latine, o∣therwise called Pa∣latium. See Aurl Vi∣ctor▪ de O∣rig. Gent. Rm. Imperiall Palace.
For some few yeares hee gave all due honour and regard to his fathers friends, being content to bee rul d by them in all mat∣ters of weight. But afterwards committing the Governement of the Empire to others, hee made Perennius an Italian (aPerennius a Favourite. good Souldier) Captaine of the Pretorian Bands: who suffe∣ring the young Emperour to follow his Pleasures, and wal∣low in all manner of sensuality, undertooke all the Affaires of the Empire, and (in effect) ruled alone. The man was insatiably covetous, for being never con∣tent with what he had, hee still gaped for more. Yea, it was his daily practice to calumniate the ancient Counsellours of the Emperours Father, and to being within compasse of Misprision, the most Wealthy and Noble
Persons, that the young Prince being by false feares and feigned surmises induced to put them to death, their Goods and Estates might be confiscate to his use. Yet for a while, was the Prince more temperable, out of respect to his Fathers memory, and his Counsellours Gravitie: but by the malignity of Fortune, that good Temper and Dispositi∣on was soone altered and per∣verted. The occasion was this. Lucilla, Commodus eldest Sister,Lucilla, Commodus his Sister. was first wedded to Lucius Ve∣rus, whom Marcus had associ∣ated in the Imperiall Governe∣ment, having obliged him in the strongest bond of love, by bestowing his Daughter upon him. After Lucius decease, she still retayning her former State and Dignity, was by her Fa∣ther affianced to Pompeianus, and
permitted by Commodus to in∣joy the same Honours. For as an Empresse she had her Chaire of State erected on the Theater, and Fire likewise (after the usu∣all manner) carryed before her. But when Commodus had mar∣riedCrispina the Empresse. Crispina, who then as the PRINCES Wife, was to have precedence, Lucilla stormed at it, and interpreting the others Honour to be her Disgrace, yet durst not impart her Designe (of surprizing the Empire) to her husband Pompeianus, because shee knew hee loved Commodus intirely: Howbeit, opening her mind to a Noble yong Gallant, called Quadratus, with whomuilla and others con∣ against  shee was suspected to play the Adulteresse▪ she grievously com∣played to him of the indigni∣ty, and at last perswaded him to such a Course, as was pernici∣ous
to himselfe, and all the Se∣natours. For among others of the Nobility which were of that Conspiracie, there was one Quintianus a bold and desperate youth, whom he inveagled, and suborned to watch some fit op∣portunity to kill Commodus with a  Stilletto (which hee might hide in his bosome) which done, he undertooke to salve the mat∣ter with Money. Shortly after, Quintianus stan∣ding in a blinde corner in the Entrie to the Amphitheater, as Commodus passed by, offered to stab him; proclayming aloud, that the Senate sent him that: which as soone as he had spo∣ken, intending to follow his thrust, hee was seized by theThe Con∣spiracie de∣tected. Guard, and received condigne punishment for his Madnesse: the Emperours Safetie beeing
wrought by his owne discove∣ry. This was the prime and maine Ground of the Princes hatrd against the Nobility. For his Mind was so deepely woun∣ded with those words, that hee tooke them all for his capitall Enemies, and could never forget the speech of the youth which assayled him. Perennius laying hold of this occasion, counselled him to root ou all the chiefe Nobles and Gallants, whose Estates being confiscate and given him, hee suddenly grew to infinit wealth. For himselfe sitting as Iudge,The Con∣sirators executed. Commodus his owne Sister, and all that had a hand in that Con∣spiracie, or were but lightly suspected for it, were put to death. Thus Perennius having made away those whom the Emperor
feared (which indeed did beare a Paternall Affection to him) tooke him into his owne tuiti∣on: and now being in the heightPerennius his treason. of Authority, hee cast about how to usurpe the Empire: to which end, hee perswaded Com∣modus, that his Sonnes (which were (yet) but youths) might bee made Commanders of the Imperiall Forces in After cal∣led Dalma∣tia, now Solavonia▪ Illyria. Wherupon he provides a migh∣ty masse of Treasure to winne the good wills of the Pretorian Souldiers. The Sonnes also se∣cretly levied great numbers of Souldiers, that as soone as their Father had slaine Commodus, they might invade the Princedome. This Treason was strangely detected in this manner. The Romans use to celebrate aThe Roy∣all Festivall of Iupiter. sacred Agon or Pageant in ho∣nour of Iupiter Capitolinus, to
which there is extraordinary resort of people, as is usuall at the Solemnities of that royall  Citie. Now it is the custome for the Emperour also to bee there present and President, to∣gether with the Priests, whichHonour of Romane Priests. yearely waite in their courses. The Emperour being set in his Throne to heare those famous Actors, and the Theater full of spectators (which with singular decency  were seated accor∣ding to their Degrees) before any thing was said or acted on the Stage, suddenly there starts out one, in a Philosophers ha∣bit, wih a staffe in his hand, and a Scrip on his shoulder, (halfe naked) who running to the midst of the Stage, stood still, and beckening with his hand for silence, said; This, O Com∣modus,Perennius discovered. is no time for Sports,
Shewes, or Festivals: Perennius his Sword hangs over your Head, and if you doe not speedily avoid the present danger, you are undone: That same Man there hath raysed both Men and Money against you, and his Sonnes likewise sollicite the Illyrian Armie: whom if you doe not instantly prevent, you are a dead man. The fellow having thus said, whether moved thereto by some Divine Instinct; or to purchase himselfe a Name (be∣ing an obscure Plebeian) or be∣cause hee hoped to attaine some great Reward of the Prince for his discovery, certainely Com∣modus was mightily astonisht. Others, though they beleeved it might be true; yet they see∣med not to credit it. Perennius commands him to bee appre∣hended, and as a seditious fran∣ticke
to bee burned. Thus suf∣fered hee for his mis-timed boldnesse. Howbeit, divers that made semblance to regard the Emperours safetie, and bore Perennius upon the spleene, for his intolerable haughty and dis∣dainefull carriage, taking this occasion, spared not to accuse him: in so much, that Commo∣dus (thereby) evaded mischiefe, and Perennius with his children smarted for it. Soone after there cameThey were Bri∣tish Souldi∣ers (as our writers say) Souldiers un∣knowne to Perennius sonne, and brought coines stamped with his Image, which they secretly shewed to Commodus, (una∣wares to Perennius though hee were Praefect:) and detected all the Treason: for which service they were exceeding richly re∣warded. Whereupon the next night the Emperour sent for
Perennius his head, who littlePerennius beheaded. dreamt hee was discovered. He sent also Posts to his sonne; which by their speed prevented the rumours of what was done at Rome, and delivered to him very loving Letters from the Emperour, requiring him to hasten forthwith to Rome, for his extraordinary advancement. The messengers also told him it was his Fathers desire hee should come; but writ not himselfe, because hee knew the Emperours Letters were suffi∣cient. The young man utterly ignorant of his Fathers disaster, or of the plot against himselfe, beleeved this to bee true; and though he were much troubled that his designes were thus in∣terrupted, yet relying on his Fathers puissance, (whom hee thought to bee safe enough) hee
set forward on his journey, and as soone as hee arrived in Italy, hee was slaine by the Emperors appoyntment. This was the end of them. Then Commodus made two Pretorian Praefects, supposing it not safe, to delegate so great power to any one, which be∣ing divided betwixt two, might bee the weaker and lesse dange∣rous. But ere long another trea∣son broke out against him in this manner. There was one Maternus aMaternus a Rebell. Souldier, that had committed many villanous outrages: whereupon for saking the camp, hee associated divers Renega∣does like himselfe, and quickly rallied together a great Rabble of Roarers; wasting and spoy∣ling Villages and Fields. Ha∣ving got much booty, there re∣sorted
to him a farre greater number of Rogues, whom hee promised great rewards; and having made them Sharers with him, hee was so followed, that now they seemed not to be a packe of Theeves, but an Host of men, or a full Armie. For they tooke great Cities, and breaking up Prisons every where, set all Prisoners and Malefactors at liberty; which all turned Souldiers, in hope of Pillage and Impunity. Thus did they ramble over all Gallia, and Spaine, sacking and burning all the great Cities they tooke. When Commodus heard this, hee sent to the Vicegerents and Governours of those Coun∣tries, very sharpe and minatory Letters, charging them with base cowardlinesse, and com∣manding them to levie an Ar∣mie
against them. Which when those Free-booters un∣derstood, thinking those Coun∣tries but hollow ground for them, they disperst themselves, and slinking thorow unused By∣wayes, made their Rendezvous in Italy: where Maternus be∣gan now to looke big, and take more upon him: consulting with his companions, how heeMaternus aspires to Soveraign∣ty. might rise to bee a King. For seeing his former adventures succeeded beyond his hopes, he resolved to undertake some gal∣lant Attempt; or (since hee had runne so great a hazard) not to die a vile and dishonourable Death. But considering with∣all, that hee had not Forces sufficient to give battle to Com∣modus, who was (yet) beloved of the Roman people; he resol∣ved to try by a cunning sleight
how the Praetorian Band stoodMernus his plot. affected to him. And this was his Stratagem. In the begin∣ning of the spring, the Romans celebrate a great Anniversary Festivall to the Cybele. Mother of the gods, in whose honour they likewise set forth a stately shew: at what time, all the most sump∣tuous and precious stuffe of the Citizens, and the choisest Iewels and Singularities of the Empe∣rors, are solemnly caried before the Image of the Goddesse; all men having liberty to revel and maske at pleasure, & to disguise themselves in the habits of what Magistrate or Officer they fancy (bee they never so great) so that a man can hardly dis∣cerne the true from the coun∣terfeit. This, Maternus ima∣gined would bee a fit time to colour his treason, & to act his
Designe, which was, to arme himselfe and his Followers, in all points, like the Emperours Guard: whereby they might thrust in among the Speares and Halberds, as part of his traine, and suddenly dispatch him, ere any were aware. With this pur∣pose he privily entrd the City with a select Troope; but some of his companions disdaining that their Fellow-thiefe shouldHe is dete∣cted by his fellowes and execu∣ted. become their Prince and Sove∣raigne, discovered all to the Emperour: whereupon before the solemnity, this king of Rake∣hels and his Complices, were apprehended and executed ac∣cording to their demerits. Com∣modus having sacrificed and ren∣dred thankes and supplications to the Goddesse, for his delive∣rance, kept her holiday with great devotion, honouring the
Shew with his owne presence, which made all the people so glad, that they celebrated the day with great joy, for the Em∣perours safety. The Reason why the Ro∣mans have this Goddesse in such high veneration, I have thought good to declare out of their Histories, because it is not commonly knowne to the Greekes. THey say, that her ImageThe Histo∣ry of the chiefe Ro∣man God∣desse. was let fall by Iove, and that it is unknowne who made it, or what it is made of; and they firmely beleeve it is no humane handiworke. The tradition is, that it fell in old time from Heaven, into a Field of Phry∣gia, called Pessinus, by oc∣casion of that fall of the Image (it being there first discovered.)
Others report, that a Battell was there fought betwixt Ilus the Phrygian, & Tantalus a Ly∣dian, the Quarrell being, either about a way, or for the stealing away of Ganymede: and when they had long fought on even tearmes, and many were slaine on both sides, the Place had that name of the great Slaugh∣ter there made. There likewise they say, that while Ganymedes brother strove to rescue him from his Lover, he was pull'd in pieces betwixt them: but to salve the matter, it was given out, that Iove tooke him from them both; whereupon he had divine honour ascribed to him. In this See plin∣l. 5. c. 32. Pessinus the Phrygians in old time celebrated their Or∣gia upon the bankes of the Ri∣ver Of which river who∣soever dranke, be∣came so md, that he gelded himselfe Gallus (whence the gelded Priests of the Goddesse, are cal∣led
Galli.) But when the Ro∣mane State beganne to flourish, the Oracle telling them that their Empire should continue and o∣vertop all others, if they could get among them the Goddesse of Pessinus, they dispatched Em∣bassadours into Phrygia, to de∣sire the Goddesses Image, which was easily graunted them, be∣cause they alledged that they were their cousIns of the whole bloud, and descended of Aeneas the Phrygian. When the Image was brought by Ship to the mouth of Tyber (which was then the only Port the Romans had) suddenly by some divine power the Ship stood still, and could not be moved with all the haling or pulling of the Romanes. At last a Vestall Nunnne, that was falsely accused to have lost her Virginity (which she had vow∣ed
to keepe inviolate) fearing she should be condemned, be∣sought the people to make the Goddesse Pessinuntia her Iudge: which being admitted, she un∣tied her Girdle, and prayed in the hearing of all, that if the Goddesse knew her to be a Vir∣gin immaculae she would com∣mand the Ship to remove. Then tying her Girdle to the Ship, she pulled, and it followed her: the Romans admiring both the Divinity of the Goddesse, and the virginity of the Priestesse. And thus much of the Story of the Goddesse Pessinuntia; which though it bee somewhat long, yet I trust will not be unpleasIng to them that are not versed in Roman Antiquities. Commodus having escaped the Treason of Maternus, doubled his Guards, came seldome a∣broad,
retired himselfe to his Houses of Pleasure in the Sub∣urbs, or to his Mannours farre from the Citie, and gave o∣ver all Exercise of Imperiall lu∣risdiction. It hapned about the same time, that all Italie was infested with a furious Pestilence, but espe∣cially the City of Rome, whichA Plague at Rome. of it selfe was wonderfull po∣pulous, and had (besides) a great number of strangers in it, that resorted thither from all parts of the World. By reason of which Confluence, there was a strange Mortality of Men and Beasts. Then was Commodus perswaded by his Physicians, to retire to Laurentum, which had a more coole and temperat aire, and many shady groves of Law∣rell (from whence it tooke the name.) For they sayd, that the
sweet smell and pleasant shade of Of Anti∣dots against the Plague, and groves of Bayes, See L. S. Al∣ans Natu∣ral History, Centur. 10. Experiment 913. and 936. Bay-trees, did much availe against the Contagion: For which purpose also, the Citi∣zens (by advice of Physicians) annoynted their Eares and No∣strills with precious Ointments, and continually used Perfumes and sweete Odoraments, that their senses (as they sayd) being prepossessed, the infected Ayre might not enter, or if it did might bee over-mastered. But notwithstanding, the Plague still raged, and Men and Beasts were every where found dead, on heapes: There was also a grie∣vousA Famine at Rome. Famine in the City, upon this occasion: One Cleander a Phrygian, having been publike∣ly sold for a Slave by the com∣mon Cryer, became the Empe∣rours Page: and being bred inCleander a Favourite. the Court, grew at last into such
favour with  prefer'd him to gre Honour and Authority, as first to b Squire of the Body, then Gen∣tlemn of his Bed-chamber, lastly, Captaine of the Guard. This fellow was so puff up with pride and too much rankenesse of prosperity, that hee also had a mind to the Empire. And ha∣ving got a huge Masse of Trea∣sure, hee monopoliz'd and in∣gross'd great store of Corne,His treason which hee had lock'd in Grana∣ries; intending when the Citie was pincht with want, suddenly to winne the good wills of the Commons and Souldiers with magnificent Donatives. He also erected a stately An Act∣vity-Co. Gymnasium, and a publike Bath. These were his bayts to catch the people. But the Romans having long borne him a grudge, and haed
him for his insatiable Avarice; sayd that he was the only cause of their Calamities. And first they publikely traduced him inHe is gene∣rally hated. the Theaters: but at last, all in ge∣nerall ran to the Emperors Pal∣lace in the Suburbs, crying out against Cleander, and demanding Iustice upon him. All the Sub∣urbs being in an uproare, while Commodus lay wantonizing in the innermost roomes, and knew not of the tumult without (for Cleander lookt to that) on a sud∣den (ere any wist) there rusht a∣mong the people the Emperors armed Horsemen; who by Cle∣anders command, wounded andHe armes the Soul∣diers a∣gainst the Commons. overthrew all afore them. The Citizens being all Footmen, and unarmed, were not able to re∣sist: Whereupon they fied a∣maine into the Citie, but being followed by the Corners of
Horse, great numbers were slain and trampled under the Horse∣feet, or thronged to death: for the Lanciers pursuing them to the Gates (without any stay) killd them outright. The Citi∣zens which kept home, under∣standing what slaughter was made of their friends and neigh∣bours, shut their doores, and from their House-tops threwe Stones and Tiles at the Horse∣men. And now the Commons had the better: for, not figh∣ting hand to hand, but darting and throwing every where aloft (out of their reach) they woun∣ded many of them, and put them to flight: some were slaine by the continuall throwing of stones; others were throwne to the ground by their Horses, which stumbled on the Stones that lay on heapes.
Also the Bands of Foot, which were billeted in the Ci∣tie, and hated the Horse-troops, suddenly came to the aid of the Citizens. A civill Warre be∣ing thus begunne, yet durst none tell Commodus, for feare of Cleander. At last, Fadilla (hisFadilla Commodus his sister. eldest sister) running to the Em∣perour (for they could not de∣ny accesse to her) with her haire dishevild, and in mourning weeds, prostrated her selfe at his feet, and said; Your MajestyShe detects Cleander. here pursues your pleasures, and lit∣tle know in what danger you are. Wee your flesh and blood are ready to bee slaughterd. Your Citie of Rome, and a great part of your Armie is overthrowne; and those outrages which Barbarians would not offer, your owne servants have acted; yea they, on whom you have heaped greatest Honours, are your
chiefest enemies: Cleander hath armed the Commons, and Souldiers against you; and being hated of one sort, and loved of the other; both sides are up in Armes, and are now killing one another, and filling the Citie with blood. And wee anon shall smart for this Geere, unlesse you presently make an end of that your wicked Servant, who is the Author of all this mischiefe, and will instantly bee your ruine. Ha∣ving thus said she rent her gar∣ment and divers there present, taking heart at the words of so great a Lady, put Commodus in∣to a terrible fright. And now fearing the instant danger, hee sends hastily for Cleander, who knew nothing of what was told the Emperour, but suspe∣cted somewhat. Being come, hee commands him to bee arre∣sted; and having strucke off
his head, and fastned it to a Speares point, hee sent it to the Commons; to whom it was a most pleasant and welcome Spectacle. Thus was that bloody broile extinguisht, and the fight on both sides ceased. For the Souldiers seeing him slaine, in whose quarrell they fought, feared the Emperours displea∣sure: for it was now apparant that hee was abused, and that what was done, was without his warrant. But the Commons were well satisfied with his death, that was the cause of all the mischiefe: And now Clean∣ders two Sonnes (all the chil∣dren hee had) and all that had beene his Flies and Familiars, were murdered, to a man; whose carkasses were drag'd through the Citie in most op∣probrious
sort, and lastly, throwne into the Iakes. This was the fatall end of Cleander, and his Complices: Humanity (as I may say) having ambiti∣ously shewed in one man, that as Fortune can upon small occa∣sion, raise from low degree, to high dignity; so in unexpected manner, She can likewise praeci∣pitate whom shee hath advan∣ced. Commodus being now afraid, left the Commons would rise, and attempt some new matter against him; was perswaded notwithstanding by his Cour∣tiers, to enter the Citie: where being received by the People with great Applause and Mag∣nificence, hee reposed him∣selfe in the Imperiall Palace. And now having past so many sharpe Pikes, hee wa jealous of
every one, killing first one, andCommodus his Cruelty  re∣ity. then another; for hee gave cre∣ditto all  Accusations, though never so false. Moreover, hee was so enslaved to sundry sen∣suall pleasures, which tooke him up wholly day and night, that hee abandoned all honourable Studies and Exercises, and ba∣nisht from his Court, as infidi∣ous Persons, all that had the least measure of Honesty or Learning. But Buffons and De∣bauched Miscreants, were (as his chiefe Minions) most pow∣erfull with him. He was exces∣sively given to Coach-races, and fighting with wild Beasts: more than became the modesty or Majesty of a Soveraigne Prince: yet his Flatterers ex∣told him as a brave Champion, for those Feats.. At this time there appeared
in the sky divers feareful signes. Starres were seen continually in the Day-time, and blazing Comets of a huge length, hang'd (as it were) in the midst of the ayre. All sorts of Crea∣tures contrary to kind, brought forth monstrous and deformed births. But that which most grievously afflicted the Citie for the present, and amazed them with the ominous Pre∣sage, was this most hideous dis∣aster; that the Temple of Peace (the stateliest and daintiest Mo∣nument of Rome) was on a sud∣den, without any Storme or Tempest preceding (but onely a little Earth-quake) quite burnt to the ground: whether by lightning, or fire (which might burst out, by the shaking of the Earth) is uncertaine. That Temple was the richest of all
other, because of its strength; being uriously adorned with  Don ries, of Massive Gold and Silver: yea, every person of Quality, had stored there his principall treasure. But the fire hapning in the night, made ma∣ny rich men poore. All there∣fore deplor'd the publike, and every one his private losse. When the fire had consumedRome fired. that Temple, it burned also ma∣ny of the most beautifull buil∣dings of the Cirie: among which was the goodly Fane of Vesta; insomuch that the Image of The Pal∣ldium; the sacred ire, &c. ere in the Valls Charge. L. l. l. 1. . 2. Pallas, which the Romans kept in secret and sacred venera∣tion, and was brought (as they say) from Troy into Italy, was now first seene in publike: For the Vestall Virgins carried it through the Sacred Street, and conveighed it into the Empe∣rours
Palace. Most of the fairest Peeces in all the Citie, pe∣risht in these flames, which ra∣ged many dayes together, and could not bee quenched but with sudden showers which fell: whereupon, it was wholly re∣puted a Celestiall Worke; all men being fully perswaded, that the fire began and ended by the Decree and Power of the gods. Divers also conjectured that the burning of the Temple of Peace was a Prognosticke of Warres to ensue: which Conceit was verified by the sequell, as in the succeeding bookes we shall declare. The Romane Citizens being thus surrounded with direfull mis-haps (one in the necke of another) begaune to looke sowre upon Commodus; imputing all their miseries to his il∣legall
Executions and dismall Deeds: For his Excesses were notoriously knowne to all; nei∣ther did he seeke to vaile them: being ambitious to exhibite in publike those base things which he formerly acted in secret.Commodus his prodigi∣ous vanity. Yea to such drunken dotage hee was now grown, that he refused his Fathers name, cōmanding him∣selfe, in stead of Commodus the Sonne of Marcus, to bee stiled Hercules the Sonne of Iupiter: and accordingly he forsooke the Romane and Imperiall Habit; and in stead thereof, thrust him∣selfe into a Lyons skinne, and carried a great Club in his hand; and (which made him extreme∣ly ridiculous) he put on also pur∣ple Amazonian Robes, embroy∣dered with Gold; expressing in one and the same Garbe, a Fe∣minine Delicacie, and a more
than Masculine Austerity. This was his daily Attire. Hee gave also new names to the Moneths of the Yeare, abolishing the old, and calling them after his owne As Au∣gust, Com∣modus: September, Herculeus: December, Amazonius Sirnames: most whereof, re∣ferr'd to Hercules, as to the most valorous Heroë. Further he com∣manded his Statuaes to be ere∣cted in all parts of the Citie, and One before the Senat-house, in forme of an Archer ready to shoot; to the end his very Ima∣ges might strike a terror into the beholders. But after his Death, the Senate tooke it away, and placed there the Image of A God∣desse a∣mong the Romans.Li∣berty. And now could not Com∣modus any longer containe, but needs must he make himselfe an Actour in publike Shewes: pro∣clayming that hee would with his owne hands kill the Wilde Beasts that should be presented,
and likewise fight at sharpe with the bravest Sword-men. When this strange Newes was blaz'd abroad, there flocked innume∣rable people out of Italy, and the Countries adjoyning, to see that spectacle which they never saw, nor heard of the like before. For hee was generally reputedCommodus an excel∣lent Dar∣ter and Ar∣cher. such an excellent Marke-man, as, whatsoever he aymed at, he could hit with Dart or Arrow: and though hee had about him most expert Parthian Archers, and Numidian Darters, yet hee farre exceeded them all. When the day of that grand Solemnity was come, the Amphitheater was thronged with Spectatours. Now there was a Tarras set up for Commo∣dus; wherein to runne round a∣bout it; and thence fight (aloft) with the Beasts, without indan∣gering
his person (which shew∣ed rather his skill in Shooting, than his Valour.) Hee slew in Chase, Buckes, Does, and other horned Beasts (except Bulls) not one escaping him: But from the Tarras he darted at Lyons, Pan∣thers, and other of the Nobler sort of Beasts, with that rare dex∣terity, as that he never threw the second time, nor gave them any wound but was mortall. For when the Beast was rowzed, he presently hit it in the Head or Heart, ayming at no other part of the body; so that as soone as it was strucke, it fell dead. For this purpose, all kinde of wilde beasts were brought farre and neere; and then did we first see those, which before we admired in their pictures. Thus did hee (to the Amazement of all) at once both shew and slay what∣soever
strange beast was brought from India, Aethiopia, North or South; so steady and ready a hand he had at his Weapon, to the Astonishment of all men. Once did hee shoote Forked Arrowes at Moresco Estriges, which were wonderfull swift of foot, using their Wings as Sailes in running. These did he hit so pat in the necke, that their heads being strucke off, they ranne a∣while See the reason her of, in that noble L. of S. Albans, Nat Hist. Cent. 4. Exp. ult. headlesse, so furious was the blow. Another time, a Panther ha∣ving seiz'd a man (that was brought into the Lists) with such vehement speed, that all made account she would instant∣ly teare him in pieces; he dar∣ted at her with such lucky speed, as that he killed the beast and sa∣ved the man, preventing the dint of her teeth, with the poynt of
his Weapon. He slew also 100 Lyons with so many Darts; their bodies falling in such or∣der, that they might easily bee numbred (not one Dart miscar∣rying.) These Feates of Activity, though unbeseeming a Prince, yet because they were proofes of his Valour and Dexterity, were not unpleasing to the peo∣ple. But when hee entred the Amphitheater naked, and be∣ganne to play the Gladiator; OCommodus playes the Fencer. it was a direfull sight to see a most nobly descended Empe∣rour, after so many Trophies of his Father and Ancestours, not to fight like a Souldier against Barbarians, nor to arme him∣selfe like a Roman Prince, but to prostitute so glorious a Dignity to so sordid a profession. He ea∣sily vanquisht his Antagonists,
and attempted no further than to draw bloud; every one yiel∣ding him the Mastery; as ac∣knowledging him rather an Em∣perour than a Fencer. In this mad humour he ranged so farre, as that hee purposed to for∣sake his Palace, and live in a Fence-Schoole: and now be∣ing weary of the Name of Her∣cules, hee assumed the Name of a famous Sword-Player, de∣ceased. And whereas the Ro∣manes had the Colossus or I∣mage of the Sunne in great ve∣neration, hee tooke the head from it, and set on another, re∣presenting his owne; inscribing in the Basis, not his Fathers Ti∣tles, or any Imperiall Stile (as he was wont) but in stead of Ger∣manicus [or Conquerour of Ger∣manie] The Vanquisher of a thousand Gladiators.
But now was it high time for him to leave his Foolery, and the Citie to bee freed from his tyrannie; which fell out in the beginning of the yeare, on that day which the Romans keepe holy to Ianus the most ancientIanus his Feast. God of Italy, who entertained Saturne, expelled by his sonne Iupiter; from whoe conceale∣ment, it had the name of Lati∣um. Wherefore to this day they first celebrate the Feast of Sa∣turne, and then of Ianus: whose Image hath two heads; alluding to the beginning of the new, and end of the old yeare. Now whereas the Romans were wont on this prime Festivity, to congratulate each other, andNewyeres∣gifts. to send to their friends peeces of Gold and Silver, and divers other gifts interchangeably, in token of mutuall love and ob∣servance
and the chiefe Ma∣gistrates of the Citie vested themselves in rich Purple, in honour of that great Solemni∣ty; Commodus then determined to issue forth, not out of the Imperiall Palace (according to the ancient custome) but out of a Fenceschoole; and to shew himselfe openly to the people, not in his Robes and Princely Purple, but armed like a Master of Defence, with a traine of Gladiators following him. This his determination, whenMarcia Commodus his Concu∣bine. hee had imparted to Marcia his most honoured Concubine, who as if she were his married Wife, had all the honours of Empresse, except that of FIRE; Shee fell downe on her knees, and besought him with teares, not to prophane the Majesty of the Roman Empire in that sort,
nor to hazard his person among such lewd and desperate Ruffi∣ans. But when after much in∣treaty, shee saw there was no hope of prevayling, shee went away weeping. Then he sends for Latus, the Generall of his Armies, and Electus his Cham∣berlaine, and commands them to prepare a lodging for him that night in the Fence▪ schoole, that hee might the next mor∣ning goe from thence to sacri∣fice on that solemne Festivall, and shew himselfe in Armes to the Romans. They humbly desired him to desist from that purpose, and not to doe an act so unworthy an Emperour: wher∣upon, in great rage hee com∣mands them out of his pre∣sence; and retiring into his bed-chamber, to repose him∣selfe at Noone (as hee vvas
wont) he tooke his Table-book, and writ downe those which hee doomd to death that night. Among which, were Marcia, Latus, Electus, and a great num∣ber of Nobles, and Senators; for he was fully resolved to cut off all the ancient Councellors, and others, which were his Fa∣thers friends; lest his blacke deeds should be checkt by their grave centures; intending to divide their Goods and Estates among the soulders & Sword∣players; that the one sort might defend him, the other de∣light him. Having thus done, hee layd his Table booke on the Pallet, not imagining that any would enter his Chamber. Now there was a little Boy that could scarce speake; such as those, which being halfe naked, are deckt with gold and preci∣ous
stones; and are the y∣sest delights of the noble Ro∣mans. This boy  ∣dus so extreamely  love,  oft ly in   hi, and w Phlo-Commodus, thatPhlo-Com∣modus. is, Commodus hs Diling; his name she wing how hee loved him. The child being fuli of play, went (as hee usually did) into the Bed-chamber (while Commodus was bathing and re∣velling with his Minions) and taking the Booke to play with, went forth, and as some Divine Power ordained, Marcia met him; and catching him up in her armes and kissing him (for shee dearely loved him) tooke the booke from him; fearing lst by his childish dalliance, he might blot out some matters of weight. As soone as shee per∣ceived it was Commodus owne
hand, shee had a great appeite to reade it, But when she found the deadly Contents, and that she before all others was to bee slaughterd, and that Laetus and Electus were to follow, with such a number of noble per∣sons, she sighed and said thus to her selfe: Is it so, Commodus?Marcia and others conspire the Empe∣rors death. doe you thus reward my love? Have I deserved this at your hands, for enduring your igno∣ble and debauched conditions so many yeares? You shall find that a sober woman is able to dash your drunken Designes. Immediately shee sends for E∣lectus (as shee was wont) in re∣gard hee was Lord Chamber∣laine; who (as it was thought) was over-familiar with her; and giving him the booke, said; See (Electus) what a banquet we are to have this night. He, as soone
as hee read it, being amazed (now hee was an Aegyptian borne, a bold and daring fel∣low, and very cholericke) seald up the booke, and sent it forth∣with by a trusty messenger to Laetus; who being likewise startled, instantly repaired to Marcia, pretending hee was to speake with her about dressing the Fence schoole for the Em∣perour. Vnder this colour they resolved that now they must in∣stantly doe or suffer without de∣lay or procraination. They concluded to dispatch him by poyson, which Marcia under∣tooke to effect very easily, in that shee still used to give him the first Cup, which from her hand hee would take most kind∣ly. As soone as hee returned from his bathes, shee presented him a poysoned Cup of Aro∣maticall
Wine. Commodus be∣ing exceeding thirsty with much bathing and chasing of wild beasts, quaffes it off as hee was wont. Whereupon his head being very heavie, he fell into a slumber, by reason of his vehe∣ment exercise (as was suppo∣sed.) Wherefore Electus and Marcia commanded all to bee gone and depart the Court, lest they disturbed his rest. Thus was it ever with him in his drunken fits: for when hee ba∣thed or banquetted, hee had no set times of Repose: being e∣ver distracted with severall sorts of pleasures, which still en∣thralled him. Having restedCommodus poysoned and strang∣led. a while, and the poyson now working in his stomacke and belly, his head grew light, and now hee fell a vomiting ex∣tremely; either by reason hee
had formerly over-glutted him∣selfe with feasting, and carow∣sing (which might haply expell the poyson;) or else because he used (as Princes doe) to take some antidot to prevent poison. When he had long vomited, the conspirators fearing, lest disgor∣ging all the poison, hee should come to himselfe, and put them all to the sword, they promised a great reward to oe Nacssus a tall desperate youth, to strangle him as hee lay. And this was Commodus end, having reignd 13 yeares after his Fathers decease; the most Nobly-descended of all the Emperours before him, and the goodliest person of his time. And to speake of his dex∣terity in Darting, inferiour to none. But he bspurtled his life with foule Vices and ignoble Exercises, as hath bin declared.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The second Booke. The Contents. PErtinax his description. His mag∣nanimity. His worthy esteeme. Laetus▪ his Speech to the Armie, Per∣tinax proclaimed Emperour, and con∣firmed by the Senate. His Speech to the Senatours. His rare Government. Embassies congratulatorie. Pertinax a Father to the Commons. Informers punisht. Pertinax his love to Lear∣ning. The Pretorians mutine. His Speech to them. He is murthered, and extremely lamented. Pretorians make Port-sale of the Empire. Iulian buies it. The Commons curse him. Hee is debauched. Niger commended. His
Policie to get the Empire. Stage-Playes and Revells. Nigers Speech. He is elected Emperour, and visited by Embassadours. His Security and Er∣rour. Severus described. His strange Dreame. His depe Policie. Hee is elected Emperour. His Speech. His Expedition to Rome. Italy surpri∣zed. Iulian amazed. Alpes. Ele∣phants trayned. Severus his Strata∣gem. Iulian deserted and slaine. Se∣verus takes the Pretorians by a train. His Speech to them. They are degra∣ded. Hee enters Rome. Hee courts the Commons and Nobles. His war∣like Preparation against Niger. Hee feares the Britans. Their Elogie. Al∣binus their Governour. He is declared Caesar by Severus. Herodian writes a Historie of 70 yeares. COMMODVS being In the Night. slain as hath beene related in the former booke) the Conspirators (carefull to con∣ceale the Fact from the Souldi∣ers which watched the Empe∣rours
Pallace) caused his Corps to be wrapped and wound up in a course Coverlet, and gave or∣der to two of their trustiest Ser∣vants to carry it forth, as some voyd stuffe sent out of the Bed∣chamber. They which convey∣ed it away, passed easily thorow the Guards, which were either so drunke or drowsie, that they could scarce hold their Halberts; or else gave small heed to that, which (they thought) little con∣cerned them. Thus was the Em∣perours Corps closely caryed out of the Court Gates, and sent (by Coach) that night to Ari∣slum. Laetus, Electus, and Marcia, ha∣ving debated what was best to be done, resolved to give out, that he dyed suddenly of an Apople∣xie; which they thought would easily bee credited, his excessive
Epicurisme and Intemperance being so vulgarly knowne. But their first care was, to elect for Emperor some ancient and tem∣perate man, both for their owne safety, and that all might have a breathing time, after so bitter and wanton a Tyrannie. After consultation, they heldPertinax his descrip∣tion. none so fit as Pertinax, who was an Italian borne, famous for ma∣ny noble acts in Peace and Warre, and renowned for ma∣ny victories over the German and Easterne Barbarians; and the onely able man that was left of all those honourable persons which Commodus was recommended to by his Father Marcus, who reposed greatest confidence in him, above all his Nobes and Commanders; whom Commodus either revered for his Gravitie, or spared for
his Poverty: for that also was part of his praise, that whereas hee tooke greatest paines in go∣verning the State, yet hee was the poorest of all the Nobility. To him therefore at midnight, when all were asleepe, Laetus and Electus, with a ew others of that faction, addresse them∣selves; who finding the Gates shut, call up the Porter, who opening the Gate, and percei∣ving the Souldiers, and Laetus the Generall, ran in great af∣fright and amazement to tell his Master, Pertinax bids him bring them to him, saying, that now that mischiefe would be∣tide him, which hee had long expected. They say, that such was his undaunted spirit, that he neither forsooke his bed, nor changed his countenance, but with a bold courage, and unap∣palled
visage, spake thus to Lae∣tus and Electus (whom he sup∣posed to bee sent to murther him:) This indeed is the end that every night I have a long while expected, being the last of all his Fathers friends; and I have oft wondered that Commodus was so slow to dispatch me. Why then for∣beare yee? Doe as you are com∣manded, that I may bee rid from continuall feare and anxietie. Lae∣tus replyed: Speake no further of these things, which are so farre be∣neath your merit: Our comming is not for your destruction, but for the safetie of our selves and the Ro∣man Empire▪ For the Tyrant is dead, and hath his due reward, ha∣ving suffered that which hee inten∣ded to inflict on us. Our comming therefore is to invest you in the Em∣pire,His wor∣thy  whom of all the Nobilitie wee know to be, for Vertue, Authority,
Age, and Gravity, most loved and honoured by the people; not doubt∣ing, but this our choyse wll be ac∣ceptable to them, and most safe for us. Pertinax answered; I am too old to bee deluded in this sort. Why doe you offer to abuse mee as a Coward, and so to slay me? Then said Electus; Since you will not credit us, reade this Booke (you know Commods his hand, ha∣ving beene so long used to it) and then you shall perceive what danger wee have escaped, and that we speake not this to try you, but truely to in∣forme you. Which when Per∣tinax had done, knowing them also to bee his ancient friends, and understanding all the busi∣nes, hee yeelded himselfe to their dispose. First then it was thought fit to send to the Army, to know how the Souldiers would take it: but Laetus under∣tooke
to get their goodwill, be∣ing their Generall, and there∣fore of some authority with them. Wherefore the night be∣ing farre spent, and the next day the Feast of the New-yeare, they hastned to doe all before it were day. They sent also some of their trustiest servants, to disperse the newes of Com∣modus death, and Pertinax his going to the Army to bee made Emperour. Which when it was divulged in the Citie, all the people in an extasie of Ioy, ran through the streets to bring the happy tydings to their friends that were of any noteWho in greatest danger of Tyrants. for wealth or worth; (for such were in greatest danger of Com∣modus.) Wherefore they ran to the Temples and Altars to give thankes to the Gods (for their deliverance.) And now some
cried out, the Tyrant was dead; some, the Fencer; others, worse than all this: For that which before they durst not mutter for feare, they now pro∣claimed with impunity. But the most part of the people po∣sted to the Army, being much afraid, lest the ruder Souldiers accustomed (under the former Tyrannie) to ravine and spoile, would not admit for Emperour, so mild a Prince as Pertinax: which to the end to perswade them to, the more forcibly, they went thither in great numbers. Laetus, Electus, and Pertinax (with the multitude) being en∣tred the Campe, and the Soul∣diers called together, Laetus spake thus.
Laetus his speech to the Army. Laetus his speech to the Army.COmmodus our Emperor is dead of an Apoplexy. There is no other cause of his death but himselfe: and though wee endeavoured to re∣claime him to a better course of life, yet all was but lost labour: For car∣rying himselfe as you know hee was wont, hee hath killed himselfe with Gluttony and Drunkennesse. This was his fatall destiny; for all die, not by the same meanes, but by different wayes come to their common end. But in stead of him, Wee, and the people of Rome, here bring you a man ve∣nerable for Age; Gravity, and Inte∣grity; and of approved skill in mar∣tiall affaires, whose brave Pertinax had done honourable service in Britaine, and was therefore surnamed Britanni. exployts you which are Veterans, experimen∣tally know; the rest cannot but ac∣knowledge, that he hath these many yeares governed the Citie with singu∣lar honour and admiration. Fortune doth therefore tender you not onely a Prince, but a Parent most indulgent:
whose government, as it will bee plea∣sing to your selves here present, so it must needs bee acceptable to your fel∣lowes in Armes, which guard the bankes of the Rivers, and defend the Marches of the Empire; in regard they well remember his noble acts. And now wee shall not need to win the Barbarians with money; who will be sufficiently awed with the experience of what they suffered under his victo∣rious Armes. Laetus having thus sayd, while the Souldiers pawsed, and were demurring on the businesse; all the people with joyfull Accla∣mations, proclaymed Pertinax Emperor and Father of their Coun∣trey. So also did the Souldiers, though not with the same Ala∣crity: for the Multitude being every where mixt among them who were unarmed because it was Holi-day, did after a sort constraine them to it, being but
few (in comparison of them.) All therfore having sworn Feal∣ty to him, and beene present at the Sacrifice, the Souldiers and Commons with Lawrell bran∣ches in their hands, conduct him ere it was Day-light, to the Im∣periall Pallace: whither being come, he was exceeding pensive. For though hee wanted neither spirit nor resolution, yet did the present action much distract and dismay him; not that he doub∣ted so much his owne safety (for he had despised greater perills) but considering with himselfe the sudden Change of the Ty∣rannicall Government, and the Noble descent of some chiefe Senatours; hee supposed they would not suffer the Empire to be invested in a man of a meane and obscure Familie, after an Emperour of so Princely a Li∣nage.
For though his Life was much commended for his tem∣perate carriage, and for deeds of Armes hee were most famous; yet was hee farre exceeded in birth by many of the Senatori∣an Order. Wherefore as soone as it was Day-light, hee went to the Senat-house, not suffering Fire to bee carryed before him, nor admitting any other Symbol of Soveraignty, till he knew the pleasure of the Senatours: but they, when they saw him, did with one accord joyfully re∣ceive him, stiling him Augustus and Emperor. Which high and envious Title (as he termed it) he disavowed at first, excusing himselfe, by reason of his Age, and desiring them to passe by him, and elect some of the prime Nobility, which might bet∣ter beseeme the Empire. Then
taking Glabrio by the hand, andGlabrio a noble Ro∣man. pulling him forth, he placed him in the Imperiall Throne; Hee was the most Nobly descended of all the Peeres, and derived his Pedigree from Aeneas, sonne to Venus and Anchises, and had beene twice Consul. Notwith∣standing he spake thus; I whom you judge most worthy, doe here ren∣der you this Princely honour; yea, all this noble Assembly adjudges you the Soveraigne Rule. WhereuponPertinax confirmed by the Se∣nate. being irrresistably importun'd, and almost compelled by the Se∣nate; after much reluctation, he seated himselfe in the Chaire of Estate, and spake as followeth. Pertinax his Speech to the Senatours. YOur singular Zeale, and incom∣parable Love, in preferring mee before so many excellent Peeres, being so farre from the least suspicion of
flattery, that it is a pregnant proofe, and cleare demonstration of your Fi∣delity; might haply make some other more bold and cheerefull to accept this Offer; and to imagine, he might easi∣ly undertake so great a Charge, that should be supported with your Friend∣ship. ut these rare and high avours amaze mee with their very sublimity; at the sight whereof, I am extremely intimidated. For it is no easie mtter for a man, condignely to requite great Benefits. Among Friends, if grea∣ter Courtesies bee returned▪ than were exhibited; not so much the Gratuity it selfe as the Gratitude is respected. But when a mans Friend hath (first) obliged him by signall Offices; if hee shew not all viissi∣tudinary Expressions of a thankefull Heart, it may well bee thought to proceed rather from blockish Dul∣nesse, and bruitish Ingratitude, than any other defect. I see therfore what a hard Taske I shall undergoe, to ren∣der my selfe worthy of this great He∣nour, which you have conferred upon me. For the Glory of Soveraignty
consists not in a  chaire of State, but in such royall Arts as are well∣beseeming a Prince. Looke how much Men abhorre the Evilis which are done and past, so much more are they apt to hope for better times Great Injuries are ever remembred▪ andInjuries and Bene∣fits. Grievances are very rarely forgot: but Good turnes perish as soon as they are done, together ith their Mmo∣rie. Thus are we not so sensible of the sweetnesse of Liberty, as of the bitter∣ness of Bondage and Slavery Nor doe men take it as a Courtesie, that they may securely injoy their owne; For that, they hold, belongs to them as their proper right: But hee that that is spoyled of his Goodo. For∣tunes, can never forget so haynous a Wrong. Neither doe men much e∣steeme the best Change that can hap∣pen for the publike Good (for common Benefits are little regarded of pri∣vate persons.) But if they be dm∣nifyed in their own particular estates, thn are they touched to the quicke. Moreouer, they which have beene u∣sed to▪ the profuse Prodigality of Ty∣rants,
if a man goe about to reduce them (when Money failes) to a more frugall and regular course, they will be ready to impute it rather to miserable basenesse, than prudent moderation: not considering, that such excessive Donatives (as heretofore) cannot bee given without Oppression and Rapine. But he that with Discretion gives to every one according to his Merit, is so farre from dispoyling others unjustly, that hee teaches all (by his Example) to bee provident Husbands. These things if you take into consideration; you will (I trust) lend me your helping hands, and assist mee in the Admini∣stration of the Empire: for seeing you are not like to live under a Tyranny, but rather an Optimacie, you have Cause to hope well, and perswade o∣thers also to the like Confidence. Pertinax having with this speech exceedingly cheered the Senatours, was with generall ac∣clamations, and great honour and reverence, conducted to the
Temple of Iove and the other Gods, where having sacrificed for his good successe in the Em∣pire, hee went to the Imperiall Pallace. When it was voyced, how graciously he had spoken to the Senate and written to the Com∣mons, all men were infinitely pleased; hoping that now they should have a worthy and tem∣peratePertinax his rare go∣vernment. Governour, and a Father rather than an Emperour. For hee made an Edict, that the souldiers should no more wrong the Commoners, nor abuse any Passingers; intending to plant every where good order and ci∣vility. When hee went abroad, or sate in Iudicature, hee shew∣ed what a meke and sweet spi∣rit hee had. And by his zea∣lous imitation of Marcus his Government, he did exceeding∣ly
content the elder sort, and at∣tract the Affections of all, who being delivered from the cruell Thraldome of Tyranny, lived now in great peace and security. The fame of his Princely ver∣tues, moved the Nations, Ar∣mies, and Confederate of the Romane Empire to Deifi him. Yea, the Barbarians which had revolted, o purposed to rebell, over-awed with the Remem∣brance of his Militar Vertue in former times; and calling to minde his singular Integriy, Iu∣stice, and Clemencie, did wil∣lingly subit themselves untoEmbassa∣dours. him. Embassadours also came from all pats, to congratulate the Romans, for so Nobly qua∣lifyed an Emperour. But that, which was such a generall Rejoicement, was muchThe Pret∣rins Ma∣ligne him. resented by the souldiers in Rome
which were the ordinary Guard of the Emperor. For being for∣bidden rapine & outrage, and re∣called to a civil & regular forme of life by the Emperours Edict, they reputed his mild & mode∣rate government to tend to their great Dishonour and Disparage∣ment: and because it bridled their licentiousnesse, they resolved not to indure it. For a while, they did but grudge and grumble at his Commands; but at last, when he had not yet raigned two months (having given pregnant hopes, in that shorttime, of many excel∣lent good acts) the malignity of Fortune overthrew all, and quite dasht his noble & admirable de∣signes for advancement of the Weale publike. For be first e∣nacted that all the wast GroundPetinax a Father to the Co∣mos. in Italy, and other Countries (though of the Princes demese)
should be planted and improved and freely given to them that would cultivate and manure it: to which purpose, hee granted to Husbandmen, ten yeares im∣munitie from all Taxes, and se∣curity from all further Trouble during his Raigne. As for the peculiar Goods of the Empe∣rors, he permitted not his name to be stamped on them; saying, that the Propriety thereof per∣tayned not to the Emperour, but to the Romane State in generall. Hee released all Tolls and Im∣posts exacted in the time of Ty∣ranny, at the Bankes of Rivers, Ports of Cities, High-wayes, and Rodes; asserting them to their ancient Freedome. Many the like good Deeds hee inten∣ded; which shewed his firme Resolution to benefit his Sub∣ject.Informers pisht. He banisht Informers out
of the City, and commanded them to bee punisht where ever they were found, to the end none might be indangered or ruinated by their forged Criminations. Heereupon the Nobility and Cōmunaltie promised to them∣selves an assured happy Estate. For hee was so moderate and  fellow-like, that he would not admit his sonne, a young Youth, into the Court, but caused him to live a privat life. He frequen∣tedPertinax love to learning. the publicke Schooles and Lectures, repayring also to the usuall Places of Exercise, where hee demeaned himselfe as an or∣dinary man, without any Prince∣ly pompe or State. Pertinax thus ruling with singular good order and decen∣cie, the Praetorian Souldiers (not enduring to be restrayned any longer from their accusto∣med
rapines and outrages) con∣sulted and agreed (at a drunken Feast) to make him away (who was so great a grievance to them) and to substitute another that would impatronize their lawlesse and licentious misde∣meanours. Whereupon, on a sudden, no man suspecting any tumult (for all lived in peace) in a great fury and Brutish rage they hurry at Noone-day (in aThe Prae∣torians mu∣tine. Military March) with drawne Swords, and Pikes advanced, to the Emperours Palace: where the Courtiers and Officers of State, affrighted with that sud∣den and unexpected Alarme, and not able (being few and un∣armed) to resist so many men at Armes, forsooke their severall charges within the Verge of the Court, and fled. Howbeit, some few that were well affe∣cted
told Pertinax of the Soul∣diers Mutiny; perswading him to avoid them by flight, and to desire the peoples aid. But al∣beit hee knew it were a safe course to follow their counsell, yet holding it an extreme Inde∣oum, dergatory to Imperiall Majesty, and unworthy his for∣mer glory, to fly, or conceale himselfe; hee resolved to af∣front the danger, hoping hee should perswade them, and ap∣pease their causelesse Commo∣tion. Going therefore out of his Chamber, he met them, and askt the reason of that sudden Impression; disswading them, without any shew of amaze∣ment: For, composing him∣selfe in a grave and venerable fashion, suitable to his Princely. State, without any signe of sub∣mission, feare, or intreay, hee spake thus.
Pertinax his speech to the Praetorian Souldiers. IF you take away my life, it will bee no great matter of gaine to you, or losse to me, being arrived to this Age, with so much honour. For this hu∣mane life must of necessitie determine at last. But if you, to whom the pre∣servation of your Prince is concredi∣ted, and which, by your oath, are to guard his Person, should be the first that marther him, and so pollute your selves with spilling your Countrey∣mans and Emperours blood; (it were in present) a fact most hainous; and might prove (in future) no lesse dan∣gerous to your selves. My conscience tels me, I have not wronged you at all. If you are sorry for Commodus death, it was no strange thing for a man to die: but if you thinke hee was made away by treason, it was none of my fault: For you know, I was not so much as suspected with it, but was altogether as ignorant as your selves of what was then done. The suspicion
(if any bee) must light upon others. And though he be dead, yet shall you want nothing which is agreeable to reason and your estate, and not clog∣ged with violence and ravine. With this speech divers ofThe like effect of Mjesty in Q∣as, see in lot lib. 14. them were perswaded, and ma∣ny retreated, being daunted with the Reverend Majestie of their Prince: but others flew upon him and slew the old Em∣perourHe is mur∣thered. while hee yet spake, which exec act as soone as they had done, purposing to decline the fy of the multi∣tude, who (thy knew) would take it most grievously, they ran to their Campe; where immuring themselves, they placed Armed men on the Bat∣tlements, to keepe the people from the Wals. This end had that renowned Pertinax. When this Massacre of the Prince was divulged, all places
were full of uproars, and dole∣full Outcries; the people ran up and downe like Frantickes,And ex∣treamely lamented. in a great hurly burly; search∣ing for the Actors, and not wot∣ting where to find them, or how to bee revenged on them: but especially the Lords and Se∣nators tooke it most to heart, as a common calamity, wanting now their indulgent Father, and most gracious Governour: all men fearing a relapse into Ty∣rannie; which they knew, the Souldiers so much delighted in. After a day or two, the people were calmed with their owne feares, and the chiefe Nobles and Magistrates retired to their remotest countrey houses, a∣voiding the danger that might ensue, by being present at the elction of the next Successor. The Souldiers perceiving that
the people were quiet, and that none durst undertake to revenge the Princes death; kept them∣selves close within the Campe, appointing those that could speake lowdest, to proclaime from the top of the Wall, that the Empire was to be sold, and heeThe Em∣pire se to sale. that would give most Silver for it, should bee invested in it, by force of Armes; and safely conducted to the Imperiall Palace. When they had made this Out-cry, none of the worthier or nobler sort of the Lords or Senators, nor yet any of those wealthie Citizens, which were the small remaines of Commodus Tyran∣nie, would goe to the wall, to traffique with them, as scor∣ning the Empire [OF THEThe brave∣rie of the Romas spirit WORLD] on such base and dishonourable termes. But when Inian, a man of
Consular dignity, who was re∣puted a great monied man (but of little honesty) had notice late in the Evening, being at supper (in the midst of his cups and jollity) of the Souldiers Proclamation, hee was perswa∣ded by his wife and daughter, and a number of Parasites, to rise from his  (for the Romans sate not at Tables.) Pallet, and hie him to the Wall, to see what was done. All the way as hee went, they counselled him to lay hold on the Empire, now it was profered; for having store of coine, hee might easily out∣vie all, in magnificent Dona∣tives, if there should bee any competition. As soone there∣fore as hee got to the Campe∣wall, hee shouted to them, pro∣mising to give whatsoever they desired: for hee said, hee had a mighty Masse of money, and
Treasuries full of gold and sil∣ver. At that same instant, Sulpi∣tianIulian and Sulpitian offer for . Provost of the Citie, who had also beene Consull, and was Pertinaxes Father in law, came thither with an intent to buy the Empire. But the Soul∣diers were jealous of him, be∣cause of his alliance to Bertinax, mistrusting, hee went about to entrap them, and to revenge his death. Wherefore rejecting him, they put downe a Ladder, and tok up Iulian to the top of the Wall, yet admitted him not into the Campe, till the summe hee should give were a∣greed upon. Being entred the Campe, hee promised to renue the memory, and restore the honours and Statuaes of Com∣modus▪ which the Snate had ab∣rogatd; to afford them as
much liberty, as ever they had under him; and to give to eve∣ry Souldier, more silver then they demanded or expected, and that without delay, in re∣gard he had it ready at home. The Souldiers allured withIlian ele∣cted. such faire Hopes, proclaymed Iulian Emperour, sirnaming him Commodus. Then slourishing their Ensignes (which they had garnisht with his pictures) they resolved to bring him into the Citie. Iulian having sacrificed in the Campe (as new Emperors were wont) issued forth with a stronger Guard than formerly had beene accustomed. For ha∣ving forcibly seiz'd the Sove∣raignety against the Peoples minde, by foule and shamefull meanes, hee might justly feare a Commotion. But the Souldi∣ers arming themselves com∣pleatly.
put themselves in Batta∣lia, that if need were, they might be ready to fight; placing their Emperour in the midst, and co∣vering their heads In forme of a Testu∣do. Vid. Lips. de Milit. Rom. with their Pikes and Targets, to prevent the Peoples throwing stones up on them from the House-tops (as they marched.) Thus they conducted him to the Palace, none of the Commons daring to resist, nor congratulating him (as was usuall at the Election of Emperors.) But on the contra∣ry, they stood a farre off, cur∣sing and banning him for pur∣chasingThe Com∣mons curse him. the Empire with mony. Here first of all, did the Soul∣diers fall into extremity of De∣bauchednesse, and by their rave∣nous and insatiable Desire of Money, the Imperiall Majesty was blasted with Contumelie. For there being none to vindi∣cate
the cruell massacre of the former Prince, nor to withstand the base Brocage of the present Vsurper; it was the chiefe cause of many Insolencies and Mu∣tinies which afterwards happe∣ned: their Greedinesse of Mo∣ney, and Contempt of Sove∣raignty, still inducing Murther and Bloud shed. Iulian having thus ravisht the Empire, plunged himselfe pre∣sently into all Riot and Disor∣der, little regarding State busi∣nesse; being wholly devoted to an Vnprincely and voluptuary life. And now it was discove∣red, that hee had cogged,  and cheated the Souldiers; and was not able to keepe up his Credit with them: for hee had not so great store of Coyne as he vaun∣ted. As for the Excheqer, Commodus had long since ex∣hausted
it, with his vaine luxu∣ry, and vast prodigality. The Souldiers therefore falling short of their hopes, were extremely offended with him, and the Commoners, who knew their minds, utterly scorned him; rayling at him, when he came abroad, and taunting him for his lewd and lascivious behavi∣our. Yea, in theThe Cir∣cus (or Horse-race) was built in an Ovall forme of great length, with rowes of Seats one above the other, able to containe above an hundred thousand Spectators.  Cirque or Race∣yard (where was the greatest Concourse of people) they de∣cryed Iulian; calling upon Ni∣ger, the chiefest Officer of the sacred Empire, to vindicate the Roman State, and hasten to free them from that propudious Go∣vernour. This Niger had beene Consul long before, & at that time was Praesident of Syria, which was then the highest and most emi∣nent Dignity in the Empire; for
the Phaenician Nation, and all the Regions as farr as Euphrates, were under his Command. He was now well stept in yeares, and having gone through many weighty Affaires, had got a ve∣ry high esteeme for his Modera∣tion and Sufficiencie: and was reputed to imitate Pertinax; for which Cause the Romanes did chiefely affect him. And now in all their Assemblies they still cryed aloud for him; reproa∣ching Iulian to his face, and uni∣versally calling upon Niger, with acclamations  Imperiall. When Niger understood the Romans inclination, and what Out cries they made for him in their ordinary meetings; consi∣dering withall, that Iulian was contemned by the Souldiery, for falsifying with them, and condemned by the communal∣ty,
for his Mercenary Purchase; he perswaded himselfe that the busines would easily be accom∣modated, and made no doubt of obtaining the Soveraignety. Wherefore imparting these Ro∣man passages and intelligences to somefew Tribunes,  Coro∣nels, and Captaines; hee sent them home one after another, that these Aires might (by their relations) bee dispersed among all the nations and Armies of the Orient: for by that courseNigers Po∣licie. hee assured himselfe, that all men would most readily incline to him, when they saw that he did not insidiously invade the Empire, but was wooed to ac∣cept it by the ardent votes, and humble sute of the Romans. And according to his expecta∣tion, they flocked to him from all parts, beseeching and impor∣tuning
him to take upon him the Soveraigne rule. Now theThe Cha∣racter of the Syrians. people of Syria are naturally light, and prone to Innovations; and were infinitely devoted to Niger, both in regard hee had ruled with singular Clemencie, and had also entertained them with Shewes and Enterldes.Stage∣playes and Revels. For the Syrians are by naturall Inclination, great lovers of sports; insomuch, that the in∣habitants of Antioch (a mighty and flourishing Citie) spend (in a manner) all the yeae in spor∣tive Recreations, either in the Citie or Suburbs. Thus Niger by continuall couring them with Bals, Masqies, Shewes, and other pleasurable pastimes, had chained their affections to him. Which hee well knowing, ap∣poynted all the Souldiers there∣abouts, to come together at a
day prefixed; What time a great number of people being likewise assembled, hee thus spake to them from a high Seat purposely erected. Niger's Speech to the Army, &c. VVIth what a gentle hand I have ruled among you, and how circumspect and punctuall I have beene in undertaking Actions of great import; I suppose is well knowne to all here present. Neither have I here assembled you of my owne head, out of ungrounded Hope or flattering Desire. But the Romans call upon me with in∣cessant Clamours and Sollicitations, to lend them my  helping hand, and not permit so ancient, excellent, and glorious an empire to bee basely mer∣chandized. Now as it were a high point of Folly and Presumption, to at∣tempt so great an Enterprise, with∣out just Occasion intitling: So to re∣fuse to yd them which implore our helpe, might breed an imputation of
Cowardize and Treacherie. The rea∣son therfore why I have conven'd you at this time, is to know your Minde; and what Course you thinke were best: being desirous of your Advice and Assistance in this weighty Affaire; which if it prosper well, will redound to your benefit, as well as mine. Nor are they vaine or meane Hopes which sollicite us; but the Romane people, whom the Gods have made Lords of the World: and the Imperiall Digni∣ty, which is yet wavering and unset∣led in the person of any man. Now the Certainty of this Designe is appa∣rent, both by the forwardnesse of them that crave our succour, and for that there is none to make Opposition or Resistance. For they which are come thence, assure us, that the Souldiers which sold the empire to the Vsurper, are not like to sticke to him, because he hath broke his Credit with them; and was not able indeed to performe his Bargain. Shew therefore (I pray you) how you stand affected. At which Words, the whole
Armie proclaimed him Empe∣rourNiger ele∣cted. and Augustus. Then vesting him in Purple Robes, and other Royall Abiliments (as that sud∣den Preparation would afford) they conducted him (with Fire carryed before him) first to the Temples of Antioch, and then to his owne House; which now honouring as the Princes Pal∣lace, they adorned on the Out∣side, with all Imperiall Orna∣ments. Niger glad at his heart, of this good successe, seeing the Ro∣mans and all others conspired to advance him, made no doubt of carrying the Soveraignety. When this Newes flew abroad, presently all the Nations borde∣ring on Europe, willingly sub∣mitted to him: sending theirEmbassa∣dours. Embassadours to Antiech, as to their rightfull Emperour. Also
the Kings and Princes beyond Euphrates and Tigris, sent to con∣gratulate him, promising their ayds, if he needed. He retur∣ned them many thankes, richly rewarded the Embassadors, and rold them he needed no supplies, for hee was sufficiently assured of the Empire, and would raigne without bloud-shed. In which Confidence reposing, he began to bee moe remisse and negli∣gent;Nigers se∣curity. solacing himselfe and the Antiochians with all variety of sports, and Theaticall delights;And Error. not regarding (which most con∣cerned him) to take his journey to Rome, nor yet acquainting the Illyrian Armies; which he ought first of all to have sollicited and gayned. But he perswaded him∣selfe, that as soone as they heard of it, they would side with the Romans, and Easterne Forces.
While hee thus demeaned him∣selfe, and anchored on these Shallowes, and Vncertainties; the Bruit of these Occurrents was fresh among the Pannonians, Il∣lyrians, and all the Garrisons which were quartered on the Bankes of Ister, and the Rhine, to defed the Romane Empire from the Incursions of the ad∣joyning Barbarians. The President of the Panno∣niansSeverus de∣scribed. (for they all ad but one Governour) was Severus, an Af∣fican by Descent, a brave active man, but of a violent spirit, in∣ured to a strict and austere life; easily induring labour and tra∣vell; of a nimble Apprehen∣sion, and quicke Resolution to execute what hee determined. When he perceived by the Mes∣sengers, that the Romane Em∣pire hanged like a  Meteor in
the Skie, and was exposed to him that could catch it; he con∣temned Iulian, as an abject Fel∣low: and Niger as a dull Fleg∣maticke. Hee was also much animated by certaine Dreames, Oracles, and Presages; which are then best credited, when they are verifyed by the event: most whereof himselfe recorded in the Booke which he writ of his owne Life; and presented them also to publicke view, in Statua∣rie Representations; but his last and chiefest Dreame, which ray∣sed him to the highest hope, I may not omit. What time Se∣verusHis dreame received intimation of Pertinax his Instalment in the Empire, having sacrificed and sworne Allegeance to him; comming home at night, he fell asleepe, and dreamed hee saw Pertinax mounted on a gallant
Corser, adorned with Impei∣all pprs, which carid him through the sacred Via sacr Street at Rome. But when he was to en∣ter the Foru, where the people, in time of Popular Rule. Democracie, had their most solemne Assemblies; the Horse seemed to throw Per∣tinax (wth a terrible fall) to the ground; and genly to suffer him (who tood next) to backe him; carrying him safely and stadily through the midst of the Forum; lifing up Severus on high, so that all the people saw him, nd adored him. And there remaines to this day in the very same place, a huge brasse Image of that Dreame. Severus hus encuaged, and prswaded he was called to the Empire by Divine Providence, resolved to try how the Soldi∣ers were inclined: and first hee
convented a few Coronels, Tri∣bunes, and Commanders; and taking occasion to speake of the Roman Empire, shewed how vilely it was prostituted; and that none of spirit or worth, went about to vindicate it. Hee inveighed also against the Pre∣torian Bands at Rome, as Tray∣tors; for violating their oath, by spilling their Emperour and Countrey-mans blood; saying, that it was fit they should pur∣sue Pertinax his murther with a sharpe revenge. Now hee well knew that the memory of Pertinax was still fresh in the Illyrian Armies; which under his command (in the Emperour Marcus time) had got many glorious victories, over the Germanes: and when hee was President of Sclavonia. Illyria, hee carried himselfe very brave∣ly
in the warres; and ruled with such wisedome and moderation, as well shewed his rare sweet spirit, and generous disposition. Wherefore they highly honou∣red his memory, and were enra∣ged against his Assassinates: Se∣verus embracing this opportu∣nity, did easily draw them to his bent, by the lustre of his faire and winning Propositions; pretending that hee affected not the Empire, nor any Principa∣lity, but was onely desirous to▪ revenge the blood of that fa∣mous Emperour. For the Na∣tivesIllyrians de∣scribed. of that Region, as they are a Race of men, mighty of body and limbe; tall Souldiers and good Sword men; so are they but of slow wits; not ea∣sily discerning the plot, if a man deale subilly or Spalato was an Il∣lyrian, and Gondomar (they say) did Severely over-reach him. politickly with them. Wherefore Severus
having solemnly vowed to pur∣sue Pertinaxes murtherers; they beleeved him, and submitting themselves, stiled him Empe∣rour, and conferred upon him the Soveraignty. Having thus assured the Pan∣nonians, he presently sent to the bordering Nations, and to the Presidents of the Northern Provinces, which were under the Roman Regiment; whom he easily gained by great hopes, and faire promises. For he was the most cunning Dissembler in the world, and of a most win∣ning behaviour;Severus a darke and subtile Prince. not regarding to falsifie his oath, to serve his turne. He knew how to cogge for his owne advantage; and would readily utter that with his tongue, which hee never meant in his heart. Thus by his courtly Letters hee won all the
Illyrians to his lure, and like∣wise the Provinciall Presidents. Which done, hee levied great numbers of Souldiers from all parts; assuming for his surname Pertinax; which hee thought would make him gracious both with the Illyrians and Romans (for their worthy esteeme of him.) His Army being assem∣bled, hee thus spake to them from an high Throne. Severus his speech to the Army. YOur zealous veneration of the Gods (by whom you have sworn) and your singular devotion to your Emperours, doe well appeare by your detestation of those hainous crimes of the Pretorian Souldiers at Rome; which are men, rather for Shew, than Service. For my owne part, having never till this present, entertained such high hopes (for you know how loyall I have ever beene to
my Liege Soveraignes) it is my chiefe care and  Prayer to pursue and effect such things, as may sort to your gene∣rall contentment, and not permit the Roman Empire, which hath hereto∣fore beene administred with so great glory and honour, to be thus embased. For albeit, under Commodus it suf∣fered much, by reason of his youth∣fulnesse; yet the errours of that Prince were shadowed with his high Nobility, and his Fathers memory. His faults deserve rather commisera∣tion, than execration: since (for the most part) they were not to be impu∣ted to him; but to his flatterers, cor∣rupt Counsellours, and Ministers of State. But when the Empire was in∣vested in that grave Pertinax. Senator (the memory of whose valour and vertue hath taken so deepe root in your  soules) the Praetorians not enduring it, most cruelly butchered that brave nd now (forsoth) there is   bought the Empire of  but such a one, as is mor∣ed of the Commons (as you ) and not beloved of the
Souldiers, whom hee hath deluded. But admit they were willing to under∣take his defence; they are not com∣parable to you for number or valour. Besides, you are better exercised in the Warres. For by your continuall skirmishes with Barbarians, you have learned to endure all manner of toyl and travell; to scorne heat and cold;Propr of good Souldiers. to wade through frozen Rivers; to drinke puddled waters; and to pra∣ctise your selves in hunting. In aHunting a Military Exece. word, you have attained to such rare perfection in Martiall Discipline; that if any Would; there is none A∣ble to stand against you. The glory of a Souldier consists in labour, not in lazinesse or No Ez∣cellencie hath foun∣dation in Delicacie. delicacie; wherewith the Stall-ed Pretorian Guards, be∣ing over-pampered, will never be able to abide your Military . Shout, much lesse the Shocke. But if any mis∣doubt the Syrian Vnder Niger's command. Forces; hee may clearely collect, how im-puissant, and dejected they are, that have not dared to stirre out of their owne Countrey; nor have had the heart to enter into consultation of an Expedition to
Rome; but love rather to sit still, and entertaine Fortune by the day: as holding it a sufficient Gurdon of an unsure Soveraignty. The Syrians are better scoffers than Souldiers, and more Mnicall than Martiall. But the Antiochians (they say) are chief∣ly devoted to Niger. As for the other Countries and Cies, which as yet see none appeare, that is worthy the naeme of an Emperour, or able to governe the state with wisedome and courage; they doe meerely temporize and col∣logue with him. But when they shall understand that the Illyrian Army hath made another Election, and shall heare of my name (which is neither unknowne, nor inglorious among them by reason of our exployts there, when wee were there President) you well know they will not charge me with sloth, or irresolution: nor will they offer to make proofe of your brave  courage, and martiall furie; being so farre your Inferiours, odlinsse of person, and excellent skill at your weapon, when you come to hand∣strokes. Wherefore let us instantly
advance, and seize Rome, and the Imperiall Palace. Then may wee with greater facility pursue our other designes, taking our rise from thence; and reposing all our confidence in the Divine Predictions; and event in your victorious Armes, and unmatchable. Severus having thus sayd, theSeverus pro∣clamed Emperour. Souldiers with great cryes of joy, proclamed him Augustus and Pertinax; making all possi∣ble expressions of Loyaltie and Alacritie. Severus without further pro∣crastination,His Expedi∣tion to Rome. commands all to Arme themselves as lightly as they could, and proclames his Expedition to Rome. Then gi∣ving them Donatives, and distri∣buting to every one a competent Portion for a Viaticum; he mar∣ches with high speed & haugh∣ty courage, resting no where, nor sarse suffering his weary troops
to breathe them a little. Him∣selfe tooke as great paines as a∣ny, using as course Lodging, and hard Fare, as the meanest common Souldier; without a∣ny shew at all of Imperial pomp or delicacie; which made the souldiers much more afect him. For taking such infinite toyle in his own Person, it did so indeare him to them, that they readily did whatsoever he commanded. After he had marched through Pannonia, and was come to the Mountaines of Italie, preventing Fame it selfe, by being seene as Emperour among them, before they had any Intelligence of his comming; all the Cities of I∣taly were in a fearfull Fever, atHe surpi∣zes Itay. the approach of so great an Ar∣mie. For the Italians having long since left all us of Arme, and Militarie Discipline, dev∣ted
themselves to Agriculture, and a peaceable course of life. While the Romanes were a free State, and Generalls were elected by the Senate, Italy was still in Armes, and having conquered the Greekes and Barbarians, be∣came Lords of the world; there being not an Angle of Earth, or Climate under Heaven, whither the Glory of the Roman Armes extended not. But when Augu∣stus came to the Monarchie, his pacificall Government induced a generall lazinesse and desue∣tude of Martiall Exercises; for hee kept onely a certaine num∣ber of Mercenary Bands in Pay, to guard the Romane Empire, at the utmost bounds thereof, which were naturally fortifyed with great Rivers, deep Ditches, craggy Mountains, and vast De∣sarts and Wildernesses. Where∣fore
a soone as it was knowne, that Sverus was comming with so mighty an Army, they were sore agast at that strange newes, and ot daring to stirre against him, went to meet him with Lawels in their hands. But hee making no longer stay at any place, than either to sacrifise to the Gods, or speake to the peo∣ple, posted away for Rome. When Iulian was advertised hereof, he made account he was utterly undone. For understan∣ding what a numerous and po∣tent Army the Illyrians were, and having no hope in the peo∣ple (to whom hee was odious) nor much in the Souldiers (whom he had gulled) he madeIulian in great▪ care. all the money he could, by him∣selfe or his friends▪ rbbing the very Temples, and publicke Treasuries, and gave all to the
Souldiers to purchase their good will. But they returning small thankes for his great lar∣gesse, tooke it rather as a due debt, than free git. Iulians friends counselled him to ad∣vance with his Army, and pre∣clude the Alpine Straits. (NowThe Alpes. the Alpes are exceeding high Mountaines (such as wee have none in these parts) circulig Italy like a wall; nature adding to the felicity of that Region, this impregnable fortification; extending from the North to the South-sea.) But Iulian not daring to budge forth of the Citie, sent to the Souldiers to beseech them to take armes, and exercise themselves, and make trenches & rampiers before the Citie; wherein he prepared all military ammunition, & causedElephants trayned. all the Elephants (which he kept
for shew and State) to be taught to indure Riders: supposing the Illyrians and their Horses would be skared wih the strange shape and bulke of those Beasts which they never saw before. All the City was now busie in providing Armes and Warlike Furniture. But while Iulian's Souldiers goe slowly to worke, and scarce prepare for Warre, Severus is reported to be come already; who having appoin∣ted many of his Souldiers, seve∣rallSeverus his Stratagem. wayes to disperse themselvs, and enter secretly into Rome, they arrived by sundry passages into the City (by night) cove∣ring their Armours with Rusti∣call habite, as if they had been plaine Countrimen. And now was the Enemie in Iulian's bo∣some ere he was aware. When the People perceived this, be∣ing
all amazed, and greatly drea∣ding Severus power, they be∣ganne to incline to him, con∣demning Iulian for a Dastard, and Niger for a Slugge, but com∣mending Severus who was now at hand. Whereupon Iulian be∣ing at his Wits end, and not knowing what to doe, assem∣bled the Senate, and sent Let∣ters to Severus, desiring to con∣tract a League with him, and to be made his Consort in the Em∣pire. But when the SenatoursIulian de∣serted. which had agreed on that course saw how basely timorous and dejected hee was, they reiected him for a Recreant, and wholly revolted to Severus. Two or three dayes after, when Newes was brought that Severus was now come in person, all the Citizens utterly forsaking Iulian, assem∣bled in the  Authority of Consuls. Guild-hall, by com∣mand
of the Consuls (who in such doubtful times have charge of the Romane State) where they entred into Consultation, what was best to bee done in that Exigent: Iulian abiding (the while) in the Palace, deploring his Infortunity, and humbly begging that hee might abjure the Soveraignty, and resigne all his Imperiality to Severus. But when the Senate understood, that Iulian was in such desperate Horrour, and that his GuardsNo receipt against Feare. (Di∣ctum Mariae illustrissimae Scotorum Reginae.) (for feare of Severus) had quite forsaken him; they decreed his Death, and declared Severus sole Emperor. Then send they (as Commissioners) diverse of the chief Magistracie, and prime Nobility, to render to him all Imperiall Honours. The Exe∣cution of Iulian was committed to one of the Tribunes, who
finding he wrtced old Man (that had bought his owne Ru∣ine with his Money) wholly de∣serted and forlorne; slew him,Iulian slain. . as he was tearing his hayre, with abject Lamentations. When Se∣verus understood the Senates Declaration, and that Iulian was slaine; hee hoped to doe grea∣ter matters; and layd a Traine to catch all the Pretorian Soul∣diers that had murthered Perti∣nax. He sent therfore secret Let∣ters to their Coronel and Cap∣taines. Tribunes and Cen∣turions, promising them great rewards, to perswade their Com∣panies in the Citie, to submit to his Mandates. Meane while, he makes Proclamation, that all of them, leaving their Armes in the Campe, should come forth likeSeverus his Traine to take the Pretorians. peaceable men, in such Habits as they used when they atten∣ded the Emperour at solemne
shewes and Sacrifices, that they might be sworne to Severus; and that they should come cheere∣fully, because they were to bee his Guard. The Souldiers cre∣diting this Edict, and being also perswaded by their Officers, lay aside all their Armes, and issue forth with lawrell branches in their hands, in such Equipage as they were wont in some great Festivity. When they drew near to Severus Campe, and it was told him they were all come, he comanded them to bee brought to his presence, as if hee meant to welcome and entertaine them with all honour. But when they came before his Throne (with joy full accna∣tions) upon a signall given at the instant, they were all apprehen∣ded. For Severus commanded his Souldiers, that when they
saw them assembled before him expecting some high favour, they should presently wheele a∣bout them in martiall manner; yet not wound nor strike them, but onely make a Ring, and hemme them in; presenting their Iavelins and Pikes towards them, which they being unar∣med, and but few in compari∣son of them, durst not resist so many men at Armes. When Severus had thus impounded them, with a strong voice, and furious spirit, hee thus spake to them. Severus his speech to the Praetorian Guards. You see now by experience, that wee farre exceed you in policie, power and number. You are easi∣ly caught, and as easily held. Now are you all at my devotion, to doe what I please with you. Here you
stand like a herd of beasts, ready to be sacrifised at my becke. If you ex∣pect a Doome, or Death, responsible to your blacke deeds, and detestable vil∣lanies; the World cannot afford it. You have barbarously butchered that venerable Father, and Excellent Emperour, whom, as his Guards, you ought to have defended. You have most shamefully truckt for silver (as if it had beene some of your owne goods) the most glorious Roman Em∣pire, which was anciently the Guer∣don of Nobility, or Militar  vertue. And now like base  Poltrones, you have betrayed him that was your Mercenary Soveraigne; not daring to guard or protect him. For these inexpiable crimes you deserve a thou∣sand deaths, if you had your due. Now you see what you are worthy to suffer. But I scorne to imitate you, or to pollute my bands with your blood. Neither justice nor equity permit, that you should any longer be the Em∣perours Guard; that thus have vio∣lated your oath, distained your selves with your naturall Princes blood, and
betrayed the trust and confidence re∣posed in you. Your Soules and Bo∣dies (of my Noblenesse) I am content to besto upon you. But I command my Souldiers to ungirdle you; and divest you of all Military Attire, and Accoutrements; and send you away stript: which done, I charge you all to get you packing, farre from Rome: for I here decree, vow, and sweare, that if any of you be found within an hundred miles of the Citie bee shall die for it. Having given this charge,The Pre∣toans de∣graded. the Illyrian Souldiers presently ranne to them, and disarming them of their short Swords, (which were curiously wrought with gold and silver, and custo∣maily worne at solemn shwes) they tooke from them their belts, scarffes, and other milita∣ry ornaments, and rasht off all their clothes; leaving them starke naked.
When they saw themselvesTraytor betrayed. thus betrayed and taken with a Wile; there was no way but patience. For what could a few naked men doe, against so many armed? They departed there∣fore with heavie cheere; yet glad their lives were given them; shrewdly repening, that by leaving their Armes, they had subjected themselves to so foule and disgracefull a Doome. Severus used also another poli∣cie; for doubting lest being de∣graded, they would desperately runne to their Campe, and re∣sume their Armes; he had sent before some Troopes of his choicest and trustiest Souldiers, by secret wayes and passages, commanding them suddenly to seize their vacant Campe, and with their owne weapons to keepe them out, if they attemp∣ted
to returne. Thus were those Assassinates of Pertinax puni∣shed. Forthwith Severus with hisSeverus enters Rome. Army arranged in Battel-array, makes his entry into Rome; the Romans being at first sight ter∣ribly afraid of him, for his da∣ring and speedy Enterprise. Howbeit, the Peeres and Com∣mons received him with Law∣rels, who of all Men and Em∣perours, was the first, that with∣out blood or sweat, effected such rare Enterprises. Indeed,His Elogie. all things in him were admira∣ble; especially his high wit, piercing judgement, indefatiga∣ble industry, happy-hopefull audacitie in great and Heroicall Attempts. After the people had well∣comed him with their Accla∣mations, and the Nobles salu∣ted
him at the City Gates, hee repayred to Iupiters Temple; where having sacrifised, he did his Devotions at the other Fans (as the Epeurs were wont) and lastly, betooke himselfe to the Imperiall Pallace. The next day he went to the Senat-house, where hee made a smooth and plausible Speech; and then gave his  Hand to all the Company, professing, That his maine End inHis Plausi∣bility. comming to the City, was to revenge Pertinaxes Death, and to lay the Plo and Foundation of an Optima∣cie: promising that none but those which were condemned by Lawe, should lose Life or Goods: that hee would not tolerate Informers: that hee would make a happy and flou∣rishing State, and in all things imi∣tate Marcus; and not onely assume the Name, but the Minde of Perti∣nax. With these faire Promi∣ses
he stroked the Senators; most of them inclining to affect and believe him: but some of the el∣der and sager sort, that better knew his disposition, told them in their eare, that hee was a rightHis Cen∣sure. Politician, full of tricks and traines, and an exquisite Dissembler and Temporizer, for his owne ends: As afterwards it proved. Severus intending but a short stay in Rome, gave to the Com∣mons a magnificent Donative of Corne, and a great Largesse to his Souldiers; selecting the ablest among them for his guard (in steed of those which were degraded.) And now he prepares an Expedition to the Orient; where Niger lay rusting (all this while) and revelling at Antioch; whom he hasted to surprise ere he were aware, and take him un∣provided.
Commanding therefore hisHis prepa∣ration for Warre. Souldiers to make ready for that Voyage, and recollecting all his Forces, he adjoyned to them all the flowre of the Italian Youth; and gave order, that the rest of the Army in Illyria should come down to Thrace, and meet him on the way. He provided also, a great sleet of ships, & prest all the gal∣lies of Italy, which he filled with Men at arms, & sent them a way: having amassed together, with incredible speed, a mighty maga∣zin of all manner of provision & ammunition. For he well knew, hee needed more than ordinary Forces against the Nations bor∣dering on Europe, which were all under Niger's command. Thus Severus  gallantly prepared for the war. But withall, like a wise and provident man, he shrewdlyHe is afraid of the Bri∣taines misdcubted the British Armies, cōsisting of great & bravetroops
of mo excellent  Souldiers; whose Generall was Albinus; ofAlbinus Governour of Britaine. very noble & honorable descent & born to exceeding greatwelth and possessions. Him hee resol∣ved to win by policie▪ lest other∣wise being excited by his riches, noblenes, forces & renown (sharp and piquant motives to aspire to Soveraignty) he should attempt to overtop him & seize on Rome (wch is not very far distant from Britaine) while himselfe were in∣gaged in the Eastern wars. Now his bait to catch him, was by a glittering shew of honor; for be∣ing a credulous man, and none of the deepest Politicks▪ he presētly believed the oaths & protestati∣ons wch he sent him by Letters: wherin he stiled him Caesar, anti∣cipatingHe is stild Caesar by Severus. his ambition, by cōmu∣nicating the sovraigne dignity. In the sayd coutly and comple∣mentall
lines, he besought him to bee Protector of the Empire, wch stood in great need of so no∣ble and brave a yong Gallant; as for himselfe, he was now grown old and gowie, and his children were but infants. Albinus easily gave credit to him, and willingly took the honor upon him; being glad he attained his desire with∣out battel, or further danger. To give the more glosse to his inten∣tions, Sevrus acquainted the Se∣nat with the passages; comanding also Coines to be stamped with his image; as also his statues to be erected; with all other Imperiall honors; the better to blanch his designes. Which having with high wisdome performed, & so lookt Albinus in Britain, that there was no feare of him; he gathered all the Illyrian Forces into one body, & now all things being in
readinesse, he leads his Army di∣rectly against Niger. What were his Stations by the way, what speeches he made to every city, what frequent prodigies N. B. . by di∣vine providēce appeared; a also what countries he marched tho∣row, what conflicts hee had, and how many were slaine on either side, many Historians have rela∣ted, & Poets especially have larg∣ly dilated; making Sever{us} acts the argument of their works. But my intendmēt is to compile a Histo∣ry of the acts of many Emperors raigning in the compasse of 70Herd writes a History of 70 vea yeares, wch I certainly  know to be true. I shall therfore deliver part of the chiefest and choifest actiōs of Sever{us}, not flattering, or faining more thā was performed (like the Writers of that time) nor yet suppressing ought that is worthy to be knowne or recor∣ded.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The third Booke. The Contents. Niger prepares for Warre. He for∣tifies Mount Taurus, and Byzan∣tium. Aemilianus his General, defeated Severus Policie. He assaults Mount Taurus. Moores described. Alexan∣dria. Battell betwixt Severus and Ni∣ger Niger beheaded. Severus Plots against Albinus. His Speech against him. His strange Winter-mrch, Albinus sayles out of Bitaie, and fights with Severus. The Britai fight bravely, and beat Severus off his Horse: They winne the first B: They di and  Albi∣nus beheaded▪  us
Elogie. Hee makes two Vicegerents in Britanie. His cruelty and covetous∣nesse. Secular Games every three hundreth yeare. Severus his Expedi∣tion into the East. He besieges Atrae, and is repulsed. His strange fortune. He surprises the Parthian King. He enters Rome in triumph. His Sonnes Dissensions. Plautian a mighty Fa∣vourite. His Treason, strangely de∣tected. Hee is cut in pieces. Severus instructs his Sonnes. News from Bri∣tanie. Severus his Expedition thither. Description and Elogie of the Picts or Scots. Severus dies for griefe. An∣tonine's Cruelty. Severus Reliques, Antonine and Geta saile out of Bri∣tanie. IN the former Booke, we have related the Mur∣ther of Pertinax, the Slaughter of Iulian, Severus his Expedition to Rome, and lastly his Preparations against Niger. As soone as Niger (who little ex∣pectedNiger pre∣pares for Warre. such ewes) understood
that Severus had seized Rome; that the Senate had proclaimed him Emperour; and that all the Illyrian Armie, and other Forces were comming against him by Sea, and Land; be∣ing extreamely startled, hee warnes all the Vice∣gerents of the Provinces, to set strong Guards at all Ports and Pasa∣ges; and sends for Ayd, to the Parthian, Armenian, and Atre∣nian Kings. The Armenians an∣swer was, that hee would bee Neutrall, and reserve his owne Forces to desend himselfe if Se∣verus assayled him. The Parthi∣an promises to write to his No∣bles, to levie Souldiers (as his manner was in time of Warre.) For the Parthians have no ordi∣nary standing Armies, nor any souldiers in continual pay. From the Atrenians came a Band of
Archers, sent from King Barse∣mius, who then raigned in those Parts. The grosse of his army he made up of the Souldiers which he had with him; most of the Countrey youths, but especial∣ly of the Antiochians, either out of their Levitie or Love to Niger; more boldly than wisely flocking unto him. The Straits and Precipices of Mount Tau∣rus,Mount Taurus for∣tifyed. hee fortifyed with strong Walls and Munitions; accoun∣ting that impassable place, would bee a Barricado to blocke up the Way to the Orient. For Taurus lifting up his Ridge be∣tween Cappadocia and Cilicia, dis∣severs the Eastern and Northern Nations. Hee put also a Garri∣son in Byzantium, the chiefestByzantim n Con∣. and mightiest Citie of Thrace, floishing at that time in strength and wealth; for beeing situ∣ate
in the narrow Proponticke Sea, it eaped equall benefit by Water and Land; from the first, Impost ad Fish; from the lat∣ter, Corne and Fruit; as having a large and fertile Territory. This strong City he preoccupates to prevent the passage of Severus Flee, which was to sale out of Europe into Asia, through that narrow Chanell. The City was compast wth a uge strong wall, of squared Milstons, so curtously cemented that it seemed to bee an in re work made by Nature, rather than Art: yea▪ the very Ruines and Rubbish (which yet appeare) shw the marvellous skill of them that buil it, and the stupendious strength of those that dismantled it. In this mannet did Niger or∣der his Affaires, with singular Prudence and Providence (as he
imagined.) Severus on the other side, slacked not, but incessant∣ly marched with his Armie. And being advertized that By∣zantium was well manned and strongly fortifyed, he turnes hisAemilianus Nigers Ge∣nerall. course to Cyzicum. Aemilianus Lievtenant of Asia, to whom Niger had committed the Man∣nage of the Warre, and chiefe Command; hearing that Seve∣rus was marching, leades all the Forces which he had leavied, or were sent by Niger, directly to Cyzicum. When the Armies met on both sides, after divers blou∣dy battels in those parts, Severus at last was Master of the Field; a great number of Nigers Soul∣dier being routed, slaine, andDefeated by Seve. pu to flight. Which Successe mightily incouraged the Illyri∣ans, and the  Easterlings. ut many were of opinion, that from
the beginning, Niger was betrai∣ed by Aemilian; for these reasons. Some say, hee envied Niger, dis∣dayning that hee, who was but his Successour in Syria, should now be his Superior, Emperor, and Soveraign. Others suppose, that hee was thereto perswaded by his Childrens Letters, who besought him to take care of their safety: for Severus having found them at Rome, put them in hold, out of deep policie, and early providence. And it was Commodus his manner to retaine with him their Children, whom hee sent to bee Lievtenants of Provinces, as Pledges of their Allegeance and fidelity. Wher∣fore Severus (like a vigilant man)Severus his Policie. at his first Designement to the Empire in Iulians time, sent se∣cretly for his children out of the Citie, lest they should be after∣ward
seized on. And at his com∣ming to Rome, hee instantly ap∣prehended all the Children of the Presidents, and other chiefe Captaines & Commanders that ruled in Asia, or the East, carrying thē with him as Prisoners, there∣by to induce their Fathers to re∣volt from Niger (for their preser∣vation) or if they continue firme to him, to let them know, that by killing them, he could be re∣venged on them at his pleasure. Nigers Souldiers being over∣throwne at Cyzicum, fled amaine; some to the Armenian Moun∣taines; others through Asia, and Galatia, hastning to Mount Tau∣rus, to get into that strong Hold. Severus Armie marcht through the Country of Cyzicum, to the next region of Bithynia. When it was famed that Sever{us} was victor suddenly all the Cities in those
Parts, fell to deadly Feud; not so much for Love or Hate to either Emperour, as out of a mortall Antipathie, and impla∣cable Enmitie one to the other. And this was anciently the fault of the Greekes, who by their intestine broyles and conspra∣cies, to exirpate the most emi∣nent men, have utterly undone Greece: whose Inhabitants (by their old grudge, and civill dis∣asters) first became Vassls to the Macedons; and then Slaves to the Romans: the same heart∣burning, and spightfull emulati∣on, continuing in the best Cities to our time. Wherefore after these things hapned at Cyzicum, the Citizens of Nicomedia in Bi∣thynia, revolted from Niger to Severus, promising him (by their Embassadors) to receive his Ar∣mie, and assist him in all things.
But the Citizens of Nicaea, out of their malignity to them, took Nigers part, and entertayned his Souldiers, which either fled thi∣ther, or were sent to detend Bi∣thynia. Out of these two Cities (as severall Camps) the Armies of both sides issuing, fought a∣gaine; but after a terrible bat∣tell, Severus got the Victory. From thence the Remaines of Nigers Forces fled to the Straits of Mount Taurus, to defnd those Fortifications. Niger having left there as many as he thought suf∣ficient to make good the Place, returnes to Antioch, to raise more Men and Money Meanewhile, Severus Armie pssing through Bithynia, and Galatia, marcht in∣to Cappadocia▪ and there beganMount Taurus a∣ayle . to assaile the Fortification But they met with no small difficul¦ties; for the passage was extreme
rough and craggie, and the Ene∣mie which was on the Walls, and over their heads, tumbled downe Stones upon them, and fought bravely; a few men ser∣ving to repell a great Num∣ber. For the Ascent was excee∣ding strait, being defended on the one side with a huge steepe Mount, on the other with a wonderfull Precipice, downe which fell continuall Cataracts from the top of the Mountaines. Niger had also made there a strong Fort to barre their En∣trance on every side. During this Assault in Cappadocia there arose Mutinies upon the like Grounds and Grudges as asore∣said. For Laodicea in Syria (in despight of Antiochi) and Tyrus in Phoenicia (repining at the Be∣rythians) when they heard of Ni∣gers Discomfiture, defaced his
Images, and proclaimed Seve∣rus Emperour: which Niger (then at Antioch) understanding, though (otherwise) of a milde disposition, yet stung with those opprobrious Injuries and De∣fections, sends against both the Cities all the Maurita∣nia, now F and Moocco. Mauritanian Darters that he had, and part of his Archers, charging them to kill all afore them, and to sacke and burn the Cities. The MooresThe Moores described. (who are naturally bloudy and desperate, regarding neither death nor danger) suddenly in∣vading the Laodiceans, put them all to the Sword, and destroyed their Towne. Thence marching to Tyre, they first pillag'd it, and then cruelly slaughtering the In∣habitants, set it on a bright blaze. While this passes in Syria and Niger is levying new Sup∣plies, the Severians persist in their
assailment of the Fort of Mount Taurus, but with much wan hope and great discouragement; for it was an impregnable Worke, and naturally defended with the Mount, and Precipice. Being quite wearyed, and their Ene∣mies now secure; extraordina∣ry Stormes and Snowes fell sud∣denly in the Night (for in Cap∣padocia, and especially at Mount Taurus, Winters are ex reame rough) accompanyed with a ve∣hemen and imptuous Torrent; which being check by the For∣tification, became more fuious and violent. At last, Nature vanqui hing Art, and the Wall yielding to the deluge, the floud (having sapt the Foundation, which was made in haste, and not so carefully as wa requi-site) bore downe all before it, and made an exceeding great
breach: which the Defendants perceiving, & feating that when the Waters were downe, they should be surprized by the Ene∣mie, they all quit the place, and fled. With this Accident, the Severians were infinitely chee∣red and animated (as lead by di∣vine providence) and seeing also the Guardians of the Mount were fled, they easily scaled it, and entered Cilicia. When Niger heard these Tidings. he gathered a vast Armie of undisciplined & inexpert Souldiers: & marching with maine speed, was followed with huge numbers of people, and almost all the Youth of An∣tioch, who exprest great alacrity, but were not comparable to the Illyrians for Valour or Experi∣ence. A the Bay of A Citie called by Alexander Niopolis, for his Vi∣ctory there. Issus, the Armies met, in a goodly spaci∣ous Plaine, which lying under
a row of Hills, Theatre-wise, is extended all along the Sea∣coast; Nature having here made (as it were) a Stage for a battell. In the very same place they say that Darius was overthrowne and taken by Alexander in the last great Battell; the In Nature the Nor∣therne Re∣gions are most Mar∣tiall. Northerne Men then also vanquishing the Easterne. The Citie Alexandria (built on a Hill) the TrophieAlexandria. and Monument of that Victo∣ry, yet remaines; and the bra∣zen Image of him that so named it. Now it fell out that the Hosts of Severss and Niger did not onely incounter in the sayd place, but also with like fortune [to the other:] For on both sides were they ready to fight in the Evening, not sleeping all Night for Care and Feare. AtThe Battell betwixt Se∣verus and Niger. Sunrising, the Generalls incou∣raged their Souldiers, who as∣sailed
each other with incredi∣ble fury; as accounting that the last Fatall Conflict; and that Fortune would there designe the Emperour. After a long and grim Fight, there being on each side so great Slaughter, that the Rivers which ranne through the Plaine, sent much more bloud than water into the Sea; at last the Orientalls turned their backs and fled, the Illyrians pursuing them to the Sea (where they thrust them in with woundes) and to the Hill-tops, where they flew them, together with a great number of people, assembled there out of the adjoining towns and villages, as Spectatours of the battell; supposing they were safe in that high ground. Niger being bravely mounted, poasted with a few of his Followers to Antioch; where the people
flying every way, and piteously bewayling their sonnes and bre∣thren; hee also grew desperate, and be tooke himselfe to flight; but being found hid in a Subur∣ban house, by the Horemen that pursued him, his Head was strucke off.Niger be∣headed. This end had Niger, being brought to that Disaster, by his dull protracting of time; though otherwise he were (as they say) in his publike and private carri∣age not culpable. Niger being slaine, Severus pre∣sently put to death all his friends and Partizans, whether Volun∣taries, or compelled to assist him. Yet he pardoned the Soul∣diers which were fled (for feare) to the Barbarians beyond the River Tigris; and received them into favour. For great numbers of them retired into those parts,
whereby it came to passe, that the Barbarians were afterwards more able to incounter the Romanes in set battell; their manner of Fight, before that time, being onely with bowes and arrowes on horseback, with∣out compleat Armour; having no skill to use Sword, or Lance; but clad with thinne loose Gar∣ments, they shot their Arrowes (most part) backewards, flying from their Enemies. But when diverse Romane Souldiers, and (among them) many Armou∣rers, which fled thither, had set set up their Rests there; the Barbarians learned not onely to use Armes, but also to make them. Severus having setled the Af∣faires of the Orient to his owne contentment, had a strong desire to invade the Dominions of the
Atrenian and Parthian Kings, who were both Nigers Confe∣derates. But deserriug that till another time, he cast about, how he might now establish the Ro∣mane Empire on himselfe and his Sonnes. For Niger being ta∣ken away, the only Rub that re∣mayned was Albinus, whom he held to be altogether unprofita∣ble for his Purpose, and incom∣patible to his designes. Besides, the Report was, that his Caesa∣rian Title had so puft up his spi∣rits, that he beganne to fare like an Emperour; and that many of the chiefe Peeres of the Se∣nate had secretly writ to him to hasten to Rome, while Severus was absent, & elswhere ingaged. And indeed all the Nobles were most devoted to Albinus; who was very honorably descended; and reputed to bee of a sweet and
generous Disposition. Of all which passages Severus having got intelligence, resolved not in∣stantly to make open warre a∣gainst him; or proclame him his enemy (there being no just cause or colour for it) but to trie if he could make him away by trea∣cherie. Wherefore hee dispat∣chesSeverus plots against Albinus. to him diverse trusty per∣sons, which (as Poasts) used to carry the Emperors Letters and Missives, giving them in charge, that after they had publikely de∣livered the Packets, they should desire him to understand some further secrets in private; and whē he was apart from his guard suddenly to fall upon him, & kill him. Moreover, he delivered to them divers sorts of poysons, to bee minstred to him by some of his Carvers or Cup bearers, if they could perswade them. But
Albinus his friends mistrusting Severus, gave him many caveats to beware him as a fraudulent and insidious person: For his fame was fouly blasted by his ill dealing with Nigers Captains; whom having under wrought by their Children (as wee for∣merly shewed) to betray Nigers Affaires, when he had made use of their Service, and attayned his owne ends, hee slew both them and their Children. By these Actions of his, they ma∣nifested to him his dangerous disposition. Albinus thereupon doubled his Guards, and admit∣ted not to his presence any mes∣senger from Severus, till he had laid by his military Fauchi, and was also searcht, lest he had any other Weapon in his bosome. And now were Severus his poasts arrived at Albinus In Britain Court, where
delivering their Letters openly, they besought him to step aside, to heare some speciall Secrets. Albinus suspecting them, com∣mands them to be apprehended. Then, secretly torturing them, he learnt out all their treachery, and put them to death; and made preparation against Severus, as a professed Enemie. Which Se∣verus understanding, being of a violent spirit and irefull nature, he no longer concealed his En∣mity, but assembling all his Ar∣my, spake thus. Severus his Speech against Albinus. LEt none, reflecting on my former Actions, tax me of Levity, Trea∣cherie, or Ingratitude, towards my reputed friend. I could doe no more than associat him (by a firme League) in the Imperiall Government: which some man would hardly doe to his own
brother. Yea, I communicated to him that, which you conferred on me alone. But Albinus unworthily requites these extraordinary Favours which I have heaped upon him. For he is now up in Armes against Ʋs, contemning your valour; and not regarding his League with me. For he seekes with insatia∣ble Desire, to ingrosse, that with his owne perill, which hee securely injoyed by a peacefull Participation. Nei∣ther doth he revere the Gods by whom hee hath so oft sworne; nor respects he your travells, which with so great glo∣ry and courage you have undertaken for Vs both. For the fruits of your hap∣py successe extended likewise to him. Yea, had he continued faithfull to us, we had done him greater honour, than was yet imparted to him. Now as to doe ill  Offices, is an act of Injustice; So, not to redresse a Wrong, is  un∣manly. In our Wars against Niger, our Quarrell was not so just, as necessary. For he sought not to imbrace the Im∣periall dignity invested in our person; but the Empire lying then at stake, and being yet litigious, both of Vs with
equall Ambition, fairely wrestled for it. But Albinus violating Leagues and Oaths; makes choice rather to bee an Enemy than a Friend, and to wage Warre rather than continue in amity; being advanced by our meere bounty to that eminent Title of Caesar im∣plyed He apparanc. Honor, which anciently appertayned to the sacred Branches of the Imperiall Stemme. Wherefore as wee have formerly en∣nobled him with great and glorious Advancements: So now wee hold it meet, to chastise his ignoble Treache∣ry by force of Armes. As for his poore Army of Britaines. Ilanders; it is impossible it should resist your Puissance. For since you alone, by your owne Valour and admirable Prowesse, have wonne so many Battells, and conquered all the Orient: who can doubt but that now by accesse of so many gallant men at Armes (for here are almost all the Roman Forces) you shall easily rout a small Number, led by One that hath neither Wit nor Courage? For who knowes not his Voluptuary life, fitter for a Swine than a Souldi∣er? Let us therefore  bravely ad∣vance
against him, with our wonted alacrity and magnanimity: having the Gods for our Guides, whom hee hath dishonoured with Perjuries; and calling to mind the many Trophies wee have erected, which hee so highly scornes. Severus having thus sayd, the whole Army proclamed Al∣binus Traytor, but making full Demonstration of their loyall zeale to him, by their Acclama∣tions; they mightily incouraged him, and made him wondrous confident. Whereupon rewar∣ding them with magnificent do∣natives, he tooke his Iourney a∣gainst Albinus. Withall he sent certaine Troops to invest Byzan∣tium,Bzantium invested. which was yet held by Nigers Souldiers that fled thi∣ther. Which Citie was after∣ward taken by Famine, and ra∣zed to the Ground; insomuch
that the Theaters, Therms, and all the splendor and glory there∣of being quite defaced, it was reduced to a meane The Fate of Roch: now, S. Ma∣ry Village. Village, and given in vassalage to the Pe∣rinthians, as Antioch in like sort to the Laodiceans. Further, hee consigned great summes of money for the reedifying of the Cities spoyled by Nigers Souldiers. And now marching without any Severus wawod was Labo∣remus Intermission, or regard to holi-dayes, or worke∣dayes, heat or cold (all being a∣like to him) he would oft in thatHis Winter∣mh. stormy season, goe bare-headed on the tops of Mountaines, when it sharply snowed; to excite his Souldiers to Patience and Ala∣crity, by his owne Example; so that they cheerefully indured all difficulties, not so much for feare of law, as in a generous emulati∣on of their royall Chiefe. He
sent also a strong Army to seize the Alpine Straits, and to fore∣lay the passages into Italy. Albinus, who (this while) pur∣sud his pleasures, and was su∣pinely negligent, when he heard that Severus was marching with such expedition; being startled with the horrour of the newes, presently sailes out of Britaine,Albinus  out o . and disbarkes his Armie in the opposite Coasts of Gallia; where he lend, his Mandates to all Go∣vernors of the adjacent Provin∣ces, to furnish him with Money and Victualls. They which did so, dealt very unadvisedly, for they were plagued for it, when the Warre was ended; but they that refused (rather by good hap than fore sight, saved themselves: the Event and  Fortune of the Warre determining who were the wiser.
Severus Forces being entred Gallia, there were first certaine light Skirmishes in divers parts; but at last, they fought a pitchtBattell be∣tixt Seve∣rus and Al∣binus. Field, neere the great and rich City Lugdunum; where Albinus immuring himselfe, sent foorth his Armie to fight. The En∣counter was exceeding fierce; and doubtful it was a great while which way the Victory wouldBritains Elogie. incline; For the BRITAINES were no whit inferior to the Il∣lyrians in  Manhood, or Mar∣tiall fury. Both Armies fighting with equall bravery, it was hard to say, which would get the bet∣ter. Divers Historians (of that Time) which more regarded ve∣rity than partiality, report that Albinus his Army was  farre superiour in that Part, which was incountred by Severus in Person, with his Battalion;
insomuch, that Himselfe was putThe Bri∣taines beat the bravest Martialist of the world. to flight, and beaten off his Horse, yea forced to throw off his Imperiall Cloake, and hide Himselfe. While the Britaines follow the Chase, chanting out their Hymnes sng to Mars before Battell, to Apollo after Victory. Paeans, as Victors; Laetus one of Severus Commanders, suddenly charges them with fierce & fresh troops. Hee was harshly censured, as if hee purposely kept aloofe, and reserved that choice Regiment to get the Empire to himselfe: intending then to take the Field, when he heard Severus was slain. Which suggestion was fortified by the event. For when Severus had setled all things to his owne minde, and secured his estate, he richly rewarded all his other Chieftaines; but remembring how Laetus had served him, hee put him to death, as he deserved. These things were done after∣wards.
Now when Laetus ame in view (as aoresaid) with a new supply; the Severians took heart againe, and remounting Severus on Horsebacke, put on his Pur∣ple A milita∣ry Mantle. Surcoat. The Albinians, that (presuming they were Ma∣sters of the Field) had So the dis-ranking of the En∣glish lost all to the ∣mans. disban∣ded themselves; being sudden∣ly and furiously charged by fresh Companies; after a short resi∣stance, fled; the Severians fol∣lowing the execution to the Ci∣ty gates. The Number of the slaine, and captives, on either side, is differently related by the Writers of that Age. The City Lyons in France. Lugdunum was sackt and burnt by the Severians; who having took Albinus, struck off his head,Albinus be∣headed. and presented it to Severus. Thus raised he two most state∣ly* Monu∣ments of Victory usuall in those prts. Trophies; One, in the East; and Another, in the North; so
that Nothing is comparable to Severus conflicts, or conquests, either for multitude of Forces, commotion of Countries, num∣ber of Battells, length of Iour∣neyes, or speede in Marches. I confesse, Caesars Acts against Pompey (the Souldiers being Ro∣mans on either side) were very great; as also that of AugustusSeverus the greatest Conqueror of the World. against Antony and Pompey's Sonnes; and likewise the Ex∣ployts of Sylla and Marius, in the civill and forraigne warres. But for One Man to have the killing of Three Enthronized Empe∣rours; to surprise the Pretorian Troops at Rome by finenesse of Wit; to kill One Emperour in the Pallace Royall; to defeat another, that raigned in the O∣rient, and was elected Empe∣rour by the Romanes; and to vanquish a Third, that was a
Caesar, of great Nobility and Dependencie; you shall hard∣ly finde the like. To this End came Albinus, having injoyed his Fatall Dignity but a short time. And now was Severus full charged with wrath and indig∣nation against Albinus Friends at Rome; whither he sent his head, commanding it to be publickly affixt on the Gallowes. And in the Letters which he writ to the People of his Victories, he ad∣ded this Post-script; that He there sent them his Head, strictly char∣ging, that it bee publickly set on the Gibbet, to the end, they might per∣ceive by that Token of his Wrath, how highly hee was offended with them. Having Ordered the State of Britaine, and divided the govern∣ment of the Province into two
President-ships; and havingTwo Vice∣royes in Britaine. likewise composed the Gallicke Affaires to his owne minde, and slaine all Albinus Friends and Partners, whether voluntary or forced; he set forward towards Rome; leading all his Army thi∣ther, to strike the greater ter∣rour. His Iourney being ended, with extraordinary speed (as his manner was) and being full of fury against Albinus Friends that survived, hee enters Rome. The Commons met him with Lau∣rells, and received him with all honour and joyful acclamation. The Senatours also congratula∣ted him, though many of them were extreamly afrayd that hee would not pardon them; being so apt by reason of his Na∣turall Immanity, to oppresse Men on the least Occasion; and having now so probable
pretences to question them. Severus having visited Iupiters Temple, and performed other  Sacred Rites, went to his Roy∣all Palace, and in honour of his Victories, bestowed great store of Corne on the Citizens, and much Coyne on his Soulders, to whom he granted many Pri∣viledges which formerly they had not. For hee first augmen∣ted their proportion of Wheat, and permitted them to weare Gold Rings, and cohabit with their Wives; all which were reputed utterly dissonant from Military austerity, and Martiall dispositions. But he was the first that altered their strong and manly Diet, and subverted all Order, Discipline, and Obedi∣ence to Governours; by tea∣ching them to hunt after Mo∣ney, and using them to delicate
Fare. Having made these Ordi∣nances (after his owne fancie) he entred the Or, Par∣liament∣house. Senat-house, where ascending his Royall Throne, hee made a bitter Invective a∣gainst Albinus Friends, produ∣cing the secret letters of some of them, which hee found in his Cabinets; and objecting to o∣thers, that they had honoured him with the richest Presents; to these, that they had favoured his Eastern Niger. Enemies; to those, that they were Albinus Favou∣rites. Then he put to death allSeverus cru∣elty and co∣vetousnes. the chiefe Peeres of the Senate; and slew without mercie all that were of great Estate and Nobi∣lity in the Provinces: preten∣ding to suppresse his Enemies; but spurred on (indeed) by ex∣treame Avarice; wherein he ex∣ceeded all the Emperours. For, as in Haughtinesse of Spirit,
hardnesse to indure labour, and Skill in Martiall affaires, he was equall to the worthiest: So was hee an unmeasurable Lover of Money; which hee accumula∣ted by cruell Slaughters, upon the least Cause or Colour; ru∣ling his Subjects rather by feare than love. Neverthelesse, hee affected popular Lustre, by fre∣quentHis Popu∣larity. exhibiting most stately Shewes (of all Sorts) where were oft slain an hundred beasts brought from strange countries. Hee distributed also magnificent Donatives to the people, and ordayned a Triumphall Game, or Exercse of Manhood. Agon, sending for Actours and Cham∣pions from all parts. I have seene (in his Time) Shewes of all kindes of Pageants in all the Theaters at once; as also pro∣cessions and vigils (like Ceres my∣steries.)Secular Games. These were then called
Secular Solemnities, because theyV. Alex. ab Alex. Gen. dier. l. 6. c. 19. were celebrated (as they sayd) after the Tearme of three Ages or Generations. What time, Bedles went thorow Rome and Italy, to invite All to come and see those Instituted in honour of Apollo and Diana (the Sunne and Moone) Shewes which they had ne∣ver seene before, nor should ever af∣ter see: Intimating thereby, that the inter-space betwixt the past and present Celebrity, exceeded the longest Age of Men, Having stayd a sufficient time at Rome (where he associated his Sonnes in the Soveraignty, and declared them Emperours) con∣sidering that his former Victo∣ries were over his owne Coun∣trey-men and the Romane Ar∣mies (for which cause he forbore Triumph) he determined to get himselfe honour by a glorious Conquest of the Barbarians. His pretext was, to be revenged
on Barsemius the Atrenian King, for his Confederacie with Ni∣ger. Whereupon he lead his ar∣my into the Orient, and as hee was about to enter Armenia, theSeverus his second Ex∣pedition in∣to the East. King of the Armenians sent him Money, Presents and Hostages; humbly intreating to contract a League of Amitie with him. Severus seeing all things happen to his mind in Armenia, marches against the Atrenians. But Au∣garus King of the Osroens sub∣mitted himselfe to him, and ha∣ving assured his Homage, by delivering his children for pled∣ges, sent to his Ayd a goodly Band of Archers. Severus ha∣ving passed the Region lying betwixt the Rivers and theArchers. Country of the Albenians, made a Rode into Arabia Felix, where growe those odorate Herbes which wee use for Spicerie and
Frankincense. Having destroy∣ed many Cities and villages, and wasted the Countrey, e entred the Land of the Atrenians, andSiege of Atrae. beleaguerd Atrae, a City moun∣ted on the top of an exceeding high Hill, strongly, walled and fortifyed, well manned and full of excellent Archers. Severus army incamping before it, made many furious Assaults, striving with all their strength to master it; to which purpose, they as∣sailed the Walls with all sorts of warlike Engines; pretermit∣ting no kinde of Invasion. But the Atrenians made abrave Re∣sistance, and with Shot and Stones from above, did much hurt to the Severians. They fil∣led also Earthen Vessells with small Fowles and Venomous beasts, which being cast among them, and lighting on their
Faces, and other open parts of their bodies, crawled all over them, and secretly stung and tormented them. Moreover, they were not able to indure the stifling Aire of that extreame hot Clime, which cast them in∣to strange Calentures; so that the most part of the Armie dy∣ed rather by that meanes, than by the Enemie. Whereupon, the Souldiers growing desperate at that luckelesse Siege (where the Romans lost more than they got) Severus discamped, and de∣parted without Effect, lest all his Men should perish: being much grieved that the successe of the Siege was not answerable to his desire. For having beene wont to get the Victory in all incounters, he now reputed him∣self overcome, because he could not overcome. But Fortune
soone after smiled on him, and advanced his Designes; so that hee lost not all his labour, but fared better than hee expected. For his Army being imbarqued was not brought to the Romane Territories (as hee intended) but was hurried by the violent Streame to the Parthian banks; not many dayes journey from Ctsiphon; where was the royallSeverus strange for∣tune. Palace of the King of Parthia, who lived there in peace; estee∣ming Severus warres against the the Atrenians, to concerne him nothing at all. In which securi∣ty he little thought of any Dis∣aster. Severus Host arriving thereSi vis secu∣rus esse, ti∣me securita∣tem. S. Ber∣nard. against their wills, by the vio∣lence of the Current; presently landed, and immediately fell a syoyling & ravaging the Coun∣trey; driving away all the Cat∣tell they met with, for Provisi∣on;
and burning all the Towns (as they went,) Then marcht they to Ctesiphon, where the great King Artabanus was resiant, andKing of Kthia surprised. finding the Barbarians ubprovided, they slew every man they found, pillaged the City, and led captive all the women and chil∣dren. The King, with a few Horsemen, escaped: but they rifled his Treasures, and taking all his Ornaments and Iewells, returned to their Ships. Thus got Severus the victory over the Parthians rather by chance than choice. And now having sped so happily beyond all hope, hee sent Dight with Lau∣rel, as Con∣querors u∣sed. Letters to the Romane Peeres and People, containing a glorious Relation of his Acts; accompanied with painted Ta∣bles, representing all his Battels and Conquests. Hereupon the Senate decreed to him all tri∣umphant
Honours, and the Sir∣names of the Nations hee had vanquished. Severus having composed the Orientall Affaires, took his way towards Rome, bringing with him his Sonnes, who were now big Youths. Having ended his Iourney, ordered the Provinces (as was requisite) and visited the Mysiae, now Servia and Bulga∣ria. Mysian and Pannonian Ar∣mies, he entred the City in Tri∣umph; the Romanes receiving him with great AcclamationsSeverus Triumph. and glorious Ceremonies. Hee againe entertained them with Feasts, Sports, Spectacles, and Pageants; giving them Royall Donatives, and solacing them with Triumphall Shewes. Hee abode many yeares in Rome, where he wholly gave himselfe to Matters of Iudicature, and State-affaires; indeavouring to
traine his Sonnes in all noble Studies and Exercises. But they being well-growne Youths, had their Dispositions corrupted by the Romane Diet and Delices; as also by the excessive frequen∣ting of Stage-playes, Charriot∣sports, and Revells. Moreover,His Sonnes disstions. the Brethren fell at variance, one with the other; their first quar∣rell being about the childish de∣sire of Victory at Quaile-fights, Cock-fights, and the wrestling of boyes. Yea whatsoever they saw or heard in publicke, they were still divided; never affecting the same thing; but what the one applauded, the other scorned, Which Discord was fomented by both their servants and slaite∣rers; who collogued with them for their owne ends, Severus un∣derstanding their differences, as∣saled to recōcile them and reduce
them to better temper. The elder of them (whose  Genuine Name was Bassian, before his Advancement to the Imperiall Family) Severus after his Inau∣guration in the Empire, named Antonine; which was the Sir∣name of Marcus. To him hee gave a wife; hoping that  Mar∣riage would make him a stayd man. Shee was the Daughter of Plautian, Captaine of the Pre∣torian Bads, who was (as they say) but of meane estate in his youth, and proscribed for Sedi∣tion, and other Crimes. Hee was Severus his Countriman (an African borne) and (by report) his Kinsman: and (as some have taxed him) in his younger yeares his Catamite. Him Severus ad∣vanced from very low degree, to great dignity; inriching him ex∣ceedingly with the Goods and
Lands of condemned persons, and almost sh Of Severus  pssg te  Es∣sy of Friendship. pire with him.  Fortunes he abciousnesse; omitti cruly or outrage, to compsse his de∣signes; being more Tyrannical∣ly sterne, than all the Princes that ever were. To his Daugh∣ter did Severus match his Sonne, and unite his House to his. But Antonine taking small joyForced Marriage. in those Nuptialls, whereto hee was forcibly yoaked, without any prae-election of his owne, infinitely hated both the young Lady and her Father; scorning to lodge or cohabite with her; yea, hee so loathed her, that hee daily menaced to kill her and her Father, as soone as hee were sole Emperour. Which when she still told her Father, shewing him how hee abhorred her, hee
mightily stomackt it. Plautian therefore considering that Seve∣rus was now growne old and diseased, and that Antonine was a bold fierce Youth, he feared his Threats, and resolved to doe some Exployt, rather than suf∣fer himselfe to bee made away.Plautian the migti∣st Favou∣rite of the World. Moreover, he had many provo∣catives to aspire to Soveraignty: such excessive wealth, as never a∣ny Subject had the like: Marti∣all men were all at his becke: the whole Romane State highly ho∣noured him: yea his ordinary Garbe made him very gracious with the people; for hee still wore the Senatorian robe, Vid. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. cap. 18. pur∣fled and embrodered with Gol∣den Studds, and was ranked with the prime Nobility. A Sword was borne before him, and hee alone represented the Emperors Person. Hee walked abroad
with such terrible Majestie, that none durst come neere him; and if any met him (by chance) they stept aside: his Gentlemen Vshers making Proclamation, that None should stand in the way, nor looke at him; but turne aside, and looke downewards. When Severus understood this, he dis∣gusted it, and beganne to thinke harshly of him; insomuch that hee clipt the Wings of his Au∣thority; commanding him to leave that insolent Demeanour. Plautian taking this as an intol∣lerable Affront, fell roundly toHis treason surprise the Empire: And this was his Plot: There was one Saturninus that had a Tribunes The com∣mand of 1000 soul∣diers. place under him, and was ex∣ceedingly devoted to Plautian; and though all were intirely his, yet hee by his singular ve∣neration, had wonne his Affe∣ction
more than the rest. Think∣ing him to be a most trusty fel∣low, and the onely Engine for his secret Designes; hee sends for him in the Evening; and all being commanded to voyd the roome, spake thus to him. NOw is the time for you to make a brave Consummation of the love and observance you have professed, and for me likewise to render to you accor∣ding to your Merits, and to make con∣dgne retribution. I put it to your choice, either to be as you see me now, and to succeed mee in this eminent place; or instantly to suffer death for refusing my Command. Let not the greatnesse of the Enterprise affright, nor the Name of Emperours amaze you. When it comes to your turne this Night to relieve the Watch, you may goe alone to the Bed-chamber, and what you are to doe, you may secretly effect without any let. Goe your wayes therefore to the Court (without any more adoe) as if you had some speciall
secret Message from me: and as soone as you come at them, kill them. Bee resolute (Man) you may soon dispatch an Old man, and a Boy. And as you partake the danger; so shall you par∣ticipate the greatest honour, for so gal∣land an Exployt. At this Spech the Tribune was not a little confused; yet recollecting himselfe, and being a notable shrewd pated Fellow (for he was a Syrian borne, and your Easterne Men are general∣ly wise, and of quicke In warme Climates people are generally more wise. sent) he considered, that to reject the mo¦tion of so mighty a Potentate, being in so great rage, were pre∣sent death: wherefore preten∣ding that hee infinitely liked the Businesse, he adored him as Em∣perour, beseeching his Warrant for the Execution: (For it was the manner of Tyrants, when they commanded any to be slain
(without Iudiciall Processe) to signe a Warrant to that purpose, for the Actors discharge.) Plau∣tian, blinded with ambition, de∣livers his Warrant to the Tri∣bune, strictly charging him, that as soone as hee had killed both the Princes, before it were noy∣sed abroad, he should send some to call for him, that hee might seize the Palace and Empire, be∣fore any man dreamt of it. With this charge and commission, the Tribune departs, and as hee was wont, walks the Round through all the Emperours Pallace; and knowing how difficult a thing it were for one man to kill two Princes in severall Lodgings, he intends to disclose all to Severus; and desired the Doore keepers to let him in, for it concerned his Life. They delivering the Message to Severus, hee com∣mands
them to bring him in. Being entred in, hee thus said: Sir, I am come (as hee that sent meeSaturninus detects Plautian. makes full account) to kill you, as your Deaths man; but as my selfe resolve and vowe to bee a Preser∣ver of your Life. Plautian trayte∣rously aspiring to the Empire, hath commanded mee to murther You and your Sonne, not onely by Word, but also by Writing; (Witnesse this Schedule.) And accordingly I undertook to execute his Command, lest, upon my Refusall, some other should have attempted it. This I come to certifie your Majestie, that you may avoyd him. The Tribune having done, fell a weeping. But Severus could not instantly credite it: For Plautian's Love had taken deep root in his heart; and hee suspected it to bee a meere Illusion, and cunning Im∣posture; imagining that his son
[the Prince] out of his hatred to Plautian and his daughter, had devised this stratagem & deadly  slander. wherfore instantly sen∣ding for him, he sharply rebuked him, for plotting such things a∣gainst his deare bosome-friend. Antoninus swore deeply he knew nothing of it. The Tribune producing Plautians Warrant, Antonine incouraged him to de∣tect the Crime. The Tribune perceiving his owne Danger, and well-knowing how gracious Plautian was with the Emperor (so that if now hee made not good his Charge, he should bee put to a cruell death) sayd thus; Sir, what clearer proofe or stronger Evidence can you desire? yet if you will give mee leave to goe out of the Pallace, and send a trusty Mes∣senger to him, to let him know that I have done his Command, hee will
presently believe it, and repaire hi∣ther to seize the Pallace. So may you learne out the Truth. Onely com∣mand all in the Court to be quiet, that there may bee no intelligence given to prevent the Plot. This being a∣greed, he sends a speciall friend to Plautian, to bid him come quickly (now both Princes were slaine) before it were blazed a∣broad; that possessing the  Ca∣stle, and seeling himselfe in the Empire, he might get the Sove∣raignty in despight of all men. Plautian believing the Message, was full of hope, and putting on a Cuirace (for defence) under his Garments (the night being well spent) he poasted in his Caroach to the Court, taking but a few with him, that supposed the Em∣perours had sent for him about extraordinary Affaires. Being ened the Royall pallace, with∣out
any stop (the Corps de guard knowing nothing of the busines) the Tribune meets him, and (of set purpose) salutes him Empe∣rour;Plautian the Traitor betrayed. then taking him by the hand in friendly sort, he leades him to the Chamber, where he said hee had throwne the dead bodies of the Emperours; (Se∣verus having appointed some of his Guard, as soone as hee en∣tred the roome, to lay hands on him.) But Plautian (who little expected such a banquet) per∣ceiving (when he was come in∣to the Chamber) both the Em∣perours standing there, and that hee was taken in the manner, being horribly afraid, fell on his knees, and sought them not to misdeeme him; saying it was a meere Gull and Tricke put upon him. Severus exprobra∣ting his Ingratitude, in rewar∣ding
his many Honours and Fa∣vours in that sort; and Plautian on the other side remembring him of his ancient love and ap∣prooved Fidelity, the Empe∣rour beganne by little and lit∣tle to incline to believe him; till his Cuirace was discerned by the opening of his Garment. Which Antonine espying, being a bold chollericke Youth, and bearing a grudge against him; Sir (quoth he) what colourable answer can you make to these two poynts? First you come to Vs (thus late) unsent for. Next, what is the meaning I pray of this Cuirace? who uses to sup or banquet in Armour? With that hee commands the Tribune, and the rest that were present, to dispatch him with their swords, as an open enemy.Plautian slaine. They (without dilay) did as the
young Emperour bade them, and threw his carcasse into the High-way, to bee the scorne of them that haed him. This end had Plautian, answe∣rable to his exorbitant Life and Insatiate Ambition. Severus henceforth made two Pretorian Prefects, and spent most of his Time in his Royall houses in the Suburbs, or in the Sea-coast of The Re∣gion be∣twixt Rome and Naples. Campania, ministring Severus was a good Law-giver. S. Aur. Vici. de Caesar. Iu∣stice, and attending State-Af∣faires. Hee was also exceeding carefull to have his Sonnes at Rome, bred in honourable fashi∣on. For he perceived they were more addicted to Playes and Games, than was agreeable to their Princely estare. The pur∣suit whereof, and their eager de∣sire to win, being stll accompa∣nyed with different successe, and vehement altercation, distracted
the Brethrens affections, and in∣flamed them with Fire-brands of enmity and discord. But An∣tonine especially (now Plautian was made away) beganne to be intolerable in his behaviour, and formidable to all; using all pos∣sible meanes to destroy his wife, daughter to Plautian. But Seve∣rus sent her away with her bro∣ther into Sicilie, assigning them sufficient Maintenance to live plentifully (imitating Augustus, who dealt in like sort with An∣tonius sonnes, when he became his Enemie.) And now he mainly labouredSeverus In∣struction to his Sonnes. to reconcile his Sons, and reduce them to Vnity and Vnanimity: Remembring them out of old Sto∣ties and Tragedies, of the disasters which befell to Brothers that were Princes, by such Dissentions. Hee shewed them how full of Money the
Treasuries and Temples were, so that they needed not to seeke for Wealth and Riches abroad, that had such abundance at home, whereby they might bountifully reward the Souldiers at their pleasure: That the Romane Guards were quadru∣pled; and so puissant an Army lay before the City, that considering the Number of men at Armes, Huge∣nes of their bodies, and great store of treasure, no forraign power was able to come neere them: And yet all (he said) would come to nought, if they jarr'd & warr'd one with the other. Thus did hee daily schoole them, and by sharpe reprehen∣sions and faire speeches, strove all hee could to bring them to sobriety and temper. But all in vaine. For these unbridled Gal∣lants, being in those first heats of youth, flesht in all kinde of Pleasures (by reason of their
Imperiall State) became worse and worse, and were more at ods than ever, by the practices of their Parasites, who did not only base offices in serving their Lusts, but were also still projecting new Quarrells and Debates be∣twixt them for their own sinister ends. But Severus finding out di∣vers of those bad Instruments, severely punisht them. The Emperour being in great anguish of spirit, by reason of his Childrens unseemly and un∣princely Demeanour, receivedNewes from Bri∣taine. Letters from his Vice-Roy of Britaine, cerifying, that the Bar∣barians there were risen, and had ranged over the Country, pilla∣ging & wasting all before them: that he needed therfore greater Forces to defend theHe means the Provin∣ciated part of Britaine. Place; or rather, that his Imperiall Maje∣stly should come in person.
Severus was glad of this newes as naturally desirous of honour, and ambitious (after his Eastern and Northern Victories and Sir∣names) to make a Conquest of the Britaines. Ioyfull also hee was of so faire an occasion to take his Sonnes from Rome, and weane them from the Diet and Delights of the City, by inuring them to a sober military life. He proclamed therefore his Expe∣ditionSeverus ex∣pedition in∣to Britaine. into Britaine, being now old and gowtie, but of more vi∣gour and alacrity, than any in the flower of youth. In his Iourney, he was carried (for the most part) in a Siegetta: and re∣sted almost in no place. Having ended his Land travells, he im∣barks (with his sonnes) for Bri∣taine; where he arrived sooner than any thought or expected. Presently he commands a gene∣rall
Muster, and raising a great power, prepares for the Warre. The Britaines much troubled at the Emperors sudden Omnia re∣pentina ter∣rent. arrival, and understanding that he meant to bring all those Forces against them, sent Embassadors to crave Peace, and excuse their Faults. But Severus seeking to protract time (lest hee should returne to Rome as he came) and being very eager of the Conquest and Sir∣name of Britaine, dismisses their Embassadors without  dispatch, and provides all warlike Ammu∣nition. And to the end his soul∣diers might stand firme in fight, and bestirre themselves nimbly, and on sure ground; hee gave strict charge to make Causies and Bridges over the Marish land: For the most part of that Region of the Britaines, being surrounded by the Oceans con∣tinuall
Irruption, is Fenny and Moorish. In those Bogges the The Ro∣manes sti∣led all Bar∣barians, but themselves and the Greeks. Barbarians use to swim and run up and downe, plunging them∣selves to the middle; for being halfe-naked, they care not for Mire or Mud. They use not Vestures, but weare about theirDescription of Picts or Scots, a branch of the Britans. wasts and neckes an Ornament of Iron, which they esteeme a rare accoutrement, and rich abi∣liment (as other Barbarians doe Gold.) They pownce and paint their bodies with curious pi∣ctures, and the shapes of all sorts of Creatures; in which regard, they are not clad all over, lestTheir Elo∣gie. they should hide that brave Em∣broderie. They are a most Marti∣all  people, and very furious in fight: wherein they use onely aSword and Pike the King and Queene of Weapons. narrow Shield, a Pike, and a Sword hanging at their naked sides. As for Cuirace or Caske,
they use none at all; deeming they would but hinder them in traversing the pools and fennes; out of which the foggy vapours continually arising, make the sky in that Coast alwaies cloudy. Severus hauing all things in readinesse that he desired, which might further the Romanes, or hinder & annoy the Barbarians, left his younger son Geta in that Viz. at York part of the Ile, which was un∣der the Romane obedience, to minister Iustice, and governe the State; appoynting (for his Assistance) his most ancient Friends and Counsellours; but tooke Antonine with him to the Warre against the Barbarians. The Armie (having past those rivers and Rampiers which dis∣terminate the Frontiers of the Romanes from the Barbarians) made certaine petty Skirmishes
and Excursions, wherein they had still the better. But the ene∣mies retreated at their pleasure into their Fastnesses among the Woods and Fennes (so familiar to them;) wherein they hid themselves; which being no small Severus lost fifty thousand in that Ser∣vice. Dio. detriment to the Romans, did spinne the Warre to a great length. Meanewhile Severus, be∣ing now very aged, fell into a languishing Disease, which for∣ced him to keep home, and send Antonine to prosecute the warre. But hee little regarding the Bar∣barians, bended all his indea∣vours to win the Souldiers, per∣swading them to make him their Chief. For he vehemently aspi∣red to sole Soveraign; to which purpose, hee still depraved and disvalued his brother. Hee was also much vext that his Fathers Disease was so lingring, and had
not made an end of him; wher∣fore he sollicited his Physicians and Attendants to dispatch the old man, and mischiefe him (by any meanes whatsoever.) At last Severus departed this life, being consumed and pined a∣way, rather Severus dies for griefe. with Heart-griefe, than any other malady; having beene the most famous Warrier of all the Emperours. For none ever got so many Victories over Civill and Forraigne Enemies. He deceased At Yorke, April. 4. An. Dom. 212. in the eighteenth yeare of his Raigne, leaving to his young sonnes which succee∣ded him, such a Masse of Trea∣sure, as never any did; and so puissant an Armie, as was un∣matchable. Antonine (after Severus death)Antonines Cruelty. being now in supreme authori∣ty, instantly beganne to bathe himselfe in bloud: putting to
death the Physicians for not ha∣stening the old Emperors death (as he commanded) & killing his own & brothers foster▪ fathers, because they had mediated an Accord between them: not spa∣ring any that either honoured his Father, or was honoured by him. He sollicited also the chief Captaines and Commanders (with large gifts and promises) to perswade the Souldiers to proclame him sole Emperour: using all possible Traines and Mines against his brother. But the Souldiers would in no wise yield to it; for they well knew, that Severus had from their In∣fancie trained them in the same degree of honour; and there∣fore they were resolved to love and honour both alike. Antonine seeing hee could not prevaile with the Armie, made a League
with the Barbarians; to whom having given peace, and recei∣ved their Pledges, hee depar∣ted in all haste to his Mother and Brother. Being come to∣gether, their Mother [the Em∣presse] and all the great Lords and Counsellours of State assai∣ed to make them friends: where∣upon Antonine, when he saw that all opposed his Designes, of constraint rather than willingly, yielded to a dissembled attone∣ment. Then both the Brothers, ruling with equall Authority, sailed out of Britaine, and tooke their Iourney to Rome; carry∣ing with them their Fathers Re∣liques.Severus his Rliques. For his body being bur∣ned, the Ashes (mixt with sweet Odours) were bestowed in an Vrne of Alablaster, which they tooke to Rome, to place it in the  sacred Sepulchers of the Em∣perours.
They lead the Army (as Conquerors of Britaine) andAntonine and Geta saile out of Britaine. landed in Gallia. Thus have we shewed in this Booke, the man∣ner of Severus Raign and Death, and how his Sonnes suc∣ceeded him in the Empire. The End of the third Booke.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The fourth Booke. The Contents. THe two Emperours enter Rome in State. What Romane Empe∣rours Deifyed. Their solemne Obse∣quie and Funerall Triumph: Seve∣rus Deified: Wrestling: The Par∣tition of the Empire: The Empresse Dowager hinders it: Antonine kills Geta: His Prodigality and savage Cruelty: His guilty Conscience: His Exercises and Military Austeri∣ty: He acts Alexander and Achilles: Hee is royally entertained at Alexan∣dria: He offers at Alexanders Shrine: His Quarrell to the Alexandrians. A fear full Massacre: He pretends to bee a Suiter to the King of Parthia's
Daughter; under which colour, hee massacres the Parthians: He consults with Magicians, and commands them to conjure: Hee is slaine: Macrinus succeeds: His Speech: A terrible bat∣tell betwixt the Romans & Parthians: Heralds make a sudden League be∣twixt them. THe Acts of Severus the Emperour during the Eighteene yeares of his Reigne, we have related in the precedent booke. His Sonnes, who were yetThe two Emperors take their Iourney to Rome. young, hastned with their Mo∣ther towards Rome: but by the way, they fell to such Iarres, as that they neither lodged in the same house, nor eate together; being extreme jealous, lest they received poyson one from the other, in their Meats or Drinks; either secretly from themselves, or otherwise, by suborning their Servants. They made therefore
the more haste in their Iourney, as supposing they might both live more securely at Rome; and that the Imperiall Palace (whichThe Mag∣nificent Pallace of the Em∣perours. for Numerous and Gorgious Edifices, was larger than all the Citty) being disparted betwixt them; there would be roome enough for each of them to have his severall Court, and live as pleased himselfe. Being come to Rome, the peo∣pleThey enter Rome in State. received them with Laurels, and the Peeres welcomed them. The Emperors themselves went formost; vested in Purple Robes of State. Next after them fol∣lowed the Consuls, which sup∣ported the Vrne, wherein were Severus Reliques. The Nobles having saluted the new Empe∣rours, passed along, and adored the Vrne: which having honou∣red with great Pompe and Ce∣remony, they shrined it in the
Temple, where the Sacred Mo∣numents of Marcus, and the Em∣perours (before him) are to be seene. After the Divine Rites and Offices were celebrated, (as is accustomed at Imperiall Inau∣gurations) the Princes went to the Palace Royall; which divi∣ding betwixt them, they dwelt apart, making fast all the secret passages; and using onely in common, the publicke Court∣gates. They chose also severall Guards, and came not together, but for some small while, when they were to shew themselves to the people. Yet had they speciall care toSeverus Fu∣nerall. solemnize their Fathers Fune∣rall with Glorious Ceremonies. For it is the manner of the Ro∣manes to Deifie those Empe∣rours, which at their Decease leave their Sonnes to succeede them. This Solemnity they call,
placing of thē among the gods. Over all the city there is a sem∣blanceThe Ritual magnifi∣cence at the Funeralls and Deifi∣cations of Emperors. of Mourning intermixt with that Divine Celebrity. For the dead corps is with sumptuous Exequies, buried as others usual∣ly are. Then in the Porch of the Palace, is erected on high, a state∣ly bed of Ivory, spred with cove∣rings of cloth of Gold; wheron is laid an Image of Waxe, made very like to the Defunct. This I∣mage lies like a sicke person, pale & discoloured. On both sides of the bed, there sit most part of the day, on the left hand, all the most Honourable Lords, in black Ve∣stures; on the right hand, all the Ladies of Honour ennobled by the Splendor of their Parents & husbands. None of which are a∣dorned with gold or Iewels, but are vested in thinne white Ray∣ment, after the guize of Mour∣ners. This they doe seaven daies
together Meane-while, Physici∣ans come often to the bed, as if they visited a Patient, saying stil, that he growes worse and worse. When he seems to be departed, the most noble young Gallants, among all the Senators, &  Or∣der of Knight-hood, lift up the bed on their shoulders, and carry it through the Via sacra: It reached from the Pallace to the Forum, which was the chiefe Place of publicke Meetings & Pleadings. Sacred Street, to the old Forum; (where the Ro∣mane Magistrates use to resigne their Offices.) On both sides are Scaffolds erected: On the one part, is a Quire of Boyes of most noble birth and descent: oppo∣site to them is a Quire of Ladies of prime Nobilitie: all which sing Hymnes and Or Paeans Lauds over the defunct, with solemn mourn∣full Melody. Which done, they take up the bed againe, and carryCamus Martius. it out of the City, to Mars his field; in the broadest place wher∣of is erected a Frame, of a Qua∣drangled
Aequilaterall Forme, made like a little  House, consi∣sting of no other Materials, butThe Fune∣rall Pile, or Deificatory Throne. huge pieces of Timber compact together. Within, it is filled with dry wood: without, it is decked with Tapestry embrodered with Gold; with Ivory Statuaes, and Exquisite Pictures. In the lower part, is placed a lesser Structure, framed and beautified like the o∣ther, with little gates and doores set open. There is also a third, and fourth roome; still lesser, and les∣ser: and then, divers other; till you come to the last, which is least of all. Which kinde of Edi∣fice, may bee resembled to theBy these Arabian Spices and Odours, & there seems to be in this supreme So∣lemnity, an Allusion to the Phoenix, &c.  Light-Houses, which by fire in the night, direct ships to a safe Harbor (vulgarly called Pharos.) The bed being brought into the second roome, they throw in (by heapes) all sorts of Spices, and sweet Odours, that the earth af∣foords,
and all kinde of fragrant and odoate Fruits, Herbes, and Gums: for there is not a . ( hich sene the Authour u∣ses it per to∣tum.) Pro∣vince, or City, or any Person of Honor and Authoritie, which is not ambitious to send these last Presents, to the Honour of their Prince. When a mighty Pile of Aromatickes is amassed toge∣ther, so that all the place is full; then, all of the Order of Knight∣hood,The Fune∣rall Dance or Triumph gallantly mounted on horseback, ride round about the Frame; wheeling to and fro, and prancing in great bravery the Dancing in Armour inveed by . rrus. Pin Hst. lib. 7. . 56. Pyrrhick Measures. In the same stately manner, there ride about the Frame, Purple Chariottiers, representing the Persons, & bea∣ring the Images of the Noblest Roman Worthies & Emperors. Which Celebrity performed, the Successor in the Empire takes a Torch in his hand, and puts it to the Frame, Then, all the ∣titude
set fire to it on every side, and presently the whole Frame, filled with such combustible and odoriferous stuff, is al on a bright blaze. Immediatly, from the top of the least and highest Turret (as from a Pinnacle) an Eagle is letAn Eagle let flie. flie into the Ayre, at the instant of the firing; which (as the Ro∣mans believe) carries the Empe∣rors soule from earth to heaven. And ever after, they worship him among the other Gods. The young Emperours, afterSeverus De∣ifyed. the solemne Deification of their Father, returning home, the flames of discord burst out a∣gaine; which growing to a dead∣ly Feud, they plotted all manner of wayes to surprize and entrap one another, each attempting all possible meanes to make away the other, that he might be sole Emperor. Yea the minds and af∣fections of all the Cittizens of
greatest Power and Dependen∣cies were infinitly distracted, both the Emperours sending (in secret) their different Letters, and seeking to win and wedge men to their severall factions, by faire promises. But the maior part in∣clined to Geta, because he shew∣edThe Cha∣racter of Geta and Antonine. some sparks of Noble Hone∣sty, and was mild and affable in Conversation, and used Honou∣rable Studies. For he had still a∣bout him Learned men, and was frequent at Wrestling, and otherWrestling a Princely Sport. ingenious Exercises. He was also full of Humanitie and Courtesie towards all▪ & of so gracefull & Princely behavior, that the fame and good opinion of him drew most mens affections to him. But Antonine bore himselfe in a harsh and rugged fashion; and being altogether averse frō the things before recited, affected the repu∣tation of a Martialist & Man of
Warre. Whereupon, doing all things in Choller and Fury, hee sought rather to winne men by Threatning than Intreating, and by Feare than Love. Their mo∣ther seeing them so discordant in all their Actions (even of least Consequence) assayed to recon∣cile them, but in vaine. Wherup∣on, they (once) resolved to shareThe Em∣pire divided the Empire betwixt them, least residing still at Rome, they should be circumvented by each other. Wherefore having assembled their Fathers Kinsmen & Coun∣cellors of State, they debated (in their Mothers presence) how to make the Partition: Where all Europe was adjudged to Antonine, and all the opposite coast called Asia, was assigned to Geta: (for so hath it pleased the Divine Pro∣vidence to disterminate both Continents by theOf this Vid. Strab. lib. 2. and the Travels of that no∣ble learned Gentleman M. George Sandys, pag. 27.—quem pulcher A∣pollo, Omnes per montes, at{que} antra per omnia auxit Propontick Gulfe.) It was also, agreed that
Antonines Campe should lye at Byzantium: and Getaes at Chalce∣don, a City in Bithynia: that the Armies facing each other (in those Frontire Townes) might guard the Dominions of both, and forbid the Passage by Sea: [Chalcedon being situate over a∣gainst Byzantium, in the mouth of Pontus Euxinus.] It was like∣wise ordered, that the Senators and Nobles which were Europae∣ans, should reside at Rome; the rest should follow Geta; who desti∣ned Antioch or Alexandria (which were not much lesse than Rome) for the chief seat of his Empire; & was content to leave to Anto∣nine the Provinciated Moors and Numidians of the South (with the bordering nations of Africk) taking to himselfe the Countries (beyond) towards the Orient. While they were thus parting the Empire  by the Map, all the
Lords being much grieved at it, their Mother Iulia thus interrup∣ted them; O my Sonnes, you haveThe Em∣presses Speech to her Sonnes. found the way to divide Sea and Land; and the Ponticke Gulfe (as you say) parts both Continents: But how will you divide your Mother? How shall I (Wretched Woman!) be torne & mangled betwixt you? First therfore kill me outright, and divide me (each of you taking his part) that I also (with Sea and Land) may bee divided betweene you. Having thus said, with many teares, she caught hold of them both (with a loud shrieke) and clasping them in her Armes, with great violence of affection, endeavoured to recon∣cile them. Which piteous sight strucke such a horrour into all; that the  Counsell was dismist, the Proposition quite dasht, and the Princes returned to their se∣verall Palaces. Yet was there no hope of Reconcilement, but still
their irrelenting Fury increased. At the Elections of Vice-Royes and Presidents, each preferred his Friend; and when they sate in Iudgement, they were of diffe∣rent Opinions; to the infinite losse of those which had Causes to be heard; for they more regar∣ded Partiallity, than Iustice or Equitie. Yea, at Sports & Games they were still of contrary sides. Neither did they forbeare any sort of Treachery; but dealt eft∣soons with their severall Cooks and Cup-bearers, to poison each other. Which not taking effect, because of the ordinary care and caution of both at their Table; at last Antonine having lost all pa∣tience, and resolved to raigne a∣lone, intends to murther his bro∣ther. For seeing his secret plots succeeded not, he determined in despight of all danger, to breake through all difficulties. Where∣fore
rushing into his bro∣thers Chamber (who thought not of him) hee slew him in hisAntonine kills Get mothers armes, who was all em∣brewed with his bloud. Which done, he leaps forth, and running through all the Court, cries out, he had like to have beene mur∣thered, and hardly escaped. Then he commands his Gaurd to con∣vey him presently into the camp to save his life; saying, he should instantly be slaine, if he stayed there. They beleeving what hee said, and not knowing what was don within, ran along with him. The City was extremely terri∣fiedHe fles to the Campe. at the Emperours running thorow the City in the evening. As soone as he got to the Camp, he went to the Chappell, where the Ensignes and Images of the army are kept with religious ve∣neration, and falling flat on the earth, thanked the Gods for his
great deliverance. Which when the Souldiers heard (that were then either bathing, or gone to their Rest) they all flockt thither in amazement. Antonine going a∣mong them, confest not present∣ly what he had done, but cryed out amaine, that he had escaped a dangerous plot of his Capitall Enemie (meaning his Brother) and that with much adoe, after a long Conflict, his Adversaries were overcome: in which fight, both being ingaged, himselfe at last (thanks to his good Fortune) remained sole Emperour: By which darke and intortled Spee∣ches, he meant they should rather ghesse at what was done, than di∣rectly understand him. Then (to secure himselfe and the Empire) he promised to every Souldier, two 80. li. (aut praeter-prop∣ter.) thousand five hundred At∣tique Drachmaes, and double theHis Prodi∣gality. Wheat they were wont to have:
bidding them go themselves im∣mediatly and take the Mony out of the Temples and Treasuries. Thus did he in one day squan∣der away all the Coyne that Se∣verus had raked out of others ruines, in eighteene yeares. The Souldiers allured with such a Masse of money, and understan∣ding how the world went, (the murther being now divulged by them that fled out of the Court) Proclaimed him sole Emperor, (terming Geta a traitor.) Antonine stayed that night in the Tem∣ple, and taking heart (as having by these Donatives assured the Souldiers) he repaired (the next day) to the Senate-house, with all his Army, which was better ar∣med than in the usuall Atten∣dance on the Prince. Having sa∣crificed, he mounted the Impe∣riall Throne, and thus spake:
Antonine's Speech to the Senate. I Am not ignorant how odious and subject to calumnie the Murther of Domestickes is at the first Bruit: for Men are apt to pitty them that suffer, and to maligne the Actors: so that he which is vanquished may bee thought to be wronged, and the Victor to have done the wrong. But if Men looke into the Matter with cleere judge∣ments, not clouded with favour to the defunct, but rightly weighing his cause and ballancing his purpose, they will soone discern that it is farre more rea∣sonable and necessary to revenge, than receive an Injurie: (the Party slaine being (withall) so egregious a coward, and the Victor so bravely valorous, as appeares by the Event.) What peril∣lous Plots hee had on fot against me, both by Poysons, and all sorts of trea∣cherous practices, you may soone finde by the torture of his Servants, whom I have therefore commanded to bee brought hither, that you may know the truth. Divers of them have beene
examined already; whose Confessions you may heare. The truth is, I being with my Mother, he and others rusht in upon me, with drawne swords: but I shrewdly suspecting it (my mind mis∣giving me) prevented it, and slew him as a Traitonr: for certes hee had not the affection or disposition of a brother: Now as it is an act of Iustice to bee revenged on such dangerous persons, so are there good Precedents for it. Romulus, the first Founder of this Ci∣ty, would not indure his owne brother, Vid. Liv. & Aurel. Victor. de Orig. Gent. Ro. that did but jest at his endeavours. I omit Germanicus, brother to Nero; and Titus, brother to Domitian. Mar∣cus himselfe, that made such afaire Flourish of Philosophy and Humani∣ty, would not suffer the affront of There was a Re∣port that Marcus Au∣relius poy∣soned him, but (as Au∣relius Victor saith) none but lewd persons be∣lieved it. Lu∣cius, his Sonne in law; but secretly dispatcht him. And so have I antici∣pated (by a just Vindication) the Poy∣sons and Sword of an Enemy: (for so his Deeds stile him.) You are ther∣fore to thanke the Gods, that have re∣served you such a Prince, under whose sole Regiment you may now live qui∣etly and securely, without Distracti∣ons: For as Iupiter is the onely Em∣perour
among the Gods, so hath hee decreed that there shall bee but one Emperour among Men. Having thus said with a loud Voice (in great rage) and castingHis Savage Cruelty. a terrible frowne on his brothers friends, he leaves the Senatours (most whereof lookt pale and trembled) and hurries to the Pal∣lace: where he instantly slew all his brothers servants & friends, not sparing any Officers that were found in the House, nor a∣ny other, no not very Infants: All whose Carkasses being de∣spightfully throwne into Carts, and carryed out of the City, were cast by heaps (at randome) into the They had not the ho∣nour of a decent Fu∣nerall. fire. Hee spared none that had the least acquaintance with Geta; but put to the sword, even Wrestlers, Charriot-dri∣vers, and all kinde of Players and Actors, that had any way delighted him, by seeing or hea∣ring
them. He slew also the most eminent and opulent Senatours, upon the least suipicion or sug∣gestion, that they were friends to his brother. He put to death Commodus his Sister (who was then an old woman, and had bin much honoured of all the Em∣perours, because she was Marcus his Daughter;) imputing it as a crime, that shee wept with his Mother at her Sonnes Murther. Nor did hee forget his quondam Wife (Plautians Daughter) that lived in Sicily; nor his Couzen∣german, named Sevecus; nor Per∣tinaxes Sonne; nor the Sonne of Lucilla (Sister to Commodus) but cut them all off, together with all the Imperiall Kindred, and the flower of the Nobility and Gentrie. Then sent he into the Provinces, and massacred all the Presidents and Procurators, as Geta's Favourites. Yea, whole
Nights were spent in such Tra∣gicall executions of all sorts of people. Hee buryed the Vestall Virgins quicke, pretending they had lost their Virginity. Lastly (which was never done before) when at the Circensian Instituted in honour of Neptune. Vid. Al. ab Alex. Gen. Die. lib. 6. cap. 19. Sports (where himself was a spectator) the people cast some scoffe at a Charriotier which he favoured, he taking it as an affront to him∣selfe, suddenly commanded his Men at armes to rush among the Multitude, and kill all that had scorned the Charriot-driver. Upon this Command, it being impossible to find out the Delin∣quents, in so great a throng (no man confessing himselfe guilty) the Souldiers spared none that they light upon, but either slew them, or tooke away that they had in lieu of Ransome. After all which hainous Acts, his con∣scienceHis guilty Conscience recoyling, and shrewdly
stinging him, he was weary of the City life, and resolved to leave Rome, upon colour to re∣forme the Legions, and visit the Provinces. Departing therfore from Italy, he came to the banks of Ister, and the Northern parts of the Empire; where he exer∣cisedHis Exerci∣ses. himselfe in Coach-races and combating with all kind of Wilde-beasts. Sometime he sat in judgement (though very sel∣dome) where, after a few words on either side, he presently gave Sentence. He much affected the Germanes, and made them hisHis affecti∣on to the Germanes▪ Confederates and Associates in warre; choosing from among them, the most valiant and per∣sonable, to bee of his Guard. Yea, he oft laid aside his Roman habit, and put on Germane at∣tire, going abroad in their Cas∣sockes trimmed with Silver; and wearing a yellow Periwig, lke
the Germane bush. Which af∣fected Garbe infinitely indeared him to the Barbarians. And the Roman Army was well pleased, by reason of his profuse Dona∣tives, and because he descended to the performance of all Mili∣taryHis Milita∣ry Austerity labours in his owne person; for hee would first dig (when neede required) and if a bridge were to bee made over a River, or a Rampire to be cast, or any Manuary worke or toyle to bee undertaken, he would be the first that should put his hand to it; contenting himselfe with a spare Diet, wooden cups and platters, and any bread whatsoever: for his manner was, to take so much wheat as would suffise one man, which he grinded himselfe, and then kneading it into Cakes, and baking it on the Embers, eat it. Briefe, hee left off all manner of Iunkets and delicates, faring no
otherwise than the poorest com∣mon souldier. Moreover, it plea∣sed him better (as he pretended) to bee called Fellow-souldier, than Emperour; accustoming himselfe to travel on foot (as the rest did) and rarely using Horse or Caroach; carrying also his owne Armes, and many times, the Great Imperiall Standard; which being marveilous weigh∣ty, by reason of the rich and Massie Gold-worke, was not ea∣sily borne by the strongest An∣cient-bearer. For these and the like observances, the army loved him as a good Souldier, and ho∣noured him as a brave Com∣mander. And indeede it was a wonder, that so small a timberd man, was able to do so great mat∣ters. But when he had visited the Legions upon the banks of Iser, and went downe into Thrace, which borders on Macedonia, he
then began to play Alexander;He acts A∣lexander. reviving that Kings Memory, by all meanes possible, causing his Statues and Images to be erected in every City, and filling Rome it selfe, the Capitoll, and all the Temples with them. I have seen also divers ridiculous Images, which had one entire Body, and one Head, which had two halfe∣faces, to wit, Alexanders and An∣tonines. His ordinary Weare, was the Macedonian Habit, a  Tur∣ban on his head, and Pantofles on his feet. He had a select troop of young Souldiers, which hee stiled the Macedonian Phalanx, commanding his Captaines to call themselves by the names of Alexanders Captaines. Hee sent for Youths from Sparta, and ter∣med them the Laconicke and Of the Ci∣ty Pitane in Lonia. Pi∣tanite Band. After this, having made the Townes and Cities te∣nable, he went to Pergamus a Ci∣tie
in Asia, to take Physicke of Aesculapius; where having done as his Fancie led him, he mar∣ched straight to Troy. Ilium, to view the Ruines of it, and visit Achilles Tombe; wch having bravely dec∣ked with flowers and garlands, hee then would needs act Achil∣les:He acts A∣chilles. but wanting a Patroclus, hee played this Pranck. He had with him one Festus, his most beloved Freed-man, and the Imperiall Remembrancer, who died while he was at Ilium, being (as some say) poysoned, that hee might have such a Funerall as Vid. Hom. ad . 23. Patro∣clus: but others say, he dyed na∣turally. However, he comman∣ded his corps to bee brought forth, and a great Funerall Pile to be made; wheron having cast the dead body, and killed of all manner of beasts, he set the Pile on fire, and lifting up a Viall, sa∣crifised Wine, and prayed to the
Winds. But when he was to cast his haire This was an ancient Funerall . Vid. . Iph.  in  pat also into the flame, having a very thin Bush naturall, all the Company laught: yet he made a sorry shift, and cut of all the haire he had. Of all Generals, he commed chiefly the Ro∣man Syll, and African Annibal:Sylla and Anniball. whose mages and Statues he e∣rected. Departing from Ilium, and passing thorow Asia, Bithynia, and other Provinces (where hee setled his Affaires) hee came to Antioch; where being honoura∣rably entertained, and having stayed a certaine time, he sent to Alexandria, pretending he had a great longing to see the City which Alexander founded; as al∣so, to consult the God which the Citizens so much honored. Vpon these two Pretexts, to wit, the Adoration of their Deity, and Veneration of that Heroes
Memory, hee gave order that Sacrifices of an hun∣dred Oxen. Hecatombes and Sacrifices (of all sorts) should bee prepared a∣gainst his Comming. Which Message being delivered to the Alexandrians (who are natural∣ly Cocke-brain'd and light-hea∣ded) they were almost beside themselves for joy that the Em∣perour was so devoted to them: They made therefore such roy∣all preparations for his Enter∣tainment,His royall entertain∣ment at A∣lexandria. as the like (they say) was never made for any Prince. All manner of exquisite Musick and curious Melody was heard over all the City: All his Passa∣ges were perfumed with all sorts of precious Odors and Aroma∣tickes. Torches were lighted, and all the way strewed with Gelsomines and Muske roses. The Emperour entred the Ci∣ty with all his Army, and first went to the Temple, where ha∣ving
sacrifised Hundreds of Beeves, and burnt Heapes of In∣cense on the Altars, he visitedHis Offer∣tory at A∣lexanders Shrine. Alexanders Shrine; where he of∣fered his Purple Robe, his Rings set with Paragon Stones, his Belt, Scarfe, and choicest Iew∣ells he had about him: all which he laid upon his Tombe; where∣at the Alexandrians being over∣joyed, revelled and feasted day and night, little dreaming what a banquet the Emperour would shortly make them. For all this Pausibilitie was meerely colou∣rable; his Intendment being to make a generall Massacre among thē. The cause of his secret an∣courHis secret  ell to  Alex∣andrians. was this: It was told him a Rome in his brothers time, and after his death, that the Citizens of Alexandria had spoken dis∣gracefully of him. Indeed theyThe Alex∣andrians described. are naturally a very scurrilous People, and much given to gi∣bing
and giering of others; ca∣sting out against the most emi∣nent Persons, many cutting Quips, which themselves thinke are fine conceits; but they against whom they are spoke, take them as great Indignities. For those jests are most biting, that have most relish of truth. Having ther∣fore much traduced him for his brothers murther, nicknamed his mother Iocasta, and scoft him, for that being such a low Grig, he would presume to personate such High and Mighty Or Semi-Gods. Heroes as Alexander and Acchilles; they did so enrage Antonine, who (by nature) was of a fiery and sangui∣nary disposition, that while they thus sported themselves with their Squibs and Flashes, he in∣tended to la them with a teri∣ble Revenge. Wherfore the Fe∣stivall Celebrity being ended; he perceiving what an infinite
number were come together in∣to the City, out of the Regions adjoyning, made Proclamation, that all the Youths should as∣semble themselves in a certaine Plaine; that as he had already a Macedonian & Spartan Phalanx; so also he might (in honor of A∣lexander) have another Phalanx; named (after him) Alexandrian. He willed therfore that the yong men should be so ranked that a Lane might bee left for him to walke and take a View, which were fittest for Age, Strength, & Stature, to serve in the wars. This being beleeved (as very proba∣ble  regard of the high honor he had so lately done to Alexan∣der, all the yonkers accompani∣ed with their Parents and Cou∣zens, me at the place assigned, with great joy and alacrity. An∣tonine passing thorow all the Ranks, and perusing them seve∣rally,
commended first one, and then another; protracting the time, till his whole army had rounded them (ere any observed it or thought of it.) As soone as he wist that they were all circu∣led by his men of war, and taken (as it were) in a toile, he presently departs (with his Guard) and makes a signall to the Army;Alexandri∣ans massa∣cred. which instantly rushing in on e∣very side, make a furious slaugh∣ter of the unarmed Youths, and all the rest that were enclosed; some of the Souldiers employ∣ing themselves onely in killing, other in throwing the dead bo∣dies into huge deep Pits, wheron casting much earth, they made a huge great Mount. Many were thrust in halfe dead; and not a few were buried quicke. There perisht also many of the Souldi∣ers: For they which had any breath left in their bodies, and
had not lost all their vigour, caught hold of the Souldiers that flung them in, and haled them with them into the graves. So great was the slaughter, that streames of bloud gushing through the Plaine, died the Month of Nilus, and the shore a∣bout the City with Purple gore. And now affecting the Sirname of Parthicus, and the honour of Conquering the Orientall Bar∣barians (though they lived in  profound Peace) he layes this Plot. He sends Letters to Arta∣banus the King of Parthia, and Embassadours with stately Pre∣sents;An embas∣sy to the Parthians. Certifying them, that he was desirous to have his daughter to wife; that he was an Emperor, and Sonne to an Emperor, and was not minded therefore to bee Sonne in Law to any Subject, or meane person, but rather to espouse a Queene, or some great Princesse; that the Roman and Par∣thicke
Empires were the two grea∣test in the world, which if (by affini∣ty) they were united, & their powers conjoyned, (without any Barre or Let by Rivers or otherwise) they would become absolutely Invincible; that the Barbarian nations subject to both Empires, would be more mannagea∣ble, if every severall Countrey and City had governours of their owne Nation; that the Roman Infantery and Pike-men excelled all others in set Battel, that the Parthian Caval∣lery and Archers, exceeded for num∣berParthian Archers. and Skill. Both which concurring with correspondent Military valour, and all Warlicke necessaries, would easily reduce the whole World to an entire Monarchy under one Diadem. And whereas those Countries yeelded Spices, Odours and the finest Silkes; and the Roman dominions abounded in all kind of Mineralls, and Ma∣nufactures, which (in the division) Merchants imported but by stealth,
and very seldome; were this Vnion effected, on one sole Empire constitu∣ted, there would follow by mutuall Trafficke and Amitie, a happy in∣tercourse, without impeachment, or impediment. The Parthian having read these Letters, refused the offer atThe Par∣thians An∣swer. first, saying; That it was very in∣convenient for the Roman & Barba∣rian Princes to match together, for what concord could there be in so dif∣ferent Language, Diet, and Habite? that the Emperour might finde at Rome, many of great Nobility, and Extraction, not unworthy his Affi∣nitie; as himselfe had likewise a∣mong his Peeres and Princes of the bloud descended of King Arsaes. Arsacidae, and that it was not fit that either of their Races should be Mungreliz'd in that manner. This was his first answer to the Emperors proposition: but Antonine reinforcing his suite, & by many gifts and solemn oaths confirming his zealous affection
and desire of Marriage; The Barbarian King yeelded (at last) and promising to give him his Daughter, called him, His son in law that should be. Which newes being divulged; all the Barbari∣ans prepared to entertaine the King of the Romanes; and re∣joyced in hope of an eternall Peace. Whereupon AntonineAntonine enters Par∣thia. passing the Rivers without op∣position, progressed over Parthia (as if it had been his own Coun∣trey) the Natives every where entertained him with Sacrifices, crowned Altars, and most exqui∣site sweet Odours; which hee made shew to bee exceedingly affected with. Approching af∣ter a long March to the Court of Artabanus, the King goes forth to meet the Bridegroome (his Son in law) in a faire Plaine be∣fore the City, attended with a wondrous company of Barbari∣ans,
wearing Chaplets of flow∣ers and divers coloured Vestures of wrought Gold; frollicking and dancing to the Musicke of Flutes, Pipes, and Timbrells; for with these Revells they are marveilously delighted, especi∣ally when they are well tipled. Now when the greatest con∣course of people was come toge∣ther, and the Barbarians (having left their horses, bowes, and ar∣rowes) were feasting and carow∣sing (at randome) and misdee∣ming nothing, thronged and crowded together to see the roy∣all Bridegroom; Antonine made a signe to his souldiers to flie up∣on them and murther them. The Barbarians amazed at this, gaveThe Par∣thians mas∣sacred. back and fled; the Roman, fol∣lowing the Chase, killing and wounding them. Artabanus him∣self being ued by his Guard, and set on Horseback, had much
adoe to escape with a few of his Courtiers. The Remainder of the Barbarians were put all to the sword; for they had neither horses (which they most needed) having turned them to pasture; nor could they runne away, be∣ing hindred by their loose Gar∣ments, which reached downe to the foot, nor had they with them their Bowes and Arrowes; for what should they doe with them at a Wedding? Thus af∣ter a mighty Massacre of the Barbarians, Antonine taking mag∣nificent Spoyles, and many Pri-soners, departs without any re∣sistance; burning Townes and Cities as he went, and licensing the Souldiers to take what pil∣lage and booty they listed. This blow the Barbarians received ere they lookt for it. Antonine having harried and wasted the Parthian Countrey (till his soul∣diers
were weary) retreits into Mesopotamia, and from thence certifies the Romane Senate and People, that hee had conquered all the Orient, and reduced all those Kingdomes under his o∣bedience. The Senate, albeit they wel knew how things went ( for it is impossible that a Prin∣ces actions should be concealed) yet out of feare and flattery they decreed to him all Triumphall Honors. And now did Antonine keepe his Court in Mesopotamia, wholly devoting himselfe to Charriot-races, and Combates with all sorts of Wilde beasts. He had two Generalls of his ar∣my; the one was very aged, and though no great Statesman, yet a good Martiall man. His name was Audentius. The other (called Macrinus) was well seen in points of State, and an excellent Law∣yer. Him the Prince did oft
shrewdly checke and taunt (in publicke) as a man of no spirit or valour, giving him very con∣tumelious tearmes. For under∣standing that he kept a good ta∣ble, and loathed the course Vi∣ands that himselfe delighted in (like a souldier) and that he used to weare a short  Cloake, and other City attire; he called him an effeminate Coward, and con∣tinually threatned to kill him. Which Macrinus taking to heart, was mightily inraged. Now there fell out this Accident (for at last Antonine was to leave the Stage.) Beeing naturally curi∣ous and inquisitive to know not onely the secrets of Men, but of Gods also, and Daemons; and suspecting that all inten∣ded Treason against him, hee consulted all Oracles, and sentMagicians consulted. farre and neere for Magicians, Astrologers, and Wizzards: not
one escaping him, that professed those Curious Arts. But mis∣doubting that they all lyed, and prophesied falsely (to sooth him in his humour) hee writes to one Maternianus, to whom hee had committed the Government of the State at Rome; and (as to his most confident friend) hee had imparted all his secrets; willing him to inquire out the chiefe Magicians and Conjurers thatConjuring. were to be found, and to demand of the Spirits that were raised, how long hee had to live; and whether any intended to surprise the empire. Maternianus obeying his Cōmand, (whether the Spi∣rits signified so much, or whether he plotted so against Macrinus;) writes back to Antonine, that Ma∣crinus  insidiously aspired to the Empire, and that therefore hee should make him away. Having sealed these Letters (a∣mong
others) hee delivers them (as usually he did) to the Posts that knew nothing of the Con∣tents. They with wonted speede arrive at the Emperours Court, at the very instant of his begin∣ning his Charriot-race, (for hee was now entring the Charriot) and deliver him the Packet, wherein the Letters (touching Macrinus) were. But Antonine's minde being wholly fixt on his present * Sports, he bids Macri∣nusCharriot∣races a great sport in those daies take the Letters and peruse them, and if there were any mat¦ters of Weight, to certifie him; otherwise to attend his Charge as he was wont, (thus he oft used to doe:) And so he hurries away in his Chariot. Macrinus retiring himselfe, broke up the severall Letters, and fell upon that which aimed at his destruction. Percei∣ving therefore that his danger was great and impendent; and
well knowing Antonines ferall Cruelty (especially having so faire a Pretext) he reserves that Letter to himselfe, and (as his manner was) acquainted the Prince with the Contents of the rest. But fearing, lest Maternianus should write againe of the same Businesse, he resolved rather to doe than suffer; and thus he plots: There was one Martial, a A Cap∣taine of an hundred men. Cen∣turion, and one of Antonines Guard, that still waited on him; whose brother was a few dayes before, executed by the Prince, upon bare Information (without proofe or proceesse) who had al∣so called Martial himselfe, Base Coward, and Macrinus his Favo∣rite (in scorne.) This man being infinitly grieved at his brothers death, and enraged with those reproaches, Macrinus (who knew all the Passages) sends for; repo∣sing in him, as having beene for∣merly
his Servant, and obliged to him by many singular Fa∣vours. Him he perswades to kill Antonine, upon the first Oppor∣tunity. Whereupon allured with Macrinus Promises, and instiga∣ted with his owne Quarrell, and his brothers Revenge, he under∣takes to effect it, as soone as was possible. Shortly after it fell out, that Antonine lying at Carrae inCarrae in Mesopota∣mia. Mesopotamia, went from his Pa∣lace to visite the Temple of the Of Luna and Lunus see M. Ssl∣den, de Dijs Syris. Moone, (a good distance from the City) which Goddesse is ho∣noured by the Natives with great Devotion. Taking with him but a small Troop of Horse (not troubling the whole army) he went on his Iourney, purpo∣sing (when he had sacrificed) to returne to the City. In the Mid∣way, commanding all to stand off, hee went aside to his Es∣ment, taking but a Pag along
with him. Whereupon all tur∣ning their faces, and going a great way off (for Honours sake) Martial, who watched every mi∣nute of opportunitie, as soone as he perceived the Prince was all alone, runs instantly (as if he had beckoned to him to doe some∣what)Antonine slaine. and stabs him behind with a Stilletto, (as he was uncovering himself.) The wound being mor∣tall, he was suddenly slaine with∣out recovery. Which done, Mar∣tial takes horse and flies. But the Germane Horsemen which An∣tonine much delighted in, and u∣sed for his Guard, being next at hand, and the first that saw what was don, pursued him, and thrust him thorow with their Iavelins. When the report heereof was brought to the Army, they all ran together to the place; where Macrinus was the first that sell a weeping and wailing (dissem∣blingly)
over the dead body. The Souldiers tooke his Death very heavily, accounting they had lost a deare friend and com∣panion rather than a Prince: and not conceiting any thing of Ma∣crinus his reason, they thought Martial had done it in his owne quarrell: and so they all returned to their Tents: Macrinus having burnt the corps, sent his Ashes in an Vrne to his mother to bu∣ry it. Shee was then at Antioch, and for griefe of her childrens disasters, slew her selfe; whether voluntarily or by compulsion, is uncertaine. This End had the Emperor Antonine, and his Mo∣ther Iulia, having lived in that manner (as I have related) hee having raigned sixe yeares alone (without his Father or Brother.) Antonine extinct, the Souldiers being all in a Maze, were two dayes without an Emperour, de∣bating
who was fittest to be ele∣cted: For they had Intelligence, that Artabanus was marching with a mighty Army to be re∣venged on them, and to Sacri∣fice them to the Ghosts of them they had treacherously slaine in the time of Peace and Festivall Solemnitie. They proceed ther∣fore to Election: and first they make choice of Audentius, a man bred up in the Warres, and a good commander. But he alled∣gingAudentius refuses the Empire. he was super-annate, refu∣ses the Empire; wherupon they elect Macrinus, by the perswasi∣on especially of the Coronels or Serjeant-Majors. Tribunes, who (after his death) were sus∣spected to have beene accessary to Antonis Murther, and of Ma∣crinus Councel, (as in the Se∣quele shall bee declared) Thus was Macrinus made Emperour,Mrinus Elected. not so much by the Souldiers Love and Fidel ie, as by urgent
Necessitie. Presently after, Ar∣tabanus approached with his for∣ces, leading a huge Army, con∣sisting of great troopes of Hors∣men and Achers, as also Riders on Camels (in compleate Ar∣mour) with extraordinary long Lances. Whereupon Macrinus assembling his Souldiers, made this Speech: Macrinus his Speech to the Army. IT is no marvell that you all grieve so much for the death of so gracious a Prince, or Companion rather. But it is the part of Wise men to take hu∣mane Chances and Calamities pati∣ently. His memory shall be ever de are and precions among us; and his brave and noble Acts, and singular love and respect to you (with whom hee so fami∣liarly conversed) shall to his eternall Glory bee recorded to Posterity▪ And now having duely henoured his memo∣ry, and performed his Funerall solem∣nity, it concernes us all to looke to our
selves, & prevent the present danger. The Barbarian (you see) is at hand with all the Power of the Orient, ha∣ving (in his owne conceit) a just Cause and Quarrell against us. For we first provokt him by infringing the league, and Warring on him in time of publike Peace and Security. And now all the Roman Empire depends on your va∣lor & fidelitie: For we are not to fight with this Great King about the Bor∣ders or Skirts of the Empire, or about Rivers; but for all our fortunes; hee being come to revenge his Children and Kinsmen which we (as he opines) have slaine unjustly, and contrary to our Oaths. Let us therfore take armes and (as Romans are wont) keepe our Rks; for this confused Barbarous rout, being not well murshalled nor trained, is like enough to bee us owne overthrow. But your good Order, Di∣scipline, and Martiall skill in fight, will hath preserve your selves, and de∣ft the Eie. Wherefore charge couragiously, like worthy Romans, and as you are wont; so shall we vanquish the Barbarians, and winne great Ho∣nor; for them will it go curant with the
Romans, and all the world; that we did not pilfer the former victory, by fraud, treachery, and perjurious violation of the League, but by force of Armes, and true valour. Having thus said, the souldiers seeing in what a The Ro∣mans fear'd the Parthi∣ans more than any o∣ther nation: Rende the letter in the beginning of the next Booke. straight they were, put themselves in Battalia, and were [all night] in armes. At Sun rising, they descry Artabanus and his huge hoste advancing. When the Barbarians had done their devotions to the Sun (after their usuall guize) they ran uponThe Battell betwixt the Romans & Parthians. the Romans wth a terrible shout, & riding close to them, dischar∣ged their arrowes among them. The Romanes having arranged their battels in such exquisie or∣der, that the Cornets of horse, & Moresco Darters, flanked each side, & the light armed souldiers had lanes made between the se∣verall Maniples, to sally forth as occasion served, with great cou∣rage
received the charge of the Barbarians. Neverthelesse, they were extremely galled with con∣tinuall shot of Arrowes, and go∣red with the long Lances, of the armed horsmen, & camell-men. Yet when the Romanes fought hand to hand, they did easily put them to the worse. But finding themselves overpressed by mul∣titudes of horses & Camels, ma∣king semblant to retreit; they strewed the way wth calthropes, and other sharpe poynted Iron engines, which being covered with sand, and not discerned, did great hurt to the Lanciers, & ca∣mel riders. For the Horses, and especially the camels (which are tender hot) as soone as they trode on them, halted downe∣right, and cat their Riders. The Barbarians, while they are mounted on orses or Camels, fight grimly. But dismounted,
they are soon taken, for they dare not come to hand-strokes; and if they be driven to fly, or pursue the enemie, their long loose gar∣ments are a maine let to them. Thus all the first and second day they fought from morning till evening. Night parting them, both sides retired to their camps as victors. The third day, they joyned battell in the selfe same plaine; where the Barbarians (be∣ing the greater number) assayed to wheele about, and Or take in a Net.  inclose the Romans; who perceiving their purpose, extēded not their army in length, but dilated it in Front, and so prevented their circum∣vention. Now there fell such an infinite number of men & beasts, that al the field was cover'd with them, insomuch, that huge heaps and piles of carkasses (but especi∣ally of camels) lay one upon an∣other, so high, that the Souldiers
could not come together to fight, both the Armies being hindred from passing one to the other, by a mightie and almost impassable Barracado of carkas∣ses; whereupon they retreated to their severall Campes. Macrinus understanding that the onely cause why Artabanus fought so fiercely and obstinate∣ly, was because he supposed hee warred against Antoninus; (for the Barbarians were wont, if they prevailed not at first, to droope and grow faint-hearted; but at that time they were more resolute, intending to fight a∣gaine, as soone as they had ta∣ken away and burnt the dead bo∣dies, not knowing that the Au∣thor of all those embroilements was slaine) sends Heralds with letters to the Parthian; certifijng him, That the Emperour was dead, and had received condigne punish∣ment
for the violation of his oath and league; that himself was now elected to the Empire, by the Romanes (to whom it belonged) and that what was formerly done, did much displease him; that he was therfore willing to restore all the captives that were re∣maining, and all the spoiles that were caried away; & that he also much de∣sired to make him his friend, & to cō∣firm the peace by oath and sacrifice. Which letters Artabanus ha∣ving read, and being fully infor∣med (by the Heralds) of Antoni∣nusHeralds. murther; conceiving also, that he was sufficiently plagued for his persidiousnesse; and satis∣fying himselfe with the rendi∣tionA sudden league. of the captives and spoiles, (without more effusion of bloud) he concludes a peace with Macri∣nus, and returnes home. The Ro∣man Emperor marched likewise with his Armie out of Msopota∣mia, and went to Antioch.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The fourth Booke. The Contents. MAcrinus his Letter to the Roman Senate and People. The Senate confirme his Election. Informers pu∣nisht. Macrinus his Errour. Maesa a poluicke Lady. Temple of the Sunne. His Image and Priest. Bassian made Emperor, and called Antonine. Iulian beheaded. Battell betwixt Macrine and Antonine. Macrine flies, and is beheaded. Diadumenianus Caesar. Antonines Devotion at Nicomedia. Hee sends his Picture to Rome. His Acts at Rome. He dances about the Altars. His Crueliy and Luxury. He writes to the Senate to excuse his ra∣vishing of a Nunne. He marries his
God to Minerva, and after divorces them. He marries the Sun and Moone together. Hee inthrones his God in a new Temple. His strange Donatives. Alexander made Caesar. Wrestling a princely exercise. Stage-players high∣ly preferred. Antonine slaine. WEe have treated in the former Booke of the Raigne and End of An∣tonine, & of the treason wrought against him, and of his Succes∣sour. Macrinus remaining at An∣tioch, sent Letters to the Senate & People of Rome, to this effect. Macrinus his Letter to the Ro∣mane Senate, &c. FOr as much as you well know my manner of life from the beginning, how mild my Conversation hath been, and what great moderation I used in my former Office, which is not farre from Soveraignty (seeing the Empe∣rour puts himselfe into the hands of the Or Gne∣ of hi Ars. Pretorian Praefect) I hold it need∣lesse
to use many words. You may re∣member how much I was grieved at his Misgovernment, and not a little indangered for your sakes, when he gi∣ving are to all Delators did extreme∣ly tyrannize you Wherfore he still ray∣led at me, and publikely taxed me for my mildnes and lenity, which he scor∣ned, and termed basenesse and Pusilla∣nimy: For delighting in fawning Sy∣copas, he esteemed them his trustiest Friends and Counsellours, which did whet his cruelty, and spurre his inge∣nerate ferity, by exasperating Calum∣nies, whereas ever highly prized mo∣desty and humanity. I have therfore so ended the dreadfull Parthick warre (wherein the whole N. B. Roman Empire was hazarded) as having regard to our honour, wee have not yeelded a jt to the Enemy (in valour) yea we have made that great King (which brought so huge an Host into the Field) of an Enemie a Friend, by ratifying a firme I ague. As for my government in the Empire, it shall be so free & unbloudy, that you shall rather judge it an Opti∣macie than a Monarchie. Nor let any deeme mee unworthy so great honour,
or blame Fortune for making me of a Knight an Emperor. For what is No∣bility Quid gens? fine meate. without Vertue and Civility? Externall fortunes may befall the un∣worthiest; but a Mans owne solid Worth is that which begets true Glo∣ry. Nobility, Riches, and the like, are reputed to make men happy, yet deserve not much to bee commended being derived from others. But Cour∣tesie and Affability, as of themselves they are lovely, so doe they also give a singular instre to the most praise-wor∣thy. What good did you reap by Com∣modus his noblenesse? or Antonine's succeeding his Father? Such as they, attaining the Rule by hereditary right, abuse it at their pleasure (as their pri∣vate Patrimony) to all licentiousnesse. But they which receive it of your bounty, are eternally obliged to expresse their Gratitude by all good Offices. Moreover, it is often seene, that the native Splendor and Nobility of Em∣perors doth so puff them up with pride, that they scorne all men as their Vas∣salls. But they which get the Sove∣raignty by moderate actions are more carefull to retaine with sobriety what
they attayned with difficulty; and to give all due honor & respect to others, For my own particular, I have deter∣mined to doe nothing without your ap∣provement whom I desire to associat as my Counsellours and Assistants in the mannagement of the State. The liber∣ties and Franchises which you lost by the tyranny of those so nobly descended Emperors, and which Marcus and Per∣tinax (raised to the Throne from a pri∣vate estate) indeavored to restore, you shall fully injoy. For it is more honou∣rable for a man to give the first lu∣stre to his Family by his owne noble Atchievements, than basely to conta∣minate (by degenerat and debauched behaviour) the Nobility received from his Ancestors. The Senate having read thisMacrinus e∣lection con∣firmed by the Senate. Letter, gave him all their votes, and decreed to him all Imperial honors. Yet was not the Senate so joyfull at Macrinus succession, as all he commons were glad at Antonines destruction. For there
was not a man of any ake or quality, but thought he had now escaped the sword which hung over his head. And now Sycophāts Pro∣moters, and all servants that had appeacht their masters, were trussed on gallowses; all the city of Rome, & almost all the Romane world being well weeded of those wicked wretches, by their death or exile. And if any ofInformere punisht. them sculked so close, that they were not apprehended, yet was their poison kept in, for that one yeare that Macrinus reigned. For it was his maine errour, that he did not presently dissolve the ar∣my, (by commanding the soul∣diers to their several homes) and repaire to Rome immediatly; the people still crying & calling for Macrinus. But he (unwisely) staidMacrinus his Error. at Antioch, trimming his Beard, and stalking in State with a so∣lemne low pace, and scarce
vouchsafing to speak to any that came to him; or with so low a voice, as (oft) could not be heard. In which garb he imitated Mar∣cus the Emperor; not resembling him otherwise in any sort. For he daily gave himselfe to a more delicate course of life, and was more addicted to Stage-playes, Masques, & Revels, than to the Administration of the Empire. When he went in publike, he was deckt with jewels, and a Or Bau∣dricke. scarfe embroidered with gold and pre∣cious stones of inestimable va∣lue▪ which excesse, the Romane army much disliked, holding it fitter for Women & Barbarians, than Princes. Considering ther∣fore his eeminate & unmartiall conditions, they began to disva∣lue him, & were still paralelling his riotous loosnesse, & Antonines military skill & prowesse. They also tooke it very hainously, that
they were forced still to live in tents far from home, and many times without provision of ne∣cessaries, and not permitted to returne into their severall coun∣tries, a peace being now conclu∣ded, while he fared plentifully, and lived deliciously. Wherfore abandoning all respect to him, they watched every opportunity to make an end of him. Thus did the Fates decree, that Macrinus having reigned but one yeare in such delicacy, should lose his life & Empire at once; Fortune mi∣nistring to the souldiers a very small and sleight occasion to ef∣fect their desires, in this manner: There was one Moesa, a woman ofMoesa. See M. G. Sands De∣scription of it in his Iournall, p. 207. Phenicia, borne in the City E∣mesa, whose sister Iulia was wife to Severus, and mother to Anto∣nine; who in her sisters life-time, had lived many yeares in Severus and Antonines Court. This Maesa,
after her sisters decease, and An∣tonines murther, was commanded by Macrinus, to take her goods, & remove into her native coun∣trey. Now she had great store of coine, which she gathered all the while she lived in so flourishing an estate. And being now old, she returned to her old home. She had two daughters, the elder na∣med Soaemis, the younger Mam∣maea, that, had a son called Bassta∣nus; this, another, called Alexia∣nus▪ both bred up with their mo∣thers & Grandmother. Bassianus was upon the point of fourteene yeares, and Alexianus of ten: both Priests of the Sun, which is wor∣shipped (as a god by the Phoeni∣cians, and tarmed (in their lan∣guage) Heliogabalus: to whom they built a stately Temple,The Tem∣ple of the Sunne. bravely adorned with gold, sil∣ver and precious stones. Nor is the Sun onely adored by them,
but also by the bordering Prin∣ces and Kings of the Barbarians, which yeerely strive who shall send him the most costly Dona∣ries. This god hath no Image to represent him, that is made with hands, after the Greeke and Ro∣man fashion; but there is onely aV. IO Selden  de Dis Syris. Synt. C. 1. huge great* stone, all round from the bottome, and sharp towards the top, like a Or Spire. Cone. The stone is of a black colour, & they con∣fidently affirme that it fell from heaven. Some shining spots there are in it, and divers figures. This (they say) is the Suns Image, notThe Image of the Sun. made by human art. To this god was Bassianus sacred, as being theBassianus elder Son; and therefore did he execute the Priests Office, being vested (after the Barbarian Rites) with gold-embroidered coats, with hanging sleeves reaching downe to the foot. His under∣garments, which covered him
all over frō his hands to his legs, were like wise cloath of gold tis∣sued upon purple: his head was a∣dorned with a rich crown of pre∣cious stones. Hee was a delicate gracefull youth, and of so sweet an aspect, that hee was held the wonder of his time. So that his beauty, age, shape, and costly ha∣bit corresponding, he might not unfitly be compared to the dain∣ty Images of Bacchus. This brave young priestling as he sacrificed, and caperd about the Altars, to the musick of flutes, pipes and all kind of instruments, was curious∣ly eyed of all, but especially of the Roman Souldiers, either be∣cause they knew he was of impe∣riall linage, or because his attra∣tive beauty drew all their eyes upon him: for at that time a great army was quartered neere to that Emesa. City, for defence of Phenicia; being soone after lead
thence, as we shal herafter shew. The souldiers therfore daily re∣pairing to the citie and temple, under colour of devotion, were ravisht with the sight of so rare a creature. Now many of them being Romane fugitives, were fa∣miliarly acquainted with oesa: who (when they extold his fa∣vour) told them (whether truly or no, is uncertaine) that he was son to Antonine, (though he were reputed anothers) who lay with her yong faire daughters in the time of her abode with her sister at the Emperors Court. Which when they heard, and had told their fellows, the bruit of it flew thorow all the arm. It was also reported, that Moesa had great store of treasure, and would give it all to the Souldiers, if they would render the Empire to her nephewes. Wherupon they pro∣mising to receive her & all hers,
and proclaim Antonines son Em∣peror, if she would come secret∣ly in the night to the campe, the old woman resolved to undergo any hazard, rather than live a private obscure life. Wherfore, issuing privily out of the citie in the night with her children and nephewes, she was conducted by the troupe of fugitives to the ar∣my; where all the souldiers wel∣comed her, and proclaiming the Boy, Antonine, clothed him in aassianus a yong Priest proclaimed Emperour. purple robe of State. Then fet∣ching into the camp all her pro∣vision, together with her daugh∣ters & their husbands, & what∣soever goods or cattell shee had in the fields and villages, they victualled & fortified the camp, that (if need were) they might hold out a siege. Whē this news was brought to Macrinus lying then at Antioch, the army there, understanding likewise (by re∣port
that Antonines sonne was found out, and that Iuliaes sister had given great store of siluer to the Souldiers, they beleeved all to be infallibly true, and began to waver, and take new resoluti∣ons, being excited therto, both by the grudge they bore Macri∣nus, & commiseration (as it were) of the memory of Antoninus but especially for the hope of cash: insomuch, that many presently fled to this new found Antonine. Macrinus scorning all this, as  Boyes play, and being as jovi∣all as ever, stirred not himselfe, but sends one of his Captaines with certaine companies, which he thought sufficient to ame the rebels. As soone as Iulian (so the Captaine was called) approched the Came walls, instantly the souldiers that were within, shew∣ed the Boy to the adverse army, from the Turrets and Pinnacies,
proclaming him to be Antonines son, and holding up their purses full of money (as a bait to betray Macrinus.) Whereupon the soul∣diers without, beleeving he was Antonines son, and perswading themselves, he did exceedingly resemble him in face and linea∣ments, struck off their Captaine Iulians head, and sent it to Macri∣nus.Iulian be∣headed. Which done, the camp gates were opened and all let in. Thus were their numbers increast to a competent Army, not onely to hold out a siege, but also to fight a battell, being augmented also by the accesse of others, that in great troopes revolted to them. Which Macrinus understanding, rouzes up his spirits, and leades forth all his Army to aslaile the Campe. But Antonines Souldiers, not intending to indure a siege, march into the field. Both the ar∣mies met on the borders of Syria
& Phoenicia; but Antonines foughtThe battell betwixt Macrie & Bassian, or Antonine.  more fiercely, as knowing they should be soūdly punished if they were overcōe: on the other side, Macrines was more faint & remiss, & many of them fled to Antonine. Which when Macrinus saw, fea∣ring lest all leaving him to the 4 winds, he should be taken priso∣ner, and villanously intreated: whē it grew toward the evening, he stript himselfe of his Purple  surcoat, and other Imperiall or∣naments (while his Army yet stood firme) and being attended with a few of his trustiest Cap∣taines, betook him to flight: sha∣ving his berd close (lest he shouldMacrinus fles. be knowne) and shrowding him∣selfe in a Riding cloake & hood (poasting day and night to pre∣vent the fame of his misfortune.) For his Captaines every where took up Coaches, as if Macrinus still being Emperour, they were
sent from him about extraordi∣nary affaires. Thus he escaped by flight. Meane while, both armies fought; Macrinus his guard (ter∣med the Praetorian Band)  brave∣ly maintaining fight against the whole Power of the enemie; for they were the tallest and choicest men that could be found. All the other multitude fought for Anto∣nine. But when Macrinus his men, after a great while, neither saw him, nor any signe of soveraign∣ty, not knowing whether he were slain, or fled, or what was become of him, they were in a great maze; for they determined to in∣gage themselves no longer for him that was not to be seen; and yet they feared to come into their mies hands by yielding en prisoners. When An∣ derstood by the Rene∣hat Macrinus was fled, eralds to certifie thē,  not to fight for an
unmanly fugitive; that he par∣doned them all that was past, and would confirme the pardon by oath, & the better to assure them, would make them presently his Guard. Thus all giving credit to the Heralds, yielded. Instantly Antonine sends to pursue Macri∣nus that was now gotten a great way on his journy: he was found at Chalcedon, Chalcedon, a Sea-City, situate in view of By∣zantium Strabo l. 12. Macrinus beheaded. a City of Bithynia, grievously sicke and over-toiled with travel, being hid in the sub∣urbs, where they strucke off his head. It was said that hee made such haste to Rome relying on the peoples love, but as hee was pas∣sing into Europe over the Propon∣ticke Gulfe (being come neere to Byzantium) hee was driven backe by contrary Gusts, as if the Winds themselves had con∣spired to his punishment. Thus Macrinus not being able to e∣scape his pursuers, came to a mi∣serable
end (through his impro∣vidence) determining to goe to Rome at last, which he should have done first of all; having nei∣ther good fore sight, nor good fortune: his son DiadumenianusDiadume∣nianus Caesar (whom he had made Caesar) being slaine also with him. When all the army had saluted Antonine Emperour, and he was now esta∣blished in the soveraignty, the o∣rientall affaires being ordered (as was requisite) by his Grandmo∣ther and friends (for he was very young and of no experience) he made no long stay there, but pre∣pared for his journey to Rome. Maesa longing to returne to the Palace, where shee had so long flourished. When intimation hereof was given to the Roman Peeres and people, it was heavie newes to all. Antonine marching out of Syria, wintered at Nicome∣dia,Antonine winters at Nicomedia. (the season so requiring.)
There he fell to his hiddygiddy veneration of his country Dei∣ty (whose Priest he was) with an∣tique dances; attired in rich Sacerdotall vestments of gold, tis∣sued on Purple; adorned with jewels and armelets: and wearing coronets of gold and precious stones, made like a Persian dia∣dem. The fashion of his habite was betwixt the long robe of the Phoenicians, and the apparrel of the Medes. For he scorned the Greek & Roman attire, as made of wooll, that is (as he termed it) of base stuffe; not daining any o∣ther weare▪ but Syrian silks & go∣ing abroad usually wi a noise of flutes & shalms, as at his sacri∣ficing solemnities. Which Moesa much distasting, hūbly besought him to put himself into the Ro∣man habit, left entring the City andParlia∣ment house Curia in that exoticke and barbarous garbe he should be an
eye-sore to the beholders not u∣sed to such gaudy & garish dresses, which they would judge fitter for women than men. But he rejecting her as an old doting foole, and refusing all good Counsell (for hee would have none about him, but such phan∣tasticks as himselfe, which soo∣thed him in his vicious humors) resolved to weare no other fa∣shion, & therfore meant to try a conclusion, how the Roman Se∣nate and people would like it. Whereupon he sent to Rome hisHe sends his Picture to Rome. owne picture (at large) in his su∣perfine Pontificalibus, and with∣all, the Image of his patriall god, whose Priest he was; comman∣ding them that carried it, to place it on high, in the midst of the Curia, over the Image of victory; that when the Senate assembled, all the nobles might burne In∣cense, & sacrifice wine before it.
Also he made an Edict, that all the Roman Magistrates, and Sa∣crificers, should, before all other Gods that they remembred at their devotions, pray to the new God Heliogabalus. Wherefore when (afterward) he entred Rome in the aforesayd Habit, hee was no Novelty to them, having bin used to his Picture. Giving ther∣fore great Donatives to the peo∣ple (as new Emperors are wont)His Acts at Rome. he exhibited all kinde of stately Shewes; and erected to his God a most gorgeous Temple, where∣in were many altars, on which e∣very morning he sacrificed hun∣dreds of Beeves, and great num∣bers of Sheep. Burning also huge heaps of all manner of redolent Odors on the Altars, he powred out [in Sacrifice] many Rund∣lets of the daintiest old Wines, so that streams of wine & bloud intermixt, ran over all the Tem∣ple
Then fell hee to By these dances, the Gentiles intimated, that every part of their body was to be imploed in the ser∣vice of their Gods. dance a∣bout the Altars, to a Consort of all kinde of Instruments, divers of his Country-women capring and skipping with him, as they played on Cymballs and Tim∣brels; while all the Nobility and order of Knighthood, stood ga∣zing at these Gambolls (as Spe∣ctators in a Theater.) Moreover, the entrails of the Sacrifices, and Aromatickes, layd on Golden Plates, were borne not by Ser∣vants and meane Persons; but by Generails of Armies, and the chiefest Officers of State, vested in long Robes with Hanging sleeves (after the Phoenician fashi∣on) and shod with Linnen shooes, like Syrian Prophets. Whom he admitted to these Mysteries, he accounted to have highly hono∣red. And though hee seemed wholly devoted to Dances and Sacrifices, yet he kept more tra∣gicall
Revells; executing manyAntonines crueltie. wealthy and noble persons, wch (as he was informed) tooke small pleasure in those things; and now and then scoffed him. He tookeHis mari∣ages. to wife the most illustrious of all the Romane Ladies; whom hee called Augusta, yet soon after di∣vorced her, & stripping her of all honors, sequestred her to a pri∣vate life. After, pretending hee was in love, and intending now to shew his manhood, he violēt∣ly tooke out of Vestaes sacred* Pomp. L∣tus sayes, they might marry after 30 yeares of age. Lib. de. Sacer. Rom. nunry at Rome, a Vestall Virgin (who by the Divine Lawes was to continue in chastitie and vir∣ginity to her end) and married her. And when he heard that the Senate was much aggrieved at that sacrilegious act, he sēt them a consolatory Letter; certifying them, That it was but a humane sin;Antonines Letter to the Sena. That he was inchanted with the ma∣gicke of her beauty, and that it was
no incongruitie, for a Priest to mar∣ry a  Priestesse: which was there∣fore a most sacred match. But this wife he kept not long, but cashie∣ring her, took a third, which was said to be of Commodus Linage. Nor did he thus play at fast and loose with human matrimonies, but now his God also (whose Priest he was) wanted a wife. He took therfore into his bedcham∣ber the Image of Three cu∣bits high, holding a Speare in the right hand, and a Sple in the left. Pallas, whichHe marries Gods toge∣ther. the Romans kept in secret venera∣tion, unseene of any; and till that day had never beene removed since it was brought from Troy, but only when the Temple was It ost the Hg priest Metlls his Eyes, to rescue it out of the flames. fired: and so hee married that Godesse and his God together in his Palace. Soon after, giving out, that his God liked not such a Martiall wife, that was ever in armes; he commāded the Image of Vrania to be brought: Which having bin exceedingly adored
by the Carthaginians & Africans, was erected, as they say, by Queene Dido (the Phoenician) what time she reedified Carthage, by cutting an Dido bought of the Lybians so much Ground as an Oxehide might com∣passe: then cutting it into small thongs, she inclosed 22 furlongs, and there built Car∣thage. Oxehide. This goddesse the Africans cal Vrania, the Phoenicians, Queene of Starres. Vid. Selden de Dis Syris. Astroarch, or the Moone. Antonine said, it would a∣gree bravely, to marry the Sun & Moone together. He sent therfore for the Image, & all the treasure and gold in the Temple; giving it to his God, for a Portion with her. When the Image was brought & set neer to Heliogaba∣lus, he commanded al the people of Rome and Italy to use all pub∣like & private feasts and exhila∣rations for joy of the gods wed¦ding.He marry∣ed the Sun and Moon. He erected also in the Sub∣urbs a mighty and magnificent Temple, into which every yeare (about mid summer) he brought his God; recreating the people (as he thought) with Chariot∣races,
stage-plaies, feasts & night∣shewesMasques.. Hee brought his God out of the citie into the suburbs, placed in a Caroach adorned with gold and most precious stones, & drawn with sixe good∣ly white steeds, decked with rare gold-worke and rich caparisons. There was no man in the charet,The in∣thronizati∣on of He∣liogabalus. but al attended about it, as if the God had driven it. Antonine run∣ning backward with his face to∣wards the Image, went before the charet, leading the horses by the reines; going all the way back-ward (in that sort) still loo∣king on the God. Lest he should fall o stumble, the way was strewed with filings of gold; and h guard supported him on each side for his more safety; the people running along with torche, & throwing flowers & garland▪ This pompous shew was honoured with the Images
of all the Gods, and the most sumptuous Donaries that were in the Temples; as also with the Imperiall  jewels & ornaments: All the nobility, gentry, and soul∣diery accompanying it. When hee had shrin'd his God in the Temple, hee solemnized the a∣bove mentioned Sacrifices and Festivities. Then he ascended ex∣ceeding high turrets purposely made for him: whence he threwA strange largesse. (as a largesse) among the people, gold and silver plate, and all kind of rich apparell and fine linnen: also all manner of tame beasts, This was done by throwing little balles or tickets, which were warrants for receit of the largesse. except swine; which he (as all the Phoenicians) abhorred. Ma∣ny there perished, being either trod to death, or thrust thorow with the souldiers pikes: so that it proved a fatall festivall to ma∣ny. He oft used his charret-sports and wild dances in publick, not caring who saw his unprincely
pranks. He walked abroad with his eyes painted, and cheeks pur∣pled, disfiguring his faire face with foule tinctures. Which His Grand mother. Moesa perceiving, mistrusted the souldiers dislike; and fearing if ought came to him, she should be remanded to a privat life, she per∣swades the vain young fondling to adopt for his son, and declare The title of the heire apparant. Caesar, his couzen Germane and her Grand-childe by her other daughter Mammaea: speaking him fair, & finely instilling into him, That it was most meet, that he being dignified with the sacred Title of a Priest, should attend onely on matters of Religion, and the celebration of di∣vine Orgies and Offices; and that some other should bee substituted to mannage humane affaires, and be as his Vice-roy, to free him from all cares and encumbrances of State: yet no stranger or alien, but rather his Cou∣zen German to be so honoured by his
princely favour. Alexianus was he, then named Alexander, his old name being changed into that of the Macedonian kings: for that famous king was much honored by Antonine (son to Severus) who was both their father, as the old beldam pretended: not sparing to vaunt of both her daughters dis∣honesty, to make their sons more gracious with the souldiers. Alex∣anderAlexander made Caesar therefore was proclaimed Caesar, and made Consull (or As∣sociat) with Antonine: the Senate ridiculously decreeing what hee commanded; to wit, him to bee the father, that was 16 yeres old, and Alexander the son, that was 12 yeares old. After that Alexan∣der was made Caesar, Antonine as∣saied to train him to his courses, as dancing, revelling, sacrificing, & the like rites, & robes, & cere∣monies. But his mother Māmaea weaned him from those vain and
unseemely exercises, and trained him up in honorable fashion, se∣cretly sending for professours of the Mathematicks, & all liberall sciences, & using him to Wrestling a princely exercise. Wrest∣lings and such manly activities: instituting him also in Greek and Roman literature. Whereat An∣tonine much repining, repented that he had adopted him, or made him his colleague in the Empire; and expelled all his tu∣tors frō the Court, putting some of the chiefe of them to death, and banishing others: alleadging ridiculously, that the pedants spoiled his son, not suffering him to dance and revell, but teaching him to be modest, and use manly exercises. Yea, he was so besot∣ted, that he preferred all sorts ofStage- play∣ers prefer∣red. theatricall Actors and Players to the highest honours and most eminent dignities; making Lord Generall of his Armies one that
in his youth was a publick dan∣cer on the theater He appointed one Stage-player, trainer and guardian Or master of the Wards. of the young Lords and Gentlemen; another, to be Lord President of his Councel; and a third, generall of the horse. He advanced to the chiefest pla∣ces of trust in the Empire, char∣ret-drivers, comoedians, and hi∣strionicall Iesters; bestowing on his servants and Bondmen set free. libertines that were most extremly debauched, the Procuratorships of Provin∣ces. At this mad and drunken di∣stribution of so many honoura∣ble offices, all men murmured, but especially the souldiers stor∣med, and scorned him, as being more effeminate than an honest woman would be; and detested him for prostituting the Impe∣riall Majesty to contempt, by his capricious dresses, golden gew∣gawes, and publike Revels. They
were therefore more inclinable to Alexander, conceiving faire hopes of him for his noble and vertuous education; and conser∣ving him diligently from the in∣sidious practices of Antonine. His mother Mammaea suffered him not to taste any meate or drinke that he sent. His Cookes and Cup-bearers were not those that waited on the Emperor, but such trusty servants as his mo∣ther made choise of▪ Shee gave him also much mony in private, to bestow on the Souldiers se∣cretly; to win them to him with that bait, which she knew would soonest catch them. Which An∣tonine understanding, plotted to destroy him and his mother; but his plots were prevented by their common Grand-mother Moesa; a subtill woman, and a po∣litickeA Politicke Lady. dame; as having lived ma∣ny yeares in the Imperiall Pa∣lace
with her sister Iulia, wife to Severus, whereby shee was well read in State affaires. For shee knew all the designes of Anto∣nine, who was naturally a blab, and would ordinarily lay him∣selfe open, and divulge all his in∣tentions. When hee could not surprize him by treachery, hee determined to strip him of his Caesarean dignity; not permitting him to be saluted, or go abroad. Then the souldiers enquired for him, and were much disconten∣ted, that hee should be deposed. Whereupon Antonine disperses a fame, that Alexander was like to die, to try how the Souldiers would take it. They, when they could not see the young Prince, were cut to the heart with the report; and being infinitly enra∣ged, sent not the usuall guards to Antonine, but lockt themselves the Campe; demanding to see
Alexander in their Temple. Anto∣nine startled at this, takes Alexan∣der, and places him with him in his Imperiall Caroach, richly a∣dorned with gold & gems; and hies to the Campe. The souldi∣ers opening the Gates, received them, & conducted them to the Temple of the Campe; excee∣dingly congratulating and wel∣coming Alexander, but coldly sa∣luting Antonine; which hee stor∣ming at, after hee had lodged all night in the Campe-Temple; was so incensed at the souldi∣ers for doing such speciall honor to Alexander, that he cōmanded the chiefe and most noted (for it) to be apprehended & executed as Authors of sedition and mutiny. Whereat all the Souldiers being exasperated, and having former∣ly hated Antonine, they resolved to rescue their fellowes, and put away that abhominable Prince.
Iudging this therefore to bee a just occasion, and faire oppor∣tunity;Antonine slaine. they presently slew An∣tonine, and his mother Soaemis, who was with him (as Empresse) with all their Privadoes, and In∣struments of lewdnesse that came with them into the Camp. Then delivered they to the peo∣ple, the Carkasses of Antonine & Soaemis, wch being disgracefully dragged a long time over all the City, and lastly dismembred, were throwne into the publicke jakes, which are voided into the River  Tyber. The Soul∣diers proclaiming Alexander Emperour, conducted him to the Royall Palace; being very young, and yet in the tuition of his mother and grand mother. The End of the Fifth Booke.
Appendix to Herodians fift Booke of his History. To the Readers. HErodian having lively drawne (in lit∣tle) that Monster of Ethnicke Priests and Princes, Pseud-Antonine, I have thought good to adjoyne (for your further satisfacti∣on) this insuing Delineation of him, extracted out of divers ancient & principal Authors. HIs Apparell was extreame brave and gorgeous: yet hee never wore one Garment twice. His Shooes were embellisht with Diamonds,See an An∣tiquity of a Romā Bath or Stove (lately dis∣covered neere Lei∣cester) related in the Descrip∣tion of that County, by that worthy Pa∣trio and judicious Antiquaty Wil. Burton Esquire. and Oriental Pearles of the most Caracts. His Seats were strewed with Musk and Amber. His Beds were covered with Cloth of Gold tissued on Purple, and imbossed with Gems of inestimable value. His Way was strewed with Filings of Gold and Silver. His Vessells, e∣ven of basest Vse, were of Obryze Gold. His Lamps burned with precious Balms & Gums of India and Arabia. His Fish-ponds were fil∣led with Rose-water. His Ships in his The∣atricall Sea-fights floated in Rivers of Wine. His Bathing was as or∣dinary with Romans, as eating and sleeping. Bathes, most magnificently built, when he had once used them, were still pluckt down, and new built. His Plate of refined massive Gold; but never served twice to his Table. His Rings and lewels infinitely rich, yet ne∣ver worne twice. His Concubincs number∣lesse,
but never laine with twice. Every Sup∣per in his Court cost 1000 pounds sterling. When hee lay neere to the Sea, hee would eat no ish: When he was farthest in the Conti∣nent, hee would eat no Flesh. Whole Meales were furnisht with Tongues of Singing Birds, and Braines of rarest Creatures. All Europe, Asia, and Africke, with the Ilands adjacent; in a word, the Globe of Earth andAs farre as was thē discovered to the Ro∣manes. Sea (wher∣of he was Lord Paramount) was not able to fill this Gulph. In his Progresse, he was at∣tended by 600 Charriots fraught with Concu∣ines, Catamites, and Pandars: for whom be built a Seraglio in his Court; where himselfe (in the habit of a Curtezan) used to make so∣lemn speeches to them, terming them his brave Fellow-Souldiers and Companions in Armes: [What gallant Instructions he gave them, I sorbeare to mention.] He caused to be gathe∣red in Rome Vid. Lips. de magnit. Romana. ten thousand weight of Spi∣ders, ten thousand Mice, and a thousand Pol∣cats; which he exhibited to the Roman Peeres and People, in a Publicke Shew and Solemnity: Professing, that now he perfectly understood how mighty a City Rome was. Lastly [to omit other more strange prankes] his sum∣moned aSenatum Parliament of Women, to consult a∣bout Tires, Fashions, Dresses, Tinctures, and the like weighty and important Affaires. FINIS.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The sixth Booke. The Contents. ALexander Emperour. The Reli∣gion and State reformed. Maesa Deified. Alexanders Elogie. His Marriage. Persians invade the Ro∣manes. Alexander writes to the Per∣sian; who scornes his Letters. Gene∣rall Muster in Italy. Alexander mar∣ches against the Persian. An Embassy. Another braving Embassy. Embas∣sadours punisht. Alexanders Policie, Archery. Armenian Mountains. The Romans defeated. Alexander retires. Best Physicke for Souldiers. Germa∣ny rebells. Alexander comes to the Rhine. Archers. Heralds. Maximine described and elected Emperor. Alex∣ander slaine.
WEe have formerly decla∣redAlexander Emperour. in what manner An∣tonine (the elder brother) ended his dayes. After him A∣lexander had the title and orna∣ments of Emperour; but the management of affaires, and re∣gencie of the Empire rested inMoesa and Mammaea Regents. Maesa and Mammaea; who labo∣red to reduce all things to better order and moderation, And first they selected out of the Senate 16. ancient, grave, and honourable Peeres, for assi∣stants and counsellers to the Prince: without whose suffrage & consent, nothing was to passe as an act of State. Which man∣ner of government was won∣drous pleasing to the People, Souldiers and Senators; the Em∣pire being thereby reduced from an injurious Tyrannie, to the forme of an ment of the principall men. Optimacie. Their prime care was to re∣store
the Images of the GodsReligion first refor∣med. (removed and displaced By An∣tonine) to their owne ancient Temples and Oratories. Next,Next, the State. all that hee had advanced to ho∣nors and offices, either withoutN. B. desert, or for their lewd prankes, they discharged and degraded; commanding every of them to follow their former trades and professions. All civill and judici∣ary offices they bestowed on fa∣mous learned men and excellent Lawyers: and all places of mar∣tiall command they gave to brave noble Captaines, & Soul∣diers, expert in . In wch words the excellent au∣thour hath couched both the parts of war: viz Tactick and Stratgema∣tick. Marshalling ofMoesa dies, & is defd Armies, and Military Exploits. The Empire being thus admi∣nistred a long time, Maesa being now very old, deceased; and was buried like an empress; being af∣ter the Roman fashion, At a Wo∣mans deifi∣cation, they used a Pea∣cocke (into which they supposed her soul to st:) as an Eagie at a Ms See this su∣preme solem∣nit descri∣bed in the beginning of the 4 book of this H. deified. Mammaea being now sole Re∣gent and Guardian of her Son,
followed still the same tracke of government. When he came to his age, to manage the state him∣selfe, shee fearing lest his unstaid youth might in that height of li∣berty & soveraignty, pciate him into the vices and vanities incident thereto; set a strong Watch about the Court, prohi∣biting allewd and loose persons from his presence, lest his good nature should be corrupted, and his minde provoked to lust by bewitching Syrens, and fawning Parasites. She perswaded him al∣so to attend matters of Iudica∣ture  the best part of the day; to keepe him from Idlenesse, the Mistris of all lewdnesse. Alexan∣der (indeed) was naturally ador∣ned with Affability, Clemencie, and other Princely graces (as was afterwards apparant in the course of his life.) For in 14 yeares, hisAlexanders Elogie. Empire was not stayned with
bloud: not one being put to death (by him) all the while. And though divers were convict of haynour crimes, yet hee spared their lives: which you shal hard∣ly finde to have bin done by any Emperor since Marcus. None can remember that in all the time of his Raigne, there was any execu∣ted without Iudiciall Processe. He much blamed his Mother, & was very angry with her, for her greedy covetousnesse of money, and accumulating of riches. For Mammaea pretending to hoord up Coin, to supply Alexanders boun∣ty to the Souldiers, got a great Masse of Treasure to her selfe. Which, although it were much disliked in her, and condemned by the Emperour; yet did her lent practices in spoyling their good and estates, him, to his obloquy & . She gave him a wife
of a noble Family; whom hee dearely loved: but she soon after banisht her the Court. For, arro∣gating to her selfe alone the title of Empresse; and maligning her Daughter in-lawes honour, shee proceeded to that outrage, that the young Empresses Father, though in great esteeme with A∣lexander (his son in law) not able to indure the many wrongs shee did him and his Daughter, fld into the Camp: prosessing he was much obliged to the Emperour for doing him that honour, but accusing Mammaea for her oppro∣brious injuries. Whereat, she be∣ing the more exasperated, com∣manded him to be slain; and ha∣ving expelled the young Lady from the Court, confined her to Africke. All Wch was done with∣out Alexanders consent, & meere∣ly against his will: for his Mo∣ther caried a high and imperious
hand over him, and he tenderly reuer'd and obeyed her in all things: so that his main error was too much softnesse, & over great obsequiousnes to his mother, in things wch himself disapproved. Having thus ruled the Empire thirteene yeares, without any grievance (in regard of his owne particular) suddenly in the four∣teenth yeare, there came letters from the Presidents of Syria and Mesopotamia, cetifying; That Ar∣taxerxes King of Persia havingThe Par∣thian king laine. conquered the parthians, and slaine Artabanus (who was the first that was called, The great King, andA double m. wore a double Diadem) did likewise subdue and make Tributary the bor∣dering Barbarians: and not contai∣ninge Persi∣ invde the Romans himelfe within the River Ty∣gris, had transpassed the banks and bounds of the Roman Empire, and made a rode into Mesopotamia, th eatning to invade Syria, and
challenging the The lesser Asia. opposite continent to Europe (limited by the Aegean Sea, and Propontick Gulfe, and cal∣led Asia) as the ancient Patrimony of the Persians: in that, from Cy∣rus (who first trāslated the Empire of the Medes to the Persians) until Da∣rius the last Persian King (deposed by Alexander) all those countries, as far as Ionia and Caria, ere ru∣led by Persian Vice-royes: and ther∣fore, he held himselfe bound in honor to recover all that wch was ancient∣ly under the Persian Scepter Wen Alexander received this dmall newes from the Easterne parts, he was not a little perplext and troubled, having beene ever trai∣ned (from a child) in peace and tranquility, and nuzled in City∣delights: advising therefore with his Councel, he first resolved to send Embassadours with letters to stop the Barbarians procee∣dings. The letters were to this ef∣fect:
That he ought to containe him∣selfeAlexanders Letters to the Persian. within his bounds: and not in vaine hope of new Conquests, raise wars and stirs. That every one ought to rest content with his owne estate, That he would find great difference in fight betwixt Romans and his fel∣low Barbarians. Lastly, he put him in mind of the victories which Augu∣stus, Trajan, Lucius & Severus had obtained against them. With these letters Alexander perswaded him∣selfe he should over-rule the Bar∣barian and make him quiet. But he scorning them, and holding itThe rsi∣an scornes them. his best course to fight rather thā talk, was now more rampāt than ever: ranging over al Mesopotamia, taking great booties, and assailing the Romā camps that were pitcht on the river banks, to defend the limits of the Empire. Being also naturally of a high spirit and haughty minde, which by this sudden successe was much more
elevated, hee thought he should conquer all afore him. Hee had great encouragements to enlarge his Dominions, being the first that attempted the Parthians, and recovered the kingdome to the Persians: for after Darius, whom Alexander the Macedon conque∣red, the Macedonians and Alex∣anders successors for many yeres divided among them the princi∣pality of the orientall Provinces over all Asia. But when by their civill wars and discords, the Ma∣cedonians & the rest were weak∣ned, Arsaces the Parthian did (as they say) first perswade the bar∣barous people of these countries to revolt from the Macedonians: and being crowned King by the Parthians and adjoyning Barba∣rians, he held the kingdome: and left it to his posterity, which en∣joyed it untill the raign of Art∣banus (in our time) slaine by
Artaxerxes, who reunited that king∣dome to the Persian Monarchy, and having brought in subjectiō the adjacent Barbarians began to trench on the Roman territories. Which Alexander understanding, and knowing it concerned him in a high degree of justice & ho∣nor, not to suffer the insolent Bar∣barian any longer, (his comman∣ders earnestly importuning him to come in person) with much a∣doe, at last he prepares to set for∣ward (against his owne inclinati∣ons) and now there were Gene∣rall musters through all Italy, and the Romane Provinces, of theA generall ster. strongest and ablest persons for the wars; great hurliburlies be∣ing in all parts of the Empire, about training the choicest that might bee found, to encounter the barbarous multitude. Alexan∣der assembling into the field all the Souldiers which were quar∣tered
neere the City, spake thus to them from his Throne: Alexanders Speech to the Army. I Could wish (my brave Fellow-soul∣diers) that I might as heretofore speak such things to you, as were to my applause, and your content. It may be that after so long peace, an unexpected war may somwhat dismay you. But it is the part of generous and tempe∣rate men to pray for the best; and be content with that which happens; for as those things which wee performe with pleasure, are delightfull: so va∣liant Exployts necessarily underta∣ken, are most glorious: And as hee that first offers wrong deserves small favour; so he that redresses a wrong is more confident, as having a good conscience; and more couragious, in that hee offers not wrong but repells it. Artaxerxes the Persian, having trayterously slaine his Soveraign Ar∣tabanus, and translated his Kingdome to the Persians, hath presumed also to bid us Battaile, and in despight of the
Roman majesty, hath begun to invade and destroy our Provinces. At first, I thought good to write to him, to desist from that insatiate fury of coveting o∣ther mens Estates: But he in his bar∣barous pride is so far from containing himselfe in his owne Limits, that hee challenges us to fight. Let us not ther∣fore refuse the Challenge, nor fore∣slow the Warre; but you, which are Ʋete∣ranes, make him know, that you are they that under the conduct of Severus and my Father Antonine, got those fa∣mous Victories over the Barbarians. And you which are young Souldiers, must strive for honour and glory, that all may know, you are not onely well disciplin'd to obey in time of peace, but that also in time of warre when need requires, you are able to make full de∣monstration of your Valour. The Bar∣barians are very fierce against them that shrinke, or come on slowly: but if they be furiously charged, they are soon calmed. For it is not their manner to attempt the Victory by pitcht Battels: but to make sudden praedatory Excur∣sions, and then runne away; thinking they have gayned sufficiently by forra∣ging
the coūtrey. But we, with our fair and wel-ordred armies, have put them to the worst, & returned conquerors. Alexander having thus said, the souldiers by their generall cry exprest their alacrity and readi∣nesse to march: wherfore giving them large pay, hee commands them to prepare for the voyage, & having made another speech (of like effect) to the Senate, he appoints a day for his departure: which being come, and the usual sacrifices & ceremonies perfor∣med, (all the Senate and City at∣tending him) hee departs from Rome, oftē looking back towards the City, and weeping. NeitherAlexander beloved o all. was there any of the people wch parted from him with drie eies: so dearely were they devoted to him, being bred amongst them, & having raigned so many years with such rare moderatiō. With speedy journeies hee visited
the Illyrian Nations and armies, and taking great forces from thence with him, he marched toHe marches to Antioch. Antioch, where he made diligent preparation for al warlike neces∣saries, still attending the training of Souldiers and other Martiall exercises. Here again (hoping to end the war by Treatie) hee sent another Embassie to the Persian king, to conclude a peace, & con∣tractAn Embas∣sie. a league with him. For be∣ing come so far in person, he was in hope either to perswade him, or at least to terrifie him. But the Barbarian prince proudly rejects the Roman Embassadors, & sends 400 of his tallest Persians in brave & rich attire as Heralds or embassadors, mounted on good∣ly coursers, wth their gay bowes and arrowes, thinking the Ro∣mans would be danted with the sight and habit of the Persians. His embassage was this, The great
King Artaxerxes commands theA braving Embassie. Romans and their Prince, to depart out of all Syria, and Asia Asia mi∣nor. that is op∣posite to Europe; to permit the Persi∣ans to rule as far as Ionia & Caria, & over all those countries which are divided by the Aegean and Pontick sea, and by patrimoniall right belong to the Persians. These 400 Em∣bassadors Alexander commandedEmbassa∣dors pu∣nisht. to bee apprehended, & stripping them of their Persian gallantry, banisht them into Phrygia, assign∣ing them certaine villages for dwelling, and fields for tillage: contenting himselfe to punish them by debarring their returne into their native countrie; it be∣ing (as he thought) an  unholy deed, & unmanly act to put them to death that fought not, but on∣ly executed their Soveraignes command. This done, Alexander being about to passe over the ri∣vers, and lead his Army into the
Barbarians countrey, many Ae∣gyptian souldiers revolted from him; and others began to make a commotion in Syria: but they were soone supprest and punisht. Alexander also sent some Forces into other countries, to prevent the Barbarians incursions. AllAlexanders policie. which things being set in order, and having now a great armie, not inferior to the enemy, he di∣vided it (by his councels advice) into three Battalions, comman∣ding one to march Northward through Armenia (which seem'd to be in friendly termes with the Romans) and that way to invade the Borders of Media; another likewise, to passe by the North through the Barbarian countries, where Tigris and Euphrates meer, & are drowned in great Marishes and lakes; whence it is unknown how they are dis-emboged; the third, being the best part of the
army, himself undertook to lead against the Barbarians, & assaile them in the midst. By this means he thought to take thē unprovi∣ded, invading thē several wayes, and that the Persian forces would be much distracted & weakned, and so lesse able to resist the Ro∣manes by being dispersed to in∣counter them in places so far dis∣terminated. For the Barbarians have no mercenary bands (as the Romans use) nor any set Camps or veterane Armies that are still exercised in Martiall discipline: but all their men (and women too sometimes) are mustered to∣gether at the Kings command: and after the war, return to their houses, taking (for their pay) all the booties they get. They use shooting and riding, not one∣lyArcherie (as the Romans) in war, but (e∣ven frō their childhood) in hun∣ting for their food: using their
bows perpetually on horsbacke, whether they follow the wars, or pursue wild beastes. This plot of Alexander, though it were plausi∣ble proved not fortunat: for the army that marcht thorow Arme∣nia, having with great difficulty climbed over the extreme steep and craggy Mountaines of thatThe Ar∣menian mountains. Region (which they did the bet∣ter, in regard it was Summer) en∣tred Media, where they burnt ma∣ny Villages, & got much pillage. Which the Persian King under∣standing, hastened against them with al his power. But they could not impeach the Romans, by rea∣son of the hillinesse and rough∣nesse of the countrie, which was more firm and pssable for foot∣men: but a maine hindrance to the Barbarian horse. Then came other news to the king that ano∣ther Army of the Romans had entred the Parthian dominions
Eastward, and wasted the Coun∣try. Fearing therfore, lest having soone conquered the Parthians, they should invade Persia, he left as many troopes as (he thought) were sufficient to defend Media, and posts with a puissant host to the East parts. The Roman Ar∣my when they saw none come a∣gainst them, began to bee more negligent in their march; suppo∣sing that Alexander had with the third part of the Army (which was the strongest) invaded the Barbarians in the middle. Re∣sting therfore & reposing them∣selves, they supposed there nee∣ded no hast; as not doubting, but that all the Army did come on, according to the first determina∣tion; to which purpose a place was assigned as a rendzvous for themselves, the prey & prisoners which they should take. But A∣lexander disappointed them: for
he neither went himself, nor sent the Army: whether for feare of losing his life in defending the Empire; or whether his mother out of a feminine feare and fond∣nes detained him, is uncertaine. Vndoubtedly shee did much a∣bate his noble courage, perswa∣ding him rather to expose others to danger, than himselfe to the fortune of war. By which means, the Roman army that had entred the Barbarians Countrey, was meerely betrayed. For the Persi∣an king leading all his forces a∣gainstThe Ro∣mans de∣feated. them ere they were aware, and taking them as it were in a net, gave thē an absolute defeat: for being few, they could not withstand so many: but guar∣ding as well as they could the o∣pen parts of their bodies (with their Armes) against the shot of the arrowes, they supposed they acquitted themselves well, if ma∣king
no resistance, they escaped safe. But having for some space defended themselves by joyning their targets together, as with a wall, & being like a city assaulted on every side, & grievously woū∣ded, at last, after a long and brave resistance, they were every man slaine. The losse of which great Army (which might well bee compared to any of the Anci∣ent, for valour or fidelity) was a mighty and unspeakable calami∣ty to the Romans. But the Persi∣an puft up with so good successe, bare his Crest aloft, and aspir'd to higher matters. Which when Alexander heard, being then very sick (either for griefe of mind, or unwholsomenesse of the aire) he tooke it exceeding heavilie: and all the Army was grievously offended with the Emperour: in that by disappointing his men, he had so foully betrayed thē. But
Alexander not able to endure hi sicknesse, nor that hot clime which afflicted all the army and especially the Illyrians (who ha∣ving beene used to a cold and moist aye, fed more plentifully than re) purposed to dis∣mach to Antioch▪ and send for thse few Souldiers that remai∣ned of thē that perish (amongst th Mountain  by extremity of the Winte season. The compa∣nies that lexander had wih him, he brought back to Antioch: ha∣ving lost many of them also: to his infinit dishonour, & his soul∣diers discontentment: Fortune failing him every where. For the most part of his threefold army (for so he divided it) perish di∣versly, either by sicknes, sword, or cold. Alexander being come to An∣tioch,Alexander retires to Antioch. and having soon recovered his health by the change of aire
(Mesopotamia being extreme hot, but Antioch much cooler, & well watred with dainty fountains) he refresh his army & reviv'd their drooping spirits with great store of Coine (for that he held to bePilula ∣eae, the best physicke for Souldiers. the onely preservative to assure the souldiers love.) Here he rai∣sed new Forces, as if he meant to leade another Army against the Persians, if they were further troublesom, & desisted not from their enterprises. But he received intelligence, that the Persian king had dismist all his Souldiers to their owne homes. And though the Barbarians seemed to have got the upper hād, yet were they excedingly wasted wth those fre∣quēt skirmishes & battels in Me∣dia & Persia▪ & they wch surviv'd were (forthe most part) grievous∣ly wounded and much weakned. For the Romans which fel, sold their lives full dearely, and lew
not a few of their Enemies, tho they were but a handful in com∣parison of them: insomuch that there were almost as many slain of the Barbarians as of the Ro∣mans, who were not inferior to them in valour, but number. And this was a certaine signe of the Barbarians great losse, that they took not armes, nor offered to stir for 3 or 4 yeares after. Alexander thus advertised, du∣ring his abode at Antioch, and be∣ing disburdened of the irksome care of War; he was much more free and frolicke, and gave him∣selfe to the City-pastimes and plesures. And now while he was confident that the Persians would bee quiet, or at least, that they would not (in hast) re-assemble their Forces, which are rather a confused multitude, then a wel∣ordered Army (for they have no other provision, thē what every
man brings from home for pre∣sent use; and are also very loath to leave their wives, children & possessiōs) there came posts with letters from the Procurators of Illyria, wch troubled Alexander & perplext him more thē ever: for they certified him, That the Ger∣manesThe Ger∣manes re∣bell. having past the Rhine, and I∣sther, had invaded the Roman Fron∣tiers, assaulted the Armies upon the Banks, & made great havock in the Cities and Villages: to the great ha∣zard of the Illyrian Regions adjacēt, and abutting on Italy: that his Pre∣sence therefore was mainly necessa∣ry, together with the whole Army. This newes amazed Alexander, and grieved the Illyrians, being twice miserable; by their late dis∣comfiture in the Persian expedi∣tion, and the slaughter of their countreymen by the German in∣cursions. They were therefore exceedingly enraged at th Em∣perour
for betraying the affaires of the East by his feare or negli∣gence, & for delaying to succour the North, being so earnestly called upon. And now Alexander and his Counsell began to mis∣doubt Italy: which was in grea∣ter danger of the Germanes then the Persians. For the remote Na∣tions of the Levant, so far dis∣joyned by Sea and Land, scarse heare of the name of Italy: but the Illyrian Dominions being of small extent, and consisting but of a few Provinces, are the only bar betwixt Italy and Germany. Being compelled therefore by necessity, hee much against his will proclaimes his Expedition: and leaving as many Companies as he thought sufficient to guard the Roman frontiers (having wel manned & fortified the Camps, Sconces, & other praesidiary pla∣ces) hee hastens with the rest of
the Army against the Germans. Having ended his Iourney withAlexander come to the Rhine. great speed, he incamped on the bankes of the Rhine, and there made provision for the German War. He made a bridge of ships and barges for the more easie passage of his Army over the ri∣ver: Rhenus and Isther being the greatest rivers of the North: the one rūning through Germany, the other through Pannonie. In sum∣mer they are navigable, by rea∣son of their deep & broad chan∣nells: but in winter they are so frozen, that they are ridden o∣ver, as if they were Plaines: the Ice being so firm and thick, that it bears not only horse and man, but they also which want water, bring not with them Pitchers or other vessels, but axes and hat∣chets, wherewith they hew out water, and carry it thence like stones. Alexander had in his Ar∣my
divers Regiments of Moors, and a goodly band of Archers, which hee brought out of the East; some from the Oroenes Country; others, that were Par∣thian Fugitives, or Stripendaries, which he sent against the Get∣mans, who were much infestedMoores ge∣nelly nle∣footed. by them: for the Moors cast their darts at a great distance, and are very deft and nimble in runningArchers. to and fro: and the archers stan∣ding afarre off, easily hit the na∣ked heads and vast bodies of the Germanes; being faire ma ks to shoot at. Sometimes also they came to hand-stroks; wherin the Germans were (oft) not inferior to the Romans. While these things were on foot, Alexander sent em∣bassadoursEmbassa∣dors. to them to treat of peace, and to assure them that they should want nothing that they needed, & that they should be well furnisht with mony. For
the Germans are soonest perswa∣ded with that, being very greedy of Ghelt, and ever ready to chaf∣fer peace with the Romanes for gold. Alexander therfore assayed rather to buy a league, than to ha∣zard himself in the war. But his Souldiers were much disconten∣ted, that they spent their time vainly and were not led to some brave Service or gallant Enter∣prise. Alexander (as they said) ca∣ring more to follow his Charret∣ting and Revelling, than to pur∣sue or punish the presumptuous Germanes (as concerned him.) Now there was in the army one Maximine, borne in an obscureMaximine  described Village of the innermost part of Thrace, a Semi barbarian; and which in his younger age had beene bred a Shepherd; after, being at mans estate, hee was for his bulk and strength appointed to serve in the warres among a
troope of horse; soone after, Fortune leading him by the hand, he passed through all Mi∣litary preferments, to the com∣mand of Armies and Provinces. Thus Maximine, was for his sin∣gular skil in the exercise of arms, made Captain by Alexander, over all the yong souldiers; to the end to traine and make them fit for Service. Who performing his taske with care and diligence was very gracious with all the army. For he did not only teach them what they should doe, but himselfe did by his owne exam∣ple, daily instruct them: where∣by they became not onely his Schollers, but also  zealous imi∣tators of his valour, being obli∣ged to him by Donatures, and all manner of honors. These young Souldiers (whereof many were Pannonians) applauded Maxi∣mine for his prowesse; but scor∣ned
Alexander, as being still Ward to his mother, & wholly subject to the authoritie and will of a woman, which made him so slowly and unmanly to pro∣secute the warres: whereby the orientall expedition miscarried: and nothing (in effect) was done against the Germans. And now being naturally prone to Inno∣vation, and wearied with the long raigne of the Prince, which was but little beneficiall to them (there being no competitors for the Empire) hoping also that if some other were made Empe∣rour (beyond his expectation) it would be more for their profit and preferment, they resolved to kill Alexander and elect Maxi∣mine Emperour, who was their comrado and fellow in Armes, and for his Martiall skill and va∣lour fittest for the present warre. Assembling therefore into the
field in Armes, when Maximine came (as his manner was) to train them, they invest him with Pur∣ple, and salute him Emperour,Maximine elected Em¦perour. which whether it were so com∣plotted, or hee were ignorant of their intentions, it is uncertaine. At first he refused and threw a∣way the Purple. But when the Souldiers brandisht their Cymi∣ters, threatning to kill him if he yielded not, he chose rather to a∣void the present then future pe∣rill; and accepted the Honour; which (hee said) had beene oft foretold him by Oracles and dreames: protesting withal to the Souldiers, that it was much a∣gainst his will, yet he would sub∣mit to their importunity: & see∣ing they would needs have it so, he wisht them instantly to take armes, & before the rumor were blazed▪ to surprize Alexander that knew nothing of it, that his soul∣diers
and guard being astonisht with the newes, might either be drawne to their party, or being taken unprovided, compelled to yield. Then cheering all the Ar∣my, with promising them a dou∣ble portion of Corne, extraordi∣nary Donatives, and remission of all punishments and penalties, he leads thē straight towards Alex∣anders Pavillion, not far thence; who, when hee heard of it, was mightily amazed, & leapt forth of his royal tent like a mad man; weeping and trembling, and ac∣cusing Maximine as perfidious and ungratefull for all the ho∣nours he had done him; and the young souldiers as perjur'd & dis∣loyall for conspiring with him. Lastly, he promised to give what they would have, and amend whatsoever was amisse. The Souldiers that were with him, comforting him for the pre∣sent
said they would stand for him to the uttermost. When the night was past, and it was now day, newes comming that Maxi∣mine was at hand, that a great dust was seene, and a huge multi∣tude heard not far off, Alexander went again into the Plaine, & as∣sembling the souldiers, besought them to protect and defend him that was bred up by them, & had raigned 14 yeares without har∣ming any: whereat, all commise∣rating him, he commanded them to take armes & charge the ene∣my. But the Souldiers, though they gave him good words, yet slipt away one after another, and would not fight. Some wisht the Praetorian Praefect and Alexan∣ders Courtiers might bee execu∣ted, imputing the mutiny to thē. Others laid all the blame on his mother, which by her insatiable avarice and base niggardice (in
scanting the souldiers) had made Alexander odious. Thus for some while they parlied and argued, but marched not. When Maxi∣mines army came in sight, & be∣gan to perswade them to leave that wretched woman, and puny Prince, that was still under his mothers wing; and adhere to a valiant Souldier and brave com∣mander, that was their own com∣panion in armes, and an excellent Master in the Art Military; they all presently revolted from Alex∣ander, and with one voice pro∣clamed Maximine Emperour. A∣lexanderExtreme calamitires confound the spirit. in great feare and distra∣ction returnes to his Pavillion, where hanging on his mother & (as they say) bemoning his infor∣tunity, which happened by her meanes; he expected his deaths∣man. Maximine being saluted Au∣gustus by all the army, comman∣ded the Knight Marshalls andO▪ Trin
some Centurions, to put Alexan∣der and his mother to death, and all that resisted. Wherupon theyAlexander slaine. rusht into his Tent and slew him with his Mother, friends, and counsellors: except them that a little before escaped by flight or concealment: which yet soon after were all apprehended and slaughtered by Maximine. This end had Alexander and his Mo∣ther, having raigned 14 yeares without  blame or bloud. For he abhorred murther and cruel∣ty, and was so mild and tempe∣rate, that he suffered none to dy, but those that were condemned by Law: and had not his misera∣ble Mother blasted his Honour by her ordid demeanour, there had beene nothing wanting to have rendred him a most excel∣lent Prince. The End of the Sixth Booke.
HERODIAN HIS IMPERIALL HISTORIE. The seventh Booke. The Contents. MAgnus. Quartinus made Em∣peror against his will. Macedon a base Traytor. Germans good swim∣mers and souldiers. A terrible battel in a Poole, betwixt Romanes and Ger∣manes. Informers and Catch-poles o∣mented by Maximine. His Covetous∣nesse, Cruelty, and Sacriledge. The Romanes Devotion. Africke revolts. A Speech to Gordian; elected Em∣perour. Vitalian slaine. Insurrection at Rome. Sabinus slaine. Maximines Flies and Spies. His Speech to the Ar∣my. His Expedition to Italy. Capel∣lian defeats the Carthaginians. Prince Gordian elected and slaine. The Em∣perour
Gordian strangles himself. The Romans solemn Parliament in Ioves Temple. Maximus and Albinus ele∣cted Emperors by the Senate, and re∣jected by the Commons. The Commons deluded. Gordian Caesar. Souldiers slaine. A Commotion at Rome. Fen∣cers slain. A Conncel of war. A general pardon. A Stratagem. Rome fired. WE have shewed in the for∣mer Book, how Alexan∣der demeaned himselfe in his 14 yeares raigne, and how he died. Maximine having attai∣ned the Soveraingty, there fol∣lowed a strange alteration. For he carried himself in such rough & terrible sort, that the Empire was now fallen frō a faire calme rule, to a stormy blustring Ty∣ranny. Knowing now he should be generally prejudged, because he was the first that was raised frō the lowest step, to the high∣est State; and being also a Barba∣rous caitife and villaine of birth,
and by education, custome, and condition, given to bloud; his chiefe care was to settle himself in the Empire by crueltie: suppo∣sing hee should bee (otherwise) contemptible to the Roman Se∣nat and subjects, who would not so much consider his present fortune, as the basenes of his pa∣rentage: for all men knew that (first) he was a Shepherd in the Mountaines of Thrace: and that after, being (for his vastnesse & activity) prest for a soldier amōg his poore countreimen, he was led by the hand (as it were) of Fortune, to the Roman Empire: wherefore he instantly  discom∣posed all Alexanders councellors & assistants that were chosen by the Senat; sending some of them to Rome; and depriving others of their offices, upon pretence of misgovernment. Which he pur∣posely did, that being rid of all
which were his betters (in birth) he might the more freely & un∣controlably practise (in his Ar∣my, as in a strōg Arcenal) al kind of Tyranny, without regard to any. Hee banisht also from the court, al Alexanders servants, that had so many yeares waited, and put many of them to death upon misprision of Treason, because they mourned for their old ma∣ster. But that which set a keene edge upon his Tyranny, was an information, that many Cap∣taines and all the Roman Senate conspired against him. There was one Magnus, a veryMagnus. noble Gentleman, that had been Consul; who was accused to the Emperor that he raised a faction against him, and dealt with the Souldiers to make himselfe Em∣peror. The Plot was said to be this: Maximin had built a bridge over the River to go against the
Germans; for as soon as he came to the Soveraignty, he presently applyed himselfe to the warres. For being elected to the Empire for his huge bulke, approved va∣lour, & skill in military affaires, he intended by deeds of Armes to confirme the Soldiers in their good opinion, and to make the world know, that Alexanders feare, &  retardation of the war, was justly to bee condemned. Wherfore he spared no pains to muster and traine the Souldiers, and being still in armes himselfe, he mightily incouraged the Ar∣my Having made the bridge, he purposed to passe into Germany. But Magnus was reported to have perswaded many of the best sol∣diers (who had the charge of guarding the bridge) that as soon as Maximine were passed over, they should cut it down; and so (preventing his returne) betray
him to the Barbarians. For so deep & broad was the river, that it was impossible hee should re∣treat (there being no ships on the other side.) This was the rumor, but whe∣ther true, or feigned by Maxi∣min, is uncertain; for it is hard to determine any thing therein; all that were suspected, being sud∣denly apprehended, and cruelly slain, without Iudiciall Processe or Pleading. But now the Osro∣ene Archers began to revolt. For being much griev'd at Alexanders murther, & meeting (by chance)Quartinus with Quartinus one of Alexanders friends (dismist but a little before by Maximine) they layd hold on him, and utterly against his will made him their Chiefe, and ho∣nouring him with the fatall Or∣naments of Purple, and Fire car∣ried before him, they proclamed him Emperor, that neither knew
of it before, nor thought of it: howbeit, soone after sleeping in his Tent, he was suddenly slain by one that had beene his com∣panion, and (as some say) his af∣fied friend: whose name was Ma∣cedon,Macedon. the Captain of the Osro∣ens, and the first mover of their revolt frō Maximin. And though hee had no cause nor quarrell at all against him; yet he slew him, whom himself had compelled to take upō him the Empire. Then, thinking he should be wondrous welcom to Maximine, he brought him Quartinus head for a Pre∣sent. Maximine being glad to see it, and rejoycing that his enemy was so easily made away; wher∣as the Actour expected great thanks and preferment; hee put him to a most cruell death; as a Ringleader of Rebellion, a mur∣therer of him that hee had per∣swaded (against his will) to that
enterprize; and a Traitour to his dearest friend. These & the like occasions whetted Maximine to all immanity, that (of himselfe) was exceeding bloudy. He had a horrible ugly countenance, and such a Cyclopicall Bulk, that no Greek nor Barbarian Champi∣on was comparable to him. Ha∣ving thus ordered his affaires, he leads all his army with great cou∣rage over the Bridge, and makes war upon the Germans. A won∣drous multitude of people fol∣lowed him; almost all the Ro∣man forces, the Moresco darters, and many Bands of Archers of the Osroens and Armenians: (whereof, the first are Vassalls to the Romans; the latter their Al∣lies and Confederates) as also the mercenary and fugitive Parthi∣ans, and the Captives of that na∣tion that served the Romanes in the war. Which confused Masse,
having been first raked together by Alexander, was after augmen∣ted & well trained by Maximine. These Darters and Archers are very serviceable against the Ger∣mans, because they nimbly sally forth upon the enemy (ere they are aware) and easily retreat into the Grosse of the army. Maximin be∣ing entred the enemies country, & finding none to resist him (for all the Barbarians were fled) spoi∣led all the country, (the corn be∣ing now ready to reape) leaving all the villages to be burnt & pil∣laged by the souldiers. Their ci∣ties & buildings are very apt to take fire, for the Germans rarely use to build with stone or brick, their houses being like sheds made of bords & timber fastned together. Maximin progressing in this sort, burning all the fields, & giving al the cattell to the Soul∣diers, could yet find no enemies.
For they had left all the Cham∣paigne and plaine Country, and betaken thēselves to the woodsWoods & Bogs. and bogs, where they skulked & watched their advantage to make an irruption upon the enemy: as knowing that the trees wch grew so thicke would hinder the ene∣mies Darts & Arrowes; and the depth of the bogs would be dan∣gerous for the Romans that knew thē not: but easie & accessible to them that wel knew where they were passable, running daily tho∣row them, up to the knees. The Germanes also are very skilfullThe Ger∣mans good swimmers. swimmers, using to wash only in Rivers. In these difficult places beganne the battell, the Roman Emperor himselfe most bravely giving the onset. For being come to a mighty great Meare or Ma∣rish, whither the Germanes had fled, the Romans fearing to fol∣low them; Maximin was the first
that entred with his horse: whereA terible battell in a Poole. plunging above the horse-belly, he made a great slaughter of the Barbarians that very stoutly re∣sisted. Whereat the Soldiers be∣ing abasht lest they should seeme o betray their Emperour, leapt boldly into the Mear, where ma∣ny on both sides were slain (but the Barbariās were almost cut of) the Romane prince most valiantly fighting in person: insomuch that the poole being fild up with car∣casses, and the fennes all purpled with bloud, it represented a gast∣ly & hideous sight of a sea-fight (as it were) on land. This battel and his other Martiall acts, the Emperour did not onely certify by Letters to the Roman Senate and People, but cōmanded also the Portrait of them (at large) to be publikly set before the Coun∣cel-house, that the Romans might not onely heare, but behold also
his brave Exployts. Which Ta∣ble (with his other honours) was afterward taken downe by the Senat. Other skirmishes there were, in all which, hee fought in the head of his troopes, and with his own hands hewed out his ho∣nour. Winter approaching, he re∣treated (with many prisoners, and mighty booties) into Pannonia Where, in Sirmium (the greatest City of that Countrey) he lay in Garrison, preparing for a Spring▪ War; and often saying (which he seemed to intend) that he would exterminate and subdue all the Barbarous nations of Germany to the very Ocean. Such a famous Warriour hee was! And surely great Glory he had got, had he not beene more bloody and cru∣ell to his owne subjects than to the enemies. For what thanks to kill Barbarians, if far more were murthered in Rome it selfe. FINIS.
