16777.2 33142672 28173
A. 18. Iaco∣bi Regis. 1620. The briefe Contents of the Bill exhibited against Logwood, and abuses in dying. 1 THis Bill vtterly prohibiteth, not onely the importa∣tion into this Realme of all Logwood alias Block∣wood, Saint Martins wood, and Campecha wood, and all mixtures to dye withall, thereof or therewith made; but also the buying, selling, vsing, dying with, occupying and keeping the same: vpon paine of forfeiture of 40 pounds, whereof a third part to the King, another third to the poore of the Parish, and another third to the Informer; besides such corporall punishment as by the Statute of 39. Eliz. is to bee inflicted on such as vse Logwood in dying, viz. To bee set on the Pillory all the market time, one or more dayes, at the discre∣tion of the Magistrate. Reasons. 1 The former Lawes extend not to the prohibition of the importation, and Logwood being licenced to be imported, Dyers will secretly get and vse the same, which cannot bee preuented, vnlesse the importation be vtterly prohibited. 2 These woods are all of one or like deceitfull nature and qualitie, yet of different names, de∣uised to defeate the Lawes, which extend only to Logwood alias Blockwood. 3 Notwithstanding all the Art and cunning that can be vsed in the mixture of these woods, yet the colours therewith all dyed, are very false and deceitfull. 4 By the prohibition of the importation of these woods, his Maiesties Customes will excee∣dingly increase: for by the booke of Rates no Custome is paid for Logwood (the King not tolle∣rating the importation) and euery Tunne of these woods spent in dying, saueth the spending of ten Tunnes of woad, or the value of so much in Indico, for which Custome is paid, so that it is manifest, that by the licence granted for importation of fiftie Tunne of Logwood yearly (if vn∣der colour thereof no more be brought in, as it is to be doubted the contrary) yet the King lo∣seth yearly the benefit of the Custome of 500. Tunnes of woad, or of the value thereof in Indico. 5 By the vse of these woods the Subiect is deceiued, the art of dying both at home and abroad much scandalized, and the ancient Trade of clothing in this Realme greatly decayed. 2 This Bill authoriseth all persons by warrant of the Ma∣jor or head Officer of any Citie or Towne corporate, or of two Iustices of peace of the Countie, to search in all suspected places for the said woods and stuffe to die withall, and finding the same, to seize and deliuer to the said Majors, &c. who are to cause the same to be speedily burned. Reasons. 1 Vnlesse they bee so authorised, they cannot finde where the same woods shall be hidden. 2 Vnlesse the woods may be speedily burned, the keeping of them may proue very hurtfull. 3 This Bill authoriseth any person by like warrant, to search for Clothes deceitfully dyed. Reasons. Which being found, the punishment for the same is prouided by former Statutes. 4 This Bill authoriseth the Wardens of the company of Diers in London, to make the like search in all places in Lon∣don and the Liberties, and within three miles thereof. Reasons. Otherwise many Dyers in those places, not free of the Company of Dyers, will not permit such search to be made. 5 This Bill forbiddeth all persons vsing dying in London and the Liberties, or within three miles thereof, to woad any Clothes or Stuffes of a lighter or lesser woad then the stalls or samples shalbe of, which shalbe deliuered to them by order of the Wardens & Assistants of the company of Dyers in Lon∣don,  on paine to forfeit fiue pounds for euery peece of broad∣cloth, & fiftie shillings for euery peece of other cloth or stuffe so insufficiently woaded, which forfeitures, as aforesaid, are to the King, to the Poore, and to the Informer. Reasons. The Free-men of the Company of Dyers in London, are by their Ordinances strictly bound to obserue this good order; but many per∣sons in those places vsing dying, some free of other companies, and some strangers, not being bound to performe this order, doe daily commit many notable deceits to the abuse of the Subiect, and scandall of the Art or mysterie of Dying. 6 This Bill appointeth the Wardens and Assistants of the company of Dyers in London, within ten dayes after Mid∣sommer, yearely to nominate, at the least foure persons ex∣pert in dying, which shall bee Searchers for woaded colours, which Searchers are to be sworne before the Lord Major and Aldermen in London, for the due execution of their office: and the Wardens and comminalty of Dyers,  for neglect of such yearly nomination to forfeit twenty pounds to the King and Informer. Reasons. This Company best knowing who are most expert in that Art, are fittest to haue the nomination of the said Searchers. 7 This Bill authoriseth the said Searchers so named, and sworn to search in al places within the limits aforesaid, where dying is vsed, all clothes and stuffes woaded before they shall bee turned out of the woad into other colours, and shall seale such clothes and stuffes which they shall find well and truely woaded with seales of lead, stamped with such seuerall stamps for seuerall colours, as are prouided for that purpose by the Wardens of the companie of Dyers: and such clothes and stuffes which the Searchers shall find or suspect to bee insuffi∣ciently woaded, to bring the same to the Dyers Hall in Lon∣don, there by a court of Assistants to be adiudged whether the same shalbe sufficiently woaded or not, and then to be redeli∣uered to the Dyer from whom the same was taken. Reasons. 1 By sight of the clothes and stuffes in the woad, expert pesons may the better discerne whether they are sufficiently woaded for th lours appointed for them, or not. 2 The like seale is appointed by diuers Statutes for diuers things, to the end that the Subiect might not be deceiued. 3 The Free-men of the Companie of Dyers vsing dying, haue many yeares past obserued this good order, which for preuention of deceit is also necessarie to bee done by all others vsing dying, though not free of their Companie. 4 Sometimes the deceit may bee so much shadowed by Art that the Searchers may bee doubtfull thereof, in which cases the triall thereof cannot more easily be made then by a court of Assistants of that Com∣panie. 8 This Bill imposeth a forfeiture of 20 pounds to the King and Informer, vpon euery person which shal not suffer search to be made, according to the tenor of this Act. Reasons.Diuers presentiments there are of the like, as 3. Ed. 6. c. 2. & 4. & 5. Ph. & M. cap. 5. 9 This Bill alloweth (towards the prouision of seales and lead, and recompence of Searchers) ob. to bee taken for the sealing of euery peece of cloth and stuffe well woaded, and that for non payment thereof, the Wardens of the Company of Dyers may distraine: The taking of which ob. cannot bee termed a Monopoly, for these reasons, viz. Reasons. 1 The same is taken of the Dyer only, who therefore doth not in any wise enhance his prices of dying, and therefore not preiudiciall to the common-wealth in generall. 2 It is doubtful whether  ob. vpon the peece wil defray the charge for lead, seales, & searchers. 3 If the profit should surmount the charge, yet the ouerplus being reserued to the Company of Dyers, is there to lye in stocke for the discharge of all extraordinarie payments and taxations, which otherwise are to be leuyed vpon euery particular person by the Pole, which stocke being so maintayned, euery member of that Company is partaker of the benefit thereof, and therefore not to be thought vnnecessarie to be paid. 4 Presidents there are diuers of receits vpon sealing, as by Statute of 5. Ed. 6. c. 6. for sealing of cloth well dressed &c. 35. Eliz cap. 10. sor searching and marking of Carsies, 1. Ia. cap. 22. for sea∣ling of leather, &c. 10 This Bill also imposeth a forfeiture of 20 pounds to the King and Informer, vpon euery Major, Iustice of peace, head Officer, Constable, &c. which shall bee negligent in the due execution of this Act, for so much as appertayneth to them. Reasons. This is not vnnecessarie, because the life of the Law is in the execu∣tion thereof. All former Lawes not repealed, made for preuention of deceits in dying and against vsing of Logwood, for so much as are not repugnant to this Act, to stand in force, this Act notwithstanding.
