17395 99845503 10408
THE TEARES OF THE BELOVED: Or, THE LAMENTATION OF Saint Iohn, Concerning the death and passion of Christ Iesus our Sauiour. By I. M. Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford: And are to be sold by Iohn Browne, at the signe of the Bible in Fleete-streete. 1600.
To the Christian Reader. ME seemeth, the same, who had so reso∣lute a purpose to enlarge our Saui∣ours suffring, tooke on him a weari∣some and needelesse iourney (for that he left the most sacred Scriptures) and made inquirie after Codrus, that was sometime King of Athens: which Codrus, begirt with a strong siege of the Peloponesians, hazarded his best health for his cities good. For though the example appeareth to hold in our head Christ, and their ru∣ler, because both beare the titles of Kings; else in this, for that both died for the good of their people: Yet questionlesse, the oddes betwixt both are won∣derfull: for what is the shaddow to the substance? A King for a small time, to a King beyond all time? the one a creature, the other a Creator? The one for a few, but our King from before all be∣ginning, to the end of the world, is that Lambe of God, &c. Leauing the one which was finite, I com∣mend thee (courteous reader) to the same who is as he
euer hath beene, and will be, infinite in his fauors to those that are his: And I offer thee my harsh and vntuned muse, which being as my talent is, slender and simple, so accompt of the first part, that I may not be discomfited in the second. The highest conti∣nue his fauours and graces vnto his Church, and shield vs in these dangerous dayes, from his and our enemies, Amen. Thine vndoubtedly, I. M.
THE TEARES OF the Beloued. THou first and last, author and cause of all, That wast with God, before these worlds were made, Thou perfect Good, whom I Gods word will call, Most soueraigne grace, do with thy grace me trade, That from thy fauors, as from fountaine rare In flowing sort, I may thy selfe declare. Euen in thy might, thou art beyond esteeme: For this wide world, thou art the chiefest King: For heauens high head, the angels all thee deeme, Within thy Church, thy saints thy prayses sing. Vnto my soule, thou art the chiefe of choyce; Life of my life, I must in thee reioyce. Now that I leane vpon thy sacred brest, In thee I ioy, sweete Sauiour of mankind: Hauen of health, succour to soules opprest, Oceans of ease, in thee the poore shall finde: For broken heart, pyning away with griefe, Sorrowing for sinne, findeth in thee reliefe.
Fly foorth, my soule, for sure this Word diuine, Hath power on thee, to call thee backe againe; Vnseene thou art, my body doth thee shrine, Bodilesse, and immortall, subiect to ioy or paine. To none more like, then to that hidden grace The godhead hath, which Sathan would deface, O that I might commaund the moone to stay; O that the houre of darknes, hence might poast; But Gods decree must stand, though flesh gainsay; There's no resist, to that he purposeth most. His bitter death, from death shall saue mankinde; Wonder of Angels, to foes that art so kinde. Come, Peter, come, come, Iames, my brother deare; Our Lord doth haste, and hasting calles vs hence; You know the place, although it darke appeare; This light so true, and truth is our defence. More might he hath, then any fenced tower More strength he hath, then any earthly power. Now in our walke, recompt his power diuine, Which like sunne-rayes, shall spread in euery place. Such strange effects from this chiefe good do shine, That foggie mists of foes farre hence shall chace. Stoope, furious fiends, ye malice him in vaine: He hath great power, your frenzies to restraine.
See how this Lambe, of sinne that hath no spot, Seemes dombe, and mute, he answereth not at all; What he foretold, must not be now forgot: Let vs with teares, record what must befall. Exceeding griefe we had, when thou didst say; One of vs twelue, should thee our Lord betray. That griefe being past, another is in place. But may it be that thus thou shouldest faint? Ah, shew thy might, those hellish hags to chace, Who thee and vs do force to sad complaint. I say no more, that must my moane restraine: This garden wils, I should a while refraine. Refraine, said I? no, now began my moane; Seeing sluggish sloth, my eyes with sleepe opprest, I carelesse slept, but Lord of Life did groane, With griefe of griefs, that brought him such vnrest. Woe worth my sinne, the cause of his complaint, Forcing my Lord indure such hard constraint. He will'd vs stay, and watch with him a space, And proofe hereof, we had from sad aspect. Full fraighted he with griefe for mans disgrace, Strangely perplext, did yeeld cause of suspect. My soule, he said, is heauie to the death, Oh stay and watch, sorrow now stops my breath.
Away he went, and fell vpon his face, Where groanes, and sighes, shewed a troubled minde. O father mine, he said, afford this grace, If it may be, thou wilt approue thy kind: Let this fierce cup, I pray thee passe from me: Not as I will, but as thou wilt, let be. After he came, and found vs three to sleepe, Simon, said he, can ye not watch one houre? Watch ye with me, 'tis prayer must ye keepe From Sathans spight, to tempt he hath the power. See, see, the spirit is prest, the gole to gaine: But flesh is fraile, esteeming labour paine. Away from vs the second time he went, Begging againe, Oh father mine I pray, If thou as yet, to fauour so art bent, Permit this cup, no longer with me stay: If needes I must indeede drinke of the same, Thy will be done, vpon me rest the blame. And then he came, but found vs fast to sleepe, Our heauie heads were glad in warre to rest. He saw our want, and kept vs as his sheepe: Cause had he none, being himselfe opprest. For friends are knowne, when dangers most assaile: Deeme him thy selfe, that for thee shall preuaile.
Stay here and pawse, before he come againe, Why what should moue vs three be so vnkinde, To worke our woe, to seeke our selues such paine, That what he would we should so little minde? Surely the best, in their decline should say; There is iust cause, Sathan should on vs pray. Admit before, his preaching did vs stay, Or such like let, cannot our crime excuse: He is our Lord, how might we him gainesay? For fond resist, proues, we did him abuse. Ours was the lot, our Lord thus to offend: His was the grace, to guide vs to the end. And though we slept, from heauen an angell sent, Did comfort him, whom we in griefe did leaue: Great was his griefe; for hell did him preuent, With endlesse pangs, of heauen him to bereaue: And gastly sweate, vpon his face was found, Like drops of blood, that trickling fell to ground. Ye siluer drops, that from my eyes thus streame; Crossing that coulour, brinish as ye be! My Lords were red; for forc't with paines extreame, He ventured life, from death to set vs free. His bitter pangs, what pen or wit can tell? My Lord indured th'extreame paines of hell.
Cast we our sight on one that parteth hence, Striuing for life, when soule away must poast; In such we see cleane gone to be their sence, They yeld to that, which cleareth euery coast. So when that death, his message pale hath done, He sweeps all hence; and thus the fort is wonne. Or thinke thou standst, this present at the barre, Before the iudge, that pryes into thy blame, Thou knowst thy guilt, thy discord makes the iarre: Thy sinnes preuaile, forcing thy vtter shame. The irefull iudge begins with angry frowne: And e're he speake, thy conscience casts thee downe. O Sauiour sweete, thou hadst thy proper sence: With perfect health, thou didst approch this place, All furious fiends of hell thou driuedst hence, Death hath no power thy godhead to deface: The angry iudge, thou needest not to feare, Thou hadst no sinne, and yet our sinne didst beare. Our sinnes did force, that far from natures reach, These blooddy drops should still from our sweet head, In these, euen yet, presumers he doth teach, They be not bold, the tract of hell to tread, Lest all too soone they fall into the snare, The angry iudge doth for his foes prepare.
These drops declare his inward sad lament; For greater griefe no earthly tongue can tell: They shew his loue to vs what good he ment He would we knew, his griefe did farre excell. Oh, why do men delight with sinnes to dwell, When sinnes do weigh the sinner downe to hell? He gaue the checke to vs for former sleepe, Graunting vs leaue, of ease to take our fill, That had no care, in anguish him to keepe, With good regard who suffred for our ill. Behold, quoth he, of darknes now the hower: Of Sonne of man, sowle sinners haue the power. Iudas, that treason harbored in his brest, Knew well that here our Lord did oft resort Vnto this place: knowledge had wrought thy rest, If all in time, thou wouldst haue found comfort: But murtherous wretch, this onely did thee good: Thou thirstie wert after th'innocent blood. O monstrous change, that from a friend of trust, Thou art a fox, and wilt thy friend betray! Companion once, and now mongst thieues to thrust, As chiefest guide, the spotlesse Lambe to fray. Cannot great fauours, cause thee to returne, Thou wofull wretch, at goodnes that dost spurne:
How many speeches, tending to our health; What feruent vowes, he sent beyond the sky: All wayes were sought, still to procure our wealth; His grace to none that would, he did deny. Might not his grace, from treason thee reclaime, But at his life, thou traytour, now wilt aime? Ye couetous carles, that for a little gaine Set soule to sale, as though there vvere no hell, Looke on this Iudas, thinke vpon his paine; His endlesse pangs all torments far excell. The very fire, the forged far doth passe: And like hell fire, no torment euer vvas. Consider yet, vvhile here vve haue a space, What griefe it is, to be exilde from God; What ioy it is, to view his pleasant face; What paine it is, to feele his heauie rod. Thrise happie they, that cleaue vnto thy grace: Thrise cursed they, that will not life imbrace. O vvretched man, bereft of inward peace, Commest thou arm'd, vvith vveapons and vvith lights? A cutthroate crew serue for thy shames increase, Are these thy mates? belike feare thee affrights. A guiltie conscience brings a restlesse griefe: Easlesse in ease, finding no sound reliefe.
Thou stately citie, of the highest King, Fitting thy name, that hadst the prince of peace: Whilom whose praise, the virgins faire did sing, What time thy glory, the chiefest did increace: Thy famous temple deuotion that relieues, Is now become a den for lothsome thieues. And must thy rulers now their forces bend, To send their seruants forth in all the haste, To binde this lambe, and then his blood to spend? What do ye long, to see your land lye waste? All this was done the Scripture to fulfill. Who can dissolue, what God alone doth will? In these we see, that bring such weapons stoare, How foes with might, Gods children doe oppresse, They haue no truth, and as for iustice loare, They likewise want, which causes should redresse: Trusting to flesh, this stay as it is wurst: So for this fault, they are of God accurst. Forward they march, bringing along their light, Their lanterns, that a little light containe, With other helpes, to guide them in the night, Vsing the lesse, and from the great refraine: To dim that light, each one doth now prepare: For light of world, no whit at all they care.
Christ knowing well the secrets of mankind, This instant sawe, what should to him betyde; Forward he goeth against the crue vnkind, From whom he could haue parted cleane vnspyde. Whom do ye seeke, said he, to me now tell. Iesus of Nazareth, said they; and downe they fell. This hath the taste of his most soueraigne might, Who with a word, could strike them to the ground. Weake is mans power, if God begin to fight, His only breath can all his foes confound. If slender touch, huge mountaines maketh smoke, How dates then man, his Maiestie prouoke? The harmlesse Lambe deuoide of sinfull spot, Askes the offenders and doth them preuent. Wanted they lawes? was piety cleane forgot? Should they not loue, and keepe the innocent? Yes, yes, they knew, th'innocents blood would cry For sharpe reuenge, against this carelesse fry. Whom do ye seeke? he verely did scorne Their fond attempt, deriding all their force: Yet offereth grace to men that were forlorne: And sure he had, euen of his foes remorce. For from themselues, he would they should confesse, That weaponlesse, he could their wrong represse.
Oh, vvhen vve heare, that of his francke accord Our God is good, to his professed foes; How kinde a good, is this our soueraigne Lord, Vnto his friends, on vvhom he grace bestowes? Oh, loue this Well, and Fountaine of all grace: Tender his truth, and all his heasts imbrace. No vvhit dismaid, Christ said, Euen I am he: Which ready speech prooueth he fear'd not death. This holy Sauiour vvould his owne flocke free, By suffring shame, and stopping of his breath. Learne courage hence, Gods cause if vve defend, He fights for vs, that life for vs did spend. Now Iudas stood, vvith all this armed traine, Like Bayard bold, forecasting no mishap Vnto himselfe, whereby he might refraine The further ill, by falling in the trap. Thus one vile sinne, another sinne doth chaine, Vntill it bring th'offender to his paine. Whom do ye seeke? the second time he said. Iesus of Nazareth, they say to him againe. That I am he, before I not denayd: If me ye seeke, from these I pray refraine. This, that the word fulfil'd might be, he spake: Of them thou gauest, I will not one forsake.
Now louing Lord, I thinke vpon this care Thou hadst for vs, and I remember well, Seeing thou alone, to suffer didst prepare: For so of old, sweete Esay did foretell. And when thy pangs appeard, fresh to approch, Thou hadst a care, foes should not vs reproch. Attend ye pastors, that your flocke should feede: How that our Lord did say, he none had lost. Your charge is great, ye dayly prayer neede, To cheere those soules, bought with so royall cost. They are Christs flocke, his blood thē bought indeed. My lambs, good Peter, O my sheepe still feed. Before that Peter heard these words thrise tolde, He was couragious ere he saw the fight; His sword he drew, like to a champion bolde, And Malchus eare, he cutteth off outright. Into thy sheath, thy sword put vp let be. Shall I not drinke that cup preparde for me? Thus said our Lord, who by this checke so kinde, Would take from Peter, his no small offence; From priuate men, the vse of sword to binde: Except that Kings arme subiects for defence. And for Religion gladly should we fight: That cause is good, and God will aide the right.
But Peters fault appeareth now the more: For sharpe reuenge belongeth vnto God: Too saucie he, Gods taske to take therefore: Him to resist, is to procure his rod: For spirituall warre are weapons of that kinde: Search we the word, and there we shall them finde. And now the band, the captaine, with the rest, Our Sauiour tooke, and fast they do him binde, His inward griefe I moand, now is exprest: The outward anguish, that my Lord did finde. They had no might, his person to assaile, He suffred them, and then they did preuaile. Not one, but many (then began their spight,) Inflam'd with wrath, incensed with great yre, Their masters would, them now in blood delight, And they deuise, how to increase that fire. If high estates against Religion frowne, They shall haue mates, to cast it hedlong downe. Ah wicked Iudas, this was thy consent, Vsing all meanes, that might our Lord betray. Lay holde on him, were words with fury bent: No maruayle then, if these from reason stray. Thy words, and workes so treasonfull descry, Vnder greene grasse, a serpent foule may lye.
The father in law of Caiphas was the first: Annas I meane, to whom my Lord was led. He, and the other, ye all, for blood did thirst: Not one I saw, as yet with pittie sped. Their violent wrongs proued so huge a streame, Suppressing right, their dealing was extreame. There I espied, how cruelty with deceight, Had this pretence to stop the common fame: Matters of slate, and those of no small weight, Were laid to Christ, for which they do him blame. Their high account, which all in them esteeme, Must beare then out, whatsoe're men should deeme. Besides, let Christ with wisdome him defend, And them confute, this they did all agree, The Romanes should his life soone bring to end: Thus were they bent, no more to set him free. Here may ye see the force of Enuyes spight, Glutted with gall, and doth in death delight. Caiphas was he, to Iewes that counsell gaue, How it vvas meete, that one for them should dye: A visage fowle, a vizor faire doth craue. Sathan vvould not that all his craft should spy. Oh, such preuaile oft times, vvho faire pretend: But giue me him, that faithfull proues in end.
I do not muse, so much how natures kinde Appeareth changed, in so corrupt a man: For God I know, euen from his foes will finde Matter of worth, fit for his will to scan. So Balaams Asse, against his proper kinde, Once checkt his Lord, when he remained blinde. There was no cause, O Caiphas thou shouldst feare, How that our Lord would take from thee thy state. This Lambe of God, which all our sinne did beare, Did much abhor, his extreame foes to hate. Malicious man, whom Enuy so did blinde, To vrge his guilt, in whom no guilt ye finde. Peter did follow, so did I like case: But I was knowne, and went into the hall; Without stoode Peter: then I left my place, And had great care, my fellow in to call. I spake to her, who there the dore then kept, To shew him fauour, who in boldly stept. The selfe same woman, vnto Peter said, Of this mans schollers art thou not now one? The fearefull man, to lye was not afraid, Boldly to say, of them that he was none. Art thou the man, which with our Lord wilt dye? And all in haste, dost flatly him deny?
The officers, and seruants of that place, Stoode there also, for they had made a fire: The extreame cold, with heate away they chace: Peter, and they to warme themselues desire. It's not amisse, Gods graces should be vsed, So in the vse, his grace be not abused. Then the high priest doth these two things propound Vnto sweete Iesus, of his disciples first: Next of his doctrine, two demaunds profound. The vvolfe vvas dry, and after blood did thirst. The hypocrite one thing in shew doth minde: But is another in his proper kinde. Our Sauiour said nothing of vs at l: One him betraid, another him denide: The rest did slee from Christ being in thrall: Small was the solace, in so sad a tide. And for his doctrine, the vvorld might testifie: What Truth he taught, was spoken openlie. The Synagogue, and Temple for resort, To all the Iewes, ye euery one can tell: Who did me heare, let such of me report; Aske these I pray, and then thou shalt do vvell. Herein Christ moued him, vvho did faire pretend, Vnmasking his malice, and his doctrine did defend.
Note the proceeding, in a cause vniust, An officer there smote Iesus with his rod: Our high priest thus, to answere now thou must? O great oppression, hatefull indeed to God! Such blinde presumption, mortall man to please So great outrage, the highest to disease. If I, quoth Iesus, haue spoken that is ill, Then witnes beare vnto the ill thy selfe: But for good speech, thy sury to fulfill, Why smitest thou me? what, is it hope of pelfe? For earthly gaine, men oft times runne astray: For stoare of gold, men will whole lands betray. Annas had now Christ bound to Caiphas sent, And Simon Peter stoode himselfe to warme. Thus to, and fro, they lead the innocent: Who still did good, must suffer extreame harme. But Peter once, being tangled in the snare, The second time, to deny our Lord doth dare. What, not content, our Life twise to deny? For high priests seruant and a kinseman neere, To Malchus said, Did I thee not espie With Christ in garden? 'tis a case most cleere. Peter euen then denied our Lord againe. Fraile is our flesh, if faintnes we retaine.
The crowing cocke must Peter put in minde Of his offence; for thus our Sauiour said: And he remembring, (Sathan did him blinde) Poasteth away, his guilt made him afraid. He that euen now, a firme faith could not keepe, Pries for a place, with bitternes to weepe. And now they lead Christ to the common hall; For day appear'd, high priests not thither went, For being defil'd, yet were to sinne a thrall; And for to eate, the Passouer they ment. See how great sinners, not so great would seeme: Making moats moūtaines, & moūtains moats esteeme. For Pilates place, he being vncircumcizde, Would them defile, but not the innocents blood: Their soules, their tongues, with murther were surpriz'd, They vs'd all meanes, to haue the truth withstood. Great sepulchers without are painted fayre, But hold within all stench and lothsome ayre. Pilate perceiued, himselfe must take some paine, To goe to them, who frighted were with spight: Tell me, he said, of Christ sith ye complaine, So shew the wrong, that I the same may right. They then reply, VVere not his doings ill, We would not vrge, that thou his blood shouldst spill.
Pilate then said, Then man vnto ye take: Doome him to death, as your law shall permit. The Iewes that time, then vnto Pilate spake, This thy resist, doth not our humors fit. It is not lawfull, for any of our traine, To kill a man; we must from blood refraine. This speech of theirs had also this effect: For he who knew the secrets of mankinde, Knew long before, vve did the Iewes suspect; His bitter death, and thereof eke the kinde. He vvould not faile, our ransome now to pay: Vs to redeeme, though hell would him gainsay. Let those that list, into their dealings pry. These vvicked men, the rulers and the rest, False counsell sought, vvith vvhich they meant to try Their great vntruth, that Iesus thus opprest, So foule offenders might be clear'd from blame: Thēselues thus clear'd, vvere they not neerer shame? As if a vvretch, incensed from deepe hell, Should kill a friend, that saued once his life: And seeing on sleepe, the wretch vvith fury fell, In sleepers hand should fast the blooddy knife; And then abroad, with outcries should maintaine, His slaughtered friend was by the other slaine.
False witnes sought, but none then found at all: Though many came, laden with vntruthes stoare; At last came two into the high priests hall: These were the last, (like bulles prepar'd to goare) Who said that Christ, the Temple would deface, And reare it vp, againe, in three dayes space. The louely sweete, hereat did hold his peace. Then the high priest, incensed all with yre, By the liuing God, did charge Christ should not cease, But answere make, to that he would require. Art thou the Christ? of God art thou the sonne? Herewith he hoapt, Iesus should be vndonne. Iesus to this replies, Thou it hast said: But neuerthelesse, hereafter ye shall see The Sonne of man, when ye shall stand dismaid, All glorious seated, on Gods right hand to be: I then will come with glory & great might, Guarded with millions, compast with clowds most bright. Now thinke ye see vpon this answere prest, The high priest doth his cloathes in sunder rent: Christ hath blasphem'd, on witnesses to rest: I see 'tis vaine, that longer time be spent. What thinke ye now? ye heare his blasphemy. They answere all, He worthy is to dye.
The fowle-mouth'd monsters spit vpon his face: Which face, the angels to behold are glad: They buffit him, and yeld him all disgrace, Smote him with rods; hereat I waxt most sad. This to inlarge, as Peter much did moane: So what insues, must force th'offender groane. The extreame spight, shewed to Gods deare sonne, Was for our sinnes, our sinnes caused this spight. Vexe him not fresh, now that the Iewes haue done. Such vexe him still, who in their sinne delight. All armed foes cannot such paines procure, That wilfull sinners for euer shall endure. This will I proue, in one example plaine: When Iudas sawe our Lord condemn'd to dye, When he beheld him led with cursed traine, When in each place he did all violence spye, The sence of sinne assailes, and fresh doth fray, He yeldes, and said, I did my Lord betray. Let presse in sight, the kindnes of this Lord, In choosing me vnto so high estate, In trusting me, euen of his owne accord, In louing me, that did deserue all hate. Ah, brutish beasts are thankfull in their kinde: I much more brutish, his fauors did not minde.
I others taught, my selfe I did not teach: I wonders wrought, and now haue wrought a wonder. Accursed houre, I after gaine did reach! Woe to my selfe, God doth with vengeance thunder. Who lookes on me, with this will me vpbraid: There goes the wretch, his Master that betraid. I, there's the sting that frets me to the gall: For ranckerous Iewes excuse them from my spight: I Christ betraid, on me all vengeance fall: I am condemn'd, that did in sinne delight. With graue forecast, why did I not preuent This monstrous sinne, for which I thus am shent? Now must I looke vpon my present losse. And what is that? but an Apostles place. That but, brings more, I gaind a little drosse: And thus lose heauen, the looking on Gods face. Ye greedy gripes, that feede on liuing men, Hasten to hell, my lothsome dark'ned den. Ye monstrous sinners, to my talke attend: Seducing Sathan snarde me with his baite: Faire words I had, but these, and deedes, did bend My couetous mind, on treason now to waite. If euery sinne should in their kinde appeare, Ye would detest, siluer to buy so deare.
I seele my sinne, a cause my selfe to hate: I haue no sence, I should for mercy cry: My sinne exclaimes, accursed is my state: Iustice is iust, this course I minde to try: These thirty pieces of siluer now at last, I will againe, to priests, and elders, cast. Good worke this is, but wanteth loue, and faith: What helpeth it, to say I did offend? The diuell prest, vnto my soule then saith, 'Tis true thou speakst, despaire, and life now end. Thus he that first did me to mischiefe traine, Doth much reioyce at my perpetuall paine. I sinn'd a sinne, betraying the innocent blood: O innocent blood, with cryes that doest affright, Affright me not: why am I thus withstood? Withstood with wrath, and with my tainted spright. One mischiefe doth vpon an another heape: 'Tis good ye looke, before the ditch he leape. VVhat's that to vs? see thou to these things looke: So said these guides, making of me a scorne; No one I found, that pitty on me tooke: For I became, indeede, a wretch forlorne. A strangling coard made end of all my doubt: I hangd my selfe, my bowels gushed out.
Suffer my speech, who suffer now with griefe: Death void of death, for death here liueth still, Barr'd from all hope, shut out from all reliefe, Most sad complaints, my hearing now doth fill: I haue no rest, but in vnrest remaine: No tongue, or penne, can well declare my paine. Now to returne to Pilate, who like case, To the common hall had entred now with speede: Who tendring much Caesars and his disgrace, Did aske of Christ, if he were King in deede? For rebels wrought the Romanes much vnrest: Which caus'd great care, to haue such wrongs redrest. He questioned much, if Christ then were a King: But no aduantage of his words could take; Our Sauiour so about his state did bring, That of his kingdome, thus in briefe he spake: My kingly state, it is no earthly might: For then my seruants would be prest to fight. Belike the saying of the wise men, much Moued mens minds, who called Christ a King. But this is sure, gainst Romanes all did gruch, The hope of freedome, flouring state would bring. Vaine was their hope, whom God ment not to free. VVho fights gainst God, should he with such agree?
Our heauenly King, in his especiall grace, Doth spirituall gifts vpon his friends bestow: He loueth them, that loue him to imbrace. VVho such sheepe are, this shepherd true doth know. Shaddowes haue shewes, wanting their proper weight, VVho vvants the ground, are fed vvith fond deceight. In this my moane, although I do digresse, Iust cause I haue, Christs kingdome me constraines: This same is it, vvhich Sathan vvould oppresse, Herein the vvicked most do tire their braines. The singer sweete of Israel saw this age: Which caus'd him muse, why vainely they do rage. Ye mortall men, vvho haue on earth your time, Like pilgrims poore, to plod in vncoath vvayes, What are ye here, but drosse, earth, clay and slime? Can ye prolong your life, vvith yeares, or dayes? Your glasse doth run, though sand in glasse do stay: But being run, you hence must poast away. Vpon the charge, Pilate to Christ did lay: Our vvisdome vvould, he should declare againe: If of himselfe, he then the vvords did say? Or that some other, to speake so did him traine? But as Iewes name, the Deputy did deny: So he declarde, on whom the blame did lye.
Then he demaunds, what our sweete Lord had done, Sith earthly pompe of Kings he did not claime, For that with spight, the Iewes this threed had sponne Gainst proper life of Sauiour, so to aime. The heathen yet, he doth assay to teach, Though he did here matter aboue his reach. Harken to him, who is a glorious King: Whose gouernement, whose lawes, and other rights, Are fram'd from heauen, of him the Angels sing: Of him to talke, each godly one delights. For ods are great twixt that which shall decay, And this dread King, which shall indure for aye. Stoope, stately Kings, vnto this King indeede: Your greatest glory, to his is not a sparke: He you defends, his taske is you to feede: He is your light, and guides you in the darke. All possible good, from this great Good doth flowe: His are your crownes, to him your crownes ye owe. And Pilate said, A King now art thou then? Iesus replyes, Thou saist I am a King. This title much doth trouble carnall men, Who causlesse heare, but conscience hath a sting. Yet of that sting they haue no sence at all, Which forceth them, to greater dangers fall.
Euen for this cause, saith Iesus I am borne; Into this world, for this cause I did come; Witnes to beare to truth, which most men scorne: Yet friends to truth that heare my voyce are some. What is the Truth? thus Pilate then did say, But turn'd his backe, and would no longer stay. A question sweete, Pilate, thou didst propound: Why wouldst not stay, to heare our Lords reply? Thou shouldst haue heard him error soone confound: This gracefull Good would not to teach deny: But thou foreshewest, how some of chiefest place, To talke of truth, accompt it their disgrace. But glorious Truth shall in the end preuaile Against all foes, who seeke to presse it downe; Sathan doth know, in vaine he doth assaile This onely Good, his ministers yet must frowne, Banding their might, against this highest grace, Working their spight, that do this truth imbrace. Most splendent Truth, thy glorious golden rayes, Many degrees surmounts the shining sunne: Thy marueilous might and thy most worthy prayse None can declare: for when we all haue donne, We come too short, thy greatnes to declare: Thee to disgrace, yet flesh and blood doth dare.
But Sunne to darke, we know is practise vaine; To warre with heauen, will proue a fearefull fight: God such doth hate, as do his truth disdaine: Against such foes, he girded is with might. Who for the truth, would not his life then spend, Seeing God is prest, his owne right to defend? To Iewes now Pilate goeth yet once againe, And to them said, In Christ no cause I finde: Your custome is, I one should loose from paine, At this your feast; then Iesus he doth minde: Ye Iewes, your King if now ye meane to choose, Your minds vnfold, will ye I Iesus loose? Me thought this was, like to a sudden stay: Forc'd by retrait, where egre battaile meetes: Where man, doth man, with mutuall might assay, And bloodlesse bodies, earth then gladly greetes: But then againe, both armies forces tryes, Till one of them must yeeld with fainting cryes. So then this comfort, corsiue I may call: For what refreshing, found my sad lament? My chiefe of choyce, my soule I saw in thrall, So I perceiued the Iewes to murther bent. Faces of men, are tables of their minde: By outward signes mens malice ye may finde.
For wicked Iewes their clamours now began: We will not Iesus, Barrabas we will: Like craues their like, let loose a murtherous man. Haue ye no care, the spotlesse blood to spill? Drop blooddy teares, my moysture waxeth dry, Like sommers drouth, that for more raine doth cry. Poore Iotham, now me thinkes, I do thee see, Who didst rebuke thy vnkinde countrymen, In offer made to trees, who King should be: They rule refus'd: but hooking bramble then Would needes be King, and then had his desire. The tyrants rule is like consuming fire. Ah, my Redeemer, this oft thou didst foretell In parables, and in thy preaching plaine, That of the Vineyard, wherein is vttered well, How for great good, they thee requite with paine. Gods heire thou art, to kill thee these now ment, Thou being slaine, they to possesse are bent. Possesse ye shall, and cruelly be destroyd: Oh wicked men, your glory shall decay, Your pleasant land shall lye both waste and voyd, To all the world ye shall become a pray. Such, who will not that Christ should rule alone, Must finde his might where they must waile & mone.
Ye will not him that would your proper good; Ye him reiect that came you to redeeme. Oh people blinde, that thus Gods grace withstood, So light to set of him beyond esteeme! Vertue in place we haue no care to minde; But being gone, we gladly would it finde. The first Adiunct. My sweetest Sweete, my Lord, my loue, my life, The worlds bright lampe, farre cleerer then the sunne, What may this meane cannot I end this strife, This ranckorous spight, by wicked Iewes begunne? O man most pure, for wretches most forlorne, Must my great God to men be made a scorne? He made his soule an offring for our sinne; His will was such, his death doth life prolong: He dying for vs, then did our life beginne: His is the gaine, to him all ioyes belong. Although our guilt did force our Lord to faint, Yet all his foes could not with sinne him taint. Thou Light of God, in whom no darknes dwels, Sole reconciler and worker of our wealth, Thy bitter pangs all passions farre excels, Our soules sweete shepheard cared for our health. Thus as my Loue constrained was to groane: So me permit againe refresh my moane.
I grieue, that sleepe so sore did me oppresse: Sinne in my selfe moues me to sad complaint: For wicked men to watch themselues addresse To pamper pleasure, where's one that seemes to faint? What lawes forbid, to that in haste we poast: The best offends, though hypocrits yet will boast. Iudas slept not, nor any of his traine: Night after night men watch, if pleasure call. Our head did watch, I could not sleep refraine: Thus to my will I was become a thrall. Ah crooked vvill that vvouldst me so misleade, That vnder foote my Lords vvill I should treade. I vvell recount vvhat harmes haue come by sleepe: VVhile Samson slept, he then did lose his might. Sleeping, Sauls sonne, his kingdome could not keepe. VVhile Sisera slept, Iael him slew outright. In towne of vvarre if all should seeke for rest, Quickly they should with enemies be opprest. How glad is Satan, vvhen vve yeld to sleepe? How sad sweete Iesus, vvhen vve slouth imbrace? Sleepe not securely, yet that are Christs sheepe, VVith sighes and groanes pray vnto God for grace: For in our sinne if God vvith iudgement ceaze, Late will it be his iustice to appeaze.
Now in my moane, to him I will returne, Who trayterously had made a cursed change: The Vine most true this withered branch did spurne. Such wander wide who in by-paths do range. O treasonfull wretch, my Lord as thou hast sold, Shall those fowle lips to kisse my Lord make bold? The subtill serpent seeking to seduce, Shroudeth himselfe vnder a faire pretence, In heart hath hate, with tongue he taketh truce, His spightfull spirit he shields with sweete defence. His chearefull looke, who gaue the glad all haile, Fed fowle conceite his treason should preuaile. Our tainted nature quickly will vs teach, To follow that we can in others blame. What needes the serpent th'apple faire to reach? We hazard all as though we vvere past shame. The vvay to hell appeareth wondrous faire, The end vvhereof doth lead to fowle despaire. Regard in Iudas, vvhen fraile flesh begins To nibble a little vpon the Serpents baite, How such vvill make a sport of all their sinnes: Doubtlesse such sinners neere to Sathan waite. For so at first the diuell Iudas tooke, And held him fast vpon his siluer hooke.
Christ is betrayed of many in this life. For art thou where Religion is abused, And hast no care then to confute that strife? There is great feare thy selfe shall be refused. Thou stragling sheepe, herein thou goest astray; Thy silence proues, thou Iesus doest betray. Else doest thou take on thee a Christians name, Following not that thou seemest to professe? Thy owne vilde life Religion much doth shame, Thou Christ betraiest that doest his truth represse. Repent thee soone for former life mispent, And turne to God, while God to grace is bent. Iesus to Iudas vseth words most kinde: For, Friend, he saith, a reason to me render, Why thou art come? as if he would him binde From former good his owne estate to tender. But none more blinde then wilfull blinded bee, That to renownce, which offereth cause of glee. Traytor, thou camest another to annoy, To annoy him, who euer sought thy good; Thy good he sought, and thou wilt him destroy. But be thou sure, thus thirsting after blood, That thou thy selfe of blood shalt haue thy fill, Though thou delight the guiltlesse blood to spill.
This to conclude, our Prince of might did foyle Not onely Sathan, but all his darkesome traine. Betray not Christ, by giuing backe the spoyle Vnto his foes; from so vile sinne refraine. As God in Christ hath shewed his bountie large, So haue great care still to regard thy charge. On Peter now if we shall cast our sight, Else on vs all the Apostles to our Lord, Cause great we haue, not to boast of our might, That weaknes are, and fall of franke accord. Yet in our fall as we feele want of strength: So God relieues, and succour sends at length. God suffred vs to see our weak'ned state, That seeing it, we should detest our sinne: He did vouchsafe to open wide his gate, His gate of grace, that we should enter in. But that his grace to vs did much abound, He had iust cause for aye vs to confound. The wounded soule from vs may comfort finde: For though we fell, yet God did vs vphold, He tendred vs, and we againe him minde, Yelding him thankes and praises manifold. How so e're, Lord, of frailty we offend, Succour thou vs, and vs with Grace defend.
What now remaines vnto the hardned Iewes, Iewes that would not our Lord as King should raigne? Raigne yet'he must, although they doe refuse: Refuse that list, he will his right maintaine. I know, when time of darknes shall expire, Our glorious King will haue his full desire. For of this nation our Sauiour did foretell, That as they sought from them his state to cleare, So God in wrath would them from thence expell, Who did reiect his louing Sonne so deare. Learne hence therefore, if ye desire Gods grace, Haue good regard Gods Christ ye doe imbrace. If Christ alone ye would in you should raigne, (For he delights within our soules to dwell) Haue good regard affections to restraine, That are not good, but of our flesh do smell. If Christ vs guide, our gaine exceeds esteeme, We haue more store, then all the world can deeme. The last of all, yet first in next complaint, Is the selfe same, who was chiefe actor made. Who seeth not, he did true Iustice taint? Doubtlesse, the wicked make of sinne a trade. These yet (forsooth) must equitie pretend, Though to the world oppression they defend.
Why, Pilate, why? thou art a man of might, Thy country lawes vilde violence doth detest: As thou art Iudge, thou ought'st regard the right, And haue great care the poore be not opprest: Desire to please should not thy minde peruert, That rightfull cause thou shouldest so subuert. FINIS.
