18507.121 99855142 20615
Iuly 29. Numb. 42. MORE NEWES OF THE GOOD SVC∣cesse of the Duke of BRVNS∣VVICKE. Fully Relating His last and seuerall Victories atchieued against the Forces of Monsieur TILLY. With the Muster, March, Strength, Order, Approa∣ches, Encounters, and Pursuits of the said Duke of Bruns∣wick; from the first setting forth vnto the third of our Iuly. As likewise some Letters betwixt the old Duke of Brunswick and Monsieur Tilly, concerning the State of the Businesse. Something also Of the Emperors other Preparations, and seuerall other Occurrences about the Kings of Denmarke, Poland, and Sweden. Together with other weekely Newes from sundry other places. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne, 1623.
THE CONTINVATI∣ON OF OVR WEEKLY newes out of Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Silesia, Austria, the Pallatinate, Eischvelt, Westpha∣lia, the Low Countries, and other pla∣ces of the vpper and lower Germanie. COnditions of composi∣tion hauing bene offered vnto Bethlem Gabor by the Emperour, and for ought we yet heare refu∣sed (as wee told you in our last printed, Iuly 22) The Emperour being now at last, either much wearied, or more weak∣ned with the warres, seemes of late times to be rather willing to require a peace, then at leasure to expect, (as aforetimes) the mediation of great Princes vnto him to grant it. So that there were the last yeere scarce more Ambassadours retaining vpon him at Vienna, then he hath of late sent abroad vpon his owne em∣ployments. Witnesse those messages of his; vnto the States of Hungary, to perswade with them for their constancy; vnto the Great Turke, for the conseruing
of the peace, concluded for twentie yeares with the former Emperor Rodulphus; vnto the Duke of Saexo∣nie, to know whither he were to expect him a friend, foe, or Neutrall; vnto the Princes of the lower Sax∣onie, to desire passage for Tilly, and deniall of passage to Brunswick: and lastly vnto Brunswick himselfe, with a second pardon, and vnto Mansfield, (as it is thought) with some promises of much preferment: Of all which we shall speake as we haue occasion. The Emperors present and most apparent hopes, seem to depend vpon Monsieur Tilly, and his greatest feares in Bethlem Gabor; who hauing of late reassumed the Title of King elect of Hungarie, which he is said to haue stamped vpon his Coyne, and to haue besides his owne preparations of Hungars and Walachians, which he hath mustered, and with them aduanced forwards, and sent the Turkes and Tartars vnto Cani∣sia, and the Borders of the Empire, (which they are feared to be ready to enter, so soone as Haruest is off the ground,) hee is further beleeued to haue agreed with the Turkes and Tartars in another place, that they for the diuersion of the King of Polands ayd, promised by him vnto his Brother in Law the Em∣perour, and fall vpon his Lands of Podolia; which as they haue often this yeare heretofore made in∣rodes vpon, so now are they said in most huge multi∣tudes, (their feares in Silesia makes them report, that there are 200000 of them) to be vpon falling in once againe vpon it. Besides all which, Bethlem Gabor is thought to correspond with the King of Sweden, who vpon the expiration of the truce betwixt him and Poland, is said to haue a braue Army in a readi∣nesse,
for the raising of the siege of Riga, which tis said that the young Prince of Poland is to besiege presently with 20000 men. Sweden is also said to haue a faire Fleet, with 23 shippes, of which as some Shippers of Amsterdam that loosed from Dant∣zick, Iune 29, and Iuly 1, relate; That the King of Poland and his sonne being then to be entertained by the Dantzickers in their Towne; that the King of Sweden lay before the Riuer about Dantzick, with 23 shippes, or as others say, with 28: many of which were furnished with 28 faire cast pieces of Brasse, (there being a report also, that his Maiestie of Sweden himselfe in person, was aboord one of them) which fleet haling all ships that past that way for the King of Sweden; did strictly and seuerally exa∣mine all the Shippers they could meet with, and ar∣rested the ships of Poland: they of the Fleet of Swe∣den also reported, that their King had an Army in a readinesse for the defence of the Country of Litua∣nia, which of late daies he tooke from the Crowne of Poland. Thus write the Letters from Amsterdam, Iuly 17. Lastly, is Bethlem Gabor affirmed, to maintaine neere intelligence with Brunswick and Mansfield, that so the Emperour might haue worke enough on all sides: and whosoeuer (finally) being discontented with the Emperour, and repaires to him, he enter∣taines; as accounting them to be friends sure enough to him, and foes eager enough against the Emperor, whom their owne priuate interest makes to be so. For preuention of all which, the Emperor is said to haue sometimes conceiued a very good hope, that
by a speedy strengthning of Monsieur Tilly, he should either by treatie or victory conclude time enough with Brunswick to employ Tilly aboue in Bohemia or Silesia, which hath beene most of the reason, that those Cosacks which himselfe meant for defence of those Countries, were by himselfe threatned vnto both the circuits of Saxonie, to be ready to be sent vnto the aid of Tilly; and that his Camp in Bohemia, for which a place had beene laid out about Conings∣graets, is since that thought fitter to be formed about Egra. For which purpose the Collonell Walsterp was about the end of Iune, come from Coningsgraets to Prage, with Commission from the Emperour to doe it. Who was thereupon to haue some better place it seemes, for his owne Regiment being mustered and paid, hee was to leaue to bee commanded by the Count of de Nagrat, whose Lieutenant Colonell, one Merote was to be. About which businesse also the Landtgraue of Lichtensteyne, Lord Deputie of Bohe∣mia, and the Count of Swartzenberg, were instantly to repaire vnto Prage, to consult vpon that, and vpon the message of the Duke of Bauaria, and the Bishop of Wurtzberg, who had then sent to Prage for all the ayd that could be spared out of Bohemia, to be forth∣with sent downe to Monsieur Tilly, who expected no other but to be put to it to fight presently. But the Count of Swartzenbergh hauing diuers aduices and Letters of the Emperour about him, is said to haue beene killed in the way (by some that lay for the pur∣pose) and his packets and intelligence taken away, which will bring forth a new discouery. This Count of Swartzenbergh, which is thus said to be killed, is
the very same Gentleman who was the last yeare that great Ambassadour from the Emperour, being heere in London feasted and entertained. As for the two aides of Cosacks, those 4000 which came to offer their seruice to the Emperour, they lie yet in Morauia about Brin and Iglaw; where hauing done much hurt, they are now said to keepe better discipline, since that the countrey of Austria hath beene enforced to contribute towards their vi∣ctuals, and that they haue beene receiued into the pay of the Bishop of Neus, who is the Arch-Duke Charles, brother to the Emperor. But for those other 12000 which lay aboue, betweene the Fron∣tiers of Poland, Brandenburgh, and Silesia; their be∣hauiour was so good, that the Silesians raised 10000 men to withstand their passage; which they offering to force, the Silesians killed diuers of the Cosacks; the Elector of Brandenburgh likewise, and the Duke of Pomeren, haue commanded their subiects from man to man, to make vp towards the Cosacks quar∣ters; and if they shall offer to forage or burne the Villages, as they haue done, to cut the throats of them. And this is the truth of the Emperors warlike and apparent preparations for resisting of Bethlem Ga∣bor. The State of Hungary is distracted and hath not as yet agreed vpon the choice of their Pallatine for this yeere: The Campe in Bohemia, is for sus∣picion of Brunswicks making vpwards, drawne downe to Egra further from Hungary, and neerer to Brunswick; (as being in the very confines of Bo∣hemia, next to the Dominions of Bauaria and Saxo∣ny,
and close vpon the vpper Pallatinate;) much of which Army is also (for the time) to be diuided, by sending aid out of it to Monsieur Tilly; and for the Auxiliarie Cosacks, you see in what distresse they are themselues. Here are the helps, that the Silesians haue now 10000 men (which whether they pur∣pose or shall be able to continue in the Emperours seruice, or whether they gathered them onely vpon this occasion to withstand the Cosacks, we cannot tell.) And for supply of money, there is a new Impo∣sition, and that a greater one, laid vpon Morauia and Silesia, (as for Lusatia which should contribute with them, it is you heare sequestred into the hands of the Duke of Saxony. They of Silesia being to pay fiue florins a month, for euery Citizen, and euery Coun∣trey man or Boer two and a halfe. The confis∣cated goods of the Protestants in Bohemia and those parts may yeeld some addition of treasure; which businesse goes now forward very earnestly; And that course which is taken with the Iewes both at Vienna and Prague, is likely to bring in a fairer Entrato and a good round summe. For the Iewes are in the end of Iune, in both these cities warned, either to turne to the Catholike Religion; or else out of hand to pay so much moneys for the entertainment of the Empe∣rours Armies, and in case they refuse to doe either, they are commanded presently to auoid the land, this is written from Vienna Iune 28, & 29. And thus haue Christian Princes, still in their necessitie saued them∣selues vpon the Iewes from time to time.
Now for the countenancing of Monseur Tilly, the Emperour hath of late taken diuers courses: As Iune 23. he sent a Poste vnto the lower Creitz of Saxony, once more to require a finall resolution of them, whether they were purposed to grant passage vnto his enemies through their Countries or not, (meaning Duke Christian of Brunswicks army) which if they purposed to doe, he then threatned them with the sending downe of the Cossackes towards the ayd of Monseur Tilly. And for this answer he propoun∣ded them eight dayes, that is, by the eight of Iuly, as they write from Vienna Iune 29. The same message was also sent to the Elector the Duke of the vpper Saxony, of whom he further requires to be certified, whether by his army which hee hath now gotten to∣gether, he now meanes peace or warre towards him. Vnto other States of the Empire, who haue hitherto shewed themselues for him, hath he sent other mes∣sengers, to desire the continuance of their constan∣cie, and that they would by no meanes be drawne in to side against him with any other League, but eue∣ry way to oppose his enemies. And Iune 27. there passed an Imperiall Poste through Prage, with Letters towards Count Mans∣field and the Duke of Brunswicke, to draw them off, with offer of pardon and new promises. But the suc∣cesse of the Letters may well be iudged, by the time of their deliuery, which fell out to be iust at the time when both Mansfield and Brunswicke were newly ri∣sen with their armies. Of the sending of these Let∣ters they write from Prage Iune 29. And that it may not seeme strange or cheape, that the Emperour
would vouchsafe to send another pardon vnto the Duke of Brunswicke, who had so lately refused the former: this is said to be the reason, namely, that the old Duchesse of Brunswicke, Duke Christians mother, hauing perswaded her selfe that she should in time preuaile with her Sonne to accept it, had already as∣sured the Emperour, that hee had accepted of it: whereupon the new pardon was drawne, signed, and sent: which being deliuered to the Duke in the Camp, without the knowledge of any such vnder∣taking of his mother in his behalfe, he first receiued and read so farre, till perceiuing what it was, he with his owne hands is said to haue cancelled, as hee had done the former. To make this pardon (it seemes) to take the sooner, Monseur Tilly had Commission likewise to demand of Duke Christian the reason of his aduancing forwards with such an Army, and re∣quired in the name of his Imperiall Maiesty his di∣rect answer within eight dayes, whether it were for the Emperour or against him. About which time (but whether vpon confidence of the former vndertaking of the old Duchesse or no, we know not, or vpon hope that the Princes of the Lower Creitz of Saxony durst not deny the Empe∣rour any thing) Monseur Tilly was bold, by directi∣ons from the Emperour, to require passage of Duke Vlrick (the present gouerning Duke of Brunswicke, Duke Christians elder Brother) for his Army to passe through his Countries, whereof we haue here giuen you the true Copies.
To the Lord Fredericke Vlrick, Duke of Brunswicke, Illustrious high-borne Prince and Gratious Lord. I Cannot forbeare in most humble manner to cer∣tifie your Princely Grace, that there is great ap∣pearance, how your Highnes Brother the Duke Christian, will easily giue mee occasion to seeke pas∣sage with my whole Army, through your Lordships Dominions. In which case, I must humbly entreat that of your good Grace you would not take it ill, If I seeke passage that way. But for the more securitie of this Army, and that his Imperiall Maiesties For∣ces may not be stopped, hindred or molested in their passage, (but rather supplyed with victualls and all other necessaries for an Army, that they may keepe ciuill and military Discipline the better, and haue cause to fauour your Highnes Subiects the more) I desire your Lordship gratiously to appoint such Of∣ficers of your owne, in all places, as may prouide vs of such conuenient necessaries as we moderately de∣mand, or otherwise (without prescribing me or li∣miting the manner or proportion) to send one or two Commissaries, which may continually attend our Army for the seruice aboue required: I am con∣fident in this particular, that according to your for∣mer sinceritie euer showne towards his Imperiall Maiesty, you will be carefull to prouide herein to sa∣tisfie our expectation.
But if it shall otherwise fall out, that any annoy∣ance or inconuenience should in our passage light vpon any of your Subiects, (which I could most wil∣lingly desire might by a good and timely order, by you to bee giuen, bee by all meanes preuented and eschewed) your Excellency shall not haue cause to impute these disturbances vnto me: for which rea∣son I would not omit to giue you timely notice by these my Letters. And thus humbly taking my leaue, I commend me with all submission vnto your prince∣ly Excellency. Your Highnes obedient, Iohn Count of Tilly. These Letters of the Generall, being receiued, read, wondred at, and considered vpon, an answer as sudden as the cause required, was forthwith re∣turned to the Bauarian Campe. The Dukes Let∣ters bearing this Superscription, which is Monseur Tillies style:
To Iohn Count Thordas of Tilly, Ba∣ron of Worbiese, Valester, and Wantigen, Generall of the Emperour. The Dukes Letters were signed on the top, Fredericke Vlrick. OVr fauour and good will prefixed. (High∣borne and especially beloued) your Letters dated at Eschwegen the 19. of Iune, Stylo novo, were yesterday deliuered vnto vs by your Trumpet, by whom you sent them: although the deliuery of them was somewhat after an vnusuall fashion, the messenger approaching our wals with sounding his Trumpet, as if he had beene in an enemies Country. By which Letters of yours, we to our great wonder vnderstood, how that your intent is to conduct your Army through this Circuit of the lower Saxony, and particularly through our Country; you pretending that our beloued Brother Duke Christian of Bruns∣wicke may giue you occasion to seeke this passage: vnto which our answer is, that as concerning our Brother we hold not our selues obliged to maintaine any of his actions, further then they are fitly and well done, wherefore wee cannot returne answer vnto your demands for passage, without the aduice of the Princes and States of the whole Circuit, of
the lower Saxony, nor before their generall Dyett or Meeting (which is now at hand) be finally ended. In the meane time neuerthelesse, we cannot appre∣hend how our Brother the Duke Christian should giue you occasion to desire such a passage; seeing that our Brother hath not hitherto made any hostile attempts, either vpon your selfe or any man else; but containes onely his army within his owne quar∣ters, which he keepes about him for his owne securi∣tie; being in the meane time in all humility and sub∣iection, in expectation of further extension and assecu∣ration of the Imperiall pardon. But if whilest this treatie be in hand (for which time the Princes and States of the lower Circuit of Saxony, haue most humbly entreated his Imperiall Maiestie to stay and suspend all further execution) you shall of your selfe against all promise and faith giuen (as is apparent vpon record) offer to surprise or set vpon him and our lands, we will not beleeue it to bee done by the consent of the Emperour our most mercifull Lord; who, in consideration of all our sincere intentions, and most faithfully deuoted seruices performed to∣wards him, will not suffer so many faithfull promises and high assurances to be called in question or mis∣trusted. And in such a case we nothing doubt, that wee are likely in equitie to incurre either blame or displeasure, if vpon our owne vrgent necessitie, wee make it manifest vnto the world, how wee are driuen and constrained to fail off from our due obedience, and most submissiue deuotion, wherein wee should otherwise haue perseuered to the end; and doe
withall in our owne defence require the assistance of the next Lords and Princes of our blood, and of his Maiestie of Denmarke especially, and like∣wise of the whole Circuit of the lower Saxony. But if you would consider that although our deare Brother did stand already declared (as God bee thanked hee yet does not) an open enemie, but stands rather vpon Articles of treatie, and relies vpon the further resolution of his Imperiall Ma∣iestie; you could not then, or at least ought not, according to the order which is giuen for the stay of the execution, (which order wee will by no meanes suffer to bee any wayes infringed) to in∣uade this Circuit of Saxony with a forraine army, and make your selfe by that meanes master of our Lands and Subiects, which are altogether in∣nocent. And if any third partie (our Brother) hath of∣fended; yet ought not his Lands to bee therefore molested. If you desire therefore to haue these orders obserued by vs, it is fit that you obserue them first your selfe. For which reason wee yet once more desire you to spare our Dominions, and forbeare to make any march or passage through them, and not to molest vs, (who rest our selues vpon so many high promises of the Emperour) vpon which many and great dammages and inconceniences may happen and ensue; and not to raise any further iea∣lousies or distrusts betwixt his Imperiall Maiesty, and the obedient Princes & States which are vnder him:
But we admonish you rather to expect his Imperiall Maiesties further resolution extension (and enlarge∣ment in some points) of his former pardon to our Brother, vpon the accommodation, or taking vp, (as wee hope) of all matters betwixt them. To the en∣tent, that the sinister opinions and diffidences which the Princes and States haue before conceiued con∣cerning the slow performance of his Imperiall Ma∣iesties many and high promises, be not more strong∣ly confirmed in them; the seuerall States of the Em∣pire hauing already heretofore deeply conceited such imaginations, and set downe their grieuances vnder their hands in writing. Wee expect hereupon your further Resolution and Declaration, by which wee may know what we are to looke for at your hands hereafter: Till when, wee rest very well inclined towards you, and wish you all prosperitie. Giuen at our Palace of Wolfenbuttel the 14 of Iune, 1623.
Not long after this resolute answer of the elder Duke of Brunswicke, which expressed the mine of the whole lower circuit of Saxony his Confederates, who were all in the same predicament: The Duke Elector of the vpper Saxony was said also to send another as peremptory a message vnto the Generall Tilly; ad∣monishing him with all speed to depart out of the land of Hessen with his whole Forces, or els he would vse other meanes to enforce him vnto it: seeing that he (the Elector) was tyed by the Articles of the League betwix him and the other Princes & States, not to suffer any man that so behaued himselfe as an enemy to remaine in any of their Lands. This they write from Culle Iuly 14. And it is also written from Franckford, Iuly 10. That if Monsieur Tilly offers to set foot vpon any of the lands of the lower Saxony, that the Princes will send their whole ioynt forces against him; And the Duke Vlricke of Brunswicke himselfe is said by the Letters from Cullen Iuly 14. to haue presently beset the passages of his owne land against Tilly, with the forces of his owne countrie. After which Auises, Generall Tilly did not onely forbeare to attempt any passage that way; out also (want in his Army withall compelling him vnto it) not long after this prepared to withdrawe out of the lands of Saxony & Hessen, making vp towards Eisch∣velt, part of which belongs (as we take it) vnto the Bishop Elector of Mentz. In which country of Eiseh∣velt, for that the whole busines so much talkt of hath beene atcheiued, let it not be vnpleasant vnto you to take the whole order of the performance, (with the likelyhoods, reasons and causes of the doing) along
with you. Of which we hauing now receiued more full, more particular, and more certaine intelligence, will import the whole vnto you, and the rather, for that one depends vpon another, and the second vic∣tory, was vpon the pursuit of the first. Monsieur Tilly therefore hauing euery way written very earnestly for all possible helpe before his rising; both of Prage, from whence the Count de Colatto was to come to him with 3. Regiments; and to Vienna from whence in the beginning of Iuly, there were foure faire pie∣ces of Canon sent towards him by water, first to∣wards Heidelbergh, and soon to his Leager; And the Crabats being vpon his Letter turned back againe to∣wards him, and the Baron of Anholt making vp to∣wards him, being not at that time able or willing to stay in Hessen land to expect them; he marcht directly towards Eischuelt, in which also the Duke of Bruns∣wick was, (this Eichuelt lying iust in his way from his owne Bishopricke of Halberstadt, & the lands of Hes∣sen, Duringen, & those places through which Tilly su∣spected him likly to march vp) Monsieur Tillies bold aduancing so neere to Brunswick, and so full in the mouth of the Canon, was; for the preuenting of his further proceedings by the stopping vp of all passa∣ges. Hauing therefore in Hessenland left Witzenhausen. Allendorp Eifrege & Wanfreid, vnder sufficient Garri∣sons assured at his backe, and Wslch Alnde and other villages not farre from Lassell it selfe pillaged and burnt, he proceeded on, and with all speed tooke in the town of Duderstadt to Eischlt, towards which Brunswick himselfe was also making; which how hee afterward recouered, we will presently enforme you. Monsieur Tilly vpon Iune 25. came vp as farre as
Garth in the country of Eischuelt; pitching his Tente for that night in the open fields about Retmartshausen: the next Thursday they went beyond Duderstadt to∣wards Lindaw, which lies within a little league (three English miles) of Northeim where Duke Christians Army was then entrenched. And there began Mon∣sieur Tilly, to measure out his ground, to cast out his quarters, to dig himselfe into the earth, and on all hands fell to forming of a Campe. While this was a doing; Tilly hauing lest order with the Duke of Saxon, Lawenburgh, and Holsteyn to prouide for the victualing of Duderstadt, wherein hee had left 500. Muskettiers (which town peraduenture was to be the two Dukes quarters) they with their horse Regiments (wherein they had 25. Cornets:) rambling vp and downe to get this victuall, by the pillage of the country: and staying something lon∣ger then their Generalls directions had giuen order to them, and the Duke of Saxon, Lawenburgh hauing a designe in his head, for the taking in of the towne of Gottingen, for that it lay full in the way towards Hal∣berstadt; which way Brunswick came; he with his fel∣lowes, when they thought themselues most sure, were falne into an Ambush by a Woods side neere Gottingen; out of which on a sudden 7. cornets of horse of the Count of Shirum start vp, whereof 400. were Dragoniers, that is horsmen euery one of which (as the manner is, leauing off his Carbine or fire-locke) had taken vp a Muskettier behinde him, which 1100. Dragoniers, horsmen, and Muskettiers) charging the Duke of Lawenburghs Regiment afront, presently had the killing of 300. of them. Some small resistance but not great, the straightnes of the place suffered those
of Tilly to make; in which conflict, Saxon Lawenburgh had his horse slaine vnder him. (Which chance made the Mayor of Budensbergh, who at the same time esca∣ped out of Saxon Lawenberghs custody, vnder which he was prisoner, to report him to be slaine when hee saw him fall (the Duke hardly recouered another, v∣pon which fresh horse, with three others horse onely in his company; some Letters from Franckford dated Iuly 10. say that he made an escape. And at the same time, the Collonel Kniphowsens horse starting vp and setting vpon their reere, & the 700. Muskettiers vpon the middle, Saxon Lawenbergh, and Holsteyn were both cut off from rescuing of their owne baggage, which was bestowed in the middle; and there (to be short) 700. of Tillyes were slaine; amongst which the Duke of Holsteyn himselfe, is in some Letters said to be one; the Captaine Montagne and another Baron were left dead in the place; the rest fled, some into the Wood, where they were left to the mercy of the Boars; there were 1000. horse taken; and all the baggage and the treasure which they of Cullen estimated to amount to 800000. Rixe Dollers. Of some horse which drue the carriages, the driuers cut off the Trayse & womb-ropes by which they drew; so that the horse being thus loose and frighted, ran away, to be taken vp o∣therwhere: Those of Tillyes were at first strong 25. Cornets or troopes of horse; there were 7. Ensignes or Cornets taken, and carryed to Duke Christian of Brunswick in token of victorie; so that the whole Re∣giments were vtterly defeated & all the baggage ta∣ken, and as some say three or foure Field-pices; So that the Duke of Saxon Lawenbergh shifting away, had not left him so much as a Shirt to shift him.
And this last description is related out of Tillyes owne Campe which Iuly 8. lay at Griebel from whence this was written. And thus the Regiments being vtterly defeated, the Conuoye for the victu∣alling of Duderstadt was cut off; which victuals being by Tilly and Saxon Lawenbergh destinated at first for the reliefe of this towne of Duderstadt, was after this brought into the Towne neuerthelesse. For Brunswicke at the same time (holding the Vant∣gard of the enemies maine Campe playd in the meane time with some light skirmishes) sent out likewise certaine other bands vnder the leading of the young Count of Thurne as some report; who cutting off those 500. Muskettiers which Monsieur Tilly had left there in Garrison; presently made themselues Masters of the place, and left a Garri∣son there of their owne, vnto whom the victuals aforesaid in 160. Waggons, was forthwith safely conueighed. And thus 700. of Tillyes being said to bee slaine in the place, in the fight with Sax∣on Lawenbergh, and some others who had their throates cut by the Boores in the foote and in their flight; and 500. surprised in this towne; will helpe to make vp the full account of 1500. men which betwixt the first encounter, and this last ta∣king in of Duderstadt, diuers Letters report to haue beene slaine of Tillyes by those of Brunswicke. This fight with Saxon Lawenbergh, was made vpon Wed∣nesday Iuly 5. (which according to our account was Iune 25. (as they write from Eranckford Iune 10. Monsieur Tilly hauing after the former answer of
the Duke Vlrick of Brunswick, aduanced neuerthelesse the land of Eischuelt, which touches vpon Brunswick land, and is within the circuit of the lower Saxony, and for the most part belongs vnto the Princes and States of that Confederacie: Duke Christian (his ene∣mie Tilly hauing thus begun) set forward to confront him; hauing stayed before in his owne Dominions of Halberstadt, as if he had wayted but for Tilly to begin to breake out first. And according to his Muster made in Halberstad Iune 1. he marcht these seuerall troopes and Companies. Of Cornets of Horse. The Duke himselfe being Generall. Hath Cornets 6 The Count of Stirum 5 D. Frederick of Oldenburg 10 Colnell Witzphel. 4 The Duke of Weymar 5 The yong Count of Thurne 10 The Count of Eisenbrgh 10 The chiefe Lieutenant Vers∣beck 4 Captaine of the horse Gent. 2 The Totall is 56. Cornets, which amount vnto 7000. or 6500. at the least. The whole Army of horse and and foote, are mustered a∣bout 3000. fighting men. Companies of Foot. Brunswick himself hath 3000 D. of Saxon Weymar 4000 D. Arut, or Barnard of Weimar 3000 Colonell Kniphewsen 3000 Colonell Spee 3000 Colonell Girtsen 2000 Colonell Mey 2000 Colonell Spar 2000 Lieutenant Colonell Platto hath of Dragoniers 600 More of spare men vndistribu∣ted towards another Regi∣ment. 1000 The totall, (counting the Dra∣goniers double) is 24200 In this gallant Army there are diuers Princes, and braue noble Spirits, as namely fiue brethren Dukes of Weymar, and three Counts of Oldenburgh: The yong
Count of Thurne is Lieutenant Generall: one of the Dukes of Weymar is chiefe Watch-maister; who in his Regiment of horse hath 420. Seruitors on horse∣back, who haue all beene Officers at Armes in other warres; and being now Reformadoes, are content to serue thus in priuate, and to be commanded: But yet for their generall honor, they are said to haue sworne one to another by the honour of Armes, to second, rescue, relieue back, assist, and fetch off one another, in all encounters, skirmishes, and dangers in battell how hot soeuer. They call themselues The desperate Cauallierie. There are also as yet diuers Bohemian Lords and Barons in his Army: and we vnderstand that there came of late a certaine Hungarian Lord vnto the yong Count of Thurn, with letters of great impor∣tance, although the contents be not as yet divulged. All this is written from the Dukes owne Leager, at Northeim Iuly 2. In the march this order was obserued; hauing stood a while some foure houres in battalia in the fields, to see if any enemy would come against them, in which space many came from seuerall places to view their order, (a faire Army being the fairest of the three fairest things in the world.) The word be∣ing giuen, they began to march. The order was in three deuisions. The Duke himselfe rode before all the rest with sixe Cornets of choyse Horse for the Guard of his person: after him followed the Duke of Saxon Weymar, who led the Vantguard, and in it 7000. horse. The Generals Lieutenant the Count of Thurne led the battell, or the body of the Army with as many more; and the Colonl Kniphowsen brought
vp the reare, likewise with the numbers proportio∣nable to the former. Some other vnarmed men like∣wise were left behind, who tarry for the Armes which one of the Dukes of Weymar brings out of Holland with him, and then they are to follow the Army. Brunswick aduancing forwards in this equipage, did at his first cōming, take in the towne of Eischuelt it selfe, in and about which, he quartered his whole forces: there is Colonell Kniphowsen said, to haue killed 300. of Tillyes Souldiers: his head quarter hee layd at Northeim, which was so neere vnto Monsieur Tillyes quarters at Lindaw, that their Vantguards had euery day some exercise of their Armes, and more then light skirmishes. The Canons out of Tillyes quatters playd vpō Brunswicks men very hotly; which were answered by Duke Christians men againe, with sixe demy-Canons; although those of Tilly could do no great matter vpō Brunswicks men, by reason of the commodity of the place, vpon which they had cho∣sen to make their approaches: The Duke of Saxon Weymar, and the Colonell Kniphowsen, placed them∣selues behind their own Ordnance, with full resoluti∣ons to set a fresh vpon the enemies, if they durst ad∣uenture forth of their trenches. But whither that the wary Generall Tilly, had giuen order to his Compa∣nies rather to receiue their enemies vpon their owne aduantages at push of Pyke on the top of their tren∣ches, if they should proue so hot & braue as to offer to force them; or that he were vnwilling to venture his men vpon a salley out of their own strengths: this the letters affirme for certain, that none of Tillies did at time issue forth; so that some bullets being spent on both sides, the night took of the brauadoe of those of Brunswick, euery man retiring to his quarter.
That night or else within a night or two following; the Generall Tilly remembring that nothing becom∣ming their liberties, he had prouoked the forces of the lower Saxonie, which for ought he knew, might be following after Brunswicke, and make him at the first thus braue to dare him in his very trenches, And con∣sidering the late losse of two braue Regiments of horse, and that the enemie was blouded by the cut∣ting off the Conuoy of victuals before Duderstadt, and the slaughter of his men there, and at Eischaelt; In all which encounters hee had lost at least 1500 or 1600 men; and considering withall, that he was by this al∣ready weakened, and did daily expect fresh supplies, (some of which he then heard to be hard by) Thought it his best to retreat backe againe towards his former quarters and Garrisons in Hessenland, vpon the riuer of Werra. In which resolution, leauing great store of lights and fires in his Campe (as if he had still been there) he did vnder the opportunitie of the darknesse of the night, with as much silence, as possible could be, without sound of drumme or trumpet, closely steale away; and what betweene retreating and fleeing he retired three great German leagues (12 miles En∣glish at least) that very night. The Perdues, as thy call them (Sentinels that lye so close to the enemies, that the sentinels of each side, may oftentimes whisper one to another) hearing some bustling; and anon per∣ceiuing the truth of the businesse; presently aduertise their Generall the Duke of Brunswicke. Whereupon the Alarme being giuen: Tilly is the next morning by
breake of day (the darknesse being vnfit, for feare of Ambushes and entrapments, for such a purpose) with might and maine pursued. Tillyes flight or retreate continued three daies, Til∣ley being ofttimes forced to make a stand by the way, and to make head against the fierce impression of the Brunswickers. And thus sometime fighting, but most times fleeing: the Vantguard of those of Brunswicke, still beat vpon his Reere, and were still cutting off the tayle of his Armie. The thirst was all this while said to be very sore in his Army; for the want of water, was said to be one of the maine reasons of his so sud∣daine retreating; (there being no riuer neere to his former camp, nor other water but such as was brought on horsebacke in buckets, water-budgets, Borachoes and the like, which made it to be sold extreame deare) And all this while showers of lead ratling amongst them. Monsir Tilley was said to be faine with much disorder and danger, to haue passed some of his for∣ces ouer the riuer of Werra againe. In this flight, three Regiments amongst the rest, are particulariz'd to haue beene worst of all beaten and disordered; many of whose Companies, thinking it safer to runne away then to be killd with their fellowes, were scattered all ouer the Country: most of which, as they were taken pilladging for their victuals, were knockt on the head by the Bores of the Countrie. With the rest, the fight and flight continued three daies, that is the 1, 2, and third of our Iuly: so that at last Brunswicke is said to haue
beaten them so much, that there were 7000 slaine in the place, and of prisoners so many hundreds taken. The booty was said to be great, some letters, that name least, mentioning 200 Waggons to haue beene there taken: others name no fewer then 600: there were foure peeces of Cannon taken, as some letters say, or as others, fixe: and of treasure fiue or sixe tunne of gold, and some reports haue beene so par∣ticular herein, as to Iudge some of the Iewels, which were taken from some of Tillyes Commanders, to haue beene some of those, which themselues before had made pillage of at the taking of Prague: where∣upon some letters boldly inferre thus much: That now is quittance cryed with the Duke of Bauaria, for the taking of Prague. Finally, the spoile was said to be such, as that many of Brunswicks Caual∣liers, were said to haue gotten aboue one thou∣sand Duckats a peece, for their single and seuerall shares. Some letters wee haue seene to conclude with this peremptorie and tart breaking off: that Monsir Tilly is by this hot and close pursuit of the Duke of Brunswicke, so beaten, routed, and disor∣dered, that they beleeue hee will not bee able to make head againe to much purpose this Summer. And some haue yet followed him further then so: Affirming that Tilly himselfe hardly escaped (alone almost) into a little Towne of the Landtgraue of Darmstadts, but which (that we can remember) they name not, but if it were any at all, Giesen is as like∣ly
as any; as being both neere enough vnto the ri∣uer of Werra, where the last of the fight is said to be, and this Towne being also newly fortified of late by the Duke. Nay some reports, will not let Tilly rest heere neither, but giue out, that Bruns∣wicke sent after him thither also, requiring him as his lawfull prisoner, to bee quietly deliuered vn∣to him by the Landtgraue of Darmstadt; and in case of denyall hee threatned to lay an imposi∣tion of seuen or eight thousand Rixe Dollars, as a punishment vpon the Landtgraue and his Domi∣nions. And thus much the seuerall reports of this busi∣nesse being laid together, will make vp, vnto which, wee promise the world, that wee haue added no one particular in the writing, but can readily shew the effect of euery point, out of the seuerall let∣ters of seuerall dates, from Franckford, Cullen, A∣quisgraue or Aken, Antwerp, Dort, and other pla∣ces: And wee further affirme, that all but the last encounter of the last three daies, is alreay prin∣ted Newes in high Dutch. The Newes you heare hath gone currant o∣uer the Towne for many daies, without any appa∣rent or particular contradiction, more then mens mistrust of the vnlikelyhood of it. And whereas it may be thought, that all this rumour came vp at first, only vpon one letter written from Cullen, vpon some misprision of the writer; you may ea∣sily
answer this by the particulars forementioned, which being diuerse, both in the manner and num∣bers; (some reporting 200 Waggons taken, and some of 600: others of foure pieces of Cannon, others of sixe, others of seuen, so that it is very vnlikely that all this varietie should arise out of one letter▪ And whereas the letters from Franckford which beare date the 12. of our Iuly, which was eight whole daies after the 3. of Iuly, which is repor∣ted to be the last day of the fight; doe yet menti∣on no such thing: we may readily answer to that, that though these letters intimate no mention of these particulars, yet doe they not inferre any con∣tradiction to them: for it is very easie for such a businesse to be eight daies in comming out of Hessenland vnto Franckford. And againe, the writer of that intelligence professes thus much, that hee had heard of Tillyes flight or retreate for three Dutch miles: and affirmes, that hee was that day to receiue letters out of Hessen, Du∣ringen, and those parts from whence the noise of this battell should come. Howsoeuer; although this victory be not im∣possible, yet for that diuers haue suspended their beleefes of it for a while; wee will not therefore vse arguments to shew the probabilitie of that, which a few daies may proue false; Thus much in the meane time, wee haue great reason to be∣leeue our selues, that much bloud hath beene shedde, and that Tilly hath had the worst of it
(though the reports of the particulars differ) and that Brunswicke hath hitherto kept the field. The particulars we must leaue to time, and our next in∣telligence. But howeuer, this small victory which we next report, is yet beyond all contradiction, being writ∣ten from Culle, Iuly 11; which was how that, The Baron of Anholt offering to ioyne with Monsir Til∣ley: that some of the Duke of Brunswickes horse had surprised and defeated a troupe of horse of the Barons, and taken their Captaine prisoner. As for further Newes of the Baron of Anholt, It is constantly affirmed. That for all that the Im∣perialists giue the Lantgraue of Hessn very good words; calling him a good man, and a faithfull subiect to the Emperour: for that he made no more resistance vnto Monsir Tilly: yet question∣lesse good words will not giue him satisfaction for the spoyling of his Countrie, nor does hee purpose to doe the Emperour such a pleasure, as to suffer the Baron of Anholt to come through his Countrie to ioyne with Monsir Tilly; but hauing before stopt vp all the passages, he is said to be re∣solued to fight with him, rather then to suffer him to passe vntalkt withall. The Baron of Anholt being in this state, did about the middle of our Iune endeauour to certifie Mon∣sir Tilly of all: For which reason he dispatcht sixe messengers with letters vnto him; whereof fiue were taken and slaine about Spangenberg; but a sixth did about the 14. of Iune get vp to Tillyes
Campe with his letters, letting him to vnderstand his Lords desire to ioyne with him, if that Tilly could find the meanes to procure or open him the passages, and this they write from Monsieur Til∣lyes owne campe, which at that time lay about Giebel. As for other ayde which was vpon comming to Tilly, the letters from Isenach Iulie 8. relate how that the 15 of Iune being Sunday, there past about noone fiue troopes of horse, of the Regi∣ment of Collonell Auentans, being for the most part Crabats, which Tilly had sent for backe a∣gaine. They brought along with them fiftie wag∣gons loaden with baggage, many hang-byes fol∣lowing the souldiers. They marcht a quarter of a league beyond out towne of Isenach, quartering that night about Mila, Bishoffsrod and Bercka from whence they are directly to repaire vnto Monsieur Tillyes Armie. They demeaned them∣selues very mannerly where they came, paying for what they tooke, and demanding victuals and wine not beyond moderation, being otherwise content with what they found. And they report, that there are yet foure thousand horse to follow them, amongst which they affirme that there bee 1000. Cutiassers (which be horsemen heauy ar∣med, and at all points cap a pie.) But whence they should come, they told not, nor doe we beleeue any such matter as foure thousand horse to bee comming to Tilly. To returne againe vnto our Duke of Brunswick
and to giue you a tast of the martiall discipline, that he keepes. Some of his armie hauing pillaged and set fire to the Dorpe called Hattorst, which is neere to the Haertzberg (a hilly forrest so called in the land of Eischvelt) he tooke ten or twelue of the principall offenders, and hanged them vp present∣ly. And whereas some of his souldiers had done some wrongs vnto certaine of the Duke of Lunen∣burghs subiects who had occasion to trauell that way; he righted them againe, proclaiming a gene∣rall and safe conduct throughout all places where he should at any time quarter: vnto the subiects of his cousen of Lunenburgh. Vnto him after his taking of Duderstadt, did the Landtgraue Maurice of Hessen addresse these 3. following names in Ambassage, as Siegen for one, the second was called Harstll, and the third was named Goets a lawyer. These had priuate audience but kept their message secret. Thus hauing done with these parts, let vs turne aside towards the Pallatinate. Concerning which it is written from Franckford Iuly 22. that the cit∣tie of Heidelbergh, shall in part be freed of her trou∣blesome garrison, in compensation whereof, the countrey that is to receiue the benefite of it, is to haue a new taxation layde vpon them. And yet neuerthelesse, that the souldiers are fewer, and the contributions greater, yet are the souldiers no better payde any where, for which reason they fall againe to commit many outrages.
As Concerning the Dyet of Composition about the Palatinate, there is not now so much talke, as there hath beene of late. But about the entent for the totall and finall Restitution, no∣thing at all, Onely there is some speech, that the treaty for the restitution of the Ioynter of the old Princesse Electresse (widdow to the former Elector, mother to the king of Bohemia, and sister to the Prince of Orange) shall first be deliberated vpon: as also the Duchyes of Simmern and Lautern, with the Lands going with them, and belonging vnto the Prince Lodowick Philip, younger brother to the king of Bohemia (who liues at this present at Castrine with his Vncle the Marquesse Elector of Branden∣burg) are withall to bee taken at consideration, seeing that the yong Prince hath before put in his Plea vnto them, at the Imperiall assembly, at the late Dyet of Regenspurg. And with the consultation about the restitution of these two Princes Portions, (the Grand-mother and the Nephew) are the Imperiall Commissoners said to be the first to begin withall. This is written from Franckford Iuly 22. The Duke of Saxony being installed in the Administration of Lusatia for these ten or twelue yeeres to come; is now sayd to be buisie about mustering his owne forces about Lipsich although his intentions in it, be scarcely knowne to the Emperour himselfe, who hath lately sent to him,
to know what he purposes to doe with them. As for the King of Denmark; it is written that for his owne person he was lately at the Dyet of Saxony, which was then held at Luneburgh, by Brunswick-land; which Dyet is now ended, and the Conclusions not yet divulged. As for his Army, it is still sayd to be about Hamborough: little of the designes of it, being as yet knowne. Concerning Don Gonsales de Cordoua, this they write from Cullen 11. How that his Forces lay then still about Mulheim where they did be∣fore, And they then heard at Cullen, that hee was not resolued to remoue, before those 3000. which hee hath so long expected, be come in vnto him; after which, tis either thought that hee shall waite vpon Mansfeild, or goe presently to the siege of Lipstat. Don Cordoua, hath lately sent his Lietenant Boyset vnto Brussells, to sollicite for that pay, which the Archduchesse is behind hand with his Companyes. Which Boyset returning backe againe, was sayd to bring such newes, as that it was thereupon rumored, that Don Cordova was to put himselfe vpon his march within a weeke or two: this they write from Franckford Iuly 10. Concerning the Count of Mansfeild, this they
write; how that hee hath had diuers faire pieces of Ordnance lately sent vnto him; with diuers Ensignes, and good store of all maner of other Ammunition. It is also here reported that Mounsiuer le Noue, hath receiued new Com∣mission in France, for the leuying of 2000. more, which are to be forthwith conducted vnto the Count of Mansfeld. His designe is as yet kept as sercet as ever, nor can we heare that hee is as yet remoued from about Meppen, where he last lay, or of any intent that he hath, or hath not for the besieging of the Towne of Lingen. Hee is agreed finally with the Count of Emb∣den, and the Articles of Agreement wee should here haue given you, which by casualty are to bee kept for the next. Prince Henry of Nassaw having victualled Mers, is againe returned to the Hage, where there is not much newes of any sudden going into the field, it being the custome of the States, to expect while Spinola begins. The Venetian Ambassadour is very stately re∣ceived at the Hage, and hath had his audience, nor is more of his Errant knowne vulgarly as yet,
then that hee is shortly to goe towards the Campe of the Count of Mansfield. As for Spinola, wee cannot heare any thing of the certainty of the time of his going into the held, by the preparations that hee makes. Onely some Spanish troopes of horse, lie about Mastricht: And that Spinola hath caused 60000. loaues of bread to be baked at Antwerp, of late. There is certaine newes come to Amsterdam, and to other places, that the Fleete of the States, whereof Mounsieur L' Hermite went Admirall, which was called the Fleet of the vnknowne Voy∣age, hath now taken the Iland of Terceraes from the Spaniards. From Prague: Iuly 1. A few dayes since, is the Imperiall Chappell standing on the lesser side of this City reformed: It was before called by the name of Iohn Hu but now the seats, benches, &c. are all to bee al∣tered, and the very stones taken off the graues, and the Chappell is to bee new Consecrated, and called Saint Leopoldus, by the name of the Empe∣rours Brother, the Arch-Duke Leopoldus. From Basile in Switzerland, Iuly 6. The Arch-Duke Leopoldus brother to the Em∣perour, is sayd to bee busie in conveying his treasure, iewels, and most precious vtensiles, out
of Alsatia, where hee vsed before to be resident: into the Countrey of Tyrolis, as if hee were afraid of some enemy. The Duke of Fiano is come out of the Valto∣line, towards Millane, whence hee presently went with the French Ambassadour in his company to∣wardes Rome. The Popes souldiers expell all the Grisons out of the valley of Paraglia, vnlesse they will embrace the Romish religion. Since our last we haue received this confirmati∣on of Brunswicks second victory, from Hanaw. From Eicshvelt, Iune 25. About Eischvelt, 150. of Tillies folke were slaine and divers of his Captaines taken prisoners. The Duke of Holstien is slaine. The Duke of Saxon Law∣enburgh hath lost 106. waggons and all his bag∣gage, (most of which, were those very same that were taken at Prague) 1000. horse, and many thou∣sands of Rixe Dollars, besides those waggons and horses which they of Brunswicke gaue away to the Boers and countrey people. It seemes they of Tillie would haue stopped Brunswicks passage at this place, which was timely enough revealed vnto Brunswicke. Vpon notice of which, Colonell Kniphousen drawing out certain choyce men out of severall Ensignes, which-divi∣ding into three troopes, they drest an Ambush, and lay all night in their armes and order. Those of Tillie comming on, fell within their
danger and were instantly put to the sword. After this slaughter, there came 15. Companies of Tallies Soldiers who presently hearing of this first victo∣rie, fell of to Brunswicks partie. The body of Tillies Army following after with a purpose to re∣treat and hearing of 1500. of theirs already slaine, and of as many more revolted in that maze, fell a flying, and those of Brunswickes pursuing, had the killing of them, so that God be thanked ours haue gotten the victory. Captaine Smit with sundry officers, amongst which they say that Tillie himself was, fled away. Captaine Petit one of Mon∣sieur Tillies side, is escaped to Tibach. For the cer∣tainty of this: The Count of Crubach (who is one of Count Mansfeildes Army) comming hither yester∣day, was with much ceremonie fetcht into the Castle: reports this for most certaine. Kniphousen hath done brauely, And he was the chiefe in their ouerthrow. From Hanaw Iuly 5▪ Stilo veteri. By this plaine description you see, the rowting of Tillie himselfe in his retreat, after the ouerthrow of the first two Regiments. Newes of this second battell also was brought vnto Hanaw by the Count of Erpach, who repor∣ted this for certaine vnto the Countesse of Hanaw; And that there were exceeding few of Brunswicks side slaine. Some say that Tillie is fled to Oppenheim. FINIS.
