18468 99848396 13486
SERENISSIMA ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA INFANTA HISPANIARUM.&c. portrait The pourtraicture of the most Illustrious Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spain Duchesse of Austria and Burgundie: And Princesse of Belgia R E sculpt
A true Coppie of the transportation of the Lowe Countries, Burgundie, and the Countie of Charrolois: Doone by the King of Spayne, for the Dowrie of his eldest Daughter. Giuen in marri∣age vnto the Cardinall ALBERT, Duke of Austria, vvith the Articles and Conditions of the same, signed by the King in Madrill. ❧ Translated out of Dutch by H. W. Nouember. 1598. AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Paule Linley, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Blacke Beare.
The Coppie of the transport done by his Maiestie, to th' Infanta his Eldest Daugh∣ter: of the Netherlands, Burgundie, & the Coun∣tie of Charolois in the yeere. 1598. PHILL. Rex. To all present and to come, which shall see or heare these presents: greeting. WHereas wée haue found to be most behoouefull not onely to our Prouinces of the Low-coun∣tries, but also, vnto all Christendome in gene∣rall, no longer to delay the marriage of our deere and beloued eldest Daughter th' Infanta, Isabel Clara Eugenia, béeing moued thereunto, as well for the conseruation of our House, as diuers other good respects: as also, for the great good affection, which we beare vnto our beloued Brother, Nephew, and Cosin, th' Archduke Albert, (a this present) Lieuetenant, Gouernour, and Cap∣taine generall, for vs in our Netherlands, and Burgundy, we haue cast our eyes on him, and choosing him for the future Husband of our said Eldest Daughter, the whole, aswel with the consent & pleasure of our holy Father the Pope, who con∣discendeth, and graunteth the dispensations thereunto belong∣ing, as also with the agréement and consent, of the most high, excellent, & puissant Prince, our beloued Brother, Nephew, and Cosin, Rodolph, the second of that name, Emperour of the Romaines, together with our welbeloued Sister the Em∣presse his Mother: which beeing considered, and to the ende that our saide Daughter might bée furnished with reasonable means, such as are required for her great calling and merrits. Also to shew and make knowne, the loue which we haue and doe beare, vnto our sayde Netherlands and Burgundie, wee
haue resolued (to th' aduanncement of the saide marriage) to giue and transport all those saide Countries, vnto our saide Daughter, and all thereunto belonging, in the manner which shall be specified héere-vnder. The whole, with the consent and good will, of our deere and welbeloued good Sonne, the Prince Phillip, our onely Sonne and heire: according to the aduertisement, which (by vs and our sayd Sonne) hath béene giuen vnto the principall Lords and Knights of our order, Go∣uernours and Estates of our said Netherlands, which are in our obeysance, together with those of our Country of Bur∣gundie. All the which haue witnessed and declared by theyr aunswer, the ioy & contentment which they receiued at our so kinde resolution, which they knowe and confesse, to be for the rest and tranquilitie of our said Netherlands, and that it is the true and right course to attaine to a good and firme peace, and to bee deliuered from such a troublesome warre: which quiet and tranquilitie, wee haue alwaies wished vnto them. And considering that (which vnto all is most manifest) the greatest felicitie which may happen to a Country, is to be gouerned by the sight and presence of theyr naturall Prince and Lord, God is witnesse of the trouble and care which we haue had, because we haue not beene able in that sort to do it personally, as (tru∣lie) we well wished, if other great and important affaires of our Realme of Spaine, had not forced and constrained vs to make a continuall residence therein, without moouing anie thing from thence: as also at this present they constraine vs. And although the age of our said Sonne, seeme more fitte to trauaile then dooth ours, notwithstanding, it hath béene the pleasure of the Almightie, to giue so many other kingdomes and Counteies, for the good gouernment of which, there will neuer want affaires of great importance, for the which also his presence shall heere be needfull. Wee haue then founde most conuenient to take this resolution, to he end that our said Low Countries be not left in the fore-passed inconueniences, together with the reason that we haue to appoynt the portion of our said Daughter th' Infanta according to her merrits, and the greatnes of her birth. As also perticulerly, that next vnto
the said Prince our Sonne, (vnto whom God confirme with long yeeres & prosperitie to his seruice) our said eldest Daugh∣ter is the first and neerest heyre vnto the said Countries, and therefore, by vertue of the will and pleasure of our said Son, shee may frō this time be constituted in the same. The more because we haue chose these meanes, hoping that thereby our said Netherlands may returne, to their auncient flower, rest, and prosperitie, which heeretofore they haue had. VVherefore we make knowne, That desiring at this pre∣sent to put in execution, that, whereon we haue so ripely con∣sidered, and in respect of the voluntarie consent, which our said Sonne the Prince hath so liberallie giuen thereunto, after hee had vnderstood, the submission wherewith our said Countries did confirme our will and intention, wée haue resolued and de∣créed, to cede and transport to our said Daughter th'Infanta, and to the aduauncement of the saide marriage, all our saide Prouinces of the Netherlands and Burgundy, in the forme, manner, and conditions heere-vnder expressed. I. THE first condition is, and not otherwise, that our sayde Daughter is to take in marriage th'Archduke Albert, in vertue of the dispensations which our holy Father the Pope, hath granted to that end, that she shall accept for her Dowrie, the said Low Countries, and the County of Burgundie. And in case that the saide marriage were disturbed for any cause whatsoeuer, the said donation and cession, shall be voyde and of none effect: as in such a case (at this present) we recall and anullate the same. II. Item on condition & not otherwise, that the Children and descendents of the said marriages, Males and Females, ligi∣timates, and borne in true marriage, (and not the vnlawfull) although by subsequent it were in marriage, the Elder procée∣ding the Younger, and the Male the Female: in like degrée they shall be Heires, from hand to hand of all the said prouin∣ces,
conioyntly without eclipsing or seperating them, decla∣ring that the Sonne or Daughter, of the Eldest Sonne or Daughter deceased, during the life of their Father: the same shall be preferred vnto the Vncles, or any other of the collate∣rall line. III. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that in case (which God defend) that there were neither Sonne nor Daughter of this mariage, or that they should be deceased, in the time of the decease of one, either of ye sayd Archduke Albert, or our Daugh∣ter th'Infanta, which shal be married: The sayd donation and concession shal be from hence-forward voyde & of no effect. In which case if our sayd Daughter remaine a Widdow, she shal be furnished with the lawfull portion from the Fathers side, & the Dowry of the Mothers side, such as appertaines vnto her: Ouer and aboue, what wee or our saide Sonne the Prince, might doe in such case in her behalfe, for the loue which wee beare her. And if the said Archduke our good Nephew surui∣ued our saide Daughter th'Infanta, he shall remaine Gouer∣nour of the said Netherlands, for, and in the name of the Pro∣prietary vnto whom the sayde Countreyes (as then) should be due. IIII. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that if all the descen∣dants, Males, and Females, procreated of the same marriage in such sort, that none (of those which should be called to those goods) should remaine in such case. They shall returne all to the kingdome of Spayne, vnto him who shall be descended from vs, which make this donation and concession: As in such case at this present we giue it him. V. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that neither our said Daughter th'Infanta, nor any other of the Successours, shal not (for any cause or pretee so ouer) transport, giue, nor allie∣nate
the sayd Countries without our consent, or the consent of our Heires, and Successours in these kingdoms. VI. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that she which shall be Princesse or Lady of the sayd Low-Countries, shal marry with the King of Spayne, or with the Prince his Sonne, which as then shal liue, keepe alwaies furnished with the due dispensations, in what shal be needfull. And if (as then) they had no mind, or meanes to make the said marriage, nor to haue them Countries in Dowry, (in such case) the said Lady may not take any other husband, nor bring him in Dowry any part of the said Netherland, except it be with our aduice and con∣sent, and of our Heires or Successors in the said Kingdome of Spaine, which shal be desenceded from vs, and in case of con∣trauention: All which shal haue been giuen and granted, shal returne vnto them: as if this gift, concession, and transport, had not beene made. VII. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that each and euery one of the Princes and Lords of the said Netherlands, shal not marry his Sonnes nor Daughters, but with our aduice and consent, or of our Heires and Successours Kings of Spaine. VIII. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that neither our said Daughter th'Infanta, her Husband, nor any of his Suc∣cessours (vnto which the said Countries shal be due) shall not in any wise make any Trade, Traffique, nor Contract to the East or West-Indies: neither send thether any sort of Ships, vnder what title, colour, or pretext soeuer: on paine that the said Countries, in the case of the saide contrauention shall be confiscated. And if any of these Subiects should (against this defence) trade or trauaile to the said Indies, the Lords of the said Countries shal punish them with paines, confiscation of goods, and other more seuere, yea with death.
IX. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that if the said Arch∣duke Albert our beloued Nephewe should suruiue our saide Daughter th' Infanta leauing a Sonne or Daughter, he shall haue the gouernment of the said Sonne or Daughter Heires, and the vse of all his goods, as if our Daughter th' Infanta were yet aliue: And ouer and aboue, our Nephewe (in this case) shal enioy (during his life) all the saide Countries, and shal be Vsufructier of the same, so farre forth, that he enter∣taine and nourish (all such Children) honourably according to their calling and quality, & that vnto the Elder, (be it Sonne or Daughter) he giue the Dutchy of Luxembourgh, and the County of Chime, which dependeth thereon to haue and en∣ioy the same during the Fathers life, after the which, he shal haue all, as his vniuersall Heire. Being heere expresly decla∣red that this clause of th' Vsufruict be onely vnderstoode in fa∣uour of our good Nephew th'Archduke Albert, and that it may not be drawne in consequence, that none of his Successours might alledge any example, nor pretend any right there-vnto in any such like case. X. Item on condition, and not otherwise: This being aboue all others the principall and chiefest obligation. That all the Children and Desendants of the said marriage, following the piety and Religion which shineth in them, shall liue and dye in our holy Catholique faith, as our holy Romaine Church teacheth, and before they take possession of the saide Nether∣lands, shal thereof take their oath in the forme and manner as is expressed after this Article. And in case (which God defend) that any of the said Desendants, should goe astray from our holy faith, and should fall in any heresie: that after our holy Father the Pope shal haue declared him for such:) he shal be depriued of th' Administration, Possession, and propriety, of the said Prouinces, and that the Subiects & Vassals of the same, obey him no more: but that they receaue and admit, the néerest
Catholique, following by degrée, who in case of decease, or such fault, ought to succéede him: and the saide Hereticke shal be reputed, as if he were deceased by naturall death. EGo iuro, ad Sancta Dei Euangelia, quod semper ad extremum vitae meae spiritum, Sacrosanctam Fidem Catholicam, quam tenet, docet & predicat Sancta Catholica & Apostolica Roma∣na Ecclesia (omnium Ecclesiarum Mater & Magistra) constan∣ter prositebor, & fideliter firmiterque credam, & veraciter tene∣bo: Atque cam à meis subditis teneri, doceri & predicari (quan∣tum in me erit) curabo. Sic me Deus adiuvet, & haec Sancta Dei Euangelia. The translation of the aboue written oath. I Sweare, by the holy Gospell of GOD, alwaies, euen to the last gaspe of my life, stedfastly to professe, truly and assu∣redly to beleeue, and vnfainedly to maintaine, the holy Ca∣tholique fayth, which is held, taught, and preached, by the holy Catholique, and Apostolick Romish Church, (of all Chur∣ches the mother and mistrisse.) And to take care (as much as in me lyeth) that the same shall be vsed, professed, taught, and preached to my subiects. So helpe me God, & his holy Gospel. XI. Item on condition, and not otherwise, that the greatest sta∣bilitie of peace, the loue, and coresponce, which ought to bee betweene the Kings of these kingdomes, shall bee betweene our descendants successors the Princes, and Lordes of the Countries on the other side. Also our descendants and succes∣sors, and euery one of them, which in time shall enter into the possession and demaine of the saide Low Countries and Bur∣gundie, shall praise, approue, and ratifie of superaboundance, all what is contained in this article: XII. And béeing, that our intention and will is, that the aboue written conditions, shall be fully accomplished, together with
the same we giue, cede, abandon, trans-fer, renounce, agree, and consent, indowrie, feeft, or reedefeeft, (and by what bet∣ter way or forme by right may or ought to bee doone, without that the forcelesse forme, may be any way preiudiciall to that which is forcible, profitable, or aduantagious) to the said In∣fanta, Isabel Clara Eugenia, our deere and welbeloued eldest Daughter, all our Netherlands, and euery Prouince therof, and the County of Burgundie, therein comprehended the Countie of Charrolois, and the Dukedomes, Principalities, Marquisats, Counties, Barronies, Shieres, Citties, Castles and Forts, which are in our saide. Netherlands and Burgun∣die, together with all regals, leanes, homages, rites, liber∣ties, freedoms, rites of patronage, rents, reuenues, domaines, aydes, confiscations, and forfeitures, with all and whatsoeuer rites and actions, which we may or might pretend in the cause of the Netherlands, and Countie of Burgundie, together with all preheminences, prerogatiues, priuiledges, exemptions, dnoueries, iurisdictions, resorts, & other superiorities what∣soeuer, and in what sort they may bee, or for what cause and occasion they may appertaine vnto vs, be it of patrimonie or otherwise in any title or howsoeuer it may be. To enioy them wholy, and in such sort as we haue enioyed them, without any exception, so farre foorth (alwaies) that they be kept inuiola∣blie all and euery one of the aboue specified conditions. And the conditions made by the immortall memory the Emperor, my Lord and Father, in the month of Nouember, Ann. 1549. touching the vnion of the sayd Low Countries, not any way consenting nor agreeing any diuision, or separation in ye same, for what cause, nor in any manner whatsoeuer. XIII. And our intention is, as wee declare and expresly ordaine by these presents, that notwithstanding this our gift, conces∣sion and transport, our saide Daugther the Infanta, and her future husband, the Archduke Albert, shall be bounde to pay and to satis-fie to all such debts and obligations, contracted by vs, or in our Name, or by the late Imperiall Maiestie, vpon
our patrimonie and domaine of the said Netherlands & Coun∣tie of Burgundie. And that also they shall bee bounde, to su∣staine, beare, and maintaine, all such rents, pensions for lyfe, and all others whatsoeuer gyftes, recompences, and others, which his said Imperiall Maiestie, vs, and our Predicessors, hath, or doe giue, grant, and assigne vnto any persons whatsoe∣uer. And also we make, create, constitute, and name (by these presents, in the forme and qualitie aboue mentioned) our said Daughter the Infanta, for Princesse and Lady of the sayde Netherlands, and the Countie of Burgundie, together with the aforesaiyd Countie of Charrolois. Graunting moreouer, vnto our said Daughter, that ouer and aboue the particuler ti∣tles of each Prouince, of the said Netherlands and Countie of Burgundie, shee may name and intitle herselfe Dutchesse of Burgundie, although that wee haue kept for vs, and the sayd Prince our Sonne, (as long as it shall please vs) the same ti∣tle of Duke of Burgundie, with all the rites which thereby are due to vs: together with the name of chiefe and soueraigne of our order of the Golden Fleece, with full power and autho∣ritie to dispose thereof in time to come, as we shall finde most conuenient. Wee also further consent, agree, and grant vnto our saide Daughter the Infanta, and gyue her absolute power and vn∣reuocable, of her owne priuate authoritie, without any other requisition or consent of her sayd future husband, or other, to take, and ceise, the entire and full possession, of all the sayde Netherlands, and Countie of Burgundie and Charrolois, and to that effect, cause the generall Estates of the said Countries to be assembled, and the perticuler Estates of euery Prouince. Or to vse any other order or forme, which shee shall find most requisite and conuenient, to declare this our concession and transport. As also to doo the oath which shall be needfull vnto the said subiects, and Estates of the said Countries, and to de∣maund inuesture of the péeces and signiories which shall bee needfull: and like-wise to receiue of them the due oath, and to binde them vnto all, according to all whereunto by their pre∣cedent oathes they were reciprocally bound.
And vntill such time as our said Daughter shal haue taken, (or cause to be taken in her name) the full possession of the said Netherlands, County of Burgundy, and Charolois, in the forme and manner referred by these presents, we set and pose our selues as Possessors of the same, in the name and behalfe of our said Daughter: In witnesse whereof we ordaine, and commaund these Letters Patents to be deliuered vnto her: consenting and graunting (moreouer) vnto her, to detaine, commit, and institute, in the said Netherlands, and Burgun∣dy: Gouernours, Iudges, Iustices, and Officers, either for the Guard or defence thereof, or for th' administration of Iu∣stice, policy, receite of the Demaines, or otherwise. And for the rest, to doe as a true Princesse and naturall Lady, and Proprietary of those Countries ought, either by right custome, or otherwise, to doe, as we haue done, and might haue done. Notwithstanding, alwaies obseruing the saide conditions a∣boue inferred. And to this effect we haue and doe quitte, ab∣solue, and discharge by these presents, all Bishops, Abbots, Prelates, and other Church-men. Dukes, Princes, Mar∣quesses, Counts, Barrons, Gouernours, Chiefetaines, Cap∣taines of Countries and Citties, Cheefetaines, Presidents, and other of our Counsaile. Chauncellors, and other Iustices and Officers. Captaines, men of Warre, and Souldiours, of Forts and Castles: their Lieuetenants, Knights, Squires, and vassailes: together with the men of law, Cittizens, inha∣bitants of Citties, Boroughs, freedoms, & villages, and each and euery one the subiects of our said Netherlands, Countie of Burgundie and Charroloies, and each of them, respectiuely of the oathes of fidelitie, faith, homage, promise, and obligations, which they ought to vs, as to theyr Lorde and Soueraigne Prince. Charging, willing, and commaunding expresly vn∣to them, that they sweare and receiue the saide Infanta our Daughter, for their true Princesse and Lady, and to sweare vnto her, the due oathes of fidelitie, fayth, homage, promise, and obligation, in the manner accustomed, according to the nature of the Countries, Lands, & Signories, and that (more∣euer) they beare vnto her, and her said future Husband, all
honour, reuerence, affection, obeysance, fidelitie and seruice, as good and loyall subiects ought, and are bound to doe, to their true and naturall Princesse, and as vntill this present they haue doone to vs. And with supplition and amendement of all and euery defaults, as much of right as deed, the which might happen betweene this our domiation, concession, and trans∣port. And of our owne mouing and incitation, full and abso∣lute royall power, (which herein wee will and doe vse) haue and doe derogate, vnto all and any lawes, constitutions, and customes, which may or might contrary here against: for such is our expresse will and desire. And to the end that all what is aboue saide, may be plaine, and manifest matter, and which may continue, alway fast, sure, and stable, wee haue subsigned the same with our owne Name, and caused our great Seale to be hung thereat. Wil∣ling and ordaining, that inregistration be made hereof, to bee held in great estimation and value, in all and euery our priuie Counsailes, and Chambers of account where it shall be requi∣site. Giuen in our Cittie of Madrill, Realme of Castile, the sixt day of the Month of May, 1598. and of our raigne of Naples and Ierusalem, the 45. of Castile, Arragon, Cicile, and others, the 44. and of Portingall the 19. Paraphed thus. N. D. V. Subsigned, PHILLIPPVS. And more vnder, By the King. And vnder written, A. de la Loo
Approbation, Aggreation, and the Oath of the Prince of Spayne, in the transpor∣tation of the Netherlands and Burgundie. PHILLIP by the grace of GOD, Prince, onely sonne and heyre to the Kingdoms, Countries, & Dominions, of the King PHILLIP, the second of that name, my Lord and Father. Vnto all present and to come, greeting. MY saide Lorde and Father, hauing resolued to espouse my Lady th' Infanta Isabel Clara Euge∣nia, our deere and wel beloued Sister, with the Archouke Albert, our beloued Vncle and Cosin, and that according to the same, his Catholique Maiestie hath also determined in our cōmunication and with our consent, béeing there-vnto perswaded through great re∣spects of the common good, yea, to the rest and tranquilitie of all Christendome in generall, and perticulerly to the rest and quietnesse of the Netherlands. As also to the end that our said good Sister, be furnished according to her qualities and high∣nes of her birth. To make a gift vnto our saide Sister of the Netherlands, and the County of Burgundy, in the forme and manner appearing by the open Letters which my Lorde and Father to that end dispatched: signed with his own hand, and sealed with his great seale, whereof the tenor followeth from word to word.
Phillippus &c. Make knowne, that after hauing perticu∣lerly vnderstoode, what is aboue saide, and mentioned euery point of the matter, considering the common good, (which is lyke to proceede thereof,) vnto all Christendome. Yea, the same by reason of the perticuler loue which we owe and beare vnto our beloued Sister th' Infanta, through her great woor∣thines: We strengthen, approoue, and confirme, for good by these presents, notwithstanding any preiudice which might belong to vs, our Successours now present or to come: and for the same reasons we consent, and agrée by these presents, that the said Netherlands, and Counties of Burgundy and Charloys shal be ceded, transported, and giuen vnto our belo∣ued Sister th' Infanta, in the manner as my aforesaid Lord and Father hath done it, and as it may best continue, and for the more security, coroboration, and assurance of what his Maiesty dooth dispose and ordaine, in the fauour and furthe∣rance of our beloued Sister. Euen so doe wee dispose and or∣daine there-vnto (if so it be néedefull) by these presents also in fauour of the same, in the same forme and manner in all: the whole, procéeding of our owne free will, without that wee haue any way, there-vnto béene incited, compelled, either by deceite, falshoode, nor any respect of paternall reuerence, nor any feare, or other, but iustly and truly: being our intention that the said Countries shal belong and appertaine to our deere and beloued Sister th' Infanta Isabell Clara Eugenia, and her Successours, in the forme of the saide disposition of the King my Lord and Father. And to the end that all may haue his full enteere effect and perfection, and remaine for euermore fa∣ster, and more stabler, we haue renounced, and renounce by these presents (in fauour of our said beloued Sister) for vs and our Successours, all Benefices which may or might be, by right, giuen or assigned vnto vs, or them, which might contra∣ry vnto these: nor although it were by right of restitution in Integrum, in the which we haue likewise renounced, and by these presents doe renounce. For our concluded and determi∣ned will is, that no manner of things shall haue any force or power against this donation, concession, and transport, which
is done of the Netherlands, in the forme and manner before written. Wherefore we haue done and giuen our oath vpon the ho∣ly Euangilan Gospel, which we haue touched with our hands, to hold and obserue, maintaine, and accomplish: and to cause to be held, obserued, maintayned, and accomplished, all what is aforesaid, without euer to bring there against any manner of excuse or exception: nor to suffer that any shall bring them in our name, the which we affirme and promise with prince∣ly words, and that we wil giue any ayd & assistance, to the ful∣filling of what is said. Such being (as is said) our earnest will and desire: In witnes wherof, we haue dispatched these pre∣sent open Letters, the which wee haue subsigned with our owne hands, and caused to be contrasigned by the Secretaries infrascripts of the estates of the King my Lord and Father, in the said matters of the said Lowcountries and Burgundy, and caused them to be sealed with the great Seale of Armes of his said Maiesty, hanging at a golden string, being present (and as witnesses ther-vnto requested) Don Gomes de Auila Mar∣ques of Velada, our Gouernour, and great Steward Don L. H. t. a p. de mora Earle of Castel. Rodrigo G tand Comman∣der d'Alcantara Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, and Cup∣bearer to our owne person, Don Iehan d'Iiaques great Com∣maunder of Lean, al thrée of the Counsaile of Estate, and Mes∣sire Nicholas d'Amant Knight, likewise Counsailour of Estate and Keeper of the Seale of his Maiesty, in the matters of the afore-said Netherlands, and Burgundy, and Chauncelour of his Countrey and Dukedome of Brabant. Giuen in the Cit∣tie of Madrill, the Realme of Castile, the sixt day of the mo∣neth of May: in the yeare of grace, 1598. Paraphe N. e. r. t signed Philippus. And more vnder, By order of my Lord the Prince: subsigned A de la Loo, and the saide Letters were sealed with the great Seale of Armes of his Maiesty, in redde waxe, hanging at a golden string.
Procuration of th'Infanta to her future Spouse, to receaue the Netherlands in her name. ISabell Clara Eugenia, by the grace of God Infanta, of al the Kingdoms of Spaine, Dutches of Burgundy, Lorrayne, Brabant, Limborch, and Artoys, Countesse Pallatin of Haynault, Holland, Zealand, of Namen, and Zut∣phen, Marquesse of the Romish Dominion, Lady of Freesland, of Saliues, and Machelen, of the County, Citty, and Country of VVtrecht, Oueryssel and Groe∣ninghen. To all present and to come which shall see or beare these Presents. KNow that, as well for the welfare of Christen∣dome ingeneral, as the perticuler of the Nether∣lands, and for other good considerations, it hath pleased the King my Lord and Father, for the furtherance of our future marriage (by the dis∣pensation of our holy Father the Pope) with our beloued Co∣sen the Archduke Albert, and with the consent, agréeation, and agréement of the high and puissant Prince our déere and wel∣beloued Brother: to make vs a gift, concession, and transpor∣tation of all the Netherlands, and Burgundy, by the open Letters thereof dispatched, and respectiuely subsigned by their
owne hands, she sixt day of this present moneth of May, with other open Letters, touching the acceptation of the transport and donation, to the end that the saide Netherlands and Bur∣gundy should (by vs) be held and possessed: also our Heires and Successours in forme and manner, and according to the conditions perticulerly expressed by the saide open Letters: And that by the same his Maiesty hath consented, agréed, and promised vs, and giueth absolute and inreuocable power of our owne authority, (without taking any other consent) to seise our selues, (or by sending of procuration to our said future hus∣band the Archduke Albert,) the whole and entire possession of the said Netherlands, and County of Burgundy and Charo∣loys, and to doe in the said effect all what perticulerly is saide in the said open Letters. MAke knowne that we for the causes aboue specified, and in euery thing to follow the will and ordinance of his Maie∣sty, to the furtherance of the same, all what in regard of the aboue written, is needfull for our voyage to the saide Nether∣lands, haue of our owne mind, and absolute power, authorised, and giuen full, and inreuocable power and commission with all faculty, (so generall as perticuler) to our future husband the Archduke Albert, for, and in our name, and in our behalfe, to do, either through himselfe, or through others, which he shal appoint there-vnto, or shal finde lawfull by vertue of these Let∣ters, once, or at more times, all and in perticuler the thinges, as much as in our name and behalfe, as in the behalfe of all the Prouinces of the Netherlands, and County of Burgundy and Charoloys in generall, and through the Estates of euery Prouince in perticuler shall be required, and néedfull there to be done: for (respectiuely) to take, seise, to haue and to hold in our name, the whole and entire possession of all the said Coun∣tries, and of euery Prouince thereof, with all what thereunto belongeth, to vse them, wholy, quietly, without any contradic∣tion, obstract, or hinderance, and to that ende to assemble the Estates of the said Countries, be it in generall or perticuler, to doe (in our name) the requisite oaths: as also to receaue of the
aforesaide Estates and others, their vsuall oathes. And ouer and aboue, shal be done by our said future husband the Arch∣duke Albert, all what we (to that end) in proper person ought to doe if we were there present: and although that there were any matter which should require more especiall commaunde∣ment, then is in the said Letters mentioned. We then suffer, by Princely words, and by our Honours, to finde agréeable, to keepe fast and sure, and to obserue, and cause to be obserued, and inuiolably accomplished, and in good fayth alwaies: all what soeuer by the saide Archduke our future husband, or by those which he shal haue appointed or commit, by vertue of the said Letters, shal be done, or passed in regard of the said entire, full, and accomplished possession, of the saide Netherlands and Burgundy, according to the forme and manner mentioned in the saide open Letters, of the said donation, cession, and tran∣sport: to the which we referre our selues without euer, to con∣trary the same, or suffer the same to be contraried, directly, or indirectly, in what manner soeuer, for such is our will. In witnes wherof, we haue signed with our hand, and caused to be contresigned by the Secretaries Infrascript, of the Estates of the King my Lord and Father, in matters of the saide Ne∣therlands and Burgundy: and sealed with the great Seale at Armes of his Maiesty, hanging at a golden string. Giuen in the Citty of Madrill the Realme of Castile, the xxx. day of May, the yeare of grace, 1598. Paraphed thus N. d. i. t. and subsigned the Lady Isabell, and on the fold, By order of my Lady the Infanta. And more signed A de la Loo. And were the said Letters sealed with the Kings great Seale, in redde waxe, hanging at a golden string.
Demonstration of the Archduke Al∣bertus, done to the generall Estates. ALBERT by the grace of God, Cardinall, Arch∣duke, Lieuetenant, Gouernour, and Cap∣taine Generall. DEere and welbeloued, the two Letters héere∣vnder ioyned, are of the King my Lord, and of the Prince his Sonne, for assurance in our be∣halfe: to declare vnto you a resolution which his Maiesty hath taken, to the welfare and con∣solation of these Countries, by the accord and consent of the said Lord the Prince. And because wee cannot personally ac∣complish, the same being a waighty matter, vnlesse we absent our selues from hence, we are therefore by these to giue you vnderstanding of our great charge, which in effect is: that his Maiesty hath found good, as well for the generall welfare of all Christendome, as especially for these Countries, no longer to prolong the marriage of the woorthy Infanta his Eldest Daughter, as wel for the conseruation of his house, as diuers other respects: he hath (to this effect) cast his eyes on our per∣son, and that by the consent of our holy Father the Pope, of the Empresse our honourable Lady and Mother, and of the Em∣perour my Lord and Brother: And that moreouer to giue bet∣ter commodity vnto his Daughter and vs, to manifest the per∣ticuler inclination which hee beareth these Countries, will transport them ouer, as a gift to his Daughter, to the furthe∣rance of the said marriage, together with the County of Bur∣gundy, without detayning or parting any thing thereof, in any manner whatsoeuer, assuring himselfe, that you and al others will reioyce of this his kinde resolution, being the same, stret∣cheth to the common welfare, & rest of the saide Countries, as being the onely way to attaine to a good and sure peace, and to come out of this miserable warre, which is the thing which
his Maiesty hath so feruently desired. Wherfore for our parts (since it toucheth vs) we are to esteeme it greatly, as also wee greatly esteeme the great honour and good which (by these) his Maiesty doeth to our person, choosing vs aboue all other per∣sons, and onely for this respect, ought we to receaue an incre∣dible contentment. And so much the more doe wee reioyce, that (by these occasions) we may shew the effects of our good, and cordiall desires: In following the paths of the Princes of Burgundy and Austria our Predicessours, labouring for the welfare and rest of the said Countries to the which we haue, and doe beare a perticuler inclination, estéeming thereof since our comming hether) to haue made a reasonable proofe, al∣though not wholy such as we desired, by reason of diuers trou∣bles and mishaps which are befallen vs: We know full well the heauy and burthensome charge, which by this resolution will fall on our necks. But assuring our selues that we shall (through you and others) be counsailed, ayded, and assisted, we hope that (by the grace of God) the matter wil haue a good and prosperous successe: and that we shall see these Countries to returne in their auntient flowre, greatnes, and prosperity, as they were in the dayes of our Predicessours, and they see∣ing with what courage the worthy Infanta and I shal employ our selues there-vnto, our persons, mindes, and our meanes, we shal kéepe the same amity, the which their Fathers (vntill now) haue held: This is the summe of that which (by vertue of the said credence) we desired to declare you, and we shal be very glad (with the first) to receaue your Letters of aunswer, as wel to his saide Maiesty as to the saide Prince, to the end they may be sent them, and that therof may be double and tri∣ple Coppies, to shun the perils which are abroad, to ye end that they be not lest by the way. And héere we beseech God (deere and welbeloued) to haue you in his protection. In Brussells the 5. of December, 1597. Paraphed R. i. c. h. V. And subsigned Albert.
The Letter OF THE KING. DEere and welbeloued, you often haue béene a∣ble to perceiue the good wil and affection which wee alwaies haue borne to our patrimoniall Netherlands, and vnto each Prouince of the same, through the great care we haue alwayes had, and incessantly beare, for the welfare, quiet, and tran∣quilitie of the same, and also through the paines and troubles, which therefore wee haue vndertaken: moreouer, the great costs and charges which we haue béene at to maintaine them, without sparing any thing to defend the same, against our e∣nemies, and to bring vnder our subiection and obeysance, those which withdrew themselues from you, rebelling against vs, theyr naturall Prince. All which shall yet more at large bée manifested vnto you, through the kinde resolution which wee haue taken for your proper welfare, the which our good Bro∣ther, Nephew, and Cosin, Albert, Archduke of Austria, shall make knowne vnto you. Vnto whom, wee desire and com∣maund you, to giue beliefe and assurance, as vnto our owne person, sith it is a matter which toucheth you so much, and like∣wise the common good. And assuring our selues that you will doe it accordingly, and that you shall reape pleasure and con∣tentment, in that which hee shall declare vnto you, wee will not say any thing more thereof. But deere and welbeloued, the Lord take you in his holy protection. From S. Laurens the tenth of September. 1597. Paraphed, N. D. V. Signed, PHILLIP. And more vnder, A. de la Loo.
The Letter OF THE PRINCE. DEere and welbeloued, as I haue endeuoured and endeuour my selfe to follow and imitate the greatnes and excellencies, vertues, and pathes of my Lord and Father, in like sort I haue also reformed my selfe in the inclinati∣on and loue towards you, for the welfare and contentment which I wish vnto you, as the effects shal cléerely manifest the same: by that, which shal be declared vnto you (in my behalfe) by our good Vncle and Co∣sen Albert Archduke of Austria, vnto whom you shal giue full beléefe and trust, or assure your selues on him, gouerning and vsing your selues according to that which he shal declare vnto you, wherein (ouer and aboue the pleasure you shall doe me) you shal your selues gather the chiefest fruites therof. Heere∣with, déere and welbeloued, our Lord take you in his holy kéeping. From S. Lawrance the tenth of September. 1597. Paraphed. W. V. S. Signed. PHILLIP. And more vnder. A. de la Loo.
A coppie of the Kings Letter to the Archduke of Austria. MY good Brother, Nephew, & Cosin, at the returne of the poast, Frans vanden Berghe, I aduertised you by my Letters of the 17. of March last past, how at his arriuall were receiued, certaine pacquets with Letters of aunswere, the which the Lords and Knights of the Order, Counsellors, and Gouernours, as also the Estates of the Prouinces, (which are vnder my obeysance) haue respec∣tiuely, rendred and giuen vp, vpon my Letters of the month of September, the yéere past, according to the matter therein touched, the which I sent ouer to be declared vnto thē, to your assurance. And afterwards to haue confessed (by theyr sayde aunswere) the great ioy and especiall content which each one of them saith to haue receiued of my kinde resolution, I haue béene yet mooued and occasioned to procéede further, without forgetting, to further that which I haue so ripely intended, in making a gift cession, & transportation, to my beloued Daugh∣ter the Infanta, of all my Netherlands and County of Bur∣gundie, but haue moreouer (the sixth of this Month, in pre∣sence of my beloued Sonne the Prince, with his expresse con∣sent and aggreation, and through the acceptance of my good Daughter beeing present) passed the dispatches of the thrée pa∣tents, which by these I send you, to the end you may be parti∣culerly informed of all what they containe, in fauour of the marriage of the saide Infanta my good Daughter with you. And by vertue of her procuration sent vnto your own person, (the which you shall find enclosed with the three patents) you may seise in her name, and in her behalfe, the whole & enteere possession of the said Countries, and euery Prouince of the same, in the forme as the said procuration containeth, putting
the same to effect at what time, and when you please or thinke good. And to the end that this my intent may come to his full effect, and that all this may be doone with great content of my vassailes and subiects on the other side, so in generall as in per∣ticuler, I write againe to the said persons and estates, as also dooth my beloued Sonne, in the substance as you shall sée by the coppies ioyned here-vnto, by reason of the aunswere they haue made respectiuelie on the said my first Letters. And although vntill this time no aunswers haue béen recei∣ued, of the Gouernour Parliament, nor from the thrée Estates of my Countie of Burgundie, (vpon my Letters sent them in the said month of September, in the yeere past) I haue found good to send them others, the which (with the coppies) you shall finde in this pacquet. It shall be very agréeable vnto mee to bee aduertised (by the first commoditie) the receit of all the aforesaid Letters: and in what sort you shall haue dealt there∣in, and how all the matters on the other side will passe. Heere∣with, (my beloued Brother, Nephew, and Cosin) the Lorde take you in his holy keeping. From Madrill the last of May, 1598. Paraphed M. D. V. Subsigned, Your good Bro∣ther, Nephew, and Cosin, Phillip. And more subscribed, A de la Loo. The superscription was, To my good Brother, Nephew and Cosin: The Archduke Albert,Lieuetenant Gouer∣nour of the Low Countries, and Burgundie. THE KING. DEere and beloued, by the contents of your Letters of the xxi. of December, the last yeere past, we were reioyced to haue vnderstood the great ioy & contentment which you receiued at our kinde resolution touching the mat∣ter, the which (in our behalfs) was caused to be declared vn∣to you, by our good Brother, Nephew, and Cosin, the Arch∣duke
Albert, by vertue of our letters of credence. And because our intent dooth tend onely to the reducing of the Low Coun∣tries to a peace and tranquilitie, through the marriage which we haue appointed, betweene our deerely beloued Daughter the Infanta, and our good Brother, Nephew, and Cosin, we therefore haue thought good, (as to the furtherance of thys good worke) to giue, cede, and transport, to our saide Daugh∣ter, all our sayde Netherlands and Burgundie, according to the open Letters which (there-unto belonging) were sent to our good Brother: as likewise those of the aggreation and cō∣sent, of our deerely beloued good Sonne the Prince, and like∣wise of the acceptance of our saide Daughter. Whereof wee assure our selues you will rest contented. And moreouer, ac∣knowledge the loue and affection, which wee alwayes haue borne the sayd Countries, as the same shall be more manifest∣ly showne (by Gods grace) by meanes of the sayde marriage, and the sending ouer of our said Daughter thether, as soone as time shall suffer it. As also, through the assistance which we shall continue to doo, to the sayd Countries, at all occasions be∣ing needfull, since our intent is not any wise (as some vndis∣creet might construe it) to abandon them: but to the contrary, to succour and defend them, as of old we haue doone, vntil such time as they shall be (by peace or otherwise) secure. Deere and welbeloued, remaine in the Lords keeping. From Ma∣drill, the 31. of May, 1598. N. D. V. Signed, Phillip. And vnder, A. de la Loo. The superscription was. To our beloued, the Sherieffe, and other Magi∣strates and Counsellors, of the Cittie and County of Machlen.
THE PRINCE. DEere and welbeloued, your aunswere of the xxi. of De∣cember the last yéere, vpon my Letters of the precedent Month of September, in credence of that which (in my behalfe) my good Vncle and Cosin hath caused to be declared vnto you, haue giuen me full satis-faction and content: such I also expect, according to the obedience you beare, to the good will of the King my Lord and Father. And because the intent of his Maiestie, referreth it selfe on the great good which shall happen to the Countries of the other side, the same seruing for the furtherance and conclusion of the future marri∣age of my deerely beloued good Sister the Infanta with the saide Archduke, with my interuention, expresse consent, and aggreation, vnto the gyft and transport, which his Maiestie intended of the said Countries, as more at large you may vn∣derstand it by his Letters. Moreouer, hee will continue his affable and fauourable affection, which at all times you haue felt: and his said Maiestie shall not nowe cease the same, but at any neede, proffer his assisting and defending hande for the said Countries, vntill such time, as by meanes of a sure peace, they shall finde themselues wholy assured, (the which of my side) I will likewise procure for the sayd causes. Deere and beloued, our Lorde haue you in his keeping, Madrill the tenth of May. 1598. N. D. V. Signed, Phillip. And more vnder, A. de la Loo. FINIS.
Demonstration of the Estates of the Prouinces to his Altere. 1. INprimis the first Article containes of the Aggreation of the transport, and gift of the Netherlands, and of the marriage. 2. Secondly, to receaue the Prouinces, and to doe his oath. 3. That his Altera shall shewe and manifest within seauen mo∣neths, the accomplishment of the marriage. 4. That his Maiesty shall giue an Act, that the twelueth Article (comprehended in this transport) shall not be hurtfull to these Netherlands, Viz. that which is written touching the feesle and Reere-seeffe. 5. That all contributions, lodging of Souldiours, and other char∣ges, shall be taken away, and that hence-forward his Altera shall helpe himselfe with the Domaynes and loanes. 6. That the Strangers from hence-forward shall remaine to the charge and payment of his Maiesty, and that they shall be im∣ployed in the field, on the borders of the Enemy. 7. All Souldiours, Germaynes, and such like of the Country shall be maintayned and paide of the said Loanes, as much as shall be possible, and the rest shall his Maiesty pay. 8. That all Offices and Gouernances of the Prouinces, Citties, and Fortresses, (at the furthest) within one yeare shall be set in the hands of the naturall Lord of the Country. 9. All extraordinary Counsailes shall be reformed & set on their auntient foote. That likewise the Prouinciall Counsaile of Ma∣chelen, as also that of Brabant, and the Counsaile of Estate, shall be replaced by men of these Countries.
10. That all the Prouinces, Countries, and Citties, shall be mayn∣tained in their old Priuiledges. 11. His Altere shall endeuour himselfe to returne to these Nether∣lands, within the next May now next comming. 12. His Altere shall set in his place (during his absence) a Gouer∣nour of his blood, who shall be bound to sweare to all what his Altere hath sworne. 13. That it shall be lawfull to the Generall Estates through inter∣uention of his Altere, to ioyne in communication with those of Holland and Zealand, to make peace. 14. And sith that the Countries are furnished with naturall Lords, there shall be three deputed to goe with his Altera to Spayne, to the end to thanke his Maiesty. 15. That his Altera shall be bound to keepe all what is aboue said, and that he in his returne, with th' Infanta, in all Prouinces shall doe the vsuall oath. 16. That all Gouernours, Captaines, and men of warre, shall not enterprise any new thing, during the absence of his Altera. 17. That his Altera after his returne, shall be bound to assemble the Generall Estates, to the end (to gather) to labour, to bring the matters of the Netherlands in a good estate. FINIS.
