23382 99840338 4835
A Christal Glas for christian women: wherein, they may see a most wonderfull and rare example, of a right vertuous life and Christian death: as by the discourse following, may appeare. CAlling to remembrance (most Christiā reader) the finall end of mans creation, which is to glo∣rifie God, and to edifie one another in the way of true godlinesse, I thought it my dutie aswel in respect of the one, as in regarde of the other, to publish this rare and wonderfull example of the vertuous life, and Christian death of Mistresse Katherine Stubbes, who whilest shee liued, was a Myrrour of womanhood, and now being dead, is a perfect patterne of true Christianitie. She was descended of honest and wealthie parents. Her father had borne diuerse offices of worship in his companie,Her Parentag amongest whom he liued in good account, credit & estimation all his daies: he was zealous in the truth, and of a sound religion. Her mother was a Dutch woman, both discreete and wise, of singular good grace & modestie: and which did most of all adorne her, shee was both religious, and also zealous. This couple liuing together in the Citie of London certaine yeares, it pleased God to blesse them with Children, of whom this Katherine was yongest saue one. But as she was yongest saue one by course of nature: so was she not inferiour to any of the rest, or rather farre excelled them all without comparison by many degrees, in the induments & quali∣ties of the mind. At xv. yeares of age (her father being dead) her mother bestowed her in mariage to one Maister Philip Stubbes,Her mariage. with whom she liued foure yeares & almost a halfe, very honestly and godly, with rare cōmēdations of all that knew her, as wel for her singular wisdom, as also for her modesty, courtesie, gentlenes affability & good gouernment. And aboue al, for her feruent zeale which she bare to the truth, wherein she seemed to surpasse ma∣ny: in so much, as if she chanced at any time to be in place where either Papists, or Atheists were, and heard them talke of Reli∣gion, of what countenaunce or credit soeuer they seemed to be, she
would not yeeld a iote, nor giue place vnto them at al, but would most mightily iustifie the truth of God, agaynst their blasphe∣mous vntruths, and conuince them, yea, & confound them by the testimonies of the word of God.Her godly eale. Which thing how could it bee o∣therwise? for her whole heart was bent to seeke the Lord, her whole delight was to be conuersant in the scriptures, & to medi∣tate vpon them day and night: in so much that you could seldome or neuer haue come into her house, and haue found her without a bible, or some other good booke in her hands. And when she was not reading, she would spend the time in conferring, talking and reasoning with her busband of the worde of God, and of religion: asking him, what is the sense of this place, and what is the sense of that? How expound you this place, and how expound you that? what obserue you of this place, and what obserue you of that? so that she seemed to be as it were,Her loue of he word of God. rauished with the same spirit that Dauid was, when he said: The zeale of thy house hath eaten me vp. She followed the commaundement of our sauiour Christ, who biddeth vs to search the scriptures, for in them ye hope to haue e∣ternall life. She obeyed the commandement of the Apostle, who biddeth women to bee silent, and to learne of their husbandes at home. She would suffer no disorder or abuse in her house, to be either vnreproued,Her gentle∣nesse. or vnreformed. And so gentle was she & curte∣ous of nature, that she was neuer heard to giue any the lie in all her life, nor so much as to (thou) any in anger. She was neuer knowne to fall out with any of her neighbours, nor with the least child that liued, much lesse to scold or brawle, as many will now a daies for euery trifle, or rather for no cause at al: & so solitary was she giuen, that she would verie seldome or neuer, & that not with∣out great constraint (& than not neither, except her husband were in companie) goe abroad with any, either to banquet or feast, to gossip or make merry (as they tearme it) in so much that she hath beene noted to do it in contempt and disdaine of others. When her husband was abroad in London, or elsewhere, there was not the dearest friend she had in the world that could get her abroad to dinner or supper, or to any disports, plaies, enterludes, or pastimes whatsoeuer: neither was shee giuen to pamper her bodie with delicate meates, wines, or strong drinkes, but rather refrained them altogether, saying, that we should eate to liue,
and not liue to eat. And as shee excelled in the gift of sobrietie, so shee surpassed in the vertue of humilitie. For it is well knowne to diuers yet liuing, that she vtterly abhorred all kinde of pride both in apparell, and otherwise. She could neuer abide to heare any filthy or vnseemly talke of scurrilitie, bawdrie or vnclean∣nes, neither swearing or blaspheming, cursing or banning, but woulde reprooue them sharpely, shewing them the vengeaunce of GOD due for such deserts. And which is more, there was neuer one filthie, vncleane, vndecent, or vnseemely word heard to come forth of her mouth, nor euer once to curse or ban, to swear, or blaspheme God any maner of way: but alwayes her speaches were such, as both might glorifie God,Her integtie of life. and minister grace to the hearers, as the Apostle speaketh. And for her conuersation, there was neuer any man or woman that euer opened their mouthes against her, or that euer either did or could once accuse her of the least shadow of dishonestie, so continently she liued, and so circum∣spectly she walked, eschuing euen the very outward appearance or shewe of euill. Againe, for true loue and loyaltie to her husband, & his friends, she was (let me speake it without offence) I thinke, the rarest Pa∣ragon in the world: for she was so far of from disswading her hus∣bād to be beneficiall to his friends, that she wold rather perswade him to be more beneficial to them. If she saw her husband merry, then she was merry: if he were sad, she was sad:Her demeanour towar her husban▪ if he were heauy or passionate, she would endeuour to make him glad: if hee were angry, she would quickly please him, so wisely shee demeaned her selfe towards him. She would neuer contrarie him in any thing, but by wise counsaile, and sage aduice, with all humilitie, & sub∣mission, seeke to perswade him. And so little giuen was she to this world, that some of her neighbours maruailing why shee was no more carefull of it, would aske her sometimes saying: Mistres Stubbes, why are you no more carefull for the things of this lyfe, but sit alwayes poaring vppon a Booke, and reading? to whom she would answere: if I should be a friend vnto this world, I should be an enemie to GOD:Her little  of the worl▪ for GOD and the world are two contraries. Iohn biddeth mee, loue not the worlde, nor anie thing in the worlde: affirming, that if I loue the worlde, the loue of the father is not in mee. Againe, Christ biddeth mee,
first seeke the kingdome of heauen, and the righteousnesse thereof, and then all these worldly things shall be giuen to me. Godlines is great riches, if a man be cōtent with that that he hath. I haue chosen with good Mary in the 10. of Luke, the better part, which shall neuer be taken from me. Gods treasure (she would say) is neuer drawne drie. I haue inough in this life, God make mee thankeful, and I knowe I haue but a short time to liue here, and it standeth me vpon to haue regard to my saluation in the life to come. Thus, the godly yong Gentlewoman held on her course three or four yeares after she was maried: at which time it plea∣sed God that she conceiued with a man Childe: after which con∣ception she would say to her husbande, and many other her good neighbours and friendes yet liuing,er prophesie  her death. not once, nor twise but ma∣ny times, that she should neuer beare more Children: that, that child should be her death, & that she should liue but to bring that child into the world. Which thing (no doubt) was reuealed vnto her by the spirit of God, for according to her prophecie so it came to passe. The time of her account being come, she was deliuered of a goodly man childe, with as much speede, and as safely in all wo∣mens iudgements, as any could be. And after her deliuerie, she grew so strong, that she was able within foure or fiue dayes to sit vp in her bed, and to walke vp and downe her chamber, and with∣in a fortnight to goe abroad in the house,er deliuery of ilde. beeing throughly well, and past all daunger as euerie one thought. But presently vpon this so sodaine recouerie, it pleased God to visite her againe, with an extreame hot and burning quotidian Ague, in which sickenesse she languished for the space of sixe weekes, or there abouts. Du∣ring all which time, she was neuer seene, nor perceyued to sleepe one houre together, neither night nor day, and yet the Lord kept her (which was miraculous) in her perfect vnderstanding, sense, and memorie, to the last breath, praised be his holy name therfore. In all her sicknes,er sicknes. which was both long and grieuous, shee neuer shewed any signe of discontentment, or of impatiencie: neither was there euer heard one worde come forth of her mouth, soūding either of desperation, or infidelitie: of mistrust, or distrust, or of a∣ny doubting or wauering, but alwayes remayned faithfull and resolute in her God. And so desirous was she to be with the Lord,
that these golden sentences were neuer out of her mouth. I de∣sire to be dissolued, and to bee with Christ. And,Her desire to be with God▪ oh miserable wretch that I am, who shall deliuer mee from this bodie subiect to sinne? Come quickly Lord Iesus, come quickly. Like as the hart desireth the water springs, so dooth my soule thirst after thee, O God. I had rather bee a doorekeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of the wicked: with many other heauenly sentences, which (least I should seeme tedious) I wil∣lingly omit. She would alwayes pray in her sicknes absolutely, that God would take her out of this miserable world: and when her husband and others would desire her to pray for health, if it were the will of God: She would answer, I beseech you pray not that I should liue, for I thinke it long to be with my God. Christ is to me life, and death is to me aduantage. I cannot enter into life but by death, & therefore is death the doore or entrance into euerlasting life to me.Her absolute prayer for death. I know and am certainely perswaded by the spirit of God, that the sentence of my death is giuen alredy, by the great Iudge, in the court or parliament of heauen, that I shal now depart out of this life: and therefore pray not for me, that I might liue here, but pray to God to giue me strength & patience, to perseuer to the end, & to close vp mine eies in a iustifying faith in the blood of my Christ. Somtimes she would speake very soft∣ly to her self, & sometimes very audibly these words, doubling thē an hundred times togither. Oh my good God, why not now? Why not now, oh my good God? I am redie for theee, I am pre∣pared, oh receiue me now for thy Christs sake. Oh send thy mes∣senger death to fetch me, send thy sergeant to arrest me, thy pur∣seuant to attach me, thy herauld to summon me, oh send thy Iay∣lour to deliuer my soule out of prison, for my body is nothing else but a stinking prison to my soule. Oh send thy holy Angels to con∣duct my soule vnto the euerlasting kingdome of heauen.Her godly me∣ditation. Other sometimes she would lie as it were in a slumber, her eyes closed, and her lips vttering these wordes very softly to her selfe: oh my sweet Iesus, oh my loue Iesus, why not now? sweet Iesus why not now? Oh sweet Iesus, pray for me, pray for me, sweete Ie∣sus, repeating them many times together. These and infinite the like were her dayly speeches, and continuall meditations: & neuer worser word was there heard to come forth of her mouth
during all the time of hir sickenesse. She was accustomed many times as she lay, verie suddenly to fall into a sweet smiling, and sometimes into a most heartie laughter, her face appearing right faire, redde, amiable and louely: and her countenance seemed as though she greatly reioyced at some glorious sight.Her glorious . And when her husband would aske her why she smiled and laughed so: shee would say: if you sawe such glorious visions, and heauenly sightes as I see, you would reioyce and laugh with me: for I see a vision of the ioyes of heauen, and the glory that I shal go too: and I see infinite millions of Angels attendant vpon me, and watching o∣uer me, readie to carie my soule into the kingdome of heauen. In regard whereof, she was willing to forsake her selfe, her husband, her childe and all the world besides. And so calling for her child, which the Nurse brought vnto her, she tooke it in her armes, and kissing it, said: God blesse thee my sweete babe, and make thee an heire of the kingdome of heauen: and kissing it againe, deli∣uered it to the nurse, with these wordes to her husband standing by. Beloued husband, I bequeath this my child vnto you, hee is no longer mine,Her request to her husbad for the brin∣ging vp of his childe. hee is the Lordes and yours, I forsake him, you, and all the world, yea and mine owne selfe, and esteeme al things dung, that I may win Iesus Christ. And I pray you sweet hus∣band bring vp this childe in good letters, in learning and disci∣pline, and aboue all things, see that he be brought vp and instruc∣ted in the exercise of true religion. The childe being taken away, shee espied a little Puppie or Bitch, (which in her life time she loued well) lying vpon her bed: she had no sooner espied her, but she beat her away, and calling her husband to her,Her hatred to worthly sayd: Good husband, you and I haue offended God grieuously in receiuing this bitch many a time into our bed, we would haue beene loth to haue receiued a Christian soule, pur∣chased with the precious blood of Iesus Christ, into our bed, and to haue nourished him in our bosoms, and fed him at our table, as we haue done this filthie our many a time: the lord giue vs grace to repent for it and al other vanities. And afterward could she ne∣uer abide to looke vpon the Bitch any more. Hauing thus godly disposed of all things,Her extasie or swound. she fell into an extasie, or into a traunce, or swound, for the space almost of a quarter of an houre, so as euerie one thought she had beene dead. But afterward shee comming to
her self spake to thē that were present (as there were many both worshipful & others) saying. Right worshipful & my good neigh∣bours & friends, I thanke you all for the great paines you haue taken with me, in this bed of my sicknes: & whereas I am not a∣ble to requite you, I beséech the Lord to reward you in the king∣dome of heauen. And for that my houre-glasse is run out, & that my time of departure hence is at hand, I am perswaded for thrée causes to make a confession of my faith, before you all. The first cause that moueth me hereto is,The causes mouing he to make cofession of  faith. for that those (if there be any such here) that are not throughly resolued in the truth of God, may heare and learne what the spirit of God hath taught me out of his blessed & al sauing word. The second cause that mooueth me is, for that none of you should iudge that I died not a perfect christiā & a liuely mēber of the mystical body of Iesus christ, & so by your rash iudgement might incurre the displeasure of God. The third and last cause, is for that, as you haue béene witnesses of part of my life: so you might be witnesses of my faith and beleeue also. And in this my confession, I would not haue you to thinke, that it is I that speak vnto you, but the spirit of God which dwelleth in me, and in al the elect of God, vnlesse they be reprobates: for Paul saith, Ro. 8. If any one haue not the spirite of Christ dwelling in him, he is none of his. This blessed spirit hath knocked at ye dore of my heart, and God hath giuen me grace to open the doore vnto him, & he dwelleth in me plentifully. And therefore I pray you giue me pacience a little, and imprint my words in your hearts, for they are not the words of flesh and bloud, but of the spirite of God, by whom we are sealed to the day of redemption. A most heauenly confession of the Christian faith, made by this blessed seruant of God Mistresse Katherine Stubbes, a little before she died. ALthough the Maiestie of God, bee both infinite and vnspeakable, and therefore according to his excellent dignitie, can neither bee conceiued in heart, nor expressed in words: yet to the end you may knowe what that God is, in whome I be∣léeue, as farre as he hath reuealed himselfe vn∣to vs in his holy word, I will define him vnto you, as the spirit of
God shal illuminate my heart. I beléeue therfore with my heart, and freely confesse with my mouth, here before you all, that this God in whom I beleeue,otable  the  trinitie. is a most glorious spirite, or spirituall substance, a diuine essence, or essential being, without beginning or ending, of infinite glorie, power, might and Maiestie, inuisi∣ble, inaccessible, incomprehensible, and altogether vnspeakeable. I beleeue & confesse that this glorious Godhead, this blessed sub∣stance, essence, or being, this diuine power which we call God, is diuidd into a trinitie of persons, the father, the sonne, and the holy spirit, distant onely in names and offices, but all one, and the same, in nature, in essence, substance, deitie▪ maiestie▪ glory, power might and eternitie, God is. I beleeue and confesse that God the father, the first person in this blessed Trinitie, is from euerlasting, be∣fore & beyond all times, not made, nor created nor begotten of a∣ny, but the onely maker, creator and begetter of all things what∣soeuer. I beleeue & confesse, that Christ Iesus the son of God, is the second person in this glorious Trinitie, not created or made of any, but begotten of his father before all Eternitie, time or worlds. I beléeue the holy spirite to be the third person in this sacred Trinity, not made of any, nor begottē, but proceeding both from the father & the son, as the very wisdome and inspiration of thē both. I do beleeue & confesse that this most glorious Trinity is cōsubstantial, & coessential together, none before or after other, none greater or lesser then another, of equal power, of equal ma∣iesty, of equal glory & eternity (as before.) I beleeue and confesse, that this God, created  things . this blessed Trinity, not onely created all things both visible and inuisible, spiritual and corporall, where or what∣soeuer, but also that he vpholdeth, continueth, and maintaineth them by his almightie power, & vnsearchable wisdome, through the secret wisdome of his spirit. I beleeue and confesse, that this God ordereth and disposeth al things according to his good plea∣sure and will, and that he also foreseeth all things by his proui∣dence and prescience, so that nothing commeth to passe by For∣tune chaunce, fortune or . or casualtie to him, though so it seemeth fortunal, or casuall to vs, who see neither the beginnings, the middles, the endes, the causes, or effects of things, before they come to passe. I beleeue and confesse, that the Lord our God, hauing created the vniuersall engine and frame of this worlde, with all things
contained therein, for the benefite and vse of man onely, the last of all other creatures euen the sixt day created man, after his owne similitude and likenesse, holy, pure, good, innocent, and in euery part perfect and absolute: giuing him also wisdome, discretion, vnderstanding and knowledge aboue all other creatures (the ho∣ly Angels set apart.) And which was more,Mans per∣fection. hee gaue vnto him a certaine power, strength and facultie (which wee call freewill) by force whereof he might haue continued and remained for euer in his integritie and holinesse, if hee had would. But hee had no sooner receiued this inestimable blessing of freewill,Manfs. of inno∣cencie, and integritie, but by hearkening to the poysoned sug∣gestions of the wicked Serpent, and by obeying his perswasi∣ons, hee lost his freewill, his integritie and perfection, and vs all his posteritie to the end of the world: and so of a Saint in hea∣uen, hee (and we in him) became firebrands of hell, vassals of Sathan, Miscreants, Reprobates, Abiects and Castawaies, before the face of God for euer. Then, when there was no other way or meanes for man to bee saued in the iustice of God, I con∣stantly beleeue and confesse, that God the Father in the multi∣tude of his mercies, when the fulnesse of tyme was come,Christ his in¦carnation. sent his owne Sonne, Christ Iesus foorth of his owne bosome into this miserable world, to take our nature vpon him, and that in the wombe of a Uirgine, without spot or blemish of sinne, and with∣out the helpe of man by the wonderfull operation and ouershado∣wing of the holy ghost. And as I constanly beléeue that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh (according to the scriptures) so I vnfaignedly beleeue, that he hath offered vp his blessed bodie vpon the aulter of the Crosse, as a sacrifice propiciatorie, satisfactorie, and expiatorie, for the sinnes of he whole world, and for me the chiefest of all sinners: By vrue, power,Christ his sa∣crifice. and efficacie of which Sacrifice and oblation onely, I trust and beleeue to be saued, and by the merits of the shading of the bloud of this immaculate lambe, Christ Iesus, to be set free, & pardoned of all my sinnes whatsoeuer. And whereas the professed enemies of GOD the Papists doo bragge of their good workes, of their merits, righteousnesse and deserts, I here before you al, in the presence of God, & his holy Angels, do vtter∣ly renunce, abandon & forsake all my own merits, righteousnes,
and deserts as filthie dounge, acknowledging my merits to bee the merits of GOD in Christ, who is made vnto me righte∣ousnesse, holines, sanctification and redemption. For I am assu∣red that if the Lord should wey my very righteousnes in the bal∣lance of his iustice, rewarding mee according to the same, I should receiue nothing but iust damnation for my deserts. I doo further beleeue and confesse, that Iesus Christ hauing suffered death vpon the Crosse for me and all mankind, rose againe to life the third day after, by the spirituall power of his Godhead, con∣quering thereby sinne, death, hel, Sathan and al his hellish band. I do also beleeue, that the same Iesus Christ, after his most vic∣torious resurrection, ascended into heauen in the sight of the Apo∣stles and holy Saints, a cloude receiuing him out of their sight, there not onely to prepare a place for vs, but also to make cōtinu∣all prayer and intercession for vs to God the Father: at whose right hande hee now sitteth, in equall glorie and blisse for euer∣more. heauens  holde  body til the  of iudge . I do constantly beleeue, that the Heauens must holde his corporall presence till the day of iudgement: that his blessed bo∣die is circumscriptible, and contained in one locall place, and can not be present in euery place▪ at one and the same time, his Dei∣tie and his Godhead notwithstanding being in euery place at once, and fulfilling all places, and yet contained in no place. For it is against the nature of a true bodie, to be present in many pla∣ces at once. And therefore the Papists in effect denie that bodie of Christ, to bee a true, essentiall and naturall bodie, by teaching it to be present in their so many and sundry Pixes at once. hrist his omming to dgement, nd of our surrection.I doe beleeue and confesse, that this Iesus Christ shall come at the latter day of iudgement, when the number of Gods elect shall be fulfilled, in the same likenes that he was seene goe vp in∣to heauen, and with the same naturall bodie, to iudge both the quicke and the dead, and to rewarde euery man according to his workes. At which day I doe constantly beleeue, that all flesh, (I meane of mankind onely) shall rise againe by the omnipotent power of God, whereby hee is able to subdue all things to him∣selfe, not one hayre of our heads lacking. Then death shall yeeld vp his dead, the graue his dead, the sea his dead, & hell his dead. And then shall the soules of the godly, of the elect and chosen of God enter into their owne bodies againe, and be reunited toge∣ther,
their bodies now being renued, altered and changed: for being before corruptible bodies, now they shall bee made incor∣ruptible: being before mortall bodies, now they shall bée made immortall: being before filthy and vncleane, now they shall bee made cleane and pure, like to the glorious bodie of Christ Iesus, shining as the Sunne for euer in the kingdome of heauen, where they shall dwell for euer, in such ioy as no heart can thinke, no tongue expresse, nor pen is able to write. Upon the other side, the soules of the wicked and reprobate, shall bee vnited to their proper bodies, and both together bée cast into hell fire, where is nothing but weeping, wailing, and gnashing of téeth for euer∣more. Further, I beléeue and confesse, that my soule, and the soules of al the elect children of God,Whither the soules of the faithful do go after their de∣parture out o their bodies. immediately after their departure out of their bodyes, doe goe into the kingdome of heauen, into the hands of God, being guided & conducted thither by the ministerie of the Angels of God, & not into Purgatorie, Lymbo patrum, or any other place whatsoeuer. For whither the soule of Christ was receiued when he cryed, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: thither are all the soules of the children of God, that die in the true fayth of Iesus Christ, receiued immediately after their departure hence. In the Gospell after saint Luke, we reade that the soule of poore Lazarus, of blessed Lazarus, straight after his death was caried into heauen by the Angels of God, and not into popish Purgatorie, which was not hatched almost in 200. yeres after. The soule of the penitent and faithfull théefe, was caried straightway into Paradice: for so Christ tolde him: this day shalt thou be with me in Paradice: that is in the kingdome of heauen, and not in Purgatorie. Salomo saith, cap. 3. The soules of the righteous are in the handes of God, and there shall no torments come nigh them. Christ saith, he went into heauen to prepare a place for vs, then not into Purgatorie, except they wil haue their Purgatorie to be in heauen. He saith further: that where hée is, there shall his seruants be also.Purgatory of the Papists blasphemou▪ But I hope they wil not say that Christ is in Purgatorie, but in Heauen, and thither shall al the soules of the faithfull ascend immediately. And therefore is the o∣pinion of popish Purgatory, both blasphemous, & sacrilegious. But the true Purgatorie in deede is this, the blood of Iesus
Christ which clenseth vs from all sinne, no other Purgatorie doo I know of by the worde of God, nor acknowledge. I beleeue al∣so and confesse, that man is iustified, that is, pronounced iust be∣fore God, freed from sinne, and al punishments due for sinne, byr true and liuely aith in the bloud of Christ onely, iustified y faith only. and not by his workes, merits, righteousnesse, or deserts: neither yet by any in∣herent righteousnesse in himselfe, as te blasphemous Papists teach, nor by any other meanes whatsoeur. And therefore the A∣postle to th Rom. 4. was  to say, that if Abraham were iusti∣fied by works, then had he wherein to reioyce, but not with God: for he saith afterward in the fift chapter: Being iustified by faith we haue peace towrds God, through Iesus Chrst. And there∣foe doo I constantly beleeue, that wee are iustified by faith one∣ly, and not by the works of the law: for if good works could aue vs then had Christ died in vaine. And if they could sae vs, why should they not be called by the name of Sauiour? But when I say that Faith onely iustifieth, I meane not a barren faith, or a dead Faith wihout good works, such as the diuels haue, but I speake of such a Faith as bringeth forth good works in great plē∣ty: and can no more be without good works, than the Sun with∣out light, the fire without heat or the water without his natural moysture.Why we hould doo ood works. If you would know why we should doo good works, if we cannot be saued by them, I will tell you: we must doo good works for foure causes, chiefly. First, to shew our obediēce to him that commaunds vs: secondly, to glorifie him that created vs and ordained good works also that we should walke in them. Third∣ly, for the mutuall lou and charitie which we beare towards the brethren. Fourthly, to make our saluation sure and certaine vnto vs, as the Apostle speaketh. For these & other causes must we do good works, & yet must we not trust to be saued by them: for there is no other name giuen vnder heauen, wherby man can be saued, but onely the name of Iesus Christ. I do also constantly beleeue & conesse,he canoni∣al scriptures he infallible ord of God. hat al the canonical scriptures are the inallible word of God▪ and that the holy spirit of God, was, & is the onely author of them & that holy men of God, spake & writ them, as they were taught and inspired by the spirite of God, as blessed Peter bea∣reth record. I also beleeue that the holy scriptures do contain all things necessary to sauation, without all popish trash of vnwrit∣ten
verities▪ or rather vnwritten berie lyes. I do further also be∣leeue and confesse, that God the father hath from euerlasting and before all worlds, in his secret counsel,Her faith in the predesti∣nation of Go and what it is▪ and in his euerlasting pur∣pose and decree, elected, chosen and predestinate in Christ Iesus, certaine of the lost sonnes of Adam, to be members of his body▪ & coheirs with him of his heauēly kingdom. And othersome hath he prdestinated to euerlasting destruction, leauing them in their naturall sin and corruption still. Now if ye aske me what prede∣stination and reprobation is: I answer, it is the euerlasting pur∣pose or decree of God, whereby he doth chuse some to saluation & some to damnation. If you demaund why he chuseth some to sal∣ution, and not all, finding them all in like state and condition: I answer In chusing of some to saluation, he sheweth his vnspeak∣able mercy, grace, fauour, and loue: and in chusing other some to damnation, he sheweth his power, his iustice, and his iudgemnt to all the world. For as by the one, the mercy of God appeareth, so by the other, wee may see what we haue all deserued. And if you aske me why he chuseth some, and reiecteth othersome. I tell you hee may doo it at his blessed will and pleasure: for if I haue two debters that owe me a thousand pound, it is in mee to release the one of the whole debt, and to exact the whole of the o∣ther: for to the one I shew but mercie, and to the other but iu∣stice.Our vocation or calling. Now those that the Lord hath predestinate in Christ Iesus to euerlasting saluation, them doth he call in his good time to the knowledge of his truth, to repentane to integrity of life, & to all perfection, and those whom he doth call them doth he iustifie, and whō he doth iustifie, them will he glorifie. And that this doctrine of predestination & reprobatiō standeth thus, the Apostle Eph. 1.11. sheweth euidently, saying: we are chosen in Christ, when we were pedestinate according to the purpose of him that worketh all things ater the counsel of his will. And in the 4 & 5 ver. of the same chapter, he aith: we are chosen in him meaning Christ, be∣fore the foundation of the world, that we should be holy & blame∣lesse before him in loue. Read Rom. 9. and many other places of holy scriptures & you shall fin this doctrine to be very cleare. I do further beleeue and confesse, that God hath his seuerall chur∣ches as namely his Church triumphant in the kingdome of hea∣uen, & his Church militant, dispersed vpon the face of the earth:
I do also beléeue, that this militant Church is two folde, vi∣sible and inuisible.he Church wo folde, and . The visible Church is knowne and discer∣ned by these marks: the word of God preached, the Sacraments sincerely ministred, Ecclesiasticall discipline and other censures of the Church duely executed. The other Church I call the in∣uisible Church, not for that men are inuisible, but for that it al∣waies appeareth not to the eye of the world, but is knowne to God onely, who alone knoweth who are his. I beleeue that this Church,How & when  Church annot . this spouse of Christ cannot erre, finally in matters of saluation, and damnation, so long as she holdeth her head Christ Iesus aright. And I constantly beléeue, that Iesus Christ is the onely head, ruler and gouernour of his Church, and not An∣tichrist the Pope, nor any of his shauelings: as Paul testifieth, Ephes. 4.15. saying: Let vs grow vp in all things in him, who is the head,Christ is the ole head of he Church. Christ Iesus. Againe in another place hee saith. As Christ is the head of the Church, so is the husband head ouer his wife. I beleeue and confesse, that Iesus Christ hath left, not one∣ly the holy Scriptures to instruct and teach his Church, but also Sacraments, in number two: to wit, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, as seales of his grace towards it to confirme it in his truth, and as conduits of his mercy, to conuey his grace & good∣nesse to it also. These Sacraments (I say) are Seales and signes of holie things,Two Sacra∣ments, and what they are, whereof they do consist, and what they re¦present vnto s. and therefore cannot be the things themselues. For it is against the nature of a Sacrament, to be the thing signified ther∣by. Baptisme consisteth of two natures, the visible Element, and the inuisible grace. The visible Element is water, the inui∣sible grace is the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, conferred in baptisme. The water signifieth vnto vs, that our whole nature is corrupted, and had need to be purged and cleansed. It signifieth also vnto vs, our regeneration, sanctification and new birth. And it representeth also vnto vs the bloud of Iesus Christ, which cleanseth vs from all sinnes. And I faithfully beleeue, that it is no more lawfull for a woman to minister this Sacrament, then it is lawfull for her to preach, or to minister the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And as concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I beleeue and confesse, that it consisteth of two natures also, an
earthly, and an heauenly nature or quality. The visible element or earthly nature is bread & wine: the heauēly nature or quality, the body and bloud of Christ signified thereby. The wine doth re∣present vnto vs the bloud of Christ which was shed for vs: and the bread doth signify vnto vs also, the body of Christ, which was gi∣uen for vs. And as many as doe receiue this Sacrament worthi∣ly in remembrance of the death & passion of Iesus Christ, doe eat and drink Iesus Christ (spiritually) to their euerlasting saluatiō. And I do verely beleeue, that in this Sacrament,Neither the bread nor wine chang in the Lord Supper. neither the bread nor the wine, neither before, nor after the wordes of conse∣cration (as they tearme them) are chaunged, altered, or transub∣stantiate, into the reall, essentiall, or materiall body of Christ, but doe remaine the same still in nature and substance that they were before. And therefore Paul feared not to call it bread still many times in his epistle to the Corinthians. And our Sauiour Christ in the 6. of Iohn saith: that they should see him ascend into heauen with the same body that he sate in with them at Supper, whole and vneaten: adding further, that the wordes that he spake, were spirite and truth, and that it is the spirit that giueth life, the flesh profiteth little. And he biddeth vs to celebrate this Supper in remembrance of him: and to preach his death therin till he come againe. If Christ were in the Sacrament, flesh, blood, and bone, then the wicked might eate him, & so should there neuer any wic∣ked be condemned: for Christ sayth, hee that eateth his flesh and drinketh his bloud shall neuer die: yea Rattes, Cattes and Mice, might eate his body, which were blasphemous, and sacrilegious once to imagine, though the Papists are not ashamed to teach it openly. And albeit that these Sacraments doe represent vnto vs most excellent things,Sacraments d not conferre grace. yet do they not conferre grace of them∣selues: neither is the grace of God so tied to the materiall Ele∣ments, that hee cannot saue without them. And therefore are the Papists more then cruell, that teach all children to be dam∣ned that die before baptisme. For wee read of certaine in the Acts of the Apostles, that were baptised, and yet they had not so much as heard whether there were any holy Ghost or not. Si∣mon Magus was baptised, yet he receiued not the holy Ghost tho. And againe, Cornelius had receyued the holy Ghost before his Baptisme. Iohn the Baptist receiued the holy Ghost in his
mothers wombe, and the like. But yet notwithstanding, al∣though the grace of God be not tyed to the Sacraments, yet hee that may receyue them, and wil not, or else setteth light by them, or contemneth them, shall neuer receiue the gifts and graces sig∣nified by them. I doe also most constantly beleeue, that as Iesus Christ is the vndoubted Sauiour of the worlde: so is he our onely Media∣tour, aduocate, and intercessour to God the Father, and none but he alone, who is ascended into the Heauens, sitteth on the right hand of God, and maketh continuall praiers to God for vs. And Iohn saith. If any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the Fa∣ther, Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. And to the same effect Paul speaketh, 1 Tim. 2.5. There is one God, onely to  called vpon,  not Saints. and one mediatour betweene God and man, which is the man Christ Iesus. And as I beleeue that Iesus Christ is our onely mediatour and aduocate: so I constantly beleeue, that he onely is to be called vpon, inuocated and prayed vnto, and ney∣ther Saint nor Angel, Patriarke nor Father, Martyr nor Con∣fessour, Peter nor Paul, Apostle nor Euangelist, Iames nor Iohn, no not Marie herselfe, nor any other creature, how excellent soe∣uer they seemed to be in the eye of the world. For we are assured by the word of god, that the saints can neither heare our praiers, nor grant our requests. And therefore Christ saith: Call vpon me in the day of thy troubles, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt prayse me. And againe, the Apostle sayth: how shall they call vp∣on him, in whom they haue not beleeued: Then as it is not law∣full to beleeue in any other saue in God alone: so is it not law∣full to pray to any other but to God alone, in the name and me∣diation of Christ Iesus onely. beliefe hither her oule should  after her eparture.I doe also most constantly beleeue, that my soule, so soone as euer it shall depart foorth of my bodie, shall be caried by the mi∣nisterie of the holy Angels of God, into the kingdome of Heauen: where I shall see, and certainly knowe, Adam, Euah, Noah A∣braham, Isaac, Iacob, Moses, Samuel, Dauid, and all other Pro∣phets▪ Patriarkes and Fathers, together, with Marie the mo∣ther of Christ, Peter, Paul, Iames and Iohn, and all other Mar∣tyrs, Confessours, and holy Saints of God, which haue dyed since the beginning of the worlde, or which shall die to the ende
of the same. Oh what a comfortable thing is this, that we shall know one another in the life to come? Talke one with another? loue one another? and praise God one with another, and all to∣gether worlde without ende? And because some of you perad∣uenture will hardly beleeue this doctrine to be so, I pray you giue me leaue to proue it by the worde of God, and then will I make an end. When God had cast Adam into a dead sleepe, & made woman of a ribbe of his side, he brought her vnto him,We shal kn one an other the life to come. and he knew her straight way, and called her by her name. Could Adam in the state of innocency know his wife, he being in a dead sleepe, whi∣lest she was in making? And shal not we being restored to a farre more excellent dignity and perfection, then euer was Adam in, not know one another? Shall our knowledge be lesse in heauen, then it is in earth? Doe we know one another in this life, where wee know but in part, and see but in part, yea as it were in a Glasse, and shall we not know one another in the life to come, where all ignorance shall be done away. In the 16. of Luke we reade, how that the rich man lying in hell, knew Abraham and Lazarus in heauen a farre off. Then I reason thus: If the wicked that be in hell in torments doe knowe those that be in heauen so farre aboue them: how much more shal the godly know one another, being altogether in one place, & fel∣lowe Citizens in the kingdome of heauen? We reade also in the 17. of Matt: how our Sauiour Christ meaning to shew vnto his Disciples Peter, Iames and Iohn as it were a shadowe, or glim∣mering of the ioyes of heauen (and therefore hee is sayd to bee transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the Sunne, and his apparell was like the light:) there appeared vnto them Moses and Elias, sayth the text. Then it followeth, that if the Disciples being in their natural corruption, and but in a shadow and glimmering of the ioyes of heauen, did knowe Moses and E∣lias, the one whereof died almost two thousand yeares before, the other not much lesse, how much more shall we knowe one a∣nother in the life to come, all corruption being taken away, and we in the full fruition and possession of all the ioyes and glory of heauen? This is my faith, this is my hope & this is my trust this hath the spirite of God taught me, and this haue I learned out of
the booke of God. And (good Lord) that hast begun this good worke in me, finish it, I beseech thee: and strengthen me that I may perseuere therein to the ende, and in the end, through Ie∣sus Christ my onely Lord and Sauiour. She had no sooner made an end of this most heauenly confes∣sion of her faith but Sathan was ready to bid her the combat, whome shee mightely repulsed, and vanquished by the power of our Lord Iesus, on whom she constantly beleeued. And wher∣as before shee looked with a sweete, louely and amiable counte∣naunce, red as the Rose, and most beautifull to beholde, nowe vpon the sudden, she bent the browes, shee frowned, and looking (as it were) with an angry, sterne, and fierce countenaunce, as though shee sawe some filthy, vgglesome and displeasant thing: shee burst foorth into these speeches following, pronouncing her wordes (as it were) scornefully, and disdainfully, in contempt of him to whom shee spake. A most wonderfull conflict betwixt Sathan and her soule, and of her valiaunt conquest in the same, by the power of Christ. HOw now Satan? what makest thou here? Art thou come to tempt the Lords seruant? wonderful emptation▪ &  in the ame. I tell thée, thou hell-hound, thou hast no part nor portion in me: nor by the grace of God neuer shalt haue. I was, now am, and shall be the Lords for euer Yea Satan, I was chosen & elected in Christ to euerlasting saluation be∣fore the foundations of the world were laid: and therefore thou maist get thee packing, thou damned Dog, and goe sake thine eares, for in me thou hast nought. But what doest thou lay to my charge, thou soule fiend? Oh that I am a sinner, and therefore shall be damned: I confesse in deed that I am a sinner, and a grie∣uous sinner, both by originall sinne, and actuall sinne, and that I may thanke thee for. And therefore Satan I bequeath my sin to thee, from whō it first came, and I appeale to the mercy of God in Christ Iesus Christ came to saue sinners (as he saith himself) and not the righteous: behold the Lambe of God (saith Iohn)
that taketh away the sinnes of the world. And in another place he crieth out, the bloud of Iesus Christ, doth cleanse vs from all sinne. And therefore Satan, I constantly beleeue that my sinnes are washed away in the precious bloud of Iesus Christ, and shall neuer be imputed vnto me any more. But what sayest thou more, Satan? Doest thou aske me how I dare come to him for mercy, hee being a righteous God, and I a miserable sinner? I tell thee Satan, I am bold through Christ, to come vnto him, being assured and certaine of pardon and remission of all my sinnes for his names sake. For, doeth not the Lorde bidde all that be heauy laden with the burthen of sinne, to come vnto him, and he will ease them?Her dispu on with  Christes armes were spread wide open (Satan) vpon the Crosse (with that shee spread her owne armes) to embrace me, and all penitent sinners: and therefore (Satan) I wil not feare to present my selfe before his footestoole, in full assurance of his mercy for Christ his sake. What more, Satan? Doest thou say, it is written, that God will rewarde euery one according to his workes, or according to his desertes? But it is written againe (thou deceiptfull deuill) that Christes righteousnesse, is my righteousnesse, his workes, my workes, his desertes my deserts, his merits, my merits, and his precious bloud a full satisfaction for al my sins. Oh, but God is a iust God, thou saist, and therefore must néedes in iustice con∣demne me. I grant (Satan) that he is a iust God, and therefore he cannot in iustice punish me for my sins, which he hath punished already in his sonne. It is against the law of iustice, to punish one fault twice. I was, and am, a great debter vnto God the Father, but Christ Iesus hath paid the debt for me: and therefore it stan∣deth not with the iustice of God to require it againe. And there∣fore auoid Satan, auoid thou firebrand of hell, auoid thou dam∣ned dog, and tempt me no more, for he that is with me, is migh∣tier then thou,Her victory ouer Satan. euen the mighty and victorious Lion of the tribe of Iuda, who hath bruzed thy head, and hath promised to be with his children to the end of the world. Auoid therfore thou dastard, auoid thou cowardly souldier, remooue thy siege, and yeeld the field won, and get thée packing, or else I wil cal vpon my grand-captaine Christ Iesus, that valiant Michael, who beat thée in Heauen, and threw thee downe to hell, with all thy hellish traine:
and diuelish crew She had scarcely pronounced these last words but she fell suddenly into a sweete smiling laughter, saying: Now is hee gone, now is he gone: doe ye not see him flie like a coward, and runne away like a beaten cocke? He hath lost the field, and I haue wonne the victory, euen the garland and crowne of euerla∣sting life: and that not by my own power and strength, but by the power and might of Iesus Christ, who hath sēt his holy Angels to keep me. And speaking to thē that were by, she said, oh would God you saw but what I sée: For do you not see infinite millions of most glorious Angels stand about me, with fierie charets rea∣die to defend me, as they did the good Prophet Elizeus? These holy Angels, gard of ngels these ministring spirits, are appoynted by God to carry my soule into the kingdome of heauen, where I shall be∣hold the Lord face to face, & shal see him, not with other, but with these same eyes. Now am I happy & blessed for euer, for I haue fought the good sight, and by the might of Christ haue won the victory. Now from henceforth shal I neuer tast neither of hūger nor cold, paine nor wo: misery nor affliction: vexation or trouble: feare nor dread: nor of any other calamity, or aduersity whatsoe∣uer. sweete editations. From henceforth is layd vp for me a crowne of life, which Christ shall giue to those that loue him. And as I am nowe in possession thereof by hope, so shall I be anon in ful fruition ther∣of by presence of my soule, and hereafter of my body also, when the Lorde shall please. Then she spake softly to her selfe as fol∣loweth. Come Lord Iesus, come my loue Iesus, oh send thy Purseuant (sweete Iesus) to fetch me. Oh (sweet Iesus) streng∣then thy seruant, and keepe thy promise. Then sang she certaine Psalmes most sweetly, and with a chearefull voice: which done, the desired her husband that the 133. Psalme might he sung be∣fore her to the Church. And further, shee desired him that hee would not mourne for her, alledging the Apostle Paul, where he saith: Brethren I would not haue you to mourn, as men without hope, request  her hus∣nd not to ourne fr  for them that die in the Lord: affirming that she was not in case to be mourned for, but rather to be reioiced of: for that shee should passe (shee said) from earth to heauen: from men to holy Angels: to Cherubins and Seraphins, to holy Saintes, Pa∣triarckes and Fathers: yea to God himselfe. After which words, very suddenly she seemed as it were greatly to reioice, and looke
verie chearfully, as though she had seene some glorious sight: and lifting vp her whole bodie, and stretching forth both her armes, as though she would embrace some glorious and pleasant thing, said: I thanke my God, through Iesus Christ, he is come, hee is come, my good Iayler is come to let my soule out of prison. Oh sweete death thou art welcome, welcome sweet death,Her talk with death, and he friendly wel∣comming of him. neuer was there any guest so welcome to me as thou art. Welcome, the messenger of euerlasting life: welcome the doore and entrance in∣to euerlasting glorie: Welcome, I say, and thrise welcome, my good Iayler, do thy office quickly, and set my soule at liber∣tie. Strike (sweet death) strike my heart, I feare not thy stroke. Now it is done. Father into thy blessed hands I commit my spi∣rit. Sweet Iesus into thy blessed hands I commend my spirite.Her last wordes Blessed spirite of God, I commit my soule into thy handes. Oh most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinitie, three persons and one true and euerlasting God, into thy blessed hands I commit both my soule and my bodie, at which words her breath stayed, and so neither moouing hand nor foote, she slept sweetly in the Lord.Her death. Thus hast thou heard (gentle Reader) the discourse of the ver∣tuous life, and christian death of this blessed and faithfull seruant of God, Mistresse Katherine Stubs: which is so much the more wonderfull, in that she was but young and tender of yeares, not halfe a yere aboue the number of xix. when she departed this life. The Lord giue vs grace to folow her good example, that we may come to those vnspeakable ioyes wherin she now resteth, through Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honour, glorie, prayse, dominion, and thankesgiuing, both nowe and for euermore. Amen. FINIS. P. S. Gent.
