25304 S113244 99848481 13577
A GODLIE Treatise, Intituled The View and Down-fall of Pride. Wherein is declared the cause of Babylons destruction, and Nabuchadnezzars subuersion. Set forth by William Wheatley Maister of Art, and Preacher of Gods word. Deut. 33.2. If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on iudgement: I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, and will re∣ward them that hate me. Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, for Iohn Deane and Iohn Baily, and are to be solde at his shop, at the doore of the Office of the sixe Clarkes in Chancerie Lane. 1602.
TO THE HONO∣rable Robert Sackuill, the No∣ble sonne and heire apparant to the right Honorable the Lord Buck∣hurst, Lord high Treasurer of England: and to the right honourable and vertuous Lady, the Lady Anne Compton: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father through Christ, be multiplied for euer. THE bright beames of your Honours most gratious coū∣tenāce, shewing me fauour not inferior to that of Ahasuerosh extended to∣wards Queene Ester, whē he held out the golden scepter: and your honourable acceptance (together with the vndeserued thankfulnes
of those worshipful assemblies, ac∣companying your honors seuerall times at those spirituall bankets which your honors appointed me the most vnskilfull of all other to set out; hath caused other blos∣somes and fruite from the tree of life to spring forth, which the cold of the winter had almost killed. And furthermore, hauing many goodly plants in my vineyard (as other men haue in theirs) both fresh & greene, and yet the fruite both bad and small (though they haue bene pruned and trimmed a long time by other labourers, as by my selfe): I much maruelled what might be the cause thereof. And digging for a fountaine to water my garden, I found a cor∣rupt vaine in the earth, that poy∣soned my trees, and made the fruit naught. A handfull wherof I haue bound vp in paper (because it is
straying) that as the Euangelist Luke dedicated of loue his booke vnto his deare Theophilus, so I might haue something to present vnto your honors for a Newyears gift. Which might be Tanquam purae nec non mentis gratissimae pro summis in me vestris accumulatis be∣neficijs indicium. And though veri∣tas odium parit, as the prouerbe is: yet because she cannot endure to creepe into a corner, (she greatly reioycing of your loue and coun∣tenance towards her, and her chil∣dren) intendeth to walke abroad. Yet for her better safetie vnder the couert of your hors. patronage and protection, vnto whom for iust cause shee chiefly commends her self: your noble honors being such as feare God like Cornelius, with your houshold; and to all good learning more gratious then ecaenas: vnto whom sinne is so
odious, and who are such godly fauourers of all that be vertuous. And thus crauing pardon for this my boldnesse, leauing these the first fruites of my poore labours publicke, as an earnest of my lo∣uing dutie, presented like the Wi∣dowes mite, into the treasurie of your Honors fauourable tuition, to be preserued from the spoyler: I humbly take my leaue: daily commending your honours vnto the protection of God. Framfield in Sussex. Anno. 1602. Your Ho. right humble and louing Chaplaine and seruant for the Lord, to commaund. William Wheatley.
TO THE READER. The Author to his late louing Au∣ditorie at Lewise, wisheth true loue among themselues, and perfect vnitie in Religion. REade heere the true substance of that thou hast heard: Of this from Pride learne thou thy soule for to gard. Be speedie dispatching thy sinne out of sight: Else damned with diuels is lotted thy right. Receiue Gods word: ioy in the sword: and die To liue: liue not to die eternally. Such things meditate, As may sin abate. Cry for repentance. Keepe off Gods vengeance.
Euer the poore pitie. View this with pietie. Iudge, but with charitie. Liue all in vnitie. Loue as Christ biddeth thee. Emmanuel keepe wee. Amen. Sicut lectorem meum nolo mihi esse deditu ta correctorem nolo sibi. Aug. in pro lib. 3. de Trē. The Reader and Corrector must iudge vp∣rightly, Without preiudiciall partialitie.
A GODLIE TREA∣tise of the destruction of Ba∣bilon, and Nabuchadnezzar his fall, through pride. Isay 14.14.15. I will ascend aboue the Cloudes, and I wil be like the most high. But thou shalt bee brought downe to the graue, to the sides of the pit. CHAP. I. A briefe exposition of the Text. THe cause of Babilōs de∣struction, and Nabu∣chadnezzar his subuer∣sion, is Pride.Dan. 4.34 & 6.22.23 Who here stands as vppon the Stage, vaunting
her selfe, like Absolon vpon the battle∣ments of his house, bewraying his sinne without any shame.2. Sam. 16.22. And is at defi∣ance with God, like PharaoExo. 5.2. or Rab∣shacheh,2. King. 18.22. speaking heere by Nabu∣chadnezzar, as the diuel did by the ser∣pent,Gen. 3.1. and thinkes scorne to be equall with any creature. And therefore as you see, she mounts her selfe aboue the cloudes, and will be like God: as the Serpent told Eua she should.Gen. 3. Such is her shamelesse impudencie, that shee fears not to encounter with God, as the diuell did with Christ,Mat. 4.3 or the dra∣gon with Michael.Re. 12 7. But God lyeth as in a scout-watch, not as the Elders did to catch Susanna, but as Israel did, to entrap their enemies.Iud. 7. Or ra∣ther tells her to her teeth, as Elias did Ahab,1. King. 1.18. answering her with no lesse terror (if it be marked) then the hand∣writing shewed the destruction of Bal∣thasarDa. 5.5 saying: Thou shalt be brought downe to the graue, to the sides of the pit. Marke the text. I (saith Pride) will ascend aboue the cloudes. See her inso∣lencie. And will be like the most high. Be∣hold her impudencie.
But (saith God) there is a stop; thou, euen Pride: shalt, thats thy hope: bee brought downe, it is thy fall: to the graue, that is thy honour: to the sides of the pit, that is the end, not onely of thee, but of all other sinne, except ye repent.Luk 13.3. The diuision of the Text. Here in order to helpe memorie, I ob∣serue a double proposition: the first sheweth the chiefe cause, of all mens fall, and heere most certainly of the King and Kingdome of Babilon: that is Pride: whose haughtie humor is heere seene by two things. First by a generall contempt of all other in regard of her selfe, in these words. I will ascend aboue the cloudes. And her wings to mount, may be first Disdaine: second, Presumptiō: third Rebel∣lion: fourth Discontentment. Noted out of (I will). Secondly, by a vaine estimation of her selfe, to be like God. 1. In proprietie, as in seeking to be exalted alone. 2. In chalen∣ging vengeance vnto her selfe. 3. In name, by vsurping the glorious name of God.
The second propositiō noteth two things, first, the certaintie of proud Nabuchad∣nezzar his fall: where I note, 1. Who threatneth. 2. What force the threatning is of. 3. How it is effected. 4. What it is. viz. the graue. Secondly, the vtter destruction and fi∣nall ouerthrowe of Pride and proud men impenitent in hell: whereof note 1. the true being and certaintie of that place for the damned. Secondly, the torments thereof, where∣in is 1. Most horrible paine. 2. Confused woe. 3. An euerlasting continuance of the same. CHAP. II. A view of Pride. SOme follow euill counsell to their own destruction; like Ahab, and Ahaziah.1. King. 22.23. Some mens wicked deuice turn to their owne confusion; like the builders of the Tower of Babell.Gen. 11.8. Ede cace boule to bouleusanti caciste, Euil counsel worst wringeth the coun∣cellor himselfe.
Mee thinkes it is no wisedome to triumph before the conquest. Benhadad King of Aram or Syria, sent & greatly threatned Ahab, king of Israel (the effect of the Text is) to tread him & his people vnder his feete. Ahab sent answer againe saying. Tell him that girdeth his harnesse on, let him not boast himselfe as he that putteth it off.1. King. 20.11. Now a litle you heare what Pride saith, but she maketh no reckning of her ende, but that will quaile her. Pride, what is that? why shouldest thou aske? But indeed the Sunne in his brightnesse is not seene of him that dooth winke: neither doth any truth preuaile with them that will not heare and beleeue. Pride is as common, as corne is like to be plentifull. For this praise the Lord, ô my soule, and all that is within mee praise his holy name: and pray that corne may be kept in the Land for the cōfort of the poore: For I feare the diuell wil Pride, though he neuer want store. And because she strutteth in euery streete, I need not seeke farre, as desirous to finde her: but am ing to speake to her, wishing to
reforme her. Loe shee starts out of my Text in shape of a monster, as the diuell did out of the earth in Samuels likenesse;1. Sam. 28.13.15 and hath as long a reach, as the di∣uells kingdome is large.Math. 4 8. Shee will ascend aboue the cloudes, and she will be like God: it may bee shee meanes as the diuell was like Samuel: therefore she here saith, I will, I will. This is all her reason for it: she thinks this may serue. Stet pro ratione voluntas. But her rea∣son is as strong, as his foundation was firme, that laid it vpon the sand:Mat. 7.26. both the buildings must downe. From this her double desire, which to obtain, she is as greedie as the Lion of his pray. I will make her knowne vnto you by this description. Pride is an vntamed lust of the heart, rebelling against God, in exalting that which he would haue cast downe, euen the Flesh: and in casting downe that which hee would haue exalted; that is the Spirit: Against which, God made a law, specially for Princes, because they should be good examples to their peo∣ple.2. Sam. 3 35.36. and generally, for all other be∣cause
the subiect should not bee proud:Num. 15.28. saying. The King must haue the law, read the lawe, and keepe all the words of this law, &c. that his heart bee not lifted vp aboue his brethren. That is, the more higher of calling, the more humble in condition they should be.Deut. 17 20. If Prin∣ces ought not to bee proud, subiects ought not to aduenture it. Therefore the holy Ghost saith to all. Bee not high minded, but feare.Ro. 11.20. Learne of mee (saith Christ) that am meeke and lowly in heart, and yee shall finde rest vnto your soules.Mat. 11 29. As if he should say, if you be proud, you shall finde no rest for your soules. For cursed are all they that doo erre from thy commaundements.Ps. 119 21. If you would see further what Pride is, S. Augustine saieth. Amor excellentiae superbia vocatur.Aug. de verb. domi∣ni. Ser. 54. The loue or desire of renowne, or to be exalted, is called Pride. Who then is not proud? who so toucheth pitch is defiled therewith.Eccl. 13.1. Pride is like pitch. Therefore Augustine saith, it is The head and cause of all other sinnes.Aug in Psal. 18. Againe he saith, it is of all o∣ther sins, the Beginning, end, and cause. Be it is not onely a sinne it selfe,
but that there neuer hath beene, is, or shall be any sinne, Sine superbia, without Pride.Aug. ad Iulia. epist. 3 Nay further, it straineth euen our good deeds,Act. 12.23. and therefore saith Augustine, Caetera vitia in malefactis va∣lent, sola superbia etiam in recte factis est cauenda,Aug. in Ps. 50. & lib. de natura & gra. all other sin in wicked deeds doth appeare, onely Pride in our good deeds, we ought to beware: for it is like the hearb Coloquintida, where that is in the pot, the broath is neuer good: and where Pride is, all our workes are abho∣minable. And as for our wicked deeds,Aug. Ser. 54. de verb. domini Prior est in vitijs superbia, in them, Pride first setteth foote aboorde: for Pride is the originall of sinne.Ecclesi. 10 14. If you aske how it can be sinne, the Apostle saith, that of many, Couetousnesse is the roote of all euill.1. Timo. I will answere you frō the auncient holy Father S. Aug.Aug. ad Iu∣lia. Epist. 3. Superbia & cupiditas in tantum est vnum malum, vt nec superbia sine cupidi∣tate, nec sine superbia possit cupidus inue∣niri. Pride and couetousnesse are thus one euill, or do consent in one, that nei∣ther a proud man can bee found with∣out couetousnesse, nor a couetous man without Pride. They are like two r∣lots,
which make but one body.1. Cor. 6 If you desire to heare of her any more, I wil omit that Pride which is most com∣mon, for it is sufficiently knowne: and I will speake of that which is least sus∣pected. CHAP. III. Foure kindes of proud men appealed. SAint Augustine speaketh of three sorts of proud men,Aug. in Ps. 93. vnto which frō the Apostle, I wil adde a fourth. First they are proud, Quibus parum est qùod mala faciunt, sed & sua peccata de∣fendere volunt, which make small ac∣count of sinning, and will also haue an excuse for their sinne, like Adam, Aron, Saul, and Ionas. Adam sinned, and cast the fault vpon the woman, and shee sought to excuse her selfe by the Ser∣pent,Gen. 3.12. but all would not serue. Aron made a golden calfe to be worshipped, and when he did see Moyses his zeale and anger against it, he cast the fault vp∣on the people.Exod. 32 33.34. Saul sinned against God, in lauing that which he was com∣maunded
to destroy. And when he was reproued for it by the Prophet, hee straight had his excuse ready: Forsooth the people did it, to offer vnto the Lord.1. Sam. 15.21. And Ionas sent to Niniuie, fled from the commaundement of the Lord, and being punished for it, yet he would ex∣cuse his sinne.Ionas. 4.2 And thus do Vsurers at this day, common swearers, blasphe∣mers, prophaners of the holy Saboath day, and infinit other sinners, which not onely do such things, but with as bad an excuse fauour themselues in their owne wickednesse. And here may be reproo∣ued non residents, dumbe dogs, and Idle Pastors, theeues, &c. But when Christ shall come with his Redde rationē, giue account of thy Stewardship,Mat. 25.31.32. It is not Lord, Lord, haue wee not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out di∣uels, and done great workes, that shall helpe; much lesse then any of your ex∣cuses. The will of God must be done, or else it shall be said, I neuer knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquitie, into euerlasting fire, &c.Math. 7.21.22.23 It was not inough for Israel, neither could they escape Gods wrath by their Templum atrint,
Templum domini; nor the Iewes with Domine, domine, nor for the Romanists, The Church, the Church; nor for vs, The Gospell, the Gospell, the Word, the Word; but wee must do workes worthy of the Word, worthy of the Gospell, as saith a learned Bishoppe. How many King∣domes & Nations hath God cut off for their sinne? and shall we escape that do not only commit sinne, euen with gree∣dinesse, but also will not stick to defend the doing of it? As the Minister doth such a thing, others doo such, and such things, and why may not I? Thus wee our selues cause others to blaspheme the worthy calling wherewith wee be called:Rom. 2.24. And thus men heape one sinne vpon an other,Eccl. 3.29. to make vp the measure of their sinnes,Mat. 23.32. and so hasten the wrath of God. But alas (deare bretheren) it is written, Thou shalt not follow a multitude to doo euill.Exod. 32.2. That is thou must not take example to sinne: which is, to feede thy selfe with winde, in excusing thine own wickednesse.Hos. 12.1 Nec enim exempla nobes simpliciter imi∣anda deus proposuit, sed verbum suum dedi, adcuius regulam & consilia nostra,
& aliorum exempla examinemus.Gual. in Hos. cap. 12 Ser. 39. For God hath not simply set vs examples to follow, but he hath giuē vs his word, according to the true rule, and direct line wherof, we may examine both our owne deuices, and the examples of o∣ther. If they swarue from the comman∣dements, go not after them, neither ex∣cuse thine owne sinne. Binde not two sinnes together, for in one thou shalt not be vnpunished.Ecc. 7.8. And as for them that giue wicked example, it is written: Woe bee to that man by whom the offence commeth.Mat. 18.6. But if it were not for Pride, all this would soone be laid aside. Secondly saith Augustine, He is proud (Qui in confessione peccatorum non agit penitentiam) which in the confession of his sinnes doth not repent: like Kain, Saul, A∣hab, and Iudas. Kain murthered his bro∣ther, he consessed his sin, but could not repent.Gen. 4.13. After Saul had sinned & was reprooued, hee said. I haue sinned, I haue transgressed the commaundements of the Lord, and thy words, because I feared the people, and obeyed their voyce. Now ther∣fore I pray thee take away my sinne, &c.1. Sam. 15. Was not this much? yet all this was
but like a sacrifice of swines flesh: be∣cause this confession was not washed with teares, wroong out of the heart, with grieuous grones of the spirite, which cannot bee expressed. Ahab hearing Gods iudgements denounced against him for his sinnes, Hee rent his cloathes, and put Sackcloath vpon him, and fasted, and lay in Sackcloath, and went barefooted;1. King. 21.27. yet hee could not repent: for the eye of his soule was closed vp, that he could not behold the bright beames of the sonne of righte∣ousnesse, appearing with the spirit of regeneration; and so he sunke backe to his sin again, as appeareth in the chapter. As for Iudas, he said: I haue sinned betray∣ing the innocent bloud:Math. 27.4. and he brought againe the siluer peeces, and cast them downe in the Temple, and departed, but he could not wash his soule in the lauer of the innocent blood, and take hold of the hornes of the altar of Gods mercie. Therefore he went and han∣ged himselfe; and hath purchased a field with the reward of iniquitie,Act. 1.18. euen hell fire, by his euill gotten goods. Be∣ware you bribe-mongers. Now at this
day, how many Kains, Sauls, Ahabs, and fewe so good as Iudas haue we? many to confesse, fewe to restore, none to re∣pent, then all to bee damned. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.Luk. 13.3. And if any desire to know repentance, en∣tending to liue in it, I will borrow so much time of my Text, as to describe it vnto you, but the true and right vse thereof, euery one must shewe forth in his owne life and conuersation, like Ʋ∣rim and Thummim on the breast of the Priest. Repentance is an vnfeyned griefe and groaning of the heart, through sor∣row for sinne committed, confessing and forsaking the same,2. Cor. 7 10.11. with tur∣ning vnto God by newnesse of life,Act. 2.18. apprehending the mercie of God by faith in Christ Iesus;Rom. 3.21.22. &c. Who of God, is made vnto vs Wisedome, and righte∣ousnesse, and sanctification, and redempti∣on.1. Co. 1.30. Where this is, that mans heart is filled with ioy, Iohn. 15.11. as the tem∣ple was with the glory of the Lord.2. Chro. 5.14. This felt Dauid and Peter, and there∣fore though theyr sinnes were great, yet the guiltinesse thereof was done
way: and so with confession seeke wee repentance, and cast away Pride, the deadly enemie thereof. Thirdly hee is proud saith Augu∣stine. Qui illa ipsa pauca quae videtur ha∣bere bona, sibi vult arrogare & derogat misericordiae dei. Such (Paul saith) are proud, boasters,2. Timo. 3.2. which do arrogate or attribute vnto themselues those fewe good things, which they doo but seeme to haue (for indeed they haue none)Ro. 7.18 and so do diminish the mercie of God. Which is to rob God of his honour, as do the Pelagians and Papists, who put∣ting their trust in their workes, as some put their confidence in horses and cha∣riots, neuer remembring the name of the Lord, and grace of God in Christ, may haue a name to liue, but they are dead with the Angell of the Church of Sardi, because they remember not how they haue receiued, and heard, and hold fast and repent:Re. 3.1 namely, that sal∣uation is of the LordGal. 5.4. and that there is no good thing in man, but that which is wrought by the holy Ghost.Isay. 26.12. With∣out me (saith Christ) ye can do nothing. Pa∣ratur enim voluntas a domino. For mans
will is prepared of the Lord,Most ex∣cellēt saith Aug. Epist. 105. Tom. 2 per tota. to eue∣ry good worke. And now for the warre betwixt the Papists and vs about this poynt: this peace I proclaime, as Em∣bassador from the Lord: That faith is a supernaturall knowledge, wrought by the holy Ghost in a regenerate man, by which hee is assured of eternall saluati∣on through Christ,Ephe. 1.17.18.19 and good works do approue this knowledge to be sound and true.Iam. 2.17.20.22 If the tree bee good, so is the fruite also, and the tree is knowne by his fruite.Math. 12.33. And thus as faith and workes cannot be seperated by the sun and his light, fire and heate: so ô Lord vnite the Papists and all other Heretickes to vs, and thy true Church militant, that we may all worship thee in one spirit and truth. If this beame of Pride were once plucked out of mens eyes, the bright sun-light of the truth of Religion would clearely appeare, and all men would walke as in the day time. Fourthly, hee is proud, that is furious like a mad man, or doteth like a foole, (for so the Greeke word signifieth, a∣bout questions and strife of words, not
being content with the doctrine of the Gospell.) If any man teach otherwaies, (saith the blessed Apostle, hauing ex∣horted vnto obedience) Tetuphotai, he is proud, knowing nothing, Alla noson, but furiously doating about questions and strife of words: whereof commeth enuy, strife, raylings, euill surmisings, vaine disputations of men of corrupt mindes, &c.1. Timo. 6.3.4. Insani vocantur tales que∣stionarij, vt qui sibi de quibuslibet rebus (e∣tiam de lana caprina) discertare, & per animi morbos conflictari indulgeant.Marl. ex Iodo. Ʋi∣lich in 1. Timot. 6. Such bee called mad, doating, or busie questionists, or disputors, as giue them∣selues to contend about euery matter, (euen of smal moment, as of the Moone shining in the water, or wearing of a comely Surples) and through Pride so to trouble themselues. As many doo about the orders of our Church, esta∣blished neither for superstition nor I∣dolatry, nor for the maintenance of any accident adioyning vnto them: ut to keepe comelinesse, vniformitie, and order in the Church: this satisfieth my conscience, and what should I seeke o alter the decree of a whole Parlia∣ment?
I know wherein to obey God rather then man: and I know how to o∣bey God by man: and I know how to obey God and man: and it is not for euery priuate man to know all the rea∣sons why such and such things bee or∣dained for policie and order in a Com∣mon-wealth. Now then, if no offence bee iustly giuen, if thy vnbrideled and vntamed spirite, (whatsoeuer thou art) vniustly take any, what is that to the Church? looke thou to that, as the Iews said to Iudas: to his maister and Lord as traiterous,Mat. 26 as you to your Princes good orders are malicious; and to her Maiestie how true, iudge your selues, as Paul saith to the Communicants.2. Cor. 13.5. I iudge no man: I doo commaund from the Lord, that you Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars. If you say, our blood is not too deare a sacrifice to be offered in her Maiesties quarell: no more then I∣saac was to his father.Gen. 22 1.10.11. I say againe: And will you not then spare one affec∣tion to obey her? One saith out of Gre∣gory: Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio ope∣ris. The triall of thy loue, is the shewing of thy deed, or to shew it by thy deeds.Ser. de temp. 100.
And Christ saith: If ye loue me, keepe my commaundements.Ioh. 14.15 How can you loue your holy Prince, & do not her will? If you deny to do that which is least, who may trust you in that which is most? Seruants obey their Maisters,Mal. 1.6 the Oxe knoweth his owner,Isay. 1.3 and sub∣iects should their Prince.Ro. 13.1 Faith with∣out good workes, is dead in it selfe.Iam. 2.20. And Iudas his haile Maister, with his kisse, was treason against the sonne of God. Math. 26. And as Dauid saith: Good words in the mouth, and warre in the heart, is nothing better then plaine hy∣pocrisie. Therefore Christ called the flattering Disciples of the Pharisies, and the Herodiās hipocrites,Mat. 22 18. which are a people or generation, pure in their owne conceit:Prou. 30.12. and it is a mightie Pride for one to cōceiue well of himself, where fewe or none else doth: and the worse, where there is no cause. Well, Christ saith, Hee that gathereth not with vs, scattereth abroad.Math. 12.30. S. Aug. saith: Non est particeps diuinae charitatis qui ho∣stis est vnitatis.Aug. Epist. 50. He is not beloued of God, which is an enemy to the vnitie of the Church. The braunch beareth not
fruite except it abide in the vine,Ioh. 15.4 and what life is in the body beeing torne a∣sunder? If I were now to come to the Papist & Puritane, I wote what to say; but others are before me (whose shooes I am not worthy to beare) then heere will I stay. A foule puddle the more it is stirred, the more it stinketh. Onely this I could wish, that our busie-bodies would cease to licke vp the vomit which others haue cast, & washed from them: as also to meddle with Callings, who, why, and how, such, and such men haue their calling lawfull: and as for my brethren of my owne calling, to meddle with matters of state, my poore wisedome and learning garded with humilitie, councelleth and teacheth me to behold and learne of King Dauid, the man after Gods owne heart (& wi∣ser then the most peeuish schismaticke, or opinionaries) who saith: Lord, I do not exercise my selfe in great matters which are too high for me, but I refraine my soule and keepe it lowe.Ps. 131. And to what end should a Countrie Pulpit meddle with matters of gouernment in Malam par∣tem, except it were to teach the people
to tread vpon the Princes lawful Scep∣ter, and tread the Crowne vnder their feete? What they haue intended, God hath preuented: and because this their counsell or worke is of men, it comes to nought: as Gamaliel told the men of Israel theirs should, if it were against God.Act. 5.34 38. Admit some things might be amisse, the best way to amend them, is there to speake of them where mends may be had, and not to keepe a wrang∣ling among such as cannot helpe. No, no, (my deare brethren) if wee looke well about vs, wee shall finde no time wherin to omit speaking of the matters of faith, for men will not beleeue: and to smite at sinne & corruption among Officers at this day. For though (per∣haps) some one head of sinne and cor∣ruption be wounded to death, yet it re∣couereth the deadly wound; like the beast in the thirteenth of the Reuela∣tion. And men returne to their sinne againe like the dogge to his vomit, nd the sowe that was washed, to her allowing in the myer.2. Pet. 2.22. Nay though ne head of sinne be cut off, yet there iseth two in the roome: behold our
Pride, which I may call our English Hy∣dra. But (alas) I desire here rather to la∣ment, then to open the vanitie of mens mindes, and vntamed affections of this time: through which, who knoweth not the church of God to be grieuously rent, and the aduersary to haue got no small occasion for to blaspheme? But to ende with these kinde of proud men, let them view Caluin, who saieth it Math. 13.41. They which proposte∣rously make haste to roote out and a∣bolish whatsoeuer liketh not, or dis∣pleaseth them, do preuent so much as in them lyeth the iudgement of Christ and do rashly vsurpe vnto themselue the power of Angels, & the office per∣taining vnto them. Therefore let vs al embrace and hold fast the counsell o the holy Apostle. Seeke peace and follow after it,1. Pet. 3.11. and studie to be quiet.1. Thess. 14.11. Fo God is not the author of dissention, bu of peace:1. Cor. 14.33. and therefore build we  together the building of God: the daie  are euill, the end of all things is at hand and happie is hee in whose worke i found no guile. Thus you heare of some that ar
proud, other you know, and moe will appeare by the rest that followeth. CHAP. IIII. Whither Pride will ascend. NOw sir, Pride saieth shee will as∣cend aboue the cloudes, may one (thinke you) beleeue her? let vs see what may be ment by the clouds, and then how she doth clime. Cloudes haue these fiue significati∣ons in the word of God. 1. They signi∣fie those Meteors which are drawne vp into the ayre out of the sea and moyst places, by the superior powers. These clouds we see daily the wind driues too and fro. Such was that cloud which E∣lias his seruant sawe arise out of the sea in bignesse like a mans hand, and pre∣sently the heauens were blacke with clouds and winde, and there was a great raine.1. Reg. 18.44.45 2. Cloudes signifie a diuine ordinance of GOD, supernaturall, appointed for a time to doo his will. Such was that cloud, that led the chil∣dren of Israel by day, to escape from
the Egyptians. And he, first God, went before them by daye in a piller of a cloudeExod. 13 21. 3. They signifie a multitude. We are compassed with so great a cloud of witnesses, &c.Heb. 12.1. 4. They do signifie the wicked and wretched worldlings which are without the truth of good workes: these the holy scriptures doth call cloudes without raine.Prouerb. 25.14. 5. Clouds do signifie all those good men of godly conuersation, whose lights of righte∣ousnesse do shine before men, whose good deeds do comfort the poore, as raine from the cloudes dooth moysten the earth. Of these Isay speaketh, say∣ing. Let the cloudes droppe downe righte∣ousnesse.Isa. 45.8 Ouer the first the builders of Babell ment for to mount. To be aboue the fourth, what credit is it for Pride, but to be counted the king or captaine, ring-leader, and lord and maister of all wickednesse? but at the fift it is that she aymeth, and though they be as is in the third a multitude, yet superioritie you heare she proclaimeth: she will bee a∣boue the cloudes: shee will bee aboue them, though she be none of them. The meaning is, that Pride perswaded Na∣buchadnezzar,
as it doth the Pope and Spaniard, that he should ouerthrow Ie∣rusalem the Citie of God, and place, which hee had chosen to put his name there, and as it were tread the people vnder his feete, driue them away cap∣tiue, and take his will and pleasure vp∣on them: as I feare the rich doo by the poore, and therefore he saith: I will as∣cend aboue the cloudes, &c. CHAP. V. How Pride doth ascend. NOw if you would know the steps by which Pride dooth clime, or the feathers of her wings which make her to mount, (for she is a winged beast, looke else on many womens gownes, but theirs hang downe as if they were broken in the flight. It may bee some of the wings of their faith are not sound, and that maketh the wings of their gownes bee so ill fauoured, ha∣uing more cost vpon a paire, then would make a poore child a coate, which they neuer remember.) Well, though they
be many, yet at this time I wil speak bu of foure, which I take to bee the fore∣most & strongest feathers of her wings And one is disdaine, which mounts h aloft, by insulting ouer, dispising, an preferring her selfe before all other scornfully contemning her betters, lik the Gentiles, who seeing that God ha cut off the Iewes, which were the natu∣ral braunches, and had grafted them in being but wilde Oliue braunches,Rom. 11 18. these began to boast against them, de∣spising them: as Hagar did her mistress Sarai.Gen. 16.4. And so the most whom Go fauoureth aboue their brethren, they insult ouer them, & swell one against a other, like the Corinthians:1. Co. 4.6. setting one an other either altogither atnought or else lightly regarding them, as the rich did the poore, among the same Co∣rinthians.1. Cor. 11 22 But S. Ambrose saith o the rich, proud, and mightie men of th world.Ambr. lib. de Nab. Iere. cap. 13 Quid enim superbis diues? quid di∣cis pauperi, noli me tangere? &c. Where∣fore ô rich man, art thou so proud? why saiest thou to the poore man, come no neare me? your beginning and end are both alike: you came from the wombe
and shall to the ground. We read, that when the huge Phi∣listine Goliah looked about and saw li∣tle Dauid, he disdained him.1. Sam. 17, 42. And you that bee as Goliah, should not thus deale with the Dauids among you. But behold further, the poore Publicane humble in spirit, (I speake of him first, for he was the better man) and the rich Pharisie proud in heart, went into the Temple for to pray. The Publican perceiued how vnmeete a thing it is for a poore soule all to be smeared with sinne, impudently to stare in the face of the most holy God: therefore hee durst not lift vp so much as his eyes to heauen, but smote his breast saying. O God be mercifull vnto mee a sinner.Luk. 18.13. But the proud Pharisie stood (he would not bowe: like our Puritanes when they come to the Church, and holy Communion) and prayed thus with himselfe. O God I thanke thee, that I am not as other men, extortioners, vn∣iust, adulterers, (such then there were, though peraduenture not halfe so bad as be now) or as this Publican, &c. Hee said true, but not so well for himselfe,
as he thought he did. For (surely belo∣ued) hee was not like the Publican, for the Publican was better then he: as S. Augustine well noteth, saying: Ille su∣perbus erat in bonis factis, ille humilis in malis factis, videte fratres, magis placuit deo humilitas in malis factis, quàm super∣bia in bonis factis.Aug. in Ps. 93. The meaning is, The Pharisie was proud in doing good deeds, the Publican meeke and lowly because of his euill deeds. Marke my brethren, God was better pleased with the Publicans humilitie, though he had liued wickedly, then with the good deeds of the Pharisie, because hee was proud and disdainfull. Which Christ confirmeth, saying: I tell you (and he knew the truth) this man, euen the hum∣ble Publican, departed home to his house iustified more then the other. Or as some note, and not the other. Againe, you know the insolent boa∣sting of the proud youth in the Gospell.Mat. 19.16. to. 23. He said he had kept the commaun∣dements, (but hee lyed with those that say so) and so thought to haue eternall life. But when Christ came to search him by his deeds, hee found no such
matter in him, but that whē he thought best of himselfe, and euen preferred himselfe before other, then was hee worst in the sight of God. And Pharao king of Egipt disdained that there shuld be any God to commaund him; there∣fore when Moyses & Aaron came with commission from the Lord, for Israels deliuerance out of Egipt, the King an∣swered. Quis est dominus vt audiam vo∣cem eius? Who is the Lord that I should heare his voyce,Exod. 5.2 and let Israel goe? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel goe. Euen so in these dayes men make as little account of Gods word, and his Embassadors: and through Pride, by which they are ouerwhelmed, they disdaine that God should teach and commaund them to let their sinne go, and this is the cause they regard him no better, but euē say like Pharao, who is the Lord, that I should heare his voyce, and let my Pride, vsury, extorti∣on, oppression, or any my pleasure goe? I know not the Lord, neither will I let them goe. Iesus Christ saith: Learne of me, take my yoake vpon you, my yoake is easie, and my burthen is light.Math. 11.30. But S.
Augustine speaking of Pride, sheweth the cause why men will not, saying. Propter hoc vitium, dedignantur subdere colla iugo Christi, obligati arctius iugo pec∣cati.Aug. in Ps. 18. Because of Pride men disdaine to yeeld their neckes to the yoake of Christ, and will rather gall them in the yoake of sinne. But know you this, that whosoeuer by this disdainfull Pride, will endeuour to mount himself, the higher he riseth, the greater shall bee his fall. And if you meane to ascend indeed, the humble your selues vnder the migh∣tie hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.1. Pet. 5.6 And let euery man e∣steeme others better then himselfe.Phil. 2.3 For he that humbleth himselfe, shalbe ex∣alted.Luk. 18.14. As the examples of Iob, Da∣niel, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, Christ, Stephen, the thiefe vpon the Crosse, and the Centurion, with many other, do plainly testifie. The Centu∣rion in the meekenesse of his humble mind, said to Christ (who promised wh he did come to his house, to heale hi seruant) Lord (saith he) I am not worth that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe but speake the word onely, & my seruan
shall be healed.Math. 8.78. If hee were not wor∣thy that Christ should come vnder his roofe, because of his maiestie & holines, it is a shame for you to foster Pride in yours, as the bawd doth the hatlot, be∣cause of her filthinesse. His humilitie Christ honored with a great commen∣dation: shall not your Pride be shamed in due condemnation? but I returne. The want of this humilitie, such height of haughtie minde & swelling with dis∣daine, like bodies poisoned, caused Kain that he could not abide to see Abels sa∣crifice accepted before his, therefore Kaine slew Abell his brother.Gen. 4.8. It made Iosephs bretheren that they could not abide to thinke that their brother should come to greater honour then they: therefore they made awaye with him, and sold him into Egypt.Gen. 37 The Rebells, Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, hauing found this, they dis∣dained superiorie, like our pretended Presbitery, so they rebelled against Moyses their godly gouernour.Numb. 16.12. It made Herod that blood-sucker, to seeke to murther Christ:Math. 2 16. and the Nobles of Babilon greatly to thirst
after Daniels death.Dan. 6.4 Where disdaine lookes out at Prides window, as Iezabe did to see Iehu,2. Reg. 9.30. there euery one de∣spise other,Luk. 18.9 and iustifie themselues:Luk. 16.15. onely because as Diotrephes loued the preheminence among men;Ioh. Epist. 3.9. so they would haue the highest roomes,Luk. 14.7. and disdaine that any should get before the Thus much for disdaine, a feather of Prides wing: I will plucke at it no lon∣ger, for it will not come out. But now to your selues, and yet I will spare you in hope you will amend. The second feather of Prides wing may be presumption, two waies to bee seen to moūt her vp aboue the clouds. First, when men dwell in wickednesse, and therin delight, as the Owle in dark∣nesse, and say, Thou God carest not for it: tush I shall neuer be cast downe, there shall no harme happen vnto me.Ps. 10.6.12.14. And there∣fore of Pride presumptuously they de∣termine with Synacharib the subuersi∣on of Kingdomes,2 Reg. 18.19. and commit mur∣ther with Kaine,Gen. 4.8.19. whordome with Lamech, the first founders thereof: extortion and oppression with Reho∣boam,
1. Reg. 12.14. against the law of God, which saith: Thou shalt not oppresse thy brother.Leu. 19.13. Nay Pride in mans hart, maketh him entend to do euen what him list, and thinks to go forward without any con∣trolment, neuer so much as once ma∣king the blessed God of their counsell: which the Apostle S. Iames sharply re∣proueth.Iam. 4.13. These, and such like, I take to bee those of whom the Prophet of God speaketh: where he saith. The vn∣godly is so proud, that hee careth not for God, neither is God in all his thoughts.Ps. 10.4 And therefore in distresse thinke not that God will care for them.Pro. 1.28. Will they yet runne on? The other kinde of presumption is, when men will dwell and continue in sinne, and thinke to salue the matter with this plaister, God is mercifull:2. Cor. 1.3. forgetting that he is iust and true,Ps. 7.9. & 10.14. & 11.7. and so repentance is deferred, sinne is en∣creased, God is blasphemed, and in the end, thou thy selfe most like to bee de∣ceiued, like one that ouer-sleepeth the Tyde, and then cannot take Ship: or like the 5. foolish Virgins, who sought yle when it was too late.Math. 25.10. Of such
almightie God complaineth by the Psalmist, saying. The plowers plowed vp∣on my backe, and made long furrowes.Ps. 129.3. By which is ment, that to prolong thy sinne, and to put off from day to day thy amendment of life, still hoping on mercie, to haue it at thy will, is to plow or digge vpon Gods backe: but marke what followeth. The righteous Lord hath cut the cordes of the wicked, to wit, in peeces. Heere is a crosse barre, or a double gate to stoppe thy way to pre∣sumption, euen the iustice of God, and the execution thereof according vnto truth. Ah fellow, art got vp to plowe and goare the backe of God? hee is iust as well as mercifull, and hee will cut in sunder the cordes of thy pre∣sumption. First hee will frustrate thy hope, by which thou drawest on thy sinnes, as the Oxen doo the plough by the chaine. And to assure thee of this, the holy Ghost vseth the time past in this word, Hath, for the time to come, as that it shall so surely bee performed, as if it were past alreadie. To con∣firme this, the word of God saieth: The person that doth ought presumptu∣ously,
whether he be borne in the Land, or a Straunger, the same blasphemeth the Lord: Therefore that person shall bee cut off from among his people, because hee hath despised the word of the Lord, and hath broken his commaundement, that person shall bee vtterly cut off: his iniqui∣tie shall bee vppon him.Numb. 15.30.31 Paul also will haue no man presume aboue that which is written.1. Cor. 4.6.1. And it is written, Put not off from day to day, for sudden∣ly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance hee shall destroy thee. This then expect, except thou re∣pent, &c. Thirdly, rebellion is an other fea∣ther in Prides wing, by which shee would heaue vp her selfe in vsurping and stretching her authoritie ouer men wthout lawfull right, or true commissi∣on: forcing them to obey her, and lea∣ding them captiue after her owne will; as well against Gods word, as any ordinance of his. And heere to goe from time to time, from one Common-wealth to an other, and view the cause of treasons among subiects towardes theyr Princes and
gouernors of warres & contentions, &c. we should find it to bee Pride and lofti∣nesse of minde, ambitiously desiring one an others kingdome, rising and re∣belling through immoderate greedines of glory. Which the holy Apostle Saint Iames affirmeth, saying. From whence are warres and contentions among you? are they not herehence euen of your lusts that fight in your members?Iam. 4.1 Onely of Pride (saith wise Salomon) doth man make con∣tention.Prouer. 13.10. Looke in Genesis. 14. and the second booke of the Kings. cap. 18. As in many places more, and thou shalt haue examples to confirme this mat∣ter. And our English Chronicles want no store, but Richard the third dooth make mee tremble to name any moe. Therefore for this time I wil keepe me at home, and as I speake to you, so I wil speake of you: for you (beloued) I de∣sire to be taught. Will you giue mee leaue in a word to tel some of you how you runne after Pride & rebell against God? if you will, I shall but onely pas∣sing along by your coats, costs I mean, plucke at here and there a weed, which hindreth the growing of better corne.
CHAP. VI. Two chaines to tie vp the branded beast Pride. NEcessitie & comelinesse for attite, firmly fastned to the strong pillar of true humilitie,Eccl. 11 4. ought to be the two chaines to tie vp the branded beast Pride: branded, because shee is of iuers colours of starch and trash, chan∣ing her selfe like the Camelion: and ltering her fashions like Proteus or Ʋertumnus, neuer remembring that the id man which is in the hart should be without all corruption.1. Pet. 3.4. But euen as the false Prophets were schooled by the diuell, to speake as the King would haue them:1. Reg. 22.22. so Pride contemneth the spirit of God, and saith, what haue I to do with thee? as the possessed with uels said to ChristMath. 8 29. teaching the flesh as she will haue it. For the head ust nod, the eies must rowle, the bo∣e must iette, the tongue must trowle, d all as Pride will haue them. Soft iment (saith Christ) is in Kings houses.
As if there were the fittest and most proper place for rich apparell to be,Math. 11.8. because it belongeth to such as are o the Kings Court. The rich glutton (rich, so he might the more easily do it yet but a glutton, and therefore it was no credit to him) was cloathed in pur∣ple and fine linnen,Luk. 16 19. or white Paul the Apostle of Christ, teacheth1. Cor. 11.6.11. that it is a shame for men to weare long haire; and for women to pray bareheaded. But as the poore man of the proude worldling is thrust to the footestoole,(d)Iam. 2.3 so the counse of the holy Ghost is set at nought.Prouer. 1.30. And men doo weare long haire, wo∣men doo goe bareheaded with they haire vncouered. Come from the Court to the Coun∣trie; in rich attire what wanteth th subiect of the Prince? view them with the poore, and you shall see of the poo∣rer sort, as proud as the rich, and th most of our common women, to ex∣cell those of the better sort. For noue∣ties, and chaunge of fashions, and toies men and women are as full, as a toade  of poyson. Of whom I may speake,
S. Ambrose doth of the couetous. La∣borant vt quaerant: vt inueniāt laborant: quid habere non norunt.Ambr. li. de Nab. Iere. ca. 13 They toile to get, and labour to finde, but what they would haue, they cannot tell thēselues. Come wee to seruants, (it is well wee must stand to reprooue theyr Pride) these, though their wages be not great, yet their ruffes must be as bigge and ilfauoured, as their harts, and the cloath as fine, as their proud dames, with blew starch too. Lastly, behold our wanton and ruffinly mynions, & see how with∣out all shame they surmount their cal∣lings, and contemne God. It grieueth me to speake that, which they bee not ashamed to do. But why do they so? Euen as Christ saith of the Pharisies: The hypocrites and the Pharisies do their deeds to be seene of men:Math. 6.16. & 23.28. And when are we most proud in apparell, but when wee thinke most to be seene of others? Then as Saul (whom God had cast off from fauour, to keepe a peece of credite with the world, for with God he had none) said to Samuel,1. Sam. 15. Honour mee before this people. So those that are proud in heart,
say to their ruffes, schoters, and hoopes, with their other implements of Pride, Honour me before this people. But alas, they bee so farre from dooing them any honour, that in the sight of God, whom they should feare,Deut. 28 58. and to all of an humble spirit, whom they should loue without dissimulation,Rom. 12 9 and not offend.Mat. 18.6 For it is written: Whosoeuer shall offend one of these little ones, which beleeue in me, it were better for him, that a mill-stone were hanged a∣bout his necke, and that hee were drowned in the depth of the Sea. And againe the holy Ghost saieth: Grieue not the holf spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed vnto the day of redemption.Ephe. 4.30. To these I say their fond fashions make them as rydi∣culous, as they are monstrous. Though they themselues bee as much besotted with them: as is said Narcissus was with his owne shadow.Ouid. Meta. li. 3 And do delight to wallow in them as the sowe in myr before the greene grasse: preferring them, as a child doth a trifle, as an apple before the best Gold. You tell vs indeed of a kind of stray∣ing vermine, is there such? how shall w know them?
How man? Heu quàm difficile est cri∣men non prodere vultu?Answer. How hard is it in outward shew, To keepe thy sinne from open vew? As S. Ambrose saith,Amb. de li. de Nab. Iere. cap. 13 Quasi is cognitus esse non potest, cum sibi desiderat demonstrari. As though he can be vn∣knowne which is desirous (like a foole) to shewe his coate. The wise man saith, A mans garment, laughter, and going, de∣clare what he is.Eccl. 19 28. And againe: The whoredome of a woman may be knowne in the pride of her eyes, and eye-lids.Eccl. 26 9. Thus the Lord God knew the daughters of Syon to be proud or haughtie, because they walked with stretched out neckes, with rowling eyes, ietting or nodding. and minsing as they did goe: with cost∣ly apparell, sweete balles, bracelets and bonnets: their head attire, head-bands, Tablets, Earings, Rings, Chrisping pinnes, and such like.Isay. 3.16.17.18.19. &c. And are you perswaded he knowes not you? Wee read of one Athila, sometimes King of Pannonia, now called Austria, whose Pride the people noted by his very ge∣sture.
These be the words of Historio∣graphersPaulus, Iouius, Charl. Steph. Textor. Erat Athila Rex Panno∣mae superbus successu, huc at{que} illuc ocu∣los circumferens, vt illata potentia in ipso corporis motu appareret. There was one Athila king of Pannonia, proud in his very going, rowling his eies hither and thither, in so much that his mightie Pride did appeare by the very motion of his body. And by your leaue, in these daies many their proud going, & spea∣king, & scornful looking, becomes thē not, neither be they meet for their per∣sons: no more then pearls for swine, or holy things for dogs. King Dauid saith: Lord I am not high minded, I haue no proud lookes.Ps. 131.1 And your elders in former times were not ashamed to be meeke & humble, Therefore as S. Ambrose saith: Caue, ne in te erubescant tuorum merita maiorum.Amb. li. de Nab. Iere. cap. 13. Beware least thou thinke scorne of the modestie and good quali∣ties of thy predecessors. Which of them did euer weare either schoters for their ruffes, or hoopes vpon their hippes, or blew starch? How vgly were one, by naturall proportion so bigge about? What, doost thou meane to mend or marre Gods workmanship? or to make
thy selfe so bigge that thou mayest not enter in at heauen gate? thy grandmo∣thers doubtlesse had neuer such imagi∣nations. And I hope they were more commendable before God and man, more meeke and humble, and better to the poore, then thou that vsest them. A graue matron and sober dame, would be sore grieued that she should be once imagined to bend her selfe, or desire to vse the light gesture and behauiour of a wanton: and me-thinketh it is more shame to see a Puritane got within a hoope, and to bee painted with blew starch, but most shame for Prelates thē∣selues and their second selues to be thus spotted, neither do I commend any that vse them, though they haue small feare of God in them. The Prophet of God was more bold with the dainty dames of Syon. Isa. 3. But know we, though wee seeme holy, yet such things doo shewe those that vse thē, to be but counterfeits, and do bewray their folly, like Ierobo∣hams wife, who disguised her selfe, that the Prophet of God should not know her.1. Reg. 14.2. Nay when they haue heaped on all their trinkets, it is most like they know not themselues, but wondring at
themselues, (who should bee like vnto the Image of God) as the Iewes did at Christ, when he came riding into Ieru∣salem: they say, who is this? What, is it I? is it I? As the Disciples said, musing which of them should betray Christ.Math. 21.10. Wel to be briefe, (for time draweth on) notwithstanding Ieroboams wife was disguised, yet the holy Prophet knew her, and sent her home, with a burthen of heauie newes, that she & all her po∣steritie should be destroyed.1. Reg. 14.10.11 12. But I haue better newes for you, if you repēt: but if you cannot know your selues, be∣ing so farre beyond comelinesse dis∣guised against the lawe: yet the Pro∣phets of the Lord that know how to discerne spirits, wotteth what you be, and feare not to tell you from the Lord, The Lord will destroy the house of proud men.Prouer. 15.25. And thus much for this: this then amend, and then come for more. Now discontentment of mind I may adde for the fourth feather of Prides wing, which maketh her to flye aboue the cloudes: as the winde forceth the fire for to flame. Through this, the An∣gels (in happinesse created to behold
the maiestie of God in heauen) kept not their first estate, but left their owne habitation, whom God hath reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darknesse, vnto the iudgement of the great day.Iude. ver. 6. Their Pride following the counsell of discontentment, as Rehoboam did of his younglings,1. Reg. 12.14. did mount them thus high, that of Angels they became diuels. Adam and the woman could not be contented with their creation, therefore God thrust them out of Pa∣radise.Gen. 3.24. This made Absolon thirst for his fathers kingdome, but he leapt short, and was hanged in an Oake.2. Sam. 15. & 18. This, this, I suppose is that which maketh our hotte-spurres and vnstayed cock∣brained crew to wring at the Princes Scepter, & get it out of her hāds, (whose peaceable and heauenly gouernment the world doth admire: and if lawes were executed as her will is, what po∣licie can appoint better? to conuey it vnto a Presbytery. The Officers thereof, and their number, and what their office should be in an established Common-wealth, cannot be prooued by any scripture: neither can our new
reformers tell themselues. For they chaunge their opinions as the Came∣lion doth his colours. Or as the wise man saith, Like a foole that chaungeth as the Moone.Eccl. 27 11. And their writings as wel as their words, declare what these men haue in their heart.Eccl. 27.6. Now name Pride, harnessed with discontentment, and thou hast found the souldiers that fight their battles, and their scoldings are grieuous for to heare, &c.Eccl. 27 15. Fur∣thermore you know that Haman could not be contented with all his promoti∣on being preserred by King Ahasuerus to be the chiefe man vnder him, in all the Prouinces of his dominion: but he obtained a Commission to kill all the Iewes (onely of spight, vnderserued of any): but by Gods prouidence they were deliuered, and Hamans discon∣tented Pride, was discharged by his owne gallowes.Ester. 3. & 7. This made Ahab he could not be quiet without Naboth his vineyard.1. Reg. 21.15.16 Pride is neuer conten∣ted, like her sister Conetousnesse. I would our coat were without this stain. But with Balaam (I am afraid) many follow the reward of iniquitie.
May wee not pray that the Fullers sope might get this spot out of theyr cloath? If they could, silkes and vel∣uets would not be in so great request, nor the Countrie cloyed with so many singlesolde gentlefolke, carrying more vpon their backes needlesse at once, then would comfort the poore at theyr boordes a whole moneth. And thinke you that you bee none of these schismatickes of Martins crew? If they were well looked vnto, it may bee you should finde theyr tables in theyr Farme-houses, as mouldie, as many Pulpets are full of copwebbes for want of vsing? Dooth not this keepe mens pittie from the poore? ow they lament I will not speake, but I would from God exhort the rich n time for to take compassion on them.Gal. 6.10 And though of many their hearts re hardned, yet because the crye of he poore is knowne to her Maiestie, nd to the wisedome of her Maiesties honourable Councell, doubt not be∣loued, but that speedie remedie and helpe is appointed. Onely this I say, that whole
Countries and Nations by this sinne of minde malecontent, rise one against an other, fewe content with their owne Patrimony: only our dread soueraigne, and most gracious Queene, dooth hold the garland from them all, God saue her life for euer, Amen. What needs further proofe where experience is plaine? She ioyeth more (most renow∣med Queene) in sauing one drop of her subiects blood, then in winning of a whole Kingdome, and therefore shee is content with her owne: long ô Lord let her enioy it, to the great example of all other. O pray for the peace of Ie∣rusalem, euen litle England. Christ saith, Learne of me: and if any would learne of her Maiestie, what need either ioy∣ning of house to house, or laying of field to field, till there be no place for the poore, that ye may bee placed by your selues on the middest of the earth?Esa. 5.8 Why should there bee such racking of rents, such colde hospitalitie, dearth of corn, and all other things, since there is plentie? But it is easie to shewe, that where Pride once setteth her foote vp∣on discontentment, or ingrafteth this
feather into her wing; there God is for∣gotten, and fewe contented with that which is Aequum & iustum, nor with their owne, then away with equitie, yea and equalitie too, euery churle must be a gentleman, Pride will be like God. These be foure sicke feathers in Prides wings: vnder which, who so shrowdeth himselfe, is couered from the fauour of God. Away from him all ye workers of iniquitie. Goliah said: I defie the hoast of Israel this day.1. Sam. 17.10. But God doth de∣fie the house of Pride for euer that will not turne. For it is written: Hee that hath high lookes and a proud stomacke, doth his soule abhorre. And wise Salo∣mon saith. These sixe things doth the Lord hate, yea his soule abhorreth seuen: the haughtie eyes, a lying tongue, &c. Loe Pride is the first, as captaine of the rest.Pro. 6.16.17. And thus much of this matter. But peraduenture it may be thought that I haue a grudge to some of you, as Salomon had to Shimei,1. Reg. 2.36. &c because I tell you the truth so boldly and plainly. Now beware you grudge not me, as as Saul did Dauid.1. Sam. 18.9. I can wash my hands in innocencie, and cleare my selfe
of this matter. Innocentia est vbi non est nocendi voluntas.Amb. li. de bono Mor. ca. 1 That is innocencie which is without desire to hurt. Au∣gustine saith: Duo sunt genera persecuto∣rum: vituperantium & adulantium; Nam plus persequitur lingua adulatoris quàm manus persequentis.Aug. in Ps. 69. There are two kindes of hurting or persecuting ene∣mies: that is, backbyters and flatterers: for the tongue of the flatterer woun∣deth or hurteth more then the hand of a sworne enemie: for so the mea∣ning is. Againe hee saith: Nemo peri∣torum aut prudentium putet, &c. There is no man of vnderstanding and wise∣dome but seeth more danger or harme to be by a lying and flattering rongue, then by the hands of a murtherer.Aug. ad Casul. 4. ad Demet. Ep. 14. For Dauid still fled from Saul when he came to kill him, and so was saued.1. Sam. 18.11. But Absolom by flattery caught his brother Ammon, and slew him.2. Sam. 13.28 29 So Ioab murthered Abner, and Ama∣sa.2. Sam. 3.27. Againe, Augustine saieth that Flat∣terie makes men colde in Religion.Aug. in Ps. 69. Therefore Iesus Christ saith: Feare
not them that kill the body.Math. 10.28. And the Prophet Isay saith: Feare not, crye aloud, spare not, lift vp thy voyce like a Trumpet, and shewe my people their transgression.Isay. 43.1. & 51.1 And the holy Apostle S. Paul saieth: Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a father, and the younger men as bretheren.1. Timot. 5.1. Put both together, and this lesson may be learned: not to doo the worke of the Lord negligently,Ier. 48.10. and yet pa∣tiently to rebuke, and to be instant in season and out of season, but yet in loue.2. Timot. 4.2. That wee may bee blamelesse and pure, as the sonnes of God without re∣buke in the middest of a noughtie and crooked Nation, in the which we shine as lights in the world, holding foorth the word of life, &c.Phil. 2.15.16. Therefore I know what to doo, I tell you the truth, why doo you not beleeue me? I can∣not speake with glosing words of mans wisedome.1. Cor. 1.17.19. I preach Christ crucifi∣ed, and teach you to crucifie the olde man and his lusts. Be not you like the Gaderenes, who because their swine were gone, desired Iesus to depart out of their coastes.Math. 8.34.
Be not like the Philistines and men of Asdod. Who, because their Idoll Da∣gon could not stand by the holy Arke, but still fell downe and was broken, sent away the Arke of God, to keepe their Idoll still.1. Sam. 5 1. &c. But forsake your sinnes, and keepe Christ:Reue. 3.20. burne your Idolls of sinne, and confesse the Arke of Gods couenant. Let not your sinnes flatter you and entice you; though they be as importunate vpon you to thrust you out of Gods fauour, as Sampsōs wife was vpon him, to get away his strength as she did indeed: therefore hee was ouercome of the Philistines,Iudg. 16.15.16. to. 21. and so shall you of the diuell at his will But if God be God, go after him: and if Baall, or Pride, or Vsurie, &c. be hee then follow them. For no man ca serue two maisters, you cannot seru God and Mammon.Math. 6.24. Now then confesse I enuie none, I grieue at you sinnes. And the holy Prophet of God teacheth me, who saith: Fret not  selfe because of the vngodly men, neith be thou enuious against the euill dooers.Ps. 37.1. Yet he saith also: It grieueth me, becau men keepe not thy lawe.Ps. 119.158. But m
should not grieue the holy spirit of God, by whom we haue commission as well to reprooue your sinne, as to in∣struct you in the truth of Gods holy will: neither should you hate vs be∣cause we tell you the truth; as the Iewes did Christ,Ioh. 8.40. or as Herod did Iohn the Baptist.Mat. 14 3.4. If you do, The seruant is not greater then his Lord and Maister.Ioh. 15.20. & 13 16. And here withall, remember what the Maister Christ Iesus saith, comforting his faithfull seruants against obstinate contemners of his word. Whosoeuer (as well Princes, Potentates, Prelates, as people) shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, among this adulterous and sinfull generation, of him shall the sonne of man be ashamed also, when he commeth in the glo∣ry of his father, with his holy Angels.Mar. 8.38. And here I will rest for this time. Wee see in Pride a contempt of all other, in regard of her self, and how she dooth mount aboue the cloudes, in de∣sire to tread them vnder her feete: and she cannot be content with this, but she will be like God; which is here the second vanitie of Pride.
CHAP. VII. How Pride would be like God. Pride may be said to be like God either in some proprieties, or else in name. First, her propertie is to exalt her selfe, and de∣sire to be praised, and held in honour as much, or rather more then God. Secondly, she challengeth vengeance to her felse to plague whom she list. In Name shee is like God, because shee vsurpeth or challengeth to be called God. OF the first wee haue heard some∣thing alreadie, how Pride dooth seek to exalt her self aboue the clouds: and being got vp into this perswasiō of her selfe, then she lookes that all should feare her, and extoll her, and doo (for∣soothe) all reuerence and worship vn∣to her, as the diuel would haue had Christ do vnto him.Math. 4.9. And here the Pope steppes in for his interest: but wee will put him backe vntill anon, telling him and his nurse. Dame Pride, that when God shall come in iudge∣ment
against them. Then the Lord onely shall bee exalted in that day.Isay. 2.11.17. The Lord of Hoasts shall be exalted in iudgement, the holy God shall be ex∣alted in iustice.Isay. 5.16 For it is written: I will arise (saith the Lord) now will I bee exalted, now will I lift vp my selfe.Isay. 33.10. Therefore the Psalmist in this respect remembring the promise of God, in which the faithful patiently expect the fall of the proud, and their owne deli∣uerance, singeth: Not vnto vs ô Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue thy glory, for thy louing mercie, and for thy truth sake.Ps. 115.1 Thus Dauid so earnest∣ly in his Psalmes exhorteth the childiē of God to praise the Lord,Ps. 106. & 136. which subdueth our enemies vnder our feete. And the Euangelist Saint Iohn sawe all the Angells fall before the Throne on their faces and worship God, say∣ing Amen, praise and glory, and wise∣dome, and thankes, and honour, and power, and might be vnto our God for euermore, Amen.Reu. 7.12. And not onely the Angels, but all the creatures which are in heauen, and in the earth, and vnder the earth,
and in the sea, and all that are in them heard I say, (saith Iohn) praise, and ho∣nour, and glory, & power, be vnto him that sitteth vpon the Throne, and vnto the Lambe for euermore.Reu. 5.13. And the Angell would not suffer Iohn to wor∣ship him.Reu. 22.8.9. But Pride (indeed shee is none of Gods creatures) would haue all to honour, and worship, and praise, and feare her: she would be like God. Thus the Samaritanes praised Symon Magus,Act. 8.10 and thus the people extol∣led Herod.Act. 12.22. Thus Pride cryeth to the hearts of men, saying: Not vnto God, not vnto God, but vnto mee giue the glory. And this is the cause that wee haunt so much, and greedily gape, for to be prai∣sed of men, like the Pharisies;Math. 6.16. to exclude Iesus Christ from his due ho∣nour, and glory, and praise, who is as∣cended into the heauens, and led capti∣uitie captiue. Pride brings out Symon Magus, speaking to the holy Apostle S. Peter, saying: Doost thou thinke thy Christ to be therefore great because he ascended from the earth to heauen? (A great peece of worke) that can I doo. And then he mounted into the ayre by
the helpe of his familiar diuell. But he that carried him vp let him tumble downe alone, and so hee was crushed in peeces, with shame inough to all his for∣mer coniurings: for hee was condem∣ned of all, and no doubt damned of God; there his Pride had a filthy fall.See Ni∣ceph. lib. 5. cap. 16. Eccl. Hist. Is not this Pride the poyson of the beast, which all they that dwell vpon the face of the earth shall worshippe, whose names are not written in the Lambes booke of life, which was slaine from the beginning of the world? And they worshipped the beast, saying: Who is like vnto the beast? who is able to warre with him?Re. 13.4 The holy Ghost saith: Feare ye the Lord, all ye his Saints. And again: Trem∣ble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the mightie God of Ia∣cob. But now Pride will be regarded: this is an Idoll set vp in euery corner, and who dooth not flee vnto it? How many do shunne this Hydra or mightie monster, chusing rather to be a doore∣keeper in the house of the Lord, or to goe into the horte fierie fornace, and resuse to obey her commaundement
to cleaue fast vnto the liuing God? In the Prouinces of Babilon among the Nobles, Princes, and Dukes, the Iudges, the Receiuers, the Councellors, the Officers, and all the Gouernours of the people, wee read but of three that worshipped the Lord, and refused the commandement of Pride, to fall downe and worship the golden Image that Na∣buchadnezzar the King had set vp.Dan. 33.7. In the old world there were but eight reserued, and in Sodome Lot,Gen 7. & 19. that bowed not their knees to this Idoll Pride and abhomination. Happie are our dayes that do not thus complaine: yea blessed bee the people that bee in better case. O my deare bretheren, the sunne dares not shewe her light,Mat. 27 45. the mountaines tremble, the earth dooth shake, the hills melt, & the diuels quake when God is angry, and at the presence of the Lord, euen the mightie God of Iacob. And darest thou, thou dunghill bird Pride, presume to be like God, or get the praise from him, to exalt thy selfe and looke to be magnified? this in∣deed is thy desire. But to the nextt. Secondly. Pride will be like God, in
taking vengeance vpon whom she list, wringing the sword out of Gods hand, and those vnto whom he hath commit∣ted it. Therefore the Pope setteth him∣selfe against God & his Church, wher∣of Christ Iesus is the head and sauiour of the whole body. 1. Proclaiming re∣bellion, & incouraging subiects to trea∣son against their Prince. 2. By ratling his excommunications. 3. By dispear∣sing his Bulles to depose Princes. 4. By priuate practising to murther Prin∣ces. 5. By coniuring and poysoning, to effect these diuellish purposes. 6. To teach periurie to subiects, and dispence therewith by the pardons of their Ag∣nus Dei, &c. And this he dooth, onely because his heart saith, being poisoned with Pride, Vengeance is mine. Come from him to Ahab the king, let Elias re∣proue his sin, and Iezabel will vow his death.1. Reg. 18. Ahab told Iezabel all that Elias had done, and how he had slaine all the Prophets of Baal with the sword. Then Iezabel sent a messen∣ger vnto Elias, saying: The Gods do so vnto me: and more also, if I make not thy life like one of their liues, by
to morrow this time: As if she had said, the diuell take me, and all the di∣uels in hell, if I be not reuenged vpon thee by taking away thy life, as thou hast done theirs, by to morrow this time. But she died vnreuenged, and the diuels had their legacie. Learne then not to punish without cause, neither let them handle the sword vnto whom it doth not belong, as Zedikiah did,1. Reg. 22.4. and other. Likewise, if the man of God displease Ieroboam, then cryeth he, Lay hold on him:1. Reg. 13.4. but men should suffer rebuke and that gladly, for open rebuke is better then secret loue (saith Salomon).Prouer. 27.5. Yet for all that, if Mar∣doche despise Hamans Pride, then Mar∣doche his blood will not quench Ha∣mans thirst, but his wrath will haue the death of all the Iewes,Hest. 3. like the Pope, &c. Pride slew Abell,Gen. 4.1. and sent Mi∣cheah to the prison. So shee dealt with the Prophet Ieremy,Ier. 20. and sent Iohn Baptist to the blocke.Math. 14 What should I speake of Iesus Christ and all his holy Martyrs, whose blood the earth hath kindly receiued, which bloo∣die tyrants haue cruelly shead? All
which do teach vs, that vengeance flee∣eth from Pride to destroy the Saints of God: as the floud of water flowed out at the mouth of the Dragon, to ouer∣throw the woman that bare the man child.Reu. 12.15. Onely because she thinkes vengeance is hers, to abuse it as she list, To turne iudgement into gall, and the fruit of righteousnesse into wormwood.Amos. 6.12. Thus patience and long suffering at this day is turned into furie: and Christian cha∣ritie doth suffer shipwracke, being dri∣uen vpon the craggy rockes of conten∣tious trouble, by the boysterous storms, foming flouds, and wandering waues of euery mans haughtie humour. This is contrary to the commaundement of Christ, saying: Loue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doo good to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you, that you may be the children of your father which is in heauen.Math. 5.44. Now then to con∣clude this point, remember that it is written: Ʋengeance is mine, and I will re∣cōpence saith the Lord.Deut. 32.35. What Pride, thou hast nothing to doo with it, and therefore must not meddle, vengeance to whom vengeance belongeth, euen
as custome to whom custome is due: that is to God and Caesar. Cannot the Pope & such like tyrants see this? They might know, that as he which killeth with the sword, 1. vniustly, shall perish with the sword: so thou that louest to take vengeance, shalt drinke of the cup of Gods vengeance, and that in double measure.Reu. 18.6 Heere is the patience and faith of the Saints.Reu. 13.10. And thus much of the second proprietie which Pride would filch or rather wring from God. Yet beloued Pride cannot be conten∣ted thus to be like God, (which is too bad allowance of the diuel for her) but she dooth often vsurpe most blasphe∣mously, the holy, glorious, and fearfull name of God; which ought not so much as to bee thought vpon without most high renerence & fear,Deut. 28 58. though men, women, & children, so lightly regard it, and by horrible blasphemie so much a∣buse it, by their vsuall swearing, contra∣ry to Gods commaundement.Exod. 10 7. But it is plaine that Pride entring into man, as the diuels did into ye heard of swine,Mat. 8 31. it carrieth him headlong into the redde sea of sin, & makes man beleeue he is a
God, and so he suffereth himselfe to be called. Thus Nabuchadnezzar was cal∣led God of Olyfernes, saying: Who is God but Nabuchadnezzar?Iudith. 6.2. And the king himselfe said to Sydrach, Misach, & A∣bednego: Who is that God that can deliuer you out of my hands?Dan. 3.15. When he ment to burne them, as the Papists do ye Chri∣stians, as if hee were God alone. And the Samaritanes said of Symon Magus: This man is the great power of God.Act. 8.10 And we read that this Symon by his cō∣iuring myracles got himselfe such cre∣dit about the Citie of Rome, that there was set vp in the Ile Tyberina an Idolor Image, betwixt two bridges (perhaps because none shuld passe by, but behold it to his shame) in honour of him, with this inscriptiō. Symoni deo sancto. To Sy∣mon the holy God.Riuius. li. 3. de my redemp. ex Iren. & Euse. Iu∣stino. And when he li∣ued, hee said himselfe that he was some great man.Act. 8 9. But his end mard al, as we shewed before. Like wise whē Herod had made an oratiō before the people, they cried, Vox dei & non hominis. It  ye voice of God, & not of man.Act. 12.22. And hee was most proud of it. We find also that one Hanno of Carthage, sometime brought
vp birdes and taught them to whistle, Deus est Hanno. Hanno is God, and so let them flye.Text. Offic. And euen much after this maner, came Mahomet the Turkes God, into his first fauour and credite. Manes the heretike preached that hee himselfe was borne of a Virgin, Deita∣tis{que} numen sibi vindicabat: and challen∣ged vnto himselfe the maiestie of a God.Charl. Step. & Text. Euseb. Menecrates a Phisitian, would take nothing for his cures, but desired of his Patients, Ʋt eius seruos esse fateā∣tur, eum{que} Iouem dicerent,Text. Ibid. That they would acknowledge themselues to bee his seruants, and call him their Iupiter or God. And the heretike Manicheus called himselfe the holy Ghost. I might shewe you how the Emperours, yet ty∣rants, haue called themselues Gods, as diuers other, but I will stay at the Pope, who is not behinde any of them; Some haue called him an earthly God. Some disdaining that, haue called him God without an Epitheton. Some our Lord God the Pope. Others being besotted with the spirit of Pride, are so wrapt, that they cannot tell what to make of him, and do affirme that hee is neither
God nor man. It may bee these cun∣ningly intend to inuest vpon him, The man of sinne,2. Thes. 2.3. as hee is indeed. But to be briefe, come to our owne dayes, and their late Champion D. Stapleton, in the Preface to his booke, called Princi∣piorum sidei doctrinalium demonstratio: besides many false and blasphemous titles there giuen to the Pope to grease his haughtie humour, the more easily to flie into his fauour, as many do by bribes when their hearts are farre (peraduen∣ture) behinde: hee calles him Basim & fiundamentum, columnam & firmamen∣tum totius orthodoxae religionis. The root and foundation, the pillar and chiefe stay of all right and true Religion. Omnium Ecclesiarum caput. The head of all Churches. Supremum in terris nu∣men. The highest godhead vpon earth. And M. Harding doth allow him to be in some certaine sence as he saith: Ter∣renum quendam deum. A certaine earth∣ly God. And we know their cloakes of Heads, and Foundations, and Gods, not absolute, but Ministring, to couer their blasphemies, as a playster doth a sore from the odious sight of men. But
put the Popes person, his blasphemous titles or names, his life or practises a∣gainst the members of Christ Iesus his bodie mysticall, in a bundle together, & laie them to the touchstone of Gods truth and sacred word: and they are of so much force to confirme or approue their follie;1. Reg. 18.26. Psal. 82.1.6. as the crying of Baals priests preuailed to obtaine fire of their Idoll. And yet we know what gouernors are righteous Gods vpon earth, that is, euen such as are noursing fathers and noursing mothers in the Church of Christ, like the Queene of England. But as one saith, God neuer called the Popes gods; his godhead is base borne: and yet for all that, because the Popes Deitie should not be thought to bee without power, as they haue fained him a false name; so they doo counter∣fait him as true authoritie, least hee should bee without credite: as those which say and doo not, are without ho∣nestie. Therefore they say (but all vn∣true) that Christus beato Petro &c. com∣misit:Clem. li. 2. de appel. pastor. di∣stinct. 32. Christ hath committed to blessed Peter the key-bearer of eternall life, Iu∣ra &c. the right or authoritie both of the earthly & heauenly Empire-dome:
and so they say. Papa totius orbis obtinet principium, the Pope hold; the Prince∣dome of the whole world.1. Sam. 18 11. 2. Sam. 15.2. Yet by their leaue, it is but in wil, it is neither indeed nor right, though lie haue as bad a mind to it, as Saul had to kill Dauid, or Abso, lō to depose his father. And yet with the Papists who but the Pope?Card. Cu∣sau. ad Boh. Epist. 2. & Epist. 3. One of their Cardinals saith, Ʋeritas aahaeret Cathe∣drae Petri. And again the same man saith Dico nulla esse Christi praecepta nisiquae per Ecclesiā pro talibus accepta sūt. The truth cleaues to Peters chaire: (then burn the chaire, and where is their truth)? Nay I say (quoth he) there is no commaunde∣ment of Christ (he meanes of force) ex∣cept it be allowed, & so go for currāt by the Church of Rome. An other saith, A doctrina Romanae Ecclesiae,Syl prier. cōtra Lu∣the. Dan. 3.16.18. & Romani Pontificis sacra scriptura robur & autho∣ritatem trahit: The sacred scripture hath her truth, or strength, and authoritie of the church and Pope of Rome. Ah blas∣phemous liers. But who beleeue them? surely none that tries them. And the scriptures of God may cry to the Pope, Who made thee a Iudge and Ruler o∣uer vs? we will not obey thee; as the three children said to Nabuchadnezzar:
yet to blinde the world, and to keepe them from trying of spirits, whether they be of God or no, they thunderout,Consil. Ro. cap. 3.5.12. Praesul summus non iudicabitur, a quopiam. The highest Prelate. 1. The Pope must not be iudged of any body, (perhaps least the Pope be found a wo∣man againe). Hee is like vnto Pharao, that said: Who is the Lord that I should heare his voyce?Exod. 5.2. And (beloued) this is the cloud that darkens all their light. Forsoothe the Pope cannot erre. And their fortresse to withstand all gun-shot, is, In matters of faith: and yet in the chiefe point thereof, which is Iustifica∣tion, they erre heretically: and are infi∣nitely ouercome by the holy scriptures (though they would ouercome them) and writings of the auntient and lear∣ned Fathers. Yet to keepe their stan∣ding, some of them are not ashamed to tell the world, and to accuse those (that reprooue the heresie and tyrannie of the Hope) of blasphemy and sinning a∣gainst the holy Ghost.R. Bri∣sto in his Repl. to Ful. & art. 35. part 2. fol. 9. & Hard. to Iewel. 4. part. fol. 438. Printed. 1571. But let God be true, and euery man a lyer, and hee that is filthy, let him be filthy still; if
Gods iudgement be such. Thus we see into what height of wickednesse Pride driues men, euen because they would get them a name, like the builders of the Tower of Babell.Gen. 11 4. Now to come to our selues, I know not who would tread in this styrrope and mount, ex∣cept it be such as in their owne conceit do say; Touch mee not, I am holyer then thou. But syr, God is comming downe with the shout of an Archan∣gell: as hee did to view the Ci ie and the Tower which the sonnes of men builded:Gen. 11.5. and to see whether they haue done according to the cry which is come vp into his eares. And there∣fore to conclude this part, take the counsell of the Apostle, those which thus in any point haue liued, be ashamed of your former conuersation, as Adam was of his nakednes,Ro. 6.21 and hide your selues vnder the tree of life, Christ Ie∣sus: take of the water that he doth giue, and liue for euer. Learne of him, for hee is meeke and lowly, and you shall sinde rest vnto yoursoules. And as S. Augu∣stine saith: Erubescat homo esse superbus, propter quem factus est humilus deus. Let
man bee ashamed for to bee proud, for whose sake God so humbled himselfe. And decke your selues inwardly with lowlynesse of minde. If you will not, hearken what followeth.1. Pet. 5.5. Thou shalt be brought downe to the graue, to the sides of the pit. 1. To hell, as after you shal heare. And thus much for the first part or pro∣position. You see how she will mount, and be like God. Now you shall heare how God doth allow it. The second part of the text, opened likewise in the Chapter following. Thou shalt bee brought downe to the graue,The text. vers. 15. to the sides of the pit. And as Saint Ierom translateth it, into the depth of the pit, In profundum: Loci. 1. The bottome of hell. Here I note two things. First, the fall of Pride. Secondly, the place whither shee shall fall. In her fall I obserue first who threat∣neth her fall. Secondly, of what power or strength the threatning is. Thirdly, how God effecteth his threatnings or purpose
vpon the proud. The place heere appointed for the proud, is first the graue, and then the sides of the pitte. CHAP. I. Who dareth to tame those proud before spoken off? HEe that heere threatneth to bring downe the proud that rise vp a∣gainst Gods Church,Dent. 28.58. 2. Esd. 8.21 &c. is the Lord God, whose throne is glorious & feare∣full. Whose name is inestimable, and his glory is incōprehensible; before whom the hoast of Angels stand with trem∣bling. And shall not his excellencie make you afraid? Iob. 13.11. Who after in this Chapter, as often in the scripture, is called the Lord of Hoasts:Isay 1.9.24. & 10.26. Ier. 11.28. & 29.8. because he hath all things in heauen and in earth, and euery where else, at his commaun∣dement, as souldiers vnder him. And he saith to one, goe, and he goeth: to an other, come, and he commeth: and to his seruant, doo this, and he doth it: as the Centurion told Christ hee did.Mat. 8.9.
Now consider, if the commaundement of man were of such force, the com∣maundement of God is greater. If the Centurion were to be beleeued, why should not God? This God, the Lord of Hoastes that planted thee (ô man) hath pronounced a plague against thee, Thou shalt bee brought downe. Paul the Apostle saith: It is God that iustifieth, who shall condemne? And now it is God that speaketh, who dares to withstand? In the bat betwixt Israel and Ame-Iech, when Moyses held vp this had, Is∣rael had the better. And when God taketh the matter into his hands, he will preuaile. For it is written, Who shall bee able to stand before him when he is angry? Euen none at all. For at thy ebuke (ô God of Iacob) both the chariot and horse are falue. This the proud Egypti∣ans knew, in spightfull enie pursuing Israel. Therfore euery one said, I wil flie from the face of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for them. And will not Priae and all sinne flie, now God is bent a∣gainst them? When proud Haman had made ready his gallowes, and was come to the Kings Court, minding to get
and take Mardoche the Lords seruant, that he might hang him, a contratie winde to Hamans expectation, had hoyst vp Mardoche to fauour:Hest. 6.10 11. and Ha∣man in stead of a hangman to shut his breath, which hee intended, became Mardoches footman and herald, to proclaime his honour; which hee sore disdained, and for which he was no lesse grieued, then Ahab was when he could not get Naboth his vineyard. Ahab came into his house, heauie and in dis∣pleasure. And euen so Haman hasted home mourning and his head coured, and tolde Zereth his wife, and all his friends, all that had befalne him. Then said his wise men & his wife vnto him, If Mardche be of the seed of the Iewes,Hest.  12 13. before whom thou hast begunne to fall, thou shalt not preuaile against him, but shalt surely fall before him. And indeed no more he did. For Hamans head was a button for his owne haler, and his bo∣dy became the clapper of his own bell, to ring his soule to hell. To be plaine, he was hanged vpon his owne gallowes. Now (beloued) if Hamans wife and his wife men knew that he should not pre∣uaile
against Mardoche, because he was of the seed of Israel: Shall Pride thinke to rise and preuaile against the Lorde, which is the God of Israel? who casteth out the heathen before him, and brin∣geth the counsell of Princes to nought, and maketh the deuises of the people to be of none effect, whose throne is the heauens, and the earth his foot-stoole, whose glorie is ouer all the earth, who filleth all things with the power of his maiestie euen God in his holie habita∣tion? No, no. It is in vaine for the pot to strie against the Potter. When the King of Iuda threatened warre to the King of Israel,Rom. 9.20. the King of Israel retur∣ned this answere again: That it was but the Thistle against the Cedar. So he made account of the King of Iuda and of his strength,2. Reg. 14.9. but as of a thistle in re∣gard of himselfe. But God is of greater strength against the wicked to destroy them; then the Cedar is in respect of the thistle to breake it. There was a battle in heauē, Michael & his Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought & his angels. But they preuailed not, neither was their place found any
more in heauen. And the great dragon that old serpent called the diuel,Ephe. 5.5. Reu. 21.27. and sa∣than was cast out; and so shall Pride and proud men. The Psalmist saith; All the beasts of the forrest are mecked and tamed by man: but the beasts of Pride God wil came. Sequitur superbos victor a tergo de∣us.Sen. in Her furi∣ente. Zeph. 2.11. God will be vpō the backs of them. He will take their matter into his owne hands: he wil deale with them himself; whom none else can match, or dares meddle with. Therefore saith the holie Ghost, God resisteth the proud. And a∣gaine:1. Pet. 5.5 Iam. 4.16. The Lord will destroy she house of proud mē: that is their posteritie. Thogh Pride be so stout that she will not come downe: like those rebels, Corath, Da∣than, & Abiram, which would not obey, but answered Moses saying:Num. 16.12. We will not come vp. Yet when God comes vnto her as hee did to the builders of the Tower of Babel, or vnto Sodome and Gomor, Hee will set her downe with a vengeance. For it is written,Deu. 32.35. Ʋen∣geance is mine, and I will recompence saith the Lord.
Then shall she hode that it is fearfull thing to all into the hands of the liuing God. For the Lord out God is euen a consuming fire, and this is he that saith here in my text, to the spirit of Pride, Thou shalt be brought downe. Thus wee see it is God that threat∣neth. Now behold the truth of his word, and whether we may beleeue him. And this we shall see by s infal∣lible assurednesse of his word, firme for euer more. The word of the Lord en∣dureth for euer. And because this point is so neare of affinitie with the former next before, I will briefly strengthen this pesition with the testimonie of the hoy scripture to assure you of the truth, and so proceed further. Our Sauiour Christ saith, Heauen and earth shall passe, but my word shall not passe. And God saith by his Prophet: My word shall stand. That which God pro∣mised to Ahab and his house, to Nabu∣chadnezzar, and proud Balthasar, and many other, came vpon them truly. Be∣cause thus saith the Lord, Dominus lo∣cutus est, the Lord hath spoken it. And will hee not be as good as his word to
them that are proud? Of them the Lord saith by the Prophet Isay. I will visit the fruite of the proud heart of the King of Assur, 1. Synacharib, and his glorious and proud lookes. And so hee did, and slew him by the hands of his owne sonnes. Againe: The high lookes of man shall bee humbled, and the loftinesse of men shall be abased. And againe: The day of the Lord of Hoasts is vpon all the proud and haugh∣tie, and vpon all that is exalted, and it shall be made lowe; euen the eyes of the proud shall be humbled. And Christ saith: He that exalteth himselfe shall bee brought lowe. And Salomon saith: The pride of man shall bring him lowe. Preprio gla∣dio iugulabitur. Her owne sword shall cut her throate, as Iudith did Olifernes with his owne. Will you haue any more? then woe to the crowne of Pride, Woe, is a kinde of threatning against sinne, whereby the holy Prophets, Iu∣stum dei iudicium exprimunt, quod omnes manet, qui idem faciunt, do expresse the iust iudgement of God, wherof all shall bee partakers that continue in sinne. And an other saith, by woe, woe, In∣gentes calamitates indicantur; Horrible
calamities are foretold.Gual. in Haba. 2. Hom. 7. Vae, autem ma∣lorum condemnationem proprie manife∣stat. Woe threatned, dooth properly assure the wicked of their condemnati∣on: vnto which Corozin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, are come: against whom Christ denounced woe to bee to the Corozin, &c. Thus we see, that feare∣full are the threatnings, and strong are the testimonies of holy scriptures, which denounce destruction to them that be proud: and yet there be more. Dauid saith:Ps. 59.12 Iob. 20.6.7 Let them be taken in their pride. They shall perish for euer like their owne dung, though their excellencie mount vp to heauen, and their head reach vp to the cloudes.Iob. 24.24 Againe: They are exalted for a lule, but they are gone, and are brought lowe as all ethers, they are destroyed, and cut off as the top of an eare of corne,Isa. 3.16. for the Lord hath spoken it. And by the Prophet Ezechiel,Ezech. 12 25.28. God saith: I am the Lord: I will speake, and that thing that I shall speake, shall come to passe, it shall no more bee prolonged.Ier. 1.12. For I will hasten my word to performe it. And further also do you not know,
that God said, Let there be light,Gen. 1.14 15. and it was so? The lawes of the Medes and Persians alter not: and shall Gods truth faile? Beloued, be not deceiued, you see what God saith against Pride.Ecech. 17.9. Euen I the Lord haue spoken it, shall it then pros∣per? No, no, deare bretheren. And yet I feare, men doo not beleeue these holy scriptures, &c. for if they did, they could not seeke sinne, and follow after it with that greedinesse as they doo. But ô Lord turne their hearts, and then shall they be turned. Breake thou the power of the vngodly, and malicious: take away his vngodlinesse, and thou shalt finde none. And thus now I end, with that note which is gi∣uen and approued vpon these words of our Sauiour Christ;Math. 7.26. Hee that heareth of me these sayings, and dooth them not, shall be likened vnto a foolish man that built his house vpon the sands, &c. That is, hee that practiseth not Gods word, which hee hath heard, giueth a plaine testimonie of himselfe, that he dooth not beleeue, nor credit the word.
And now for to end this point, let me exhort you to pluck down your plumes of Pride, as the Peacock casteth downe his traine, beholding his blacke feete. Come home with the prodigall sonne, saying:Luk. 15.21 Father I haue sinned against hea∣uen and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne. Be ashamed of your sinne, as Adam was of his nakednesse. And as Ioel teacheth; Turne vnto the Lord with all your hearts.Ioel. 2. He careth not fot a peece, rent your hearts and not your garments, for they be too much hacked alreadie, because you will bee contrarie to the most high God. La∣ment as Niniuie did, let euery man turn from his euill way, and from the wic∣kednesse that is in their hands. Then shall your light breake foorth as the morning, and your iust dealing as the noone-day, and God will put away your wickednesse out of his remem∣brance, as he hath promised by his holy Prophet. But if you will not, then will hee come against you,Gen. 18.21. as he did against So∣dome, and see whether you haue done altogether according to that cry which
is come vp vnto him. If you haue, then will hee call and muster his Hoasts to∣gether, encouraging and hastning them to the slaughter: crying against Pride, as the childrē of Edom did in the day of Ierusalem: Downe with it, downe with it,Ps. 137.7 euen to the ground. Then his souldiers will answere comming to destroy, as it is written of Christ, comming for to saue; Loe I am come to doo thy will ô God.Heb. 10.7 And they shall go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and in the power of his might, and come vnto all that are proud, as Dauid did against Goliah, in the name of the Lord of Hoasts, whom men haue despised and blasphemed. And they will not bee carelesse in de∣stroying, as Saul was, to destroy some, and saue some aliue: but they will a∣way with all that they are commaun∣ded to pull downe: both man and wife, sonnes and daughters, sheepe, oxen, and asses, and all things else, as Iosuae dealt with Acan. And yet if you will not beleeue, let vs see what experience hath taught, and by what meanes God hath brought many downe. And his arme is not shortned, but his hand is
stretched out still. And for shortnesse sake, I will speake but of six braunches which he hath vsed to hang the wicked and abhominable vpon,2. Sam. 18.9 as truly as Ab∣solon vpon the oake. CHAP. II. How God ouerthroweth, or subdueth the proud. 1. FIrst, heere to omit the godly lawes of this our land, made to suppresse Pride in euerie degree, I doo lament the palpable contempt of Gods most sacred word, by which Pride and all sinne should be brought downe and humbled,Act. 16.29.30. and afraid to remember in what case they keepe men, as the Iaylor was to keepe Paul and Silas. And men should, seeing their sinnes, with those in the 2. of the Acts, being pricked in their hearts, cry out: Men and bretheren what shall we do? But seeing they will not be learned, nor vnderstand, let thē know,Reue. 19.13.15. that the word of God is a sharpe sword, which seperateth betweene the marrow & the bone: yea it doth either seperate sin from vs, or vs from the pre∣sence and fauour of God; so mightie it is
in operation. All the beasts of the For∣rest do tremble and quake at the roa∣ring of the Lyon: but the voyce of the Lyon of the Tribe of Iuda is not regar∣ded of the beasts of Pride and silthy sin. Well then, seeing the matter is so in∣deed, see what the holy Ghost saith, most fearfull to be remembred.2. Thes. 2.10. Those that shall perish, receiue not the word of truth, that they might be saued. To such, Gods word is a sauour of death vnto death, spoken by his messengers.Mark. 8.38. 2. Thes. 1.7.8. Which who so despiseth, shall be despised and con∣founded. For it is written, The Lord Ie∣sus shall shewe himselfe from heauen with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendring vengeance vnto thē that do not know God, and which obey not the Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ. Whoso liketh this, Let him that is filthy, be filthy still: and thus the Lord God wil bring thee downe.Ps. 68.1.2 2. God bringeth downe otherwaies the Pride of men, euen by confounding their enterprises, & making their deuises (as the Psalmist saith) to bee of none ef∣fect. And this he doth sometimes after one means, & sometimes after an other. 1. By frustrating their counsel and pre∣tence: as for example.
The builders of the Tower of Babel,Gen. 11.7 would build to preuent Gods ven∣geance, but he brought them downe by confusion of languages. Thus that which they thought should haue bene for their good, was vnto them an occasi∣on of falling. Synacharib King of As∣sur, thought with the proud Spaniard, by an innumerable band of men to o∣uerthrowe and lay waste the Lords vineyard:2. Reg. 19.35.37.28 35. &c. but his strength was ouer∣throwne by an Angell, and himselfe slaine by his owne children: and thus came his Pride downe. And wee know how lately the Lord God of heauen tooke the Spaniard, and did shake his sword at vs, and held vp his rodde a∣gainst vs, to winne vs from sinne. And when hee had done so, because God knew the Spaniards dwelling, his going out, and comming in, and furie against him: and because hee raged, and his Pride came vp into his eares, like the Pride of Synacharib, therefore God put his hooke into his nosthrills, and his bridle into his lippes, and drew him backe out of our sight, and suffered him not to doo vs any harme, but God
cast them out as the dust before the winde, & the Angell of the Lord scat∣tered them, and their Pride was spoy∣led in the sea,Ps. 35.5. Math. 8.32. 2. Sam. 17 14.23. as the diuels drowned the heard of swine. Againe, God confoun∣ded the wicked counsell of Achitophel, by the good aduise and wisedome of Hushai. See the place. And when Achi∣tophel did perceiue that his counsell was not regarded, hee went home and hanged himselfe. And his friends might be glad he had no worse an end. Abso∣lon in the Pride of his heart made warre against his father Dauid, and thought to haue slaine him, and so to haue got his kingdome.2. Sam. 18.6.17. But in the wood of E∣phraim where the battell was fought, as hee rid vnder an oake, there God hanged him by his owne haire: (see to what vse God puts mans lōg haire, and yet some of you will weare it in a bra∣uerie) then Ioab came and thrust him through with a dart, and the souldiers threw him into a pit, and how could it be otherwise, but that his guttes were pressed out with that great heape of stones which they cast in vpon him? What Pride of any man dooth euer
meane to haue such an ende? But to be briefe, how damnable and daunge∣rous, as diuillish and yet in vaine, haue beene the counsels and enterprises of the Pope and Spanyard against the ioy of our peace, and light of our daies, and most ioyfull happines of our time, Elizabeth our noble Queene & dead fouraigne? Yet they alwayes con∣founded in the craftie wylinesse they haue imagined, the only mightie pro∣uidence of GOD preseruing her gra∣cious Maestie vnder the couering of his winges: because they rebell against him,Psal. 105.15. Psal. 107.22. & 50.14. Psal. 9.11 who onely saith; Touch not mine annointed. Therefore shall not wee offer vnto the Lorde the sacifice of praise, and tell out his workes with gladnesse? Oh beloued, for this cause specially, as all other generally, Sing praise vnto the Lorde which dwelleth in Sion, and tell the people of his do∣ings. Let vs declare his louing kind∣nesse earely in the morning,Psal. 92.2. and his trueth in the night season: and pray, that her dayes may be as the dayes of heauen, peace within the walles of her Domimon, and plenteousnes within
her Pallaces: the mightie God her on∣ly fortresse, and shee next vnder him our chiefe happinesse. Amen. But to proceed, the booke of God, and histories of many ages doo shewe vnto vs, how vilde and yet without ef∣fect, the pretences of man hath beene against the Church of God from time to time. Who is it, that desireth not to be ignorant, but knoweth the same? And therefore let neither the whore of Babylon, Gog, and Magog, of Rome and Spaine; nor Synacharib the Turke, that vncircumcised Philistine, nor wicked Achitophels of Englands counsell, nor any domesticall and traiterous Abso∣solons thinke to preuaile against God, and his annointed: neither like wilde Boores out of the wood to roote vp, nor like wilde beastes out of the forrest of the diuel, to spoyle and laie waste the Lordes vineyard, whilest it doth yeeld him good fruites of encrease. For thogh you goe too and fro in the euening of your blindnesse, and barke like Dogges, and goe about the Citie of Gods people and his inheritaunce,
bragging in your talke, with swords in your mouthes,Ps. 59 6.7.8.9.10. and warre in your hart: yet our trust is in the name of the Lord, who at his pleasure will haue you in derision, and laugh you to scorne: for he is strong. Therefore wee will wait vpon him, for God is our defence, and a very present helpe in trouble, and as his good pleasure is, hee will let vs see our desire vpon our enemies.Ps. 76.15 For hee shall cut off the spirit of Princes: hee is terrible to the Kings of the earth. That is, to such as are earthly minded. There∣fore be we strong, and he will comfort our hearts. Thus loe we see how God casteth out the counsell of Princes, and maketh the deuices of the people to be of none effect, thus bringing them downe by confounding their enterpri∣ses, for there is no counsell against the Lord, but it must come to nought. 3.Ps. 7.15 Againe, God bringeth downe the proud and wicked men, by driuing them into the pit they digge for others. That is, looke what euill one man pre∣tends against an other, into such they shall fall themselues. For proofe, the crueltie of Chush, Sauls kinsman, was so
great and outragious against Dauid, without any iust cause, that Dauid was forced to cry vnto God against him, saying:Ps. 7 9. Pro. 26 27 Ps. 34.21 Iob. 15.35 Ps. 7.14. Isay. 59 4.5. Ps. 7.16. O let the malice of the wicked come to an end. An other place of holy scrip∣ture saith: Malice shall slay the wicked. Againe it is said of them, They conceiue mischief, and bring forth vanitie, and their belly hath prepared deceit, they doo euen hatch Cockatrice egges. That is, they are altogether set vpon wickednesse. But their mischiefe shall returne vpon their owne head, and their crueltie shall fall vpon theyr owne pate. So that any Saint, or soule of the righteous, may in confident boldnesse say with the Psalmist: The Lord is my refuge,Ps. 94.22 23. and my God is the rocke of my hope: and he will recompence them their wickednesse, and destroy them in their owne malice; yea the Lord our God shall destroy them. And a∣gaine it is written: The wicked haue drawne their sword, and haue bent their bowe to cast downe the poore & needie, and to slay such as be of an vpright cōuersation. But how shall they prosper? their sword shall enter into their owne heart, and their bowes shalbe brokē. For the Lord
shall helpe them, and deliuer them: he shal deliuer them from the wicked, and shall saue thē, because they trust in him. And thus the Iudge of all the world doth exalt himself, and render a reward to the proud. Proud Haman would haue hanged meeke Mardoche, but hee was hanged himselfe. Pharao with the E∣giptians, pursuing the Israelites through the red sea said:Exod. 15.9.19. I will pursue, I will ouer∣take them &c. my hand shall destroy them. But they were destroyed themselues. The most valiant men in Nabuchad∣nezzars army, bound and cast Sydrach, Misach, and bednego, the seruants of the liuing God, into the hot siery for∣nace, but these were preserued, & those were burned and conmed. After this, because Pride alwaies enuieth superio∣ritie through her ambition, like Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, and the Pope, I will spare the Puritane. The Princes of Babilon (ouer whom Daniel was prefer∣red by the King, as Moyses by God) got by subtiltie a decree of the King, confirmed against Daniel, and cast him into the Lyons denne: but Daniel by Gods prouidence was deliuered from
the power of the Lyons: & at the com∣maundement of the King, those men which had accused Daniel, were brought and cast into the denne of Lyons, they, their children, and their wiues, and the Lyons had the masterie of them, and brake all their bones in peeces or euer they came at the ground of the d. Thus these that would haue destroyed others, were themselues destroyed of the destroyer. Then let vs learne to be∣leeue, that hee which loueth cursing, so shall it come vnto him. And he that lo∣ueth not blessing, so shall it be far from him. And euē he that stoppeth his eare at the crying of the poore, so hee shall cry himselfe (euē to God in his distresse) and shall not be heard. For it is written: With what measure you mete, it shall bee measured to you againe, saieth Christ.Mat. 7.2. Therefore when Adonibezecke was ta∣ken in warre by the Israelites, they cut off the thumbes of his hands and feete, as he had done by others. Then said A∣donibezecke: Seuentie Kings hauing the thumbes of their hands and of their feete cut off, gathered bread vnder my table:Iudg. 17. as I haue done, so God hath rewarded me.
Samuel in like manner vsed king Agag,1. Sam. 15 37. and said: As thy sword hath made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse among other women: And Samuel hew∣ed Agag in peeces before the Lord in Gilgal. This should terrifie men frō pre∣tending hurt against their neighbours. Therefore to end this point, I counsell you from wise Salomon: Robbe not the poore, because he is poore; neither op∣presse the afflicted in iudgement. For the Lord will defend their cause, and spoile the soule of those that spoile them. And thus we see they shall be brought downe. 4 Fourthly, almightie God often bringeth downe the Pride of many, by spoiling them of those things whereof they be proud; so sending the to shame, and making them a derision vnto the people.Iob. 11.20. Therefore holy Iob saith: The eies of the wicked shal faile, & their refuge shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrow of minde. Thus God promised (& he was as good as his word) to pull down ye Pride of the daughters of Sion, & bring thē to shame. Thus thy pomp shalbe brought down, as the worldling with his wealth:
for thy glorie is but dung and wormes, to day thou art set vp, and to morrow thou shalt not bee found. Therefore looke to thy learning, thy wisdome and wealth: be not proud of thy honour, beautie, or strength, as Paul was of his reuelations. 2. Cor. 12. For Inquinat egre∣gios adiuncta superbia mores. Pride stai∣neth the best vertues. There saith Saint Augustine, Sola superbia etiam in recte factis est cauenda. Onely Pride in our good deeds must be auoyded. This I take to be the cause (euen for that we are proud of those things we haue) that holy Iob and the Prophet Isay doo say in effect. Many rich, become poore: many strong, weake: the wise, foolish: and the beautifull vgly, &c. Because God will bring downe proud men and send them to shame and confusion by that which is their glorie, Isay 20.5. and whereof they be proud. 5. Fiftly, To humble men and bring them downe. God dooth further not only whet his sword, and bend his bowe, and prepare infinite instruments of death; but hee hath shot his arrowes and wounded his persecutors, and proud rebels & ene∣mies,
most terrible to remember: sometimes by the sword of one neigh∣bour against another. This was his pro∣mise against the Egiptians.Isay 19.2. 2. Chro. 20.22.23. This hee dealt in iudgement with the Ammo∣nites, Moabites, and Idumeans. They slew one an other, and euery one hel∣ped to destroy an other. Such was his vengeance vpon the Midonites.Iudg. 7.22. Isay 9.4. 2. Sam. 13 See Exod. 32.27.28 The Lorde set euery mans sword vppon his neighbor. Absolon slew his brother Am∣mon, and in the end of the world Amons enemies shalbe those of his own house∣hold. But good Lord defend vs from ci∣uill warre and domesticall blood-shead through one neighbour against an o∣ther: by which thou hast promised to destroy them, that tread thine inheri∣tance vnder their feete,Isai 49.29 saying: I will feed them that spoile thee, with their owne flesh, and they shall be drunke with their owne blood, as with sweete wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Sa∣uiour and thy Redeemer, the mightie one of Iacob. If I should step to other histories, I could shewe you that it was saide to King Cyrus:Herodotus Thou hast thirsted after
blood, and thou shalt drinke thy belly full of blood. Calippus would haue stab∣bed his friend Dion, but with the same dagger hee was stabbed in himselfe of his owne friends. This alas, is most lamentable, when almightie GOD to bring downe our Pride, doth stirre vp one friend to de∣stroy an other, to execute his fearce wrath vpon them that dwell on the face of the earth. 6 Lastly, when the Lord God hath gone thus farre with the children of men that are abhominable, hee will not here rest, so filthie & vilde is Pride and sinne in his sight: but their memoriall shall perish with them, their posteritie shall be cut off, and their name shall be cleane put out. Therfore saith the Pro∣phet Dauid,Psal. 34 16. The face of the Lorde is a∣gainst them that do euil, to cut off the re∣membrance of them from the earth. And Eliphash saith in the booke of Iob of such men. Their braunch shall not be green,Iob. 15.32. &c. but shall be cut off before his day, God shall de∣stroy him, &c. and the congregation of hy∣pocrites shall be desolate.
Againe.Psal. 37.28.35.36. The seed of the wicked shall be cut off, saith Dauid. Thus the Lord dealt with the house and posteritie of Ieroboā and Baasha, and fulfilled the like iudge∣ment vpon wicked king Ahab & all his posteritie, by the sword of Hasaell, Iehu, and Eliza. And what is become of all the Tribes of Israel? Alas they haue drunke of the like cup of Gods heauie wrath & displeasure, though they were the chosen & peculiar people of God. And hath God dealt in truth of iudge∣ment against them? Then thou which art but a wilde Oliue braunch, Be not high minded, but feare. But who euer thinketh that it is for their sin and wic∣kednes, that God giueth them no chil∣dren, and againe taketh away those that they haue, because hee will roote out their remembrance from off the earth? But nill they, will they (as men say) in spight of their teeth, thus God brin∣geth man downe, and layeth their Pride in the dust like water that is powred vp∣on the earth, which cannot be gathered vp againe. 2. Sam. 14.14. Then vnderstand ye vnwise among the people.Psal. 94 8. What need I tell you fur∣ther
of Gods infinite armies, which going foorth at his commaundement, runne verie swiftly to execute his will? When he commaunded, the water o∣beyed and drowned the world. When he commaunded, the fire hasted & con∣sumed Sodome. To destroy Synacha∣ribs campe, hee armed an Angel. To some he sent Lyons: to some fierie Ser∣pents: to some he sent Beares, and to Herod Wormes, and all these destroy∣ed without any pittie, for God had so commaunded. Moreouer, Some the earth swallowed, some the Sea drow∣ned. Others laughter hath killed, as Sophocles & Dionisius, the Tyrant of Si∣cilia. Some died with gluttony or surfer∣ting, as Ʋalentinian, and Iouinian, the Emperours. Some haue died with drin∣king and bousing, as Anacreon, and Archesilaus. And many wofully pined away with famine, in the siege of Ieru∣salem: In the siege of Casilinum: and in that great famin of Sagunthus in Spaine. Infinite are the diseases, and extraordi∣nary meanes, as Dauid in some sort she∣weth; whereby the Lord fighteth his battels & destroyeth man. Mille modis
miseros mors rapit vna homines. In so much then as all the hoasts of men, ne∣uer so proud and loftie, are not able to withstand the least of Gods armies, euen of silly wormes, and such like ver∣mine, but they will preuaile against vs when God sends them forth. O fooles that we are, why will we not be wise? O we of vncircumcised hearts & eares, let vs not forget how God hath cast some downe, we know not what will become of our selues, our sinnes call for vengeance, and the Lord is not slacke in comming, as some men count slack∣nesse. But inough of this point, Thou shalt be brought downe. And how this promise is effected, it doth plainely ap∣peare.
CHAP. III. Whither proud men shall bee brought downe. The Text saith: First to the graue, then to the side of the pit. Of death I obserue, 1. The diuision. 2. The description. 3. The necessitie. 4. The certaintie. 5. Why some men do tremble and quake: Other do ioy at the comming of death. 6. Whether we are to mourne for our friends that be dead. VVHen Death hath seized vpon man,Ier. 16.3.4. then the graue is a meet habitation for the carkasse:Aug. de cura pro Mor. Her l. ca. 3. & lib. 1. de de Ciuit. dei: cap. 12. &c. And when this may not be had, it is a great plague of God: as it is a blessing to attaine vn∣to Christian buriall: which of dutie those that liue ought to performe to the dead corpes, after the examples in these places of the word of God, Gen. 23.19. and 25.8.9. & 50.13. with many other.
And when Moses was dead,Deu. 34.6 Iud. 9. God sent an Angel and buried him. Thus his ma∣iestie regarded the buriall of the dead. And when wicked Iezabel died a most cursed death,2. Reg. 9.34.35.36. yet Iohn said, Visit now yon∣der cursed woman, and bury her. And some went, but before they came, the dogges had eate her. Loe though she were the cursed of God, it was thought meet, that she should be buried. Then I condemne the light opinions of those that say, It is no matter what becomes of the bodie being dead; and I wish them to correct their folly, that denie to bury the dead: and that they would not cease to doo good to them that are dead. Well, to the graue with Nabu∣chadnezzar, those that be proud must come. Which in my Text I take to be spoken Nomine to scorne Pride, because shee would be aboue the cloudes, shee shall be brought vnder the earth. Inso∣much that todes & serpents, and dogs, and swine, and wormes, and whatsoeuer is vilde, which shee once disdained, should touch her, shall now tread vp∣on her. Yea stinke and rottennesse shall so preuaile against that bodie which
was once so proud that none may abide it, like Herods and Antiochus: but all men readie to get her into the ground to auoyd her noy some smel, which once abounded with Pomanders and must-balls? Thus wee see a foule fall of filthie Pride, neuer thought vpon before it come, of the most: Like Diues, who ne∣uer remembred hell vntill hee was in it. Then he cried. But if thou once be there,Luk. 16.24 then neuer hope for helpe: for Ab in∣ferno nulla est redemptic, thou shalt ne∣uer come out. Amend then before death come.Ambr. lib. de bono Mortis. c. 2. et in ora∣tione de fide resur. Aug. in Io. Tract. 42. & lib. Q. 2.65. & 32. Oreg. in Epist. ad Rom. lib. 6. Of death, the auncient and learned Fathers haue gathered from the holie scriptures, as the painfull Bees dooth hony from the flowers, not only for themselues, but for others: Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra boues? Therefore because that which is written, is writ∣ten for our learning, I haue gathe∣red from them both, foure kindes of death.
1 The death of sin generall. 2 The death Mysticall. 3 The death Naturall. 4 The death Eternall. 1 The death of sinne (as Saint Am∣brose calls it) is the depriuation or losse, or darkening of the Image of God in man: like vnto which hee was crea∣red. Thus Adam dyed, so soone as he had eaten of the forbidden fruit: as God promised vnto him hee should. And in Adam All die;1. Cor. 15.22. like as the braunches of a tree doo wither when the roote is dead. Therefore the Apostle saith;Rom. 3.23. All haue sinned, and are depriued of the glo∣rie of God:Ephe. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath, and were dead in our sinnes. Of this death many places testifie. As Let the dead bury the dead.Math. 8.22 Arise thou that sleepest, stand vp from the dead, &c. See Galathians 3.22. Psal. 14.1. Further search, and thou shalt finde.
2 Death Mysticall, is to forsake sinne, Quando quis peccato moritur, & deo viuit. When one dyeth vnto sinne, and liueth vnto God. It is Qua a peccatis moriuntur, whereby men die from sinne. Of this Paule speaketh, saying; How shall wee that are dead vnto sinne, yet liue therein? Againe: Ye are dead to sinne, but are aliue to GOD in Iesus Christ our Lord. Of this death Christ speaketh, say∣ing: The houre is come, and now it is, when the dead shall heare the voice of the sonne of GOD, and liue. Thus Paul dyed. And so should we; therefore hee saieth; Mortifie your earthly mem∣bers. 3 Death Naturall, S. Ambrose saith, is Animae corporisque secessio, The de∣parting or seperating asunder of the body and the soule. Thus Adam dyed, and all we must die. Only Elias, & those that shalbe found aliue at Christs com∣ming to iudgement, die not thus: but they shall be chaunged. Which shall be in stead of death.
4. Death eternall, is the seperation of the soule and body from God, and the kingdome of heauen, and that for euermore. Quae & stipendium peccati no∣minatur: Which is called the reward of sinne. This Christ remembreth, saying: If a man keepe my word, hee shall neuer see death. Which the Euangelist calleth the Second death. 1. The lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. Into which the great Iudge of all the world will send all the wicked, saying: Go ye cursed into euerlasting fire,Ioh. 8.51. which is prepared for the diuell and his angels. Of these two last my text speaketh for Nabuchadnezzar and all the proud and abhominable of the world. But know, that wee all must to the first and third:Math. 25 41. and they that come not to the second, shall be sure of the fourth. For the first, the King cared not: to the se∣cond he came not: to the third hee was forced: and in the fourth, hee, with all such shall neuer haue rest. Cruciabun∣tur die ac nocte. They shalbe tormen∣ted day and night, and that for euer∣more.
Now of these two last in or∣der. CHAP. IIII. What death is. DEath naturall is described of many in seuerall maner, but the sence or meaning is all one. One saith, death is Metoicesis, tes psuches euthenthe eis allon topon. A remoouing, Translatio,Abret. ex Plat. Act. 7.59. Chrysos. popu. ad Antioch. Hom. 7. Aug. in Iohn. Ambr. li. de bono mort. ca. 1 & 3. or trans∣lating of the soule from hence to ano∣ther place. An other: Depositio sarcinae grauis. An easing or vnlading one of a heauie burthen. S. Ambrose saith, death is, Spirandi munere priuari: To bee depriued of the benefite of brea∣thing. Againe: Mors est absolutio ani∣mae & corporis, & quaedam hominis sepe∣ratio. Death is an absolution or dis∣charge of the soule from the body, and a certaine seperation of man. It is like
vnto a bill of diuorcement betwixt man and wife, seperating that which before was one flesh. Adultery is the cause of the one: and the diuell, sinne, and thine owne consent thereto, is the cause of the other. But the most affirme, that Mors aliud non est,Aug. de cōso. mort. lib. 2. ca. 1. quam animae seperatio à corpore. Death is nothing else but the seperation of the body and the soule. It is like enuy that parteth friends a∣sunder. Therefore Ambrose vseth this say∣ing of the Psalme; he speaking of death; Thou hast broken my bonds asunder.Abr. li. de bono Mor∣tis. cap. 3. Be∣cause death breaketh open the prison of the soule. Augustine saith: That euen as famine is the defect of foode, thirst the want of drinke, and darknesse the absence of light, &c. euen so death is nothing else.Aug. con∣tra Pelag. Hyp. lib. 1. Nisi Nomen recedente vita, But a name, the life beeing gone. To be short, the Apostle Paul spake of death, when he said: I desire to be loosed. So did Ionas when hee said: Take my life from mee. And Iob when he desired To be cut off. This loosing, taking away of life,
or cutting off, is death. By which the soule departing, Paulatim, (saith Am∣brose) by litle and litle,Ambr. de bono Mor. cap. 2. Soluat se vinculis carnis: & ore emissa, euolat tanquam car∣cereo corporis huius exuta gurgustio; She looseth her selfe from the bandes of the flesh: and beeing got out at the doore of the mouth, (as the spies esca∣ped through Rahabs windowe) shee mounteth, as being freed from the close darke dungion of the body: as one be∣stirreth his heeles that is broke out of prison. And this is death, whither all must come. But I thinke some scarce beleeueth it: and therefore I wil proue it vnto them. CHAP. V. That all men must die, and when. THat all men must die, it is plaine, for it is written:Iosuah. 2.15. What man liueth and shall not see death? and shall hee deliuer his soule from the hand of the graue?
The woman of Tekoah hauing a sute to king Dauid, the better to mooue him to graunt her request; she put him in minde of his death, saying: Omnes, We all must needs die, &c. for it is appoin∣ted vnto men, that they shall once die. Ortus cuncta suos repetunt Matrem{que} requirunt. The meaning is, All things must to their mother from whence they were taken. Gen. 3.19. Adam is earthy, and therefore called Adam, and must to the earth,Eccl. 41.10. Coru. Gal. Aug. in Euch. ad Laur. cap. 93. & de pecca. Me∣ri. libr. 2. cap. 34. Aug. in Ps. 38. as the wise man saith; All that is of the earth, shall turne to the earth a∣gaine. Thnascomen homos hapantes. Which the Poet doth well expresse, saying: Omnibus est eadem lethi via. All die alike, but seuerall meanes bring men to their end. Of this, thy very meate vpō thy table, might put thee in mind. For all things die for thy sustenance, and thou shalt die for thy sinne. The labourer is worthy of his hyer; and the wages of sinne, is death. Rom. 6. Quo cun{que} te verteris, incerta omnia, sola mors certa. Whatsoeuer thou shalt determin,
all things are vncertaine, onely death is certain. All flie at the sight of her whip, as the dust before the winde. She doth ransacke as wel the pallaces of Princes, as poore cottages. Both rich and poore, young and old; of what degree soeuer, Ferentur, shall packe with her: there is no parlying about the matter. But when shee comes, as Iehu said to the messenger of Iehoram; so will shee to thee: Turne thee behinde me.2. Reg. 9.18 Follow thou me, as Christ said to Peter. Heu, Heu, quam surda miseros auerti∣tur aure,Boet. Et flentes oculos, claudere saeua negat. Which thus may be translated. Alas, ô woe, from wofull men, as deafe she turnes her eare; And though they cry, she doth deny, any one of them to heare. It is written of all Superiours:Ps. 82.6.7 I haue said you are Gods, but a retreit is also sounded, You shall die like men.1. Reg. 2.2 Cesar, Hanniball, Alexander, Pompey, & many
other the mightie Captaines and Mo∣narkes of the world are dead. King Da∣uid, though the man after Gods owne heart, said: I go the way of all the earth: 1. I die as all must. Nay Iesus Christ was not exempted from this death. Looke in the booke of God, and you shall finde this the Period of life, as well to the holy Fathers, the Patriarkes, and Prophet, as to young babes, Mortuus est, and he dyed, and the childe dyed. Thus we see what death is, and that all must die. Now know this, that none shall die before their time appointed of God: but euen when theyr time is come, which they shall not passe. This some of the vely Heathen did consesse, saying: Stat sua cui{que} dies breue & irrepara∣bile tempus omnibus est vitae. The effect is, euery mans time is ap∣pointed short, and vnrepaireable. But the scriptures are plaine, proouing the same. Holy Iob saith:Iob. 14. Are not his dayes determined? the number of his moneths
are with thee: thou 1. God hast appointed his bounds, which he cannot passe. Which Caluin confesseth, writing vpon the same place. As Ioseph was cast into prison, and kept in the stocks, yet when his time came, the King sent and loo∣sed him: euen so will God do by thy soule. For as the Egiptians could not keepe the Israelites in bondage, after their time was come to be deliuered: no more can the body the soule, nor the graue the body, when God sendeth for their deiluerance. Almightie God speaking by his Prophet of the destruction of the E∣giptians, saith: They could not stand,Ier. 46.21 be∣cause the day of destruction was come vp∣on them. And for the death and de∣struction of all the enemies of Gods Church, Daniel saith: (which also was reuealed vnto the Euangelist Iohn) There is a time appointed,Dan. 11.35.36. the determi∣nation is made. You know many times the Iewes sought to kill Iesus Christ: but when they would they could not, as the Apostle saieth. No man laid hands on him, for his houre was not yet come. And Salomon saith: To
all things there is an appointed time, &c. A time to be borne, and a time to die. The very minute or instant thereof thou shalt not passe: as before is shew∣ed. And this is the ordinance of the Lord ouer all flesh. CHAP. VI. Whether any die before their time. BVt here some will obiect, and say with Dauid,Ps. 55.24 25 The bloudie and deceit∣ful men shall not liue halfe their dayes. Againe, God added fifteene yeares vnto the dayes of Hezechias. And Ionas preached to Niniuie,Ionas. 3.4 saying: Yet fortie dayes; and Niniuy shall be destroyed. For∣tie dayes came, and Niniuy was not de∣stroyed. Therefore to some their time is shortned for a plague, and to some their daies are prolonged for a blessing, as God hath promised. And the time of death, and certaine end of mans life, is not determined. First to the threatnings, as also to the promises of the blessings of almightie God, I answere, that both containe al∣waies
a condition, sometimes expressed in Deut. 28.2.15. Isa. 1.19.20. Ezech. 33.13.14.15. Sometimes not expres∣sed, as to Hezechiab. 2. Reg 20.1. To Niniuy. Ionas. 3. And infinite other wic∣ked people. Gal. 5.21. Reu. 21.8. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. And when God giueth grace to vs to do his will, or leaueth man to his sin: the condition is obserued or not obserued. According vnto which, the promise taketh place, whether it be of a curse, or of a blessing. So that though we say commonly of them that kill themselues, they shorten their daies, or they die before their time; indeed it seemeth so to the opini∣on of man. yet in the decree of God it is not so. But Gods iudgement was so determined vpon such a man, and the like, with Iob his children,Malum paenae. before the world was. And his counsell shall stand for our instruction. 1. Either to try or quicken our faith, and expresse our pa∣tience to the example of other,Iob. 1.22. as he did with the holy man Iob. 2. Or to expresse his owne power, as hee did to him that was borne blinde. The Disciples said to Christ: Maister, who did sinne, this
man, or his parents, that hee was borne blinde?Ioh. 9, 2.3 Iesus answered: Neitther hath this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the workes of God should be shewed on him. 3. Or else to shewe vs his high displea∣sure and punishment for sinne, as he did against Nabuchadnezzar, and the wic∣ked of the world. And with the Lord there is no shadow of chaunge. So that through death, punishments come vp∣on men, by meanes ordinary and ex∣traordinarie, as Dauid effectually con∣fesseth: yet the time, and houre, and very instant thereof is certaine, as is shewed. Now for Hezechias. The fifteene yeares are said to be added, not that his time to die appointed from the begin∣ning, was then come: for though the Prophet told him Thou shalt die and not liue. It is true: yet hee told him not when: and at his repentance and con∣trition, those fifteene yeares were ad∣ded as a blessing, not to the definite time of his age, which was vnchange∣able, but to that time of his sicknesse.
Then what vse is there of phisicke? 1. Euen to preserue health, and to prolong thy daies in ease, which else should be consumed in paine. For as thy end is appointed of God certaine, so are the meanes vnto the same end, and they must not be despised. 2. To helpe nature, to ouerthrow that disease in short time, which she her selfe will ouercome, by good order and dyet in the end. Therefore saith the wise man. Eccles. 38.4.7. Honour the Phisitian, with that honour which is due vnto him, because of necessitie: For the Lord hath created him, and the Lord hath created medicines of the earth, and hee that is wise will not abhorre them. For with such doth he heale men, and ta∣keth away their paines. In ipso corpore alia praecipitur medicina ne bona valetudo amittatur, alia verò, vt amissa recupere∣tur. Aug. lib. 80. Quest. q. 45. In mans bo∣dy one medicine is giuen to preserue health, an other to recouer that which is lost.
But we see wicked men liue long, a grieuous burthen to the poore, &c. Their long life is to them a curse, and the same is their reward; the poore must trust in God, for God will be their de∣liuerer, if they fight firme in faith. Secondly, such wicked men haue their pleasure in this world, to make them most inexcusable, and their dam∣nation sure in the life to come, with Diues. CHAP. VII. Why wee know not when wee shall dye. WEll, if our end be so certaine, why is it not made knowne vnto vs when it shall bee? Why? Dixit dominus, the Lord hath so determined, and that should suffice thee.Deut. 28.66. For hee saith, Thou shalt haue no assurance of thy life. And to this end it is said,1. Thes. 5.2 The day of the Lord shall come euen as a theefe in the night. Againe: hee which hath the seuen spirites of GOD, saieth:
I will come vpon thee as a theefe,Reue. 3.3. and thou shalt not knowe what houre I will come vpon thee. This then beeing so, why shouldest thou aske any moe questi∣ons. Secondly, for the knowledge of thy end, it is not opened in the word of God, and therefore it appertaineth to his vnreuealed will, and thou must not seeke further, and busie thy selfe in the secrets of God, as coniurers, and figure-flingers, and starre-tooters doo. Therefore I answere thee, as Christ did his Disciples, enquiring of him to know the like matter, saying:Act. 1.7. It is not for you to knowe the times or the seasons which the Father hath put in his owne power. Thirdly, the knowledge of our last end is hidden from vs, to the ende men should not encourage themselues to sinne, and presume of repentance a litle before their end. Therefore well saith Augustine:Aug. in Ps. 34. conc. 1 Diem nobis nouissi∣num mortis nostrae abscondit, ne nobis de futuro aliquid promittamus. The effect is, God hath not re∣uealed vnto vs the last houre of our
death, least wee should sinne of pre∣sumption. Againe hee saith: Ne de speveniae peius viuerent,Idem. in Ps. 101. fecit diem mortis incertum. God hath made to vs, the day of death vncertaine, least vpon hope of pardon we should liue the worse. Fourthly, it is most certaine, that GOD hath kept from vs the know∣ledge of our dying day, because wee should continually watch, and be pre∣pared for it with the oyle of good workes in our Lampes of faith, cleare∣ly burning, to light in the Bridegrome whensoeuer hee knocketh. There∣fore it is written:1. Pet. 1.13 Math. 24.42.44. Luk. 12.35. to. 47. 2. Pet. 3.1 Gird vp the loynes of your minde, awake, and be ye also rea∣die with your lights burning, and ye your selues like vnto men that waite for theyr maister. And Peter the Apostle saith: Seeing that all things must be dissolued, what ma∣ner of persons ought wee to be in holy con∣uersation and righteousnesse? Againe:1. Pet. 4.7 8.9. The ende of all things is at hand, bee yee therefore sober and watching in prayer, but aboue all things, haue feruent loue among you, (O some
of you cannot abide this) but loue co∣uereth the multitude of sinnes. Bee you harberous one towards an other without grudging. These and such like good workes, done in and for Christ, are those gar∣ments which wee must keepe. Our lights that must shine before men, to glorifie our father which is in heauen: and that same treasure which wee must lay vp for our selues in heauen. And blessed shall that seruant bee whom his maister when hee commeth, shall finde so doing. Moyses (doubtlesse) knowing this, hee euen reproouing the stub∣berne negligence of the Iewes: and beeing desirous that they should make right vse of the consideration of theyr owne deathes, saith:Deut. 32.29. O that they were wise, then they would vnderstand this, they would consider their latter ende. E∣uen by it to bee kept and guided from sinne, as Israel was from the sight of the Egiptians in the day time, by the pillar of a cloud. Againe, Moyses knowing that to all those that bee wise, and haue any
true feare of God in them, the remem∣brance of death dooth effect the same thing,Ps. 90.12 hee prayeth saying: O teach vs to number our dayes, that wee may apply our hearts vnto wisedome. There∣fore,Aug. de discip. Christ. Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruentur omnes dies. Serò parantur remedia, quum mortis imminet periculum. Our last end or dying day, is kept secret from vs, because wee should watch, and be readie euery day. For the medicine comes too late, when death is knocking at our gate. This is that which the Apostle meaneth, and would haue vs to doo when hee saieth:Eph. 5.15.16. Take heed therefore that yee walke circumspectly, not as fooles, but as wise, redeeming the time, for the dayes are euill. And againe:Gal. 4.5. Walke wisely towards them that are without, and redeeme the time. So that Moses the man of God praieth, that we may be taught to nūber our daies: And the holie Apostle of Iesus Christ, would haue vs To redeem the time. That is, to remember & consider, how vainly we haue spent yesterday, and to day, to
make amends for it, by walking in Ho∣lines and righteousnes before God all the dayes of our life. To this the considerati∣on of death should guide vs. And ther∣fore it is compared of some to the stern of a ship, which though it be in the hin∣der part of the ship, yet it guideth the whole, whither soeuer the lust of the Gouernour will, and so should death our life. Therefore it is said:Ecclesiast. 7.36. Aug. lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. Remember thy end, and thou shalt neuer do amisse. And so Timor de futura morte mentem neces∣sario contulit, & quasi clauus carnis, omnes motus superbiae ligno crucis affigit. The feare of death to come, of force fret∣teth or disquieteth the minde, and as a naile of the flesh, it fasteneth or pin∣neth all the motions of Pride to the stocke or altar of the Crosse. But the forgetfulnesse of death, and that woe that followeth, together with the con∣tempt of godly patience and long suf∣fering, maketh men forget, that the bountifulnesse of God is to leade vs vn∣to amendment of life. And therefore with the slothfull beast, they are euen fatted against the day of slaughter: wal∣lowing
in their sinne, as the sow in the myer: like the sluggard, who rowles himselfe vpon his bed, saying: Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, a little foulding of the handes to sleepe. In like manner those that be proud, with the vsurer, the whore-maister, the ex∣tortioner, and oppressor, &c. say with themselues one day after an other; Yet a little more Pride, a little more vsu∣rie, whoredome, extortion, oppressi∣on, &c. yet a little more: nay a little more yet. So they haue neuer inough, lyke Hell which cannot bee satisfied. And as they thirst after sinne, so Hell gapeth after them. And (deare bretheren, bought with the blood of the immaculate Lambe of GOD) without repentance, destruc∣tion shall come vpon them, and euer∣lasting death shall gnaw on them. Then shall they see what a faire thred they haue spunne. Nothing could content them, but Hell will containe them. Therefore aright remember thy ende, and let that mooue thee to applie thy heart vnto wisedome. Take the coun∣sell of the holie Ghost, Walke whilest
it is called to day. While ye haue the light, beleeue in the light, that yee may be the children of the light. And behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of saluation: the night commeth when no man can walke. And these may be causes why the time of death is not re∣uealed. CHAP. VIII. Of those that deferre to repent, and think they shall not die yet. BVt notwithstanding this, heere is a certaine fellowe called (Shall) that all this while lyeth lurking in the text, which carrieth along, a great deale of filth: and still he is at all hands rea∣die, and sets his foote before men, to keepe them from this resolution. And makes them thinke (yet it is but a sleight of the diuel) that if they may haue him their friend, if they may haue that day giuen them, then they will doo bad y∣nough. You thinke I should say well inough. But read the second Chapter of Wisedome, and you shall see what these Atheists both say and doo. And surely
this same presumptuous fellow (Shall) or some other his bastarde brother, vn∣doubtedly brings men into some one, or into all these wicked opinions. 1 With the foolish bodie to say in their heart,Psal. 14.1 There is no God. 2. Or else neuer to remember or regarde death, with the rich man in the Gospel: who said to his soule,Luk. 12.19 Soule, thou hast much goods laid vp for many yeares: liue at ease, cate, drinke (the poore would if they had it) and be mery, or take thy pastime. 3. Or else they thinke that after death, there is no woe.Wisd. 2.5. And so they say desperately, Surely wee will walke after our owne imaginations, and doo euery man after the stubbornnesse of his wicked heart, and practise it, because our hand hath power. 4. Or else they put farre away the euil day. I. They thinke they shall not die yet, and so approach to the seate of iniquitie. Thus shewing themselues to be of the number of those mockers, whereof S. Peter speaketh, which say; Where is the promise of his comming? Such things do they imagine, and goe astray, for their owne wickednes hath blinded them.
But to answere this fellow and your backe friend (Shall), be ye well assu∣red, that he stands not in my Text, to note the deferring or prolonging of iudgement: but to shewe the certaintie and necessitie of an intollerable plague to come vpon Nabuchadnezzar, and all such that are proud. Therefore (ô wic∣ked man) Be not deceiued: that is,Gal. 6.7. deceiue not thy selfe, God is not mocked. 1. Thou canst not mocke with God, but What∣soeuer a man soweth, that shall he reape. This is true, Thou shalt die: thy time is set, and it shall not tarry long, though thou presume neuer so much vpon this (Shall). Which for to prooue, the ho∣lie Scriptures are plaine. And many men haue written long and large dis∣courses heereof, and daily experience doth manifest the same. And a short Epitomie of all, thus briefly may be shewed.
CHAP. IX. What time men may account off to liue. THe oldest men that euer liued in this world neuer sawe a thousand yeares.Gen. 5. Psal. 90.4 2. Pet. 3.8. And if they had, Athousand yeeres with the Lord are but as yesterday: seeing that is past as a watch in the night. In agnitione diuinae virtutis, Et preterita, & presentia,Glos. ord. in Pet. ibid. & futura aequaliter praesen∣tia constant: With the Almightie, times past, present, and to come, are all pre∣sent alike. And therefore it is saide onely of him,Reu. 22.13. I am Alpha, and Ome∣ga, the beginning and the end, the first and the last. And Christ saith, Before Abraham was, I am. But come thou to thy selfe (ô man) looke of what time thou canst bee assured, and of that thou mayest boast. The time that is past, thou canst not recall: of that which is to come, thou must not presume: measure that, that is present, and take that for thine
owne. And this is the very instant, and moment of time, shorter then can be spoken of: and therefore a short time will serue for to measure it. But put all together, and because thou shouldest not be imboldened to sinne, neither expect by presumption any time to come, the most sacred word of God sheweth that it is but short. Ho∣ly Iob saith:Iob. 14.1. Man that is borne of a wo∣man, hath but a short time to liue. Which Paul confirmeth, saying:1. Cor. 7.29. This I say bre∣theren, because the time is short, &c. The shortnesse whereof, is further made manifest by diuers Similitudes. For mans life is compared to a Flower of the field. To a grasse. To a shadow. To a vapore. A vapore vanisheth, a shadow fadeth, grasse withereth, the flower fal∣leth, all are soone gone: and the dayes of man consume apace, and passe verie swiftly. Therefore they be compared vnto a thought: To wind: To a Wea∣uers shittle: To a poste: To most swift ships: and to an Eagle. Then which, what is swifter? and then man, what is britler?Psal. 39.5. Wherefore he is called an ear∣then vessell, which is suddenly broken.
Therefore Dauid measuring out man∣life, he saith:2. Cor. 4.7 Thou. 1. God hast made my dayes as an hand breadth, and my age is no∣thing in respect of thee: Surely euery man liuing is altogether vanitie: yea lighter then vanitie it selfe. Now if I did shewe you, what great consideration the verie heathen haue had of the shortnesse of mans life, and the condition thereof: I should not speake it, without as great shame to those that do so lightly regard it, as I may shew it, to the praise of them that so truly thought of it. Shall not they condemne thee? They made ac∣count & assurance of it, but like a buble of water, which is suddenly vp, and sud∣denly downe. Pindarus called man, the dreame of a shadow. And what is that? Sophocles, a breath, and a shadow onely. Horace, Puluis & vmbra, dust and a shadow. That this is true, thou canst not denie: and yet thy wilfull infide∣litie, thy deeds doo descrie. For men liue as though there were no death: or as though they cared not for any reck∣ning to be had after death: as if there were neither God to consume them in his wrath: nor diuell or hell to torment
them in the flame with Diues. But thou mayest see that our time is short, which to the glory of God should bee spent. And no further assurance to bee made of any time temporall, but that which is present, and therein to prepare for the houre of death. Which some doo∣ing, do ioy at death comming: others omitting, doo tremble and quake. Now heare who these bee, and why this is so. CHAP. X. To whom death is fearefull. ALl those men which are the wic∣ked and abhominable, from euery good worke reprobate, may think in soule & conscience that death comes vpon them; as the watchmen in the Tower of Iezarell did see Iehu hasting towards the Citie, marching furiously, then they imagine with themselues, sure it brings no good vnto vs: as Ahab said by the Prophet of God, I hate him,1. Reg. 22 8. for he doth neuer prophesie good vnto me, but euill. And when they see that death
is come indeed, then they say as the wicked King did to Elias;1. Reg. 21.20. Math. 8.29. Exod 10. Art thou come to torment vs before the time? As the diuels said to Christ: What haue wee to doo with thee? Get thee from vs, as Pharao said to Moyses. Moyses then departed, but death will not, saying to the soules of such:28. Luk. 4.35 Hold thy peace, and come out of him: As Christ said to the diuell in one that was possessed. Then they hang downe their heads, their countenance is chan∣ged, their thoughts are troubled, and happily their knees trembling, knocke one against an other for feare, like Bal∣thazers, when he saw the hand writing vpon the wall against him. Therefore well saith the wise man:Eccles. 41 1. O death, how bit∣ter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that liueth at rest in his owne possessions. CHAP. XI. Why is death bitter? FIrst, because men doubt of their re∣conciliation to God, who in their life-time haue contemned his cousell,
and set his correction at nought. So that neither the word of God preached, his mercie and long suffering offered, nor his iudgements powred vpon them, haue taken any effect in them. But they haue followed their owne waies, and one after their owne wicked imagina∣tions, willingly refusing to know, stop∣ping their eares like the deafe Adder at the voyce of the wise charmer, spur∣ning forward their soule to iniquitie, as Balaam did his Asse against the Lord. Numb. 22.25. Such men are condem∣ned by the Oxe and the Asse. The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his maisters cribbe, but Israel (what if I said England, nay Leweis) hath not knowne, my people hath not vnderstood. Isai. 1.3. The reason is, for they would not. O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, (saieth Christ) which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent vnto thee, how oft would I haue gathered thy children together as the henne gathereth her chickens vnder her wings, and ye would not. Luk. 13.34. Math. 23.34. That is, euen when ye might, therefore ye shall not when ye would.
For it is written: I will laugh at your de∣struction (saieth God by Salomon) and mock you when your feare commeth: when your feare commeth like sudden desolati∣on, and your destruction shall come like a whirlewinde, when affliction and anguish shall come vpon you: Then shall they ca vpon me, but I will not answere: they shall seeke mee early, but they shall not finde me, because they hated knowledge, and did not chuse the feare of the Lord: They would none of my counsell, but despised all my correction. Pro. 1.26. Therfore I will surely cōsume thē, saith the Lord. Ier. 8.13. The consideration of this, is a woun∣ding woe; which if thy conscience tell thee cannot be helped, it forceth thee to this out-cry with Caine:Gen. 4.13 My sinne is greater then can be forgiuē. Then the di∣uell will be ready to perswade thy con∣science, that thou art partaker of that great offence: which is, if we sinne wil∣lingly; that is,Gloss, or∣din. Ibid. Nobis in voluntate peccan∣di manentibus: Wee continuing in desire to sinne, and forsake Iesus Christ, as Iu∣das, Saul, Arrius, & Iulian the Apostate did.Geneua note Ibid. After we haue receiued the know∣ledge of the truth, there remaineth no
more sacrifice for sinnes, but a feare∣full looking for of iudgement, and vio∣lent fire which shall deuour the aduer∣sary. And this also know, that as the candle stinketh more, beeing blowne out, then if it had neuer bene a light: so they that once haue had the truth, and wilfully reiect and turne away from the truth, shal haue greater iudgement, and are more odious in the sight of God, then if they had neuer knowne the truth. For it is written: It had bene bet∣ter for them, not to haue knowne the way of righteousnesse, then after they haue known it to turne from the holy commaundement giuen vnto thē. 2. Pet. 2.21. This doubt∣lesse doth make men tremble & quake to remember death, when they consi∣der how farre they haue gone into sin, and can finde no way out. Then per∣haps they begin to flee and to runne, like the Egiptians pursuing the Israe∣es through the redde sea: but the wa∣ters ouerwelmed them before they could get out. Exod. 14.35.28. And so may death thee: for it is written; Thou hole, this night will I fetch away thy soule from thee. Luk. 12.20.
Then remember this (my deare bre∣thren) and forget not, how plentifull Gods word hath bene among you, and praise his name for it, with prayer to cō∣tinue it; and know how greatly it hath bene contemned. Whoredome is haun∣ted, (and be not some of those curres heere, that do vse to this carrion?) the Saboath is polluted) the name of God is blasphemed, vsurie and enuy, with such like abhomination, is vsed: and yet will you say Gods word is regar∣ded? Bee not blinde, but see how God hath warned our Towne by fire feare∣full to behold, with the plague of pe∣stilence beating at our doores, and the sharpe sword of samine and hunger, with many other diseases, one present∣ly after an other. What haue these wrought in our hearts? where is any re∣formation of manners? Pride encrea∣seth, &c. Christ told the Iewes, when an vncleane spirit is gone out of a man he walketh through drie places, seeking rest, and finding none. Then he saith:  wil return into mine house frō whence I came: and when he is come, he findeth it emptie, swept and garnished. The
hee goeth and taketh vnto him seuen other spirits worse then himself, & they enter in and dwell there: and the end of that man is worse thē the beginning. Euen so shall it be with this wicked ge∣neration. Pharao his heart was hardned to his owne destruction. Is yours think you, to saluation? You should not for∣get that Esau,Heb. 12.17. when hee would haue in∣herited the blessing, hee was reiected: for hee found no place to repentance, though he sought the same with teares. But what may wee looke for, among whom, I feare, for our sinnes, teares are as plentifull, as snow in sommer? There are none. Corazin, Bethsaida, Sodome,Math. 11.20. & Gomor, with Tyre, Sydon, & Capernaum, &c. are in the lake of torments that bur∣neth with fire and brimstone, for con∣temning the word of God. Diues would haue had Abrahā (when he could get no helpe for himselfe) to send Lazarus to warne his brethren, Least (saith he) they come into this place of tormēts. But Abra∣ham answered againe, saying:Luk. 16.23. They haue Moses and the Prophets, (with whom, we haue Christ & his Apostles also) let thē heare them. As if he should say, if they will not heare thē, for such is that place
of torments and woe prepared. Perad∣uenture thou dost thinke to haue repen∣tance at thy call, as the Centurion had his seruants. Thou seest by Esau, thou mayest be deceiued. Can an Ethiopian or Blackmoore change his blacke skin, or the Leopard his spots? and can you do well, hauing learned all the dayes of your life to doo euill? Who can bow a full growne Oake? And who can repent when himselfe list? What might bee said here of this matter without weari∣nesse? But I will onely send you to one place more. Then consider with your selues what cause wicked men haue, to tremble at the sight or remem∣brance of death, when they shall bee plagued for abusing the time of salua∣tion, and repentance offered, and the counsell of the Lord, with his louing correctiō.1. Pet. 5 7 God at at all times carefully, as before calamitie, specially called Is∣rael from their sinnes by his holy Pro∣phets. And whatsoeuer is written, is written for our learning.Zach. 7.11. But they refu∣sed to hearken and obey; therfore God denied to heare & help them, (though they cryed) when destruction fell vpon them.
When thou thinkest that God will do so by thee: O how fearefull will the re∣memembrance of death bee? Secondly, as the remembrance of death is terrible vnto vs, when we think that God will not heare vs,2. Chro. 24.20. lying on our beds crying and howling: because we haue despised to heare him, when his holie maiestie cried & called for vs: so also to consider, that God is true in his promises, that to them that cannot re∣pent, he fulfilleth his threatnings, that he therefore is iust, that hee is the God of vengeance, 1. vnto whom vengeance belongeth: that as hee is crowned with mercie, so he is armed with iustice; and in truth he will shew himselfe to plead against vs, and to plague vs. And when thou (O man) doest call to minde vp∣on thy bed of death, that thy life hath bene spent in vsurie, extortion, oppres∣sion, Pride, couetousnesse, whoredome, drunkennesse, malice & enuie, and such like sinnes, for which the curse of God is due; this will make thee say of death, as Israel did to Moses of God, saying: Let not God talke with vs least we die.Exo. 20.19. So thou, Let not death apprehend vs, least
we goe to hell. Here now we may see, euen what the feare of death is,Ludelp. Sax. in Mat. 10. Idem Ex Chris. ibid. Non do∣lor exeundi de corpore, sed disperatio vitae post mortem timet. Idest mortem qui non putat: se viuere post mortem. The feare of death is, not sorrow to die, but the dispairing of life after death. That is; He feareth death, that cannot tell what will become of his soule after death. And so,Aug. de vera inno∣cen. Qui malae conscientiae est, semper pu∣cillanimis & timidus est, hee that is of an euil conscience, is alwayes faint-har∣ted and fearfull of death: because they tremble to thinke, Moriendo, quo ire rogantur, whither God in vengeance will sende them when they bee dead. And beleeue me thereof is great cause. For we reade that Esdras prayed,Mat. 44. as we are taught, saying: Let it not be thy will, to destroy them that haue liued like beasts, and worse then beasts. Esdr. 8.28. Answer is made, I will not verily consider the workes of them, before the death, before the iudgement, before destructi∣on. As if it were saide; But then God will. Math. 13.29.41.42. These are they that haue their portion in this life,
these are such like: as of whom Christ saide: Ʋerily I say vnto you, they haue their reward: Math. 6.5. euen pleasure in this life, for paine in the life to come,Luk. 16. with Diues. Then woe be vnto you. O ye vn∣godly, which haue forsaken the lawe of the most high God: For though you increase, yet shall ye perish: If ye be borne, ye shall be borne to cursing: If ye die, the curse shall be your portion. Ecclesiast. 41.8.9. Knowe yee not, that the vnrigh∣teous shall not inherit the kingdome GOD? Be not deceiued, for nei∣ther fornicators, adulterers, vncleane, wantons, Idolators, Witches, they that liue in hatred, debate, wrath, and en∣uie, they that are proud emulators, contentious, seditious, heretickes, mur∣therers, drunkards, gluttons, Infidels, lyars, buggerers, Theeues, couetous, raylers, extortioners, backbyters, ha∣ters of GOD, dooers of wrong, proud, boasters, couenaunt breakers, disobe∣dient to parents, and such like, These Gods word saith shall not inherite the kingdome of GOD. Rom. 1.29.30. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Gal. 5.19.20. Reu. 21.8.27. For they goe the way that leadeth to destruction. Math. 7.13.
Thus we see the workes of the flesh are manifest: And if yee liue after the flesh, ye shall die. Ro. 8.13. Then feare, for if the righteous scarcely shall be sa∣ued, where shall the vngodly and the sinner appeare? 1. Pet. 4.18. Whose iudgement long agoe is not far off, and their damnation sleepeth not. 2. Pet. 2.3. But euerie one shall receiue according to his workes: Psal. 62 12. When it shall be said: Depart from me, ye workers of ini∣quitie. Luk. 13.27. Ye cursed into euer∣lasting fire, which is prepared for the diuel and his angels. Math. 25.41. Where indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish shall bee vpon the soule of euery man that dooth euill: of the Iew first, and also of the Gretian. Reue. 2.9. O the fearefull trembling that these and such like truthes of Gods holy word doo bring to a desperate soule, at the re∣membrance of death: Of which in their life time, though they haue no feeling, yet at the day of death they may bring a wofull griping. Thirdly, I omit to speake of the vn∣satiable care worldly men haue to get, their greedie desire to keepe, and their
loathsomenesse to depart from theyr Mamonisme, worldly wealth, and plea∣sure. All which doth make them sorrie to see death, and quake to thinke vpon it. Ecclesi. 41.1.Mat. 19.21. The worldling in the Gospell was loth, and sorrowfull, yea more, he would not leaue his worldly pelfe to walk with Iesus Christ, though hee was promised treasure in heauen. And how wil those that be such grieue, when they see, they must in spight of their teeth goe with death, of whome they are perswaded, it neuer bringeth good vnto them, but euil:1. Reg. 21.8. as Ahab was by the holie Prophet or messenger of the Lord? Fourthly, I would (if any of my paines could preuaile with you, to wring sinne from you) shewe, what reare God may strike into the hearts of wicked men at the remembrance of death, when they call to mind, 1. how they haue cau∣sed many to blaspheme,Rom. 2.24 Mat. 18.7 and to commit sinne, by their euil example: And 2. do know that therefore their punishment shall be the greater: As 3. to consider that the fathers wicked life shall be cast in their childrens teeth: as,Rom. 18.8. what was thy
father, but an Vsurer, Extortioner Drunkard,Eccle. 41.7. Wisd. 4 6. a whoremaster, or such like? Of which saith the wise man, The Chil∣dren complaine of an vngodly father, be∣cause they be reproached for his sake. Will not these thinke you, with a thousand the like cogitations, driue terrour and feare into wicked mens hearts, at the sight of death? Fift and lastly, when such wicked men doo call to minde how they haue seen the poore to be afflicted many and sundry wayes, and haue not comforted them: but haue rather sought diuersly to vexe them, and so haue brought the curse of the people vpon them. And herewithall remember, how the poore shall be comforted,Luc. 16.25. Pro. 10.7. Psal. 37.2.9.10. and themselues tormented: and that their name shall rotte, and their remembrance shall be cleane put out. And also do perswade themselues that they be of the number of them, of whom it is said: Woe be to you that are full: for ye shall hunger. Woe be to you that now laugh, for you shall waile and mourne. Luk. 6.25. Then they may turne their faces to the wall, with He∣zechias, but looke for small comfort,
and say; What hath our Pride profited vs? or what profit hath the pompe of our riches brought vs? We sometimes haue had many in dirision, and in a pa∣rable of reproach. We fooles, we coun∣ted their life madnesse, and thought their ende would be without honour: But they are reckoned among the chil∣dren of God,Wisd. 5.3.4.5.8. and shall haue their porti∣on among the Saints. But with vs it is not so:1. Psal. 1.5.6. Wisd. 4.14 we are like the chaffe which the wind driueth away from the face of the earth, therefore we shall not be able to stand in the iudgements, neither in the congregation of the righteous. O the consideratiō of these things to a distres∣sed soule, plunged in distrust, is iust cause to sorrow and mourne. Of such it may truly be said, Nasci miseria, viuere paena, mori angustia est: To be borne is miserie, to liue is a plague, and for to die is anguish and woe. And thus much to shewe you some causes why death is a terror vnto the wicked people of the world.
CHAP. XII. Who feare not death. NOw there is an other sort of men, vnto whom death is neuer terri∣ble, but most heartily welcome: And these are those spirituall minded men, the number whereof is but small: Math. 7.14. which haue the seale of the liuing God in their foreheads. Reue. 7.3. Whose names are written in the Lambes booke of life. Which haue made their long robes white in the bloud of the Lambe. These haue the spirit of the liuing God, by which they are sealed vnto the day of redemption: and are not in the flesh, but in the spi∣rit, because the spirit of God dwelleth in them. Which spirit beareth witnesse vnto our spirits,Rom. 8.9.16. that wee are the chil∣dren of God, and heires annexed with Christ: if so bee that wee suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him, or else not. For after death, there is a seperation of the soule from God into hell onely, Math. 7.23. Which
the learned doo call the death of the soule: and the Euangelist Iohn,Luk. 16.26. The se∣cond death. Quam omnes patiuntur, qui periculorum metu fidem abnegant, & mun∣do sese conformes reddunt:Gualt. in Hos. 14. Hom. 44. Mat. 10. 1. Ioh. 2.15 Which all soules do fuffer, that for feare of daun∣gers doo denie the faith, and fashion themselues like vnto the worlde. But the Saints of God are free, being iustifi∣ed by faith, and are at peace with God, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. And they do shewe forth their faith by their workes, being borne anew, not of mor∣tall seed, but of immortall: by the word of God, who liueth and endureth for euer. And these beeing strong in the Lorde, and in the power of his might, doo cast away the workes of darknesse, and put vpon them the armor of light; euen the whole armour of God, by which they are able to resist in the euill day; and hauing finished all things they stand fast. For their heart (as the Pro∣phet saith) beleeueth in the Lord, and they are not afraid to meete with their enemie in the gate. Therefore if death come, or the diuel, or whatsoeuer, they feare not. For who shall laie any thing
to the charge of Gods elect?Rom. 8.33. It is God that iustifieth, who shall condemne? And so these are as willing to welcome death,Luk. 2.25.28. Colloss. 1.21. Psal. 120.5 as Simeon was ioyfull to imbrace Christ, because death is to them aduan∣tage. Therefore the Princely Prophet Dauid said: Woe is me that I am constrai∣ned to dwell with Meshech, and to abide a∣mong the tents of Kedar. And againe, Bring my soule out of prison.Ps. 142.7. 1. Reg. 2.2. And a lit∣tle before his death, quietly hee said: I goe the way of all the earth: that is, I know death is at hand.Iob. 6.8.9. Ien. 4.3. This holie Iob wished for, and Ionas praied, O Lord, take I be∣seech thee my life from me; for it is better for me to die then to liue? Paul know∣ing the same,Rom. 7.24. saide: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from the bodie of this death: And writing to the Philippians, hee saith:Phil. 1.23.24. To abide in the flesh was need∣full for them: but for himselfe, he shew∣eth his minde, euen that hee desired to be loose hand to be with Christ, which is best of all. Thus holie men after they once beginne with Henocke to walke with GOD,Wis. 4.10. that is, in godlinesse to please
God, as he did, they iudge none blessed before their death. Which the verie Heathen confessed. — Dicique beatus, Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.Ouide. li. 3. Met. The meaning is, to be accounted blessed, none should, before their last end, Thē though the righteous be pre∣uented with death,Wisd. 4.7. Luk. 16 22 & 23.43. Luk. 2.28. yet shall he be at rest in Abrahams bosome, in Paradice with Christ: that is, in the kingdome of hea∣uen. Therefore when death commeth, these do say, ioying with Simeon, when hee had seene Christ,Psal. 4.8. Lord now lettest thou thy seruaunt depart in peace, accor∣ding to thy word. Or with Dauid,Psa. 116.7 I will late me downe, and sleepe in peace, for thou Lorde onely makest mee dwell in safetie: therefore returne vnto thy rest ô my soule. Thus peaceably and ioyfully of such faithfull men, death is louingly imbra∣ced. And euery day the Apostles desire to
bee with Christ,How death is, and is not, to be wished for. is preferred to any worldly consolation or ioy. Not as wi∣shing the determinate decree of God concerning our end, to be altered: (as those blasphemous people do, who vp∣on euery occasion or crosse, wish them∣selues out of the world, or that they had neuer bene borne, with such like like kinde of cursed speaking) but expres∣sing our choyse and loue betwixt life temporall and death,2. Cor. 5.8. and therein sub∣mitting our selues vnder the mightie hand of God. Thus death is imbraced, and louingly entertained of the chil∣dren of God, for diuers considerations. CHAP. XIII. Why death is neuer feared of the godly. FIrst because with that aged Father the Patriarke Iacob,Gen. 47.9. Heb. 11.13. 1. Cron. 29.15. Ps. 39.12. 1. Pe. 2.11 Gen. 15.13 & 47.4. we make ac∣count, that our life is but as a pilgri∣mage: and our selues straungers & Pil∣grimes, or soiourners on the earth, as the seed of Abraham were in a land that was not theirs. Straungers continue not in a
place: and we looke for a better home. For as the Tabernacles of the Israelites were to be remooued, euen so are ours.Exo. 33.7 2. Cor. 5 5. Num. 15.2 2. Cor. 5.4. Their abiding place hoped for, was the land of promise: and ours is the king∣dome of heauen figured by theirs: where mortalitie shall be swallowed vp of life. Therfore it is written,Heb. 13.14 Here we haue no continuing citie, but we seeke one to come. For we know, that if our earth∣ly house of this Tabernacle be destroy∣ed, we haue a building giuen of God, e an house, not made with hands, but eternall life in the heauens. So that whi∣lest we are strangers in the body,2. Cor. 5.1.6. we are absent from the Lord. Therfore we for∣get that which is behind,Phil. 3.13 14. and indeuour our selues vnto that which is before, and followe hard towardes the marke, vn∣to which death guides vs, as is before shewed. Therefore it is called a Waye,1. Reg. 2 2. Iob. 16 22. Aretius de Morte. that brings vs vnto God. A quo in hunc mundum sumus peregrinatum missi, of whom we are sent into the world, to a∣bide there as straungers, vntill death come. And then Anima ad caeleslia colli∣gitur, corpus suis restituitur elementis, ad suū vs{que} tempus, The soule is taken into
the heauens, and the bodie is dissolued into his elements vntill his appointed time. An other writer saith, that death Oslij instar est,Gualt. in Has. 13. Hom. 44. aut viae, per quam nos ex hac vita mortali, in immortalitatem transire oportet, is like vnto a doore, or a waye, through which wee must passe out of this mortall life into immortalitie. And it may not amisse be compared vnto the starre,Mat. 2.9 10. that guided the wise men till they came to the stable where the bles∣sed babe Christ lay in the manger: and death brings vs to behold Christ glori∣fied in the heauens, at the right hand of his father.Ioh. 20.20. When they saw the starre, they reioyced with an exceeding great ioy: like the Disciples, which were glad when they had seene the Lord. And shall we be sorrie to meee with death, that brings vs vnto God? Christ hea∣ling one, lying vpon his bed sick of the palsie,Mat. 9.6. said: Arise, take vp thy bed, and goe to thine house. Euen so when death com∣meth, she may say to our soules in our bodies sick vpon our beds: as the Pro∣phet of God did to Israel in an other matter; Arise and depart, for this is not your rest. Mich. 2.10. He that had bene
sicke arose, and departed to his owne house. And (beloued) why should not we at the commaundement of God, when he saith by death, come: Loue to remoue out of the bodie, and to dwell with the Lord? 2. Cor. 5.8. being here but strangers in a vaile of miserie? One saith: Vita quid est hominis nisi vallis plena malorum, Principio, medio, fine dolenda suo. What is mans life, but a vaile of griefe, still tumbled in strife? His springtime's woe, Autumne is so, Winter hath sorrow as rife. And therfore Mors pro remedio data est, quasi finis malorum,Ambr. in orat de fi∣de resue. Chris. de popu. Antioch. Hom. 7. Death is giuen vs for a remedie, as the end of all trou∣bles, it being A vitae curis absolutio, The absolution frō the cares of this life. And therefore carefully to be expected, and willingly imbraced, without any feare. Secondly, we haue great cause to re∣ioyce at the comming of death, because by it, we passe from infinite troubles, to the end of our faith, euen the saluation of our soules, long hoped for. Which is an inheritance immortall and vndesi∣led, that fadeth not away, reserued in
heauen for vs. 1. Pet. 1.9. &c. Vnto the hope whereof wee are begotten by the resurrection of Iesus Christ from the dead. So that we account of death, but as of an happy hauen, wherin we do arriue, and are at ease from infinite tur∣bulent stormes, which we haue suffred in the surging seas of this wicked world. Morborum vltimus medicus mors:Aret. Stella. Chrysost. vt ante. tan∣tum corporis tollit mala. Death is the last Phisitian or helper of our paine, which onely riddeth away the griefes of the body. Portus est mortalibus mors. Of Chrysostome it is called Tranquillus por∣tus; Death a calme hauen for mortall men where they arriue, to behold the faire beautie of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. In many places of holy scrip∣ture, Death is called a Sleepe. Because that euen as sleepe and quiet rest is to a painfull honest labouring man, at night most sweete and comfortable, so lkewise is Death to a faithfull soule, garnished with good workes, like a Bride-chamber adorned, ending all things with ioy like a Comedie. And therefore why should she not bee wel∣come?
Thirdly, death most willingly wee embrace, because it being come, we at∣taine to that perfection of knowledge which we do desire, & which in this life we cannot attaine vnto. All men desire to be expert in their science or profes∣sion: and the Saints of God in the true knowledge of their saluation, and when death is come, then this is obtained. Euen then, when we shall all meet to∣gether in the vnitie of the faith, and knowledge of the sonne of God vnto a perfect man, and vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ. Christ saith: This is life eternall,Ioh. 17.3. that they know thee to be the only very God, & him whom thou hast sent, Iesus Christ. Now this knowledge we haue, being in the body, and absent from the Lord, by faith and not by sight. Through which, we all be∣hold as in a myrror or glasse, the glory of the Lord, with open face.Marl. ex Cal. in 1. Cor. 13 Fides ergo nostra deum nunc intuetur tanquam ab∣sentem. Our faith therefore now doth see God, yet as being absent. For wee know in part, and we prophesie in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then Id est post mortem. After death, that
which is in part, shall be abolished. Which Paul the Apostle prooueth by a double argument, one taken from the example of himselfe, the other is a simi∣litude. Which is thus much briefly: The vnderstanding of an Infant is far inferiour to the vnderstanding of a mā: And through a glasse we cannot see so clearely as without. This life is like to Infancie.Amb. ibid. And the life to come is our perfect age, then our knowledge shall be made perfect. The glasse through which we now see God, is faith: which being done away, we shall see clearely. Which doth confirme this truth. That not now, but after death we shall see God face to face.Marl. ex Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 13. (O endlesse felicitie) By which, Denotatur perspicuus, planus, at{que} clarissimus diuinus aspectus, is noted a manifest, plaine, and most cleare be∣holding of ye diuine nature after death.Of face to face, see Aug. wri∣ting pro∣foundly. Epist. 3. & Epist. 6. Tome. 2. Moyses, as the glory of the Lord passed by him, sawe his backe parts darkly and imperfectly. But after death we shal see euidently, Diuinā essentiam, The essence of God. For by the face of God Mani∣festatio eius intelligenda est, An open ma∣nifestation of him, is to be vnderstood.
Which is the truth by Christ himselfe expressed: who saith, (speaking of Gods deare adopted children) See that ye de∣spise not one of these litle ones:Math. 18.10. Th. Aquin. in Heb. 11 1. Lects prima. for I say vn∣to you, that in heauen, their Angels alwaies behold the face of my Father which is in heauen. Then we see that Vltimus finis simpliciter ipsius fidei, quam intendimus ex fide, est beatitudo quae in aperta dei visione consistit. The last end simply of faith, which we expect by faith, is the blessed∣nesse, which consisteth in the open and plaine sight of God.Aug. de cinit dei. ibid. Praemium ita{que} fidei nobis visio ista seruatur. This sight there∣fore the reward of faith is kept for vs. And we shall know as we are knowne of God. Note by the way, that this word (As) Non importat aequalitatem cognitio∣nis, sed similitudinem tamen longinquam,Lyra. Pet. Mart. ibid. doth not import an equalitie of know∣ledge (betwixt God and vs) but a cer∣taine likenesse, yet ours is far inferiour to his.Marler. ex R. ibid. Simplex ergo sensus est cognoscam sicut & cognitus sum, hoc est, perfectissimè & certissime. The true meaning of this, I shal know as I am known,Ambr. ibid. is most per∣fectly & truly, I shal see my selfe to be present with God where Christ is. This is that which the Euangelist Iohn hath, saying: We shall see him as he is. This
Then know (beloued) that now in this life wee haue many schoolemaisters to teach vs this imperfect knowledge of God that wee haue. As. 1. Gods creatures. The heauens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shew∣eth his handie worke. Againe, the A∣postle Paul saith: His eternall power and godhead, are seene by the creation of the world, being considered in his workes. Psal. 19.1. 2. His punishments, of the con∣tempt whereof, God by Salomon com∣plaineth, saying: They haue despised all my correction. Pro. 1.30. 3. The holy scriptures. Therefore saieth Christ, Search the scriptures, for in them ye think to haue eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me. Iohn. 5.39. 4. Faith, of which saith the holy Ghost, Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the euidence of things which are not seene: Heb. 11.1. Now all these shall cease to teach vs when death comes: like the ceremonies of the lawe at the coming of Christ. Heb. 10.1.9. For what needeth a candle in the cleare and open sunne light? Then we shall not need to say one to an other, know
the Lord, for all shall know him, from the least vnto the greatest. Therefore welcome death, and come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Fourthly, though death set vpon thee as thine enemie, and do bring thee downe to the graue: yet shalt thou not feare to buckle with her, because in the end thou shalt get the maistrie of her, as Michael did of the dragon. Reue. 12.9. And triumph ouer her by the power of God, Rom. 6.4. through faith in the death of Christ. Who by his rising from death, hath ouercome these thy most mightie enemies, Sinne, Death, and Hell: Rom. 8.32.33.34. and thereby assu∣reth thee of the conquest ouer them, through him at the resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.12. For in that hee suffered and was tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. Heb. 2.18. And that hee will, the scriptures affirme plainely of Christ the seeed of the woman, that he shall breake the head of the serpent. Gen. 3.15. Hee shall destroy death for euer. Isai. 25.8. And the Lord God saith by the Prophet Hoseas: I will redeeme thee from the power of the graue, I will de∣liuer
thee from death. O death, I will be thy death: O graue, I will be thy destruction. And Paul saith:Rom. 6.9. Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more death hath no more power ouer him. Who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortalitie to light through the Gospell. Againe it is written:2. Tim. 1.10. For as much as the children were partakers of the flesh and bloud, hee also, 1. Christ himselfe likewise tooke part with them, that he might destroy through death, him that had the power of death, that is, the diuell. And that he might de∣liuer all them, which for feare of death; were all their life time subiect vnto bon∣dage. Heb. 2.14. Well therefore say the learned,Marl. ex Pet. Mart in 1. Cor. 15.17. Ipse bellum nostrum pugna∣uit, & nos: victoriae illius per fidem red∣diti sumus perticipes. Hee hath fought our battaile, and through faith wee are made partakers of his conquest. So that we may say, and not vse the Apostles words much amisse: Wee know that hee which hath raised vp the Lord Iesus, shall raise vs vp also. 2. Cor. 4.14. Euen when Christ which is our head shall appeare, then shall we appeare with him in glory. Collos. 3.4.
Then Sciant fideles se ex mundo migra∣re,Calu. in 1. Thess. 4. vt tandem colligantur in regnum dei. The faithfull doo know, that they de∣part out of the world, that at the last they may bee receiued into the king∣dome of God. And then God shall wipe away all teares from our eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more paine: for the first things are passed. Reue. 21.4. So that euen in this world, Insultare morti licet,Seb. Mai. in 1. Co. 15. tanquam subactae, quia Christi victoria nostra est. Wee may triumph ouer death as conquered, because the victo∣rie of Christ is ours. Then to end this, thankes bee vnto God which hath gi∣uen vs victorie through our Lord lesus Christ. Therefore (my deare brethren) be ye stadfast and vnmooueable, and al∣waies rich in the workes of the Lord. Why shuld you tremble at the remem∣brance of death? Further, there may be added a sift consideration, which may make death comfortable vnto vs, and though it be here last in order, yet see thou too it, as to one of the first & chiefe which must
goe before the rest. And this is, in thy whole life time carefully to expresse the truth and soundnesse of thy faith, by thy good workes. Iam. 2.20. Which GOD hath ordained that wee should walke in them: Ephe. 2.10. because the bloud of Christ hath purged our con∣science from dead workes, to serue the liuing God. Heb. 9.14. Which seruice of good workes must be done, not as causes, but as fruites that follow iusti∣fication. Quia opera bona ex ipsius iustifi∣catione operamur:Aug. de Gram. Nobi Test. ad Hono∣rat. ca. 30. Aug. ad Simpl. li. 1. Quest. 2. because our good workes doo spring from our iustificati∣on, as light from the sunne. And what∣soeuer is not of faith, is sinne. And with∣out faith it is impossible to please God. But if thou haue this oyle in thy Lamps of faith, and keepe not thy conuersati∣on in the lusts of thy flesh, fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind: thou shalt be redaie for the Bridegroome, with the fiue wise Virgins, and death can doo thee no harme. Nisi peccatum habueris non est quod mortem timeas,Stella in Luk. 12. Tom. 2. fol. 73. &c. except thou haue sinne, thou needest not feare death, but when thou doost transgresse the commaundement of
the Lord, then doest thou arme death, and make it able and strong to fight a∣gainst thy selfe.Stella in Luk. 12. Tom. 2. fol. 37. But Mors sinullum adsit peccatū imbecillis & inarmis venit: Death where sinne is absent, comes weake and vnarmed: as I hope the Spaniard will, if we haue no Traytors at home. Well,Amb. de bono mort. cap. 5. Qui vicerit non laedetur, a morte secunda. He that ouercommeth, (to wit, by the blood of the Lambe) shall not be hurt of the second death. Therefore Quod eam timeamus quae animae nocere non sc∣leat: Why should we be afraid of her, that vseth not to hurt such a soule? Feare ye not them (saith Christ) that kill the bo∣die, but are not able to kill the soule. Can the Bee hurt thee & haue lost her sting? And can death wound thy soule with∣out thine owne sin? The sting of death is sinne. Resist the diuel, and he will flie from thee: and keepe death from thine owne sword of sinne, and she shall not hurt thee. The fire flameth and fu∣meth like a tyrant, whilest it hath mat∣ter: and the Diuell hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time. But as God hath set the sea boundes, which it cannot passe, though it rage
and swell horribly; and as the strong winde may shake off the leaues from the greatest Oake, but the stocke stan∣deth firme: euen so death, the diuel, and the world, may a little trouble na∣ture, (experience heerein hath taught me something) but they cannot beate downe faith. As examples of many doo teach: Of holie Iob, Sydrach, Mi∣sach, and Abednego, Daniel the Pro∣phet, the Apostles, and holie Mar∣tyrs. Therefore saith the Apostle Paul, I am perswaded,Rom. 8.38.39. that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor po∣wers, nor thinges present, nor thinges to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any o∣ther creature, shall be able to seperate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lorde. But flie thou from sinne as from a Serpent, the matter of this sire, the baite of the Diuel, and the sting of death: by which thy soule is so wonnded, that without the mighty worke of God, thou canst not be sa∣ued. Then cease to doo euill, learne to doo well: Proue your owne workes, take the brest-plate of righteousnesse,
the shield of faith, and helmet of salua∣tion, &c. and fight a good fight. None is crowned except hee striue lawfully. Non datur Nobilitati palma sed cursui. There is no respect of persons with God, he seeth not as man seeth. There∣fore so runne that ye may obtaine: do well, and haue well; For God rewardeth euerie man according to his workes: not of due debt, but of his louing and free mercie. This is briefe; One droppe of the Sea dooth taste the saultnesse of the whole: and by this thou maiest sauour the truth. Which beeing not to be withstood: what maner of men ought we to be, in holie conuersation and righteousnesse? Why do we not shewe forth our faith by our good works?Ambr. li. de Nab. Iezr. cap. 14. Qui dines est in misericordia, diues est in deo. He that is rich in the workes of mercy, is rich in God: and this sacrifice plea∣seth him. But he that hath this worlds goods, and seeth his brother haue neede, and shutteth vp his compas∣sion from him, (as the mysers of the world doo, that will not abate one
penny in a bushell of corne, to helpe the poore) how dwelleth the loue of God in them? Euen as Christ abode a∣mong the Gargesens, he departed out of their coastes. Therefore let not your Religion be in words, as of most it is: but in deeds, as of all it should. For pure Religion and vndefiled before God, euen the Father, is this: to visite the fatherlesse and the widow in their aduersitie, and to keep himselfe vnspot∣ted of the world. This (beloued) is Comes defunctorum,Ambrose. A companion for the dead: Their workes follow them. E∣uen to testifie before the eternal Iudge, how with Henoch they haue walked and pleased God. If ye know these things, blessed are you, if ye do them. Mat. 25.35. and 7.23.24. But the contempt of thus doing, in deare yeares, do send vp many greeuous groanes of the poore members of Christs body into the eares of God. And thinke you, that the cry∣ing of the poore shall goe for nought? No, no: He that made him, will heare him. But I will lament, and pray for that which I cannot helpe. And though the waters would now flow: yet I will
stop their course: and ende with an ex∣cellent sentence of S. Ambrose, all one in effect with these of the holie Ghost: Let vs cast away the workes of darknesse:Ambr. li. de bea. Mort. c. 5. that is, Sinne that hangeth on so fast. Ab∣ducamus nos a corporis nexu, relinquamus omnia quae terrena sunt: vt cum venerit aduersarius nihil in nobis inueniat suum. The meaning is: Let vs withdraw our selues from the bondage of the flesh let vs forsake all things that are earthly and full of sinne: that when the aduersary commeth, he may finde in vs nothing of his owne. This if we doo, then let death doo what shee may, shee cannot hurt our soules.Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 1. ca. 11 So that Mala mors pu∣tanda non est, quam bona vita praecessit: Death it neuer to be accounted euill to him that hath liued well. And therfore no cause at all, why the seruants of God should once be afraid of it: though it be most wofull to the rest. And thus much to teach you for what causes death shuld be welcome vnto you.
CHAP. XIIII. Whether Christians should mourne for their friends that are dead. BVt now to correct a fault that may be seene among some: if death be so ioyfully to be accepted of, why should we mourne for them that are at rest? nay, is it lawfull to weepe for them that be dead? I answere,Gen. 23.2. when Sarai was dead, A∣braham mourned & wept for her. Whē the Patriarch Iacob thought Ioseph had bene dead,Gen. 37.34.35. he sorrowed & wept great∣ly. And when this aged Father had blessed his children,Learne this you parents and made an end of giuing charge vnto them to serue God, he plucked his feete vp into the bed, and gaue vp the ghoast. Then his louing child Ioseph fell vpon his fathers face,Gen. 50.1. and wept vpon him, and kissed him.Num. 20.29. When Aaron was dead, all Israel wept for him thirtie dayes. And so they did when Moses died.Deu. 34.8 1. Sam. 16.1. I might shewe you, how Samuel mourned for Saul, and all Israel for Samuel. Dauid and
those that were with him, for the death of Saul and Ionathan.1. Sam. 25.1. So did Dauid for Absolon. So did the old Prophet for the man of God,2. Sam. 1.11.12. that was slaine of the Lyō. What need I tell you of Mar∣tha and Mary,2. Sam. 18 33. & 19.1. 1. Reg. 13.30. and our Sauiour Christ that wept for Lazarus being dead? And many other that made lamentation for the blessed Martyr S. Stephen. As other widowes,Ioh. 11.33. that mourned for that godly woman Dorcas, with many other: which for briefnes,Acts. 8.2. as a thing needlesse here I omit. All which may seeme to teach vs to mourne for the dead. Now on the other side when Samuel wept for Saul,Cyril. being cut off from the fa∣uour of God,1. Sam. 16 1. the Lorde as being an∣gry with him, reproued him for his sorrowing. When King Dauid perceiued that his childe was dead, (for which hee fa∣sted and sorrowed greatly whilest it laic sicke) hee arose vp, and mourned no longer. Thē his seruants maruelled, why hee so sorrowed when it liued: and left off whē it was dead, and they asked him the cause. Dauid answered: While the child was yet aliue, I fasted & wept: for I said, who can tel, whether God wil haue
mercie on me, that the childe may liue. But now, it being dead, wherfore shuld I fast? Can I bring him againe any more? I shall goe to him, but he shall not returne againe to me? And so hee did not mourne for his dead. Christ comforting the widdow of Naim ouer her sonnes corpes, which shee with her neighbours were going for to burie, he said, Weepe not. Luk. 7.13. And Christ himselfe the Lambe of God going to be offered a sweete smelling sacrifice for the sinnes of the people, euen to be crucified: there followed him a great multitude of people & women, which women bewailed and lamented him, euen because hee was going to death. But Iesus turned backe vnto them, and said, Daughters of Ierusalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues, and for your children. Luk 23.27. S. Aug. saith of Christs mourning for Lazarus:Aug. de Cosol. mort. lib. 1 cap. 4. Fleuit plane & dominus Lazarum iam sepultum, non vtiquè vt flendi mortuos formam da∣ret, &c. (I know what Cyril saith); The Lord wept indeed ouer Lazarus that was buried, but not to teach vs how to mourne for the dead.
But either to shewe by his teares, that he had a true humane body, or else hee did lament of sincere loue to the Iewes: Qui nec dei signo monstrato,Aug. ibid. erant in cum credituri, which would not beleeue in him, though hee shewed them the mightie power of God. And thus it seemeth that wee should not mourne for the dead. Here now you see is a great contro∣uersie, what will you determine? Who thinke you will haue the foyle? or what dayes men shall wee finde to end the contention? Let vs not goe to lawe, for there the greedinesse of money will deferre our cause. And the Goose will scarce be left, whilest there is a feather on her backe: And in the end the coun∣trie must trie conscience. To reconcile all, and keepe peace, without any great losse or harme to ei∣ther partie, our good neighbours at home, which are the holy scriptures, well marking the matter, determine that in mourning for the dead there be two things to be noted.
That in mourning for the dead, there be two things to be noted. 1. What is to be obserued. 2. What is to be auoyded. That which must be obserued, is, 1. Faith. 2. Charitie. Faith, to moderate vs, Ne nimium doleamus sine spe resurrectionis, That we mourne not too much, as men without hope of the resurruction. Therfore the Apostle Paul instructeth the Thessalo∣nians, saying:1. Thes. 4.13. I would not (brethren) haue you ignorant concerning them which are a sleepe, that ye sorrowe not euen as others which haue no hope. That is, of the im∣mortalitie of the soule, and resurrection of the body, like Infidels. For we looke for the Sauiour, the Lord Iesus Christ: who shall change our vilde body, that it may be fashioned like vnto his glorious body, according to the mightie wor∣king, whereby hee is able to subdue all things vnto himselfe. Thus Faith is first to be regarded. The second thing is Charitie, by
which nature is forced to mourne and sorrow for the departure of our neare and deare faithfull friend, a sound and good Christian, for the Cōmon-wealth profitable, and to the poore comforta∣ble. This loue the Iewe thought, made Christ weepe when Lazarus was dead: Therefore they said, Beholde how he loued him. And thus saith S. Augustine. Contristamur ergo nos, &c. We there∣fore are heauie for our dead, because of necessitie we must part from them: but yet with this hope, againe for to see them. Inde angimur, hinc consolamur:Ioh. 11.36. inde infirmitas afficit, hinc fides reficit, inde dolet humana conditio, hinc sanat diuina promissio. For that wee are grieued, in this we are comforted: for that weake∣nesse weares, in this faith reuiues vs: for that, our fraile nature mourneth: but in this, Gods promise doth strengthen vs. This loue and affection, together with faith, is not to be condemned, and it is lawful to mourn with them that mourn. Rom. 12.15. That which must bee auoyded in Funeralls, and mourning for the dead, is three things.
1. Superstition. 2. Hypocrisie. 3. Immoderate sorrow. Superstition was great among the Gentiles: it is litle lesse among the Pa∣pists: I know not who else do vse it. Of which if thou wilt thou mayest see Po∣licanus, and Caluin, and the Gloss. ord. vpon the 1. Thess. 4. And because this is mightily ouer∣throwne & condemned by many from the word of God: and I so litle cause to speake of it among you, I will (hauing bene long) please you, and ease my self; and make an end of this, with the opini∣on of S. Augustine, who saith: Pompa funeris,Aug. de verb. A∣post. ser. 32 The pompe of burialls. Agmina exequiarum sumptuosa deligentia sepul∣turae, monumentorum opulenta constructio viuorum sunt qualiacun{que} solatia non ad∣iutoria mortuorum. The traine of so∣lemne mourners, the costly preparati∣on or care of buriall, and the rich buil∣ding of Sepulchres, are some, (such as they bee) consolations or pleasures for them that are liuing, but no helpe os
comfort at all to the dead. Masse-mon∣gers are ashamed to see this. Permittan∣tur ita{que} pia corda. Suffer therefore god∣ly mindes to sorrow for their dead, so that it be without superstition. Hypocrisie is most shamefull and damnable in mourning for the dead. Thus Herod mourned or seemed hea∣uie, when Iohn Baptist was to be behea∣ded. The text saith: The King was sor∣rie. Math. 14.9. But it was but from the teeth outward. For the truth is, hee was glad that the mote was out of his eye, which would not suffer him to en∣ioy his incest. Yet hee could not for shame, but seeme sorrowfull for him whom the rest loued. Therefore he is like to those wicked women and chil∣dren that would gladly haue their hus∣bands and fathers dead, because they thinke them to bee some lettes vnto them to accomplish their wicked desi∣ers. Such feigne themselues to weepe, like Tekoah, 2 Sam. 14.2. but their sto∣nie hearts, without an onyon in a nap∣kie, can wring out as many teares from their hypocriticall eyes, as iuyce from a mill-stone, though they grumble much
alike, and I pray you is this commend∣able? The third thing to bee auoyded in mourning for our dead, or when any crosse is laid vpon vs, is immoderate weeping & howling. This God repro∣ued in Samuel, sorrowing for king Saul, though he were not dead, but cast off from God, saying: How long wilt thou mourne for Saul, seeing I haue cast him a∣way from raigning ouer Israel? This was folly in old Iacob, who thus grieuously mourning for Ioseph (whom he thought had bene dead) vtterly refused to bee comforted of his children, and so con∣tinued weeping. And Dauid was great∣ly to be blamed, who though he mour∣ned not when his infant was dead, yet outragiously he lamented and tormen∣ted himselfe for the death of the traitor Absolon, that sought to depose him frō his kingdome. 2. Sam. 18.33. This too too wofull lamenting for the dead, Al∣mightie God fobad in the time of the Lawe, and vnder the holy Gospell it is not to be vsed. The Lord saith: You shall not cut your flesh for the dead, neither make any print of a marke vpon you: I
am the Lord. Leuit. 12.28. This some come very neare vnto, that pull them∣selues, and teare their flesh, as howling in infidelitie. From which the holy A∣postle counselleth: Chrysostome dis∣swadeth, which Cyril greatly disliketh: S. Ambrose reproueth, and S. Augu∣stine sharply condemneth. So then hy∣pocrisie, superstition, and excessiue sor∣row auoyded, faith and charitie obser∣ued: Funeralls and mourning, are com∣mendable ouer the dead, and may law∣fully be vsed, after the examples of the Patriarkes, Prophets, holy men, Christ, his Apostles, and other the Saints of God. Therefore well saith Iesus Syrach, Let not them that weepe be without com∣fort, but mourne with them that mourne: Eccles. 7.34. For there is a time for all things. Eccles. 3.1. But make small wee∣ping for the dead, for he is at rest. Yet vse lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, least thou be euil spo∣ken of, and then comfort thy selfe for thy heauinesse. For of heauinesse com∣meth death, and the heauinesse of the heart breaketh the strength, and dry∣eth vp the bones. Eccles. 38.17.18.
This Christ forbad not, when hee said Weepe not for me.Stella. ibid. Luk. 23. Non prohibet dominus compassionē sed pudeat aliam luc∣tus causam. The Lord doth not forbid their compassiō, but foresheweth them a greater cause of lamentatiō. Of which Iesus Christ spake, when he said: Woe be to them, that are with childe, and to them that giue sucke in those daies. Luk. 21.23. He ment because of the warre and destruction that should come vp∣on them, when they should not be able to flie, or flying should haue no com∣fort. Againe, S. Augustine reprouing as well the hardnesse of mans heart, as commending kinde compassion and loue,Aug. lib. 19. cap. 8. de ciuit. dei saith: Of whom we haue had singu∣lar comfort and friendship in their life∣time, how is it possible that for their depar∣ture we should not be sorrowfull? And an other saith:Marl. ex Iod. Ʋilic. in . Thes. 4 Calu. ibid. Quis vnquam? Who euer denied Chistians to mourne for their dead, except he were a stocke, or al∣together a very stone? And Caluin saith; This is the summe of all, we must not mourne for our dead too immode∣rately: but the sorrow of the godly
must be mixed with comfort, which may guide them vnto patience. And therefore the holy Apostle saith, Wee must not murmur against God. 1. Cor. 10.10. And so make a lawfull thing vn∣lawfull and damnable. Then to con∣clude our matters of the graue, let vs haue a due regard vnto this that is spoken, and vse our health and sicknesse aright, so that it may be said of vs, as it is of holy Iob in his heauinesse. In all this did not Iob offend, nor charge God foolish∣ly. And thus much for the down-fall of Pride. CHAP. XV. A briefe note of Hell. NOw to her destruction, to the sides of the it: that is, euerlasting death and damnation. Not that I counsell you to goe thither, but that I feare many wil: and I would forewarne you of that place of torments. The God of heauen giue vs grace to be warned whilest we haue time: for it will be too late to seeke for helpe, as Diues did, when the gate of geace shall be shut a∣gainst vs.
The proud heart of Nabuchadnez∣zar perswaded it selfe to get aboue the cloudes, as the Spaniard spiteth vs, and to be like the most high God, that is, he determined to take Ierusalem, which the Lord had chosen to be an habitati∣on for himselfe, and of Pride hee ment to tread downe the people of God vn∣der his feet, as the Pope did the Empe∣rour. But he is brought downe, (and so shall (I trust) the Spaniard, if our Pride and sin hold him not vp) to the graue, euen to the sides of the pit. By which is ment, that Pride shall haue the grea∣test torments and chiefest roome in hel of all other sinnes, because on earth she hath bene the foremost & chiefe ring∣leader of all other.Musc. in Isai. 14.15. Qui similis esse vole∣bas deo: pro coelo demersus es in tenebras inferni. Thou which wouldest be like vnto God, in stead of heauen, thou art drowned or plunged in the darknesse of hell. It is euen the same iudgement which the sonne of God Christ Iesus, denounced against proud Capernaum, saying: And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heauen, shalt be thrust downe to hell. Luk. 10.15.
Hell is a place without the heauen, prepared of God, with vnspeakeable, most horrible, confused, & euerlasting torments for the damned. Of which, though the extreame and full horror thereof, cannot of man bee expressed, no not if a damned soule were permit∣ted to expresse what it could of the paine, it is not able to describe that, which it most wofully feeleth: yet the holy scriptures of God do speak plain∣ly and sufficiently thereof, for our lear∣ning and instruction, most wonderfull to behold. Whereof many men haue written learnedly: the chiefe substance whereof, thou shalt finde collected by Parsons in his Resolution, the ninth Chapter: vnto which for this time I will send you. 1. Because of the truth of the argument, and the plaine & easie maner of handling it. 2. As also I must confesse I cannot much amend it, nei∣ther now stay to speake that which I would of it. 3. Because honour is to be giuen to whom honour is due. The Idollators rob God of his honour: and he that taketh an other mans workes without his name, is like a theefe that
stealeth an other mans goods to enrich himselfe. As many do in these dayes, that cause the poore to smart, as vsu∣rers, extortioners, oppressors, theeues, and the couetous, &c. for whom is re∣serued the myst of darknesse for euer, without repentance. And thus for this time, I haue finished that which I de∣termined for the Lord, beeing but able to rough-hewe my timber, and so leaue it the more readie for a better builder. God graunt we may all build together the worke of the Lord, to the hum∣ble and perfect finishing of our faith, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Lord liueth, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of my saluation. Psal. 18.47. Amen. FINIS.
Si malè quid dictū est hominem dixisse memento: Si bene quid dixi, gloria Chri∣ste tua est. Is ought here past my penne humane? that same is due to mee: But what is right, and true, O God, that same I haue of thee. And thee do praise for all thy grace, and knowledge of thy word. O Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, one God, and mightie Lord. Let vs pray. O Holy and eternall God, most mightie Lord, and mercifull Father, whose truth reacheth vn∣to the heauens, & righteousnesse vnto the ends of the world, which haste now taught vs, that those which exalt themselues, shall be brought downe to the graue, to
the sides of the pit, euen to hell, giue vs grace, that we by thy pow∣er may subdue the flesh vnto the spirit, that wee may be the habita∣tion of thine owne holinesse, and the place which thou hast chosen to put thy name there. So shall wee be safe vnder thy protection, and our hearts shall be filled with ioy, as the Temple was with the glory of the Lord. And then as Sy∣meon reioyced to embrace Christ, so shall wee to receiue death with∣out trembling through faith, be∣ing assured of deliuerance from thy wrath. Heare vs ô Lord for Iesus Christs sake, our onely Me∣diator and Aduocate. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all thankes, and praise, and honour, and power, and glo∣ry, and maiestie ascribed, now, and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
