5369.2 22852020 25812
A RECANTATION Of an ill led Life. OR A discouerie of the High-way Law. WITH Vehement disswasions to all (in that kind) OFFENDERS. As also Many cautelous Admonitions and full Instructions, how to know, shun, and apprehend a Theefe. MOST Necessarie for all honest Trauellers to per'use, obserue and Practise. Written by Iohn Clauell, Gent. Ego non, sum, Ego. —Quantum mutatus ab illo? Approued by the KINGS most Excellent Maiestie, and published by his expresse Commaund. LONDON, Printed for the Authous vse, 1628.
The Epistle Dedicatorie. To the Kings most Ex∣cellent Maiestie. THat you may see (great King) you haue not done▪ A worke in which your glory shall not liue, In sauing me: the course which I haue runne, Behold, deciphred, here to you I giue. In which I doe so punctually set forth Euen in the liueliest colours what I know Of those base wayes: that who so has of worth The meanest sparke, will scorne the like to doe. I haue not only charactred this ill, But Actors to; that the least iudging eye Those Locusts, which your Land with trouble fill, May, in their chief'st disguises, them discrie. So that in sauing me, you haue destroy'd, O Heauen knowes what; a crew of those vild things, By whom your better people were anoy'd, Whose liues may now speake seruice to their Kings. And for my selfe, let my Detractors call, This course a seruile one, and to my shame
Say I haue rip'd, the bowels vp of all, And to preserue my life, haue lost my fame By such detections; but (great Sir) you know, Your bountie, without article or tie, My forfeit life so freely did bestow, You bad, it was obey'd, I did not die. This then I pay to you a double debt, First, to that grace preseru'd me, (which is yours:) Next that borne dutie I must not forget The subiect ow's to Princes, and their powers. The last made greater by the first: engage Both life and dutie in a two-fold band; Which may produce vnto succeeding age Stories worth my redemption; which may stand, With the faire memories of men: so plac'd, The times may blesse your mercy; by whose grace This shame and ills of mine are quite defac'd, When vertue shall succeed in vice his place: So that what after good my life shall bring, Must needs be call'd the blessing of my King. Your Maiesties most humbly deuoted prostitute. Iohn Clauell.
TO HER NEVER TO BE equall'd MAIESTIE, the Queene of Great Brittaine, &c. HOnours Store-house, Vertues Storie, Fames best Trophie, Natures Glorie. O may with mosse the Muses floud, Be ouer growne, damm'd vp with mud: All their holy Hils polluted, And their Oracles confuted, If that they straine not all they may, Now their best vowes to you to pay; And hoarse as Rauens may they sing, Who dare neglect their offering; Or find a subiect for a Verse, That any meaner worths rehearse; You the true Storie are, and all That's rich, faire, sweet, Maiesticall. The fullest wonder of our time For Chronicles, in Prose, or Rime. Aud like the Rosie morne doe blesse Our drooping Land with cheerefulnesse;
Throwing your bountie's euery where As fresh, and fragrant as the ayre. The Woodbines, and the Violet The Season of the Yeare forget: And to attend your sweetnesse doe Grow euery where, you tred, or goe. I, in the Autume of my life, When guilt, and Iustice were at strife, Was by your royall breath (strange thing) Vnwithered, turn'd into my Spring. Accept this Sacrifice (great Queene) In which no merit can be seene, But that your Royall Name doe blesse My Muse in her vnworthinesse. And though no lustre crowne my art, Holy fires inspires my heart. Obedience, Dutie, Zeale, attend The faithfull tribute, that I send. So the Gods accept of still Not the off'ring but the will. Celuy qui plus honor vos vertus & admire vostre Bonte, & Cle∣mence & qui est le plus oblige a vostre Maieste. Iehan Clauell.
To the no lesse ennobled by Vertue, then Honourable by their Titles, and Dignities; the Duchesses, Marchionesses, Countesses, with the rest of the most worthy and noble La∣dies, of the Court of that great Queene of Mercie, her Maiestie of Great Brittaine. THe hardest heart, with rudest hand, That is least subiect to command, That feares not God, grimme Death, nor Hell, Nor euer knew but to rebell, Seizing by force, and rifling all That in his greedie Clutches fall, As you passe by, must in a Maze (Voyd of all power) stand and gaze; Such awe a Ladies presence beares, Filling a Rake-hells heart, wih feares; Besides, you alwayes haue your guide, And a safe Conuoy, as you ride; Not to profect you (there's no need) Is then this Storie, (you may reade;) This chiefly is, to let you see My good amendments constancie; Our blessed Queene (mou'd thereunto I doe presume, by some of you) Preseru'd my life; accept you then Iust thankes, from my vnskilfull pen; Loe, this I was enioyn'd to write, But I meane shortly to indite A perfect, true, and ample Storie, That shall speake nothing, but your glory; Accept (meane while) what beere you see; You'le otherwise, dishearten mee. The admired of Vertues, Iohn Clauell.
To the right Honourable the Lords of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuie Counsaile, and Counsaile of Warre. Right Honourable. So vild, and audacious, so publike, and rebel∣lious haue mine offences beene; such, and so extraordinary the mercy I haue receiued (of both which I am truly sensible) that I wish really, and sincerely from my heart, I had suffered the shame∣full death was due vnto mee, then, that now there is a faire occasion, I should bee debarred from regaining my lost honour, and reputation, in his Maiesties Warres abroad. May it please your Honours, when I saw all my fellow offen∣ders, and other Delinquents whatsoeuer dis∣charged and sent vpon imployment, I enuied not their happinesse, but seriously began to con∣sider, how I (who alone was denied that fairest way of all) might doe my Country some seruice, euen whilst I continued here, an vnfortunate,
and wretched prisoner. Thus sadly musing (fin∣ding my Conscience burthened,) I resolued to write this reall Recantation of all my euill wayes; whereby I haue not only disarmed, and preuen∣ted my selfe, from falling into the same lewd course of life, at any time hereafter; but also so fully and faithfully instructed all honest Trauel∣lers, that no man that will bee pleased to follow my aduise, can from hence forth, (that way) miscarry. Sithence therefore I haue yeelded so faire a testimonie, both of my contrition, and conuersion; I most humbly beseech your Ho∣nours to entertaine a fauourable, and good opi∣nion of me, and (moued thence vnto commisera∣tion) that you would vouchsafe to grant a War∣rant for my discharge, that I may not spend my youthfull dayes in this miserable and wretched prison, but may on, vpon my Prince, and Coun∣tries seruice; where I am resolued to acquite my selfe, by some braue, and notable exploite, or a worthy death; and whilst I liue, I shall at all times rest accountable for my libertie, and the life that is lent Your Honours, most embounden, vn∣worthy, and distressed Suppliant, Iohn Clauell. Kings Bench Prison Octob. 1627.
To all his Honourable, Noble, and neuer to bee enough thanked Friends at the Court. THere's no necessitie that can exclude the poorest being from a gratitude. And where the strength of Fortune lends no more, He that is truly thankfull, is not poore. Were I to pay this debt to courser men, I might dispaire; and mine owne fate contemne; Their satisfaction only liues in things That profit, or the Golden tribute brings. But your farre finer soules in Heauen that dwell, Despise those meaner ends, so neere to Hell. And for your owne sakes noble actions doe As well as theirs, they are extended to. Yours be the bountie then, mine the great debt: On which no time, nor power can ransome set. Yours most obliged, I. C.
To the impartiall Iudges of his Maiesties Bench, my Lord Chiefe Iustice, and his other three Honourable Assistants. THose pardon'd men who taste their Princes loues, (As married to new life) do giue you Gloues; But I haue chosen rather to present You, with the off'ring of a faire intent. And though your iustest sentence lost it's scope, Yet I presume, your goodnesse will find hope In my vnquestion'd alteration: so You kil'd my sin, though my life 'scapt the blow. And that is justice obiect's faire extent, To iudge the Past, the new ills to preuent. For were the Bench of mens repentance sure: None should the strictnesse of the Law endure. So thriue this worke, as in effect it may My vice, and true repentance, both display. Your distressed Prisoner, I. Clauell.
To the right Worshipfull the Iustices of Peace, and Gentlemen of qualitie in this KINGDOME. Right Worshipfull, VSuall, and ordinary is your contribution to the reliefe of those, that suffer losse by the High-way side (the Law requiring it) great is your care and trou∣ble, almost at euery Session and Assize, in tryall of those, who that way offend; seriously to bee lamented is the losse of many young Gentlemen (well descended) who haue beene, for that fact, found guilty, and accor∣dingly suffered, vntimely ignominious, yet deserued deaths; These mischiefes, and inconueniences I haue ob∣serued, and seriously considered; so that (partly to exte∣nuate my owne foule offences, partly to procure ease vnto my burdened conscience, but most especially that the like may not bee hereafter) I haue written this Discouery, which I entitle my Recantation; I haue heereby not onely preuented the baser sort of people from committing such rebellious out-rages, but also laid open to the better sort (I meane too such as are of Gentle Parentage) the foule∣nesse and basenesse of the Act, that who so hath the least rellish of a Gentleman, will be no more seduced, and that way misled; now if it take this good effect (as I heartily wish it may) I shall account my selfe happy, although I continue still, A distressed Prisoner. I. C.
To the Right Worshipfull, Sir Robert Heath Knight, the Kings Atturney; and Esquire, one of his Maiesties Iohn Clauell wisheth long life, and prosperitie in this, with eternall happinesse in the World to come. IN the relaps of my danger (as I may so terme it) when I was thought past cure, you were plea∣sed to administer, and your vndertakings were not in vaine, for the breath, I breathe, is what, you then procured vnto me; the motiues that moued you hereunto, (as well as Charitie, and mercifull disposi∣tion) were (questionlesse) your good opinions, that I would from thencefoorth become an honest man; I therefore, that your expectation may not be frustrate, and that you may not bethinke the good Act you did, but rather glorie in what you haue done, haue made, a reall and faithfull Recantation, of all my euill wayes; which I here publish vnto the World, and (as most especially bound) perticularly present you with; take it as the inward man, vouchsafe it your kind acceptance, gentle censure, and favourable protecti∣on, but aboue all I doe desire the continuance of your Loue, whilest I shall bee, what I here professe my selfe An altered man I. C.
To the right Worshipfull, his euer deare and well approued good Vncle, Sir William Clauell Knight Banneret. YOur hidden purposes (graue Sir) that rest, Within the secret closet of your brest, Haue like predomination with my Fate, I shall be happy or vnfortunate, As they assigne me; you may iustly take A faire occasion now; both to forsake And vtterly renounce me; but behold My God aboue (whose secrets are vntold, All things on Earth as he thinkes best decreeing, What will my future actions be, foreseeing) Hath lent me life, and mercie, by my King, Who is his Substitute, in euery thing; Since then their doome is past, O let not me Be new arraign'd, by your seueritie; Forget my foule offences, me, and all, Vntill some braue, and noble actions shall Bring you a new acquainted, if againe I euer take a course, what shall be vaine, Or if of any ill, I faultie be, O then for euer disinherit me. Your right sorrowfull Nephew, Iohn Clauell.
To all the graue, and learned Seriants and Counsellours at LAW. THere needs no cunning Settor to betray To his companions, when, nor yet which way You are to ride, nor need the theeues be told What store of coyne you carrie; they all hold You to be rich, and certaine prize, beside They know when from, when to, the terme you ride; Great is your danger then; which to preuent Peruse I pray what with a faire intent Is offered to your view, if by whats here (When you shall be beset) you get off cleere, My ioy shall be, iust like the ioy you take, When for your pleading, and good counsaile sake, A poore man still in peace retaines his owne, Who otherwise had beene, quite ouerthrowne. Your in all due obseruance, I. C.
To the Reader. THe liueliest and best Monuments of men are their actions, and in those, their me∣mories either die before them in infamy, or suruiue them vnto the farthest extent of per∣petuitie in the fullest and fairest Registers of time, and glorie; both of these retaine their subsisten∣ces, not in the brazen leaues of Sepulchres, nor in the tongue-failing relation of succession, but in those Paper Records, which seldome forfeite them to losse, although assaulted by neuer so many alterations, as the Stories from the first World, as well prophane, as diuine, may wonderfully witnesse to all Obseruers, This truth may question my discretion, that haue made mine owne hand the Character of such actions as Posteritie will blush at, whose me∣mory might easily haue lost the thoughts of men in lesse then halfe an age. If thus I had not giuen
it continuance as lasting as the World; It is con∣fest in respect of my selfe the answere is difficult, but in respect of God, the World, and mine owne conscience, I could contriue no fairer or more reall satisfaction. The sinnes of the dee∣rest children of God haue had their like pu∣nishments, Dauid's Murther and Adulterie must haue Dauid's written Confession and Contrition, Salomons Lasciuiousnesse must haue his owne acknowledgement and recantation, and to con∣clude, he that is ashamed to confesse the ills hee hath beene conscious of, argues too palpably that he is a great many leagues from repentance, and is more in loue with his sinne, then his a∣mendment. Belieue in Charitie, this is my resolu∣tion, that mine owne free detection of this perni∣cious and common vice, might not only kill the feare of my impossible relapses, but be a iust de∣terrer of all the worshippers of this course. Nor can I feare, that such Idolatry of theirs can rise in Iudgement against this truth of mine, which hath so honestly condemned them, and their acti∣ons: or that their reuenges, which they haue al∣readie proclaymed against the innocence of my Recantation, can reach farther then the counsels of Achitophel, Whose effect extended to selfe ruine, whilst I shall be happie, to be either censu∣red,
or forgotten by them; for whose amend∣ment I owe my Prayers, and will Religiously inuoke; that they may, either become new men like me, or else, that they may know my resolution hath built me beyond the aspersion of their poysons Nor can I feare the ill con∣struing of this worke of mine, they that loue truth, and reconciliation of wild youth (to that perfection the first Creation intended) will loue my expression, more then my Verse; and hugge my intended innocence, more then they can in goodnesse condemne my detected Offences; The rest, that are Gald, or preuented by this Discouerie must not dare to Iudge, because all indifferencie is denied them. Nor can they whose hatreds against my Person, or Actions, haue drawne, into a resolued opposing, of my fairest cour∣ses, clayme any Language in the condem∣nation of my Booke, or profession of amend∣ment, since their splenatiue Soules will draw them into a worse extremitie of censure, then euer my most prouoking needes could mee, into the high way of this kind of sinning. How so euer it is taken, it is honestly meant, and will prooue (questionlesse) a wholesome
preuention for the honest traueller, whose sa∣tisfaction I couet, that my ills may finde some redemption that way, which is the fullest am∣bition and hope of Your well wisher, Iohn Clauell. From my louely sad, and vnfrequented Cham∣ber in the Kings Bench, October, 1627.
The Argument of the whole Booke. AN Introduction. ☞ Folio 1 A free acknowledgement and confession of my foule offences both to God and man, with my preparation and resolution, when I was to haue saffered death. ☞ Folio 4 An absolute defiance of all those that follow my late course of life, li∣uing vpon the spoile. ☞ Folio 8 The high∣way Law. 1. The oath euerie young theefe takes, when he is ad∣mitted a brother of the companie. ☞ Folio 10 2. The order prescribed, or the charge giuen by the oldest theefe, to the rest, before they attempt. ☞ Folio 12 3. The manner of their assault, and how they behaue themselues in the action, and after. ☞ Folio 13 How soone and ill they spend, what thus vnlawfully they get. ☞ Folio 16 Hearty dis∣swasions with my best ende∣uour to re∣claime them. 1. By shewing them the miserie of a prison, which must be their first step. ☞ Folio 17 2. By giuing them to vnderstand, how much they are mis∣taken in other mens opinions of them. ☞ Folio 21 3. By putting them in minde of their wretched and cur∣sed ends (which they fondly iest at.) ☞ Folio 2. As also their reward in the world to come. ☞ Folio 28 4. That they must not presume on my example of grace, which was most extraordinarie in many respects. ☞ Folio 23
Instructi∣ons for the honest tra∣neller, that bee may passe in safetie. 1. What he is to take heed vnto, before he take his iour∣ney. ☞ Folio 30 2. How to carrie himselfe in his Inne. ☞ Folio 31 3. The danger of trauelling on the Sabhath day. ☞ Folio 31 4. How as he rides he shall know a theefe from an honest man. ☞ Folio 32 5. An instance, how dangerous it is to grow familiar with any stranger vpon the way. ☞ Folio 34 6. When to ride. ☞ Folio 34 7. Where to ride. ☞ Folio 35 8. How to ride. ☞ Folio 36 9. What is to be done, if he be beset. ☞ Folio 37 (A foule fault where of many trauellers are guiltie. ☞ Folio 39 10. If by chance he be vnawares surprized, how to be∣haue himselfe. ☞ Folio 40 11. Being robd, how to follow, which way to set forth Hue and Cry, how to coast, and where to finde the theeues. ☞ Folio 42. An extraordinarie charge the Countrey vsually put themselues vnto, which is both needlesse and hurtfull. ☞ Folio 44 Diuers instructions for the Inne-keeper, how to know theeues from his honest guests. ☞ Folio 46 The Con∣clusion. 1. Wherein I proue my recantation to be reall. ☞ Folio 50, 54 2. Wherein I answer some aspersions laid on a guiltlesse person, to whom I am much indebted, and how. ☞ Folio 52 3. Wherein I humbly beseech his Maiestie, to bee graci∣ously pleased to employ me in some seruice, and not to banish me. ☞ Folio 56 A Postscript vnto his Maiestie for my enlargement: ☞ Folio 59
CLAVELL'S Recantation. ☞ STand and deliuer to your obseruation, Right serious thoughts, that you by my relati∣on May benefit, for otherwise in vaine I write, you reade, vnlesse from hence you gaine The happinesse I meane you; blest is he That will make vse of others ieopardie. Be warn'd by me, so may you purchace hence At a cheape rate my deare experience. You must not looke from me to haue the straine Of your Black-friers Poets, or the vaine. Of those high flying men, whose rare Muse brings Forth births, that Gossipt are by Lords and Kings. For though I oft haue seene Gadd's-hill, and those Red tops of Mountaines, where good people lose, Their ill kept purses, I did neuer climbe Pernassus Hill, or could aduenture time, To tread the Muses Mazes, or their floore Because I knew that they are lightly poore,
And Shooters Hill was fitter farre for me, Where pas'd releifes for my owne pouertie. I neuer rode on Pegasus (for then I had fled farther then pursuite of men) If therefore you expect a loftie straine, You wrong your selues, and me, your thoughts are vaine. Perchance my Verse may amble, trot, or flie As if my frights presented Hue and Crie To dogge me still, nor (Poetlike) I faigne My theame is Truth, my selfe the subiect plaine. I cannot play the Satire; my disguise Fairely pluck't off, I am nor grim, nor wise, Nor curst enough to scourge, no Beadle I To punish you with petilasherie: I meane to paint my selfe, and not to be The Chronicler of others infamie. I will not ayme at Motes within your eyes, For I confesse in mine a beame their lies; Which I plucke out, and deale as punctually As if I spake against mine enemie. Let this inuite you then, these newest wayes Of selfe inuectiue writing. Now adayes Each one commends himselfe, and others blame Of faults, when he is guiltie of the same, Yea and of worser too, and seeming wise As folly will the daintest Wits despise. Such has beene my conceite, for I was prone To blame each action, which was not mine owne,
Belieuing what I did was good, maintaining That my vngodly and worst way of gaining Was more legitimate, and farre more fit Then borrowing, and thus I argu'd it. Who, in the way of loane, takes from his friend Whom he findes kinde, and ready for to lend, The maine of his estate, with an intent (Premeditated basely) fraudulent: Betrayes a trust, and in performance slacke, Breakes both his word, his owne, and his friends backe, Who findes no remedy; but who hath lost His purse, repayd is at the Countries cost, Besides the theefe sayes not he will repay, Nor is't expected from him, and yet they That borrow, will a thousand oaths let fly, And wish they may be damn'd eternally If that they faile, and thus the purse they fill, Make light their oaths, and load their soules with ill. But hence capitulation, hee's not free From ill, that would by ill excused bee. Such Sophistrie as this, and such beleefe The Prince of darknesse Satan, that old theefe Did prompt me to; he first perswades to sin, Then firmely that we may continue in The foule transgressions we commit: he tells What faire excuse we may alledge; which quells Our good intentions to desist: he saies Vnto the quarreller it is a praise
For to affront the meeke, and a great glorie To boast thereof, and to repeat the storie. The enuious, and the sullen minded man That aimes at bloud, and ruine all he can, He cherishes, and sayes it is but meet, Bids him persist, and that reuenge is sweet. Thus Satan pleads, thus he deludes vs all, And then at last he glories in our fall. ☞But horrid Sire of Hell, I doe descry, And finde thou art the Father of each lie, That a delinquent has for his excuse, And therein doth consist thy maine abuse Vnto mankinde, immediatly next that Temptation which made Eue to perpetrate; For since that damned act of thine, 'tis true We sinne by nature, but are borne anew Through Christ, which blest regeneration Has notwithstanding no relation To those accursed, that doe want the grace, For to appeale thereto: or haue the face To iustifie themselues, and with a lie As 'twere confront the sacred deity. Had Adam too, not from his iust God fled, Had he confess'd, as otherwaies he did Denie what he had done, and had he cried For mercy, when himselfe he iustified, I doe beleeue the vengeance for his sin Had not so lasting, and so heauie bin.
Thus I debated with my selfe when I Was first attach'd, and kept so priuately That none must visite me, and euen then Not being allowed to haue aduice of men, To thee my gracious God I did appeale, To thee (who knew'st before) I did reueale, Confesse, acknowledge, and bewaile my sinnes, Assertained that whosoeuer winnes Mercy and fauour from thee, must repent, That onely causes thee for to relent And stay thy wrath, I said within my heart, All idle wandring thoughts first set apart, O God most mercifull thou knowest all, What is, what was, and what hereafter shall, If thy foreseeing knowledge doth descry, That if I liue, I will liue wickedly, And licking vp the vomit of my sinne, The same or a worse way of ill begin Now let thy thundring hand my curs'd dayes end, But if my euill daies I shall amend, And by a true conuersion yeeld thee praise And glory, then, O then in mercy raise Me from the snares of death, direct me to Both what I am to speake, and what to doe. Thus I besought my God; what comfort then And ease came to my minde, neither my pen Can write, nor you imagine, for that blisse He onely knowes, by whom enioy'd it is.
But whilst this contemplation did transport My rauish'd minde, behold another sort O thoughts assault me, that the Deuill might Lose all his power in me in this great fight, Me thought vpon a sodaine I beheld My Conscience frighted with my sinnes, that yeld, And cry'd, accusing me, my ills were such, The glorie that I saw, I might not touch; The World, on th'other side, by me offended Inditing me, with euidence transcended All trialls here, for who will nor conesse, Addes to his fault, and doth a new tangresse. The heauenly Iudge knew all, and could enforme The Iurie how my passages were borne. Then Satan that had tempted, next comes in, And though he fashion'd, yet reueal'd my sinne. So that I conscious, all amazed stood Betwixt so much of ill, so much of good. And as my comforts reached at the Crowne, Frozen despaire assayes to plucke me downe. At length my sinnes (me thoughts) like clouds did fly, And vanish'd quite, and none accuser by To peale against my pardon, which seal'd stood, Writ in the Lambes deare innocence, and blood; And all my ruines were restor'd in that He that must iudge me is my Aduocate. And thus prepar'd, induc'd, assur'd, I came To my confession here, resolu'd to name
And to particularize all my offences, My ill got goods, and dearer times expences, To satisfie sterne Iustice in each point, Vnscruing my disguises ioynt, by ioynt. Not caring though this freenesse might depriue My being here, and take me from the liue To mingle with the dead, if but from hence My forfeit life might pay for mine offence, I did not then vnto the Iudge at home Deny those ills, which were perhaps vnknowne To his enquirie, nor refuse to tell What euer I had done that was not well. And at the barre when death and iustice stood Not greedy for, but challenging my blood As debt to them: I did not faintly then Before the faces of so many men That witnesse my arraignment, or deny My foulest deeds, nor could the feare to dye About me houer with a face so grimme, As not to ease my conscience of the sinne I had committed, that my iudgement might, How sad so ere, be equall yet, and right. And that the glorie vnto God might be More than the pitie was bestow'd on me. Nor was it hope of mercie, that my youth Might purchace fauour only for this truth, Or that the Bench in policie might saue Me from the clawes of death, in hope to haue
Such freenesse from the like offenders still, When they should see my plainesse thriu'd not ill; And that the law because I vented all, Would but my follies chide, not let me fall. No, it was none of these, my wounded minde, That could no rest, no ease, no quiet finde, But in confession, plainly prou'd that I Was lesse afraid of dying, then a lye: I knew besides that in concealing so I striu'd to keepe my ills, not let them goe. And he that in excuses folds his shame Retaines his sinne, although he saue his fame. Hence then my ill companion, I no more Will striue to hide thee, but vnlocke the dore Where my offences lye, whose vgly shape Shall nor the worlds, nor mine owne censure scape. Of all the hainous facts man can commit, There's none like this of mine, for it is right Rebellion against God and man, so foule That it deserues the losse of life and soule. ☞ Now you licencious Rebels, that doe make Profession of this wicked course, and take A pride therein, and would be term'd by me Knights of the Rodes, or else at leastwise be Stil'd High-way Lawyers; No, I doe defie You, and your actions, I will tell you why; But first plucke of your visards, hoods, disguise, Masks, Muzles, Mufflers, patches from your eyes,
Those beards, those heads of haire, and that great wen Which is not naturall, that I may ken Your faces as they are, and rightly know If you will blush at what I speake, or no; As well you may-but that you want the grace Forlorned men, I pitty though your case, Because it hath been mine, and gladly I Would suffer death, to be a remedy, And your example, onely that I know It will doe better for to liue, and show Vnto the world your basenesse, to preuent Others that yet sinne onely in intent, Conceiuing that it is a gentile course, Not to be discommended, whilst non's worse, Or baser on the earth, yet it is true Some Gentlemen perhaps, before they knew The poorenesse of this way, to serue their neede Haue more then once attempted some such deede, But now they see their warlike Prince take Armes, They scorne to liue vpon their Countries harmes, But will goe on, whence there may Honour grow To blot out quite their fames first ouerthrow. Expressing to the world, that want of Action. As much as Moneys, made them know your faction. Which though your courser natures follow still, The Actiue spirit leaues, and knowes it ill; But what are you, that nothing can reclaime From giuing to your soules so foule a name?
Who neither feare of heauens, nor earths iust Law Can, into compasse of selfe knowing, draw? Whose honours, strumpetted to this base course, Haue made you of your selues, take no remorse? But hugging your owne ruine, and foule shames, Are proud in losing your repute and fames? Now I consider better, 'tis not strange That you this life will for no other change; For you haue got by this vile course of sinning A kinde of state, nere knowne to your beginning; And from attending others, are become The principall, and best men in the roome; Where (like the Asse in trappings) you doe awe The silly beasts, that Beere and Claret draw; For they you Captaines, and Lieutenents call, And tremble when a frowne you doe let fall, For Peerelesse now your selues are masters growne, That in mans memorie were Foot-boyes knowne; And your dispaire as base as your condition Makes you beleeue, if you should leaue perdition In these attempts, you should againe be made From being sunnes your selues, anothers shade, And that your worthlesse spirits cannot rise In any course, that walkes without disguise, For bred on dunghills, if vnmask'd, you feare You shall too much, in your owne filths appeare; ☞ And as the witch, and damn'd Euchaunters pay Their tributes to the Deuill, and doe pray
In a loose forme, vnto that beastly spirit, From whom they doe their wickednesse inherit, Haue their oaths, orders, and distinctions so, As they that in a tract of goodnesse goe: Such irreligious forme, and course you take For your accursed, damn'd, Protectors sake. And fearing that your acts were not enough To make you his, an oath of such blacke stuffe You haue compounded, as you meant to tye Yours lues to sinne be your owne periurie. For he that truth for sweares, but to his ills Makes conscience of a vow, which conscience kills, And so is periur'd as he sweares to be True to vntruths, and false to honestie. With this you tempt and binde vnhappie men, Who doubting to be damn'd, are damned then, And to those vowes still stiriuing to be true Forsake all good, in being iust to you. This hellish oath you minister, and now Out ere they ride you charme them to their vow, That if misfortune in your traffique doe Betray you to the Law, and danger too, You must not tell your Complices, nor name How by this cursed trade, and life you came; For if you are examin'd, when you fell To these lewd courses? Then you are to tell That you came vp here with a full intent To goe for seruice; ere the forces went
(Which you must ready be to name) you had Spent ll your money; here must you looke sad. And fetch a sigh or two, and then confesse Onely for one supply, this wickednesse You fell into so may you moue beliefe, Whilst you are thought to be a poore yong thiefe Lately seduc'd, and hence will pittie grow; Then must you vow you will no more doe so: Thus shall you cousin Iustice of her due, Quickly get off, and to this course anew. Nor must remorce of conscience touch you, for Your sacrament relenting doth abhorre; And (entred in) you must resolue to grow Old in your Vice, and keepe your contract so. For you are sworne to vse these courses still, And so indeede are married to your ill. But be assur'd our Lawes are of that force, They will on easie suite graunt a diuorce. Yet you not minding this, doe next agree Both of the time, and where the place shall bee Appointed for a meeting, scarce in this. (Though in all goodnesse slacke) will any misse. ☞ So being come together, there you lie In some odde corner, whence you may discrie Such booties as shall passe, and then sayes he That is the oldest theefe, be ruld by me, And marke what I shall say, thus must you place Your Maskes and Chin-clothes, thus then you your face
May soone disguise, and what is he can sweare Directly and precisely who we were; And that your words may yeeld a differing tone, Put in your mouthes each one a pible stone. Now must we chuse a watch-word somewhat common, As (what's acnocke) for feare least we should summon, Their thoughts into suspition, then be sure The word once nam'd, each man to deale secure We that are strongest at the gripe will seaze, Then be assur'd for to obserue me these; With your left hand to catch the Bridle fast: And let the right vpon the sword be cast, The one preuents escaping, tother then Quells their resistance, let our weaker men That are not thus imploy'd, cry boldly stand; And with their Swords and Pistols them command, Whilst you afright we will perswade, so that By faire or foule meanes they shall yeeld, that's flat. ☞Perhaps Whilst he is talking yet, one cryes, Arme, Arme Camaradas, yonder comes a prize; If vp the hill you meete, if downe they ride You follow after, and then side by side Each hauing singled out his chosen one: And the Coast cleere, you ioyntly seize vpon. And then in troth 'tis very strange to see What different qualities in men there bee. You shall haue able fellowes, strong, well set As ere your eyes beheld, when they are met,
And set vpon (great Boobies) tremble quiuer, And cry like Children at the word Deliuer, Though to affright them there's no weapon drawne, Nor money in their purses to be tane. Such cowards there are many, others then That are as Pigmies to these taller men) Though they are nere so threatned to be shot, Or to be straight wayes murthered, feare it not; But fight couragiously whilst they haue breath, Not daunted at the present shew of death: On disaduantages yet being caught (Not yeelding though) by you strōg theeues are brought With their sad fellowes, likewise in the lerch, Out of the way, where you begin your search: Then euery place about them you see sift, That it is impossible that they should shift A peny out of sight and if so be You find some gold that's quilted priuately, You call them villaines, and dishonest men For their intended coozenage, happ'ly then The Traueller cryes out he is vndone, Because in that all his estate is wonne; Which moues not, for your consciences are grosse, You value gaine, and not the poore mans losse, Then chop you Horses most familiarly, Exchange you tell them is no robberie. And next most desperately you make them sweare, That they shall neither follow you, nor reare
The Country with a hue and cry, so vext, Robb'd, rifled, destitute, amaz'd, perplext, You leaue them, and are gone, they know not whither Nor scarce the number, but you went together, And that's all they can say, here is poore light To those that doe pursue, yet in your flight You shew your cowardly feare, each Crow you see Seemes like a Constable, and if so be A Colt or Calfe within the bushes stirre, You thinke you are beset, in hast conferre One with another how you shall get gone From that so imminent destruction, Did not I see of late, after a prize, A strange confusion on such poore surmize; An Owle which into Sanctuarie gat To shunne the ayrie quires wondring at, Screend in a hollow Tree, so discontent Began with fatall hoopes the ayre to rent, At which you switch'd apace, fearing that hollow Was of the Country, that your flight did follow, Thus more a fraid then hurt you often are The more the pitle, afterward you share And doe deuide the spoyle, here let me show Another piece of Knauery that I know, You play the double theeues, you cheate, forsweare, Reseruing the best part, from those you dare, And curse your selues to Hell 'tis all; for I Haue found you in your damned periury,
☞ But makes no matter, vvhither more or lesse, 'Tis soone consum'd againe in vvickednesse, Ill gotten goods can neuer prosper vvell, Nor can they thriue that haue no place to dvvell, The rolling stone can hardly gather mosse: Those that liue on, doe alvvayes liue in losse. You haue no trade, no calling, no vocation Whereby to liue, and saue; you haue relation To nothing that is good, vvastfull expence Is of your lavvlesse gaines the recompence. Thus to be furnish'd then, is iust as tho A man should thatch his dwelling house with snow, Which melts, drops, soulters, and consumes avvay Euen the time of one sun-shining day. For vvhen to Innes or Tauernes you doe runne That note your vvayes, there are you tvvice vndone. For vvell they knovv their bils you dare not chide, If you presume your actions they must hide, And so to make them rich, you forfeit all That men may vvife, or good, or honest call. And as you sinn'd in gaining, so are faine To be in spending coozen'd, not complaine Although yon knovv't, so thriftlesse is their vvay That doe on ruines of their Countrey prey. I had a treble income, by the meanes Of such as vvere my men, and yet my gaines Scarce counteruail'd my charge, yet vvas I vvarie Not vvastfull in expence, but alvvayes chairie
In that particular, to blinde mens eyes, For feare that thence suspition might arise. Yet (notvvithstanding all this thrift) I could Neuer grovv rich by sauing, nor yet vvould The somme I had, vvhen I vvas doom'd to die, Pay for my buriall, and my Coffin buy. Whence I conclude, though vve goe late to bed, And rise betimes, and likevvise eate the bread Of carefulnesse, the vantage vvill be small Vnlesse God giues his blessing there vvithall. Which he vvill neuer doe to such attempts; Your vvicked and vnlavvfull course exempts You from that gracious benefit, and tho You doe subsist avvhile, God suffers so To try if that you vvill reclaymed bee, If not, his heauie vengeance shall you see Out poured in abundance, then too late You vvill repent you, cursing cruell fate When 'tis past remedie, the Pots you knovv That ouer often to the Riuer goe ☞At last come broken home, O then forsake This life, least you your Inne the Prison make; And here arriu'd, O Heauens; Hell not retaynes More fuller tortures, torments, vvoes, and paines. Which vvere enough to punish all offence Though vvith the forfeit life, the Law dispence. For here no sooner entred, but you meete A thousand vvretched soules, that loosely fleet
From place, to place, where sighing is their ayre, Their comforts coldnesse, and their food despaire; And euer as they see a Keeper come They start, as fearing some new martyrdome. Whilst the insulting Rascall swels to thinke The crauen soule should from his power shrinke, And standing on the tiptoes of poore pride Screwes his ill fauour'd face, on tother side; As the poore Prisoner with a dolefull looke Seemes to petition some thing, (as the Booke Of his sad face may tell) the Iayler vild, His deuillish heart is from remorse exild. The minutes of your rest (if rest there be Within the wals of so much Iniurie) Are frighted with your cares, or some rude noyse Of sencelesse creatures, from whose drunken voice, The night is quartred into Earth-quakes sad, That you would thinke eu'n the whole World were mad And you another humorist shall heare, Cursing the Stars, the Earth, and all that's neere, Another vild, and franticke in his oaths His blasphemies 'gainst God and Angels throwes, Cursing his cruell Creditors, and fate That makes him begge his food within a grate. Perhaps some pray, but if they doe, 'tis so As if the good they meant they did not know, But as their wants or customes doe prouoke They in distraction, doe their Gods inuoke,
Who heares as little, for such vowes as those The best effects of true petitions loose. Here are you mingled with the various straine Of fainting need, and euery humour vaine, And must of force endure the idle way Of those that doe blaspheme and such as pray At one selfe instant, here what other ill Your owne corruption knew not, meete you still, And if a little tainted when you came Ere you depart y'are all compos'd of shame, And grow as cunning now in all offence As he that tempted Mans first innocence. Nor is that humour which some Parents haue, (Thinking their vilder sonnes they thus may saue From vtter ruine or reclayme from sinne, If but a prison once they are put in) To be forgiuen; for in sauing so They doe precipitate their ouerthrow; The cause is easie, for examples ill Purge not, but doe adulterate the will, Too prone to giddie folly, and beside They that enioy the ayre and Region wide, When from a Kinsman or a friend confin'd. They haue a Message, or a Letter sign'd As if they had him sacrific'd to Hell, Nor know him, nor the place where he doth dwell, Or if they call his mention from the dead, It is as faint as of those buried.
So that the liuing deaths of prisoners bee The feelingst Monmets of miserie, But these are but the Interludes to those Sad Tragedies writ in your ouerthrowes, And as the quickest passage in your Scene, To your Catastrophes, so slight, so meane, That he that sees your ends, may truly say The Prison was the best of all your play, For there your fatall lodging, and sad roome, Presenting to you your accursed doome, May well instruct you, that abuse of aire Hath brought you to this chamber of despaire, Where when the tell-tale Sunne through crannies spies Your day-bard carkasse, lock'd in miseries, It snatches his free beames from your dull sight, As who should say, you had abus'd his light By doing that it was asham'd to see, And therefore darknesse must your portion bee. The night, which you can scarce distinguish then, (Whilst your sad thoughts your errours may condemne) Instead of sleepe, should with a thousand feares, Sound your wak'd conscience larums in your eares, Vnfold your guilts, and crowne your watchfull eyes Not with a dreame, but sence of Miseries, Then death, which or you feare not, or despise Must coldly in your apprehensions rise, And teach you truly what it is to die, Not natures, but the sonnes of infamie.
☞But such considerations haue long since, With your worst thoughts, a cruell difference. For you beleeue you haue deseru'd to bee Admir'd, not scorn'd, for your past villany, And that the actions, you haue done are such As pace with honour, can endure the touch Of cruell'st censure, whilst you fondly deeme That men you braue, and valiant doe esteeme, And so are bound with your ills to conniue, And in despight of Law keepe you aliue. So from the Gaole vnto the halter goe Carelesse of now, or after ouerthrow. Base vsurpation, and conceits as vaine As are your liues, expenses, and your gaine. For good and braue men censure right your sinne, And pitty you, and the course you are in Rather in common Pietie, then that Your vilde defeatings should be wondred at; And since you are discouered thus by mee, If by mistake before a man might bee So cheated with your boastings, and lowd talke, Because he neuer knew the tracke you walke With your disguises, now his Iudgement may Be altered, betterd, or quite throwne away. When all your fained worths, appeare to be, But faint protectors of your infamy Disabled in the poore things you commit, Which neither are for worth, nor valour fit.
Your ends besides (if nothing else) might draw ☞You into feare to breake the rigorous Law; Vnhappie he that hangs vpon a tree, The wretched guerdon of impietie. Nor Dyes the shame with him that suffers so, His family in such an ouerthrow Participate and share, whose innocence Are Dyed in scandall, but for his offence. And the whole stocke, aboue an age in time, Is blasted for this debt, he paid his crime. And yet these sencelesse Caitiues who inherit This way of dying by their owne demerit, Laugh at this Iudgement, call it a fine thing. Thus to be pulld to heauen in a stringe, And that the Apoplex, fleames and Catarre, More cruell to the soules of Christians are Then hanging, for these passions take men hence, Ere they can thinke of dying, or haue sence Of their repentance, being snatcht away Scarce with so poore a warning, as to pray. But these haue Sermons, prayer, Sacrament, Psalmes, and alwayes to bring them to repent, And a great audience of the people by. For whose faire warning th'are content to dy, And thus their strong deluder drawes them on To laugh at, and deserues destruction. What should be their example, and afright them Doe rather please, reioyce, content, delight them,
☞But you fond men it may be doe suppose Because I scap'd, that you shall neither loose Your sorfeit liues, I wish the grace I found May not to any of your harmes redownd, I meane to your encouragement, you know But of particulars no generalls grow, One Swallow makes no Summer, though Noyes flood Once ouerwhelmed all the liuing brood That stroue against the streame, topping the rankes Of the great Mountaines, and the lesser Bankes, With euery Crawling creature (not one mist) Though they Lent all their powers to resist, Yet God hath promised (we haue vnderstood) He will not send vs such another flood. Things seldome are not vsuall: besides strong The reasons are, that did my life prolong You must conclude, that had the time not byn The Iubily of mercy, when my sinne Was cald in question, I had president Bin not in writing, but in punishment: For that great power by whom we gouern'd are, To limit my ill courses (straind so farre) Thus tooke me from my sinne, and did contriue How by strange meanes I should be kept aliue, For know, iust at that instant when the ioyes Of great men, good men, old men, young men, Boyes, Had but one obiect, like the heauenly spheares, Whose harmony, one note, one burthen beares,
Then when each face did like a Bridegroome smile, And one entire contentment crown'd this Isle, The Birds, the Beasts, the men, and euery thing Presenting their glad Aues to their king, Who like a Sunne new risen on the earth, Disdaines to view a corner where's not mirth, So threw a beame on me, whose lucklesse fate Was then midst all this ioy disconsolate. Then was my apprehension, euen iust then As if my faults distinguish'd me from men That were ordain'd for ioy, or mine offence Deny'd my share in blisse of Innocence. Yet this preseru'd me; Barabbas must be At the great Feast from death and bondage free, It was no fauour to the man, or crime, That sau'd his life, his blessing was the time, Nor could my glorious Sunne, that Rose so faire, With blood infect or cloud the laughing aire, Or die the Crimson of his Morne with red Of Malefactors blood (so early shed) His beauty is his owne, nor would he shine At first in Iustice, though 'tis cald diuine. Hence grew the Mercy, that my ioy so might Be in respect of all mens tripartite, For besides this I had an Aduocate Whose vertue could the hardest penetrate, And make compassion easie, for her smile Could the sad browes of sternesse reconcile;
Her sweetnesse can the angry Ocean calme, And turne the Aspe his poison into Balme, And stay the thunders heauy hand, iust then When it is threatning ruine to all men. The Tiger of her yong-ones robd would stay But at her presence, and forbeare her prey. The angriest things must at her sight appeare As smooth as August, or the springing yeare. She the rich partner of his royall bed Who weares a triple crowne vpon his head. Embrac'd him, cald him Lord, and at that word, Who could denie a pardon to afford. She ask'd, he gaue, and my deare fate in this Got my free pardon, she a bountious kisse. So sweetly seald was my remisse from death, So ratified by this so royall breath. Presume not yet on this, occasion so Will not her liberall aide to all bestow, One thiefe was sau'd, that no man should despaire, But one, so that presumptions forfeit are: He with his Sauiour died, blest time for him, Who else had found no pardon for his sinne; I in my Soueraignes glory was to die, And that time set my life at liberty. Note the occasions strange that set vs free Me from this death, him to eternitie. My Prince's crowning, his Redeemers death, Assur'd his soule, and did restore my breath.
But euery day is not Coronation; Nor Dd many suffer with our Sauiour. And mercy at such times as these extended. To Iudgements turne, if grace be twice offended. And now you thinke me happy being free From death and shame by this benignitie, But if you doe a little backe reflect On the recharges of my foes, th'aspect Of this sun-shining day, you cloudy find And much foule weather in my face behind, For now, as I haue seene a tired Hare Of his owne swiftnesse in a faint despaire, After whose fearefull feet, the yelping cry, Of the whole kennell, follow eagerly. Which spi'd, some Huntsman or some Shepheard neere, Seeing the weary Wat halfe dead with feare, In the Pursuers sight, in his safe armes Folds the poore creature from their cruell harmes, 'Bout whom the angry chasers leape and bay, Assaulting him that keepes them from their prey, And with their fearefull noyses fright it more, Then the poore beast was in pursuit before. Euen iust thus is my poore life pursu'de, Whilst I thought danger past, it was renew'd For first they followed with much speed, and cry, After poore mee (that fled but easily) And when the King of Forrests and of Chafes Thus found me destitute, before their faces,
(Ready to be deuour'd) snatch'd me away Iust then, as they were seizing on the prey, And in his royall armes of grace embrac'd My panting life, before so hotly chac'te, And yet behold my Aduersaries rore With lowder exclamations, then before. And would with horrid clamours him constraine What he preseru'd, thus to destroy againe. Appeales and Caueats, and such things they bring To force me from the bosome of my King. On which diuinest altar whilst I hold I cannot be vnto their furies sold. And yet the rarest eloquence in Law That I could to my causes handling draw, I was enforc'd to craue; so strongly they Did although pardon'd 'gainst my life inuay. Here I a new must muster vp my friends Wearied before; to crosse their irefull ends. Make their endeauours such to saue me now As if the King no Pardon did allow, Thus though my life they cannot take, you see They make me weary of 't by troubling mee. Thus a Delinquent must of force endure: He knowes not when he's freed; nor when secure. Behold, the Map of your proceeding heere, A Glasse in which to life, there doth appeare The forme of all your actions; vvhich I knovv Are vglier yet in substance then in shovv.
As they are vilde, your Aymes are worse, your ends As bad againe, yet these your Hope transcends, For both in ill designes, it leads you on, And will most faile, when most you trust vpon. ☞ Now then if that you are not quite bereft Of likelihoods for grace, if there be left Roome but for one good thought, if vnto sinne You haue not sold your selues out-right, let in This motion I shall make, behold your fact, Summon your guilty conscience, which is rackt And gladly would speake truth, that it might gaine Ease to her selfe in her ensuing paine, She would account, and be discharg'd, thereby The worme a breeding would soone liue, soone die, A hideous horrid sight it must needs bee, When in their vgly shapes, you chance to see Your monstrous sinnes appeare; yet happy men You cannot euer be at all till then: No nor then neither, if it be to late, 'Tis some mens cursed and vnhappy fate, That they can ne're be touch'd at heart vntill The damned bed-roll of their sinnes o're-fill Their guilty conscience, in stead of prayer In vaine as they conceiue, they then despaire, Not able to appeale to Christ his passion, They greedily lay hold on their damnation. If not the feare of this your temporall death, Let the eternall moue, the one's but breath:
The other endlesse, euer-liuing paine, Ere it be done, it still begins againe, Pitty your silly soules, that else must frie In burning lakes of Brimstome, neuer die Where worse then Egypt's darknesse hems you in, With seuerall tortures for each vgly sinne. Where howles, and hollow groanes the coapes-mates be To this eternall night of Miserie. Where frosts, fires, drownings, sulphur, choakings come Encreasing still, ne're ending; here's your doome. And these the torments that prepared are, Of which (vild men) you must expect your share. If you will still persist, and not giue o're, 'Tis then in vaine for to perswade you more. I'le cease my faire meanes therefore, and will try If I can fright you with an Hue and Cry, Here would I name both you, and your abode, But that you varie those, on euery rode, Yo'are East, now West, and next North-Country men, And then your names as oft you change agen. Thus to informe then, were to put in doubt, Not to giue light to men to finde you out. You in another kinde I will describe, That euery man shall know you as you ride, Or to auoid you how, or his purse lost I teach you a true rule how he shall coast, And dogge you as you ride, how to be sure To take you, when you thinke your selues secure.
☞ Because I liu'd by spoyle of Passengers Thus will I recompence them, this worke's theirs Meant for their good, the guerdon for my gaine Is to aduise, how they may not sustaine A farther losse, come be you rul'd by me, And well obserue, these your instructions bee, When as you carrie charge, let no man know Nor of your money, nor yet when you goe. You haue a humour when you are to ride Your Neighbours Kinsmen, or your friends you bid To sup, or breake their fasts, only to drinke Healths to your good returne, you little thinke There's any harme in this, yet I haue knowne A Father thus betray'd by his owne Sonne, A Brother by a Brother, and a friend Most deare in outward shew, to condescend. And lay the plot with theeues, bid them prepare Such a prize comes, whereof he takes a share. Whilst, but for him they neuer had bin met. Another kind of men there is, that set, Ten times more dangerous, you often choose Some one to guard you for feare you should loose Your money by the way, yon doe relye Both on his valour, and his honestie, Now as you ride together, if he see You light on any other company, He rounds you in the eare (as if he tooke The greatest care) and sayes that yon mans looke
He likes not, you perswaded slacke your pace, So that alone he brings you to the place Where his confederates lie, and then surpris'd (As 'twas by him and them before deuis'd) They hacke, and hew against each others sword, Till threatned to be shot, you giue the word, And bid him yeeld, (which he seemes loth to doe) Nay more he is inform'd which way they goe, And as you follow with an hue and Cry, He will be sure to leade you quite awry. ☞ Oft in your Clothiers and your Grasiers Inne, You shall haue Chamberlaines, that there haue bin Plac'd purposely by theeues, or else consenting By their large bribes, and by their often tempting, That marke your purses drawne, and giue a gesse What's there, within a little more or lesse; Then will they gripe your cloak-bags, feele there weight There's likewise in my Host sometimes deceit, If it be left in charge with him all night, Vnto his roaring Guests he giues a light, (Who spend full thrice as much in wine and beare) As you in those, and all your other cheare) These inconueniences doe oft arise For want of heed, and care, be therefore wise. ☞ Forbeare to ride vpon the Sabbath day, In which God sayes, Remember, rest, and pray▪ As we our seruants oftentimes command, When many businesses they take in hand▪
That chiefly one by no meanes they forget Aboue the rest; iust thus much in effect Imports the word Remember, though our law Be not of force enough to keepe in awe The Sabbath-breaker, yet God in the way Oft meets with him, and giues him as a prey To high-way theeues, that day they rather choose Then any other, fittest for their vse, For then the roads are quiet, and they know None ride but those haue great affaires to doe, Which to effect, 'tis thought, they haue about them Great store of Coyne, and this makes theeues misdoubt them. And as the Cut-purse is in prime of play, When men at Church doe most deuoutly pray, So are the High-way Cutters; for the Deuill Is not content to tempt them to doe euill, But teaches them presumption in the Act, Which well he knowes doth aggrauate the fact. Lastly, if you are rob'd on that high day, It is not fit that then the Country pay Your money backe againe, that remedy, The Iudge in conscience will to you deny, What reason is it men should leaue to pray, To wait vpon your theeues that run away? ☞ Noe, ride at lawfull times, and you shall meet Store of good company for you to keepe; Associate though with none, vnlesse with those That you finde rather willing for to loose
Then haue your company; for they that still Presse to be neere you, though against your will, Are somewhat dangerous; but I will show How you shall finde if they be theeues, or no; Take but occasion for to make some stay, Then marke; if that they keepe not on their way But slacke their pace, or else alight and goe; Or if perchance they doe refuse to doe As I haue said, iust then, before your face; Follow some halfe hower after, a slow pace; If so you ouer-take them, then take heed, For that's the very tricke of theeues indeed. Next of a theefe, the vsuall markes be these, (Which as you ride you may obserue with ease) They muffle with their cloakes, or else their coate Hides all their clothes, that so you may not note What sutes they haue, a Handkercher they were About their neckes, or Cipresse, which they reare Ouer their mouthes, and noses, with their hand Iust at the time, when as they bid you stand; Perhaps since here I haue discouered this, They will now leaue them off, that you may misse Your obseruation, be you therefore sure As soone as they come riding somewhat neere To gaze full at their faces, you shall see Them turne their heads away, as if so bee They had spide something on the tother side, Which if they doe, then keepe your distance wide,
But now they will not may be, yet may you Haue by these meanes a full and perfect view, And know them when you see them next, or whither Their great bush beard, and face, agree together. This aboue all I wish you for your good, By any meanes shun him that weares a hood, Beware of them that whisper, and those men That are inquisitiue, for surely then They but examine you that they may know By circumstance, whe'r you haue coine or no. ☞ You and your friend perchance doe ride together, Your company's increased by another, A seeming honest man, and you are glad Where's two to one suspition none is had. You call him fellow-trauellor, and he Reioyces in your honest companie, About some two miles riding there o'e-takes Some three of his companions, then he shakes, Trembles, and quiuers, and seemes sore afraid, And cries, directly friends we are way-laid, If you haue charge about you let me know, That I may cocke my Pistoll as I goe, By those, and such like words, he will soone find, Whether, or no, your Purse be richly lin'd, And whil'st you thought, there had been three to three, Your Iudas is on t'other side you see. ☞ Had you not need be wary, iudge I pray? Let me perswade you, doe not ride by day
With any summe you are afraid to lose But in the night, but then take heed of those Base Padding Rascalls, for their kill-calfe law I am not priuy to, I neuer saw Them, nor their actions, then I cannot show How to preuent the thing I doe not know. But thus much I assure you, you are free From any horsmen you shall meet, or see, For they beleeue that none will ride at night, But onely those whose Purses are too light, And hardly worth the taking; next they must Keepe lawfull howers, for feare they through mistrust Be apprehended, that's their chiefest eare; And then againe, I know they hardly dare Aduenture in the darke; for they can spie Neither aduantage, opportunitie, Nor whether you haue Pistolls, nor yet know, Whether that you be likely men, or no, And you haue time your money to conuey, And much more benefit by night, then day. But since God hath ordain'd this time to rest, And not to trauell in, I doe my best So to aduise you, that you shall be sure What time so e're you ride, to be secure. ☞ This is a generall rule, and obseruation, Your high-way theeues doe alwaies keepe their station Vpon your greatest roads, that out of those That do passe by, they may both picke and choose;
And so they cull the likeliest out of many; But on your petty By-roads, where scarce any Are wont to trauell, they nere vse to bee, You may be safe from any ieopardie If here you coast, which I aduise you to Rather then on your great high roads to go. ☞ But aboue all which way so e're you ride, A Butts length distance at the least diuide Your selues from one another, so keepe on, For I assure you they nere set vpon A scattered troope, for feare of somes escaping, Which may endanger their immediate taking, Besides, their company they doe diuide And set at seuerall stands, and should you ride All in a cluster, they will sally out Before, behinde, and compasse you about. Now if that following, they attempt, you spie Their drift and resolution presently By their deuision, and haue time to shun The thing intended, ere it be begun. Besides, they dare not doe but altogether, That they may be at hand with one another, To helpe where there's occasion, say they should Aduenture desperately, they neuer could Bring you together, nor aside the way, Without much trouble, and a greater stay; And peraduenture, ere halfe this be done, Vnto your rescue there are others come.
Now I coniure you that ride by the while, Let neither threats nor faire words you beguile Nor yet diswade, from yeelding your reliefe To those you find in action with the thiefe, I doe remember I haue often beene Thus wickedly imploy'd, whilst I haue seene Some others riding in to this our fray, I only wish'd them to keepe on their way, With such perswasions, I found suted best With their amaze, see fairely thus distrest And to our mercies, they haue left those men That very eas'ly might haue rescu'de beene. ☞ Now thus much for preuention, here you see From point to point, a plaine discouerie, Of the theeues policie, I shew'd you how You may auoyde it, let me tell you now What you haue next to doe, If you espie (As you may guesse by my discouerie) That there are theeues amongst you, doe not gaze On this, and tother side, nor in a maze Affrighted stand, as if your only hope Were some to rescue you, that will prouoke And not dishearten them, then minde it not, But be as though all feare you had forgot, And looke as bigge as they, and if they proffer Be sure to draw, as soon's they make their offer Remember then the cause you haue in hand, Your reputation, and your money stand
At gage in this, and if you dare not fight, It grieues me much to doe you thus much right. They, (if they find you resolute and stout) Dare euen as wellbe hang'd, as fight it out, Not out of cowardize, but that they know To their discomforts, that in fighting so They striue against a Countrey, Iustice, Law, Right, equity, and these keepes them in awe. They studie most, how they may bugbeares seeme, And who are rob'd, but those that doe esteeme Their threats, vnlesse you yeeld without delay, We shoot you thorow, they perhaps may say; But who thus threatned, yet resisting still Can say vnto me that he fared ill. Some though are somewhat resolutely bent, Tis true, yet is it farre from their intent To shed your blood, for they in doing so, Should worke their owne immediate ouerthrow, They could not then subsist, for though they passe, Sought after slightly for the monies losse, Should they take life and all, they could not ride To any place where they might safely bide, But through continuall search they would be found, And then pay dearly for each bloody wound. This the euent would be, which they well know, Rather then hurt you, they will let you goe, And stay a while vntill they meet with some Which their faire words, or threats will ouercome.
Besides, the right is of your side, and though You are o're-match'd, God may enable you so Those Caytifes may be vanquish'd by your hand; Then what good seruice you shall doe your land, Your Prince, and Common-wealth, you may suppose, Euen in the act by apprehending those Who liue vpon the spoile, then hold them play And yours shall be the honour of the day. ☞ But 'tis a fault of yours, you doe consent And yeeld too patiently, you are content Not onely to be rob'd, but let them goe, And basely wish they may escape, that so The Countrey may be lyable, for why If they not taken be with hue and cry, You must haue all restor'd, and what care you: One thing more I will tell you, which is true, You often double and misname the summe, You know the hundred willing is to come To composition with you, if they doe, You cousen both the theeues and Country too. And when you tell the story, then although You say they were fiue, six, or at least fower, You were rob'd fairely, and but two to two, And that you fought it out aboue an hower, And then you cut and slash your harmelesse clothes, And say that in the fight 'twas done by those That tooke your money, which God knowes you gaue Without resistance  they scarce did craue.
Doe no more so, nor striue that men may deeme You valiant, for it is a poore esteeme To be accounted, if you be not so; And they haue farre a harder taske to doe To keepe opinion, falsly vndergone, Then those haue none, for to atchieue to one. Be what your Images, doe represent, Men nobly spirited, 'twas God's intent When he created you, not much vnlike His Image most diuine, that you should fight In a iust cause, because he is all iust, And herein failing you betray God's trust, Neglect your dutie, and doe animate Not curbe, the vild'ones, that doe perpetrate. ☞ But now suppose through negligence you fall Into their clutches, and surpris'd with all You are vnthought of, 'tis no fault of mine You might haue taken better heed in time. Thus yet I will aduise you, if you see That you must yeeld and ouer-mastred bee, Striue not at all, but giue the fairest words Your best inuention and your wit affords, Wish that you had more monies, and withall Deliuer some, and so perhaps you shall By searching of your selues, and freenesse too, Without a further re-examining goe. But if they make an offer, doe not you Seeme to dislike, what they doe meane to doe
Then will they sift you soundly, doe not hold Your hand vpon your money, they are told Thus where it is, and surely they will guesse, They haue not all by your owne fearefulnesse. I haue obserued many times, when I Had tane such money, as did satisfie, Out of the pocket hauing no intent To make a further search, but only meant To lead the Passenger aside the way, (Because I knew what danger 'twas to stay) Fast'ning my clutches on his arme, or thigh, With a sad looke, he would begin to cry He was vndone, if I tooke what was there, Thinking I felt (because my hand was neere) His greater summe, which I by that should find Hid in his sleeue, or in his shirt behind. But now then, if they find not such a summe As was expected, they will bid you come, Into some corner, then protest, and sweare, If patiently a while, you will sit there, You shall haue all restor'd, that they mistooke You like are, but not those, for whom they looke On these fond hopes you rest, vntill that they Haue watch'd their time, and seiz'd another prey. To which you now are accessaries growne, But see where are their promises become? (Nor meant thev otherwise) those rifled to They take their Horses and away they goe,
And leaue you destitute, so with the rest To tell the storie whether fared best. ☞ Yet loose no time, but on with all the speed That possible you can, and then take heed, It much concernes you, for when they espy That you pursue, the formost cunningly Falls into some by lane, 'tis vndescride For you suppose they altogether ride, So whilst you thinke, you keepe at distance farre, Anew amidst them you surprised are. Here's their maine plot, you are forewarn'd, But say You cannot ouertake them, and that they Haue left the roade, and you in a great doubt, So that you know not how to finde them out, Let me direct you, I will instance thus, Suppose on Colebrooke way you lose your purse, The Theeues to Vxbridge roade, or Stanes will ride, And not to faile will there all night abide, This is the chiefest Maxime in their law, The Subt'lest surely that I euer saw, It stands by reason, for they know full well None vse to trauell thus athawrt to tell The Passages, or to describe the men They rest at pleasure, and are gone agen Ere that the lazie-tithing hue and Cry Comes to enquire, and the authority Of some poore silly fellow, who is plac'd In that meane office, that he may be grac'd
For double-diligence, oft as he goes Through wretched wilfulnesse attaches those That nere ment harme, yet being apprehended, They often lose their liues, though ne're offended. But to deale safe and sure, without delay Scoure you the next great right and left hand way, And if at night you misse, a carefull spy Next day shall surely see them riding by. Grant Now they leaue this custome, all their art, Their wit, inuention, neuer can impart The like againe, I vow, I doe not see Whither they can betake them to be free: But by the way know thus much, if they light On a great summe, then will they ride that night Vnto their Rendeuous here in the City, Which is too sure a shelter, (more's the pitty,) But follow my aduise, and marke me well, For here a cunning plot of theirs I tell, If you are rob'd out in the Easterne quarter, When you with hue and cry the theeues make after, Ride not to London in the roade you were, Nor raise those parts, you will not finde them there, But hie to Westminster, Holborne, the Strand, And for a speedy search there giue command, If Northward they light on you, straightwayes ride And search both Southwarke, Lambeth, & Banckeside, Thus they doe alwaies plant themselues, for so They haue the Citty betwixt them and you.
And ere your search comes at them (by the way Which often dyes) there's time at will to stay. I haue obseru'd (and it is still in vse, Nor will it ere reforme the vild abuse It hath a leuell at) a needlesse care Wherewith all sorts of people troubled are, And charged too, when any one hath lost His purse to theeues, then at the Countries cost There is a watch prepar'd to guard that place Where the poore man by them surprised was; This is like shutting vp the Stable doore, When as the Horse was stolne out before, 'Tis not to be suppos'd the thiefe will come And make a needlesse breach, to thanke the Groome For feeding of the best; loe then iust so, Nor meane the high-way theeues that way to goe Where there is waite laid for them, say they should; I doe protest here; I did euer hold (And found it by experience) that high-way That had a watch vpon it, best for prey. For first the honest Trauellers suppose It is impossible, that they should lose Their money being guarded thus; and hence They grow more carelesse, doubting none offence Can any wayes betyde them; whilst alasse A thiefe may doe his list, and freely passe, The watchmen neere the wiser; for they stand Setled at one place by a strict command.
It is indifferent when the theefe layes hold, His booty singled out, he will make bold To seize him any where; all places are All one alike to him, he will not care So that the coast be cleare, and then how can He be distinguish'd from an honest man? I neuer past by, but the watchmen gaue Me courteous language, wishing me to haue A speciall care I was not rob'd; whil'st I Was a chiefe actor of that villanie. But now suppose they had examin'd me, I would haue answer'd them so courteously, That they could not suspect. Now what are they That are appointed watchmen for the way? Poore, silly, old, decrepped men, that are Fitting for nought else, but to loyter there; Haue not I seene a dozen such, all stand (With each of them a Holbert in his hand) Amaz'd, affrighted, and durst neuer quatch, Whil'st we before their faces all; did catch, Assault, seize, rifle such as did passe by, When we were gone (perhaps) then would they cry Theefes, theefes, (to little purpose) I haue knowne Some that by way of parly, thus haue growne Familiar with the watch, and as they found A fit occasion, they haue tane, and bound The silly fellowes hand, and foot; then stood Like a safe guard set for the Countries good,
With browne bils in their hands, and so made bold (As with authority) to stop, and hold All that did come that way, I doe suppose A watch of Holbarteers were good for those Foot-padding-night theeues) but for these you see Such care, and trouble all in vaine will bee. But if you will needs haue it so, choose then Strong, able, stout, and resolute young men, Arme them with Bow, and Arrowes, Muscets, Shot, And with a Horse or two, that they may not Be thus abus'd, but if occasion be May follow on to purpose; but by me And mine instructions here, I hope you shall Be well secur'd, and need no watch at all. ☞ I thinke it fitting now for me to show Vnto the Inne-keeper, how he shall know Such guests from other men, my Host take heed, To winke at such faults were a fault indeed, Respect then rather honesty, then gaine. Know well your seruants whom you entertaine, Trie them, that you may trust, their helpe in this Subtill discouery, most needfull is. Your Ostler must obserue, and he shall see About their horses, they will curious bee They must be strangely drest, as strangelyfed With Mashes, prouender, and Christians bred; If this be wondred at, they cannot hold, Their goodly qualities they must vnfold,
Crying, they doe deserue it, and that they By their good seruice will their cost repay With ouer-plus, or some words more or lesse, By which relation he may shrewdly guesse. And then they will be asking, who is he That ownes that horse? and whose those horses be That stand beyond him? what their Masters are? What kind of men? whither they ride? how farre? And when? so by his answeres they surmize Which of them all will be their likeliest prize. Next of their Cloak-bags let him notice take, They onely carry them for fashion'd sake, For they are empty ones, in pollicie, Because their horses should not laden be. Your Chamberlaine shall finde, when as they come Vsher'd vp by him to their Lodging roome, He shall be sent away, let him giue eare, And not to faile, he shall be sure to heare The gingling of their money, Let him pry Behind some secret Cranies priuily, And he shall see them share, what they haue got, And euery one to take what is his lot. This they by no meanes will deferre, for feare, Who has the purse, should cheat them in the share; This done, they hug each other, next they call Their rauish'd sences home, and then withall They knocke againe for him, who shall be sheut For not attending, though enioyn'd he went.
Now must he draw a cup of curious Sacke, Then next mine Hoast your company they lacke, With farre-fetcht complements they will salute And bid you welcome, marke from their dispute What you can gather, you may somewhat guesse By their mens sawcy peremptorinesse, For seruants when their Masters ills they know Cease their obedience, and presumptious grow. Enquire a part, each ones particular name, And let your seuerall seruants doe the same, And you shall finde them tripping, they well may Forget the new names, that they tooke that day; At supper time let some one hastily Knocke at your gate, as with authority, You shall obserue a sudden fearefull start, Marke then their lookes (the Index of the heart) And you shall finde them troubled, looke you sad, And aske if yonder Constable be mad? Bid them say quickly, what their danger is, Then promise no authority of his Shall enter there, if they command it so, By this, into their priuate thoughts you go, They will confesse for succour, needs no more, 'Tis euident what you but thought before, But say hereafter they should carelesse grow, Then are they taken with the lesse adoe. Now say they come about the noone of day, You shall well know them, by their needlesse stay,
Their carelesnesse of time, for they but bait, That they may stand at gaze, and fitly wait For honest passengers, when they haue spide A likely-moneyd booty by them ride, Then will they bussle, and make hast away With farre more speed then tedious was their stay. And cry yon rides their Vncle, or their friend With whom some earnest businesse they pretend; When in an Inne, they must all-night abide, They cunningly, sometimes themselues diuide And come as seuerall companies, thereby To crosse the number in the Hue and Cry. Besides thus parted, they are sure to know If otherwise then well, the squares should goe, They of each other will no notice take Of you (mine Host) they will enquirie make What their companions are? what Countrimen? Whether you know them yea or no? and then If they can finde you haue a Ielousie Shrewdly suspecting either company, Hauing discouered your opinion With all conuenient speed, they will get gone, But if you doe (as well you may) mistake them And that for honest trauellers you take them, They (as by chance) will in your kitchen meet, And as meere strangers, one another greet, There will they drinke together, ere they goe From thence, so louing and so kinde they grow
That they willsup togeather, marke them well And you their cunning knauery shall smell. Still strangers to each other will they bee, Whil'st any of your house are there to see; But see, and be not seene, and you shall finde Them all familiar in another kinde, They will Embrace, reioyce, laugh at their plot And at mine Host that he suspects it not. The fairest Innes they vsually frequent, Out of a wary-politicke intent, Presuming, for disparaging the man They will not search his howse, and there they can Rest vnmolested, but since this you know Let not the subtile theefe, escape you so. ☞Loe here I haue vnclasp'd this obscure booke, And full Quotations on those secrets tooke, That the plaine eye of Iudging reason, may Discouer such abuses of the way, And as 'tis said, that true repenters must Their secret sinnes, and all ills from them thrust, Lest the vild tainture of one crime behinde Contaminate againe the sinfull minde, Thus haue I left no nooke, no cranny small, Which men may cunning or pernicious call Vn-open'd here, before the curious day As cleere and plaine, as is the Champion way. No act, or vse which theeues discouer might, No Art, to make the honest know them right.
Lest by retaining ought, it might be deem'd, My true recanting is not, what it seem'd. But marke my cautions well, and you will know That these way-riflers must some new way goe Imagination, or their practice yet Could neuer reach to, or before you set Preuention of their worst assaults, their drifts In their attempt, and their best scaping shifts. Nor can I feare, but since so freely I Haue here dissected such impietie, Anatomizing euery hidden Nerue That for the strength of such occasions serue, The charitable world will hence allow, That I those men and actions disauow I make so plaine and hatefull, nor againe Will I my honour in those puddles staine, Nor can it be suppos'd by enuie, that Any relap's of mine be aimed at, For mine owne writ, must then in Iudgement stand And signe me vnto death, mine owne false hand; The Iurie, and the Iudge, in Euidence, Shall no enquiry need for mine offence, This booke alone against all pittie's plea, Turnes all excuse into Apostrophe, Whil'st dumbe as death, with double shame I must 'Count both my ruine, and my sentence iust. Now let detracting censure, pawse, and stay And turne rank'rous spleenes another way,
And know that now in Censure, they doe more Then I haue done in all the rest before, When my determin'd Innocence shalbee A Iudge seuere against their cruelty; ☞And such whose most vnnecessary eye, Into forbidden acts of others pry, And when the man they curiously haue read, Must then attempt the secrets of his bed, To poyson all his blessings, nicely draw The Curtaines, whose concealings no man saw Without a rude intruding, for the bed Of lawfull couples being iniured By base detractions, leades that troubled sence Into the fullest foulnesse of offence; And so my pillowes partner, to whose truth I owe the best reforming of my youth, As if she must be sharer of my wrongs, Though ne're arraign'd▪ was yet condemn'd by tongs. As if of force because shee's mine, she must In spight of all her vertue be vniust, But I imagine rather this surmize, Doth from the common ground of ill arise, Or from that Enuy, Sathan left behind, When he infected our first mothers mind: Shew me the man whose tendrest, dearest loue, And whose affection in a straine doth moue Beyond community, vnto his wife, Who but in her, has neither soule, nor life,
And giue me reasons why his should transcend The debt I owe to mine vnequall friend? Then will I yeeld my dotage, his loue rare, And thus our obligations I compare. First, vnto you whose marriages intent Haue to the fortune of your choice extent More then the person, or those faire deserts Which make the blessedst contracts of the hearts, And loue the purchase more of her estate Then her perfections, you ne're leaueld at; You who were neuer caught with darting eies, Whose best affections in her treasure lies, And neuer had your soules with loue refin'd, Peruerting the true vse of either kind, Can yet in this your portions dotage, not Exceed the Income I by mine haue got. For when I was adiudg'd, and doom'd to die, She onely by strange importunitie Melted the hearts of all resolu'd against mee, Who pittying her, set my lifes danger free, In this my life, my fortune, and my all, I may her portion, and her blessing call. And last for other tyes, which doe obliege Such as to loues faire fortresses lay siege The simpathizing liking, and those parts Of loues religion, which locks louers hearts Was throwne on me, and these who can disproue, Must either haue no heart, or know no loue:
In pitty then, to Citharaea's Shrine All you that sacrifice your thoughts diuine, Since we are pleas'd, let none our peace molest, Nor breake the Vnion of so sweet a rest, With nice inquiry, after things, you must Confesse you haue no businesse with, that's iust, And we shall be, if you but leaue vs so, More happy, then 'tis fit for you to know. ☞Yet for my selfe, beleeue I haue the sence Of mine owne youth's abusing, and offence Which I haue wrought against the Common-weale, Whose wounds by this relation I may heale, If my aduice be follow'd, you will see The soule vnlac'd of high-way subtiltie. That who shall suffer now, in such offence, Has none to blame but his owne negligence, I doe besides my pretious youth lament, My reput's forfeit, honours lauishment, The deare mispences of my fairest time, Conuerting all my blessings into crime, My wit, my Iudgement, strength, courage, and all Vnto my Countries mischiefe, mine owne fall. Nor doe I thinke it halfe enough that I Barely confesse mine owne impiety, And talking onely to the people shew Those guilts, perhaps before I speake, they know Or with a superficiall glosse thus seene To flatter men into a faire esteeme
Of my best promis'd actions, whose euent Might proue the speakers of a worse intent; No, naked as first Adam's Innocence, I strip the deform'd shape of mine offence, Dislodging from my heart that banisht spirit, That can no dwelling there againe inherit, And on iust cause diuorc'd from such a bride, Can hardly now it's memory abide, Me thinkes thus purg'd, I hate the very roome Which that vild Inmates lodging was become, And as the bodies glorified, scorne The thoughts of ioyes wherewith their frailty's borne. Despising as it were the fullest things Which the dull earth to our admiring brings; So my refined soule, and my cleare minde Can in these vild companions no peace finde, But troubled at the old acquaintance grow, Thught-sick, that e're such practice they did know. Or as the Epicure, whose working wish Is dreaming still vponsome curious dish, On which, his waking thoughts, and sleepe imploy'd Are busily, vntill it be enioy'd. Which purchac'd, his discretion is farre lesse Then was his couetere he did possesse, For gluttonizing his o're-charged chest, He neither can vngorge, nor yet digest, Till surfeited to death, he loaths it more Then ere he did embrace, or loue before.
So I whose easie youth, with fond admire, Was drawne, at first this ill course to desire, Hug'd it in dreames, and in my waking fits Doted vpon't, to my worse losse of wits, Whil'st esteem'd none braue, or good, but this, But now I know how farre I was amisse. And surfeited, as 'twere to death indeed, From which by rare ingredients I am freed. I loath my stomacke-queller, and abhorre What I in too much louing sufferd for, Nor can profession free me from the doome Of cruel'st censure and opinion, These actuall ills of mine freely confess'd Must be in act recouer'd, or exprest My faire intentions cannot be, nor I Sau'd from the taxe of my first infamie. ☞ O may my fate so well prouide as now That power which knowes, may helpe me in my vow, And crowne my resolutions with some way Which of the world, and heauen recouer may All my lost honour, by some acts of mine, That may proue farre more welcome to the time. Then my disastrous courses, and expresse I am much better then I dare professe. And that great king, whose mercy, goodnesse, grace, Hath fixt my tottering life in a firme place, Whose royall bounty do's I know expect From my so great enioying, some effect
Which may a thankfull tribute pay to him, And speake the full redemption of my sinne. You, mightie Sir, to whom my life I owe As debt to that great grace you did bestowe, May now command it prostrate at your feet In any danger, (I shall haste to meet) That so by seruing in your enterprise, You may perceiue how true a sacrifice Ile make againe, of what you gaue so free, And that's the offering must accepted bee. I hope (great Sir) it is not your intent That I shall spend my dayes in Banishment, For happier farre is he condemn'd that dies, Then him you saue t'exile from your faire eies. For what auailes the blinded man to see, If that a dungeon must his prison bee? Where doubly curs'd to be debarr'd from light He dwells, that knew't not, whil'st he wanted sight, O let me liue, where euery day I may My most religious offrings truely pay; And that the life you gaue me, be not made A trouble to me, whil'st my thoughts inuade My discontented soule with torments strange; Not that I must my aire, and Country change, Or (bard inheriting thereby) forgoe The temporall fortunes I am borne vnto. But that the Shryne I worship should not see The constant sacrifice is made by mee.
Me thinkes could doe more then common men, (For no such obligation strengthens them) That my Prince might his owne great power know, In seruice I could doe vpon his foe; So let me liue, that vent'ring so to die, I pay my debt, and suffer happilie. Viuit post funera, virtus. FINIS.
To the Kings most excellent Ma∣iestie, Iohn Clauell wisheth a long, and prosperous reigne in this, and in the world to come, a plenteous share of those peculiar blessings, which God himselfe (out of his wonderfull and abundant goodnes) hath prouided and set apart (euen for the choisest of his elect) which are farre beyond the imagniation of mor∣tall men to conceiue, much more impossible to be expressed. IT grieues my soule, and wounds my troubled minde, That onely I alone must be confinde, When others are let loose, that they may gaine The honour they haue lost, whil'st my foule staine Blurres both my birth, and fortunes; had I dide, My ignominious death had satisfide; But to liue still, and still to liue in shame, (Within the summons of vpbraiding fame) Is a worse plague then euer Egypt had; It may be thought, I that haue beene so bad Cannot recant, but very likely may Fall to my old rebellion, on the way;
First let this treaty plead; then here I call My God aboue to witnesse (who knowes all The secrets of my heart) I doe intend Whilst these your warres endure, euen there to spend My time, in that braue seruice; when that ends (If  chance to suruiue) I haue then friends, And a poore fortune of my owne, that can Fairely maintaine me, like an honest man; If so your Highnesse please, that I may haue My gratious pardon, (you so freely gaue) What is required of me, I cannot pay, If that the meanes wherewith be kept away; Confinde within these walls, is it your will That I a prisoner here, continue still? When I was past the cure, and helpe of men, You (that could onely) shielded me, iust then When death had taken leuell with his dart, Was it that I might feele this greater sart? O no; I neuer since haue beg'd that boone, But you (great Sir) haue granted it right soone, Yet notwithstanding your most royall pleasure, I am enforc'd to tarry others leasure, Like Tantalus, in this my hell I see, And know the grace you haue bestowd on me But may not touch it, and enioy much lesse, The more's my griefe, and my vnhappinesse, O free me from this lingring lethergie, Set me at liberty, or let me die.
