5802 99846568 11547
THE Arte of Nauiga∣tion. Conteyning a compen∣dious description of the Sphere, with the making of certayne Instruments and Rules for Nauigations, and exemplifyed by ma∣ny Demonstra∣tions. Written by MARTIN CORTES Spanyarde. Englished out of Spanishe by RICHARD EDEN, and now newly corrected and amended in diuers places. ¶ At London printed, at the charges of Richard Watkins. 1589.
¶ To the ryght woorshipfull Syr Wylliam Garerd Knyght, and Maister Thomas Lodge, Aldermen of the Citie of London, and gouer∣nours of the honorable Felowship or Societie, as well of certayne of the Nobilitie, as of Merchants Aduen∣turers, for the discouery of Lands, Territories, Ilands, & Signories vnknowen, and not before their fyrst aduenture or enterpryse by Sea or Nauiga∣tion commonly frequented. And to the ryght Worshipfull the Consulles, Assistents, and Comminaltie of the same Societie, RICHARD EDEN Wysheth health and prosperitie. WHat so euer he was (right Honorable and Woorshipfull) that first beleeued that the frame and coaptation of the body of man, with the functions, of∣fices, and dueties of the partes and members of the same, knit togeather in a certayne vnitie to a common mi∣nistration, did represent a liuely i∣mage & similitude of a perfect Com∣mon wealth: I thinke that he was a man of no vulgar iudge∣ment, or obiect minde, but rather of singuler wisedome and prudence, in the contemplation of diuine & humane things. For he sawe, that as in the small natiue seede of all growing or liuing things, is conteined the fourme that bringeth them to theyr perfection: so in certayne small and obscure mem∣bers of the Common wealth, consisteth no small encrease to the perfection of the whole. He saw lykewise, that heere∣in, as in the body of man, representing the partes and mem∣bers of the world (as I haue sayde) are dyuers parts of diuers and sundry actions & motions, greatly differing in fourme,
number, and quantitie, yet all the same to be so knit togea∣ther, and so to consent in one vniformitie, to the common profit of the whole, that a greater concord & harmonie can not be imagined, then is proportioned by the friendly vnitie of diuers and conrary. He saw likewise in the same, such a mutuall compassion of part to part, and member to mem∣ber, by one common sense exitent in them all, that no one part or member can feele eyther ioy or payne, but that in manner all the other are partakers thereof more or lesse, yf they be liuely members, and not withered, or otherwise vn∣sensate by reason of dead flesh, which only by cutting and burning ought to be diuided from the sound and whole. But as in man (whome Plato calleth the lesse world) the vigour and agilitie of the immortall soule and minde neuer ceasseth from continuall moouing, but is euer exercised in excogita∣tions & inuentions of great things (herein resembling God, whose caract it beareth) by prouidence foreseeing, and by intelligence vnderstanding, and deuising what is to be done, and what to be eschewed, doth immmediatly mooue and rayse vp the faculties, powers, and members of the body to execute the same: Euen so, in the greater world, the proui∣dence of God, and vniuersall counsayle and consent of men, hath elected & appoynted certayne principall men, to beare like rule & aucthoritie in the body of the Common wealth, as hath the intellectiue soule in the members of our body to mooue and commaund the same. To Princes therefore, Counsaylours, Rulers, Gouernours, and Magistrates, as to the most intellectiue and sensitiue partes of the societie of men, hath God and Nature geuen preeminence and gouer∣naunce of the Common wealth, that by their prouidence, wisedome, and ayde, it may vniuersally florishe, not only by iust administratiō of good lawes, with due correction of ma∣lefactours, but also by lyberall rewarding of suche as haue well deserued, and especially by maynteinance of such Artes and Sciences, as the Common wealth can not well be with∣out. And to drawe nearer to the applying of my simili∣tude, I say, that what so euer Vertue, what so euer Arte.
or the ingenious industry of men, hath to this day inuented, all the same is to be imputed to the beneuolence and libera∣litie of such as haue honorably mainteyned, and freely re∣warded the trauayles, paynes, and charges of them that haue spent theyr lyues, goodes, and wits (as many haue done) in the inuentions of necessarie and profitable Artes and Scien∣ces. For euen as wholesome and temperate ayre, with sea∣sonable weather, and fauourable influence of the heauens and planets, causeth fruitefulnes on the earth, and contrary∣wise, barrennes by the contrary: Euen so the fauour of Prin∣ces and Magistrates, nourisheth, augmenteth, and amplify∣eth, all Artes and Sciences by liberalitie, and extinguisheth the same by miserable couetousnes and parcimonie. And al∣though in some men of rare and noble nature, the desyre of honor and fame, only for vertues sake, and studie towarde their Countrey and Common wealth, haue mooued them (in maner to their owne vndoing, through their great losse and hinderance) to set foorth and inuent diuers thyngs for the commoditie of the common wealth, and other, rather then for their owne yet vndoubtedly, who so well consyde∣reth, and indifferently wayeth that I haue sayd, shall fynde and see by dayly experience, that in maner onely munifi∣cence, liberalitie, and reward, or the hope thereof, geueth spurres to them that attempt great and vertuous enterpri∣ses, as I could more largely proue by so many testimonies of hystories, both holy & prophane, that the rehearsall therof should be but tedious, and not greatly necessary for my pur∣pose, especially writing vnto your Honors and Worships, of whose munificence, and liberalitie, I haue had great experi∣ence, both in my selfe, and others, who by your ayde and mayntenance, haue attempted, & perfourmed many good∣ly inuentions, vyages, nauigations, and discoueries of lands and seas, heretofore vnknowen. Wherein, what great char∣ges you haue susteyned, and how liberall and constant you haue bee in furthering the same, doth well declare, tht hytherto you are rather losers then gayners thereby. The whcih thing doubtlesse, is more to your commendation, in
that it may heereby appeare that you haue attempted the same, rather for knowledge and vertues sake, then for co∣uetousnesse of gaynes: as is furthermore well knowen by your fyrst vyages of discouerie attempted to Cathay, by the Northeast seas, vpon certayne losse and detriment, for vn∣certayne hope eyther of gaynes, or of any such way to be found, otherwise then by certayne likely coniectures: not much vnlike to the shining flowres of Marchasytes, which outwardly appearing in minerall mountaynes, are signes and tokens whereby is coniectured what metall is contay∣ned therein, and whether the same be to be folowed or not. And although it sometime so chaunce, that such signes are fayleable, shewing more in apparance, then they contayne in substance: yet are not such signes, tokens, or shewes to be contemned, but rather earnestly to be folowed, for as much as it hath been often prooued, and found by experi∣ence, that by folowing the same, haue been found great and ryche mynes of mettalles, as Georgius Agricola in his bookes De rebus metallices, dooth largely declare and prooue by ma∣ny examples. But to write at large what great things haue proceeded of small and obscure beginnings, and in manner meere coniectures, it would so farre exceede the measure of an Epistle or Preface, that it would rather encrease to the iust quantitie of a booke. For in manner all the late disco∣ueryes both of the Spanyards and Portugales, had theyr be∣ginnings of such small coniectures, with vncertayne hope (as it were praeter spem sub spe) vntyll God and good happe, by the constant trauayle and valiant minde f such as fyrst attempted the same, gaue them to enioy that they hoped for. But what so euer they haue obteyned, and do enioy, this may I boldly say in your behalfe (right Honorable and Worshypfull) that there hath not lacked in you, eyther the lyke or greater promptnesse of minde, forwardnesse in attempting, magnificence in expences, or liberalitie in re∣wardes For besyde the great charges, and losses that you haue been at otherwyse, what should I speake of the great giftes that you haue sent to the Emperour of Russia? What
of your last chargeable vyage of discouerie among the in∣numerable Rockes, Ilandes, and moueable mountaynes of yse in the frosen sea, by innumerable lands and Ilands vn∣knowne to the Antiques, euen vnder and farre within and beyond the circle Articke, where they thought that no ly∣uyng creature coulde drawe breath or lyfe for extreeme colde? whereas neuerthelesse the same hath been by you discouered, euen vnto the mightie ryuer of Ob, that falleth into the Scythian Ocean, or Oceanus Hyperborei, not farre from the mountaynes called Hyperboreus, so named, because they are situate almost vnder the North Pole, and thought therefore to be inaccessible. A voyage doubtlesse of suche difficultie, and in maner impossibilitie, that considering the infinite dangers thereof (as I haue learned by the informa∣tion of Steuen a Burrough, that was then the chiefe Pilot of the same voyage) it may seeme impossible that they should euer haue escaped, except the mightie hand of God, by the expert skylfulnesse of so excellent a Pilot, had deliuered thē from those dangers. And although in deede (as religion bindeth vs) it is conuenient in all things to geue all honour, glory, and thanks to God: yet are we not thereby restray∣ned to be thankefull to such men, as by theyr arte, ingenious∣nesse, trauayle, and diligence, haue deseued both iust com∣mendation, and large rewarde. And therefore referring the reward to you (right Honorable & Worshipfull, to whome it apperteyneth) if I should not heere geue him at the least such commendation as in my iudgement he hath well deser∣ued, I might seeme both to defraud him of his woorthy de∣serts, and also to forget the friendship and good will I beare him, only for his vertues and excellencie in his profession. For certainely when I consider how indigent and destitute this Realme is of excellent and expert Pilottes, I can doo no lesse of conscience, then, in respect of your owne commo∣ditie, yea rather for the commoditie of the Queenes Ma∣istie, and the whole Realme, to exhort you, and put you in remembrance (although I may heerein seeme to put the Spurrs to a running Horsse, as sayth the Prouerbe) so to
regard hym, and esteeme hym, and his faithfull, true, and paynefull seruice toward you, that he may thereby be fur∣ther encouraged, and not discouraged, eyther for lacke of mayntenance, or otherwise by the iniurious assaults of such his enimies, as onely his vertues and excellency haue moued to beare him displeasure: as enuie doeth euer follow ver∣tue, as sayth the Latine Prouerbe, Virtuti comes inuidia. And how true a sentence this is, is well verified by the saying of a certayne Philosopher (whose name I do not remember) who hearing one vaynely reioyce that he had no enimies, answeared, that that was a token he had done little good: meaning thereby (as dayly experience poueth) that if he had excelled in any vertue, he could not haue lacked some enimies. And hauing here touched o speake of enuie, I re∣member that when I was a young Scholler, I haue read in the Poet Hesiodus of two kyndes of enuie, whereof the one is called Inuidia, and the other Aemulatio, which is more tol∣lerable then the first, for that it is ioyned with some vertue, and enuyeth that any should excell him in any excellent qualitie that he professeth. But for asmuch as this enuie of emulation proceedeth of some singuler vertue of them that are so maliced, they may herein reioyce, that they shall euer haue a hundred freends for one enimie: yea, and although they had none, yet is vertue a reward to it selfe, and to bee embraced for it selfe onely, as the Philosophers affyrme. What then shall we say to such, as forgetting this reward of vertue, do not onely fauour, but rather hynder the prefer∣ment and mayntenance of such expert men, more estee∣ming certayne Fyshermen that goe a trawling for fysh in Catches, or Mongers, and Dradgies for Oysters about the sandes, betweene the South furland and Wyntertonnesse, and the sandes about Temmes mouth, then they doo suche excellent Pilotes as are able without any Rutter or Carde of Nauigation, not onely to attempt long and farre vyages, but also to discouer vnknowen lands and Ilandes, as haue done of late yeeres many excellent men, to the great honor and enriching of theyr Prince and Countrey. But as tou∣ching
Steen a Brrough, the chiefe Pilot of your vyages of discouery, it may hereby well appeare, that he is neyther malitious nor enuious of his Arte and Science, in that hee desireth the same, for the common profite, to be common to all men: and for the same intet was the first that moo∣ued certayne Worshipfull of your company, as Syr Wyllyam Garrerd, Mayster Wyllyam Mericke, Mayster Blase Sanders, and Mayster Edward Castlen, to haue this worke translated into the Englishe tongue: Who of theyr owne good na∣ture, fauouring all vertuous studies, and the professours of the same, did soone enclyne to his host request heerein, and therewith not onely desired me, but also with liberall rewarde enterteyned me, to take in hand the translation. Which beyng now finished as well as my poore learning may perfourme, I desyre your Honors, and Worships, to accept in good part, as I haue meant heerein to grate you, and doo such seruice as my abilitie may suffice. Now there∣fore thys woorke of the Art of Nauigation, being publyshed in our vlger tongue, you may be assured to haue more store of skilfull Pilots. Pilots, (I say) not Pirots, Rulers, nor Ro∣uers, but such as by their honest behauiour and conditions, ioyned with art and experience, may do you honest and true seruice: Which is not to be looked for of such as being desti∣tute aswell of the feare of God, as of all morall vertues, su∣perabound in all notorious vices, accompting desperatnesse for boldnesse, rashnesse for hardines, impudencie for stout∣nesse, and crueltie for manhood. What other thing (I say) is to be looked for of such, then of such trees, such fruites, Et mali corui, malum oum. But frasmuch as these haue no place appoynted them in the body of our common wealth, which we haue here before compared to the members of the body of man: therefore are they no otherwise to be estee∣med, then as excrements of the body, to whome Nature hath appoynted no place in the same, but labureth conti∣nually to cast th foorth diuers wayes, least by their filthy∣nesse they should infect the other members, euen as the pompe of the Shyp, if it be not auoyded, is noyous to the
Ship, and all that are therein. But the wise and honest Pi∣lotte, fyrst hauing before his eyes the feare of God, and put∣ting his chiefe trust in him, shall secondarily trust in his Arte and Science, without any such vaine obseruations, as the su∣persticious Horoscopers (Astrologiers I meane, and not A∣stronomers) are accustomed to vse in the elections of houres, times, and dayes, by constellatins and aspectes of the Starres and Planets, as many fond men haue done, thyn∣kyng thereby to haue escaped such dangers, as they haue thereby the rather fallen into, through contempt of Arte and Science, by foolish confidence in superstitious Astrolo∣gie: which for the vaniie and vncertaintie thereof, the ryght Worshipfull, and of singuler learning in all Sciences, Syr Thomas Smyth, in my time the flowre of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, and sometyme my Tutor, was accustomed to call Ingeniosissimam artem mentiendi, (that is) The most in∣genious arte of lying. Omitting therefore the superstitious and phantasticall obseruations of the iudicials of Astrolo∣gie, it shalbe better and more necessarie for all Pilottes that desyre to excell in their profession, to learne and obserue the principles of this Booke, whereby they may haue such knowledge of the Sphere, as may instruct them the making and vse of diuers goodly Astronomicall instruments pertay∣ning to the arte of Nauigation, by knowledge of the moo∣uings of the Sunne and Moone in their Spheres, and the o∣ther Planettes and fyxt Starres: thereby to attayne to the true knowledge of houres, tymes, and tydes, with the va∣riation of the Compasse, and many other goodly naturall obseruations of weather, tempestes, and calmes, by cer∣tayne infallible signes and tokens of the same, very necessa∣rie to be obserued, and this by the true principles of Astro∣nomie, and not of Astrologie. And this is the true Astrono∣mie, whereof the diuine Philosopher Plato hath written so diuine a sentence, that I haue thought the same heere woor∣thy to be alleaged, that by the aucthoritie of so famous an aucthour, we may know what is true Astronomie, with the vse and commoditie thereof. Therefore in his booke enti∣tuled
Timeus vel de Natura, these are his words. Rerum autem optimarum cognitionem, nobis oculi attulerunt. Nam haec que de mundo disputantur, nunquam inuenta fuissent, si neque Sydera, neque Sol, neque Coelum, suscipe potuissent. Cog∣nitio vero diei ac noctis, ab oculis orta, fecit vt dimensione quadam mensium, annorumque ambitus metiremur, tempus cognosceremus, a vniuersae naturae ordinem scrutaremur. Quibus ex rebus, Phi∣losophiam adepti sumus. That is to say, Our eyes haue brought vnto vs the know∣ledge of most excellent things. For whatsoeuer is disputed of the world, had neuer been inuented, if neyther the Starres, neyther the Sunne, neyther Heauen, could haue been seene. For the knowledge of the day and nyght, taking beginning at the eyes, caued vs, as it were by certayne limits and boundes, to measure the circuites of monethes and yeeres, whereby we came to the knowledge of tymes, and the or∣der of vniuersall nature. And heereby also we obteyne the knowledge of Philosophie. &c. And thus by the aucthori∣tie of diuine Plato, (whome for his excellencie Cicero called Deum Philosophorum, that is, the God of Philosophers) we may vnderstande, that the true Astronomie, is the perfect knowledge of the miraculous mouings of the Planets, Stars, and heauens (and especially of the Sunne and Moone) where∣by is caused the varietie of times, and diuersitie of all natu∣ral things, by natural causes: as by the qualities of Elemēts, as hote, colde, moyst, and dry, which are augmented or di∣minished by the more or lesse influence of these two Lumi∣naries, as they come neere vnto vs at sometimes, or depart farther frō vs at other times, with diuers motions in diuers climates, which causeth not only varietie of tymes in sundrie climates, but also the varietie of dyuers complexions, fourmes, and dispositons of all creatures vnder the face of heauen, none other accidentall, contingent, voluntarie, or violent cause, to the contrary notwithstanding. And this is it that Plato meaneth by these woords, Vt tempus cognosce∣remus ac vniuersae naturae ordinem, &c. That is, to knowe the tymes and vniuersall order of nature. And doubtlesse,
who so well consydereth the marueylous effectes that are caused, especially by the variable moouing of the Sunne in the Zodiacke, must needes acknowledge it to be the chiefe instrument and meane that God vseth in the generation, preseruaion, and alteration of all creatures that are contey∣ned in the world of generation and corruption. And for this consyderation, certayne of the auncient Philosophers cal∣led it the soule of the world: Other, the eye: and other also the hart of the world. Plato also affyrmeth, that the soule of the world is the Sunne, and that all other lyuing things re∣ceiue lyfe from thence. And hereof commeth the saying of the Philosopher, Sol & homo, generant hominem: (that is) the Sunne and man, beget man. And therefore (as wryteth Marcilius Ficinus) of all Idolaters they are most tollerable that honor the Sunne for God. The which, although it be not, yet vndoubtedly are his effects so great and wonderfull in this inferiour world, that it may seeme in manner to be Gods Vicegerent, Liefetenant, and Viceroy, in all the works of nature, except where and when it pleaseth him in any thing miraculously, otherwise then by the common order and course of nature, to commaund the contrarie. And if it may not be tedious vnto you (right Honorable and Worshipfull) it shalbe a pleasure vnto me, for the better declaration hereof, to make a briefe discourse of the mar∣ueylous and strange effects that are caused by the Sunne: which perhaps few haue done, otherwise then dispearsedly here and there, as occasion hath serued. Fyrst therefore let vs consyder what it hath done ouer the Equinoctial lyne, and vnder both the Poles at one instant, diuersly and con∣traryly the one to the other. For so hath the infinite wise∣dome of the great God of nature, the supreame Architec∣ture of the vniuersall world, disposed all things in such per∣fect order, that to them that are vnder the Equinoctial, and haue theyr Horizon passing by the two Poles, the day is of twelue houres, and the nyght as much, and theyr yeere also is deuided into twelue monethes: But they that dwell iust and perpendiculerly vnder our Pole, and that haue theyr
Horizon passing ouer the sayd lyne, haue the day of the sixe monethes: That is to say, beginning from the tenth day of March, when the Sunne commeth ouer the sayde Horizon, vntill it returne to passe vnder the same at the tenth of Sep∣tember. And contrarywyse, one night of sixe moneths haue the inhabitantes vnder the Pole Anarticke: whose yeere (that is to say, all the course that the Sunne maketh by the twelue signes of the Zodiacke) is accomplished in one day and one nyght: a thing doubtlesse most wonderfull and marueylous. Lykewise, when we haue sommer, they that are vnder our Pole, haue the day of sixe monethes, and they of the opposite or contrary Pole, haue their night of the same length. Againe, when it is winter with vs, then vnder our Pole is the night of the said sixe monethes, and vnder the op∣posite Pole, is the day of the same length. So that, as it were, course by course, when we haue the night, they haue the day: and contrarywyse, whē we haue the day, they haue the night. The which, although it be so long, & of so great space of time, yet is it not continually obscured with darkenesse. For the Sunne maketh his course in such order, that the in∣habitants of that part, liue not during that time altogeather in darknesses, as Moles liue vnder the ground, but as other creatures that liue vpon the globe and face of the Earth, they haue such lyght as may suffyse to susteyne and mayn∣teyne their life. For the body of the Sunne declyneth no more either beneath the Equinoctial line, either aboue the same line (which is the Horizon to both the Poles) then 23. degrees, that is to say, no lower or higher then the Tropikes, which are no more then 23. degrees, or there about, from the sayd Equinoctial, that is their Horizon, as is aforesayd. And yet in these 23. degrees, he maketh not his course by the opposite Diameter, but goeth continually round about in circuite: so that his beames reuerberating heauen, repre∣sent such a manner of lyght, as wee haue in Sommer two houres before the Sunne rise. And this example whiche we haue taken of the diuersitie of the Horizons of the E∣quinoctial, and vnder the two Poles, is to demonstrate the
marueylous effect that the Sunne maketh, departing from the xij. houres of the Equinoctiall (that is to say, from Aries to Libra) and comming by lytle and lytle, illuminating the Globe of the earth, and so reducing the yeere of xij. mo∣nethes, into one onely day, ad one night, as is sayd before. Vnder the infinite varietie of the which course, sometyme with long dayes, and sometime with short, all the Inhabi∣tants of the world are fourmed and disposed, of such strength and complexion of body, that euery of them are proportio∣nate of the Climate assigned vnto them, be it hote or colde, and may dwell and abide there, as in their naturall place and temperament, not lamenting, or desiring to dwell else∣where, so great a loue resteth in them to their natiue situa∣tion. But not to depart from the vyage which the Sunne maketh in one whole yeere, as sometime approching neere vnto vs, and sometime departing from vs, I say, that at one selfe same time, in diuers partes vpon the round Globe of the earth, it causeth the Spring, Sommer, Autumne, and Winter. And neuerthelesse, at the same instant and punct of time, it maketh day and high noone in one place, and nyght and midnight on the opposite part. The which varietie, al∣though it appeare incomprehensible to the slendernesse of our wits, yet beholding the same with the eyes of vnder∣standing, and therewith considering the vnestimable moo∣uing that the Sunne maketh continually, we shall fynde it to be true, hauing respect to the diuers situations of the earth, as it is continually illuminate more or lesse by the Sunne. And this varietie is made with such a harmonie and consonancie, and such a lawe perpetuall and immutable, that yf any poynt or pricke thereof should fayle, it is to be doubted lest the Elements should be confounded together, and returne to their first Chaos. And to haue sayd thus much of the wonderfull effects of the course of the Sunne, it may suffise for an example to prooue how necessary a thing it is, not onely for all Pilots and Sea men to haue the knowledge heereof, but also for all other such as shall attempt great and farre voyages in vn∣knowen
lands, and strange countreys, as did of late Maister Ienkinson, a worthy Gentleman, set foorth by you, and main∣teined at your charges, more like an Ambassadour sent from any Prince or Emperour, then from a company of Merchant men. Wherein, what commendation you haue deserued, to the increase of your perpetuall fame and honour, I referre it to that I haue sayd before. And as touching Maister Ienkin∣son, what trauayles, paynes, and dangers he hath susteyned, and hardly escaped, and what diligence and arte he hath vsed in the searching of strange countreys, and in the description of those his voyages, it were but in vayne for me to wryte much vnto you, vnto whome the same is better knowen then to me. And therefore to conclude, with rendering iust commendations both vnto you and him, I can say no more, but as Plato wryteth in his Booke De Legibus, Decens est eos ciues laudibus ornare, qui corporis vel animi viribus, res arduas praecláras que gesserunt, & legibus libenter paruerunt. That is to say, It is decent to commend those Citizens, that by theyr industry of body and minde, haue done great affayres, and haue wyllyngly obeyed good lawes. And thus eftsoones de∣siryng your Honors and Worships to accept in good part whatsoeuer I haue sayd of good will and affection to∣ward you and your proceedings, and with your shield of iustice and auctoritie, to defend me against the assaults of such as are enimies to vertue, and captious of other mens doings, I rest at your commaunde∣ment to the vttermost of my power, to do you what seruice I may.
The Epistle dedicatorie of Mar∣tin Cortes, to the most mightie and victorious Monarch CHARLES the Emperour, the fyfth of that name, King of Spayne. SO greatly were esteemed the inuentours of certayne Artes and Sciences in auncient time (as wryteth Saint Augustine in hisThe fyrst inuentours of Artes. bookes De Ciuitate Dei) that they tooke them not for mortall men, but honoured them as immortall gods.Isis. Isis arriuing in Egypt, ordeyned common weales with iust gouernaunce, gaue them lawes, and kowledge of letters, and taught them also the vse of Flaxe. In consideration whereof, she was honoured of such as then knewe her, and reuereced of them that came after her: In so much, that they establshed a capitall penaltie or punshment of death, against all such as eyther in sport or in earnest affyrmed her to be an earthly woman, and not rather a duine Goddesse.Ceres. Ceres beyng of lyuely wit and cleere vnderstanding,The Ci∣cilians. beholding in the Cicilians humane similitude and shape to the outward apparance, and inwardly the fiercensse of bruite beastes: brideled their customes, and refour∣med them with newe Statutes, teaching them to tame Oxen to beare the yoke, to sowe Whete for their great commodtie, to grinde in the Myll, to kneade in the hose, and to bake in the Ouen. In recompence whereof, they made sacrifice vnto her, and builded many sumptuous Temples in honour of her. Saturnus comming from Creta,Saturne gaue Lawes to the Latines. gaue lawes vto the Latines, whereby they might gouerne them selues, and rscrbed them maners of lyuyng, tea∣ching them to Tyll and Manure the ground,Tillage of the ground. and sowe Corne, and to geather ripe frutes in due season. And if Saturne were profi∣table to those natons, and they not vthankefull vnto him, in that they builded him aulters, celebrated vnto him festiuall dayes, and accompted him in the number of the heauenly Goddes, naming him also the father of the Gods. And (if I say) he was to them so profitable, and that world iudged so happy and prosperous for ha∣uing
so valiaunt a King, and so iust a Lawe geuer, that it was therefore by the mouthes of all men called, The Golden World,The glden worle, and aigne of Saurn. The woorty factes of Charles the fyth. Sicilia. and Raigne of Saturne: Certes, except I greatly deceyue my selfe, this our time is nothyng infriour to that. For we knowe certaynely, that your Maiestie hath beene more profiable to Spaye, then euer was Saturne to the Latines: and also a more excellent Lawe geuer, in manner to all Europe, and further, to the newe World, lately dscouered, then he that gaue lawes but onely to a lttle corner of Italie. Whereby I consider, that th felicitie of your Maiesties time, hah been o lttle commenda∣tion to your dooings, in that you haue banished vce, honoured vertu, punished offendours, ad fauoured innocente: so that the quiet haue thereby lyued more peaceably, the vnquiet restrayned, the good exalted, and the euyll chastsed: In so muche that nowe, by reason of iust ministration of good order in yor Maiesties d∣minions, they that walke in the nyght, goe in safete, whreas we knowe, that in other Prouinces, such as walke in the day goe in daunger and peryll. And therefore in th most happie tyme of your Maiestie, it appeareth that Spayne is renewed,Spayn re∣formed. not onely in the excellencie of Mechanicall or handy craftes, but also in the know∣ledge of letters, and discipline of warre: In so much, that she that sometyme lacked her selfe, may now abundantly minister to her neighbours that haue neede. And whereas to your imperiall Ma∣iestie, it shoulde not suffice to ordeyne lawes, if power and armes shoulde fayle to defende and punyshe: who, comparable to your Maiestie,The triumphs and victoies of Charles the fyth. enioyeth the one, and wanteth not the other, hauyng tryumphed ouer Kyges and Kyngdomes, enlarging also the name of Spayne in many vnknowen and barbarous Landes and Na∣tions? Greater duetie therefore owe your Subiectes vnto you, then euer dyd the Egyptians to Isis, or the Cicilians to Ceres, or the Latines to Saturne, for as muche as they haue receyued of your Maestie more common and profitable benefytes. It is not long since your Maiestie hath forbydden and abo∣lyshed the vse of Mules,Mules. and restored agayne the exercse of Armes, so log out of vse, that the one wth the other, hath been no small profite and commoditie to your Subiectes and Domini∣ns. For by taking away the vse of Mules, is so encreased the
umber of Horsses and Horssemen,horses and horsemen. that suche as before neuer durst or coulde in manner lyght vp vppon a Horsse, can nowe easi∣ly and aptly manedge them. So that you seme to haue reuiued the dyes of Belleophon the sonne of Kyng Glaucus,Belleropho. and lykewyse the tyme of Saturne, when men had fyrst the know∣ldge howe to make Horsses to abyde the brydle, and to bryng them vp to serue for dyuers vses and necessite of men. And ryght sure I am, that by reason of suche laudable Statutes and Ordinaunces in your Dominions, shall fayle neyther Horsses nor Horssemen, as well for the Courte, as for the Campe. Who knewe in manner howe to grde a Swoorde,Wearing of weapons and armour. bfore that your Maestie permitted Weapons and Armour to bee worne, euen in your Courte, and that else-where all men myght doo the lyke? before whche tyme dexteritie fayled, where cou∣rage abounded. Ouer and besyde the profite and commoditie that hath rysen heereof, what honour you haue obteyned by the same, is manfest by Frauncis the Frenche Kyng,Frauncis the French king taken priso∣ner. who by your Maiestie beeyng taken prsoner in the Parke of Pauia, was brought to Madrid, in the yeere a thosand fyue hundred twentie and fyue, where seeyng many young men in manner without beardes, and yet laden with Armour and Weapons, sayde, O happie Spayne, that brygest foorth and nouryshest men of VVarre. In your most happie dayes also, the Christian Fayth is amplyfyed,The Christian faith nlarged. and in manner whole Spayne florisheth dayly more and more in sumptuous buyldyngs,The sumptu∣ous buyldings and riches of Spayne. and is abundant∣ly enryched in treasure brought from your Indes, farre sur∣mountig the ryches of Solomon brought from Ophir. Yea, and to say the truth, consyderig the Nauies of Golde and Syl∣uer,The Indies nauies of gold and syluer. which haue been ordnarily brought from thence to your Ma∣iestie, thys tyme may rather be called the golden age, then that of Saturne. Not omitting aso, that by your prosperous attemptes, haue beene discouered so many Landes and Ilandes,New landes and Ilandes discouered. heeretofore so vnknowen to the Cosmographers, Geogra∣phers, and Historiographers, that they neuer hearde of theyr names. VVhiche neurthelesse, ae now so well knowen to your Subiectes, that they haue troden them with theyr feete, and mea∣sured them by pases. VVho before thys tyme euer hearde any
menton of the ryche and large Prounce of Peru,Peu. or of the straights of Magalianes,The straights of Magaa∣nes. or of the ryuer of Syluer, called Rio de la Plata. They in times past seemed to haue doone no small thyng, when they had knowledge of the fortunate Ilandes,Rio de la Plata. the whch, since they were conquered by your Maiesties Graundfather, haue beene called the Ilandes of Canaria.The fortunate Ilande, or Canaries. And f it be, and hath been much to discouer and subdue this newe worlde: it is doubtlesse no lesse glory to your Maiestie, not onely to possesse ad enioy it, but also that you dayly procure to send thither Iudges to gouerne with Lawes,Religion in the Indies. and Preachers to instructe in Doctrine, to bryng those Indians to the knowledge and honouring of the true GOD. And therefore consyderyng your Maiesties godly desyre ad purpose, as touching these Nauigations, and the daungers of such as goe to discouer this newe worlde (although it be not newe to the Spa∣niardes to trauayle into farre Countreys,The Spaniar∣des haue euer trauailed into fr countries. for as much as in the dayes of Caius Caesar, the sonne of Augustus, were founde bro∣ken peeces of Spanish Shyppes, lost in the Gulfe of Arabie, as al∣so Celius Antipater affyrmeth, that certayne Shyppes of Spayne were accustomed to sayle for Merchaundize to the East partes of Ethiope) in consyderation heereof, haue I the more willingly pub∣lished these my trauayles, for the furtheraunce of all suche as shall hereafter attempt the lyke Nauigation. The antiqui∣i of Naui∣gation.And heere doo I not say that Nauigation is not a thyng of antiquitie. For we reade that in olde tyme, the Argonanti say∣led to Colchos,Argonan∣ti. Colchos. and Danaus brought the fyrst Shyppe from Egypt to Greece. But I saye, that I am the fyrste that haue brought the Arte of Nauigation into a briefe compendiousnesse, geuing infayleable principles,The Arte of Nauigation. and euident demonstrations, de∣scribing the practise and speculation of the same, geuing also true rules to Mariners,Things par∣teyning to nauigation. and shewyng wayes to Pilottes, by teachyng them the making and vse of Instrumentes, to knowe and take the altitude of the Sunne, to knowe the Tydes or ebbyng and flow∣ing of the Sea, how to order theyr Cardes and Compasses for Na∣uigations, geuing them instructions of the course of the Sunne, and motions of the Moone: teachyng them furthermore the ma∣king of Dyalles, both for the day and for the nyght, so certayne, that in all places they shall shewe the true houres without default:
and haue likewise declared the secret propertie of the Lode stone,The lodstone falsly called in English Ada∣mant, is in La∣tine called Magnes. with the maner and cause of the Northeasting and Northwesting (commonly called the variation of the compasse) with also instru∣ments thereunto belonging. And that, that which I shall say or doo, be not accompted to be presumpteously done or spoken, I ac∣knowledge that whatsoeuer I haue well done or written, it is from aboue by the helpe of the diuine grace, and by the fauour and pros∣perous fortune of your Maiestie. And thus shall they that now liue, and likewise they that shall succeede vs, see and perceiue, how much more the world oweth and is behoulding to your Maiestie, then were the auncient Egyptians to their Isis.Charles the 5. greater then the hroes of olde yme. Vniuersall b∣nefites. Comparison with the an∣tiques. She gaue them letters to reade, but your Maiestie hath geuen rules and orders to sayle on the Seas. The profite of Isis was onely for one Prouince. But the commoditie that ensueth of your doings, is vniuersall for all Pro∣uinces and Nations, and for all Seas, aswell to go to places discoue∣red, as also to discouer Lands and Regions yet vnknowen.Plinie. If they of auncient time had reached that we haue obteyned,Nauigation of old tim. the Indies had not now been to discouer: neyther should it be esteemed a mi∣racle vnto vs, as at the tyme when Carthage florished, that one Agnus went foorth from the Baye of Cadiz, and sayled to the end of Arabie. Neyther would Cornelius Nepos haue written it for so famous a thing, that a certayne man flying from King La∣tinus, came from the gulfe of Arabie: Whereby it is manifest, that aswell Nauigation, as other Artes, doth from day to day in∣crease, and by litle and litle is come to perfection. For in those daies they had neyther compasse nor carde of sayling whereby to gouerne them selues.The perfecti∣ons of artes at this day. They lacked the consideration of the Starres, vntil the Phenitians found the knowledge thereof, and were the fyrst tha vnderstoode (that to such as should trauayle by sea) i should be ne∣cessarie to lift vp their eyes to heauen,The rudeness of the anti∣quie. and consider the motions thereof. They that sayled to the Iland of Tabrobana, (whih in old time was called Antitono) caryed for their voyages lyuing byrds.Aug∣rium. And when they thought good, let certayne of them flee: nd by the flyght of their wings directed the hlme and sayles of their Ships. They sayled onely three monethes in the yeer. To them therefore it was necessarie to obserue  the tyme, vntill they found it to srue with a for wynde. They kew o how  hlp
themselues with the bowe lye, or syde winde: neyther sawe they the North Starre,The North Starre. or sought it, or had ay knowledge thereof. Ad I beleeue veryly that this was the cause of so long a voyage which the Shyppes of Solomon made,The voyage of Solomon to Tharsis and Ophir. saylyng to Tharsis ad Ophir, wherein they spent three yeres: although in deede that was no short voyage which they mad compassyng about da, and may other Prouinces. And whereas before I sayd, that Nauigaton by litle and litle came to perfection, I fynd by auncient hystories, that Tipho fyrst found the Gouernale or Rudder,The first in∣uentours of igation. Dedalus the Maste and Shrowdes, and Icarus the Sayles, the Thirreni found the vse of the Aker of one graspe or stooke, and Palaminus brought it to perfection, adding the other. And thus may it manifestly appeare, that in these prosperous and fortunate dayes of your Maiestie, it hath pleased God to bring the knowledge of Nauigation to perfec∣tion, with this my breefe discourse as touching the same, aswell profitable and necessarie for them that trauayle by land,Commodities & difficulties of nauiga∣i. as by Sea. What can be a better or more charitable deede, then to bring them into the way that wander? What can be more difficult, then to guide a shyp engoulfed, where only water and heauen maybe seene? One of the foure most difficult things, whereof Solomon maketh mention in his Prouerbes, is the voyage of a Shyp by the Sea. The which Galfrede expounding, sayth, that in humane things, none is more fearefull or more daungerous, then to aduenture life in a thinne and weake peece of wood, or for a man to commt himselfe to the rage of furious windes, among the tempestes of the Sea, and there to hazard that be loueth so well. O how much more should the same seeme difficult to Solomon, if at these dayes he should see that fewe or none of the Pilottes can scarsely reade,The igno∣nce of Pi∣lot. and are scarse∣ly of capacitie to learne? And whereas in the fyrst Chapter of this Booke,The goue. I haue made mention, that the gouernall or sterage ought to be comitted to expert men, and of good vnderstanding, he should see, that now adayes, the ignorat presume to gouerne other, which were neuer able to rule or gouerne themselues. I most humbly desire your Maiestie; to receiue in good part this my poore seruice, which, although it be litle, yet being dedcate vnto th greatnesse of your regall person, it shall be much more the great. The profite ad commoditie thereof  notorious, and the bnefite
that thereby may be receyued, is vniuersall. If therefore, when your Maiestie shall finde your selfe released from greater affaires, it may please you to feede your eyes with these my trauailes, you shall fynde therein many new, delectable, and witty things, with also many profitable and certayne rules, both to reade and vnderstand. To conclude, I eftsoones make humble petitions to your Emperiall Maiestie, not so much to consider what I wryte, as to re∣spect the intent of my wrytyng: and not the gift, but the affection and good will that remayneth in mee to serue your Maiestie.
The firste parte of this woorke, which entreateth of the composition of the world, and of the vniuersall principles for the Arte of Nauigation. ¶ The fyrst Chapter, of the generall distinction of Creatures. THE infinite GOD, the beginning, and cause of the whole vniuersall world, created three orders of creatures, differing in kinde:Three diffe∣rences of creatures. that is to say, Cor∣porall, as the Elements, Spirituall, as Angelles, and compounded of these two, as Man. The cor∣porall nature is diuided into bright and shining bo∣dyes,Corporall tures. as the Starres: or into darke and thicke bodyes, as Earth and Mealles: either into Daphane or transparent bodyes, as Ayre and Water. Of these creatures (as sayth Saint Gregorie) some haue  beeing, as Sones, some lyue, as Trees, and o∣ther haue sense, as Beastes, other vnderstanding, as Man, who in holy Scripture is called all Creatures,Man is called all creatures and the lesse world. according to the sayig of Christ to his Disciples, where he sayth, Goe and preache the Gospell to all Creatures. And therefore not without good cause was Man called of the Greeke Philosophers, Microcosmos, (that is) the lesse World.Man compa∣red to the wold. In the which we contemplate things of no lesse admiration, then in the great World. The similitude be∣tweene them both, is, that euen as the great world, and the whole Globe or Sphere thereof, is mooued by the voluntarie motion of an intellectiue substaunce, or an Angell: euen so is this. For (as Aristotle wryteth) What so euer is mooued,All that moo∣eth, is moo∣ued by an o∣ter immo∣eable. is mooued by vertue of an other: As, Man is mooued by the internall or in∣ward fourme that is within him (that is to say) by the intellectiue soule that is proper vnto him. In lyke maner, in the great worlde are found dyuers mooueable thyngs: All which, are reduced to one immoueable moouer. So in man are found many thyngs mooued by diuers motions,The intellec∣te soule. which are all referred to his intellec∣tiue
soule. The great worlde conteyneth the creatures within it selfe, and consequently is all really, as hauing nothing without it. Euen so, man by knowledge is all, and knoweth all things,Man kno∣weth part of all things. and nothing naturally is id from him, or vnknowen to him. Agayne, in this lesse humane world, are two motions, Intellectiue, and Sensu.Two moti∣ons in man.  the great world hath two locall mo∣tons: the one, wherewith the fyrst mooueable is mooued, and draweth with it all the other Spheres from the East to the West,Primum mobile. and is called Rationall moouing.Rationall motion. The second, is the moouing of the other Spheres, from the Weast into the East: and is called Irrationall moouing.Irrationall motion. But now leauing to speake of the lesse world, we will proceede to speake further of the great. ¶ The seconde Chapter, of the definition of the worlde. THE world (as sayth Isodorus) is Heauen and Earth,What is the world. and the other woorks of God that are conteyned therein. It is compounded of things visible, and yet vnsearchable. Moses and Saint Iohn the Euangelist wit∣nesse, that it was made by God. The Philosophers called it Mndus a mouendo,Or Mun∣dus a Munditi. because it is in continuall moouing, and neuer in rest. The Greekes called it Cosmos,That is, clear∣nsse or fairnesse. which signifieth, Fayre, or Beautifull, and so named it, because of the marueilous ornament thereof, and di∣uersitie of Elements, with the resplendence or shining of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. And doubtlesse, nothing may be seene with the corporall eyes of man, more beautfull then it is. In so much that the diuine Philosopher Plato affyrmed,Eyes were geuen to men to behold the farenesse and beautie of th world. that eyes were geuen to men to beholde the beautie thereof, and to take pleasure in the contemplation of the heauenly bodyes, and round∣nesse of the world, which also for the roundnesse thereof, is called Spheriall,The roundn of the world. because that Sphera in the Greeke tongue signifieth a round body.
The thyrd Chapter, of the definition of the Sphere. Definition of the Sphere.THeodosius sayth, that the Sphere is a whole and corporall figure, vnder one superficial: in the middest whereof, is a poynt or pricke, from the which all right lines drawne directly to the cir∣cumference,The center of e Sphere. are equall. This poyut or pricke, is called the center of the Sphere: according to Euclide, it is the passage of the circum∣ference of hlfe a circle, which is turned round about his Diame∣ter that is fixed, vntill it returne to his owne proper place againe, as where it was at the fyrst. By the center of the Sphere, passeth a right lyne, and thextremities or endes thereof, touch in the cir∣cumference. And this lyne (imagined) is called the Axis,The axis and Poles of the world. or Exel∣tree of the Sphere, and the endes thereof are called the Pales. Uppon this Axis is the Sphere of the world mooued. The fourth Chapter, of the diuision of the world. IT is to be presupposed, that there is  difference betweene Element,Quinta Essentia. Aristotle cal∣eth it the fift lement. The fift es∣sence is incor∣ruptible. What is ele∣ment. The inferiour lements are not pure nor mple. and Ele∣mentate, and the fyfte, being caled Quinta Essentia. The Quint essence, or fyfte substance, is a body of it selfe, diffe∣ring from all Elements, and things E∣lemental, aswell in matter as in fourme, and no lesse in nature and vertue: and hauing in it selfe no contrarietie, is certaynly without corruption. And hereof cometh it, that the Philosophers called the heauens and heauenly bodyes, the fyfth substaunce, or fyfth essence, by rea∣son of the incoruptibilitie thereof. Element is that, whereof any thing is coounded. It is the fyrst of compositions, and of it self is not compounded. Wereby it foloweth, that neyther the earth, the ayre, the water, nor the fyre, that are neare vnto vs, or about
s, are pure and simple Elements. For these Elements do some∣times mingle themselues one with another, and especially where they are neare togeather, and touche one another. Of these ele∣ments euery part is named by the name of the whole: As euery part of fyre, is called fyre, and euery part of earth, is called earth, and so of the other. They are called simple bodyes in respecte of other compound and mixt bodyes.The elemen are diuisible into partes. The commition of ele∣mens. They are diuisible into partes of diuers fourmes: and of the commixtion of them, are made and engendred diuers things of sundry kyndes. These foure (that is to meane, Earth, Ayre, Water, and Fyre) although they are named simple, but in respecte as aforesayde, yet are they the Ele∣ments (that is to say) beginnings and principles of all other com∣poundes and mixtes. A pure Element can not be seene,Pure & simpl elements ca not be seene. The diuisio of elements. VVhat is lmentate. forasmuch as that that is pure, lacketh colour: and that that hath no colour, is not visible. The Elements (as sayth Isodorus) were diuided by the hand of God. The imperiall Heauen was replenished with Angelles, the ayre with byrdes, the sea with fyshes, and the land with men, and other beastes. Elementate, is euery body com∣pounded of the foure Elements. Not that they are Elements formally, but vertually in myxt bodies. This knowen, we wyll shewe how the world is diuided into two regions: Celestiall, and Elementall.Diuision of the world in∣to Celestiall and eleme∣tall. The region Elementall, which is continually subiect to alterations, is diuided into foure Elements: which are, Earth, Water, Ayre, and Fyre. These Elments, the Greekes call Yctogia, for the communion and concord that they haue beweene them∣selues. The heauenly or etheriall re∣gion (called Quinta EssentiaQuintae Essentia.) compasseth and conteineth the Elementall worlde within it.
The fyfth Chapter, of the number, order, and propertie of the Elements and Heauens. Th orders of Elemets.THE Earth (after the Philosopher) is a pricke or poynt in the middest, called the center, to the which they assigne the lowest place. Next vnto the earth,Earth. and about it, the Water occupyeth the second place,VVa. and the Ayre the thyrd.Ayre. The Fyre is higher then any of the other elements.Fyre. And it is to vnderstand, that the water hath two superficials.The four of the watr. One, which is called concaue, or halow: the other, conuex or embowing. You may compare the inward part of the concaue to a dyshe or a bolle, whose outward part is called conuex. As touching the concaue, the water compasseth about the earth, leauing discouered that part that serueth for the respiration and life of men, and other beastes. As concerning which,Th Ocean S. sam thinke that the Ocean Sea is higher then the earth: and aske the question why the Sa couereth not the whole earth, and why the earth is not sunke in the water: To this it may be a sufficient aunsweare, that it hath so pleased the wyll of Gd, according to the saying of the prophet Duid:Psal. 107. Ter∣minum posuisti quem non transgredietur, neque conuertetr operir terram.Iob. 38. That is, Thou hast appoynted limits, which it shall not passe, neyther shall it returne to couer the earth. Besyde the wyll of God,The will of God, is the cause of . which is the cheefe and sufficient cause thereof, we say that nature fayleth not in her necessaries. For she sometime admitteth a litle inconuenience, to auoyde a greater euill: as when heauie things, which natually should descend, doo not only not descende, but rise vp: And a also sotime it chaunceth that fyre descen∣deth, and wter aryseth to fyll the voyd or emptie places, least any where should be foud voyd or emptie, which nature so greatly ab∣horeth.Nature ab∣horreth emp∣s. T this pupose, nature foreseeing the kindes of many things that could not elsewhere liue then on the earth, neither bee conserued wthin the water (as men, and other earthly beasts) de∣termed before to mke the earth not perfectly round,The earth is not pfecly rounde. contrary to the nature thereof: whereof it foloweth, that it is not altogea∣ther
couered of the water. And as (sayth Origen) the earth re∣mayneth discouered of water, that it might bring foorth fruites, trees,Diuision of the ayr int thre Region and plantes. As touching the conuex aforesayde, the water and earth discouered, are conteyned vnder the concauitie of the ayre, which is diuided into three Regions, as the lowest, hyghest, and middlemost. The lowest is hote, by reason of the reflection or rebounding of the beames of the Sunne, stryken backe by the earth. The highest also is hote, by participation of the fyre, and nearenesse thereunto. The myddle region is colde, as is manifest by the snowe and hayle,The hyghest ayre is in∣combusibl. engendred in the same. The ayre neare vnto the region of the fyre, which is pure heate, doth neither burne nor lighten, because it hath no combustible matter, and so hath it power, and not acte. It is neare vnto, and reacheth the circle of the Moone, which compasseth it about. The heauen,The order of the heaue. or circle of the Moone, is next vnto the heauen of Mercuri: and Mercuri vnto Venus: Venus, vnto the Sunne: the Sunne, to Mars: Mars, to Iupiter: Iupiter, to Saturne, which is next, and rea∣cheth vnto the heauen of the Starres, called the Firmament,The Firma∣ment. be∣cause that in it are all the Starres (except the Planets) firme and fyxt as a knot in a table. The knowledge of the Planets was had by seuen sundry motions they haue among themselues,The Plaets. and by their course, not vnifourme to that of the Starres of the eyght heauen, because that sometimes the Planets appeare vnto vs ioy∣ned togeather, and sometimes diuided. The Christaline heauen,The Chria∣line heauen. compasseth about, or conteyneth within it the heauen of Starres. This Christaline heauen, is transparent, and prspicuous, as cleare water or glasse that may be seene through, by reason of the cleerenesse and pure substaunce thereof. It is by an other name called, the heauen of water,The heaue of water. whereof holy Scripture speaketh, say∣ing, Aquae quae supra caelos sunt, laudent nomen Domini.Psal. 148. That is to say,Daniel. 3. Let the waters that are aboue the heauens, prayse the name of the Lord.The moouing of the first mooueable. It was created for the conseruation of corpo∣rall things, and to temper the heate engendred of the moouing of the fyrst moueable, which being so great of body, that it not onely compasseth all the Elements, but also all the inferior heauens is mooued so swiftly, that it dayly perfectly mooueth all the aforesaid Spheres. And least by reason of the great heate thereof, caused
by his swyft motion, it should consume inferior things, God or∣deyned this Christaline heauen,Th coldesse of the Chri∣stalin an. The heaun of the fyrst moueable. that the coldnesse thereof might temper the extreame heae of the other. This Christaline hea∣uen, reacheth vnto the fist moueable heauen, called Primum mo∣bile. Ad this reacheth to the Emperiall heauen, which is the twelfth, called Emperium,The heae called Empe∣riu, is not mooued, & is the habitatio of Angelles. by reason of his cleerenesse and res∣ple. T is , a is mot pfect. The Phi∣losophers had no knoledge heereof. B we beleeue by holy Scripture, that such a heaun there is, and the same to be the ha∣bitation of Agelles, and Spirituall creatures. It is also called Coelum Coelorum, that is, The heauen of heauens: because it conteyneth and includeth within it all the other heauens. It is of greater cleerenesse then all the other heauens, and was created immediatly with the Angelles. In this also remayneth the huma∣nitie of Iesus Christ our GOD,The ani∣ie of Christ in he Emperiall heauen. and in dignitie aboue it. It conteyneth three holy orders or principalities, called, Hierarchias. Wereof the fyrst is called Supercelestall,Three orders of angelles. and hath in it alo three orders, Seraphims, Ceruims, an Thrones. The se∣cond is called Celestiall, and conteyneth Dminations, Princi∣pates, and Potestates. The third, called Subcelestiall, contei∣neth Uirtutes, Archangells, and Angelles. And to coclude, it hath aboundance of all goodnesse and perfect felicitie, with priuation or want of all euill.The periall eauen pr∣seruth ll the  heue. The heauen also geueth influence of constancie, stedfastnesse, and durabilitie to things, aganst the flux∣abilitie and inconstancie of the other heauens: the order whereof, doth appeare in the demonstra∣tion followyng.
The vi. Chapter, of the immutabilitie or im∣mobilitie of the Earth. THE Pythagorians, and other auncient naturall Philosophers (as sayth Aristotle) were of opi∣nion that the earth did mooue,Opinion that the earth mooueth. yet not by a ryght foorth motion,Molus in loco. but circulerly about the middest of one place. The which errour, both Aristotle him∣selfe, and the Astronomers do confute and re∣prooue by euident causes, and manifest demonstrations: For cir∣culer motion, is proper to the heauens. And as the earth differeth from them in nature,The arth is immoouable. so likewise in moouing. And although it be
so that the earth may naturally mooue by certayne of his partes, yet to mooue in the whole, and without the circuite of his Sphere, it is impossible, being founded and established vppon his owne cen∣ter, the which of it selfe is naturally immooueable: for as much as in it the reason of all heauynes consisteth.All heauie things enclin to the center of the earth. Whereas otherwise, euery part that is mooued should ascend, contrary to the nature of all heauie things. Bt there is found nothing heauie that doth not naturally enclyne directly to the center of the earth, and would actually descend thyther, if it had no impediment of some other thing to resist it: and when it toucheth there, or is come thyther, would still rest and remayne there. And heereby it foloweth, that the earth,The earth is founded vp∣pon his owne center. being founded vppon his owne center, is not mooued. The wich thing the Prophet Dauid also affyrmeth, saying: Fundasti terram super stabilitatem suam, (that is) Thou foun∣dedst the earth vppon his stabilitie.Psal. 130. The vij. Chapter, of the roundnesse of the Earth and Water. The roundnes of the earth.THAT the Earth is rounde, it ap∣peareth by manifest euidence: For if it were playne or flatte, the dawning of the day or day spryng, should e∣qually and at one time appeare to them in the West,The rysing of the Sunne. as to them in the East. But we see the contrarie, that it appeareth fyrst to them that dwell in the East, and afterward to them in the West. This is prooued by the Eclipse of the Moone,The Eclipse of he Moone. which begin∣ning at one instant, they of Hierusa∣lem see it begin at foure a clocke of the night, and we of Anda∣lusie in Spayne, at one a clocke of the night. It foloweth here∣by, that to them it nighteneth three houres sooner then vnto vs in Spayne: and this is caused by the roundnesse of the earth. It is also as well knowen to be rounde, from the pole Ar∣tyke, to the pole Antartyke: for by the roundnesse thereof, is
caused the equalitie and inequalitie of the dayes and nyghtes.The equalitie of the dayes and nyghtes. The same is lykewyse knowen by the raysing of the Pole aboue our Horizon. And that the superficiall part of the earth and wa∣ter, is all one rounde and spheri∣call Globe,The earth and the war ae one round Globe is manyfest by the shadowe thereof, béeyng a cer∣tayne darke bodye, reflected from the Earth in the Eclipse of the Moone. For by this, as by playne demonstration, maye weé knowe that the Earth is rounde, as may more manyfest∣ly appeare by thys Figure.The water is a round body It is also prooued, that the water is a rounde body, as is seéne by experience. For yf you erecte a marke vppon the Sea banke of a Porte, and a Shyppe de∣parte from that Porte a cer∣tayne space: then standyng in the Poupe or Sterne of the Shyppe, you shall not seé the marke aforesayde: but yf you stande in the top of the Shyp, then may you seé it. Whereas notwithstandyng (yf that por∣tion of the bendyng Arke of the earth, dyd not hynder the syght) you shoulde sée it better beyng in the Poupe, forasmuch as it is nearer to the marke then to the toppe of the Shyppe, as by thys demonstration folowing appeareth.
But heere some may mooue a doubte, saying, that on the earth we may see many Mountaynes,how the earth is round. and consequently many great Uallyes and Paynes, with many diuersities of sundrye o∣ther deepe and vnequall places, by reason whereof, the earth can not truely be called rounde. To this I say, that in two manners, the earth is called and vnderstoode to be rounde. As after one manner, speakyng precisely, it is called rounde, as a Cicle or a Sphere, which we call rounde, because that all ryght lines drawen from the center thereof to the circumference, are equall. The other roundnesse, is consydered without this precisenesse: and is suche, as not by all his partes is equally distant from his myddest or cen∣ter, but hath some partes hygher, and some lower, yet not in such quantitie as may destroy the roundnesse of the whole. As yf in a Bowle there wee certayne clyftes or holes, it should not thereby leaue to be round, although not perfectly or precisely rounde. And for this cause sayth Auerrois, that although both the heauenly bodyes and the Elements are of round fourme, yet differ they in this, that the heauenly Spheres haue perfect roundnesse, and the Elemets not. As the earth, by reason of his Mountaynes and Uales, the Sea by his encreasing, and decreasing, the Ayre also for his nearenesse to the fyre, and by his contrarietie doth some∣time doo, and soetime suffer (that is to say) is sometime actiue, and sometyme passiue.The ayre is actiu and passiue, and not perfectly round. So that folowing the one, it fleeth the o∣ther, by reason whereof, it also lacketh perfect roundnesse. But the fyre, for as muche as it is neare to the concaue of the circle of the Moone, which is Sphericall, may therefore be called Sphericall or rounde.The fyr is ound.
The viij. Chapter, of the motion of the Heauens and Ele∣mentes. IT is not to be forgotten, that all the Elementes are wholy mooueable by locall motion, except the earth. The water is mooued by the motion of the Moone, or tossed by the Wyndes. The fyre (as sayth Aristotle) is mooued cir∣culerly by the motion of the day,how the fyr is mooued. and is drawen of the circles that embrace it, or compasse it about: as is manyfest by the Cometes, or bla∣zing Starres, and other fyerie exhalations, conteyned and en∣gendred in it: Which beeyng caryed with thys motion, conclude, that the fyre mooueth in lyke maner. And with thys motion is the superiour parte of the ayre violently caryed about,how the ayre is mooued. as the other impressions therein doo shewe. The inferiour part is mooued by dyuers motions, (that is to meane) laterally, as by experience we see when the wyndes blowe.The Moone. The Moone with her Heauen or Sphere, by her proper motion geueth her turne from the West to the East, in xxvii. dayes, and vii. houres, with xv. mi∣nutes. Venus,Venus. Mercuri,Mercuri. and the Sunne,The Sunne. in a yeere, which is the space of three hundred threescore and fyue dayes, with fyue houres, and fourtie and niene minutes.Mars. Mars in two yeeres. Iupiter in twelue yeeres. Saturne in xxx. yeeres. The eyght heauen, which is the Fyrmament, or Starrie Heauen,The Starrie heauen o fyr∣mament. by his owne proper mo∣tion is mooued by the nienth Heauen, vpon the beginning of Aries and Libra, and vpon these two poyntes accomplysheth hys Reuo∣lution in seuen thousand yeeres. This motion is called Motus trepidationis (that is to say)The Christa∣line heauen.
the tremblyng motion, or motion of accesse and recesse. The nienth heauen endeth his motion from the West to the East, in fourtie and niene thousand yéeres: And by this motion moueth the eight heauen. Te tenth heauen, called Primum mobile, is mooued from the East to the West:First moue∣able. and in twentie and foure houres (whiche is a naturall day) perfourmeth one reuolution, and with the myghtye force and swyftnesse of his motio, ca∣ryeth wyth hym all the other inferior heauens, and maketh them to geue the same turne in twentie and foure houres, where as neuerthelesse they ceasse not in the meane tyme to keépe the course of theyr owne proper motion.how the fist moueabl draweth the other hea∣s. As (for example) yf an Ant or Pismie shold goe about the wheéle of a Myll, contrary to the moouing of the whéele: before the Ant in goyng styll forward, should come agayne to the poynt from whenee she fyrst depar∣ted (which is once about, or one turne) the wheéle should in that space make many turnes. The ix. Chapter, of the diuision of the Sphere into formall partes. THE Sphere of the worlde, is diuided in two manners, (that is to say) by sub∣staunce, and by accident. By substaunce into tenne Spheres, as we haue sayde. By accident,The right and crooked or obliqu Spher. into a right Sphere, and oblique or crooked Sphere. They haue the ryght Sphere that dwell vnder the Equinoctiall lyne, and is called ryght, because to them the Ples are equally in the Hrizon, as ap∣peareth by thys Figure folowing.
They haue the oblique Sphere that dwell eyther on thys syde or the other syde of the Equinoctiall,The obliqu or crooked Sphere. vnto whome is euer one of
the Poles aboue the Horizon, and the other vnder it, as appeareth in this Figure. The x. circles of the Sphre.The Sphere is compounded of tenne circles imagined. And (as sayth Iohn de sacro bosco in his booke of the Sphere) syxe
of them are greater, and foure lesse. The greater Circle, is that which deuideth the Sphere into two equall partes, and hath his center with the center of it. These are the Equinoctiall, the Zodiacke, the two Coluri, the Horizon, and the Meridian. The lesse Circle, is that that deuideth the Sphere into two vnequall partes. These are the two Tropykes, and two Poler Circles. The x. Chapter, of the Equinoctiall Circle. THE Equinoctiall, is a Circle that deuideth the Sphere into two equall partes,The Equi∣noctiall. and is by euery parte equally distaunt from both the Poles. It is one of the greate Circles in the Sphere, and is the greatest Circle of those which are described in the Sphere, by the motion of Primum mobi∣le, or fyrst moueable. This Circle, for his equalitie, and regula∣ritie, is more noble then the Zodiacke, which we haue described in the eight sphere, and also then any of the other. It is imagned to gyrd the world round about by East and West.The equalitie of the day and nyght. It is called Equi∣noctiall, because this word Equinoctium, signifyeth equalitie of nyghtes and dayes, whereof the cause is, that the Sunne com∣ming to this Circle, the Arke of the day is equall with the Arke of the night, and then is the Equinoctiall. It is also called the Zone, or gyrdle of the fyrst mooueable.The fyrst moueble. For euen as a gyrdle doth gyrde a man by the myddest, so doth this Circle gyrd in the middest be∣tweene both the Poles, vppon the whiche the fyrst moouable is mooued. One of these imagined on our pate of the Sphere, is called Polus Arctius, because it is neare vnto certayne Starres, whiche the Astronomers call Arcturus, whiche is the great Beare.The Pole Atyke. It is called Septentrional, or Septenrion, be∣cause that rounde about it are mooued the vij. Starres, whiche make the lesse Bere, commoly called Bozina, (that is, the
horne.The hore. The Starre whiche is in the tayle of the lesser Beare, is called the North Starre,North Starre. because it is nearest vnto the North Pole: the whiche Pole is a certayne poynt in the Firmament, which can not be seene, although the nyght be neuer so cleere. This Starre (as the Poet Homer sayth) dooth mooue lytle or nothyng,Pole Antar∣ike. because of his lytle distance from the Pole. The other Pole is imagined on the other contrary part, and is called Po∣lus Antarticus, of the woord Ante, whyche signifyeth agaynste, contrary, or opposite, because it is on the contrary pate from the Pole Artyke. It is also called the South Pole, because that from that parte of heauen commeth the Wide, commonly cal∣led the South: and is lykewyse called Meridional, because it is ryght South from vs.The cross eer vnto the Pole Antartike. This is neuer seene to vs. They that dwell vnder the Equinoctiall, or come neare vnto this Pole Antartike, haue for a signe or marke to knowe it, foure Starres, in fourme of a Crosse. And when the greatest of these is lowest in the foote of the Crosse, they say it is xxx. degrees aboue the Pole. And as we can not see theyr Pole from hence, so they can not see our Pole from thence. The xi. Chapter, of the Zodiacke Circle. Zodiack.THE Zodiacke is defyned to declyne or bende it selfe from the Equinoctiall. It is a greate Circle, whiche deuideth the Sphere in two equall partes, cuttyng the Equinoctiall by oblique or crooked angles: So that being thus cut or deui∣ded by it into two equall partes, one parte thereof declineth toward the South, and the other toward the North. This Circle is called the Zodiacke, of this worde Zon,Th twelue signes of th zodiacke. which in the Greeke tongue signifyeth lyfe, because that accordyng to the moouing of the Planets vnder it, is the lyfe of inferiour creatures: Or is so named of Zodion, whiche signifieth a lyuyng beast. And is therefore diuided into
twelue equall partes, whereof euery part is called a signe, and euery signe hath an especiall name of some beast, in respect of some propertie agreeable to the same: or for the order and dis∣position of the ixt Starres in those partes, somewhat represen∣ting the similitudes of suche beastes, it is called Zodiacke. The Latines called this Circle,how the Sun is cause of ge∣neration and corruption. Signifer, (that is) the signe bearer, because it caryeth these signes or images in it also, because the twelue partes,Deuision of the twelue Signes. Deuision of the signes into degrees. Deuision of the zodiacke by latitude. into the which this Circle is deuided, are called the xij. Signes. That parte which declyneth to the North, con∣teyneth vi. Signes septentrionall, and the other that declyneth to the South, conteyneth other vi. called Meridionall. Further∣more, it is to consyder, that the zodiacke may be deuided in two maners. One, by longitude or length into the xii. signes afore∣sayd, and euery signe is deuided into xxx. degrees, which make CCClx. degrees, lykewise, euery degree is deuided into lx. mi∣nutes, and euery minute into lx. secondes, and euery seconde into lx. terces, and so to tenne. The other deuision of the zodiacke is, by latitude or breadth. By latitude it is deuided into xii. de∣grees, and in it we imagine a lyne that deuideth his latitude by the myddest, hauing vi. degrees on euery parte or syde. And thys lyne,The Eclipike lyne. whyche deuideth into two equall partes the breadth or lati∣tude of the zodiacke, is called the Eclyptike lyne, because that when the Sunne and Moone are directly deuided vnder thys lyne, eyther ioyned togeather by coniunction, or deuided by oppo∣sition, then is the Eclipse of the Sunne or of the Moone. Under this zodiacke the seuen planets are mooued. The Sunne also mooueth in the myddest of the sayde zodiacke, alongest the E∣cliptike lyne, not enclyning more to the one part then to the other. But the other Planettes do sometyme goe towarde the North, and otherwhyles towarde the South, and sometyme also to∣warde or trauerse the Eclyptyke. It is lykewyse to be noted, that these signes whereof we haue spoken, are not the constella∣tions or starres that make those figures,The moouing of the Sunne and the other Planets in the zodiacke. whiche the auncient A∣stronomers dyd appropriate to certayne Beastes, and other thynges: For these figures are mooued according to the moti∣on of the eight Sphere, and passe from one signe of the zodiacke to another. As we see that the Starre, called Oculus Tauri,
(that is) the Bulles eye, is in two degrees of Gemini. And the two Starres that are the head of Gemini,The figures o beasts and other things imagined in heauen be∣sides the xii. ignes. are in xiii. and xvi. de∣grees of Cancer. And Spica verginis (that is) the spyke of the Uirgin, is in xvi. degrees of Libra, and the hart of Scorpio in two degrees of Sagittarius. And by this order do they passe frō one signe to another: so that we may not vnderstand the signes by these starres, but the xii. partes of the Arke of the Zodiacke, taking the begynnyng of the Equinoctiall of Aries. The names of these signes, with theyr Caractes and qualities, are described in this table heere folowyng. Numb. Names. Charact. Qualities. 1 Aries. ♈ Hot and dry. 2 Taurus ♉ Cold and dry. 3 Gemini. ♊ Hot and moyst. 4 Cancer. ♋ Colde and moyst. 5 Leo. ♌ Hot and dry. 6 Virgo. ♍ Colde and dry. 7 Libra. ♎ Hot and moyst. 8 Scorp. ♏ Colde and moyst. 9 Sagitt. ♐ Hot and dry. 10 Capri. ♑ Colde and dry. 11 Aqua. ♒ Hot and moyst. 12 Pisces. ♓ Colde and moyst. The xii. Chapter, of the Circles called Coluri. THere are two circles in the Sphere, called Co∣luri, so named of the Greeke woorde Colon, whiche signifieth, a member: And of Vros, whiche signifyeth a wylde Oxe. The tayle of this beast, maketh a Semycircle, or halfe Circle, not perfecte. And as this beaste mooueth his tayle laterally or side wayes, and not by longitude: euen so do the Coluri mooue to vs, and are cut in ryght sphericall Angles,
vpon the Poles of the world. The one passeth by the Poles of the world, and by the poynts of the Equinoctials, and is called the E∣quinoctiall Colure:The Euinoc∣tial Colure. the other lykewyse passeth by the Poles of the worlde, and also by the Poles of the Zodiacke, and by the poynts of the Solstitialles, and is called the Colure Solstitiall,The Solstitia Colur. called Sol∣stitium, as Solis statio (that is) the standing or staying of the Sunne: because that when the Sunne commeth to this poynt, it declyneth no more, but turneth toward the Equinoctiall. These circles deuide aswell the Equinoctiall, as the zodiacke into foure equall partes, by the poyntes of the Equinoctialles, and Solsti∣ialles. In the Colure Solstitiall,Th greates declination of th Zodiacke, are the greatest declinations of the zodiacke, which are two Arkes of this Colure, contey∣ed betweene the Equinoctiall and the zodiacke. And these Arkes are equall to the other two of the same Colure, included betweene the Poles of the world, and the Poles of the zo∣diacke. The xiii. Chapter, of the Meridian Circle. THE Meridian,Definition of the Meridian Circl. is one of the greate Circles, imagined to trauerse the sphere by the Poles of the worlde, cutting the same in two equall partes by the ze∣nith or verticall poynt. It is called Me∣ridian for this effect, that wheresoeuer a man becommeth, and at what soeuer tyme of the yeere, when the Sunne (by the moouyng of the fyrste mooueable) shall come to hys Mridian,The mydday or noone. to hym shall it be hygh noone at mydday, and is therefore als called the circle of the mydday.
It is also to be noted, that there are as many Meridians,Diuers Meri∣dians. or Me∣ridian lynes, as are differences or habitations by longitude: so that they that dwell in the East, haue other Meridians then they that dwell in the West: So that the interposition of the arke of the Equinoctiall, betweene the Meridian of one Citie, and the Meridian of the other, is called the difference of longitude from one Region to another, and from one Citie to another, as we wyll further declare heereafter. The xiiij. Chapter, of the Horizontall Circle. THE Horizon (after the Astronomers) is a Circle whyche deuydeth that parte of the hea∣uen whyche wee doo see, from the other parte whiche wee see not, so that the sayde Horizon deuideth the Sphere of the worlde into two e∣quall halfes,Definition of the horizon. called Hemispheres. The halfe whiche wee doo see, is called the Hemisphere superior, and it whiche wee see not, is called the Hemisphere inferior.hemisphere or horizon. This Ho∣rizon, chaungeth to them that mooue: for as one doth mooue, hys Horizon doth chaunge. And heereof it commeth, that how many places are vppon the earth,Diuers hori∣zon. and the circumference thereof, it is possible there should be so many Horizons. The Astrono∣mers suppose the Horizon, after two manner of sortes, that is to say, a ryght Horizon, and an oblique, or crooked Horizon. The ryght Horizon, is to them whose zenith or verticall poynt is directly in the Equinoctiall: and thys ryght Horizon, passeth by the Poles of the worlde, and deuideth the Equinoctiall in ryght sphericall angles.The ryght and oblique horizon. The other oblique or declyned Hori∣zon haue they, vnto whome the Pole of the world doth ryse a∣boue theyr Horizon. This Horizon is also called oblique, because it deuideth the Equinoctiall in vnequall and oblique or crooked angles.
Also it is to bée vnderstoode, that the Pole of the Horizon is called Zenith, or the verticall poynt of heauen, perpendiculer∣lye, or directly ouer our head. Whereby is inferred, that as much as is the eleuation of the Pole of the world aboue the Horizon, so much is the distaunce of the Zenith from the Equinoctiall.Distance of the zenith from the Equinoctiall. For the Zenith by all his partes, is distaunt from the Horizon by nintie degeés. And all other impediments excluded, we may e∣uer seé halfe the heauen: And in as much as any shall passe from the Equinoctiall, toward the one Pole or the other, so much fal∣leth the Horizon vnder or beneath the Pole, toward the course he entendeth, and likewise as much shall it be raysed aboue the con∣trary Pole, as shall appeare by a demonstration in the ende of this Chapter.how the hori∣zon is deui∣ded by th Meridian. This Horizon is diuided by the Meridian into two e∣quall partes, that is to say, the East and West partes of the sayde Horizon. The Est part is, where the Sunne and Starres be∣ginne to aryse to vs, and appeare in our syght. The West part is, where the Sunne and Starres doth set and begyn to be hydde out of our syght, vnder the sayde Horizon. Moreouer, it is to beé vnderstanded, that there be two manners of the East and West, that is to say, the true East and West,The true and vntrue East and VVst. or the vntrue. The true East, is the poynt in the East part of the Horizon, where it doth cutte with the Equinoctiall: for when the Sunne is in the poynts of the Equinoctiall, then he ryseth in the poynt of the true East. And lykewyse is to be vnderstand of the poynt of the true West, to be in the West part of the Horizon, where the Equinoctiall doth cutte with the sayde Horizon. The vntrue East and West is va∣riable, accordyng as the Sunne ryseth and setteth dayly in dyuers poynts of the Horizon, which is distant from the poyntes of the true East and Wst, sometymes more to the Northward, and sometymes more to the South.
The xv. Chapter, of the foure lesse Circles. HAuing entreated of the vi. biggest Circles, it re∣mayneth to speake of the foure lesse Circles. The lesse Circles.A lesse Circle (as we haue sayde before) is that, whose superficiall diuideth the Sphere into vnequall partes, not passing by the Center there∣of.
And of these, two are named Tropikes:Tropykes. so named of Tropo the Greeke word, which signifieth Conuertion, because the Sunne comming to any of these Tropikes, is conuerted, and turneth to∣ward the Equinotiall. These Tropikes are described by the mo∣tion of the fyrst moueable, with the poynts of the Solstitials. The one with the beginning of Cancer, and this is called the Tropike of Cancer, or Etiuall, or Sommer Tropike: The other is de∣scribed with the beginning of Capricorne, and is called the Tro∣pike of Capricorne, or Hiemall, or Winter Tropike. These two Tropikes and the Pola Circles (whereof I wyll say more heere∣after) are called Paralelles:Paralelles. so named, for that they are equally distant by their circumferences one from an other, as well as from the Equinoctiall. The Polar Circles are described in this man∣ner:The Polar Circles. so that as the Zodiacke declineth from the Equinoctiall, so do the Poles of the Zodiacke decline from the Poles of the world.The Poles of the zodiacke, and Poles of the world. And as the eyght Sphere is mooued at the motion of the fyrste mooueable, so shal the Zodiacke mooue, whiche is parte of the Sphere. And the Zodiacke being mooued, his Poles shall lyke∣wyse mooue aboue the Poles of the world.The great declination of the Sunne. And as the Poles of the Zodiacke are distant from the Poles of the world xxiii. degrees and a halfe (which is as much as the greatest declination) they shal describe certayne circles distaunt from the Poles of the world, in the selfe same xxiii. degrees and a half. These Polar Circles, take their name or dominion of that Pole of the world that is most neere vnto them, and therefore is the one called Artyke,The Artyk, and Antar∣tike. and the other Antartyke.
The xvj. Chapter, of the fyue Zones. THE auncient Astronomers diuided the Sphere into v. Zones.The Sphere diuided into fiue zones. The fist, from the Pole Artyke, to the Circle Artyke. The second, from the Circle Artyke, to the Tropike of Cancer. The thyrde, from the Tropike of Cancer, to the Tropike of Capricorne. The fourth, from the Tropike of Capricorne, to the Circle Antartike. The fyfth, from the Circle Antartyke, to the Pole Antartyke. Of these fyue Zones,Zones habi∣tabl and vn∣habitable. they haue certayne knowledge, that two of the Poles were vnhabitable for extreame colde: and also that the burnt Zone (called Torrida Zo∣na) whereby the Sunne passeth by the middest of them, should be vnhabitable for extreame heate. That from the Tropike of Ca∣pricorne, vnto the Circle Antartyke, they called desart, because they knew not that it was inhabited. And this our Zone,The diuision of the earth according to the fiue zones of heauen. that is, from the Tropike of Cancer, to the Circle Artyke, they called in∣habited, or habitable. And to haue more perfect knowledge hereof, it is to imagine, that the earth is diuided proportionally into fyue Regions or Portions, which answeare directly to the sayd fyue Zones, as sayth the Poet Ouid in this Uerse. Totidemque plage, tellure praemuntur. (That is) And so many Regions, are on the earth beneath. Euery of these Regions or portions of the earth, is situate vn∣der one of the fiue Zones aforesayd. But whereas certayne men of aucthoritie haue moued the question, whether the earth vnder the Zone, from the Tropike of Cancer, to the Circle Antartyke, is desart or no: Ptolomie,An errour of Ptolomie and the Astrono∣m. and the Astronomers affyrme, that it is vnpeopled. But Aristotle, Ouid in the second of his Metamor∣phoses, Plinie also, and Iohn de Sacro bosco, affyrme the con∣trary: as for the more certaintie thereof we knowe the experience of such as goe and come dayly from those partes. Moreouer then this, we knowe that that lande is not onely well replenished with people of good corporature, and of white colour, but the same to be also very rych in Golde. For they that sayle to the East Indies,
touch in the cape of Buena speranza, or Caput bone Spei, which is in this Zone. Likewyse the land of Brasile,The land of Brasile. and the confynes of Rio de la Plata, with all the coast, vnto the straights of Maga∣lianes, euen vnto the 54. degrees of the south part.The straights of Magalianes This lande was discouered by Magalianes, in the yeere 1520 or 1521. whereby that is now wel knowen by sight, whereof Ptolome had no knowledge by heare say. The rnt Zone (called Torrida Zo∣na) they also described to be vnhabitable, by reason of the greate heate thereof, as Aristotle, Pinie, and in maner all other ancient aucthors affirme: whereof the Poet Virgil wryteth thus. Quinque tenent coelum Zonae, quarum vna corrusco. Semper sole rubens, & torrida semper ab igne. Which in the English tongue is thus much to say in effect. In Zones fyue, the heauens conteyned be, Whereof the one with burning Sunne is red: Scorching the Earth subiect to his degree, That for the heate thereof it is vnhabited. Lykewyse Ouide in his Metamorphoses, toucheth the same, saying. Quarum quae media est, & torrida semper ab igne. &c. Yet that the burnt zone is inhabited, and well replenyshed wyth people that lyue there, we knowe so certaynely by the number of them that dayly passe too and fro the Indies of your Maiestie dis∣couered,The West Indies. in your most happie dayes, that to say any thing to the contrary, it should be a manifest errour, and therefore is it greatly to be marueyled, that certayne wise men haue affirmed these parts to bee vnhabitable: whereas neuerthelesse they had knowledge of Arabia, Foelix, Aethiopia, Tabrobana, and dyuers other Regions situate vnder the burnt Zone. Plinie wryteth, that a Ship came from the sea of Percia by the Ocean, round about Ethiope, and came to the pyllers of Hercules, which is now the Citie of Cadiz, where at this present I write this briefe treatise. They of Guinca, Calicut, Gatigara, and Malaca, lyue all vnder the burnt Zone,People of long life vn∣der the zone. and many of them lyue very long. And doubtlesse, many things ought to perswade vs, that vnder the burnt zone, the earth is furnished with all thynges perteyning to the lyfe of man: for that in that region, or portion of the earth, is in maner
continuall Equiuoctiall, and the coldnesse of the night doth suffici∣ently temper the heate of the day. Agayne, they that inhabite vn∣der that Zone, haue two Sommers, and two Winters in the yeere:Cold Regions habitable. whereby is concluded that the auncient aucthours erred, not onely in affyrming this Zone to be vnhabitable by reason of the great heat thereof, but in lyke maner erred, in affyrming the Zone that is betweene the circle Articke, and the pole Articke, to be al∣so vnhabited by reason of great cold. The contrary whereof, we may well affyrme, knowing as we knowe, that Island,Island. with part of Gothland,Gothland Norway,Norway. Russia,Russia. and dyuers other Lands, are inha∣bited and well peopled. This is the figure and demonstration which foloweth.
The xvij. Chapter, of longitude and latitude, and of the proportion which the lesse circles haue to the great circle. THE Sphere or globe of the earth, is also diuided in breadth,The diuisio of the Sphere by longitude and latitude. and in length. The breadth (which is called latitude) is by degrees: for from the E∣quinoctiall, to eyther of the two poles, is 90. de∣grees. The length (which is called longitude) is by the degrees of the Equinoctiall, which is diui∣ded in 60. degrees. The fyrst degree of longitude, doth begin at a certaine Meridian, which passeth by the Ilands of the Canares, called the fyxed Meridian: and the order of the numbring of the sayd longitude, is alwayes toward the East. By euery degree of the sayd longitude in the Equinoctiall, may be vnderstanded a great circle (called Meridian) to passe, eche one of them passyng and meeting the poles of the world, so that the sayd great circles, or meridians, doth diuide euery paralel or lesse circle, proportional∣ly into 360. degrees:The degre of the Equi∣noctial circl. but we must not vnderstand these degrees to be equall (that is to say) as great in one circle, as in another: for the greater the circle is, the greater is the degree in it: and the greater the paralel is, the nearer it is vnto the Equinoctiall lyne. Euery degree of the Equinoctiall, conteyneth in longitude 60. mi∣nutes, so likewise it is to be vnderstanded of the degrees of lati∣tude, which be diuided ech one into 60. minutes of latitude, be∣cause the degrees and minutes in the great circles, doo not differ in theyr bignesse the one from the other: but the degrees in the paralels, as they are distaunt from the Equinoctiall, and come neare to eyther of the two Poles, they diminish consequently, so that one degree in the paralel, of 7. degrees of latitude, doth make in quantitie but 59. minutes, and 33. seconds of the Equinoctial circle: and to one degree in the paralel of 12. degrees of latitude, goeth but 58. minutes, and 41. seconds of the Equinoctial, and to one degree in the paralel of 16. degrees of latitude, there goeth 57. minutes, and 41. seconds.
The Table of minutes, which euery degree conteyneth in euery of the paralelles. G M S G M S G M S G M S G M S G M S 1 59 59 16 57 41 31 51 26 46 41 41 61 29 5 76 14 31 2 59 58 17 57 23 32 50 53 47 40 55 62 28 10 77 13 30 3 59 55 18 57 4 33 50 19 48 40 9 63 27 14 7 2 2 4 59 51 19 56 44 34 49 45 49 39 22 64 26 18 79 11 27 5 59 46 20 56 23 35 49 9 50 38 34 65 25 21 80 10 25 6 59 40 21 56 1 36 48 32 51 37 46 66 24 24 81 9 23 7 59 33 22 55 38 37 47 55 52 36 56 67 23 27 82 8 21 8 59 25 23 55 14 38 47 17 53 36 7 68 22 29 83 7 19 9 59 16 24 54 49 39 46 38 54 35 16 69 21 30 84 6 16 10 59 5 25 54 23 40 45 58 55 34 25 70 20 31 85 5 14 11 58 54 26 53 56 41 45 17 56 33 33 71 1 32 86 4 11 12 58 41 27 53 28 42 44 35 57 32 41 72 18 32 87 3 8 13 58 28 28 52 59 43 43 53 58 31 48 73 17 33 88 2 5 14 58 13 29 52 29 44 43 10 59 30 54 74 16 32 89 1 3 15 57 57 30 51 58 45 42 26 60 30 0 75 15 32 90 0 0 The xviii. Chapter, of the circuite or compasse of the Earth and Water, according to the opinion of the auncient and latter aucthours. IT may heere appeare to be necessarie for our purpose, to declare what space of the superficie of the earth or water, the auncient wryters di suppose to aunsweare to one degree of a greater circle in the heauen: for in diuers coun∣tries, they vsed to count by diuers sorts of measures: as, the Latines counted by miles,Myle. the Greeks by furlongs,Furlongs. the Spanyards & Frenchmen by leagues,Leagues. the Egyptians by signes or marks, and the Persians
by saguas. But they all agree, that foure graynes of Barly make a finger breadth,Grayne. four fingers,Fynger. a hand breadth, four hands a oote, fiue foote,Foote. a Geometricall pase (for two simple pases,Pase. make fiue feete.) Also 125. Geometricall pases, make a furlong, eyght fur∣longs, one myle, whiche is a thousand pases: and three myles, one lague. In Germanie they make leagues of more feete, and in some places more then in other. In Fraunce, they count thyrie leagues, to one degree. The Spanyards, count sixteene leagues and two terces, and seuenteene and a halfe for a degree of the great cicle: this difference that one league is bigger then an∣other, may come heereof, that one Barly corne is bigger then ano∣ther. But to our purpose, let vs geue to euery league three thou∣sand pases, and to euery pase fyue foote, and so shall euery league haue xv. thousand foote. In the Cardes of the sea, that haue their degrees of xvi. leagues and two terces,The degre of the sea Cardes. we say, that of these, the roundenesse of the land and the water conteyneth sixe thousande leagues. And in the Cardes that haue seuenteene leagues and a halfe for a degree, of these we say that it conteyneth sixe thousand and three hundred leagues. And who so desyreth to knowe howe muche is the Diameter of the earth and water,The diameter of the earth and water. may knowe it by multiplying the circumference by seuen, so that diuiding the summe that riseth thereof by twentie and two, the part that ryseth of that calculation, shall be the Diameter: and the halfe thereof shall be the semidiameter. The xix. Chapter, of the seue Climates. THE auncient aucthours did also diuide that part of the superficie of the earth,Diuision of the earth and water by Climates. on the North side of the Equinoctiall, which they supposed to be most habitable, into seuen Climates, wherein they did fynde to be dyuers conditions and customes of men,Diuersities of thyngs in di∣uers Climates. and diuersities of beastes, and of other naturall thynges: the whiche
thyngs they perceyued to haue a diuerstie in the countreys, as where the day of the one did encrease or differ aboue the day of the other by halfe an houre, so that the space of the superficiall of the earth betweene two paralelle lynes, wherein the longest day doth increase or differ by halfe an houre, is called a Climate. The place where they suppose the fyrst climate to begin,What is  climate. is distant in Latitude from the Equinoctial by 12. degrees, and 45. minutes, where the longest day is 12. houres,Differenc of dayes. and 45. minutes, & the place where the last climate doth finishe, is in the Latitude of 50. de∣grees, and 30. minutes, where the longest day is 16. houres, and 15. minutes,The space of sn climates so that the increase of the longest day in the ende of the seuenth climate, dooeth exceede it in the beginning of the fyrst climate by three houres and an halfe: and the whole compasse of the earth, with all the seuen climates, dooeth conteyne in breadth 37. degrees, and 45. minutes, but their length is supposed to ex∣tend to 180. degrees of longitude. In that maner, a climate, the neare it is vnto the Equinoctial, the more it conteyneth of the su∣perficiall of the earth, because the paralelle circles, the nearer they be vnto the Equinoctial,The quantiti f the lss circl. the greater is the compasse of the earth which they make in length, and the lesser the compasse is, the nea∣rer they be vnto the poles, as dooth appeare euidently by the Meridians, where they doo all concurre, and meete in the poles, heir distaunces waxeth continually lesser and lesser, the nearer they be vnto the sayd poles, so that the nearer the climate is vnto the pole, the lesser it conteyneth of myles in the length. In lyke maner shall you vnderstand, that greater is the breadth of the first clime, then of the second, and the second then the third, and lyke∣wyse of the other. For in how much the more the Equinoctial you come neare to the pole, so much the more is the Sphere oblique or crooked, and consequently the day encreaseth more: by reason whereof,The Latitude of Climates. in lesse space is found the increaseth of halfe an houre, in which the climate maketh difference and doth varye. Whiche thyng shall be more manifest to hym that beholdeth the Lati∣tude of them all, as may appeare by the Table heere folowyng: In whiche you may see the houres whiche the greatest daye conteyneth of euery climate in his beginning, middest, and
ende, with also the eleuation of the Pole, or distance from the E∣quinoctial, and also the degrees of Latitude, which euery Climate conteyneth. The longest day.     The eleuation of the Pole.   Differences of the latitude. Climates. Beginning. Midst. End. beginning. Midst. End.         Ho. M Ho. M Ho. M G M G M G M G M 1 12 45 13 0 13 15 12 45 16 40 20 30 7 45 2 13 15 13 30 13 45 20 30 24 15 27 30 7 0 3 13 45 14 0 14 15 27 30 30 45 33 40 6 10 4 14 15 14 30 14 45 33 40 36 24 39 0 5 20 5 14 45 15 0 15 15 39 0 41 20 43 30 4 30 6 15 15 15 30 15 45 43 30 45 24 47 15 3 45 7 15 45 16 0 16 15 47 15 48 40 50 30 3 15 The fyrst Climate, is called Dia Meroes.Dia M∣r. Meroe is a Citie of Aphrike, vnder the burnt Zone, on this side the Equinoctiall, 16. degrees. The second, is called Dia Siena.Dia Sien Siena is a Citie in the con∣ines of Ethiope, where there is a well that sheweth the Sommer solstitiall, because that place is vnder the circle of the Tropike of Cancer, and the Sunne seemeth to stand directly ouer that place at mydday of the solsticiall, whereby the well is then very cleere, and hath in it no shadowe at all: as the Poet Lucan maketh men∣tion in Farsalia, where he sayth. Vmbras nusquam flectentes. That is to say, Shadowes no where reflecting. The thyrd is. Dia Alexandros.Dia A∣lexandros. Alexandria is a famous Ci∣tie in Aphrike, buylded by great Alexander, and is the cheefe Citie or Metropolis of Egypt. The fourth is, Dia Rhodos.Dia Rho∣dos. Rodes is an Iland of Asia the lesse, where were sometyme the Knyghtes of the Rhodes, cal∣led the Knyghtes of the order of Saint Iohn,knightes of the Rhodes. or Knyghtes of Hierusalem, who were dryuen from thence, when the Ilande and Citie was taken by Solton Suliman the greate Turke,The Rhod taken by th Turke. in the yeere 1522. Philippe Vrlerio Frencheman,
beyng then graund Maister of the Rhodes. Within this fourth Climate, is the Citie of Hierusalem, within the holy land called Palestina, and also a great part of Spayne, with many other Prouinces. Dia Ro∣mes.The fyfth, is Dia Romes. Rome is the most famous Citie of Italie, and most notorious of all Europe, sometyme the head of the worlde, dommatrix of Nations, and now the See of the By∣shop of Rome. Dia Bo∣risthenes.The syxth, is Dia Boristhenes. Boristhenes is a great Riuer of Scithia, the fourth arme of the riuer Istro. It falleth into the sea Euxinum: and where as all other riuers of Scithia are trou∣bled, this is cleere and fayre, also olesome to be drunke, and full of Fyshes. Dia Ri∣feos.The seuenth, and last Climate, is called Dia Rifeos. The Mountaynes called Rifei, are famous in the part of Europe called Parmatia, and are contlly couered with Snow. Out of these, spryngeth the riuer Tanais,The riuer Tanais. well knowen in the worlde by fame. When it is written with ph, it is the name of certayne Mountaynes of Archadia. And heere ought we not to be igno∣raunt, that whereas the aucthours assigned onely seuen Cli∣mates, they might haue made many more. And for that they iud∣ged the part of the Pole Antartike not to be inhabited, they assigned no Climates thereto. Stoflerine added the eyght Climate,Stoflerine. coun∣ting from the ende of the seuenth Climate, vnto 57. degrees: and other added more. In like maner describing Meridionall or South Climates,The Meridian or South Climate. we call them by the selfe same names, as we dyd the aforesayd Septentrionall, or North Climates: sauing that it is necessarie to put before euery of them thys Greeke proposition Anti, which in the Latin tongue signifieth Contra, or Contra∣rium, (that is) contrary, or against. So that as we named the fyrst North Climate, Dia Meroes, we must to the fyrst of the South, adde this word Anti, and so shall the fyrst South Cli∣mate be named Anti Dia Meroes: The seconde, Anti Dia Sienes, and so foorth of the other, as is seene in the Figure heere folowyng.
The xx. Chapter, of certayne principles, that ought to be knowen for this science. INtreating of the Sphere, wee haue spoken of Circles, Circumferences, Centers, Diameters, Lynes, with such other words, appropriat to this science: The which, what they are, it is conueni∣ent further to declare. A ryght lyne,A right line. is a short extention from poynt to poynt. An angle,An angle. is the touchyng of lynes in one superficiall,
whose touch shall not be direct: for if it be, it shal be a lyne, and not an angle.. Solide is a body, which by deuisions hath length, breadth, and depth. A circl.A circle is a playne figure, conteyned vnder a lyne drawne in compasse, in whose middest is a poynt or pricke, from the which all right lynes comming foorth to the circular lyne that compasseth it about, are equall. The circumference of a circle, is a lyne that conteyneth the circle,The circum∣ference of a circle. (that is to meae) that lyne to the which all ryght lynes that proceed from the center of the circle vnto it, are equall: and this is called the roundnesse of the circle. The center of a circle.The center of a circle, is that poynt or pricke from the which all ryght lynes proceeding vnto the circumference, are equall. DimeterThe Diameter of a circle, is a ryght lyne, which passing by the center of the circle, and extending his endes to the circumference, diuideth it in two halfes. SeicircleThe halfe circle, is a playne figure, conteyned betweene the Diameter of the circle, and the halfe circumference. Zenith.Zenith, is a poynt or pricke imagined in the heauen, directly o∣uer the oppe of any thyng, as if we should imagine a ryght lyne to passe by the center of the earth, extended from thence directly to heauen, and passing through the feete and head of a man stan∣dyng vpryght, so that the extremities or ends of this lyne, should reach vnto and touch the circumference of heauen: then the ima∣gined poynt or pricke of heauen, where the ende of the lyne tou∣cheth, is called Zenith, o poynt of the head, or verticall point. The same is to be vnderstoode of a Cittie, or any other thyng, when we speake of the Zenith thereof. Eccn∣tricke.Eccentricke, is a circle, which hath his center distant, or diuided from the center of the worlde, and is described in the heauen of the Sune, imagining a lyne from the center of the Eccentricke, to the center of the Sunne, making a complete reuolution at the pro∣per motion of the Sunne, in the other heauens, imagining a lyne from the center of his Eccentricke, to the center of his Epicicle, and beyng mooued a whole reuolution at the proper motion of the Epicicle.
The Epicicle,Epicicle. is a circle, or litle rundell fyxt in the deapth of the Eccentricke: in which the Planet fyxed, and neare to his center, is mooued circularly. The Auge,Auge. is a poynt in the circumference of the Eccentricke, nearest vnto the firmament: or it may be sayde, that the Auge is a poynt fardest distant from the earth. Aux in the Greeke tongue, is as muche to say,Oppos of Auge. as the greatest longitude, or greatest eleuation from the earth. The Opposite of Auge, is an other poynt in the circumference of the Eccentricke, nearest vnto the earth, and far∣dest distant from the firmament. ¶Here endeth the first part. ¶ The seconde part, intreating of the motions of the Sunne, and the Moone, and of the effectes caused thereby. ¶ The fyrst Chapter, of the course of the Sunne in the Zodiacke, and the effectes caused by the same. WE haue briefly spoken of the Sunne,The Sune is the guyde in Nauigation. and of the other heauens. But for as muche as the Sunne must bee our marke, guide, and gouernour in Naui∣gation, whereof we intend to geue per∣fect instructions, it shalbe necessarie espe∣cially, and preciely, to declare the course and motions thereof. Therefore (as we haue sayd) the Sunne is mooued vnder the Zodiacke,The moouing of the Sunn vnder the zo∣diack. and vpon his poles in the lyne Eclipticke, passing by the xii. signes, beginning in the fyrst degree of Aries, where he ma∣keth
Equinox, that is to say, he maketh the day equall vnto the nyght in all places. Then from Aries, he entreth and mooueth into Taurus, approching nearer and nearer vnto vs on the North part, whereby the length of the dayes are increased with vs, and the nyghtes are shortened. Then entreth he into Gemini, and from Gemini into Cancer, where in the beginning of the first de∣gree he maketh Solstice, and toucheth the Sommer or Estiuall Tropike,The Sommer Tropicke. Declination of the Sunne. and then are the dayes longest with vs, and the nightes shortest. Then declyneth he no farther from the Equi∣noctiall: but returning towarde it, passeth by this signe, shorte∣ning the dayes to vs, and lengthening the nightes. From thys signe of Cancer, it entreth into Leo, and passeth by it into Uir∣go, and by it entreth into the first degree of Libra, where he is in the Equinoctiall, and then he maketh the other Equinox, so that the nyght is then equall vnto the day ouer all the worlde. And passyng by this signe, goeth declyning from the Equinoctiall to∣warde the pole Antartike, increasyng the nyghtes to vs, and shortening the dayes: and so entreth into Scorpio, and from thence into Sagittarius. And passyng by it, entreth into the fyrst degree of Capricorne, to the Hyemall or Winter Tro∣pike:The Winter Tropike. and then are the longest nyghtes vnto vs, and the shortest dayes. From hence he returneth towarde the Equinoctiall, shortening vnto vs the nyghtes, and lengthening the dayes. He passeth by thys signe of Capricorne, and entreth into Aqua∣rius: and passyng by it, entreth into Pisces: and passyng from thence,The cause of increasing and decrea∣sing of the day and nyghtes. returneth to hys fyrst poynt of the Equinoctiall of A∣ries, whe he begn. Heereby it followeth, that as the Sunne goeth the halfe of the Zodiacke on thys part of the Equinoctiall, and the other halfe on the other part of it, and in these halfes hath diuers declinations, is caused the increasing or decreasing of the dayes and nyghtes, to one more, and to another lesse, accordyng as euery one with his Horizon discouereth of the course of the Sunne, by the lytle or muche that he is departed or distant from the Equinoctiall, or as the pole is raysed aboue his Horizon. So that when as to them that are on this part of the Equinoc∣tiall, is the longest day and the shortest nyght: euen so to them
on the other part, is the longest nyght, and shortest day. And con∣trarywise, when vnto vs is the shortest day, vnto them is the longest, which shall further appeare by euident demonstration in the last Chapter of the thyrd part. The discreete Reader shall heere note,The moouing of the Sunne in the center of his Sphere. that the Sunne is not mooued regularly in the Zodiacke, making so much by his pro∣per motion in one day, as in the other, because his reguler motion is in respect of the center of his owne proper sphere or orbe where∣in he is mooued, whose center is distaunt without the center of the world, toward that part of Cancer, so that the greater part of his orbe eccentricke, is toward the septentrionall part, where the Sunne passyng by the septentrionall signes, is more distaunt from the earth, and hath more to goe of his orbe eccentricke, then being in the South signes: for passyng by the North signes, he aryeth nyne dayes more, to describe that halfe of the Zodiacke, then the other halfe toward the South part, and for that cause the Sunne is more swifter in his motion in the Zodiacke one time then another, for his motion in one day in the South signes, shall be greater then it is in one day in the North signes, as shall ap∣peare in the table that foloweth: whose vse is, for the fynding of the motion and true place of the Sunne in the Zodiacke for euery day of the yeere. And hereby it foloweth of the sayd vnequall moo∣uing of the Sunne, and by the obliquite of the Zodiacke, certayne dayes of Witer, with their yghtes, are longer then certayne other of Sommer, with their nyghtes: that is to say, that the day naturall in the Winter, doth surmount that in the Sommer, be∣cause the ryght assension, which answeareth to one dayes mo∣tion of the Sunne, being in the South signes, is greater then the assension for one dayes moouing, being in the North signes.
The ij. Chapter, of the true place of the Sunne in the Zodiacke. THE true place of the Sunne is a poynt or prick in the Zodiacke,To fynde the true place of the . which is thus found: that dra∣wyng a ryght lyne from the center of the world, to the center of the sunne, and carying the same continually right foorth vnto the Zodiack, where this lyne sheweth or toucheth, that is the true place of the Sunne. This place is found in three maners. One way, by a table: anther way, by an instrument: and the thyrde way, by a certayne rule, to be borne in memorie. To fynde the true place of the Sunne by a table,The equion of the yere. seeke in the table folowing, the moneth that you are in, in the front or head of the table, and the dayes of the moneth, on the left syde of the table. Then directly against the dayes, vnder the litle of the monethes, you shall fynde two numbers, which are the degrees and minutes of the signe which you shall fyrst fynde, named ouer the head, or aboue the sayde numbers. Ten to the degrees and minutes whiche you shall fynde, you shal adde the equation, that is directly of the yeere in the which you are, or seeke to knowe. And this shall you seeke in the table of equations, which is after this: and that which doth amount or rise thereof, shall be the true place of the Sunne. And heere is to be noted, that in the comon yeeres (which are they that haue not the bisextile or leape yeeres) from the ende of Februarie, vntyll the ende of the yeere (I say of De∣cember) shal euer one degree be diminished or taken away: and the degrees and minutes that shall remayne, is the true place of the Sun. How to knowe this by an instru∣ment and by memorie, shall be said in the seuenth Chapter.
The Table of the true place of the Sunne. Months Ianuary. February. March. Apryll. May. Iune. Signes. Caprico. Aquarius. Pisces. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Dayes. G M G M G M G M G M G M 1 20 22 21 53 20 55 21 24 20 21 19 55 2 21 24 22 54 21 55 22 22 21 18 20 52 3 22 25 23 54 22 54 23 21 22 16 21 49 4 23 26 24 55 23 54 24 19 23 11 22 46 5 24 27 25 55 24 53 25 17 24 13 23 43 6 25 28 26 56 25 53 26 16 25 8 24 40 7 26 30 27 56 26 52 27 14 26 6 25 37 8 27 31 28 56 27 52 28 12 27 3 26 34 9 28 32 29 57 28 51 29 10 28 0 27 31 10 29 33 ☉♓ 57 29 50 ☉♉ 8 28 58 28 28 11 ☉♒ 35 1 57 ☉♈ 49 1 6 29 55 29 25 12 1 36 2 58 1 48 2 4 ☉♊ 52 ☉♋ 22 13 2 37 3 58 2 47 3 2 1 50 1 19 14 3 38 4 58 3 46 4 0 2 47 2 16 15 4 39 5 58 4 45 4 58 3 44 3 13 16 5 40 6 58 5 44 5 56 4 41 4 10 17 6 41 7 58 6 43 6 54 5 38 5 7 18 7 42 8 58 7 42 7 52 6 36 6 4 19 8 43 9 58 8 41 8 49 7 33 7 1 20 9 44 10 58 9 39 9 47 8 30 7 58 21 10 45 11 58 10 38 10 45 9 27 8 55 22 11 46 12 58 11 37 11 43 10 24 9 52 23 12 47 13 57 12 36 12 40 11 21 10 49 24 13 48 14 57 13 34 13 38 12 18 11 46 25 14 48 15 57 14 33 14 36 13 15 12 43 26 15 49 16 56 15 32 15 33 14 12 13 40 27 16 50 17 56 16 30 16 31 15 10 14 37 28 17 51 18 56 17 29 17 28 16 7 15 34 29 18 51 19 56 18 28 18 26 17 4 16 31 30 19 52     19 27 19 23 18 1 17 29 31 20 52     20 25     18 58    
The Table of the true place of the Sunne. Months. Iuly. August. Septēber. October. Nouēber. Decēber. Signes. Cācer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittari Dayes. G M G M G M G M G M G M 1 18 26 18 18 4 17 39 18 49 19 24 2 19 23 1 19 2 18 39 19 50 20 26 3 20 20 19 58 20 1 19 38 20 51 21 27 4 21 17 20 55 21 0 20 38 21 52 22 29 5 22 14 2 53 21 58 21 38 22 53 23 30 6 23 11 22 51 2 57 22 38 23 54 24 31 7 24 8 23 48 23 56 23 38 24 55 25 33 8 25 5 24 46 24 55 24 38 25 56 26 34 9 26 2 25 44 25 54 25 39 26 57 27 36 10 27 0 26 42 26 53 26 39 27 58 28 37 11 27 57 27 40 27 52 27 39 28 59 29 39 12 28 54 28 38 28 51 28 39 ☉♐ 0 ☉♑ 40 13 29 51 29 36 29 50 29 39 1 1 1 42 14 ☉♌ 48 ♍ 34 ☉♎ 49 ☉♏ 39 2 3 2 43 15 1 46 1 32 1 48 1 40 3 4 3 45 16 2 43 2 30 2 47 2 40 4 5 4 46 17 3 40 3 28 3 46 3 40 5 6 5 48 18 4 38 4 26 4 45 4 41 6 8 6 49 19 5 35 5 24 5 45 5 41 7 9 7 51 20 6 32 6 22 6 44 6 42 8 1 8 52 21 7 30 7 21 7 44 7 42 9 11 9 54 22 8 27 8 19 8 43 8 43 10 12 10 55 23 9 25 9 17 9 42 9 43 11 13 11 57 24 10 22 10 16 10 42 10 44 12 14 12 58 25 11 20 11 14 11 41 11 45 13 15 13 59 26 12 17 12 13 12 41 12 45 14 16 15 1 27 13 15 13 11 13 41 13 46 15 18 16 2 28 14 12 14 10 14 40 14 47 16 19 17 3 29 15 10 15 8 15 40 15 47 17 20 18 5 30 16 7 16 7 16 39 16 48 18 22 19 6 31 17 5 17 5     17 49   22 20 7
The Table of the Equation of the Sunne. The yeres of our lord The equation to be added. The yeres of our lord The equation to be added. The yeres of our lord The equation to be added. The yeres of our lord The equation to be added.   G M   G M   G M   G M 1545 R1 0 1581 1 16 1617 1 32 1653 1 48 1546   45 1582 1 1 618 1 17 1654 1 33 1547   30 1583   46 1619 1 2 1655 1 18 1548   15 1584   32 1620   47 1656 1 3 1549 1 2 1585 1 18 1621 1 33 1657 1 49 1550   47 1586 1 3 1622 1 18 1658 1 34 1551   32 1587   48 1623 1 3 1659 1 19 1552   18 1588   33 1624   49 1660 1 4 1553 1 4 1589 1 9 1625 1 35 1661 1 51 1554   49 1590 1 4 1626 1 20 1662 1 36 1555   34 1591   49 1627 1 25 1663 1 21 1556   19 1592   35 1628   51 1664 1 7 1557 1 05 1593 1 21 1629 1 37 1665 1 53 1558   50 1594 1 6 1630 1 22 1666 1 38 1559   35 1595   51 1631 1 7 1667 1 23 1560   21 1596   37 1632   53 1668 1 9 1561 1 7 1597 1 23 1633 1 38 1669 1 55 1562   52 1598 1 8 1634 1 23 1670 1 40 1563   37 1599   53 1635 1 8 1671 1 25 1564   23 1600   39 1636   54 1672 1 10 1565 1 9 1601 1 25 1637 1 40 1673 1 56 1566   54 1602 1 10 1638 1 5 1674 1 41 1567   39 1603   55 1639 1 10 1675 1 26 1568   25 1604   40 1640   56 1676 1 12 1569 1 11 1605 1 26 1641 1 42 1677 1 58 1570   56 1606 1 11 1642 1 27 1678 1 33 1571   41 1607   56 1643 1 12 1679 1 28 1572   26 1608   32 1644   8 1680 1 13 1573 1 12 1609 1 28 1645 1 44 1681 R2 ☉ 1574   57 1610 1 13 1646 1 29 1682 1 45 1575   42 1611   58 1647 1 14 1683 1 30 1576   28 1612   44 1648 1 0 1684 1 15 1577 1 14 1613 1 30 1649 1 46 1685 2 2 1578   59 1614 1 15 1650 1 31 1686 1 4 1579   44 1615 1 10 1651 1 16 1687 2 32 1580   29 1616   46 1652 1 2 1688 1 8
This Table of the Equation of the Sunne, serueth from the yeere of 1545. where it hath hys roote or beginning, vntill 1680. and in the yeere of 1681. it shal returne to the roote, adding there∣vnto one degree more. As for example. In the yeere of 1681. adde one degree vpon the other degree that the roote hath, and so shall the yeere of 1681. haue two degrees of Equation, and the yeere of 1682. shall haue one degree, and 45. minutes, which is to adde one degree vpon 45. minutes, that had the yeere of 1546. &c. And hauing passed other 136. yeeres, you shall returne to the roote, ad∣ding two degrees. The iij. Chapter, of the declination of the Sunne. THE declination of the Sunne, is the arcke of the greater Circle,VVhat is the declination of the Sue. whiche passeth by the Poles of the worlde, included betweene the Equnoctiall and the Zodiacke. And heere is to be noted, that whatsoeuer foure poynts or prickes which are equally distaunt from the poynts of equinoxes (which are the beginnings of Aries and Li∣bra) shall haue equall declinations. Whereof if foloweth, that the foure quarters of the Zodiacke haue equall declinations. And to auoyde prolixitie, I will adde heerevnto a Table of the declinations of onely one quarter of the Zodiacke, so that all hauing one selfe same maner of declinations, it may serue for all, and the order of it is this. The signes whose declination in∣creaseth, are in the head or front of the Table, and the degrees of these signes descend by the left side thereof. And the signes whose declination decreaseth, are in the foote of the Table, and the de∣grees of these signes, rise by the right side of the same. The dispo∣sition of the Table being vnderstood: then to knowe what decli∣nation the Sunne hath in euery degree of the Zodiacke, you ought
Signes ♈ ♎ ♉ ♏ ♊ ♐ Signes G G M G M G M G 0 0   11 30 20 12 30 1 0 24 11 51 20 25 29 2 0 48 12 12 20 37 28 3 1 12 12 33 20 49 27 4 1 36 12 53 21 0 26 5 2 0 13 13 21 11 25 6 2 23 13 33 21 22 24 7 2 47 13 53 21 32 23 8 3 11 14 13 21 42 22 9 3 35 14 32 21 51 21 0 3 58 14 51 22 0 20 11 4 22 15 10 22 9 19 12 4 45 15 28 22 17 18 13 5 9 15 47 22 25 17 14 5 32 16 5 22 32 16 15 5 55 16 23 22 39 15 16 6 19 16 40 22 46 14 17 6 42 16 57 22 52 13 18 7 5 17 14 23 57 12 19 7 28 17 31 23 3 11 20 7 50 17 47 23 8 10 21 8 13 18 3 23 12 9 2 8 35 18 19 23 15 8 3 8 58 18 34 23 19 7 24 9 20 18 49 23 22 6 5 9 42 9 4 23 24 5 26 10 4 19 18 23 6 4 27 10 26 9 32 23 28 3 8 10 47 19 46 23 29   29 11 9 19 59 23 30 1 30 11 30 20 12 23 30 0 Signes ♓   ♏ ♒ ♌ ♑ ♋ Signes to know the true place of the Sunne (as in the Chapter past is decla∣red) for the day of the de∣clination which you de∣sire to knowe, and the signe which the Sunne shalbe found in that day, shall you seek in the front or foote of the Table. And if it be in the front, you shall seeke the num∣ber of the degrees on the left side. And if it shalbe at the foot of the Table, you shall seeke it on the ryght syde. Then aboue or vnder the signe, in the front of that degree of the sayd signe, you shall fynde twoo numbers, whereof the first is of de∣grees, and the second of minutes: and those de∣grees and minutes of declination the Sunne hath that day. And thys is vnderstoode without hauing respecte to the odde minutes aboue the degree, which the true place of the Sunne hath. And if you desyre to veryfie this more pre∣cisely, note the declinati∣on of that degree, and of the degree folowing: and take the lesse from the
more, and that whch remayeth, shalbe the difference of the de∣clination from the one degree to the other, of which difference yee shall take a part propotioally, as are the minutes of the place of the Snne vnto 60. And this part of minutes must be added to the fyrst declination of it, and be lesse then the second, or must be taken from it if it shall be geater, and then that riseth thereof, shalbe the precise declination for that signe, degree, and minute. As for example. In the yeere 1546. the tenth day of Septem∣ber, the Sunne shalbe in 26. G. 38. M. of Virgo, & to the 26. G. precise, shall correspond 1. G. 36. M. of declination. And to veri∣fe the declination that commeth to 38. minutes, which is more of the 26. G. you must marke the difference that is from the de∣clination of 26. G. (which is one G. 36. M.) to the declination of the 27. G. which is 1. G. 12. M. The difference is 24. M. Of these you must take such part proportionally, as the 38. minutes beareth vnto 60. which are almost two terces of a degree. Then the two terces of 24. are 16. which must be taken from one de∣gree 36. M. which correspond to the 26. G. of Virgo, because the declinatios goe decreasyng, and remayneth 1. G. 20. M. and if the declinations increase, you must adde thereto, as you take away when they decrease. An other example for this yeere of 1561. Example for the yeere 1561. the 20. of Apryll, I fynde the true place of the Sunne at noone, in 9. degrees 54. minutes of Taurus: then in the Table of the signes present, I seeke for 9. degrees of Taurus, to whiche doth answeare for the declination 14. degrees. 32. minutes, & to the next degree folowing, doth an∣sweare 14. degrees 51. minutes: then take the lesser out of the more, so resteth 19. minutes. Then from a rul of 3. & say, if 60. minutes geue 54. miutes (which 54. minuts doth rest before of the 9. degrees of Taurus) how many doth 19. minutes geue? which 19. minuts are the diuersitie of the 9. & 10. degrees of Tau∣rus. S I finde, that 19. minutes geueth 17. minutes, and 6. se∣codes, which 17. mnutes, and 6. secondes, I adde to the 14. de∣grees 23. minuts, which answeareth to the 9. degrees of Taurus.
And it commeth to fourteene degrees. 49. minutes, and syxe se∣condes, which is the true declination for the twentie day of A∣pryl. Anno. 1561. It is also to be noted, that I adde these seuenteene minutes and sixe secondes, because the declination doth encrease: for if it decreased, it were to be taken out so much, and the rest is the de∣clination. So is the declination for the twentie of Apryll in the yeere 1561. fourteene degrees. 49. minutes, and syxe secondes. The iiij. Chapter, of the encrease of the Sunne into the twelue Signes. And of the Equinoctials and Solstitials which deuide the foure tymes of the yeere. OF that is sayd in the Chapter before,The entrance of the Sunne into the fou principall signes. it fol∣loweth that the sunne entring into the foure principall signes, causeth the foure tymes of the yeere. For entring into Aries, it chaun∣geth the time to vs from winter to the spring time. And entryng into Cancer, it chaun∣geth the tyme from spryng to sommer. And entring into Libra, from sommer to Autumne. Likewise en∣tring into Capricorne, it chaungeth from Autumne to Winter. So that when to vs that be on the part of the North, is sommer, then is it winter to them that are on the South part. Or contra∣rywyse, being sommer to them on the South, it is winter to them on the North. The enrance of the sunne into these signes, and all other of the Zodiacke, hath not been euer at one selfe same tyme of the yeere. The cause of this is, that the Latine yere is not equall with the moouing of the snne in the Zodiacke,The Latin yeere. as shalbe sayd in the x. Chapter,The Euinoc∣tialles in the yere of Chri∣sts byrth. where we wyl entreate of the yeere. In the tyme that Christ our redeemer was borne, were the E∣quinoctialles. The one at the eyght of the aledes of Apryll,
and the other at fyue of the kalendes of October: So that they had the Equinoctiall of the Spryng, at the xxv. of Marche, and the Equinoctiall of Autumne, at the xxvii. of September, as writeth Iohn Baptist Capuano, vppon the seconde Chapter of the Sphere of Iohan. De sacro bosco. They iudged then the Solsticialles,The Solsti∣ls. as that of the Somme, at the eyght day of the kalendes of Iuly, whych is the xxiiii. of Iune: the other of the Wynter, they iudged at the eyght day of the kalends of Inu∣arie, which is the xxv. of December. And heere wyll I not omit to say how in those times, at these foure dayes (that is to meane, in the two Solstitialles and two Equinoctialles) were celebra∣ted, or dyd chaunce foure marueylous thynges in the worlde. For in the spring Equinoctiall, which was at the xxv. of March, the Sonne of GOD was incanate, and afterwarde borne of the Uirgin Marie in the Solstitiall of Wynter,our notable thyngs. whyche was at the xxv. of December. In the Equinoctiall of Autumne, whiche was the xxvii. of September, was conceyued blessed Iohn Baptist, the cryer and precursour of Christ: and was borne in the sommer Solsti∣ciall, that was the xxiiii. of Iune. And this is the syxth Moneth whereof Saint Luke speaketh in the Gospell. Whiche thyng also Iohn Chrysostome doth veryfie, saying that S. Iohn was borne when the dayes beganne to decrease, and our Lorde when they began to increase. And it may certaynely seeme woorthie to be had in memorie, that in the sayde Equinoctiall of the spring, Christ suffered, Adam was created and loste the estate of innocencye, Abel was slayne, Melchisedech offered bread and wyne, Isahac by Abraham was brought to be sacrificed, Iohn Baptist was be∣headed at Macherunta, Peter delyuered out of pryson, Saint Iames beheaded by Herode, the good Theefe enioyed Paradise, and the bodyes of many Saintes rose wyth Chryste. And who so further desyreth more precisely to knowe the entraunce of the Sunne into Aries,To knowe more precisely the entraunce of the Sunne into the foure principall ign. and into the other principall signes, shall in the thyrde parte of thys woorke, in the eyght Chapter, fynde rules whiche shall bryng hym to the knowledge thereof. Bt o
returne to our tyme, I say that thys present yeere of 1545. the Sunne entreth into the fyrste degree of Aries, at the tenth of Marche, at foure of the clocke at after noone, and into the fyrst degree of Taurus the nynth of Apryll 2. houres, and 7. minutes, and into Gemini the 11. of May 2. houres and syxe minutes, into Cancer the 11. of Iune. 14. houres. 44. minutes, into Leo the 13. of Iuly. 3. houres. 50. minutes, into Virgo the 13. of August 9. houres 56. minutes, into Libra the 13. of September 4. houres 4. miuutes, into Scorpio the 13. of October. 7. houres 13. minutes into Sagittarie the 12. of Nouember iust at noone, into Capricorne the 11. of December 8. houres 16. minutes, into Aquarius the 9. of Ianuarie. 2. houres, one minute, into Pisces the 8. of Februarie 1. houre 30. minutes after midday (that is to say) from noone 1. houre 30. minutes.To knowe when the Sunne entreth into euery of the xii. Sign And that we may in the yeeres to come, knowe the day, houre, and minute, in the whiche the Sunne entreth into euery signe, we will followe this order. Upon the dayes, houres, and minutes, that the Sunne entreth into euery signe thys sayde yeere. 1545. we must adde for euery yeere fyue houres and 49. minutes, which with the 365. dayes, which euery yeere conteyneth, shalbe the tyme in the whiche the Sunne accomplysheth his Reuolution.Leape yer. And because that in the yeere of the Bisextile or Leape yeere, is added to Februarie one day more to his 28. which he hath once in foure yeeres, from 6. to 6. houres, yf we shall take from the computation that whyche we haue geuen hym, turning one day backward (as shalbe in the yeere 1548.) and vppon that that remayneth shall returne in the yeere folowyng of 1549. to adde fyue hores 49. minutes, and as much more euery other yeere folowing, shalbe a certayne rule for euer. And it is to note, that the degrees and minutes which wee haue touched before, are properly for the Citie of Cadiz. And yf we desyre to applye them for other Cities or places more East∣warde: then for euery xv. degrees that they are distaunt from
Cadiz in longitude, we must adde one houre. And yf for Cities, or places more WstwardVariation of houres by the rapte mouing of the Sunne from the East to the VVest. in lyke maner for euery xv. degrees we must take away one houre, by reason of the course of the Sun by his rapte moouing from the East to the West. For it is cer∣tayne, that when with vs in Cadiz it is xii. houres of the clocke, t them that are xv. degrees Eastward from vs, it is one of the clock, and to them that are from vs xv. degrees toward the West, it is xi. of the clocke. Nowe that we haue Rules to knowe the entraunce of the Sunne into the xii. signes, thereby may we also knowe his en∣traunce into the foure Cdinall or principall signes, whiche are they that determine and ende the Equinoctialles and Solstiti∣alles, whereby are caused the foure tymes of the yeere. And for∣asmuch as the generall chaunge of tymes, is by reason of the Sunne,The entrance of the Sunne into the iiii. principall signes, cau∣seth the chaunge of tyme. who by his comming neare, warmeth, by hys remay∣ning dryeth, with his departure, cooleth, and by his long tarying away, causeth maystnesse, we will shew the qualities of the princi∣pall windes, elements, regions, humours, and ages, in one briefe Table: and then consequently in an other will we describe the be∣ginning, middest, and ende of the foure times of the yeere, aswell in the monethes, as in the heauenly signes. The Table of the qualities of the Elementes. Qualities. Hot & dry Hot & moyst Cold & moyst Cold & dry Partes of the yere Sommer Spryng. Winter. Autumne. Principall windes East. South. West. North. Elements. Fyre. Ayre. Water. Earth. Regions. East. South. West. North. 4. Humours. Choler. Blood. Flegme. Melancholy 4. Ages. Youth. Mans state. Aged. Age.
The Table of the foure tymes of the yeere. Tymes. Beginning. Myddest. Ende. Spryng. Marche. Aries. Apryl. Taurus. May. Gemini. Somer. Iune. Cancer. Iuly. Leo. August. Virgo. Autumne. Septem. Libra. Octob. Scorpio. Nouemb. Sagit. Wynter. Decemb. Capricor. Ianua. Aquar. Februa. Pisces. The v. Chapter, of the Moone, and of her motions and properties. IN the Chapters past of this seconde parte,The Sunne and Moone are the princi∣pal luminaries wee haue entreated of the Sunne, and of his motions and effects, as the most noble and principall lumi∣narie. In this present Chapter we wyll entreate of the Moone, which is the second luminarie, al∣though in the order of the heauens she is the first, and nearest vnto vs of all other Planets or Starres. The Mone therefore is a round body, of heauenly substaunce, solide and darke in respecte of the Sunne, hauing no proper light of his owne, but is apt to receyue light. She is mooued from the West into the East, according to the order of the signes, euery day 13. degrees litle more or lesse, and somewhat more then 10. minutes,The Eclipse of the Moone by the proper motion of the heauen or sphere vpon the Ares and Poles of the Zodiake. I sayd more or lesse, because that ouer and beside the moouing of her deferent or circle, which is moued euery day the aforesayd 13. degrees and 10. minutes, almost 11. she hath an Eclipse where the Moone is fixed: at the motion whereof, sometimes she is moued more swftly, and some∣times more slowly: Neuerthelesse, according to her selfe motion, she maketh her course in 27. dayes and almost 8. houres:The coniunc∣tion of the Moone with the Sunne. The Moone receyueth her lyght of the Sunne. and ha∣uing no light of her owne, she is lyghtened of the Sunne, as mani∣festly appeareth hereby, that being in coniunction with the Sunne, or neare vnto him, we see her not lyghtened: because the lyght which she then receyueth, is onely her vppermost or highest parte, whereby she directly beholdeth the Sunne, forasmuche as he is
in the fourth heauen, and she in the first. And departing from the Sunne by her propr moouing,The aspect of the Moone to th Sunne. the Sunne remayneth on the West part. Then toward that part we begyn to see a lytle of the part of the Moone lyghtened, and so more and more by lytle and lytle, as she departeth farther from the Sunne. And at thys tyme she hath her hornes or corners towarde the East, because the Sunne is in the West. During this tyme also, she is sayde to in∣crease, or that she goeth increasing vnto the opposition whiche we see,The increa∣sing and op∣position of th Moone. by the part of her, which the Sunne directly beholdeth. And so do we see her altogeather lyghtened, and call it the full Moone. Then passyng from the opposition, she commeth nearer the Sunne by lytle and lytle, beyng darkened and hyd fom vs, and lyghtened onely by her hyghest part: and this tyme is caled the decreasing or wane of the Moone. Then also hath she her hornes toward the West, because the Sunne is in the East: and this vntyll she turne agayne in coniunction with the Sunne, and that we see her not lyghtened at all. The Moone is lesse then the Starres or other Planets, except Mercurie,The bignes of the Moone. and lesse then the earth. And yf any shall affirme the contrary, saying, that it is written in the fyrst of Genesis, that God made two great lyghtes: the greatest to geue lyght to the day, and the lesse to lyghten the nyght, (as Dauid also affirmeth.) To this I answeare, that the Moone beyng nearest vnto the earth, appeareth vnto vs greater then she should do, yf she were further distaunt from vs. And although she be great of lyght (receyued as we haue sayde) and bigge of body, yet is she not great in respect of the other Starres. And therefore the words of Genesis aforesayd,The Moone is earest vnto the eth. may be vnderstoode to be spoken in such ma∣ner and phrase as holy Scripture often vseth, to humble and apply it selfe to the weakenesse of our vnderstanding, and grosenesse of our senses.
The vi. Chapter, of the coniunctions and oppositions of the Sunne and the Moone. THE Sunne and the Moone are mooued vnder the Zodiacke with diuers motions. The Moone with a swifter motion then the Sunne foloweth hym,The motion of the moon. ouertaketh him, and goeth before him, vntill she place her selfe in Diameter with him. And when she hath thus ouertaken him, so that they are both in one selfesame degree of the Zodiacke, then is the con∣iunction.The coniun∣ction. Then departing from him, and being in equall degrees of the signes opposite according to the Diameter, is the opposi∣tion. To knowe the times of these coniunctions and oppositions,Th opposit. is very profitable and necessarie for Mariners. These times may be knowen in two manners.To know th times of op∣positions and coniunctios. One way, by the Ephimerides or Almanacke, or other tables, or Lunaie instrumentes. And by these meanes is knowen precisely the day, houre, and minute of the coniunction and opposition. It may lykewyse be knowen by the rules of computation, whiche are the rules that are knowen by memorie, although not precisely, as by the bookes aforesayde. And heere is to be vnderstoode, that from one coniunction to an∣other, accordyng to the halfe moouings of the Sunne and the Moone, there passeth 29. dayes, twelue houres, and 44. minuts. And consequenty from coniunction to opposition, and from op∣position to coniunction, the halfe thereof, which is fourteene dayes 18. houres, and 22. minutes. To knowe thee coniunctions by rules of computaton, is presupposed to knowe the golden num∣ber, and by it, the concurrent or Epacte. The golden number,To know the golden num∣ber. is the number of nienteene yeeres. In which time, the coniunctions of the Sunne and the Moone make all their varieties in the times of euery yeere: so that yf the con∣iunction were the twelfth day of Marche in this yeere of 1545. from this yeere in the nienteene yeeres folowing, which shalbe in the yeere of 1564. the coniunction shall returne to be at the twelfth day of Mche. It was fyrst called the golden number by the Egyptians, who fyrste found the vse thereof, and sent it to
Rome written in golden Letters. To fynde this number, it is needfull to know his rootes, which is this. In the yeere that Christ our Lorde and redeemer was borne (whereby we make this ac∣compt) the golden number was the number of one,The rootes of the golden number. which was the yeere of the roote or beging: and the fyrst yeere of the byrth of Christ, was two of the golden number. So that ioyning to the yeeres of our Lord one of the roote or begning, and from all take away the nienteene, then the rest shall be the golden number. And yf you desyre to make computation by a nearer roote, take for the roote the yeere of 1500. when nienteene was the golden number, and in the yeere of 1501. did begin one of the golden number, and so consequently euer taking away the nienteene. This present yeere of 1545. we haue seuen of the golden num∣ber. And in the yeere of 1546. we shall haue eyght. &c. The concur∣rent.The golden number being knowen, it is necessarie for thys computation of the Moone to knowe the concurrent. The concur∣rent of euery yeere, is the number of the dayes passed of the con∣iunction of the Moone at the beginning of Marche. And thee grow of the difference of the Solar yeere to the Lunar:The Solar and Lunar yeeres. As the Lunar yeere hath 354. dayes, and the Solar yeere 365. so hauing euery yeere eleuen dayes of difference, which are added euery yeere vn∣tyll they come to the number of thyrtie, and passyng thyrtie, those that do passe are of the concurrent. To fynde the number of the concurrent.The number of the concurrent of euery yeere, is founde in this maner. And the better to beare it in memorie, you must imagine three places: and these commonly are assigned on the thumbe. As the fyrst place at the roote of the thumbe, the second in the middle ioynt thereof, and the thyrd and last, in the toppe of the thumbe. Then n the fyrst place put tenne, in the second twentie, and in the thyrd thirtie. Then by the order of these places shalbe compted the golden number: As one in the fyrst place, two in the second, and three in the third, returning foure to the fyrst place. &c. vnti the golden number of that yeere for the whiche the concurrent is sought. And the number of that place where the golden number endeth, must be ioyned with the number of the golden number: and that doth amount thereof, shall be the concurrent, so that it
passe not 30. But if it passe 30. then that that is more then 10. is the concurrent of that yeere. And heere is to be noted, that the yeeres of this computation of the Moone, begin at the first day of March, and last vntyll the last day of Februarie, so that this present yeere of 1545. by computa∣tion of the golden number, we haue seuen: which accompted by the sayd places, endeth in the first, which is 10. which also ioyned with the golden number of seuen, make 7. and so much is the con∣current of this present yeere. Likewise, this number of Epacte,Epact. or concurrent, is found in multiplying the golden number by 11. & deuiding the summe by 30. then that remayneth, is the Epact or concurrent. The concurrent being thus knowen,To know th dayes o ag of the Moon. then to knowe the dayes of the Moone, it is necessary to knowe three numbers. The fyrst is the concurrent. The second, the number of the moneth in which you are, beginning at March. The thyrd, the dayes past of the same moneth. And ioyning thse three numbers, if they come not to 30. so many dayes olde is the Moon. And if they be 30. it is the coniunction. And if they passe 30. they also that passe, are the age of the Moone. This is vnderstoode in the monethes that haue 3 dayes, for in them that haue onely 30. dayes, the coniunction is at the 29. day, and they that passe of 29. are the age of the Moone. As for ex∣ample. The fyrst day of August, of the concurrent 17. of moneths from March 6. and of dayes of the moneth  make 24. and so much is the age of the Moone. An other example. The tenth of September, of concurrent 17. of monethes seuen, of dayes ten, which are in all 34. And because that September hath onely 34. dayes, we must take away 29. of the 34. and so rest fyue dayes, whiche are the age of the Moone. And in lyke maner shall w geue to Februarie 29. dayes of the Moone. It followet,To know t day of the coniunction. that the dayes of the Moone beeyng knowen, then vnreckong or disreckning backewarde, wee fynde
for example. The 20. of Iuly, the Moone hath 12. dayes taken from the 20. remayneth 8. Then the eight day was the coniunction. The day of the coniunction is lykewyse knowen by ioyning the monethes (beginning in Marche) with the concurrent, and if they come not to 30. then at so many dayes of that moneth as lacketh of 30. shalbe the coniunction. Example. In August 6. of the monethes, and 17. of the concurrent, are 23. which of 30. lacketh 7. Then at the seuenth day was the con∣iunction, and if they passe 30. then taking them that passe from the number of the dayes which the moneth had next before, and then that which remayneth, doth shew the day of the coniunction. Lyke as the Moone of September of the yeere 1546. we shall count the concurrent 28. of monethes 7. which are 35. Then taking away the 5. from 30. and one which August hath, remay∣neth 26. and so the 26. of August, of the yeere to come of 1546. the Moone shall make coniunction. The vij. Chapter, of the declaration and vse of an Instru∣ment, by the which is found the place and decli∣nation of the Sunne, with the dayes and place of the Moone. To know the place of the Moone in the Zodiacke, and what aspectes she hath with the Sunne.IN the seconde and thyrde Chapter, I haue geuen rules to knowe the true place of the Sunne, and his declinati∣on. In this Chapter I will describe an instrument, whereby may be knowe the declination and place of the Sunne, and knowing by the Chapter past, the dayes of the Moone, shall also bee knowen her place in the Zodiacke, and how much of her is lighte∣ned, and what aspect she hath with the Sunne.
This Instrument is in square fourme, and hath by the sydes 23. degrees and a halfe, of the which the 23. and a halfe that descende from the myddest downeward,The descripti∣on of the In∣strument. is the declination of the South signes: and the other from the myddest vpwarde, are the declinatons of the North signes. Within this quadrature is de∣scribed a circle, by the circumference whereof, are the twelue signes and their degrees, ioyned to the circumference: and fur∣ther within, is the number of them, and then their names. Yet further within this, is another circle, where are the twelue mo∣nethes, with their numbers and dayes. Then to the center of this circle, are annexed two rundelles, whereof the greatest and lowest is called the rundel of the Sunne. This hath an Idex or shewer, in which is paynted the Sun, and in the circumference of it are the dayes of the age of the Moone. In the other circle, in the circumference thereof, is a round hole, representing the Moone: directly from the which, is another Index comming foorth of the circumference of thys rundell, in which rundell are all the aspectes which the Moone maketh with the Sunne. Hauing described the Instrument, let vs declare the vse there∣of, which is this. Fyrst to fynde the true place of the Sunne,The vse of the Instrument to fynd the tru place of th Sunne. we must put the Index of the rundell of the Sunne, vppon the day of the moneth in which we are, or desire to knowe the place of the Sunne. Then in the circle of the signes, it shall shew the signe and degree in the which it is: and in like maner, resting styll vpon the degree, loo∣king in the paralels that touch in the circumference, and procee∣ding by that line that toucheth the Sunne which the Index doth note, ye shall see in the syde of the Instrument, the number of the degrees of the declination which the Sunne hath at that day. To fynde the place of the Moone,To fynde the place of the Moone. we must holde the Index of the rundell of the Sunne, fast vpon the day of the moueth in the which we desire to knowe the place of the Moone. And accomp∣ting in the rundell of the Sunne, the dayes that haue passed from the day of the Coniunction (as I haue sayde in the Chapter be∣fore) and where endeth that number of the dayes, yf there wee
apply the index of the Moone, it shall shewe in the circle of the signes, the place where she is. And so shall she appeare in the in∣strument lightened, or darkened, more or lesse as in heauen. In lyke manner, consydering the place of the Sunne and the Moone, shall be seene what aspect they haue, by the lynes that trauerse the superficiall of the Lunar circle of the Moone.
The aspects which the Planets haue one to another, or wher∣by they behold one another, are fyue.Fiue aspecte of the Pla∣nets. Coniunction is, when two Planets be vnder one selfe same degrée and minute in the Zodiacke,Coniunction. whos charact is this. ♂ Opposition is,Opposition. when betwéene the place of the Planetes is halfe a circle, which are 180. degreés, and is thus figured. ☍ Trinall aspect is,Trinall. when betwéene the Planettes shalbe foure signes, which are 120. degrees, and is figured thus. ⊦ Quadrine aspect is,quadrine. when one Planet is distaunt from ano∣ther by thrée signes, which are 90. degreés, whose charact is this. □ Sextile aspect is,Sextie. when two signes are betweéne them which are threéscore degrees, and is marked thus. ✶ And yf by memorie you desyre to knowe the true space of the sunne,To know th place of the Sunne by th rule of me∣morie. To knowe in what degree the Sunne is. without respect of minutes (whiche may sufficiently be done with the Astrolabie) beae in memorie these numbers, 10.9.10.11.12.13.14.13.14.13.12. Of the which the first serueth for Ianuarie, the seconde for Februarie, with theyr signes: and so of the rest. Then to knowe in what degree the sunne is, you shall take away the dayes that are applyed to e∣uery Moneth, according to the sayd numbers of the dayes for the which you desyre to knowe the true place of the sunne, and in them that remayne, in so many degreés is the sunne of the signe into the which it entreth the Moneth. And yf the dayes past of the Moneth, shalbe lesse then the dayes applyed to the same Moneth: you shall ioyne thirtie with those dayes past of the Moneth, and of the summe that amounteth, you shall take away the dayes applyed to the sayd Moneth, and the rest shalbe the degrées in which the sunne shalbe of the signe of the Mo∣neth past, as for example.
Example. Ianuarie. 10 ♒ Februarie. 9 ♓ Marche. 10 ♈ Apryll. 10 ♉ May. 11 ♊ Iune. 12 ♋ Iuly. 13 ♌ August. 14 ♍ September. 13 ♎ October. 14 ♏ Nouember. 14 ♐ December. 13 ♑ The 22. of October, taking away four∣teéne that were applyed, remaine eyght de∣grées of Scorpio, where the Sunne is. Another Example. The syxe of December, whiche are lesser then twelue whiche is applyed vnto it, yf we ioyne syxe to thyrie, whiche are the dayes of the moneth next afore, they make 36. and from them we take away the 12. rest 24. So in 24. degreés, is the sunne, of the signe of the moneth before, whiche is Sagittarie. The viii. Chapter, of the Eclipse of the Moone and the Sunne. THe Eclipses of the sunne and of the Mooe, is a thyng that causeth great feare and admiration among the common and ignoraunt people, and o them that vnderstand the cause thereof, no∣thing at all. And therefore haue I thought god to declare the effectes thereof. The Eclipse of the Moone.The Eclipse of the Moone, is the interposition or beyng of the Earth betweéne her & the sunne. And whereas the Moone hath no proper lyght of her owne, and the earth, being darke and not transparent, maketh his shadow on the part opposite to the sunne: the Moone by her proper motion doth passe by this sha∣dowe, and is Eclipsed or darkened eyther in the whole or in part, according to the portion of her that passeth by the shadow. Moreuer (as we haue sayde) that onely the sunne is mooued in the lyne Eclipticke, and the Earth being in the center of the world, the poynt or pricke of the shadowe shall be vnder the E∣clipticke. The Moone declieth from the Eclipticke sometimes to the one part,The moouing of the Sunne in the Eclipse. and sometymes to the other, because her Eccen∣tricke wherin she is mooued, doth cut the Eclipticke equally in∣to two halfes, so that the one halfe of the Eccentricke, doth de∣cline from the Eclipticke toward the North part, and the other
halfe toward the South, and the greatest declination of it from the Ecliptike, is 5. degreés. In that maner, the Moone shalbe at no time in the Eclipticke, but only when she shalbe in eyther of the intersections where the Eccentricke doth cut the said Eclip∣ticke. That intersetion where she passeth & goeth oward the North part, is called the head of the Dra∣gon,The head of the Dragon. and is marked thus. ☋ The other where she passeth and declineth towarde the South part, is called the tayle of the Dragon,The tayle of the Dragon. and is marked thus. ☊ And the Sunne moouing by his proper motion, and comming to the head, then shall the shadowe of the earth be in the tayle, because it is the poynt opposite. And yf then the Moone come thy∣ther,The Sunne is bigger then the earth. of her proper motion she pas∣seth by the shadowe,The shadowe of the earth. and lacking lyght of the Sunne, she is eclipsed. And yf the Sunne come to the tayle, the shadowe is in the head, and then lykewise shall the Moone be eclipsed, if she passe by the head. It is to vnderstand, that the sunne is much bigger then the earth, and by perspectiue, the shadowe of the earth in howe muche the farther it parteth from it, becommeth shar∣per and sharper, vntyl it come to a poynt: so that the shado of the whole earth, is piramidally sharpe. And as the Moone is lesse then the earth, yet (although his shadowe goeth sharpning) it suffiseth to e∣clipse the Moone, if she passe by the middest thereof.
The Eclipse of h Sunne.The Eclipse of the Sunne, is the interpostion of the Moone betweéne vs and the Sunne, as yf the Sunne be in the fourth heauen, and the Moone in the fyrst, she beyng a darke body, and by her proper motion ouertake the Sunne, then putting her selfe betweéne him and vs, she couereth him in part, or in the whole, and this is the Eclipse of the Sunne. As the Sunne al∣so goeth euer vnder the Ecliptykes, at that time that he com∣meth to the head or tayle of the Dragon, if then the Moone make coniunction with him, shalbe the Eclipse of the Sunne, for as much as they are both vnder the Ecliptyke. The Eclipse of the Sunne is not vniuersall.The Eclipse of the Sunne can not be vniuersall in the whole earth, I say, vnto all them that may seé the Sunne at the tyme of the Eclipse, as is the Eclipse of the Moone vniuersall. For yf the Moone haue one part Eclipsed, all that may sée her, shall seé her Eclipsed: But the Sunne some may seé al wholly Eclipsed, and other in part, or other also not at all Eclipsed: and this all at one selfe same time. The cause whereof, is the diuersitie of the specte, which is, to seé the Moone in the Zodiacke out of her place: as yf the Sunne and Moone should make coniunction in the beginning of Aries, and in the head of the Dragon, they that then should be in the Equinoctial, vnder the Sunne and the Moone, or that the Sunne and the Moone should be in theyr Zenith, they should seé the Moone hyde all the Sunne. And they that should be in the North Climates, shoulde seé, that the Moone hydeth or darkeneth onely the South part of the Sunne,ow h Sunne is eclip∣sed in the whole, or i par. and not al. Againe, they on the South part, should seé the Moone hyde the North part of the Sunne, and not all. And yf at the tyme of the coniunction, she haue a lytle passed the head of the Dragon, or lacke a lytle to come to the tayle, so that she be in the North latitude: they that then should be in the North Climates, shoulde seé the Moone Eclipse all the Sunne: and they of the Equinoctiall shoulde seé onely the North parte of the Sunne Eclipsed, and they of the South shoulde see hym nothyng at all Eclipsed. So that
although the Eclipse of the Sunne shalbe totall or perticuler, it can not be vniuersall in the whole earth. And note, that for the quantitie of these Eclipses,Of the quan∣titie of the Eclipses. the Astro∣nomers deuide into twelue equal partes, aswel the Diameter of the Sunne, as of the Moone, and these partes they call figures, punctes, or prickes, and according to he pnces of the Dia∣meter of the Moone, whiche is couered by the shadowe of the earth, or the partes of the Diameter of the Sunne, whiche the Moone doth couer, so many fingers or punctes shalbe sayd to be Eclipsed. As yf 6. the halfe, yf 3. a quarter, yf 4. a terce, or thyrde parte, yf 6. threé quarters, yf 8. two terces. It is also to be noted,why the Moone see∣meth somtime bigger, and sometime lesse then the Sunne. that although the Sunne be bigger then the Moone, yet at sometyme the Moone seemeth greater then the Sunne. And thys shall beé, when the Sunne is in the Auge of the Eccentrike, and the Moone in the opposite of the Auge of the Epicicle. And when it so appeareth, he may be all Eclipsed. Sometymes also the Moone seemeth lesse. This is when the Sunne is in the opposite of the Auge of the Eccentricke, and the Moone in the Auge of the Epicicle. Then although we shoulde seé the cen∣ter of the Moone in the center of the Sunne, she can not hyde hym all whol∣lye, because the Sunne shall appeare greater. Of this that we haue sayd,The Sunne is Eclipsed in coniunction, & the Moone in opposition. it folow∣eth that all the Eclipses of the Sune, must of necessitie be in the coniunct∣tion, and the Eclipses of the Moone, in the opposition: whereby is inferred, that the Eclipse of the Sunne in
By the description of other, the great yeére is when the eight sphere ioytly with all the Ages,The reuouti∣on on o the ight Sphere. make one perfect reuolution at the moouing of the nyenth Sphere. And this shall be in the space of xlix. thousand yeéres. The solar yéere,The Solr yeere. is a reuolution of the Sunne, carried by the proper moouing of his heauen vppon the Axis and Poles of the Zodiacke, ending where it began, and returnyng an other yeére by the selfe same course, as the Poet Vigil affyrmeth, saying. Atque in se sua per vestigia voluitur annus. That is to say, The yeére turneth agayne to hym selfe by his owne proper steppes. how the E∣gyptians pain∣ted the yeere.The Egyptians lackyng the vse of Letters, and hauyng the same consideration, paynted the yéere lyke vnto an Adder, by∣tyng her owne tayle: and heéreof was a ryng called Annulus, as it were Annus (that is, a yeére) because a ryng turneth round in it selfe,The quantitie of the yeere. as doth the yeére. Of the quantitie of this yeére were diuers opinions and computations among them of auncient tyme. The Arabians and Persians accompted it regulerly by xii. Mooes, which are 354. dayes. Romulus gaue to his yéere x. monethes, because that tyme suffiseth to a woman to bryng foorth her byrth, and also for that duryng so much tyme, it was not lawfull for a Wddow to marrie after the death of her hus∣bande. Numa Pompilius added two monethes, to make it vp twelue monethes in 350. dayes,The yeere of the hebrues. whiche was the mst auncient yeére of the Hebrues, accordyng to the which, they accompt at this day. The Greékes and Egyptians,The Greekes. consydering the course of the Sunne, made the yeére of 365. dayes. Then by the com∣maundement of Iulius CaesarIulius Caesar. (whose order we now obserue) were added syxe houres, to the ende to make equall this number of dayes with the course of the Sunne: and hereof the Bisextile or Leape yeére had his beginning,Lpe yeere. from foure to foure yeéres. But to say the trueth, they erred: The one, by somewhat too much, and the other by somewhat too litle. Dayes of the yer.This yere conteyneth 365. dayes. 5. hures, & 49. minutes.
Lykewyse at the fyrst, the yéere had diuers begynninges. Numa Pompilius began it from the Winter solsticiall,Beginning of the yeere. be∣cause tht then the Sunne beginneth to rise toward vs,Ouid. as Ouid affrmeth in these verses: Brum noui prima est,bruma is the stay of the sunne in win∣ter, the winter solstitiall, and shortest day of the yeere. veterisque nouissima Solis. Principum capiunt Phaebus & Annus idem. Which may thus be englyshed. Brume is the fyrst of the newe yéere, And last day of the olde: The Sunne and yeére beginne at once, As Ouid hath vs tolde. Romulus began it at Marche, at the Equinox of the spring, because that then all thyngs reuiue and floryshe: and by the opi∣nion of the Duies,The Creation of the world. it seémeth good reason to begyn the yeére at Marche, because the world was created the 25. of the Kalen∣des of Apryl, which is the 18. of the moneth aforesayde. Lyke∣wyse, God speaking of this moneth to the people of Israel,Exod. xii. sayd vnto them, This shalbe the fyrst of the monethes of the yeére. The Arabians begin from the Sommer solstiiall, whose opini∣on is, that the Sune was made in the signe of Leo. Other be∣gin the yere in September, about the Equinoctial of Autumne, as do the Iewes, resting in the aucthoritie of Genesis, where it is wrytten thus: Let the earth bryng foorth greéne hearbes, to haue fruite agréeable to theyr kynde. &c. And because Autumne is a fruitefull tyme, they beganne from thence to accompt their yeére. The Greékes, Persians, and Egyptians, accompt it from October. The Christians,VVhere the Christians be∣gin the yeere. some from the Incarnation of Christe, other from his byrth, and other from the fyrst daye of Ianuarie. In lyke maner,Diuersitie in the number of the yeeres or the date. is great diuersitie in beginning the num∣ber of yeéres, whiche we call Era, that is, the date. The Greékes beganne their date, from the death of great Alexander. The Egyptians, from the death of Nabuchodonosor. The Per∣sians,
from Gesdargit. The Arabians or Moores, from the preaching of Mchomet,Machomet. who was after the byrth of Christ 626. yeéres. Other also from the Romane Emperours. The Christi∣ans began the accompt of our Sauiour Iesu Christ 500. yeéres after his byrth,The date of the Christians as writeth Cardinal Cusanus. And héere it shall not be from my purpose, to shewe how iustly and ryghtfully was commaunded by Don Iohn King of Spayne, the fyrst of that name, that i the Courtes and Parliamentes whiche he helde in Segoia, in the yeére of 1383. leauing the dates that they had begun from the Emperour Octauian, for tributes and other payments specifyed in Wrytynges and Priuiledges, they should no more put the date of the Emperour, for as much as the day in the which the Sonne of God became man, and was borne by the blessed Uirgin, was so excellent a thyng, and most worthie to be had in memorie. So that in Spayne, since that tyme, in all common Writynges, the date is made from the Natiuitie of our Lorde, begynnyng there the fyrst day of the yeére, and commonly the fyrst day of Ianuary. Some Astrono∣mers begyn it the fyrst of Marche. We haue in this Chapter entreated of the great yeére, and of the Solar yeére, with his quantitie, beginning, and date. In the Chapter folowyng, we wyll entreate of the Lunar yeére, which we call a moneth. ¶ The xi. Chapter, of the moneth, and of his differences. The Lunar yeere, or mo∣eth. Reuolution of the moone.COnsydering the moneth bsolutelye without hauing respecte to the Solar yeére, it may be called a yéere, according to the diuision we haue made in the Chapter of the yeére. For it is a reuolu∣tion of the heauen of the Moone whic moueth slowly in comparson of the first heauen. And yf we consyder the mo∣neth
as part of the yéere, then is the name of a moneth more proper vnto it. For this word Mens mensis, in Latin, is deri∣ued of Mensur, which signifieth measure. And so the moneth and yeére referred to tyme, all may be called moneth: forasmuch as all is the measure of tyme, as we haue touched in the sayd Chapter of the yeére. The moneth is to be consydered in two maners: eyther (as it is) part of the Solar yeére, or is caused by the course of the Moone. The moneth that is part of the Solar yeére, is that which at this day we vse. And into xii. o these monethes,The deuisio of the yeer into twelue monethes. is the yeere diided: as Ianuare, Februarie, Marche, Apryll, May, Iune, Iuly, August, September, October, Nouember, De∣cember. They are not all of equall dayes, Apryl, Iune, September, and Nouember, haue 30. dayes: all the other haue 31. except Februarie, which hath 28. and when the Bisextile or Leape is, it hath 29. The names and numbers of these monethes were as∣signed at the wyll and pleasure of men, and the cause why they haue remayned so long time, is the aucthoritie of the Empe∣rours, that ordeined them for the common people, who accepted them by the Romane Church, which admitted the vse of them. The Lunar moneth hath two consyderations.The Luna moneth. The one is the tyme whiche the Moone tarieth from that sheé commeth foorth from one poynt of the Zodiacke, vntyll she returne thy∣ther by her proper moouing, and this is called the moneth of the peragration,The mone of peragratio in which reuolution she spendeth 27. dayes, and almost 8. houres. The other consyderation is, hauyng re∣spect to the tyme whiche the Moone taryeth, from that she is in coniunction with the Sunne, vntyll another coniunctin. And this is called the moneth of Consecution,The moneth of consecutio and is more then the moneth of Peragration, by two dayes 4. houres. 44. minutes. For the Sunne and the Moone beyng in coniunction vnder one punct of the Zodiacke,The mouing of the Sune and moone in coniunction. and moouing both by theyr proper moouinges, towarde the East, as the moouyng of the Moone is swifter then the moouing of the Sunne, she leaueth hym behynde.
And when she had ended her moneth of peregrination, she retur∣neth to the poynt from whence she departed, and not findyng the Sunne there (because in the meane tyme the Sunne of hys proper motion hath gone almost 27. degreés) the Moone pas∣seth from this poynt, and in the sayde 2. dayes. 4. houres 44. minutes, ouertaketh the Sunne: and so commonly hath this moneth of consecution 26. dayes. 12. houres, and 44. mi∣nutes. So that whatsoeuer is sayd of the Lunar moneth, is to be vnderstood of this moneth of consecution, whiche all they vse that accompt by Moones: as doo the Hebrues, Arabians, and Persians. The Mariners ought not to neclect this computation, be∣cause it is conuenient for them to knowe the tydes,To know the tydes by the aspectes of the Moone. and other ef∣fectes caused by the aspectes of the Sunne and the Moone, for their aspectes do correspond to the partes of this moneth, as the coniunction to the beginning, the opposition to the middest, and the quartile aspect to the quarter, and so of the other. Lykewise in this moneth, is considered the illumination of the Moone,The illumina∣tion or change of the Moone. and the dayes that the lyght fayleth her: so that neyther by day nor by nyght weé may sée her, for beéyng burnt vnder the beames of the Sunne. The tyme that sheé is so, is called In∣terlunium (that is) the chaunge or hydyng,Interlunium, is the space of tyme in the which neither the olde Moone doth appeare, nor the newe Moone is seene. whyche is some∣tyme more, and sometyme lesse. When the coniunction shalbe from the beginning of Capricorne vntyll the ende of Gemini, and the Moone hath North latitude, and her moouing swyfte: then shall the newe Moone soone be seéne, and so hall the In∣terlunium be but lytle. And when the coniunction shalbe from the beginning of Cancer, vntyll the ende of Sagittarius, and the Moone hath South latitude, and her moouing slowe, the longer will it be or the new Moone shew her selfe to vs: and certaine of the cau∣ses concurring, and not all, so shall the Interlunium be in a meane betweéne both.
The xii. Chapter. Of the weeke. THe weéke is a tyme of seuen dayes,The weeke of the Iews. the beginning whereof is Sunday, and so did the Iewes count their first day, say∣ing, Prima Sabati, secunda Sabati, (that is) the first of the Sabboth, the se∣conde of the Sabboth. &c. to the sixth of the Sabboth, and then the Sabboth. The Romanes that called the Planets Gods,The Roman. forasmuch as the sunne was principall among them, called theyr fyrst day, the day of the sunne, the seconde, of the Moone, the thyrde, of Mars, the fourh, of Mercury, the fyfth, of Iupiter, the syxth, of Uenus, the seuenth, of Saturne.The Christi∣ans. The Christians solemnising the sun∣day, began their accompt from it: as, on such a day our Lorde was borne:Ferine, signi∣fieth vacant daies, or som∣time holy or fstiuall . on such a day he rose: and on such a day he sent the holy Ghost vpon hys Apostles. &c. They also accompt the dayes of the weéke for Ferias. The xiii. Chapter, of the day, and of the nyght. THE daye is of two sortes, as, the naturall day, and the artificiall day. The naturall day,The naall day. is the space of tyme, wherein, the sunne is caryed by the fyrst moueable about the earth, from the Meridian, to the Weast, and from the Weast vnder the earth, comming to the East, and from thence returning agayne to the sayde Meridian: and this time hath the Equinoctiall geuen one whole turne, and more, suche parte of it as correspondeth to the proper mo∣uing of the sunne: or otherwise, the naturall day is a circle de∣scribed with the center of the sunne, at the mouing of the first mouable. The Romanes began this naturall day, from mid∣night, and ended it in the mydnight folowing,The begin∣ning of the naturall day. and so do we ac∣compt
it for fasting dayes: and from euening to euening, in celebrating of festiuall dayes. The Athenienses began it at the Sunne set, or going downe of the Sunne. The Babylonians, at the risyng of the Sunne. The Umbrias, and Ethuscos, from the mydday, or noone, and ended it the noone day folowing. In his manner do the Astronomers begyn it, and fynde that the day shll euer begyn at one selfe same houre for the qualitie of the Meridians. And yf they had begun it from the rising or fall of the Sunne, it should not be euer at one selfe same houre, be∣cause the Sunne riseth and falleth at sometymes sooner, and at other times later:The ende of the nauall day. and so should the beginning of the day beé variable. And it is to vnderstand, that when we commonly say at the tenth day of such a moneth: the same enth day doth ende the same day at noone, and the houres that runne from that noonetyde forward, are of the eleuenth day: and so do the Astro∣nomrs accompt them. The artificiall day.The day artificiall, is part of the day natural, and is the tyme that the Sunne tarieth from that it riseth in the East, vntyll it fall in the Weast, And the nyght is that part that lacketh or fay∣leth for the naturall day,The nygh. which is the time that the Sunne tary∣eth from that he hydeth hym selfe in the Weast, vntyl he returne to appeare in the East: and so the day artificiall and the nyght, make one naturall day. And accordyng heéreunto, it is written in Genesis, that of euening and morning was made one day. Isodorus defining this artificiall day, sayth, that the day is the presence of the Sunne, or the beyng of the Sunne aboue the earth: as it is nyght vnto vs when he is vnder it. Or otherwise, the night is the shadowe of the earth, extended diametrally op∣posite to the Sunne. The quantitie and differences of these dayes artificiall, and theyr nyghtes, and how they increase and diminishe, we haue largely declared in the fyrst Chapter.
The xiiii. Chapter of houres. AS there is two differences of the day, as the naturall day, and artificiall: so is there two differences of houres, as houres naturall, which correspond to the naturall day,houres natu∣ral and artifi∣ciall. and houres artificiall which correspond to the artificiall day. Hora or Ora is a Greéke name, and signifieth ende. And so say we Ora ma∣ris, for the ende or brymme of the sea, or the list or edge of apparll, as sayth Isodore in his Etimola∣gies. The houre natural or equall,The hour na∣tural or equal. is a 24. part of the day natu∣ral, ad is the time of passng fyfteéne degreés of the Equinocti∣al. These 24. houres that make one naturall day, the Astrono∣mers doth begin the day at the Meridian, compting the houres after the order of the fyrst mooueable, which is from the sayde Meridian, in the angle of mydnyght, where they accompt twelue houres, and from thence toward the East, and come to ende the 24. houres in the same Meridian where they began: and this they vse for the computation of the tables of the mo∣uings of the heauens. The Astronomers vse the same in theyr instruments, as in the Astrolabie, and Dials Horizontall, and verticall, and in all other instruments for houres. In Spayne also we vse to accompt these 24. in two tymes twelue, begyn∣ning at noone, and ending twelue at mydnight: and agayne, beginning at mydnight, and ending other twelue at noone. And to distinct the one from the other, they call the one afternoone houres, and the other forenoone houres: and commonly we say syxe houres of the morning, and syxe of the euening. In Italie they accompt them from the falling of the Sunne, vntyll the next fall the day folowing. The artificial or temperal houre,The houre artificial or temperal. is a twelfe part of the day arcke, or the nyght arcke.
They are called temperall houres, because they ae in the tymes that the day varieth: For in the time that the dayes shall be great, so shalbe the houres: and when the dayes shalbe short, so lykewise shall the houres be, and in lyke maner of the nights. So that, as the artificiall day, great or lytle, is deuided into twelue houres: euen so the nyght great or litle, is deuided into other twelue. The auncients deuide the day into foure partes,The day and nyght diuided into foure partes. and the nyght into other foure, geuing vnto euery quarter part threé houres. At the rysyng of the Sunne, which was the fyrst houre of the fyrst quarter, they called the fyrst houre: and thrée houres passed, they called the thyrd houre, and syxe houres pas∣sed of the day, they called the syxth houre, which was the midday or noone tyde. Also the nienth houre, they named at niene houres past of the day. And the Sunne set, or goyng downe of the Sunne, they called the Euening: as sayth the Poet Uirgil in this verse. Ante diem clausam componet vesper olimpo. Interpretation of certayne places of the Gospell.And according to this computation, is to be vnderstoode that wryteth Saint Matthewe: That the labourers came to the Uineyarde at the eleuenth houre, whereby is meant the fyfth houre, one houre before the Sunne was set. And when we reade in S. Iohn: The ague left hym the seuenth houre. &c. By this accompt it was one houre after noone, when Christ healed the sonne of the Ruler that was diseased in Capernaum. In lyke maner by these houres, the auncients deuided the nyght into foure quarters,The night diuided into ii. quarters. Four watches of the nyght. geuing threé houres to euery quarter. And in these foure partes of the nyght were Souldiers appointed to watche. In the fyrst quarter, whiche they call Canticinium, (and we the fyrst sleépe) they watched all. In the second, which they called Intempestiuum, being the turne of midnyght, the young men watched. In the thyrd, which they called Gallicini∣um, of the crowing of Cockes, watched the Souldiers of middle age. In the fourth and last quarter, called Matutinum, or Anti∣lucanum (that is, the spring of the day) the old Souldiers wat∣ched. And thus is vnderstood the fyrst, the seconde, and thyrde
watch of the nyght, in lyke maner ought the Mariners to keépe watch and warde,how Mariners ought to watch. to auoyde aswell the peryll of the sea, as also the daungers of Rouers: and to deuide the nyght by quarters, after the maner of Souldiers, as dyd also the Mariners in olde tyme. The xv. Chapter, of the making and vse of an vniuersall Dyal for the day. WHereas in the Chapter before, we haue intreated of houres, and theyr differen∣ces, we entend héere to describe the ma∣king of an Instrument general,To know the houres of the day by the Sunne. to know the houres of the day by the beames of the Sunne, which is done in this maner. Take a round plate of Laton, and let it be called the Equinoctiall circle, the circumference whereof, you shall deuide into 24. equall partes by both the sydes, and from the center to euery of these partes, you shall drawe a right lyne: one of the which shalbe a Meridian. And in the one part of that, write twelue, whiche shall be the houre of the mydday or Noone. And in the other part write other twelue, which shall be for Mydnyght. In the highest part, turnyng vpon the center, towarde the ryght hande, write one, two, three, foure &c. In the lower, or neather part, you shall count towarde the left hande, turnyng it vppon the cen∣ter: so that the one houre of the one parte, come vppon the lyne of the one houre of the other parte, in lyke maner two vppon two, threé vppon threé, and so foorth of the other. And note that in the lyne of syxe at after Noone, and at the lyne of syxe in the Morning, there remayne certayne rounde péeces, corners, or endes, after the maner of Axis, of the thicknesse of the selfe same plate. Then make a halfe circle of the same mettall, as bygge as the halfe circumference of the plate, and of the thicknesse of a peéce of foure ryalles of Plate, or somewhat more, euen as the plate it selfe, and of the breadth of halfe a
fynger, if the instrument shalbe great: or lesse, if the instrument shalbe lesse. This halfe circle, shall you graduate or diuide into 180. degrées, beginning at the one ende, one, two, threé, and so foorth, vnto 90. in the myddest, and the lyke shall you doo from the other ende vnto the same 90. Also, you must number them in the breadth of the same halfe circle: and this halfe circle, shall you make fast on the neather part of the instrument, so that the endes thereof may be fixed in the endes of the Meridian line. Then through the center of the plate or Equinoctiall circle, shal passe a rounde steéle or wyre of the same mettall, made fast or so∣dered in it, so that it rise and come foorth equally from euery side of the plae the fourth part of the Diameter of the same, and this shalbe called the Axis or exiltrée of the world. The instrument being thus made, you shall place it, or set it in a frame, hauing two armes, standards, or arches, so that it change betweéne the sayd arches, borne vp by the ronnde peéces or endes of the plate, left therof at the endes of the line of the syxe houres aforesayd, in such sort, that being thus stayed, it may be directly turned. And in the middest betweéne these two armes, beneath in the foote of them, or where they are placed, you shal rayse a prick, or poynt: so that the plate which signifieth the Equinoctial, being perpen∣diculer, the brimme or edge thereof may fall vpon the poynt or pricke, and consequently the plate standing playne or flatte, the nientie degreés of the halfe circle, must shew or touche the sayde prick, as shal also the end or extremitie of the Axis of the world, and the other ende shall shewe the Zenith or vertical poynt. This instrument must be so placed, that the Meridian line be North and South:The placing of the instru∣ment. which you shall finde in this maner. In an open and playne place, where the Sunne shyneth for the most part of the day, you shall make a circle with a payre of compas∣ses, in the middes whereof, you shall set a steéle or wyre, so vp∣right, that it declyne not, or bend not, eyther one way or other, and the same no longer then the fourth part of the Diameter of the circle.The fynding of the Meri∣dian lyne. Then in the morning when the Sunne ryseth, the shadowe shall be very long, and as it ryseth hygher and hygher, so the shadowe waxeth shorter and shorter. Then must you ob∣serue
the tyme, when the extremitie or ende of the shadowe tou∣cheth in the circumference of the Circle, and where it toucheth you shall make a pricke. Then goeth the shadowe shortnyng vn∣to the mydday or noone tyde, and as from thence the Sunne declineth, so doeth the shadowe encrease, and whē it shall come a∣aine to the circumference of the Circle, you shal make another prycke. Then shall you part in the myddest, the arke that is be∣tweéne the one pricke and the other, and from the middle pricke draw a ryght lyne to the center of the Circle: And that shall be the Meridian line, whereupon you shal set the instrument. Fur∣thermore, in the foote of the frame of the instrument, you shall set a compasse or Dyal, which shall shewe the Meridian lyne, This done, vpon the arches of the frame, and corners of the sixe houres, you shall turne the Equinoctiall so far, that it passe so much of the halfe circle by the middle pricke, howe many degrees the Pole is raysed aboue the Horizon of that region or place where you are,The eleuation of the Pole. and then the shadow of the wyre or steele, shal iustly shew in the Plate, the houre, and what a clock it is.
Heere foloweth the Figure of the Instrument.
The xv. Chapter, of certayne particuler Dyals, Mural, and Horizontall. AMong sundry manner and fashions of perticuler Dyals, there are two princi∣pall. Whereof the one is Horizontall,Dyals hori∣zontall and verticall. which is placed in the superficiall of the Horizon: the other is verticiall, and must be made or set on a wall perpendi∣culer, and directly against the South or mydday, from the true leuant or East, to the true ponent or West,East & est. the whiche the Mariners call East & West. To make any of these two Dials, you must drawe a right lyne, and call it the Axis of the poles of the world, vpon the which you shall drawe an halfe circle, and deuide it in 90. equall partes. And where the halfe circle is cut with the lyne of the Axis, must be accompted by the circumfe∣rence, the altitude of the pole for the citie or place for the whiche you intende to make the Dyall. And in the poynt of the circum∣ference where endeth the altitude of the pole, you shall make a marke, and write there, The altitude of the pole. And from that poynt draw a ryght lyne vnto the poynt where you began to ac∣compt the altitude of the pole, which lyne shalbe called the Se∣midiameter, or halfe Diameter of the verticall circle. And from the same poynt of the altitude of the pole, drawe another ryght lyne to the other extremitie or ende of the Axis, and this shall be called the Semidiameter of the Horizon: and likewyse from the same poynt of the altitude of the pole, draw a ryght lyne perpen∣diculer vntyl it touche in the Axis, and this shalbe called the Se∣midiameter of the Equinoctial. Hereby is consydered a Trian∣gle,The Triangle. which hath by the sydes thereof the Semidiameter of the vertical, the Semidiameter of the Horizon, and the Axis of the worlde, which Triangle shal serue afterwarde. These thrée Se∣midiameters, of the vertical, the Equinoctiall, and the Horizon, being founde, you shall make the Dyall in this manner.
Drawe a ryght lyne somewhat long, and call it the lyne of contingence.The making of the Dyall. This shll you cut with an other lye i ryght angles after the maner of a crosse, whiche shlbe the Meridian lyne. Then with your compasse, ake rom the Triangle the Semidiameter of the Equinoctiall, and of this bygnesse drawe a circle vpon the Meridian lyne: so tht the edge or brymme of the circle, touche in the lyne of contingece. Then with a com∣passe, take the Diameter of the verticall circle, yf you wil make a muall Dyall, or the Semidiameter of the Horizon, yf you wyll make a Horizontall Dyall, on a playe or flatte fourme. Therefore with such Semidiameter as you desyre, you shall drawe a circle vpon the other part of the Meridian lyne, so that the circumference thereof touche in the lyne of contingence. Then shall you deuide the Equinoctiall circle into foure equall partes, and the quarter that is towarde the lyne of contingence, shall you deuide into syxe equal partes. And settyng the ende of the ruler in the center of the Equinoctial, and vpon euery poynt of them that deuide he syxe equal partes, from thence shall you drawe certayne ryght lynes, vntyll they touche in the lyne of contingence. And from these poyntes of the line of contingence, you shal draw other ryght lynes, to the center of the Horizontal circle, which lynes shalbe the determiners of the houres. And neére vnto the Meridian lyne, where it toucheth in the lyne of contingence, you shal wryte twelue, and consequently towarde the East, you shal wryte one, two, threé, foure, fyue, syxe: and from the syxth houre, you shal drawe a ryght lyne, which shall passe by the center of the Hrizontal circle equally distant from the lyne of contyngence. The one quarter of the Horizontal be∣yng drawne by the selfe same, and of the same measure and byg∣nesse shal you drawe the other, in suche sorte, that the same byg∣nesse that is from twelue to one, the selfe same shall you geue from the twelfth, to the eleuenth: and the same bignesse and measure that is from one to two, shal you geue from eleuen to twelue, and so foorth of the other. And note that the Horizontal Dyall, after the syxth houre of te euenyng, shall haue the houres of seuen and eyght,
and in climates farre North xi. also, and more if néede shall re∣quire, and consequently must haue the houres of fiue and foure of the morning,houres of the horizontall Dyall. and in climates farre North, threé also: and these also must be so marked, that from syxe to seuen, may be the same that is from fyue to syxe, and from seuen to eyght, the same that is from foure to fyue: also, foure and fyue of the mor∣ning, as seuen and eyght. The Dyal being thus drawen in pa∣per, or on a table,Placing of t Dyall. or any other thyng, must be painted (on a table, or in stone, or in what so euer you desyre to make the Dyall) a circle, of the same bignesse as is the circle horizon∣tall, and in that must be translated the lynes and numbers of the sayd circle horizontall: Then must you make a triangle of metall, of the selfe same bignesse and fourme that is made in the myddle circle: and the syde of this triangle (which is cal∣led the halfe diameter of he horizon) must be fixed vppon the Meridian lyne of the horizon Dyall, so that the syde of the tryangle (which is the Axis of the worlde) and extremitie or ende thereof, may fall in the center of the horizontall Dyall, and must stand so perpendiculer, that it declyne neyther to the one part, nor to the other. The Dyall being thus made, you shall set it vppon a Meridian lyne,The Meridian line of th Dyall. so that the Meridian lyne of the Dyall may stand or rest vpon it, and so shall the shadowe of the triangle shewe the houre: and yf for this place we desyre to knowe it, we must fixe it there. And if for any other place, so setting it, we shall haue a certayne houre. So may we in any instant remooue it to ano∣ther place, and likewise set it there, to make cer∣taine & true demon∣stration of the houre.
¶ Heere foloweth the Figure of this Demonstration. The making of the verti∣cal Dyall.In like maner as is made the Horizontal Dyal, must be made the verticall, taking from the Triangle the Semidiameter of the Circle verticall. And note, that for the Circle verticall, it shall not be néede∣full
of more then sixe houres before noone, and other sixe after noone. And the triangle must be fixt in the meridian lyne vp∣pon the side that is called the Semidiameter of the Circle ver∣tical. And yf you will not make a triangle of metall, but that a wyre of Iron may gyue the shadowe, then must you make the sayd triangle of paste or paper. And according to the forme or paterne thereof make the wyre of Iron, and cause the same to be set in all sortes of Dials, as is before. The xvii. Chapter, of the composition and vse of an instrument generall for the houres of the nyght. WHere as in the Chapters past, I haue descri∣bed the manner and forme to make two Dials for the houres of the day, me séemeth that for the more perfection of this worke, it would be conuenient héere to teach the making of a Dyal to knowe the houres of the nyght,The Guard starres. by the Circle which the two Starres, called the Guardians, or the mouth of the horne, doo describe by the moouing of the fyrste moo∣ueable. But for as much as it is a common opinion, that in the myddest of Apryll it is mydnyght when the Guardes be in the head, whereof they take the begynnyng of the yeare, I wyll declare how it ought to beé vnderstoode.what is myd∣nyght. Certayne it is, that to be mydnyght, is none other thyng but the Sunne to beé by the moouing of the fyrst moueable, to euery one in that part of his Meridyan that is to hym vnder the earth, euen as is to hym mydday,Noone, or mydday. or noone, when to hym it is in that parte of the Meridyan that is aboue the earth. And in this present yeére of 1545. (to be out of doubt heéreof) I made experience with a precise Astrolabie, so that the fyrst or foremost Guard Starre, beyng perpendiculerly ouer or aboue the North Starre, I found in the Meridyan, where the Sunne maketh mydnyght, the ix. degreé of Taurus, whereby it foloweth, that the Sunne being in thys degreé, which is at the xix. of Apryl, the same Guard Starre shall be perpendiculerly ouer the North starre,
which is the lyne of the head, and consequently the Sunne beé∣ing in the nienth degreé of Scorpio, which is at the xxii. of October, the guard starre shalbe in the lyne of the féete: and by thys calculation may be knowen when it shalbe in the ryght or in the leat,An errour. and in all the other lynes: so that they manyfest∣ly erre, that accompt the mydnyght at the xv. of Apryll, when the fyrst guard starre is in the lyne of the head, accompting a terce or thyrde parte of an houre sooner and more then they should doo. The making of the nstru∣ment.Huing thus geuen principles for the instrument, you shall procéde in the making thereof, as foloweth. In paste, or on a plate of aton, make a circle of the quantitie of a spanne, or of the bignesse that you desyre the instrument or Dyal to be: then make an other circle somewhat lesse, so farre distaunt from the greater, that betweéne the one and the other may be a space, in the which may be signed or marked the dayes and monethes. Likewyse shall you make another lesse circle, leauing space to set the numbers of the dayes of euery moneth. And vnder this circle, shal you make an other, leauing space to write the names of the moneths: then shall you deuide the first and greatest circle into eyght equal partes, so that the xix. of Apryl may be in the highest or vppermost part of the instrument, which is where they say the lyne of the head to be, and the xxii. of October must be in the neather part. Also, the xiii. of Ianuarie, in the ryght arme: and in the leaft arme, the xvii. of Iuly: and so the other dayes that doo fall to the other lynes, accordyng as they an∣sweare to the ryght assension of the Sunne, as you may sée in this figure. This being thus diuided, you must also diuide the spaces that are betweéne the one lyne and the other, into the dayes whiche be numbred in euery space: so that betweéne the xix. of Apryll, and the thyrde of Iune, are 45. dayes, and that space shal you deuide into 45. partes. And whereas the instrument beyng small, it can not in so lytle space receyue so many partes, you shall deuide it from fyue, to fyue partes, and so shall you de∣uide the other spaces by the numbers that are signed in them.
Then one day more before the x. toward the left hand you shall make a strike, and there shalbe the xx. of Apryl. And fyue dayes more before, make another stryke, and there shalbe the xxv. Ad yet other fyue dayes more before, whiche shalbe the xxx. of Apryl, make another strike ouerthwart vnto the neathermost circle, and there shall May begyn: And from these dayes shall you begyn to accompt the dayes of May from fyue to fyue. And in the last space you shall put syxe, which shall make the xxxi. dayes that May hath.
And there shall you make another strike, which shall trauerse or uerthwart vnto the lesse cicle. And in this maner you shal de∣uide the other monethes, geuing to euery of them the number of his dayes. This being done, vpon the outward part of the great circle, you shal cut downe the paper, paste, or plate of laton, leauing of the same for a signe or marke a floure Deluce vpon the 19. of A∣pryl, for that it must be the head: and lykewyse at the 22. of Oc∣tober, may be left a handel to holde it by. Then must you make a rundel to the same paste or laton, of the bignesse of the lesse cir∣cle, without the circumference whereof, shalbe left a tooth or in∣dex, in the which you shall wryte, Tyme. And from the one syde of this index towards the left hand, you shal draw a ryght lyne, that may passe through the center to the circumference, and this shalbe the Meridian lyne. Also to this rundel you shal geue a cir∣cle, so muche lower from the circumference, that there may be left a space where the number of the dayes may be written. And this rundel you shall deuide into 24. equall partes, begyn∣nyng at the Meridian lyne of the index at the twelfth houre of the nyght. Then in the next space towarde the left hand, you shal make the number of one. Likewise in the second space the num∣ber of two, in the thyrde, the number of threé, and so foorth of the residue, vnto the other twelue of the day, in the opposite or con∣trary part of the index. So consequently proceeding i. ii. iii. &c. vnto the twelue of the index, which shall be the xxiiii. houres of the naturall day. Furthermore also you must make another peéce, of the same substaunce of past or metal, in maner of a horne,The horne of the seuen star∣res, whiche make the lesse beare. in forme and or∣der as are in heauen the seuen starres, whiche make the lesse beare: And this of such quantitie, that the first or formost guarde starre, may reach without the great rundell close to the circum∣ference thereof, hauyng the North starre his center, with the center of the instrument. And from this starre or center vnto the fyrst and formost guard starre, must be a right lyne, by the whiche the horne must be cut néere from the center, vnto the dis∣couering
or shewing of the houres. Also, from the fyrst guarde to the seconde, must be two partes of niene, of that that is from the Starre, whiche signifieth the North, to the fyrst guarde. Agayne, the second & last guarde, must be toward the left hand, ouer or aboue the fyrst, threé quarter partes of one halfe Circle, which hath for the Semidiameter the two partes of niene, (whereof we haue spoken before) geuen vpon the right line that goeth from the North to the fyrst guard. These two guarde Starres, must be boared through with holes, of the bygnesse of an Aglet of a poynt, and lykewyse the North Starre, with also the two rundelles through the center, and by that, al threé peéces annexed, so that there remayne a hole in the myddest, lyke the holes of the guardes so that by it, and by the other of the guardes, may be seéne the Starres in heauen, in suche sorte, that the lesse rundell and the horne may be turned round about the Axis, as doth appeare in the demon∣stration folowing.
To fynde the hour with the instrument.The instrument thus ended, and brought to perfection, when you desire to know the houre, you shal turne the index of the lesse rundell in the which is written, Time, to that part of the great rundell where is marked the day in the whiche you desyre to knowe the houre: and directing your face towarde the North, you shal make the head toward the height of heauen, at the 19. of
Aprill. And seéyng in heauen by the hole in the myddest the starre of the North, holdyng the instrument in suche compasse of the face, that by the circumference of the greater rundell, may be seéne the guarde starre in heauen, you shall turne the horne rounde about, vntyll in fall vppon the Guardes: so that by the two holes of the mouth of the horne, the two Guard starres may be seéne, and by the hole in the myddest, the North starre, and all threé with one eye: then the right lye that goeth from the North to the fyrst Guarde, shall shewe in the lesse rundell, the houre that shalbe. The xviii. Chapter, of the tyme of Tydes, or rysyng and fallyng of the Sea. GReat accompt ought Pilottes and Ma∣rirs to haue of the Tydes, to take Port, enter vppon Barres, passe by Flattes, and finally, for al maner of Na∣uigations. For beyng ignoraunt heére∣of, great hurt and inconuenience myght chaunce vnto them, as did of late to the valiant Captayne, Don Iohn Gusman the Earle of Niebla, in the yeére of 1436. who was drowned be∣fore the Citie of Gibraltar, for that the Mariners kept noe accompt, neyther had consyderation of the Tydes. By reason whereof, not onely he was drowned, but also with hym dyed many woorthe Gentlemen, and valiaunt Captaynes of Spayne. The Mariners hold for a certaine rule,The Mariners opinion of bbyng and flowing of the sea, or tyds. Obseruation of the Moon to know the tydes. that the Moone being in the Northeast, or in the Southwest, is ful Sea: and being in the Southwest, or Northwest, to be lowe Water. They affirme also, that at the fyrst day of the newe Moone, the Sunne beyng at Northeast, and a quarter to the East (that is Northeast, and by East) the Moone shall be Northeast, and then shall be full Sea, and thrée houres, and threé quarters.
And at the seconde daye of the Moone, when the Sunne shalbe at East Northeast, the Moone shalbe at Northeast, and then shall be full sea, and foure houres, and two quarters. &c. Theyr accompt is, that the Sunne beéyng in the North, is mydnyght: and béeyng in the Northeast, they accompte, thrée:Eyght princi∣pall wyndes. and in the East, syxe. So that they accompte, threé houres from wynde to wynde, by the eyght pryncipall wyndes, or lynes, whyche the Spanyardes call Rumbos. These wyndes must beé imagined vppon the North, placed in the Angle, vnder, or beneath the Earth: and the Sunne and the Moone at the moouing of the fyrst mooueable, and they ought not to be imagined in the Horizon, as the compasse sheweth. For speaking by the tearmes of Astronomie, you must vnderstande, that the Moone touchyng in the circle of houres at the number of threé, is euer full Sea: and touchyng in the same circle at the number of niene, is euer lowe water. No lesse ought they to obserue iuste accompt of the houres, by quarters of houres. For to geue 30. dayes to the Moone, it shalbe necessarie to accompt by the fyftes of houres, as shalbe sayd heéreafter. Heére is to be noted, that the Spanyardes thynke (be lyke) that a Northeast and Southwest Moone, maketh a full Sea in all other places, as it dooth in Spayne. But in that they be greatly deceyued, and therefore the rule that they haue set foorth for the Tydes, serueth onely for suche places where it flo∣weth Northeast and Southwest Moone a full Sea. And the better to vnderstand the increasyng and decreasyng of the Ocean Sea,The Moone causeth the ebbing and flowing of the Ocean Sea it shall be conuenient to knowe the cause thereof, whervnto we say, that the Moone is the cause of eb∣byng and flowyng, or rysing and falling, increase or decrease of the Sea: not onely by her lyght, but also by her secrete or hyd propertie. The Moone compasseth about the earth,The moouing of the Moone. from the East into the West, vntyll she returne to the place or poynt from whence she departed: and in this course wasteth or spendeth so muche more then one naturall day, in howe muche her pro∣per moouing is more then the Sunne against the fyrst mooue∣able,
so that she maketh her turne or course about the four quar∣ters of heauen in xxiiii. houres, and foure fyfthes of one houre, whiche are the twelue degreés that she goeth more then the Sunne. And in this tyme the Ocean increaseth and decreaseth twyse, so that this increasing and decreasing, answereth direct∣ly to the course of the Moone: whereby it foloweth, that the sea increaseth syxe houres and one fyfth part, and decreaseth other syxe houres, and one fyfth. And yf this day at the twelfth houre, was full sea, the lowe water shalbe at the syxth houre and one fyfth part: and at the twelfth houre and two fyfth partes it shall returne to be full sea: and at the syxth houre and thrée fyfthes, shalbe lowe water agayne: and at the twelfth and foure fyfthes of the other day, shalbe ful sea. So that from one day to another, the tide doth shorten foure fyfthes of an houre,The shortning of the tydes. which is the time that the Moone slacketh or carieth more then one natural day, to returne to the poynt from whence she departed by the twelue de∣greés, whereof we haue spoken. Whereby it manifestly appea∣reth, how they beguyle them selues that say,An errour. that the sea increa∣seth syxe houres, and decreaseth other syxe. For yf it were so, the tydes should euer be at one selfe same tyme and houre. But for as muche as there is more then xxiiii. houres,The variation of the tydes. by the saide foure fyfth partes, thereby is caused the variation of the tydes: so that if this day, the tyde be at one of the clocke, to morow it shalbe at one and foure fyfth partes, and the day folowing, at two of the clocke and thrée fyftes. &c. For this accompt, I wyl describe a Table in circular figure,A Table to knowe th variation of the tydes. although not precise, for the causes which we haue touched be∣fore in the fyfth Chapter, speaking of the Moone: who some∣tymes in her mouing is swyft, and sometyme sacketh as much, because the coniunction is not euer in one selfe same poynt of the Zodiacke, as ye Mariners presuppose for their rule. This figure shall haue two circles, in the lesse (whiche shalbe the fyrst, and next vnto the center) shalbe the dayes of the Moone, from one to thirtie, which we count the coniunction. And in the seconde and greatest circle, shalbe founde the houres of the tydes. So that, who so desyreth to knowe when the tyde shalbe, where it floweth Southwest and Northeast, let hym at that houre take
héede to the dayes of the Moone, how many they are: as if heé beé in the coniunction, or if it beé the fyrst or seconde of the Moone. &c. And the day beyng knowen, then in the second circle which answeareth directly to the day, shall heé fynde when shalbe hygh water, or full sea: and consequently, the ebbe, or low water, which shalbe syxe houres and one fyfth, after the full sea, and so lykewyse may he iudge when shalbe the halfe tyde: an this aswell at the time when it encreaseth (which shalbe threé houres and halfe a fyfth part of an houre, before the full sea) as also when it decreaseth, which shalbe the halfe ebbe, threé houres, and halfe the fyfth of one houre, after the full sea. ¶ The Table foloweth.
This increasing and decreasing of the Tydes, is not euer in equall quantitie. In the coniunctions and oppositions, they in∣crease and decrease much, which the Mariners cal hygh spring tydes, and the greatest increase of al, they cal the hygh springes. In the quarters of the Moone (which are at the 7. and 22. of the Moone, or neére there about) they increase and decrease but litle: which the Mariners cal nepe tydes, low water, dead waters, or lowe flooddes. The xix. Chapter, of certayne signes, which progno∣sticate tempestes, or fayre weather. A Good Pilot or Mariner, ought not to be ignorant of certayne signes or tokens which the naturall Philosophers de∣scribe of tempests. For as they signifie vnto him, so shall he leaue his porte, or enter into it: which yf he can not, then ought he with patience and hope, to tary the tyme that God hath appoynted for hym, who mooueth and troubleth the Seas, when it pleaseth hym, and appeaseth them agayne at his pleasure. Lesse hurteth and damageth the stroke whiche we seé comming, or foreseé, then that which hath stricked vs, and taken vs carelesse. When the Sunne ryseth fayre and cleare, it signifyeth a fayre day: but yf it shewe yealowe, or deadly, tempest is lyke to folowe. Agayne, yf at the rysing of the Sunne his beames shewe them selues contract,Signes of fa and sowle weather. or geathered togeather, and short, you shal haue rayne: if the mistes or cloudes make a circle about the Sunne or Moone, how much the greater that circle shalbe, so much grea∣ter shalbe the tempest to come: and yf here shalbe two circles, the tempest shall increase the more. And yf it chaunce, that at the rysyng of the Sunne the cloudes be turned edde, it is a signe of no small tempest. When the Sunne or the Moone shall haue a circle, looke towarde the part where it breaketh, and from thence shall wynde come: yf it depart, or dispearse equally, fayre weather shall follow. When the Moone ryseth bryght and
by the whyche they passe. We seé that in some oe region it rayneth with one wynde, and the selfe same wynde in other places disperseth the cloudes. The Nrthwest wynde is drye in Spayne, yet in Lybia it is very moyst and rayny. The South wynde in Europe, causeth rayne in most places, and therefore the Poets named it the wynde of waters, and this wind in Palestina or Iurie is drie. The cause of this diuersitie, is, that when the wynde bloweth in Palestina, it passeth by hot and drye regions, as by the desarts of Affrike, and passeth not by any sea at al. But when it bloweth in these partes of Europe, it must of necesstie passe by, and ouer the waters of the sea Me∣diterraneum, or the Leuant sea, where it gathereth moysture and causeth rayne. The Leuant or East wynde, in Malaga, and Gibralter, is moyste, and in Sheres De la Frontera, is hot as Hell. The xx. Chapter, of the bright and shynyng exhalations that appeare in the tempestes, which the Ma∣riners call Santelmo, or Corpus sancti. IGnorance is the mother of errours, and therefore will I not omitte to shewe the naturall cause héereof, al∣though among certayne simple and ignoraunt people, it is accounted for a myracle, that in certayne tempestes on the Sea, the Maryners seé cer∣tayne shynyng and bright fyres, which with great superstition they kneéle downe vnto, and pray vn∣to, affyrming that it is Santelmo that appeareth vnto them,Some cal these the fiers of S. Elin and S. Nicolas. and not contented héerewith, some sweare that they haue seén drops of gréene wxe fall downe. Other affyrme that this waxe is of such heate, that if it fall from the top of the Ship, it doth melt the rosen and pitch of the hatches of the Ship, with such other foolish imaginations, and therefore it shall be good briefly
to speake héereof, to stop the mouthes of such fond and ignorant persons. The exhalations or vapoures of the grosse umes or smokes that ryse from the eath,wandring fyers engen∣dred of exha∣lations and vapours. are constrayned or geathered togeather by the coldnesse of the nyght, and the ayre, and are thickned in the fyrst region of the ayre, next vnto the earth. This may, and is wont to be inflamed or kindled, and yf it finde a body whereunto it may cleaue, it abydeth in that vntyll it be consu∣med. This fyre is cleare, and shyneth, and yet burneth not. The Greékes call it Polyduces,Castor and Pollux. and the Latines call it Castor and Pollux. It is accustomed to appeare vpon the shrowdes, and oftentymes is séene vpon the pykes of souldyers, in the ar∣mies of men of warre, as Plinie wryteth, and this, aswell by reason of continuall smoke, as also by the heate of muche peo∣ple. Certayne it is,what is smoke and flame. that smoke is none other thyng then fyre dispearsed: as flame is an exhalation or euaporation that ry∣seth in maner of smoke, from a grosse or fat body, and at the tyme that it ryseth, being geathered togeather, is constrayned into flame, inuestured with fyre. This resplendence or shy∣yng, is also often tymes seéne,Exhalations of the land and water. not onely in iourneying by lande, but also in sayling by ryuers: and when it appeareth on the lande, it ryseth of the smoke that is geathered togea∣ther with the colde ayre of the nyght, and on the bankes of ry∣uers: this smoke is geathered of the exhalations of the water, and consequently beyng kyndeled, appeareth bryght and shy∣nyng. But nowe let vs come to the Shyps that sayle by the Sea, and to the Mariners hat are accustomed to tempestes. To them thereore I saye, that that lyght,Exhalations and vapours engendred in Shyps. or suche other lyghtes as they seé, is engendred of the fumes and smokes of theyr Shyp, with the heate of men couched close and neare to∣geather in a narrowe place, and when a tempest ryseth, the sayde smoke is thickned, prest togeather, and beaten downe by the wyndes, in suche sorte, that beyng tossed from one syde to another, it is set on fyre by moouing, and taketh holde sometyme on the shroudes, and sometymes on the toppe, and sometyme also in the poupe, or in the foreshyppe: So that to seé this lyght, or the same to appeare, is a naturall thyng, and not supernaturall.
When Captayne Bzerra was at Corron, in the Emperours Nauie, with his company of Souldyers, he chaunced to be in a tempest, and sawe the sayde fyre of Santelmo, which short∣ly after descended so lowe, that the Captayne might easily come to it: and taking it in his cloke, he found it to be a litle drop of water. Some haue thought it to be a certayne shyning Flie,A shining flye called Taros, whiche the sea men some time see in a calme in the Sommer season: and thus Santelmo appeared no more. The Captayne remayned astonished at the mockerie, and the other perceyued it to be no miracle. The opinion of the Maryners that affirmed it to be Santelmo,A superstiti∣ous opinion of the Mari∣ners. may ryse of Sainct Erasmo, Byshop of Naples, who (as they say) not only in his life tyme, but also after his death, was a patrone and helper of Mariners that called vpon him in tempests. This name of Erasmo, they of Naples call Ereemo: and processe of time taking away one e. by the figure of Sincope, remayned the name of Santermo. And the Spaniardes, who neuer can long keépe any strange vocable, call it Santelmo, turning r. into l. Yet of this San∣telmo, whereof the Maryners speake, there is neither scripture that maketh mention, nor auctoritie that confirmeth it. I heare say that the Frier preachers hadde a religious man,A lye of the fryer prea∣chers. of com∣mendable life, and good conuersation, named Frier Pero Gon∣zales, borne in Galizia, and that in his lyfe time our Lorde did certayne miracles by him, and that this is he that shyneth and geueth lyght in tempests. No doubte, but GOD worketh myracles in his Saintes, and by his Saintes, as sayth Dauid. But yf this seruant of GOD was Pero Gonzales,Psalm. 67. Testimonie of auncient auc∣thours. how then shall he be Santelmo? Another difficultie there is, as touching this lyght: for there are wrytyngs of more antiquitie then the lawe of grace and comming of Christ in fleshe, whiche geue testimonie heéreof. For the Poet Uirgyll, in the second of hys Aeneidos, wryteth, that this fire appeared vpon the head of Iulius Ascanius. And Titus Liuius in his first booke, affirmeth, that it appeared vpon the head of Seruius Tullius, the sixth King of the Romanes.
Pomponius Articus sayth, that Rome began to be buylded in the thyrd yéere of the thyrde Olimpiades,The buildyng of Rome. that is, in the tenth yeére of Ionathan kyng of the Iewes, and from the creation of the worlde 3201. yeéres, and 729. yeéres before Christ our Sauiour was borne. The Kyngs of Rome were seuen, and raigned 244. yeéres.The Roman kyngs. Eusebius saith, they raigned 246. Seruius Tullius raigned 44. yeéres. Tarquinus Superbus 25. yeéres after him. So that discountyng these yeéres, it shall appeare clearely as I say. Although the yeéres were not discounted, let them reade Diadorus Siculus, an auncient wryter, let them reade Plutarchus, Aristotle, and other olde Auctours that haue wrytten héereof, and they shall fynde, that yf tempestes be neare vnto the Sea, these fyres and lightes appeare in them: and ap∣peared not onely to the Gentiles, but at this day also appeare to the Turkes and Moores in tempestes. When onely one lyght appeareth, it is taken for an euyll signe: And héereof sayde Propertius thus. Candida foelici soluite vela toro. And why it is an euyll signe,One lyght or fyre is an euill signe. Two lyghtes. this is the cause: that if the tem∣pest that ryseth be great, it choketh the exhalation, although yet by the part least troubled, it appeareth. When there are two lyghtes, it signifyeth that it is sufficient to consume the matter of the tempest, or that the tempest beginneth to ceasse, and the grosse humour hath the maisterie. But sometyme it chaunceth, that two lyghtes appearing, there may be a tempest, and one appearyng shall not be so great, and often tymes there is a tempest without any lyght at all seéne. The blynde Gentilitie called these Castor and Pollux,Castor and Pollux. and placed them in heauen in the signe of Gemini. Nowe remayneth to aunsweare to one obiection of the Marrines,an errour of the Mariners. who saye, that neuer man that hath séene these Fyres, hath peryshed. To this I say, that many may seé, and haue seéne these lyghtes, of whome, some haue beén in pe∣ryll, and some drowned: Notwithstandyng, no man can af∣firme,
that yf the drowned myght speake, they woulde say that they haue seéne them. Therefore the wyse Christian Ma∣ryner ought to haue a cleare conscience, and to call for the helpe of almightie God, lyfting vp his eyes and handes vn∣to heauen,Psalm. 68. and say wyth the Prophet, Saluum me fac Deus, quoniam intrauerunt aquae vsque ad animam meam. Saue me, oh my God, for waters haue en∣tred euen vnto my soule. Heere endeth the second part.
The thirde part, entreateth of the com∣position and vse of Instruments, and Rules for the Arte of Nauigation. ¶ The fyrst Chapter, of the number, order, and names of the wyndes. SO greatly esteémed was Eolus,why Eolus was fayned god of winds. Kyng of the Eolas Ilandes, or Ilandes of Vulcane, for hauyng reason and know∣ledge of the wyndes, that they of aun∣cient tyme called hym the god and lord of them. With no lesse consyderation, the prudent Maryner ought not to beé ignorant of them, for as much as the vniuersall benefite, and commoditie of Nauigation consisteth therein. And to haue the better knowledge thereof, you shall vnderstand, that wynde is fruite of the ayre,what is winde. and vapour of the earth: the which by reason of his subtiltie, pearceth the ayre, striketh it, and enforceth it. Other say, that wind, is ayre, moued or tossed by the vehement influence of vapours of contrary qua∣litie. It is in Latin called Ventus, because it is vehement, and volent, whose force is so great, that it ouerthroweth not onely heapes of stones, or rockes, and casteth downe treés: but also di∣sturbeth the ayre and the earth, and moueth the seas. There are foure principal wyndes,The foure principall or Cardinall wynds. which come from the foure cardinall or principall poyntes of the Horizon. We haue sayd that the Me∣ridian circle, cutteth the Horizon in two poynts (that is) in the North ad in the South, and the Equinoctial cutteth i in other two, that is, in the East and West, and from these foure poynts come these foure windes,Luke. xvii. whereof all the whle Scripture ma∣keth menion. These foure wyndes they in auncient tyme, na∣med in this manner. That that commeth from the East they called Subolanus,East. which we call the Leuant, or East wynde.
That commeth from the South,Souh. they named Auster, whiche we call the Meridian, or South wynde. That commeth from the West,west. they call Faucinus, whiche we call the Ponent or West. That from the North they named Septentrio, or A∣quile, or Boreas,North. which we call North. To euery of these foure wyndes, they adioyned two collaterall wyndes, in maner as fol∣loweth. That that is from the East towarde the parte of the North, where the Tropike of Cancer aryseth, or cōmeth forth, they called Vulturnus: and that that is from thence toward the part of ye South,Collaerall wyndes. where ryseth the Tropike of Capricorne, they called Eurus: also that is from the West toward the part of the South, where the Tropike of Capricorne goeth downe, they cal Aphricus: & that that declineth to the North, where the Tro∣pike of Cancer goeth downe, they cal Caurus. The Collaterals of the North and he South, answeareth to the circumferences of the Polar circles: that that is from the North towarde the Leuant, or East, they call Aquilo: and that declineth towarde the West part, they cal Circius: that is from the South toward the East, Euro Auster, and towarde the West, Euro Aphri∣cus: thus many hath Aristotle in his Metheora.Twelue wydes. With these xii. windes, they sayled in old time, & made their compasse by them. The Hydrographers of late dayes, & such as are trauayled & exercised in saylyng, agreé with the aucients in the foure prin∣cipal wyndes,Eyght whole wyndes. Diuision of the horizon by the foure principall wyndes. although they haue chaungd the names, callyng the Leuant, or Orient, East: y• Ponent or Occident, West: the Septentrional, North: and the Meridional, South. Betwéene these foure windes, they deuide euery quarter of the Horizon in∣to two halfes, made of the two nearest, in this maner. Be∣tweéne the North and the East, takyng name of them both, they name the Northeast. Betwéene the East and the South, they name the Southeast: and betweéne the South and the West, Southwest: betweéne West and North, Northwest. These eyght wyndes in nauigation, they call whole wyndes. Betweéne these eyght wyndes, they place other eyght, that are called halfe wyndes, whiche also are named of the two that are nearest vnto them.Eyght halfe wyndes. That that is be∣tweéne the North ad Northeast, they call Northnortheast,
Betweene North East, and is East Northeast: and so foorth of the other. Beside these halfe windes, they haue other which they call quarter windes.quarter windes. These take the name of the windes to the which they declyne: as yf to the quarter from he North, to∣warde the Northeast, they call it North, and a quarter towarde the Northeast, that is, North and by East. And that that is toward the Northwest, they call North, and a quarter towarde Northwest. And so of the other, as shalbe verified in the fy∣gure folowyng:The deuisio of the wind. whereof is gathered, that deuidyng the eyght principall wyndes into halfe wyndes, they are 16. And eue∣ry halfe wynde deuided into two quarters,xxxii. winde in al are in al 32. wyndes. Some haue beén so curious, or rather so vaynely carefull and too precise, that they haue deuided them into 64. And in the Cards that they haue, the confusion of lines is greater, then the profit that may beé taken there∣by.
The demonstration of the wyndes. These names doo they vse that sayle by the Ocean Sea. And it seémeth they had their beginnyng of the Almaine or Flemish tongue: For these nations chiefely sayle in the Ocean. They that sayle in the Sa Mediteraneum,The names of the windes in the Italian or Tuscane tongu. or Leuant Sea, call them by other nams, taking originall of the Tuscan or I∣talian tongue. Or els that they haue denomination of the parts from whence they come, in respect of the Sea Mediteraneum, as the wynde called Graeco, because it commeth from Grecia,
and Libeco, because it commth from Lybia, and Syroccho, because it commeth frm Syria, and begynning at the North, these are thir names, Tramontana, Graeco, Leuante, Ponen∣te, Maestro, and that that is betwéene Tramontana and Grae∣co, they call Graeco Tramontana, and that is betweéne Graeco and Leuante, they call Graeco Leuante, and that is betweéne Leuante and Syroccho, they call Leuante Syroccho, and that is betwéene Syroccho and Mezzo Iorno, they call Mezzo Ior∣no Syroccho, and so of the other: and the lyke of the quarters. And because they that sayle in the Ocean, are gouerned by al∣titudes, we will vse the names that they vse, where we intende to intreate of altituds, and euery man shall vse them as he lyst∣th, for as much as the difference is not in the windes, but onely in their names. The seconde Chapter, of the composition of Cardes for the Sea. ARriuyng to the end desyred (which is Nauiga∣tion,What is Na∣uigation. the principall intent why I began thys worke) I say, that Nauigation or Sayling, is none other thing then to iourney, or vyage by water, from one place to another, and is one of the foure difficultst things,Prouerb. xxx. wherof the most wise King hath written. These viags do differ from viages by land, in thrée things: for the land is yrme and stedfast, but this is fluxible,The daunger and difficulti of nauigatio wauering, and ooueable. That of the lande, is knowen and termined by markes, signes, and limittes: but this of the Sea, is vncertayne and vnknowen. And yf in viages by land, there are hylles, mountaines, rockes, and craggie places, the Sea payeth the same seuen folde with torments and tem∣pestes: therefore these viages being so difficult, it shalbe hard to make the same vnderstood by words or wryting. The best ex∣plication, or inuention, that the wittes of men haue found for the manifesting of this, is to geue the same paynted in a Carde.
Making of Cardes for the Sea.For the draught, or making whereof, it shall be requisite to know two things: whereof the one is, the right position of pla∣ces, or placing of countries and coastes. The other is the distan∣ces that is from one place to another, and so the Carde shal haue two descriptions.The wyndes or lynes are called Rum∣bos, in the Spaish toong The one that answeareth to the position, shal∣be the wyndes, whiche the Mariners call lynes or poyntes of the compasse: and the other that aunsweareth to the distances, shalbe the drawing and poynting of the coastes of the land, and of the Ilandes compassed with the sea. To poynt the wyndes, or lynes, you must take saynnes of Parchment, or large Paper, of suche bygnesse as you wyll the Carde to be, and in it drawe two ryght lynes with blacke inke, whiche in the middest shall cut or deuide them selues in ryght angles, the one accordyng to the length of the Carde, which shalbe East and West, and the other North and South. Uppon the poynt where they cut, make a center, and vppon it, geue a priuie or hid circle, whiche may oc∣cupie in maner the whole Carde. This circle, some make with lead, that it may be easily put out: these two lynes deuide the cir∣cle into foure equall partes, and euery part of these shall you de∣uide in the myddest with a pricke or puncte. Then from one puncte to another, drawe a ryght Diametrall lyne with blacke incke: and so shall the circle remayne deuided with foure lynes, into eyght equal partes, which corresponde to the eight windes. In like maner shal you deuide euery of the eight into two equall partes, and euery part of these is called a halfe wynde. Then drawe from euery puncte, to his opposite Diametrall a ryght lyne, of greéne, or azure: lykewyse shall you deuide euery halfe wynde in the circle, into two equall partes. And from these punctes, which deuide the quarters, you shall drawe a certayne ryght lyne with redde inke, whiche also shall passe by the cen∣ter, whiche they call the mother Compasse,The mother compasse of the Carde 32. lynes which signifie so ma∣y windes. or chiefe compasse of the Carde, beyng in the myddest thereof: and so shall come foorth from the center, to the circumference 32. lynes, whiche signifie the 32. windes. Beside these said lynes, you shall make other equal distant to them, and of the selfe same colours, in this maner. From the poyntes of the wyndes and halfe wyndes that passe by the center, drawe certayne ryght lynes, that passe
not by the center, but be equally distant to those that passe by the center, and of the same colours and equidistance, as are they that passe by the center. And as these lynes concurre togeather aswell in the center as in the poyntes of the wyndes, and halfe wyndes, that are in the circumference of the circle, they shall leaue, or make there other syxtéene compasses,The placing of many com∣pases in the Carde. euery one with his thyrtie and two wyndes. And if the Carde be very great, because the lynes may not goe farre in sunder, yf you wil make there other syxteéne compasses, you must make them betwéene the one and the other of the fyrste syxteéne poyntes, where the quarters are made with theyr wyndes, as we haue sayde. It is the custome for the most part, to paynt vpon the center of these compasses, a flowre, or a rose,The flower, or rose of the center. with diuers colours, & gold, dif∣ferencing the lynes, and marking them with letters and other markes: especially signing the North with a flowre Deluce, and he East with a Crosse. This besyde the destinction of the wyndes,The North. serueth also for the garnishing of the Carde. And this for ye most part is done after that the coast is drawne. And thus muche suffiseth for the draught of the wyndes. The situation of the places,The situation of he place. &c. Portes, and Ilandes in the Carde, accordyng to theyr proper ifferences, consysteth in the particuler, and rue relation of suche as haue trauayled them, and therefore for this purpose it shall be neédefull to haue pa∣ternes of Coastes, Portes and Ilandes, which must be paynted in the Carde, and hese of the best & most approued to be true: and not only to haue paternes well paynted, but also it shall be necessarie to know the true altitudes of the Pole, of certayne principall Capes, Portes, and famous Cities. This done, they must be translated into certayne thinne papers,Translation of the Carde, from one to another. & transparent, that may be seéne through, and those of the best and finest that may be had, annoynting them with oyle of Line séede, and then drying thē at the Sunne. Then take the paterne or Card that is to be translated, and reache or streche it foorth vpon a table. Then put the transparent paper, vpō the one side of the paterne where you wyll begyn. And the paper eing made fast vpon the
paterne with plomettes of leade, or a lytle waxe, that may easily be taken off, you shal in the transparent paper marke with a fine penne, one East and West, and one North and South, or two, vpon those that are seéne by the selfe same paper in the paterne. And this is called tracyng, or translatyng. In lyke maner shall you trace all ye Costes, Hauens, Ports, Ilands, Cities, Capes, and riuers, as appeareth in the paterne, vnto the rockes that come foorth of the water, and the knowne bankes. And because this paper dooth not suffice, you shall put thereto another, and more, is neéde shall require. And begyn the translation in one, where the other endeth, vntyll you haue translated all that you desyre, not forgetting to make in euery one, lynes of North and South, East and West, to serue for markes afterward. So that the lyne of North and South, of the one paper, may ioyne close and euen, with the lyne of the North and South of the other paper that is ioyned to it by longitude. And the paterne thus translated into these papers, you must put the ruled or lyned paper or papers vpon a playne, smooth, and stedfast table, where you shall stretche them foorth, and make them fast with plomets or weyghts, or nayle them to the table by the sides or corners, with small nayles. Then vpon the sayd ruled paper, you shall put the paper that is translated from the paterne, in that side or part that is correspondent from the paterne, to the ruled Carde, so that the lynes of East and West, North and South of the translation, may be vpon the lynes that aunswere to them in the ruled Carde. This paper thus made faste by the one syde or part, you shall by the other syde (that it may remayne in his place) put vnder it an other fyne paper, smoked or smyred on the neather∣most part (which is that, that falleth vppon the ruled Carde) eyther wyth a lynke,Some do this only with oyle. or with matches of pitche. These thus or∣dered, and made fast one vppon another, you shall take a steéle bodkyn, or wyre, with a smoothe and blunt poynt, that it race not,Tracing of h Carde. or bore not the paper, and with it shall you drawe, pres∣syng vppon all the translation, and tracing it with diligence
and discretion, marking euer how much in it is translated from the paterne: sauyng the wyndes or lynes which the Maryners call Rumbos, and so shall remayne all the impression of the smoke in the ruled Carde, vppon the whiche, with a fyne penne you shall trace with ynke: whiche beeyng drye, you shall with rummes of bread make it cleane from all the smoke, and so shal the coaste appeare in the Carde drawne with ynke. This doone,The paynting of the Carde. then with a small penne shall you describe in the Carde, all the places and names of the coast in that part where they are, and as they are seéne in the paterne. And first you must describe in redde, the Portes, principal Capes, famous Cities, with other notable thynges: and all the residue in blacke. Then shall you drawe or paynt Cities, Shyps, Banners, and beasts, and also marke the Regions, and other notable thynges. Then with colours and golde shall you garnyshe and beautifie the Cities, Compasses, Shyps, & other partes of the Carde. Then shall you set foorth the coastes with greéne, by the shore or bankes of the landes, and make them fayre to syght with a lile saffron, or otherwyse, as shall séeme best. Lykewyse shall you describe certayne letters, with theyr significations, in thys maner. B. for a Bay. C. for a Cape. A. for an Angle. I. or Y. for an Ilande. M. for a Mountayne. P. for a Porte. R. for a Ryuer. Then in place where is more roome,The making of the trunke or scale of the leagues. or that is least occupi∣ed, you shal drawe two right lynes, equally distaunt: and the one no further from the other then half a singer, or litle more, and so long, that betweéne thē may be marked at ye least thrée hundred leagues. And this the Maryners call the truncke or scale of lea∣gues, and place it or vse it in this maner. They take with y• com∣passe, a hundred leagues of y• trunke of the Carde or paterne yt is translated, and they set them iust betwéene the two lynes, and this space they part by the halfe, and reste the foote of the com∣passe in 50. and these deuided againe equally in two parts, they rest the compasse in 25. and the 25. beyng lykewyse deuided,
they rest in xii. leagues and a halfe, and make them as appea∣reth in the demonstration folowing. The gradua∣tion of the Carde.The Carde beyng thus made, then to graduate it, or diuide it into degreés, you must drawe thrée lynes, whiche make ryght angles with the lyne of Ea nd West, equidistant to the lyne of North and South: and  also shalbe North and South. These shall be drawne by the Ilandes f Asores, or Soria, or neérer to Spayne, or where the Carde shall be less occupyed. And for this purpose, the one lyne  so farre distant from the other, that in the two spaces wh  make, may be mar∣ked, in the one, the degrées, & in the other, the number of them, conformable to the graduacion of the paterne: as the uumbers of degreés shewe East and West, with the Ports, Capes, and coastes in their proper altitudes. And if the Carde haue no graduation, you shall take with the compasse in the trunke of the leagues, seuen spaces of 12. lea∣gues and a halfe, which are 87. leagues and a halfe. And these must be deuided into fiue partes, which come foorth at 17. lea∣gues and a halfe for a part: and the foure partes taken with the compasse, make foure degreés, and deuided into foure partes, euery part is a degrée, and is marked thus. °. And yf you wyll make the degreés at 16. leagues, and two terces or more:The marke of a degree. you shall geue to euery degreé so much space as the leagues comprehend. This graduation must be begun from some one cape, whose altitude of the Pole is well knowen. And the whole Carde being thus graduate, you must begin the num∣ber of the degrées from the Equinoctiall lyne, one, two, thre. &c. toward the one Pole, and the lyke toward the other: so that to the knowne Cape, may answeare the number of his altitude. And so shall you doo to the whole Carde. Also, the Equinoctiall lyne shall be marked in his proper place.
And in lyke maner shal you marke the Tropikes according as they are in ye sphere. But forasmuch as in Spayne,Cape S. Vin∣cent. Cape saint Uincent is the principall, they begin there to make graduation, & number it in 37. degreés. And from thence towarde the Pole Artike, the degrées doo encrease. And from thence towarde the Equinoctial line,Increasing and dimini∣shing of the degrees. they deminish: and from that lyne, to the pole Antartike, they encrease againe (as we haue sayd) as is contei∣ned in the Carde, and as appeareth in this demonstration fol∣lowing. And if the paterne haue neyther leagues nor degreés, you must take or know the altitudes of two Capes,If the paterne haue neyther league nor de∣gree. that are North, and South, of the degreés, and the difference of the degreés of the eleuation, that is from the one Cape to the other, ye shall deuide all that space in so many partes, and so eche one parte shalbe seuenteéne leagues and a halfe, as answereth to one de∣greé.
Or accordyng to the opinion of the leagues of the round∣nesse of the earth, as we haue sayde, as touchyng this in the eyghteénth Chapter of the fyrst part. In Spayne they vse with the compasse to take the space that is from Cape saint Uincent, to the myddest of the greatest Ilande of Berlinga, whiche they account threé degrées: so that after seuenteéne leagues and a halfe for a degreé, they are 52. leagues and a halfe: and so much do they put in this space. Other put fiftie leagues, accompting after syxteéne leagues, and two terces for a degrée, and in this maner they make of leagues, degreés, and of degrées, leagues. The sayling Cards, haue no certayne bignesse limitted them, because they onely represent the description of the water and earth, and not the quantitie, and for this cause some are payn∣ted in great space, and other in lyttle. They that are in great space, are more manyfest, and more precise: and these the Ma∣ryners call Cards of the lrgest pricke or draught.The quantitie of Cardes. Some desire rather to haue them in lesse space, because they are brieffer, and conteyne much in litle roome: and these thy call Cardes of the less prycke. And if for any consyderation aforesayde, you de∣sire to reduce any Crde from the greatest pricke to the least, or contrarywyse:The reducing of Card from a bigge form to a lesse, or the contrary. yu must paynt onely the coast and Ilands on a paper, in maner as you did in the ruled Carde, of the lynes or wyndes, I say, let it be drawen vpon paper, for destroying or rasing the paterne. And when it is traced onely with ynke, then vpon that draught shall you drawe certayne ryght lies equi∣distaunt made all by one compasse, according to the length of the Carde, and other lynes that may cut them in ryght angles. and lykewyse equidistaunt, and of the same compasse that the fyrst are. These two orders of lynes, shall deuide all the super∣ficiall part of the Carde, into perfect squares or quadratures. And it is to be noted, that the nearer the lynes are ioyned to∣geather, and the squares the lese, so muche the more perfectly may it be reduced, and more easily. Then shall you take an∣other paper, greater or lesse then the Carde, accordyng to the poynt that you desyre to reduce it vnto, and in the length and breadth thereof, you shall deuide so many spaces as are betweene the lynes of the other paper, and yf it bee
greater, the squares shalbe greater: and if lesse, lesse. To kepe order in the correspondence of the squares (which shalbe a great lyght to translate the one from the other) you shall number the orders of the squares, as those of the longitude, by the ronte or vppermost part: and those of the latitude, by the syde, as well in the one paper, as in the other, conformable: also, those of the front, from the left hand to the ryght, and those of the side, from aboue, downeward. Then beholde the coast how it goeth by the squares of the first paper, and likewise the trac∣ting or drawing in the squares of the seconde, in the selfe same order and proportion, as it is there, and so shall it remayne redu∣ced to the poynt whiche you de∣syre. And this shal serue for a paterne, to set in the ruled Carde.
Heere foloweth the maner of the translating of the Card from one fourme into another, greater or lesse. Here foloweth a similitude of the Mariners Carde.
The pilots and Mariners neither vse nor haue the knowledge to vse other Cardes,The plyne Cardes are imperfecte. Example of erour in the playne Cards. then onely these that are playne, as I haue sayd. The whiche, because they are no Globus, Spheri∣call, or rounde, are imperfect, and fayle to shewe the true distan∣ces. For in how much they depart from the Equinoctiall, to∣ward which so euer of the Ples, the Meridian lynes are con∣tracte narrower and narrower: In suche maner, that f two Cities or poyntes in the Equinoctiall, shoulde be distaunt of longitude 60. leagues, and in the selfe same Meridian at 60. de∣grées from the Equinoctiall, toward either of the Poles should be other wo Cities or poynts, they should be distun in longi∣tude but onely 30. leagues. And for the better declaration and vnderstanding hereof, I say, that if two Ships should depart from the Equinoctiall, the one distaunt from the other a hun∣dred leagues by East and Weast, and that either of them should sayle directly by his Meridian toward the North: then when either of them hath the Pole ouer his Horizon 60. degrées, the one shall be distaunt from the other onely 50. leagues by the Paralelle of East and Weast, as appeareth by the playne Cardes, that they haue the selfe same hundred leagues. And beside these considerations, one error brngeth in an other, and so another an other. Whereof to speake any more here, it shalbe to certaine Pilots (as the prouerbe saith) not onely to geue mu∣syke to the deafe,The ign∣raunce of er∣tayne Pilots. Good Cardes. The variation of the Com∣pas. or to payt a house for blinde men, but shall al∣so be an endlesse confusion. Furthermore it is necessary to con∣syder, that good Cardes ought to haue the Coastes, Ports, Ci∣ties, and other places, situate according to the wyndes or lynes thereof, proportionally as they are in the world: and not by the wyndes that the compasse sheweth. This I say for the North∣easting or Northwesting of the compasse (called the variation) as hereafter I will touche in the fyfth Chapter. And lykewise shall you diligently obserue, that the graduation of the Carde shew the same in their proper altitudes.Altitude. The Cardes that lacke this, ought to be corrected & amended by wise and expert men:
Sauig that in the Leuant sea (called Marae Mediterraneum) and in this Chanell of Flaunders (called the narrow seas) it is nt conuenint for the nauigation,In the narow seas thy syle not by ele∣uation of the Pole. that the Portes be marked in the Cardes by the wyndes, which the compasse sheweth, for as muche as they sayle not by the altitudes of the Pole. Lyke∣wise, it shal not be inconuenient, but rather very necessary (to auoyde so many errours, of the which do low great daungers, and suche a confusion) that your Maiestie shoulde commaunde certayne learned Cosmographers and expert in the arte of say∣ling,Correction of the sea Carde. to verifie ye altitudes of ye Pole, that are of Ports, Capes, Ilandes, and people by the coastes of the Sea, and in like ma∣ner truely to describe the coastes of the lande, especially of the Nauigation of the West Indies,The west Indies. or Mundo Nueuo, where it hath pleased God that so many nations and people haue recei∣ued the water of holy baptisme, commyng to the knowledge of the true God, whereby the Christian Empire is greatly am∣plyfyde, besyde the great rychesse had by the sayd Indies. An this hath God miraculously wrought by the conquestes of your Maiestie, in subduing Infidels, and Gentiles, to the obedi∣ence of the true Catholique fayth.Charles the fyfth. Whereby, not onely God hath ben well pleased, but also your Maiestie hath receyued perpetuall fame, with e∣ternall renowne, and immortall glorie to your posteritie in worldes to come.
¶The iii. Chapter, of the vertue and propertie of the Lodestone, called in Latine Magnes, and in Spanish, Pedraymon. THe Lode stone (as writeth Cardinall Cusanus) hath substance,The vertue, subance, and operation of the Lodestone vertue, and operation. His ver∣ue is engendred of his substance, essence, or be∣ing, and of his essence & vertue proceedeth this operation and effect, in such sort, that this stone communicating his vertue to iron, by reason thereof, causeth the iron to moue, although betweéne the one and the other be a cuppe, or plate of syluer, or a table, or any other lyke thing.Vertue at∣tractiue. The attractiue, or drawing force of the Lode stone, causeth the nature of iron to be and rest in it, and that so fyrmely and quietly,Cusan apply∣eth this to th gloriied body of Christ, ac∣cording to these words, If I shalbe exalted, I will draw all vnto me. that being naturally heauy and ponderous, it descendeth not, because his nature resteth not in hym self, but is vnite with the nature of the stone, which seémeth to extende it selfe, and as it were to cast oorth a liuely spirit of enchaunting vertue. In∣somuch that (as we sée by experience) by the sayde vnion, it not onely distributeth his vertue to one iron, but that iron likewyse to another, and that other againe to another, and so foorth: vntill of many ryngs or lynkes of iron, be made a chayne. Saint Augustine (as he writeth in his bookes, De ciuitate Dei) did maruayle that he sawe an iron mooue it selfe vpon a vssell, by mooing the Lode stone vnder the vessel. It is called Magnes,VVhy the Lode stone was called Magns, and the findyng thereof. because the inuentour, or fynder therof, was so named: who (as Pline writeth) keéping cattell in East Idia, had his shoes soled with plates of iron, and iron nayles, such as they vse in Gsconie, and had in his hand a staffe wyth a pyke, or hooke of iron: and resting him selfe vpon a quantitie of this stone, could ot remooue his féete, neyther lyft vp hys staffe. Then staying a whyle astoyshed, as ignoraunt of the cause, at the length began to perceyue the propertie of the stone, and to vnderstande the attractiue vertue thereof (the colour of it differeth not from iron) and was therefore called quicke iron, or lyuing iron.
The best kinde of these stones, is of Auzurine or blew colour, as the sea sometimes appeareth.Sundry kinds of the lode stone. Of these, are found fyue kyndes or differences. The first is, of Ethiope. The seconde, of Maedonie. The thyrde, of Le∣chio in Boetia. The fourth, of Troda, neére to Alexandria, And the fyfth of Asia: but at this day, it is founde in dyuers other places. It is founde also in many places in Spayne:The ldestone of payne. as in the hyll Morna, neére vnto the village of Calera, beéyng of the order of saint Iames, in the prouince of Leon. Lykewise in a hyll of Moron, in the territorie of the Erle of Vrenia, is great quantitie threof, and in diuers other places. The stone that we most commonly vse, is of the Ilande of Elua,The Iland of Elua. The lodestone of Denmarke. of the Lord of Pomblina, which I iudge to be better then that of Den∣marke. This and the other, haue vertue to draw iron vnto ē. And true it is that Teanxedes wryteth,The lodestone of Ethiope. Diuers opini∣ons of the lode stone. that in Ethiope is founde an other kynde of thys stone, that putteth iron from it. Auerroes the commentator of Aristotle, denyeth hat Mag∣nes draweth iron vnto it, but sayth,The qualities and properties of the lode stone. that iron by his naturall in∣clination doth mooue to the stone, as to his naturall place, by a crtayne qualitie, which the stone impresseth in iron. And beside this verue and propertie that it hath to drawe iron vnto it,The parts of the lodestone. it hath also another: and that is, that it geueth vnto iron verue and power, to shewe the two poyntes of the Horizon, where it cutteth the Meridian, that is in the two wyndes, of Norh, and South. These vertues are founde more intent, in oely two partes of the stone: and these are euer opposite, or conrary the one to the other, and so are they contrary in operation. For iron touched with the one part, and placed where it may mooue freély, will shewe the North: and an other iron touched with the other parte, wyll shewe the South. Fyndyng this expe∣rience, may be knowne,VVhat part of the stone au∣sweareth to the North and South. what parte of the stone answeareth to the North, which the Mariners call the face of the stone, and lykewyse of the South. This stone is so necessary, that with∣out it, Nauigation shoulde bée imperfecte and vncertayne, because it geueth lyfe to the Neédle and Compasse, which leadeth and guydeth the Pilote, that he maye goe certaynely
in the daye, and not erre or wander in the nyght. Also it she∣weth and directeth to compasse the worlde,The vse and making of the Maryners compas. and to knowe the wyndes. And therefore, for as muche as the compasse is so ne∣cessarie, weé intende to shewe the order and manner howe it ought to be made, for it may chaunce to fayle, or be lost in the viage. ¶ The iiii. Chapter, of te making of the Mariners compasse for Nauigation. TAke such paste or paper, whereof Cardes are made, and make in it a Circle, of the quanti∣tie of a spanne, or litle more or lesse. In the whiche you shall paynte the 31. wyndes, with theyr colours, in suche order as we gaue in the firste and seconde Chapter of the wyndes, and of the Carde,The Floure deluse, and the crosse. not forgetting to marke the North with a Floure deluce, ad the East with a crosse. And more then this, may euery man garnishe and beautifie the same, as seémeth best to his phantasie. Then on the lower or neather parte of this paste, you must drawe a lyne, whiche shall be directly vnder that of the North and South, which shall be the marke for the setting of the Irons and Steéles.The flye, floure, or rose of the com∣pas. Then shall you take wyre of iron or steéle, of the bygnesse of a great pynne, or accordyng to the bygnesse or the roundnse of he paste, floure, rose or flye, as it may be called. This wyre must be bowed double, so that euery of the partes may be equally as long as the Diameter of the flye, and a quarter part more. The endes or poyntes of these iros or stéeles, must be pynched togeather, and made close, and open in the myddest, the one from the other, vntyll the endes come to beé equall with the extremities of the Diameter of the flye, and so shall the eéles remayne in maner in fourme of an edge. These wyres or irons must be made fast in the neather parte of the flye: so that theyr extrmities, nds, or
points, come precisely by the lyne of North and South.The lyne of the North and South. And to fixe or fasten them so, they must be couered with a thinne paper glued, leauyng the poyntes and endes vncouered: And these endes must be ouched with the Lode stone, in this maner. The part that is vnder the floure deluce, must be rubbed on that part of the stone that answereth to the North, as is sayd in the Chapter before.The touching of the nedle with the lode stone. And thys shall suffice for the perfection of the compasse. Yet some there beé, that for superaboundaunce, do touche the other part of the Iron, with that part of the stone that answereth to the South, although it may suffice to touche it on∣ly with the other parte. This touchyng of the Iron with the stone, that the demonstratiue or woorking vertue may shewe it selfe foorth,The breaking of the tone, to draw out his vertu. must be done with geuyng certayne strokes with a hammer, on that parte of the stone wherewith the Iron must be touched, that is to say, in the North part, or the South: And from these wyll come forth of the stone certayne beardes, lyke small ysicles, whereon you shall rubbe the point of the Iron, as you would whe a knyfe: and so shall certayne of those beardes of the stone, cleaue and sticke fas to the Iron. And the Irons thus touched, with the beardes cleauing to them, you must take a prick or poynt of laton, of Peramidal, sharp, or steple fourme, which is brode below, & sharde aboue toward the point, this is made round, or eyght square, as semeth best: and in the neather parte or breadth, it must be bored (but not through) with a borer, which must also be of Piramidall fourme, and center into the myddest of the sayde Pramidall pricke, or poynt of laton, vnto the middest, or somewhat more. This Piramidall poynt (which the mariners call the Capitell) must be of height halfe a fynger breadth, or according as the compasse shall be, and must be put through the center of the flye, so that the poynt come foorth on the hygher part thereof, and must there be made fast, and well ixte. Then shall you take a round boxe of wood, within the which the néedle may be,The boxe of the compasse. not touching the sydes of the same: And this must be of the heyght of the halfe Diameter of the compasse. And the ground or bottome thereof must be set to it, as to the couering of a boxe, that it may be easely
taken off, and put on, to haue often recourse, to touche the irons with the sone (which they call feéding) when neéde shall be,Feedyng the needle with the stone. that the vertue of the compasse fayle not. Also in the middest of the ground, or floore of the boxe, you must set a sharpe poynt or pricke, made of a wyre of laton, this must stande ryght vp, and vpon the pricke or poynt thereof, you shall se the bored hole of the Capitel, and that the wynde enter not aboue, you shall couer the boxe with a glasse. And thus being touched with the stone and set vpon the poynt, it shall shewe the true part of the North, and consequently all the other wyndes. And heere is to be noted, that after the irons or neédle of the compasse hath béen touched in any of these maners,A notable ex∣perience of the Lodeston if you bryng the North part of the stone, to the North of the neédle or com∣passe: then wyll the North of the neédle come to it. And yf you bryng the North part of the stone, to the South parte of the néedle, it will flée from it. And contrariwise, yf you bryng the South part of the stone, to the South of the neédle, it wyl come to it, and yf to the North, it wyll fleé from it. This is vnderstoode, the neédle or compasse standing as it should be. And this also is a good signe, to know which is the North part and South part of the stone. Moreouer, this boxe must be put within another boxe, in the which it must hang vpon two circles of laton, annexed the one within the other: whiche serue that the compasse sway not, or hang not toward the one syde or the other, although the Shyp sway, and this boxe also must haue his couer of wood, to keépe the other. You shall lykewyse obserue that the poynt of the Ca∣pitell, and the hole thereof, and also the poynt or prick vpon the which it resteth, by vprigt, and lykewyse the Rose, that it de∣clyne not to one part or other. And if it be quicker then it ought to be, then make the poynt that it goeth vpon somewhat blun∣ter.
¶ The v. Chapter, of the effect or propertie, that the compasse hath to the Northeasting or North∣westing, whereby is knowen the vari∣ation of the Compasse. The variation of the com∣p.MAny and dyuers are the opinions that I haue hearde, and also read in cer∣tayne wryters of latter dayes, as tou∣ching the Northeasting and North∣westing of the Compasse, and yet meé seemeth, that none dooth touche the prycke, and fewe the whyte. They call it Northeasting, when the
neédle sheweth or poynteth from the North (which is his true marke) toward the Northeast: and Northwesting, when from the North, it declyneth towarde Northwest. For the better vn∣derstanding of these differences, whereby the neédles differ or vary from the pole, you must (being in the Meridian where the compasses shewe the pole) imagine a poyt vnder the pole of the world,The poyt attractiue imagined vnder th pole of the world. and this poynt to be without all the heauens, conteyned vnder the fyrst moueable. The which poynt or part of heauen, hath a vertue attractiue, yt draweth vnto it Iron touched with the part of the lode stone, correspondent to that certayne part of heauen imagined without or vnder al the heauens, moued by ye fyrst moueable. For if it were imagined to be moued within any of the moued heauens, then the attractiue point, by the mouing of the first moueable, & consequently he compasse, should make the selfe same mouing in 24. houres, which is neuer seéne. And therefore this poynt is not in the moueable heauens, neither in ye pole. For if it were in it, the compasse should not vary, North∣easting, and Northwesting.The cause of the vaiation of the compas Therfore the cause of Northeasting or Northwesting, or departing from the pole of the world, is, that being in the sayd Meridian, the attractiue poynt and the pole, are in the selfe same, or in one Meridian: and the compasse shewing the attractiue poynt,Departing of the pole from the poynt attractiue. sheweth directly the pole. And de∣parting from the same Meridian toward the East (the worlde being round) the pole of the world remayneth to vs on the left hand: and the poynt of the attractiue vertue, shalbe on the right hand, which is toward the Northeast winde. And in how much more we shall sayle toward the East, the distaunce shall appeare greater vnto vs, vntill we come vnto the 90. degrées: and there shalbe the most and greatest Northeasting. And passyng from thence further forward,The greatest Northeasting. it shall appeare vnto vs, yt the attractiue poynt, commeth neérer & neérer vnto the Meridian line: and so much shall the compasse go bettering or amending the North∣easting, vntil it returne to the self same meridian in the opposite or contrary part from whence they came, or where they began, & then shall the attractiue point be to them directly vpō, or against the pole of the world, & the compasse shall shew or point directly toward it. And againe, passing further forward, the pole of the
wol shl remine to the right hand, and the point attractiue to the left hand, and so shall the compasse begin Northwesting,The greatest othwesting. in∣creasing it vntil it come from thence to the 90 degreés, & there shalbe the most of his Northwesting. For turning towarde the Meridian from the attractiue point, it shall go amending or bet∣tering, vntil it returne to the selfesame Meridian from whence it departed, & there shal the compasse shew the pole of the world directly, by, or ouer against the attractiue point, which is per∣pendiculerly vnder the pole.The attractiue point is vnder the Pole. And if frō thence they should turne, to passe toward the West, the pole should rest to the right hand, & the attractiue point to the left, & so shall the variation be to the Northwest: and this is the cause of the Northeasting, & North∣westing, or variation of the compasse.The Northea∣sting & North¦westing is not vnifourme. Also it is not to be vnder∣stooe that this Northeasting, & Northwesting, is vniforme, as is the departing (or according to the departure) from the Meri∣dian, where the compasse sheweth perfectly: but rather before at the beginning of the departing from the sayd Meridian, it ma∣keth differēce, or variation in a certaine quantitie, & the increase that is afterward, is litle, and so much the lesse, in how much y• more the departing is frō the said Meridian. For it is a passion of ye circles,The declinati∣n of th Sun. deuiding or cutting them selues in ye sphere: so that these differences are, as are they of the declinatiōs of the Sun: which neére vnto the Equinoctials, are great, & neére to the sol∣stitials, are litle. All the which shal euidently appeare in ye figure folowing, which is a circle deuided by two Diameters, into 4. equal parts, cutting thē selues in ye center in right angles. And from the center point (called the pole) cōmeth foorth a moueable Meridian: & in it goeth a compasse likewise moueable about the circle. The attractiue poynt is somwhat distant from the pole of the world, & from it, commeth foorth a threéde, which must euer passe by the North & South of the compasse. And the compasse being in the Meridian of ye point attractiue, that passeth by the pole, shall shew the pole. And without that shal go northeasting, or northwesting, so varying & departing frō the true Meridian that commeth forth of the pole of the world.Te Meridian that sheweth  Pole. It is the opinion of some Mariners, that the Meridian where the compasse sheweth directly the pole, passeth by the Iland of Sancta Maria, & other say, by the Iland of Cueruo in the Asores.
Demonstration of Northeasting. And where as the inconuenience is manifest and notorious, the same must be remedied with prudence and tyme,Experience, the ground of reason. and not to be negligent in the viage: but euer to vse & obserue experience, more profitable then the subtyle and curious questions of the secrete searchers of naturall things without experience, wherof reason taketh his principall grounde. And therefore the wyse Pilot ought to knowe by experience (as many of them doo not) how much a good compasse doth vary,Aduertise∣ment to Pi∣lots. Northeasting, or North∣westing from one Port to another. So that to know how much the compasse doth vary, Northeasting, or Northwesting, from one place to another, (as to say, halfe a quarter, or more or lesse in quantitie as they are distant from the said Meridian, where the compasses shew the Pole) shall in the Nauigation take heéde,
and well consider, in any such vage, Northeasting or North∣westing, in the poynts of the compasse. And this shalbe to sayle truely by the poynts or lynes that the Carde dooth certaynely shewe. As for example.Example of aylyng. In sayling from any Ilande that is in the sayd Meridian, or from any other part, in seekyng of any port that is to them true Northeast, yf by this way the compasse should Nrtheast halfe a quarter, then saylyng by the poynes or lynes of the compasse Northeast half a quarter to the North, their Nauigation shalbe (exceptig other impediments) to the Northeast which the Carde sheweth: And by this point or lyne, must be made the accompt of such a vyage. And so by the points of the Carde, they shll directly fynd the Port that they sought. And by this order shall they gorne themselues in all Nuiga∣tions. For the which, it is conuenient that wyse and expert Pi∣lots, should make notes of obseruations of Norheasting and Northwesting, that is, from Port, to Port, and to make compi∣lations and geatherings of suche notes, to cary with them in their Shyppes for regims: and not to be busie or crious to amende their compasss, or with the stone to rubbe the Irons or Seéles, neither on the one syde or the other, from whence the Floure deluce doth shewe: For this shoulde cause many incon∣ueniences. Neither ought they to admit in their Cardes, two graduations:The variation of the com∣p. especially for that to knowe how much in euery place the compasse doth goe asyde, or vary from the true Meri∣dian, may easely be made an instrument to shew the same by the Sune in the day, and by the Starres in the nyght. The vi. Chapter, of the introduction and principls of the Arte of Nauigation. FOr as much as now we haue the guyde, whiche is the compasse, it is conuenient to enter into the way, which is Nauiga∣tion. The which (as we haue sayde) is to goe or passe by water from one place to another. And this presupposed, I say that he that desireth to attempt Naui∣gations, must knowe two things, which
the Carde shall shewe him. The one is, by what poynt or lyne he ought to sayle:In Nauigation what is chief∣ly to be consi∣dered. and this shall the lynes of the saylyng Carde shew him. The other is, he leagues of the distaunce: and this shall the scale or trunke of the leagues shewe, taking with a compasse the distaunce of two places, and applying it to the sal. The knowledge of these two things, ought the Pilot to beare in memory: and to put them in effect, ought to direct his foreship to the selfesame wynde, which the compasse doth shewe. For the distaunce,The distance. he ought to knowe how muche the Ship goeth dayly, wel considering and obseruing the windes, tydes, currents, and all suche thynges as may be with hym, or against him. And according heéreunto, he shall knowe howe muche he hath gone, and what remayneth for hym to goe, and whether he be farre off, or néere vnto the place whither he inen∣deth to sayle: the which in Nauigation, is the ende desired. And because this estimation or computation can not be iust & exact, especially in a long vyage, or in long tyme, it shalbe conuenient that we rectifie or amend it, knowing the place where the Ship is, on the superficiall part of the water, by the place that answe∣reth to it in heauen.The altitude of the Pole & Equinoctiall. This place of heauen, is knowen by the al∣titude of the pole: and by the altitude of the pole, is knowen the altitude of the Equinoctial: & by the altitude of the Equinoctiall and declination of the Sunne, is knowen y• Meridian altitude: and contrarywyse,The Meridian altitude. knowing the Meridian altitude and declina∣tion of the Sunne, is knowen the altitude of the Equinoctiall, and by the Equinoctial, the pole, and by the altitude of the pole, is knowen the latitude: and this is the place that is desyred to be knowen. But for as muche as the heauen is moueable from the East to the West, this place is not knowen as a certayne point, but is knowen as a lyne or paralel at a certayne distaunce from the Equinoctiall, and it is knowen in what poynt of this paralel the Ship is,To know the place of hea∣uen. by the altitudes that are taken from heauen: but it is knowen by the lyne that the Ship hath gone, as we wil further declare in ye xiii. Chapter, of making a poynt or pricke in the Carde. And in this maner you shall haue rectifi∣ed the way that the Ship hath gone,To know the way of the vyage. and consequently the way that it hath yet to goe.
And forasmuch as these altitudes are so profitable and ne∣cessarie, it shalbe néedfull to geue rules how we may vse them to our most commoditie.Rules to knowe the litudes. And for this, is presupposed to know, that all places situate on the superficiall part of the earth, and water, eyther they are vnder one Mridian, so that they haue, or where they haue one selfe same longitude,Longitude and latitude. and differ in latitude, or are in one parallel, where they haue one selfe same latitude, and differ in longitude, or are in diuers Meridians and para∣leles, where they differ in longitude, and latitude. And I say, that if they haue one selfe same longitude, they saile frō the one to the other, by the lyne of North, and South, and how many degrées doth vary the altitude of the pole and of the Equinocti∣al in heauen, so many degrées haue they gone by sea, or by land, If two places haue one selfe same latitude, they passe from the one to the other by the lyne of East and West. And in such ma∣ner of viage, the altitudes do not profit vs, because there is no variation. If they differ or vary in longitude, and latitude, they sayle from the one to the other by some of the other lynes.Variation of degrees. But there are more degreés that correspond the way that the Ship maketh, then the degreés that vary the altitudes of the Equi∣noctial, and the pole. And this difference shalbe greater, in how much the lyne shal draw neare to the East and West: And how muche it shall draw néere to North and South, it shalbe lesse. Of the degreés or leagues that aunswere to euery degreé of the variation of the altitude, we will entreate héereater in the xii. Chapter. how the alti∣tudes are knowen,These altitudes are knowen many wayes, but especially by two: as by the Meridian altitude & declination of the Sunne (as we haue sayd) is knowen the altitude of the Equinoctiall, and by it, the altitude of the Pole. The second way, they are knowen by the altitude of some fixt Starre,The fixte Starres. of those that are not hid. And among many other, the North Starre,The North Starre. is taken, because it is nearest to the Pole. To know the altitudes by the Sun,To know the altitudes by the Sunne. The Meri∣dian. threé things are necessarie, that is to say, an instrument, the declination of the Sun, and rules. The instrument to know the Meridian altitude shalbe the Astrolabie, ecause it is most commodious for this purpose, whereof we wyll entreate in the
Chapter folowing. The declination of the Sunne (which is to take it away, or to ioyne it with the Meridian altitude) we haue alredy described in the third Chapter of the second part. The rule to knowe when the declinations must be ioyned with the Meridian altitude,The declina∣tion of the Sunne. The altitudes of the Pole. or taken from it, we will geue in the viii. Chapter. To knowe the altitudes of the Pole, by the altitudes of the North Starre, two things are necessarie: that is, an in∣strument, and rules. The instrument wherewith the Ma∣riners are accustomed to take the altitudes of the North, they call Balestilia, which is a crosse staffe, whereof we will write heéreafter in the nienh Chapter.Laobes staffe. And the rules of the Turne or compasse, which the North Starre maketh about the Pole, we wil declare in the tenth Chapter. ¶ The vii. Chapter, of the making and vse of the Astrolabie with the which the maryners take the altitude of the Sunne. TAke a plate of copper, or latton (which for this purpose is better then any other mettall) of the biggenesse hat you desire to make the Astrola∣bi, and is commonly of the biggenesse of a spanne of the Diameter, and let it be of the thicknesse of halfe a finger at the least: for the waightier that it shalbe, so much shall it be more steadie to make the altitude. This place must be made round by a circle, leauing comming foorth of the circle or corner, in the which you shall put a ring or handel with a hole, whereby you may hang the Astrolabie, by a threéd or lie to take the altitude.
After it is thus made, with y• ring or handle annexed thereto, make it bryght, and smoothe, publlyshed on both the sydes, and all of one equall thicknesse, that one syde be not heauier then a∣nother, which yu shall try in this maner:The rectifying of the Aro∣labie hang the plate by the ryng or hole that you haue made, and from the same hole hang a plomet of leade, fasted to a heere, or fyne threéde of silke. The Astrolabie thus hanging, frée, and at libertie with the plomet, if then the threéd fal vpon the center of the Astrolabie,The threed and plomet. it is wel: but yf the thréede doo leane or sware to the one side, or to the other, from the center, then is that side thicker and heauier then the other, and must therefore be made thynner, vntyll the thréed fall iustly vpon the center. This doone, make a circle vpon the sayde center a litle within the circumference of the Astrolabie. Then draw a Diameter frō the center of the hole, in the which the ring or handle is, vnto ye center of the Astrolabie, trauersing or ouerthwarting the whole Circle. And this shalbe called the line of the Zenith,The lynes vertical & ho∣rizontall. or Uertial poynt: which also shalbe cut with an other Diameter vpon the center, making right angles with it. And this Diameter shalbe called the Horizontall line. These two Diameters shal deuide the circle, into foure equall partes. After this, you shall make another circle, so much more within the second, that betwene the circumferences of both the circles, may bée conteyned the numbers of the degrées. Then (the A∣strolabie hanging before you) you shall deuide the one part (be∣ing the superiour and leaft part) fyrst into thrée equall partes, and euery part shall conteyne 30. degrées. Then shall you de∣uide euery part of these into threé other equall partes, and they shall conteyne 10. degreés: and euery of these deuide into two partes, and they shall conteyne 5. degrés. This doone, put a ruler vpon the center of the Astrolabie, applying it to euery of the poyntes that deuide the sayde partes, and drawe certayne lynes that passe from the circumference of the first circle, vnto the lesse circumference: and in the spaces of the lesse circle write the numbers of the degreés, beginning in the Horizontall lyne: and in that space put fiue, and in the second, tn, and so foorth of the other, vntyll the 90. degrées ende in the lyne of the Zenith. then shal you deuide the spaces that are betweéne the fyrst circle
and the second, euery space into fyne, which shall make the 90. degreés. The Astrolabie thus made, you shall make the Alhida∣da or Label.The Alhidada of the Asto∣labie. For the whiche, you shall take a plae of laton, of the breadth of scarcely two fingers, and as thicke as the Astro∣labie: also as long as the Diameter of the Astrolabie, and make a lyne in the myddest thereof by the longitude: in the middest of this lyne, make a circle, so great, that it may touch in the sides of the plate: then cut off this plate on the on side, that which it hath from the lyne to the ryght hande, and on the other syde, that it hath from the lyne to the leaft hand, leauyng the circle whole. This lyne that shall passe by the center of the circle, is called Linea fiduciae, (that is) the lyne of confidence, which is that, that sheweth in the degreés, the altitude that is taken. Then shall you take away the endes or corners of the Alhidada that are without the lyne, so that you touche not the lyne. This doone, you shal make two litle rysing or raised tables or plates, of the same metal whereof the Astrolabie is made, and of the self same thicknesse that is the Alhidada, or lytle lesse, and of the breadth of the Diameter of the circle of the Alhidada, and let them be a thumbe in heyght or breadth. In the myddest of these two places by the heigth, you shal make a lyne. When these are made equal, and al thyr angles right, in euery lyne of these that you haue made, you shal also make two holes, qually distaunt from the sydes or edges of the sayd plates or tablettes. And of the two holes of euery of these little plates,The holes of the alhidada. the one hole must be as bigge as may conteyne a great pynne: and these shall serue to take the altitude of the Starres. The other must be so subtile and small as a fyne sowyng neédle: and these serue to take the altitude of the Sunne. They must be made in such maner, that the outward parte of them be bygger, and lesse within, of the quantitie that I haue sayde. These tablets or erected plates be∣ing thus made, they must be sothered in the Alhidada, betwene the center & extremities or endes of the same, making in it cer∣tayne notches where they may be made faste, and sothered: or leauyng fyrst in the plates certayne sharpe poyntes or corners, that may enter into certayne holes made in the Alhidada, where∣by they may be made faste vnderneath with pinnes: And they
must be so set, that the line where the holes of ye plates are, may fall vpon the lyne of confidence of the Alhidada, so that the one halfe of the plate be set vpon the Alhidada, & the other half with∣out it, or at large. In like maner you shall take good aduertise∣ment, that the great hole of the one plate, stand directly against the great hole of the other plate, & be nothing at all awry. This done, you shal bore the Astrolabie through by the center, making a very round hole, that may haue in the middest of it the center of the Astrolabie. This hole shalbe of the biggenesse of a goose quil. And the like shal you make in the center of the circle of the Alhidada. Then shal you make a pynne or nayle of the same la∣on, the whiche on the vpper part of the Alhidada may haue a playne and round head. This pynne also shalbe very round and smoothe, that it may enter iust and close into the hole of the Alhidada and Astrolabie. And at the end or poynt thereof, com∣ming foorth on the other side of the Astrolabie, must be a hole made sydeway through the pinne, close to the plate of the Astrolabie, of the bignesse of a litle naile or pinne, that may be put therein, to make fast together the Alhidada with the Astrolabie, so that the Alhidada may thereby be turned round a∣bout the Astrolabie, as ap∣peareth in this figure following.
To take the altitude of the Sunne,To take the altitude of the Sunne. hang vp the Astrolabie by the ryng, and set the Alhidada against the Sunne, and rayse it, or put it downe in the quarter that is graduate, vntill ye beames of the Sunne enter in by the litle hole of the other table or ray∣sed plate, and precisely by the other litle hole of the other tablet. Then loke vpon the lyne of confidence: and how many degreés it sheweth in the quarter that is graduate (beginning from the Horizontall lyne) so many degreés of height hath the Sunne. In like maner shall you doo to take the altitude of any other Star, looking through the great holes, because this may hardly be seéne by the litle holes.
¶ The viii. Chapter, of the dfinition of the altitude. And howe the altitude of the Pole may well be knowen by the Meridian altitude and eleuation of the Sunne. IT is conuenient to dfine the altitude, bfore we geue rules of the vse there∣of. The Altitude of the Sunne, or the Moone, or of any other Starres,VVhat is the altitude of the Planets or Starres. is the distaunce that is betweéne it and the Horizon. And this ought to beé ac∣compted by the degreés of the great Circle, which passeth by the Zenith, & by the center of the Sunne, or of the Moone, or of the Star, vn∣to the Horizon. And the degreés that are from the Hrizon to the Star, or to the Sunne, that is the altitude:The comple∣ment of the altitude. And the degreés that are from the Center of the Sarre, or of the Sunne, vnto the Zenith, is called the complement, or supplement of the alti∣tude. The altitude of the Equinoctiall, is euer conted by the Meridian. And the degreés of the Meridian, that are betweéne the Equinoctiall and the Horizon, is the altitude of the Equi∣noctiall: and other so many are they, that are from the Zenith to the Pole.rom the Ze∣nith to the Pole. For the altitude of the Equinoctial, is equall to the complement of the altitude of the Pole. The degreés of the Me∣ridian that are bewne the Equinoctiall, and the Zenith, is cal∣led the complement of the altitude of the Equinoctiall, and is equal to the altitude of the Pole. And alhough we haue defined the altitude in generall, ye shall we only profit our selues by the Meridional altitude of the Sunne. The Meridian altitude, is the greatest altitude that the Sunne hath euery day:The Meridian altitude of the Sunne. and this shall be, when the Center of the Sunne is in the Meridian. And the Arke of the Meridian, that is betweene the Horizon and the Sunne,The shadows that the Sun maketh at mydday. is the Meridian altitude. So that when we say the altitude of the Sunne is taken, it is vnderstoode at mydday. The shadowes that the Sunne then maketh, are in threé sorts.
for either to vs it casteth the shadow toward the North part, or toward the South, or pendiculer by a right vp line, so that at midday, or noone, nothyng that standeth vpryght, geueth any shadow at all. But forasmuch as there is such variation in decli∣nations, altitudes, shadowes, an paralelles, i shalbe necessarie to geue rules for all variaions. And these shalbe reduced into foure briefe and compedious rules the which I haue here des∣cribed,Rules for all variations. that the wyttie may haue profite by them, and the rude learne them: not caryng for the rules of the Mariners, because they are so long and tedious. For (as the Philosopher saith) it is vainely done by many, that may well be done by few. When the shadowe shalbe perpendiculer,The pependi∣culer shadow. it is because the Sunne is in the Zenith, and 90 degreés aboue the Horizon. And then how many degreés of declination the Sunne hath so much shal we be distant from the Equioctiall, toward the part where the Sunne declineth. And if it haue no declination, it and we shalbe vnder the Equinoctiall. But when the Sunne and the shadowes shalbe to vs from the Equinoctiall,The declinin shadowes. towarde one of the Poles, we shall take away the declination from the Meridian altitude, and then shall remayne the complement of the eleuation, which complement being ta∣ken from 90. degreés, then shall remayne that which we be di∣staunt from the Equinoctiall, toward the same Pole. When the Sunne declineth from the Equinoctiall, toward the one Pole, and the shadowes shalbe towarde the other, we shal ioyne the declination with the meridian altitude: and if all come not to 90. then substract them from 90. degrées, ad we shall haue the complement, and so much shal we be distan from the Equinoctiall, toward that Pole to the whih the shadowe falleth. And yf they be more in number then 90. then the ouer∣plus of 90. shall we be distaunt from the Equinoctiall, towarde the Pole where the Sunne declineth And if they be iust 90 we shalbe vnder the Equinociall. When the Sunne hath no declinationVVhen the Sune hath no declina∣tion. we shalbe distaunt frō the Equinoctial the complement of the Meridian altitude, toward the Pole where the shadowes are. By these rules (be∣side the vse whereof we haue spoken) may be knowen how much
is the greatest declination of the Sunne, th altitude of the E∣quinoctial, the day, houre, and minute, when the Equinox was: the which is knowen as foloweth. Hauing taken the greater Meridian altitude of the Sommet (which is in the beginning of Cancer) and the lesse of Winter,To know the greatest decli∣nation of th nne. (which is in the beginning of Capricorne) taking away the lesse from the more, the est is that, that is from Tropike to Tropike, & consequently pared by the middest, is the greatest declination. As for example.Exampl. I suppose, that being in the Ci∣tie of Cadi, to finde the great Meridian altitude of the Sunne (being in the beginning of Cancer) to be 77. degrées, and the lesser Meridian altitude (which is, when the Sunne is in the beginning of Capricorne) to be 30. degreés: then taking 30. from 77. remayne 28. degrées: and so much is frō Tropike to Tropike. And the halfe (which is 23. and a halfe) is the greatest declination. Consequently the greatest declination added to the lesse Me∣ridian altitude, taking it away from the greater Meridian alti∣tude, that riseth thereof, is the altitude of the Equinoctiall. Ex∣ample 23. and a half of the greatest declination,Example. ioined with 30. of the least Meridian altitude, or taken away from the 77. of the greatest Meridian altitude, remayne 53. degreés and a halfe, which is the altitude of the Equinoctiall, in the Citie of Cadiz. Hereof it foloweth,The true Equinoctial. that wē we shal ake the meridian altitude in 53. degreés and a halfe, that day is the true Equinoctial. But if it had one day lesse, and the other day folowing it had more, we must take the lesse from the more, & fourme the rule of threé vppon the rest, saying, If 24. minutes (which is that that the Sunne declineth in one day) doth yeéld 24. houres, how much shall those minutes that lacketh of 53. degreés and a halfe of the altitude of the Equinoctial, yeéld me? Multiplying & deuiding according to the foresayd rule, then that which commeth there∣of, shall be the houres after the midday, when it is Equinox. Example.Example of the experience that I made in the Citie of Cadiz the tenth day of March at midday or high noone, I toke the altitude of the Sunne, in 53 degreés, and 26. minutes, they lacke to be the Equinoctial 4. minutes. An other day, the xi. of
Marche, at noone, I tooke the Sunne, in 53. degrées, and fiftie minutes: which are more then the Equinoctiall by twenty mi∣nutes. Then to knowe at what houre the Sunne was in the 53. degreés, and thirtie minutes of the Equinoctiall, I tooke away the Meridian altitude that I tooke at the tenth of March, from that that I tooke at the eleuenth, which is the difference 24. mi∣nutes, and I formed the rule, saying: if 24. minutes the Sunne did rise to me, in 24. houres, then in how much time shall ryse vnto me the four minutes that failed me at the tenth of March? I multiplyed, deuided, & found, that in four houres: and so shall you say, that the Equinoctiall was in the citie of Cadiz the tenth day of March, at foure of the clocke at after noone, which is vn∣derstoode (according to the Astronomers) at foure houres run at the eleuenth day of March, at this present yeére 1545. The ix. Chapter, of the making of the crosse staffe, wherewith the Mariner take the altitude of the North Starre. MAke a square saffe or yarde, of the thicknesse of a nger, more or lesse, ac∣cording to the goodnesse of the wood, and of length sixe spannes, or more. For the longer that it is, the more precise shall it be, and the degreés shall be the grea∣ter, whereby followeth the certainetie of the altitude. Then take a very plaine table, of the length of the stae, and two spannes of breadth, or at the least a spanne and a halfe: and in the myddest of this Table, make a ryght lyne by longitude, and in the one end of this lyne, make another lyne that may cut it in right angles. And vppon the cutting of these two lynes, put the foote of the compasse, and make halfe a circle, which may remayne on the parte of the long lyne, so that the halfe circle may haue so much Diameter, as you desire the
height of the hammer, head, or crossepéece of the staffe to be. This halfe circle being made, you shall drawe two lynes, equi∣distaunt to the lyne which you haue made by the middest of the Table. These lines must touch in the extremities or ends of the half circle. Then deuide euery halfe of ye halfe circle, or quarter of the circle, into two equal parts, & the two halfes that shal end in the first line, deuide eche of them into 90. equall parts. Then take a ruler, and put the edge thereof vpon the center of the half circle, and vpon euery of the marks which deuide the 90. parts, and so proceéde, making punctes in the lynes, which you haue made equidistant to the fyrst lyne. Then drawe certayne ryght lynes, from the punctes of the one lyne, to the opposite punctes of the other: and so shal the draught be ended. Then take ye staffe or yard, & put the one end therof in the center of the halfe circle, and apply the edge of the yarde to the lyne that goeth by the middest of the Table: and marke in the yarde the markes that are in the said lyne, by meanes of the trauersing lynes, and seé also that the markes which you make in the yard, be trauersing lynes, and make them their numbers, beginning at the end or poynt of the yarde that shalbe to the contrary part, from that whiche you did in the punct of the halfe circle. And to knowe with what degreés you shall beginne the yarde or staffe, and what number you shal marke in the fyrst lyne of the punct, looke how many degreés are from the circle whiche you deuided be∣tweéne the lyne that goeth to the last marke, and with so many degreés enter, and so consequently shall you place the numbers from fyue to fyue, or from tenne to tenne. When you haue thus numbred the yard, then to make the crosse peéce thereof, take a table or planke of good wood, which shalbe so muche in length as shalbe the Diameter of the halfe circle, & so much in breadth as thrée tymes the thycknesse of the yarde, and of thicknesse two fyngers, or litle lesse. On the one syde also it must bée very playne, and on the other side in the myddest it must haue a square or quadrature of al the thicknes of the plancke, and from the square to the ends, it must be made thinner and thinner, so that it hath in maner the fourme of suche pickars wherewith
milstones are pycked. And in the myddest (by longitude and latitude) it must haue a square hole, by the whiche the yarde may enter iust, and make right angles with the crosse peéce. And the poynte of the yarde must enter by the playne syde of the crosse péece, and come foorth of the square syde there∣of. To take the altitude of the North Starre,To take th altitude of the Starr. or any other Starre on the Sea (for it ser∣ueth not on the Lande, nor for the Sunne, except the Sunne shalbe vnder any thinne cloude, & the Horizon cleare) you shall put the head of the staffe to the corner of your eye, aysing it vp, or putting it downe, vntyll the neather part of the crosse peéce come with the Horizon: and being so, if the higher part of the crosse peéce shall come with the starre, you must looke the playne syde of the crosse peece in what number of de∣grées of the staffe it falleth, and those degrees shall be the alti∣tude of the Starre: as yf the crosse peece reache not to the Starre, you must bring the crosse peece nearer to your eye, vntyll the one part therof come with the Hrizon, and the o∣ther with he Starre, and the degrees, which it sheweth, shalbe the altitude.
¶ The x. Chapter, of the altitude of the Pole, knowen by the altitude of the North Starre. TO knowe the paralell in the which the Ship is, ouer and beside the rules there before of the al∣titudes of the Sunne, it is likewise knowen by the altitudes of the North Starre. These two maners are vsed, for that more credit is giuen to two witnesses, then to one: So that if by one aryse any doubt, the same may be certified by the other, and also because tyme may sometyme serue for the one, and not for the other: as, to haue a cloudy midday or noone, and a cleare night. The North Starre.The altitude is taken of the North Starre, which is a Star in the extremitie or end of the tayle of the lesse Beare, being a constellation,The les beare. commonly called the Horne. For this North Starre (of the most notable Starres about the Pole) is nearest vnto it, & shall therfore shew a lesse circle then any of the other, and so shall his altitude differ litle from the altitude of the Pole. This Starre hath declination 85. degreés,The horne. and 51. minuts, and the complement to nientie (which are four degreés,The distaunce of the north Starre from the Pole. and nientie minutes) is his distance from the Pole. And although the Mari∣ners hold opinion, that it is not distaunt more then threé degreés and a halfe, yet to my iudgement, more credit ought to be geuen to the Astronomers, then to the Mariners, for as much as the Astronomers do knowe the places of the Starres, with theyr longitudes, latitudes, declinations, and right assentions, more perfectly and precisely then do the Mariners: For they accompt not onely by degrées, but also by minutes and seconds. But let none deceiue them selues through my opinion. Therefore, who∣soeuer will precisely know it, let him take the highest altitude of the North Starre, which is his being ouer the pole, and the lesse altitude, which is his being vnder it: then take away the lesse from the more, and the halfe of that that remayneth, shall be the distaunce of that Starre from the pole of the world.
And likewise by this experience, may be knowen the altitude of the pole, and what all the other starres, that goe not downe vnder the Horizon, be distant from it. Ioyning the greater al∣titude with the lesse, and that shall amount thereof, deuided by the halfe, shalbe the altitude of the Pole: and taking away this altitude of the Pole, from the greater altitude of the Starre, or the lesse from the altitude of the Pole, the rest that remaineth shalbe the distance of the Starre from the Pole.The Pole is inuisible. And as ye Pole is inuisible, it can not be séene or knowen, whē the North Star is higher or lower, except it be by the meane of some oher marke: and for this is considered the position of the former Guards, or watch, being one of ye two starres called the Guard, which are in the mouth of the Horne.The two stars called the Guards of the North Starre. The Mariners haue noted eight positions from the former Guard starre, to the North starre, which answeare to the eight principall windes. And as the Guard is to the North starre according to the placing of these positions, so shall it be higher or lower from the Pole. Let vs here put the common rules which the Mariners vse,Common rules of the Mariners dif∣fering from the Astrono∣mers. to com∣ply with those that are of opinion of the thrée degreés & a halfe. And for the opinion of ye Astronomers (which is the distance of 4. degrées, and 9. minuts) I wil hereafter giue a circuler figure with a moueable horne: then the eight wyndes of the eyght po∣sitions being marked, and putting the Guarde and the North starre in euery of the wyndes, it shalbe the distaunce that the North starre is higher or lower from the Pole. Common Rules. The forme Guarde being in the East,These rules af∣ter the Mari∣ners accompt do holde, but not after the Asronomers accompt, as may appeare in the rules next before. the North Starre is in one degrée and a halfe vnder the Pole. The Guarde being in the Northeast, the North Starre is threé degreés and a halfe vnder the Pole. The Guarde being in the North, the Starre is threé degrées vnder the Pole. The Guarde in the Northwest, the Starre is halfe a degreé vnder the Pole. The Guarde in the West, the Starre is one degreé and a halfe aboue the Pole.
The Guarde in the Southwest, the Starre is threé degreé and a halfe aboue the Pole. The Guarde in the South, the Starre is thrée degrees a∣boue the Pole. The Guarde in the Southeast, the sayd North Starre is halfe a degreé aboue the Pole. The eyght principall winds accor∣ding to four lyes.Note that these eyght wyndes, are made according to foure lynes. Whereof two are right, which are North & South, and East & West: and the other two are crooked, which are North∣east Southwest, and Southeast Northwest. When the Guarde and the North Starre shalbe in the right lyne, it shall appeare cleare how they are: and when they shalbe in th crooked lynes, it may be seéne, because the Guards are the one by the other in a ryght lyne. To seé by Theorike or Speculation, how the North starre riseth vp, and goeth downe from the Pole of the world, I will here describe the saide circuler figure or instrument, which is a circle,An instrument o knowe the rising o fal∣ling of the North starre from the pole of the world. in whose circumference are written the eyght wyndes. The North in the highest place of the instrumēt, which they cal the head, and the South in the neather part thereof, which they call the foote: the East in the right arme, the West in the lef arme, the foure rest betwéene these in their places. And here is to be noted, that the lines which passe not through y• center, are of y• wynds of their equidistances that passe through the center. Within this circle, is an other litle circle, which describeth the starre of the North, by the mouing of the first moueable, & hath for his center the Pole of the world, as hath the first. This litle circle hath for his Diameter eyght degrees and eyghteene mi∣nutes: as foure degreés and nine minutes aboue the pole, and the other foure degrees and nine minutes vnder it. And they are deuided by certaine lynes equidistant to the East and West. In ye center of this circle,The horne of the seuen stars is annexed a horne, with his seuen stars, moueable round about by all the windes. And seeing them in heauen,Aduertise∣ment to Ma∣riners in vsing the figure fol∣lowing. how, & in what wind they are, euen so in this figure shal we seé the North starre, in what part it is of the degrees high or lowe from the pole: & that the Pilot or Mariners shall not erre. I say that he ought not to put the foreguard in the windes that
passe through the center of the figure, for it shalbe North and South with the pole, and not with the starre of the North, as it ought to be, and so of the other windes. And in this maner the starre of the North, shall shew in the lynes equidistant from the lesse circle, the degreés & partes of degreés that it is higher or lower then the pole of the world: for the same course, differen∣ces, and variations, it maketh in heauen. ¶ This figure is after the Astronomers, Which affirme that th North starre is four degrees, and nine minutes from the Pl. Thus being knowen how muche the North starre is vnder or aoue the pole,The altitude of the Pole aboue th horizon. let vs take the altitude thereof: and that of if
that is vnder the Pole, let vs ioyne to his height, and as muche of it as is aboue, let vs take away, and that shall rise thereof, shall be the altitude of the Pole aboue our Horizon. The xi. Chapter, of the composition and vse of an instrument, by the which without obseruing the South Sunne, or mid∣day, is knowen the altitude of the Pole, and the houre that is. WE haue geuen rules, whereby the Pilotte may knowe in what paralel he findeth himselfe with his Shippe. But hee may not knowe this at all houres, for as muche as for the altitudes of the Sunne, it is necessary to obserue the mid∣day iustly, and for the altitudes of the North, it is necessry to obserue, that the foremost guarde be placed iustly with the North, in some of the foure lynes of the eight wyndes. And ouer and besyde the rules aforesaide, I haue thought good to describe an instrument,An instru∣ment to knowe the paralel and houre by the snne. by the which may be knowen the paralel where the Shippe is, and what the houre is at any time of the day by the beames of the sunne. Make a rounde plae of Laon, or other conuenient met∣tall, of the Diameter of a spne, or more: For the greater that it is, the more precis shall it beé: and make in it two Di∣ameters, that may cut themselues in ryght angles vpon the center. In the foure extreames or endes of these Diameters, leaue foure rounde punces or poyntes, that may serue for axis. The one of these Diameters, shalbe called the axis of the world, and the other, the lyne of East and West. This doone, make of the same laon a semicircular peéce, of the thicknes of the plate, or litle lesse, and of the breadth of halfe a inger: this must stand vpon an edge, so that the coex part may come iustly with the halfe of the circumference of the plate, to the whiche it must be nayled or sothered in the neather part of the plate, the semicircle being raysed, & that the endes thereof may come with the endes of the axis of the world. And this semicircle shal you deuide into wo equal partes, and euery halfe into 90. degreés, beginning
from the halfe poynt toward the ende of the Axis of the world, which are the Poles. In lyke maner shall you make two circuler peeces, of the big∣nesse of a pece of foure ryals of plate, which thy call rundels, for the houres: these must be made fast in the plate by the Poles of the worlde, whiche may hold or beare them by their ceners. And euery of these rundelles must be deuided into 24. equall parts, and although not all, yet the vppermost part of the plate. And aboue in ye highest point of these diuisions, you must write 12. because that there it shall shew the midday or noone. And frō thence, the afternoone houres must begin their numbers toward the West part, and shall ende. 6. houres in the halfe or middest of the ioynt of the circle with the plate. In the other ioynt of the other part, shall begin 6. of the houres before noone, & shal ende 12. in the ighest poynt. You must also make another Semi∣circular peece, of the breadth of a finger, this must be playne or flat, & the concauitie or holownesse thereof, equall to the Se∣micircle of the edge or syde of the plate, and in the endes muste haue two holes, wherein may iustly enter the poynts that come foorth of the circle, for the houres, which are the Poles of the world. Also, this Semicircle must haue two lynes, one on the vppermost part, and the other on the neathermost, whiche may deuide the breadth into two equall parts. This halfe circle like∣wise must be deuided into two equal parts by longitude, with a auersed line, which shalbe called the Equinoctiall, & from this lyne, to the inwarde part thereof, must be counted 13. degreés and a halfe towarde the one part, and as muche towarde the o∣ther parte of the 90. that euery halfe of the circle conteyneth. And at euery part where ende the 13. degreés & a halfe, make a trauersed line, so that from the one to the other, may be 47. de∣greés. And in this space shall you drawe certayne lynes equi∣distaunte with them of the middest, that they and the middle lyne, may deuide into 4. equall partes the breadth of the halfe circle. Then looke in the table of the declinations of the sunne, what declination haue the 5. degreés of Aries, and that shall you accompt from the Equinoctiall towarde the one part, and
as much more toward the other, making a lyne that may tra∣uerse that of the myddest, where that declination doth end and touch in the other two lynes. And the same shall you doo at 10.15.20.25. and 30. wich is the end of Aries, and beginning of Taurus: and then the lyne shal trauerse al the breadth. The like also shall yo doo to Taurus and Gemini, then in the spaces, write the caractes of the xii. signes, beginning Aries from the Equinoctial,The caracts of the xii. signes. toward the North Pole. And then doo Taurus and Gemini end in the greatest declination, beginning Cancer in the other part of it. Then Leo and Uirgo do end in the E∣quinoctial, where shal begin Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius: and in the other part, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, shall end in the Equinoctiall where Aries began. This halfe circle must haue an opening, or open place, euen and iust in the mid∣dest from the Equinoctial, vnto somewhat more then the grea∣test declinations, and must be a litle broder on the inner part, then without: and not so brode as may come to the two lynes, because it would then take away the graduation of the signes. And in this open place must be put a square grayne or stubbe, which on the inner part may come playne with the halfe circle, & on the vtter part may cme forth a litle, where shalbe nyld a square peéce of Laton, of the breadth of the halfe circle. This graine or stubbe being so nayled with the péece, must haue in the middest a hole,The hole that representeth the Sunne. so small, as may receiue a litle pinne, and by the center of this hole, must passe a line, which shal trauerse all the grayne. And this lyne shall serue to put the sunne (which the hole representeth) in the degrée of the signe where it is. This halfe circle where it goeth in the circumferences of the rundels for the houres, must e fyled on the one side vnto the line that is in the myddest, to marke it, and shew the number of it. For the placyng or settyg of this instrument,The placing or setting of the instru∣ment. you must cut a gyrdle or ryng of laton, as thick as the plate, and of the breadth of a fy∣ger, or litle lesse: and so large, that of it may be made a circle somewhat bigger then the plate, so that the plate and the Meri∣dian may easily be conteyed within it. This circle shalbe cal∣led the Horizon, which must be deuided into foure quarters. In lyke mner must be mde two semicirculer péeces, & the
ends of them must be nayled or sothered in the poynts that de∣uide the quarters of the circle: and deuide the one from thther in two equal parts, making right spherical angles. And in this ioynt of these two peéces, must be nayled or sothered a Mast, the which at the one end is deuided into two braunches or forks.The Fooe or Base of the instrument. Then shal you make a base or foote for the same, which in the vppermost part thereof shall haue a concauitie or holow∣nesse, where may be set a sayling compasse or a neédle, touched with the Lode stone, and couered ouer with a glasse. And on the highest edges of this base, the two braunches of the Mastel shal∣be made fast, and this base, with the Mastel, the halfe circle, and the circle, shalbe all one peéce, which halbe called the seate or frame of the instrument. The Horizontal circle in the ends of one halfe circle, must haue two holes, in the which may enter the Axis that are made in the ends of the lyne of East & West. Also you must take good heéde when you sother or make fast the Mustel in the base, that the North and South of the plate or Horizon, come with the North and South of the néedle that is beneath, hauing euer respect how much the neédle doth vary from the Meridian, by Northeasting or Northwesting. In the ioynt of the two halfe circles vpon the Mastel, must be a poynt (called the index or shewer) whch shal shew in the halfe circle,The Index or shewer. sothered in the place on ye nether part the degrées that the Pole is raysed aboue the Horizon. For the perfection of this instrument, it shalbe conuenient to set the Horizon very playe and equal at the time of the opera∣tion or practising with the instrument,The placing of the hori∣zon. and this may be done in two maners. Whereof the one is, hanging by a fine threéde, at the center of the plate, a plomet made somewhat poynted at the neather ende: so that the Horizon standing playne & leuel, the poynt of the plome may al vpon the poynt of the index,For the Land. and this maner is good for the land. But for the Sea,For the Sea. you shall so∣ther the Horzon two Axs, little stubbes or endes comming foorth. These shalbe put in the two opposite holes of a circle of mettall made somewhat strong, and this circle must haue other two stubbes lykewyse comming foorth, and equally distant from the two holes. These must be sothered or nayled in two
holes of another circle in like maner, and the other circle with other two stubbes, inclosed in a boxe. If then the boxe stand euen and leuel, the poyse or waight shall cause the Horizon to stande leuell, although the Ship sway or roule from side to side. The vse of this instrument is in this maner. The vse of the instru∣ment.When you desyre to knowe the paralel in whiche you are, and the houre that is, put the lyne that trauerseth the graine, in the degree of the signe in the which the Sun is (which you shal knowe by the able of the place of the Sunne, in the seconde Chapter of the second parte) and set the North and the South of the plate, with the North and South of the néedle. Then turne the moueable Meridian against the Sunne, the foote of the instrument standing fast, and rayse it, or put it downe in the plate, vntill the beame of the Sunne enter in at the hole of the graine, and fall in the center of the plate, and standing so, behold the index,The altitude of th Pole. and how many degreés it shew∣eth from the Meridian, so much is the altitude of the Pole. Then looke where the moueable Meridian sheweth in the rundel of the houres, and there shall you sée the houre that is.
Heere foloeth the demonstration.
¶ The xii. Chapter, of the leagues that are runne for a degree, according vnto diers courses. IN the sixth Chapter, I promised to geue a rule to knowe the distaunce from one paralel to another,To know the distance from one paralel to another. sayling by whatsoeuer lyne or wynde, except the East and West: for the whiche is to bée vnderstoode, that the Nauiga∣tion or course from one place to ano∣ther (according to the Cosmogra∣phers) ought to be by the arke of the greater circle,The arke of the greater circle. for that by this maner shalbe the shortest course, and this greater circle they deuide into 360. degreés: and al the distances that are frō one place to another, they accompt by the degreés & minutes of this circle: and so sayling from North to South, to one degreé of the variation of the height of the Pole, shal answeare another degreé of the greater circle in the superficiall part of the water and land. And therefore sayling by whatsoeuer other line, vn∣till the Pole doth vary one degreé of altitudes,The altitude of the Pole varying one degree. we shall haue gone more then one degrée of the greater circle: and the degreés that aunsweare to euery lyne or winde, you shall seé in the de∣monstration folowing, which hath two paralel lynes, whiche are East and West, and the lyne that cutteth them in ryght angles, which commeth foorth of the center from the quarter of the circle that is made, is North and South, and then shall you seé by this order, all the other wyndes, halfe wyndes, and quar∣ters of wyndes, reduced to one quarter:The quarter seruing for the 32. winds of the com∣pas. For the selfe same ac∣compt serueth for Northeast and Southwest, and Northwest and Southeast, and so of the halfe windes & quarters of winds that are equally distant from the line of the North and South: and so this quarter shall serue for all the 32. wynds of the com∣passe. Without this quarter, harde by the lyne, you shall finde two numbers, wherof the first shalbe of the degreés, & minuts of degrées of the great circle, which is frō one paralel to another.
The other number, shalbe the leagues, & pares of lagues that such degreés and minutes do amount vnto, after the rate of 17. leagues and a halfe for a degrée. In like maner in the paralell, where the lynes of the wyndes do concurre, shalbe set ioyntly to euery lyne the degreés & minutes of the distaunce from the lyne of North and South, and leagues & partes of leagues that such degreés and minutes amount vnto. And so it is, that sayling by the lyne, wynd, or point of North and South, vntil the altitude of the pole vary one degrée, is run another degreé, which contei∣neth leagues 17. and a halfe. And by the next line,One degree of variation of the Pole. for one dgreé of the variation of the altitude of the pole, is run one degreé, one minute 17. leagues, and 5. syxe partes. And thy that run vpon that lyne or poynt, depart from the lyne of North, and South, or Meridian line 12. minutes, leagues 3. and a halfe. By the se∣cond lyne,Departing from the Me∣ridian lyne. is runne one degrée 5. minutes, and leagues 19. scant, and in this course, they part from the Meridian 25. mi∣nutes, leagues 17. and a quarter. By the third line is runne one degrée 12. minutes, leagues 21. and a 20. part of a league, and depart from the Meridian lyne 40. minutes, leagues 11. and two terces. By the fourth lyne, is run one degre, minutes 25. leagues 24. and threé quarters, and depart from the Meridian, one degrée iustly, leagues 17. and a halfe. By the fyfth lyne, is runne one degreé, minutes 48. leagues 31. and a halfe, and de∣part from the lyne one degreé 30. minutes, leagues 26. and one quarter. By the syxth lyne, is runne two degreés, minutes 37. leagues 45. and of the 45. partes of one league, the 11. part, and depart from the lyne two degreés, minutes 25. leagues 42. and a quarter. By the seuenth lyne, is runne yue degrées,Degrees of the greater circle. mi∣nutes 8. leagues 29. and two teres, and depart from the lyne fyue degreés, minus 2. which are leagues 88. accompting 17. lagues and a halfe for a degreé of the greater circle. And yf for euery lyne you desire to know this cmputation of leagues, af∣ter 16. leagues and two terces for a degreé, or for more or lesse leagues or myles, multiply those such degres by the number of the leagues or myles which nter into euery degreé, & likewise shall you number the minutes that are more then the degreés, by
the same number of the leagues that nter in euery degreé, de∣uiding them by sixtie, and that that shall come of the diuision, you shall ioyne with the multiplication of the degrées, and that shall amount thereof, shalbe the leagues, and parts of leagues, that was in those such degreés. The xiii. Chapter, how to set or make a prycke in the Carde of Nauigation. THe Mariners call the pricking of a poynt in the Carde,To knowe in what part or poynt the Ship is. to seé and appoynt in it, in what poynt or part of the Sea the Ship is in Na∣uigation. For the perfourming whereof, it shall be requisite that the Pilot knowe from what degreé, or how many degreés of the alti∣tude of the Pole heé departed, and with what wynde heé say∣leth. And when heé desyreth to knowe where he is, let hym knowe the altitude of the Pole,The altitude of the Pole. by some of the aforesayde rules. And if (taking the altitude) he fynd him selfe in the same degreés where he was when he departed, his Nauigation hath beén from the East to the West, and what he hath gone can not be knowen but by the iudgement of a wyse and expert man, ac∣cording to the synesse or goodnesse of his Ship, with consi∣deration of the more or lesse time he hath had, as we haue sayd before in the sixth Chapter.To fynde the distaunce by the Carde. But if e fynde him selfe in more or lesse degreés, let him take two payre of compasses, and put the foote of one, in the poynt or plate where his Ship was when he departed, and the other in the line or wind by the which he say∣leth, and likewise let him set the one poynt of the other compasse in the graduation of the Card, in that number of degreés that he findeth the altitude of h Pole, and the other poynt of the same compasse in the next line o East & West: and so with both the compasses, one in the one hand, and the other in the other hand, let hm goe ioyning them togeather, taking good heéde, that the poynt of the compasse do ot swarue frm the wynde whereby he hath sayled, neythr the pynt of the other compasse from the lyne of East and West, where he set it.
And folowing those two compasses by these two lynes, vntyll the poynts of the two compasses ioyne (that is to meane, the poynt that was set in the place from whence he departed, and the other that was set in the degrees that were found) then where these two poynts do ioyne, is the poynt where the Ship is. But (as we haue sayd in the syxth Chapter) they must haue great respect to the wyndes and seas,Aduertise∣ments t the Pilotes. and other things which experience sheweth them, to knowe yf they haue gone directly by that lyne, or yf they haue fallen from it, and to what part: the which I remit to the iudgement of men of good experience. From thence forward, they shall returne to keépe the same ac∣compt, as when they departed from the hauen, especially when they change their course. ¶ The xiiii. Chapter, of the making and vse of the Instru∣ment generll, to knowe the houres and quantities of the day, and at what winde the Sunne ryseth and falleth. MAke a rounde plate wyth a ryng or a handle aboue, as in the Astrolabie, drawing a lyne from the ring downe∣ward passing through the center, and another lyne that may cut it in ryght angles throngh the center: And this last lyne shall be called the Horizon. Then shall you geue a circle vppon the cen∣ter, leauing so much space betweéne it and the edge of the plate, that therein may be written the num∣bers of the degrees: then also make another circle somewhat more within, leauing lykewyse a space where the graduations may be deuided. This done, deide one of the highest qua∣drants towarde the left hand into 90. partes, whiche shall be called the degrees of latitude, beginning the number of them from the ring, and ending the same in the Horizon. Then make another rundell somewhat lesse then this, in such maner that the degrees and numbers of the greater, remayne vncouered.
And deuid this lesse, by two Diameters into four equal parts. And at the one end of the one Diameter, leaue a poynt cōmyng foorth of the lesse rundell, cut directly with the same Diameter by the one part, and this shalbe called the index or shewer. In this rundell you shall make a circle half, a fynger lesse then the rundel. Then with a compasse take. 23. Degrées and a halfe from the Diameter, which signifieth the Equinoctiall: and where as end the. 23. degreés and a halfe, for euery part make a ryght lyne from one poynt to another, so that this be a lyne of 47. Degreés, and as mu  at e other end of the sayde Equinoctiall. Upon euery one of these right lines, you shall make a hae ircle, and euide ury of them into syxe equall partes, whiche may aunswere to six signes, and euery signe into thre partes, which may  to the tenthes or tenth part f dgés: and if the  be great, you shall de∣uide eury signe into fi or  pares, so that you may make it perfect and precise. This , from the points or prickes of the one halfe circle, to the pointes of the other, draw certaine lynes whiche shalbe equidin to the Equinoctiall. In the endes of these lynes, betweée the lesse circle, and the edge of the rundell, drawe also certayne lynes, whiche may reache vnto the beginninges and endes of the signes: and in the oppe of the endes, or ouer the endes of these lynes, make an Arke, so farre distaunt from the lesse circle, as is the thicknesse of the edge of a peéce of foure ryals of plate: And in the space that is left, graduate the signes from tenne to tenne, or as the diuision shalbe. The space that remayneth from thence to the edge of the rundel, you shal deuide by the halfe,The placing of the twelue signes in the instrument. and in it shalbe made twelue spaces, where you shall set the signes with their names or ca∣ractes orderly, so that Aries be next vnto the Equinoctiall then Taurus towarde the part of the Index, then Gemini: and turning towarde the Equinoctiall, Cancer, Leo, Uirgo. Likewise on the other parte of the Equinoctiall, Libra, Scor∣pio, Sagittarius. And turnyng to the Equinoctiall, Ca∣pricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.The zodiacke. And thus hauing signed the Zodiacke, you shall also signe or marke the houres in manner as followeth.
Deuide the lesse circle of this rundel into foure equal parts, so that euery quarter may haue sixe partes. Reduce this diuision to the Diameter, putting the ruler vpon the poynts, equally di∣stant from the Horizon. And where it toucheth the Equinoctial, make pricks or poynts,Diuision of the Equi∣noctial and Tropikes. so that the Equinoctial remayne deui∣ded into twelue partes. Then vpon one of the Tropykes giue a circle, which may haue the same Tropike for his Diameter. Deuide this circle into 24. equall parts & reduce these diuisions to the Tropike, as is done in the Equinoctial, & from one Tro∣pike to another: then the Equinoctial and the Tropikes being thus deuided with this pricks or poynts, you shall passe with a payre of compasses by euery poynt equally ordered from the Horizon, to the one and the other part: and these shalbe called houres, wryting in the ends of them theyr numbers, beginning the one part in one,The houres with theyr numbers. and ending it in twelue. On the other part, begin the one in thopposite part, and end in twelue. This done, these rundels shalbe brought to their perfection. Moreouer, you shal make a triangle, with a right angle, hauing two equal sides that may make the right angle. Euery of these sides must be as long as is the Semidiameter of the greatest rundel:The triangle. also, vpon and about the ryght angle, you shall make a litle circle, whiche shall haue the same angle for his center, & on the one side of this tryangle, set two raysed plates, as in the Astrolabie: on the con∣trary side of these raysed plates, must be a hole, so farre distant from the ceter or angle, as is the Semidiameter of the circle of the lesse rundel. In this hole you must put a threéd, hanging thereat a little wayght or plommet, only sufficient to hold the threéd straight, so that it cause nothing of the rundels to turne, or the instrument to decline. Furthermore, in a circle as bigge as the lesse of the lesse rundel, you shal deuide into 32. parts the eyght wyndes,Diuision of the windes. and halfe wyndes, and quarters of winds. And being thus redused to their Diameters (as is done in the Equi∣noctial) you shal translate them in the sides of the triangle, in the which by the center of his little circle, and by the center of the rundels, all the three peéces must be made fast with an axes or a nayle, so that they may be turned about close and very iuste. Then put a ring in the handle of the instrument, wherby it may
hang, as in the Astrolabie: and so shall the Instrument be yni∣shed and brought to perfection. This is the trace or draught of the Instrument.
To knowe at what hour the Sunne ryseth and falleth (by the Instrument folowyng) you shall put the Pole of the lesse rundel (which is the index) to the left hand in the greatest rundell,To know at what houre the Sun riseth or falleth. in so many degrees aboue the Horizon, in how many degrees the Pole is raysed in that lande or place. Then put the tryangle, (which is the Horizon) in his place: that is to say, yf the Sunne shalbe in the North signes, put it to the left hand: and if it shalbe in the South signes, to the ryght hand, and then the triangle shal cut the paralel where the Sunne goeth, in .10. or .20. or .30. degreés, or proportionally where it is, and there shall you see in the sydes of the Zodiacke, the houres when the Sunne ryseth and falleth. And lykewyse at what wind the Sunne ryseéth and falleth to vs, you shall seé in the wynds of the tryangle. At what winde the Sunne riseth or falleth.To know by the eleuation of the Sunne, the houre that is, put the Pole or Index so farre distant from the Zenith or handle of the Instrument, as it is in that place or paralel aboue the Ho∣rizon, then turne the triangle towarde the Sunne, vntill the beames thereof enter in at the raysed plates, and then the threéd with the plomet, shall cut the paralell of the Sunne, by the houre that shalbe: and consequently the tri∣angle shalbe distant from the Zenith the degreés that the Sunne shall be raysed that houre about the Horizon.
This is the Demonstration. FINIS.
¶ Heere beginneth the Table of this Booke. The contentes of the Chapters of the first part. THe generall distinction of Creatures. Folio. iiii. The definition of the World. Fol. v. The definition of the Sphere. Fol. eodem. The diuision of the World. Fol. eodem. The number, order, and propertie of the Elementes and Heauens. Fol. vi. The immutabilitie or immobilitie of the Earth. Fol. viii. The roundnes of the Earth and Water. Fol. viii. The motion of the Heauens and Elements. Fol. x. The diuision of the Sphere into formall partes. Fol. eod. The Equinoctiall circle. Fol. xii. The Zodiacke. Fol. eodem. The circle called Coluri. Fol. xiii. The Meridian circle. Fol. xiiii. The Horizontall circle. Fol. eod. The foure lesse circles. Fol. xv. The fiue Zones. Fol. xvi. The Longitude and Laitude. And of the proportion which the lesse circles haue to the great circle. Fol. xviii. The circuite or compasse of the earth and water, according to the opinions of the auncient & later auctours. Fol. xix. The vii. Climates. Fol. eod. Certayne principles of this science. Fol. xxi. The Contentes of the second part. THe course of the Sunne in the Zodiacke. Fol. xxii. The true place of the Sunne in the Zodiacke. Fol. xxiii. The declination of the Sunne. Fol. xxv. The entraunce of the Sunne in the xii. signes, and of the Equinoctials and Solstitials which deuide the foure times of the yeere. Fol. xxvii. Of the Moone, and her motions and properties. Fol. xxix. The coniunctions and oppositions of the Sunne and the Moone. Fol. xxx.
The declaration and vse of an instrument, by the which is found the place and declination of the Sunne, with the dayes and place of the Moone. Fol. xxxi. The Eclipses of the Moone and the Sunne. Fol. xxxiii. Of tyme, and the definition thereof. Fol. xxxv. Of the yeere, and the diuers beginnings and reckonings or computations had thereof in olde tyme. Fol. xxxvi. Of the moneth, and of his differences. Fol. xxxvii. Of the weeke. Fol. xxxix. Of the day and night. Fol. eod. Of houres. Fol. xl. The making & vse of an vniuersall Dyal for the day. Fol. xli. Of certain perticuler Dials, Mural & Horizontal. Fol. xliii. The composition and vse of an instrument for the houres of the night. Fol. xlv. The time of the tides, or rising & falling of the sea. Fol. xlviii Of certayne signes which prognosticate tempests, or fayre weather. Fol. l. Of the bright & shining exhalations that appere in tēpests which the Mariners call Santelmo, or Corpus sancti. Fol. li. The Contentes of the third part. THe number, order, and names of the windes. Fol. liiii. The composition of Cardes for the Sea. Fol. lvi. The vertue and propertie of the Lodestone, called in Latin, Magnes, and in Spanish, Piedrayman. Fol. lxii. The making of the Mariners cōpasse for Nauiga. Fol. lxiii. The effect and propertie that the compasse hath to North∣easting or Northwesting, whereby is knowen the varia∣tion of the compasse. Fol. lxiiii. The introductiō & principles of the art of Nauiga. Fol. lxvii The making and vse of the Astrolabie, with the which the Mainers take the altitudes of the Sunne. Fol. lxviii. The definition of the altitudes, an how the altitudes of the Pole may well be knowen by the Meridian altitude and delination of the Sunne. Fol. lxxi.
The making of the crosse staffe, wherwith the Mariners take the altitude of the North starre. Fol. lxxii. How the altitude of the Pole is knowen by the altitude of the North starre. Fol. lxxiii. The composition & vse of an Instrumēt, by the which with∣out obseruing the South Sunne or midday, is knowen the altitude of the Pole, and the houre that is. Fol. lxxv. Of the leagues that are run for a degree, according vnto di∣uers courses. Fol. lxxviii. Howe to set or make a pricke in the carde of Nauiga∣tion. Fol. lxxx. Of the making and vse of an Instrument generall, to knowe the houres and quantities of the day, and what wind the Sunne ryseth and falleth. Fol. eod. FINIS. Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffes for Richard VVatkins, and are to be sould at his shop. Cum Priuilegio.
