7274 99845592 10501
ARS AVLICA OR The Courtiers Arte. Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos. MAR. Et Principibus placuisse viris, non vltima laus est. HOR. at, at Felice chipuò. LONDON, Printed by Melch. Bradwood for Edward Blount. 1607.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE and most Noble Brothers: The Lord WILLIAM, Earle of Penbrook, And Lo. PHILIP, Earle of Montgomery. RIght Honour∣able and wor∣thie LORDS, This small Treatise hapning to speake English at this time; how I know not, but by a kinde of fate, should seeme destined
to your protection: who from your owne practise in Court can cleereliest iudge of his arte. You, whose indi∣uiduall and innated worths, besides my particular dutie, challenge this so equall Pa∣tronage; and binde me the most humbly de∣uoted to your honors. ED. BLOVNT.
Da Dio si prega per appoggio fermo: Che, fra gl'huomini gia non c'è più schermo. A Fiori, à fumo, à sogno ed ombra vana, Molt' assomigliano lo nostro stato; Anzi io per me, non trouo cosa humana, Che l' histrion, e'l palco; cui dar à lato Il mondo rio, & mente nostra insana. Theatro è quello, & questa per il fato, E fatta histrion', cangiando à mille modi Habiti, & persona; dispreggi & lodi. Per che ti chieggio, O gran Chorago de i celesti chori, Chi co'l cenno sopra i più bassi palchi Da legge; à chi, hor, chi tardo è d'vscir fu∣ori, Per far mostra à te, & tuci gran siniscalchi, Quanto tutti possono pur megliori, Et secondo dai mercè, ò fai diffalchi. Fà, ch'io tal mi comporti in questa scena; Ch'al mondo, nō che da te io seampi pena, Fatto che deggio. Poluere minuta. G. G.
LORENZO DVCCI to the Noble Courtiers. WOrthy gentle∣men, I cannot conceiue what more befitting and fruitfull Present may be offered vnto you, than that which with an apparent breuitie conteineth in it the meanes how to com∣passe and obteine that End, which by seruice is desired.
To which purpose hauing fini∣shed this present Discourse, by me named The Arte of the Court, inperfection accord∣ing to the module of my con∣ceits: I giue it, and as I con∣iecture, most iustly dedicate the same vnto you: not, be∣cause either by vertue of a long experience, or of an ex∣act iudgment, I make professi∣on to be a Master in this Arte, but to manifest, that by the North guide-star of methodi∣call knowlege, a man may fur∣row the deepest seas of vn∣knowen discipline; and haply far from the dangerous rocks of reasonable censures, arriue at the Port of true and com∣mendable
doctrine. If then my  herein misgiue me not, my desired reward shall be the profit you shall make of it: but if any man thinke o∣therwise, the way lies open, no lesse to the triall of his owne knowledge, than (if he can) to the correction of other mens labours. Fare you well From the Castle of Ferrara the 29 of Ianuarie 1601.
The Preface. IT is my in∣tent to make triall if by the waie of cer∣teine princi∣ples, there may anie pre∣cepts be established, for the instruction and institution of a woorthy Courtier: Not to shew what vertues be∣long vnto him, but, presup∣posing him alreadie to haue that habit, which the Court requireth, to teach him in what maner he should car∣ry himselfe to run the course of his seruice with happi∣nesse.
And because multi∣plicitie of words is toilsome to the writer, and breedes confusion in the Readers mind, I wil make my proof with that breuitie, which may exclude obscuritie in the vnderstanding, and yet lie very plaine vn∣to indifferent ca∣pacities.
A Table of the Chapters contei∣ned in this Booke. CHAP. I. WHat should be the Cour∣tiers end or scope. CHAP. II. A declaration of the foresaide ends. CHAP. III. Of the choice of the Prince to bee serued. CHAP. IIII. That the Courtier must conceale the endeuor of his proper com∣moditie, vnder the apparent desire of the Princes seruice. CHAP. V. Of the Courtiers office or du∣tie.
CHAP. VI. If in all things the Courtier be bound to serue his Prince. CHAP. VII. If the Courtier vpon occasion be bound to spende his life an goods in the Princes seruice. CHAP. VIII. Of the Princes bonde or dutie to∣wards the Courtier. CHAP: IX. Of two sorts of seruices considera∣ble. CHAP. X. Of seruice by dutie of affectio¦ned. CHAP. XI. Of voluntarie or assistant ser¦uice. CHAP. XII. Meanes how to know the natur and affection of the Prince. CHAP. XIII.
The maner how to accommodat  himselfe to the Princes humor. CHAP. XIIII. Whether it bee fit to haue often speech or conference with the Prince. CHAP. XV. How many and what be the kindes of speeches or discourses the Courtier is to haue with his Prince. CHAP. XVI. How to take opportunitie to induce a conference of State. CHAP. XVII. What is to be obserued in the pas∣sing of this conference. CHAP. XVIII. How to induce conference of enter∣teinment. CHAP. XIX. The order that must be kept in con∣ference of enterteinment. CHAP. XX. Of Praise and flatterie.
CHAP. XXI. Of the soundings and trials which Princes sometimes vse with their Courtiers. CHAP. XXII. Meanes how to distinguish and come to the knowledge of these trials. CHAP. XXIII. What the Courtier is to doe know∣ing and perceiuing these soun∣dings or trials. CHAP. XXIIII. Of the subsidiarie aides & meane to obteine the Princes fauor. CHAP. XXV. Of the helpe which may be drawen from the Princes kindred for procurement of his fauor. CHAP. XXVI. Of the helpe which may be drawen from the Princes friends. CHAP. XXVII.
Of the helpe which may be drawen  from the Princes seruants. CHAP. XXVIII. How to keepe in fauour once ob∣teined. CHAP. XXIX. What is to bee obserued with the Prince for the continuing in his fauour. CHAP. XXX. What is to be obserued with other Courtiers, and the maner how to make them his friends. CHAP. XXXI. The meanes how to obteine of the Prince those fauors and graces which are desired. CHAP. XXXII. What must be obserued not to haue the Courtiers his enemies, and to auoid ill turnes and offices. CHAP. XXXIII. How the Courtier is to carrie himselfe with his enemies and persecutors.
CHAP. XXXIIII. How he may keepe backe his con∣currents and corriualls. CHAP. XXXV. The meanes how to auoid enuie. CHAP. XXXVI. What the Courtier is to doe, who shall finde himselfe slenderly re∣spected of his Prince.
ARS AVLICA, OR The Courtiers Arte. CHAP. I. What should be the Courtiers and or scope. ALL Humane actions haue for their end & scope some good or benefit of him who is the actour of them. The chiefest good prin∣cipally thirsted after by man is happinesse: For this, all actions are done; which either medi∣atly or immediatly regard the same; so that euery Agent pro∣perlie worketh for his owne benefit. True it is, that many times in the atchieuement of
some desired good being very difficult, the helpe of another is expedient, his owne forces not bastant or sufficient. For this cause, in the beginning, were Societies instituted; in the which if euery one should worke for his owne good, with∣out respecting that of his fel∣low; doubtlesse, they should be vaine and friutlesse. Where∣fore in these, it is behooffull not to worke for proper com∣moditie, but for publike bene∣fit; for that in this maner euery one as interessed, doe agree to effect and facilize the obtain∣ing of that good which is desi∣red. The end then of euery So∣ciety is the common good of those who are comprehended therin. The respect and relation of him that commandeth, towards him that serueth, I dare not
call it a Societie; for such is the inequalitie of the termes, that by many wise men the seruant is held the Commanders instru∣ment; whereby it followeth, that among them there is no o∣ther end, than the good of the master, knowing it to be cleere, that we can not distinguish the end of the instrument, from that of the agent which mooues the same. Heere-hence it follow∣eth further, that the Seruant oweth all his actions (as a ser∣uant) vnto his Master, and the Master nothing vnto his ser∣uant; and that therefore recei∣uing any benefit from the com∣mander or Master, he is by far more bound, than by seruing he can oblige the other; since in seruing he doth but the acti∣ons of an instrument, the which are to be acknowledged from
the agent, but in receiuing of a benefit, he hath the same from another as from an affected cause: From the same principle many excellent and important consequences might be dedu∣ced, the which notwithstand∣ing I will reserue, as for a place more fit, in that part of actiue Philosophie, which conteineth precepts of Oeconomicall pru∣dence. In the meane time wee say, That not entreating heere of naturall or violent seruitude, but of voluntary and electiue seruice, it seemeth, and not without reason, it may pretend to haue in some sort the qualitie and na∣ture of a Societie, and that by consequence we may attribute vnto it for the end thereof a kinde of communion of good. And certeinly that heerein the
seruice due to the Master is most considerable, may be ga∣thered by what alreadie hath beene sayd, as also by weying or iudging of their mutuall bonds: for, if any demand What is the seruants duetie or bond, there is none I thinke that will not answer, To serue his lord and master: But on the other side seeking what is the Masters dutie, we shall finde it, To benefit the seruant according to his merit. So that by this mu∣tuall obligation, these two termes Master and Seruant are vnited together in a societie; the which as hath already been sayd, hath for the end a com∣mon profit. This granted, it seemeth that the Masters scope or end is, the seruants benefit, and that of the Seruant, the Masters seruice, since their du∣ties
haue these references. And if it be so, there groweth a doubt how it may be verified, that euery one worketh for his pe∣culiar profit, or that this is the naturall inclination of euerie man, and of all working things▪ But it is answered, that the ends are of two sorts, either desired or intended by themselues, or by accident and caused by ano∣ther. Whereby it followeth, that two, which between them∣selues seeme contrary, may de∣sire one thing without repug∣nancy, as in this present case it happeneth. For the seruant de∣sireth for himselfe, and worketh for his proper benefit, mooued vnto it by a naturall instinct: but by accident, and for this cause desireth and worketh in the seruice of his Lord, since that from hence finallie hee
draweth the profit and com∣modity which he longeth after; whereby there is no contradi∣ction at all, that the seruant should haue for his end his pro∣per benefit, and withall the ser∣uice of his Master. Yet this doth not wholly re∣solue the propounded doubt, because it seemeth, that if the true and principall end of the seruant be his owne proper commoditie, we might say that his dutie were to worke, not for his Masters seruice, but for his owne profit: and therefore this is by euery man with great rea∣son reiected. Wherefore wee say that a seruant may two wayes be considered, either as he is sociable, or as he is associa∣ted: if as sociable, without doubt the end of his actions is his proper benefit: if as associa∣ted,
by the bond of duty which bindes him, his End is the ser∣uice of his Master. Or if in o∣ther termes, we wil say the same thing, that is, that the seruant hath two Ends or Respects, one which moueth him to contra this societie, and this out of a question and resolutely is his proper benefit; the other is the end of the societie, and this doubtlesse is the commoditie or seruice of the master, though not disbanded or disioyned from the profit of the seruant, by the participation that this habitude or respect of societie hath betweene the Master and the seruant, the which, as it is said, endeth alwaies in a com∣mon profit. To conclude then, and to re∣serue that vnto another place, which heere (as not so proper)
we will but briefly touch. We say, That the end for the which the Courtier voluntarilie sub∣mits his necke vnto the yoke of seruitude, is his owne profit, for the which as his end princi∣pally intended, he both labou∣reth and endureth much. But his end, as a Courtier, obliged in societie and duetie of serui∣tude, is the seruice of his Lord, the which he vseth as a meanes vnto the former and more prin∣cipall, which is his proper be∣nefit, with the intercourse of fa∣uour which followeth the actu∣all seruice. For the Courtier first of all longeth after his owne profit; but not able o∣therwise to compasse the same than by the loue and fauour of his Prince, he propoundeth his seruice, and diligently working therein, obteineth his fauour,
which breedeth his owne pro∣fit and commoditie aboue all other things by him desired. It appeareth then that the ends or scopes that the Courti∣er hath are three, that is, his proper interest, and this is that which chiefly he endeuoureth: next, the fauour of the Prince, as the cause of his first end: and then, the seruice of the Prince, as the efficient cause of that fa∣uour. But because these things haue in themselues some diffi∣culties, a larger declaration is necessary. CHAP. II. A declaration of the fore∣said ends. PRoper interest, Seruice, and the Princes fauour are, as it is said, the Courtiers ends, of
the which his proper interest is the first, and by it selfe desired; the others by accident and as meanes. Now what is meant by this terme fauour, is so mani∣fest, that it needs no other ex∣plication: but those of proper interest, and the Princes seruice, are not so well vnderstood, both the one & the other terme conteining many things, vnto the which (it may be) the end and dutie of a Courtier doth not extend. Let vs first then consider the Seruice, and say thus; There is no doubt, but the Prince hath diuers and many sorts of men which serue him; as the souldi∣ers in the war, the Magistrates in time of peace, and those which in his house perform his necessary businesse. If all then (as it is most plaine) are bound
to serue him, all their ends shall be the seruice of the Prince: and so if he be a Courtier whose end is the Princes seruice, all those aboue named, and particularly such which are in actuall ser∣uice should be Courtiers: but it seemeth not only a new terme, but withall, contrarie to com∣mon sense and the true signifi∣cation of the name of a Courti∣er, to comprehend therein, the Souldiers, the Iudges and o∣ther Magistrates; wherfore we can not say they are all Courti∣ers which serue, but only some of them, amongst whom wee can not denie those to be held for such which priuately serue him. So as it is fit to consider in the Prince two persons, one publike, which makes him to be a Prince; the other priuate, by the which we suppose him to be
the head of a familie, as by the other (as a Prince) hee is head of a Kingdome or Common-wealth. Those then who serue him as a Prince, that is, in the actions belonging to the pub∣like benefit, were neuer called by the name of Courtiers; but those only who serue him pri∣uatly, and are comprehended in his familie or Court. From this principle, wee draw that which at the first we sought for, that is, what things this seruice conteineth; for that, from it are wholly excluded all ciuill ends and publike actions; on the other part are receiued all those which the domestical bu∣sinesse or that of the family re∣quireth, in such sort, that as the Magistrate, in another place, shall be by vs termed the Prin∣ces instrument as a publike per∣son,
so is the Courtier his in∣strument, as the head and fa∣ther of a familie; so that all works belonging to the charge of housholdrie are embraced and conteined in his end as a Courtier: and therefore when we say his end to be the seruice of the Prince, it is vnderstood (as wee haue sayd) of all that which exceeds not the limits of houshold affaires. Let vs now come to declare what is vnderstood by proper interest. It can not be doubted that this terme interest doth not conteine all kinde of humane good, though to this large scope of signification, it seem∣eth the common vse thereof hath extended it, but we ought with reason to aduert the exclu∣sion of that good which cannot be obtained from another: be∣cause
in vain should the Courti∣er serue the Prince to that end, to obteine from him that thing, which neither he nor any other could impart vnto him: as for example are the vertues, which in vaine are expected from any other, than from our owne well ordered and proper nature: so that this good excluded, it see∣meth (and in this likewise the vulgar opinion doth agree) that for two things principally hee doth take vpon him and vnder∣go this seruitude; for profit and for honour. Some serue for pro∣fit, not esteeming of honour, as the mercenaries; others for ho∣nour only, as the noble, either by birth or greatnesse of minde and spirit; others both for the one and the other. Well, let it be so that euery man serueth for these two ei∣ther
ioyntly or seuerally. Profit particularly includeth in it ri∣ches, the which are in abun∣dance of necessaries for our life; as money, lands, cattell, moue∣ables, furniture for houses, and such like. But by honour, is not vnderstood at all that which followeth the actions or vertu∣ous qualities, since that this good (as alreadie hath beene sayd) dependeth on our proper election and facultie, and may without others helpe be obtei∣ned; for I thinke none of opi∣nion, that freely to vse prudence, fortitude, iustice or magnanimi∣tie, it is necessary to enter into the Court of Princes; but there rather to obteine degrees of power and dignitie, which com∣monly are called honours; or be it that worthily by meanes of vertuous actions they are attri∣buted
as honor giuen in reward of vertue; or because, as they say, Honour is the opinion held of anothers vertue: by meanes whereof they obtaine in the world an opinion of merit, or because he that possesseth it, is honoured. So that the honours which are the Courtiers end, are degrees, dignities, power, wealth & the reputation, which spring from them; and not the whole compasse of honour. For since the actions of vertue may as wel be vsed out of the Court, as hath beene declared, the ho∣nours answerable thereunto may also without being a Courtier be in like maner obtei∣ned.
CHAP. III. Of the choice of the Prince to be serued. OVt of these thing may easilie be drawen a rule which the Courtier is to obserue in the election of the Prince to whom he is to dedicate his ser∣uice; the which requireth great consideration, for the inconue∣niences which otherwise may follow: because if in this an er∣ror be committed, it is cleerely impossible euer to obteine the end for which he serues; wher∣by vaine is the labor he shall af∣terwards vndertake in seruice, false his hope of reward, vnpro∣fitable his repentance, and the amendment very dangerous: for that vnto the easie change of Masters followeth a conceit of lightnesse, & a difficulty not
happely to be new placed, by reason of the impediments op∣posed, either by the authoritie and power of the abandoned Prince, or by the foresaid opi∣nion of instabilitie, or hard to be contented, or of arrogancie according as the cause of the change may be variably repor∣ted or beleeued: the which happening by reason of the Princes discharge or casting off, can not bee for the most part without a great staine or blot vnto the Courtier. Wherefore it is very necessary to be carefull that this election should bee wisely made, and it shalbe such, when the Prince which is cho∣sen may giue cause vnto the Courtier of that end, which prin∣cipally he pretendeth aboue all others. But to make a perfect iudgement heerein, wee must
consider the qualitie of the in∣tended end, and the ability and proportion which the Prince beareth to the same. The Courtiers end hath alre∣die beene said to be his propt commoditie, that is, his profit and honour. And because there is no limitation in desired ends, which are (as they say) infinite, whereupon the Merchant co∣ueteth an infinite gaine, and the Captaine a most singular victo∣rie, so no lesse doth the Courti∣er desire a profit without end and honour in the highest de∣gree that may be obteined. The Princes abilitie consi∣steth in power and will, they had wont to ioyne thereunto know∣ledge; but in this affaire it hath so little part, that without error it may be let passe. Wee must then examine his ability and his
willingnes, diligently beholding what proportion they holde with the forsaid ends, and if we know them to haue proportion vpon an effectiue cause, most assuredly it shall bee good to make choice of such a Prince: and to speake more plainly, I say, that if propounding any profit, there shall be any Prince that both can and will impart the same vnto the Courtier, he is the most worthie whom hee should serue. In like sort may wee reason of the other end, which is honor, aduertizing, that the Courtier either by himselfe, or by meanes of some other who haue greater and more in∣ward knowledge than he, may learne if these two principals, that is, Power and Will to bene∣fit, be truly in the Prince, whose power may easilie bee vnder∣stood,
as a thing for the mos part commonly knowen, an must be considered not onel immediatly, as proper in him∣selfe, but mediatly and by othe helps; for that, if by himself he can not performe much, b by his authority be able, so that by meanes of him it shalbe law∣full for the Courtier to hope for his desired end, we may iust say that he is able: but if neithe by himselfe nor by meanes o another he be able, in vaine the seruice that shall be vnder∣taken with him. The Will is yet harder to be knowen, the which by nature ouershadowed with many vales howbeit, it is discoured an vnmaskt by due obseruation o the effects: for if the Prince be accustomed to bee beneficiall and seemeth inclined thereun∣to,
we may suppose an habit of beneficence, which wanting, he is assuredly incaple of honour∣able seruice. But in this parti∣cular we must consider a diuisi∣on, because some Princes are not of a beneficent and liberall nature towards their seruants; others are, but much more with their seruants, to whom by me∣rit of their seruice they thinke themselues in some sort bound. The illiberall niggardly and ab∣solute not beneficiall, are vn∣worthie of life, since they liue vnprofitably in this humane so∣cietie, wherein nothing is requi∣red more necessarilie, than be∣neficence and liberalitie; such Princes towards their seruants are not woorthily enabled for the seruice of the Courtier in∣structed in this arte; wherefore for the most part they are ser∣ued
with mercenarie people without spirit or feeling of ho∣nour, and to conclude, worthy of them. Amongst those who are be∣neficiall towards their seruants, there are some, who sparingly and with hardnesse grant their benefits and fauours, not be∣cause they doe not loue the good of their seruants, but doubting lest hauing profited them, they should abuse their fauors, or suspecting lest shew∣ing themselues too gentle, they should grow too confident and secure. With these kinde of Princes a man may with com∣mendations contract seruice, but how he is to proceed to ob∣teine these fauours shall be fully declared in his place. Some o∣thers there are, who by benig∣nitie of nature most easily en∣cline
to benefit and to doe fa∣uors, who notwithstanding ve∣ry consideratly and with a iust proportion dispence and di∣uide the same; and these are those who aboue all the rest de∣serue the seruice of the most honourable and accomplished Courtiers: wherfore vpon these doth fall the wise election, as of Princes or Lords, from whose magnanimitie, by meanes of seruice, there is in all reason hope to obteine their desired profit and reputation. CHAP. IIII. That the Courtier must conceale the endeuor of his proper com∣moditie vnder the apparent de∣sire of the Princes seruice. BVt to returne to the Cour∣tiers end, and to speake of
some things woorthie speciall confideration, you are to vn∣derstand, that the end, by it owne nature, hath a desire in it selfe to moue and induce an o∣peration or working; wherfore labouring in fauour thereof, those are iudged prouident and wise, who are seene to take a good way proportionate and apt for the obtaining and com∣passing of the same. But in the particular of a Courtier this rule faileth, since it is not sufficient that the actions be wise and dis∣creet, which manifestly appeare to tend to his end, that is, his proper interest; but those also which seeme to belong to the profit and seruice of the Prince: and the reason is, because the Courtier is not to expect bene∣fit, without the loue and fauor of the Prince, which shall neuer
be obteined if he discouer his interessed seruice, since such kinde of Courtiers are esteemed as mercenaries, and more selfe-friends than their Masters; who supposing that the Societie which they holde with their ser∣uant should tend to their profit, take it for an iniurie vnto them, whilest peruerting the order, another end is preferred, which by accident (in their opinion) should bee desired. This part was excellently wel vnderstood of a great Courtier of whom manie and verie considerable obseruations are read in Corne∣lius Tacitus,Ann. 4. who causeth Seia∣nus thus to speake: Fulgorem honorum à se nunquam praelatum, excubias ac labores, vt vnum ex militibus pro incolumitate Impe∣ratoris, malie: Hee neuer layd before him bright shining ho∣nours,
but wisht rather watch∣ings and labours as one of the common souldiers for the Em∣perours safetie. And Tigillinus saith:Idem 14. Non se vt Burrhum diuer∣sas spes, sed solùm incolumitatem Neronis spectare: Hee had not diuers hopes like Burrhus, but respected the onely health of Nero. This man in his time was likewise in great fauour, and by his arte surpast and ouercame all his concurrents. In summe, this aduertisement is so necessa∣ry, that taking any other course, all hope of euer being fortunate in Court is cut off: wherefore he must not only make profes∣sion in words, but with effects make perfect shew to haue no other interest than the absolute seruice of his lord: which to do we will now teach the meanes. The scope of the Courtier is
his proper interest, that of the Prince, is his profit. Amongst the actions which the Courtier can performe, some respect on∣ly his proper interest, some the seruice and commoditie of the Prince, and some are common to both. Of those respecting the proper interest, some are contrary to the Princes seruice, some not: likewise, of those re∣specting the Princes profit, some are repugnant and con∣trarie to the Courtiers good, others not. Now, seeking in what maner by meanes of our labour, wee may conceale the desire of our proper interest, with an apparent will of the Princes seruice; we say, first it is necessary that we who wholly abstaine from those actions which behold our proper com∣moditie to the preiudice of the
Prince. It is also necessarie (al∣though it should not be so great an error to do the contrarie) to beware to doe any thing which immediatly respecteth our pro∣per good. And of all this the reason is cleere enough by what hath beene sayd before. Those actions now which are common to the end, both of the one & the other, are not great∣ly hurtfull nor profitable to the Courtiers intention: but those actions are profitable which re∣gard the Princes commoditie, and especially those which seem to conteine any danger or da∣mage to the seruant. Amongst those of greatest importance to maske the appetite of our pro∣per commoditie, are those which are wrought in benefit of the Prince with great danger and detriment of things most
deere. But we must note heere, that the end of the Courtier be∣ing double, that is, of profit and reputation; in that of honor or reputation we must haue speci∣all consideration and regard, because it shalbe an action most commendable in a Courtier (as a Courtier) to despise or refuse some honour or dignitie to continue in the seruice of his Prince; and in this sort to suffer a damage, is a thing to be desi∣red; but withall it should not be commendable, if for any re∣spect of his Lord he should suf∣fer any blot or staine in his re∣putation: for that is a thing which amongst men ought to be preferred (as commonly it is) yea before life it selfe. But in that which belongeth to the profit and good seruice of the Prince, he may securely make
any losse, the which by how much either in aduenture or in effect it shall be greater, by so much the more doth it answer to courtly wisdome. And be∣cause vnder the name of profit I meane the goods which may be giuen or taken, and in deed all are termed actions of this kinde (vertue and honour ex∣cepted) as when for the honor of his Prince he spendeth libe∣rally; when hee aduentureth friends and kindred; when hee leaueth his owne pleasures, and many times his necessary com∣modities of liuing or of health∣full liuing, as meat, rest, sleepe and such like, so farre as nature will suffer, to preferre the ser∣uice and execute his Princes commandement, and aboue all, when he exposeth his life to danger for the honour, safetie,
and pleasure of his Prince. Cornelius Tacitus an excel∣lent Master of Courtiers, with an example of Seianus, most plainly teacheth all that hither∣to hath beene spoken to this purpose: because whilest Tibe∣rius was yet in doubt how farre hee might haue confidence in Seianus, against whom manie things were muttered:Ann. 4. Fortè, inquit, illis diebus oblatum Caesaeri anceps periculum auxit vana ru∣moris, praebuit{que} ipsi materiam, cur amicitiae constantiae{que} Seiani magis fideret: By chance, sayth he, in those dayes a doubtfull perill being offered vnto Cae∣sar, encreased the vaine report, and gaue matter why he should be more cōfident in the friend∣ship and constancy of Seianus. Then shewing the fall of the grott wherin Tiberius banketed,
eius os lapsis repentè saxis obruit quosdam ministros, hinc metus in omnes, & fuga eorum qui conui∣uium celebrabant; at the mouth whereof certeine stones falling downe, slew some of the serui∣tors, wherupon all fearing, those that prepared the banket fled. But Seianus, borne to obteine, and (as it were) to impatronise himselfe in his Princes fauour, genu, vultu{que} & manibus super Caesarem suspensas opposuit se in∣cidentibus, with knees, face and handes ouer-panching Caesar, opposed himselfe against the imminent ruines. This then is one of those actions which we before haue pointed at, and is by the circumstances in the highest degree, aswell, happen∣ing so great a danger of life, as that the remedie was immedi∣atly taken, and that without
any premeditated discourse; wherby was perceiued a minde most readie and well disposed towards the Prince: because it seemed that by a strong motion of nature it selfe well inclined, a worke of so great safetie to his Lord was performed. Where∣fore worthily followed the re∣ward which the same Authour adioyneth: Maior ex eo, & quamuis exitiosa suaderet; vt non sui anxius, cum fide audieba∣tur: He grew greater heereby, and although hee should per∣swade dangerous matters, they were yet faithfully heard, as from one not respecting him∣selfe. Where these words are of especiall note: vt non sui an∣xius, as not respecting or care∣lesse of himselfe: because they confirme the principle of hi∣ding the appetite of our pro∣per
interest, vnder the vale of apparent desire to do the Prince seruice. Such then is the drift or end of the Courtier, and as hath beene declared must be couertly or ouertly desired, if he will induce the Prince to accept of his seruice, and make a pas∣sage for the obteining of fauour, by meanes whereof he winneth the possession both of profit and honor; marks which in his prin∣cipall intention hee chieflie ai∣meth at. CHAP. V. Of the Courtiers office or duty. ALl those desseignes which men purpose, are to be compassed by action or ende∣uour, the end being first duly considered, that course or acti∣on which is taken for the ob∣teining
thereof, is the office of the agent: wherefore the Cour∣tier being bound (as a Courti∣er) to haue immediatly in his intention, and withall to pro∣cure, the Princes seruice; it is manifest that the action which he purposeth to do, is, to serue; not in shew and in will, but effe∣ctually and in act: and this is so true, that according to the quantitie and qualitie of such operation, the fauour in pro∣portion is answerable, which is the mediate reward of seruice; and the Prince which equallie diuideth the same, ought to measure it by the rule of merit, the which (as it is said) grow∣eth from actuall seruice, in such wise, that who most serueth, meriteth most fauour, and who lesse, lesse reward. This is Courtly right, or law: as the
right or law politike and ciuill is founded vpon merit in the Common-wealth, that is, of be∣nefits done vnto his countrey, which desert is recompensed ac∣cording to distributiue iustice, whose rule is (as in the morals it is taught) Geometricall proporti∣on: but to speake more fitly to the common capacitie, we say, that the axiom or ground being true, That most is due to him that serueth most, and lesse to the lesse seruing, and nothing at all to him who actually is not in seruice; it followeth, that they are greatly deceiued, who thinke with no∣bilitie only, with abundance of wealth, singularitie in learning, armes, or such like, to merit more than those vnto whom in respect of seruice, they are farre inferiors; because the reward of the Court (as hath beene sayd)
must be proportioned as from the efficient cause from whence it groweth, vnto the actuall ser∣uice. For as if you were to make choice of a Captaine to vnder∣take some dangerous enter∣prise, their pretention should be very vaine, that would per∣swade themselues, either for their beauty of body, learning, wealth or nobilitie, to be pre∣ferred in choice, before the more experienced and practi∣sed in matters of warre, though lesse learned, and inferior vnto them in other qualities: the like opinion is held of those who in Court pretend greater desert, for such like respects, whilest others in diligence of seruice go farre beyond them, because Courtly desert is not brought into the Court, but is necessarilie to bee sought for
there, and is by labour obtei∣ned: which labour properly of the Courtier is to serue. I say not now, that a learned Courti∣er is not of qualitie greater and more estimable than an igno∣rant, and a noble man than a plebean, although in seruice; but I say, these are qualities, which not put in practise or ex∣ercised in the Princes seruice, reape no reward with him, they cause indeed a precedencie of one man before another, as members of a ciuill societie, but not as Courtiers. So likewise, if (for example) we consider of one nobly borne in comparison of a vulgar person, it is most cleere he is of greater estimati∣on, as a man and part of the Ci∣tie; but if wee peize and com∣pare them as souldiers, wherin, it may be, the ignoble is more
practised and better disposed (supposing at least it bee so) without all doubt hee shall be preferred, and the noble man pretending the contrary should take a vaine and vndue excep∣tion. But heere we must not let passe a difficulty, occasioned by common obseruance, and iustly commended of all: that is, let vs suppose two in the Princes houshold, whereof one far ex∣celles in nobility, learning and other like qualities, but little imploied in seruice; the other much inferiour vnto this: It is thought fit by all, that the more noble & qualified should more honourably bee entertained: wherfore we see him sometimes honored by the Prince at his ta∣ble, receiueth greater commo∣dities, of lodgings, of seruants,
precedency in place, in title, in standing couered and in com∣plement; in fine, the Princes respect of him in estimation is very conueniently more then of the other, whereupon wee may doubt, how this may be an effect of Courtlie iustice, or how the foundation of desert should be seruice. Whereunto we answer thus; he who is com∣prehended in the Princes hous∣holde may two waies be consi∣dered, either as such a man with such conditions and qualities, or as a Courtier only. If only as a Courtier, I say it shalbe in∣iustice to him who serueth more to be lesse rewarded, or but in equall liberality with him, who in actuall seruice was his inferi∣our. If as such a man and so qualified, it is very reasonable, that who excelleth in good
parts esteemed of in common ociety, should be had in grea∣ter accompt and reputation. But there resteth a doubt if we shal preferre one consideration before an other, and that when, and in what things: for that we see many times the considerati∣on of one as qualified to bee preferred before the other, as a Courtier, & therefore although he serue lesse, is not withstan∣ding in better place. We see also on the other side, that the best qualified in some things stand farre inferiour, to the bet∣ter and diligent seruing Cour∣tier. For, speaking of fauours (for the most part) the best be∣loued obtaine them, and those are, the diligent carefull in ser∣uice, they haue greater autho∣ritie with the Ministers of the Court, and of the housholde
affaires of the Prince, yea and of the publike also, respecting the power of a Courtier-fauorite, & the recompence with profit and dignity, presupposing their abi∣lities, which ordinarily & with∣out compare is more large to∣wardes them. And surely the name of Minion, or Priuado, which we see commonly attri∣buted to those greatly fauoured in the Court, is not obtained by the best learned, by the greatest captains, the most noble, or the happiest in fortunes blessings; but by those who in their Prin∣ces seruice are most readie. So we see Seianus preferred in fa∣uour with Tiberius, and with greater liberality rewarded then any other that serued at that time; albeit we may safely be∣leeue, there were many, in ma∣ny other things that did surpasse
him. And also those Pallanti-Narcisi, and Calisti with Clau∣dius and Tigillinus about Nero, were not so farre in authority and fauour aboue others, as vn∣to an infinite number of those times, they were without all comparison most inferior in all other good qualities. Wherefore we say that the benefits which the Prince doth, are of two sorts, one which he bestoweth amongst his seruants answerable to their qualities, as men in that kind enabled; these benefits are apparent and doe not grow vpon any Courtly de∣sert of those on whom they are bestowed, but vpon the loue and fauour of the giuer; which is plaine, because they are be∣stowed in the beginning of ser∣uice, when we cannot say there was any desert before, & might
aswell haue beene granted be∣fore any seruice, and it may be greater. The other kind of be∣nefit, is that which is giuen to those, who with great diligence haue serued; and these are not granted but after seruice begun, and are augmented as the fauor by seruice doth encrease, which makes vs attaine sometimes to that pitch of grace that Seianus did,Ann. 4. qui varijs artibus Tiberium deuinxit adeo, vt obscurum ad∣uersum alios, sibi vni incautum intectúmque efficeret; who by sundry wiles had so bewitched Tiberius, that being close to all others, to him alone hee had him open and vncircumspect. But that which more import∣eth, he came to that height of fauor, that in the iourney which hee made with Tiberius out of the city, the Senators, non modò
aram clementiae, aram amicitiae, sed effigies quoque circum Caesaris & Seiani censuere; not only ere∣cted an altar of Clemencie and another of Friendship, but thought meet to place the i∣mages of Caesar and Seianus a∣bout them. Neither stayed hee heere, crebris precibus efflagita∣bant, visendi sui copiam facerent, most earnestly intreating they might haue the fauour to be∣hold him, vsing the seruant as fellow with the Prince; but more, that which seeemes in∣credible, he durst hope for, yea, and in scorne of wonder obtei∣ned in marriage the widowe, daughter in law to his Lord. Neither, it may be, is it of lesse consideration with the same Authour, that, which a princi∣pall man of the Senate, called in question for his friendship with
Seianus should say (amongst o∣ther things) in his excuse, be∣ing fallen vnto a miserable end through the whirle of fortunes rouling wheele; Etiam Satri∣um atque Pomponium veneraba∣mur, wee did likewise Court Satrius and Pomponius; neither did this suffice, libertis quoque ac Ianitoribus eius notescere pro magnifico accipiebatur; to bee knowen to his freed-men and doore-keepers we accompted a speciall grace. He saieth not to be deere to them or in fauour, but notescerre, that they would take notice of them: neither doth he say that it was necessary or profitable, but, pro magnifi∣co accipiebatur, as a high and speciall grace. At that time it was a reputation and credit vn∣to the Senators of Rome, not as then hauing altogether lost the
brightnesse of their place, to be knowen to Seianus freed-men and doore-keepers: To such degree of state sometimes doth fortune heaue a circumspect & prouident Courtier, by means of his place woorthily per∣formed, vnto which pitch of height, it is not recorded that euer any attained by fauour or recompence of his Lord who did not serue, but by some o∣ther way of merit liued in the Court. Wherefore wee must conclude that the office and duty of a Courtier is actually to serue, and that this is the action wherewith oftentimes hee becommeth not onely possessor, but dispen∣sor too of the fa∣uour of his Lord.
CHAP. VI. If in all things the Courtier be bound to serue his Prince. BVt to the intent it may the better be vnderstood what hitherto hath beene spoken of the office and duty of a Courti∣er, & that euery man may know within what bounds the duty of him that serueth is confined, and what things his office a bond embraceth, whereupon also the resolution of many things dependeth; it is very necessary to be vnderstood of the Courtier to whom it be∣longeth actually to serue his Prince, (as already is concluded) be therefore bound to serue in all things without exception. For cleering of this doubt, sifted and discussed by many,
me thinks, very many effectu∣all things may be said, neither spoken of nor heard of heereto∣fore, wherin we will proceed briefly and so farre as the vn∣property of the place will per∣mit, in this manner. If it were possible without externall helpe to obtaine hu∣mane felicity, so that euery man by himselfe, were of suffici∣ency to compasse it, Societies ould bee superfluous: but this is impossible, it hath beene thought necessary, not only to institute them, but with all to make them the more ef∣fectuall, fruitfull and firme, to giue them ability and vertue, to binde all those that are compre∣hended in them, to performe and act some thing woorthy thereof, in such sort, that euery associate, (as such an one) is
bound to endeuour himselfe to that end whereunto the society tendeth: and that this is true, there is no Society found with∣out Bond, nor Bond without So∣ciety, either reall or rationall, that is, with tearmes and fel∣lowes really and apparent, or at least distinct in works of the minde and vnderstanding, as more plainly we will set downe in the actiue Philosophie, which is the proper place. Wherefore the bond or duty, is not other thing then the habitude respect or custome which the associats haue together, which is an im∣pulsiue beginning to labour for their common good, as their only end. The labour or work∣ing which doth grow heereup∣on is called the office or duty of the associats, the which duty in fine, is no other thing then an
actiō springing from that bond, although this word, bond, is at∣tributed also vnto the action, so that in saying he doth his duty, bond or office, it hath all one signification. Now it is cleere that this duty hath a proporti∣on with the End, because that is the cause of the working, and therefore from it, it receiueth the rule, order and moderati∣on, which ought to bee such as the end proposed requireth. Wherefore he doth his duty who worketh proportionably to the end set downe, and hee who doth actions preiudiciall to such end, doth the contrary. But he doth more then his duty who doth things comprehen∣ding the end and more: and he lesse, who doth things that in their owne nature, are not an∣swerable to the destinated End,
or leaueth many things vndon, which to the obtaining of the purposed end are very necessa∣ry. Whereupon, both duty and bond, as hath beene said, being all one, euery associate is bound to labour and indeuor for the end intended by the so∣ciety wherein he is, and who doth lesse, answereth not his du∣ty, and who doth more, is said to exceede in duty and is com∣mendable, so it doth not pre∣iudice the society in any sort: who doth any action not be∣longing to the End, worketh idly and in vaine, but who doth things hurtfull to the preten∣ded end doth things contrary to his duty and bond. Where∣fore we conclude, that by the purposed end of euery Society, is drawen and knowen what actions euery of the associats
are bound to performe, and from which to abstaine, adding thus much for a greater decla∣ration, of the actions which may be performed in a society, some are commanded and fall vnder the bond which in that fellowship bindeth the associats therof, and these are the neces∣sary actions for the obtaining the desired end, others are for∣bidden and doe discredit the actours thereof, and those are preiudiciall or contrary to that end: In both, the bond of duty hath power, but in those which are necessary it bindeth to the performance, & in those which are contrary to the absti∣nence. Let vs come now to our par∣ticular purpose: it hath beene already sayd, there is a kinde of societie betweene the Prince and
the Courtier; the which for the inequalitie of termes, hath not altogether the common benefit for end: yet if not that alone, at least principally that of the Master, wherefore the Courtier is bound to doe all that which doth comprehend the benefit, profit or seruice of his Lord. And because aboue wee haue sufficientlie declared that the seruice which is the end of this society is restrained to the hous∣hold or oeconomicall part, in sort, that all the housholde actions which may redound to the be∣nefit of the Prince, fall vnder the bond of the Courtier, that is, binde him to effect the same for the seruice of his Lord: and on the contrary, all that may preiudice this oeconomicall ser∣uice, is forbidden the Courtier, and doing it, doth a thing vn∣worthie
his name; and by that reason may be called an infa∣mous seruant, since that as do∣ing well, to the desired end of the societie, he obteineth ho∣nor thereby: so who worketh to the contrary is defamed; yet not simply or wholly, but an∣swerable to the societie and his bond of duty. As for example, hee should be a very infamous souldier, who at the giuing bat∣tel should throw away his armes and flie, but not wholly disgra∣ced, because hee might then iustly be so called, as if he had betrayed his Prince and coun∣trey, or such like: for the reason which shalbe shewed elswhere: so likewise he is a dishonorable Courtier who acteth any thing contrary to the oeconomicall ser∣uice of his Prince, but not alto∣gether
a disgraced man or infa∣mous citizen. CHAP. VII. If the Courtier vpon occasion be bound to spend his life and goods in the Prin∣ces seruice. THe Courtier then is bound, as appeareth by what hath beene sayd before, to serue his Prince in all oeconomicall acti∣ons, & not bound but exempt from all other not conteined therein, as particularlie hath beene declared touching the publike affaires. Not, because doing any thing therein, he shal not deserue commendations; but, because not intermedling or not willing to deale therein, he can not iustly be censured.
The like both may and ought to be vnderstood of the parti∣cular offices of the Court, for that as the Courtier in generall comprehendeth all the house∣hold seruice, and is not other∣wise bound to any thing, as not conteined therein; so a parti∣cular officer or minister of the Court is bound onely to those actions, which particularly be∣long to his charge, and for the which he hath contracted ser∣uice with the Prince: in the o∣ther there is no bond to con∣straine him. But because it hath beene said, that generally the Courtier ought to do all things belonging vnto oeconomicall ser∣uice, there riseth a doubt, if therefore he be bound to neg∣lect all other respects, and not to care for any losse particularly either of life or goods, fully to
effect the same. For solution then of this difficultie, it is ne∣cessary againe to speake of some things very important, concer∣ning societie, but moderatlie, because in our actuall Philosophy wee must speake thereof with greater plainnesse and more di∣stinctly. Wee say then in the meane time, that particular so∣cieties do aime at some particu∣lar good wherewith more easily they obteine that onely happi∣nesse whereunto euery humane desire and thought is bent, as to the last and most noble end, vnto the which the others doe serue as meanes and helps, with such order that those neerest vnto it are the more noble and more desired, so that the inferi∣our is commanded and ruled by the superior, or at least with∣out the hurt or offence of it, na∣ture
not permitting, that a thing lesse desired, should be procu∣red with the offence or hurt of an other more deere and noble, for so should the course and or∣der of causes be ouerthrowen, & with that confusion depriue the second causes of that vertue and efficacy which they receiue from the first, and by conse∣quence make a surceasing of the motions which succeed: the which is true, not alone in the causes of naturall motion, a∣mongst the which the superior taken away, the inferiour can worke or moue nothing at all. As doubtlesse the elements should be idle, if the heauen the superior cause were not, neither would the heauen moue, if the internall parts assisted not, nor should that haue force of moti∣on, if from the superiour, and
finally from the first mouer, by tradition from one vnto the o∣ther, there were not vertue im∣parted. But so likewise it falleth out in designes and purposed Ends; amongst the which that is the first & chiefest, which by influence (as it were) doth im∣part the vertue of mouing the desire to all the rest, and doth make it happy, as hath beene said, and by degrees doth much more qualifie the next adia∣cent Ends, in such sort, that it is impossible for an inferiour to moue any affection without the vertue of the superiours pur∣pose: but much more to be a∣ble to mooue the desire towards himselfe, with a preiudice of that good, which doth exceede it. By example it will be made more plain. There is no doubt, but the sickeman for his health
sake longeth for a medicine: and therefore I say, that it is im∣possible he should wish for it, or in any sort consent to the ta∣king thereof imagining it hurt∣full to his health, and the rea∣son is, because the lesser or infe∣riour purpose or end, doth not moue but by vertue of the grea∣ter and more eminent, and therefore when no vertue doth flow from this, that other by no meanes can be desired, neither then doth it impart any vertue at all, when the inferiour pur∣pose or end doth preiudice or hurt the superior, as hath beene said of the potion hurtfull to the health. Now let vs come to our own case, and giue solution of the propounded difficultie, which most easily will be done: I say that the Courtier can not desire
in the seruice of his Prince, any thing that shall be hurtfull or contrarie to his owne profit and commoditie; the reason is, be∣cause he desireth not the Prin∣ces seruice, as thereby mooued vnto it. But by reason of his owne profit which giuing ver∣tue and efficacie to that seruice, to mooue the Courtiers desire and appetite, doth not suffer for the reasons before noted, that he desire it to his preiudice. Wherefore all that is contrarie to the Courtiers profit, mean∣ing that profit, which (as a Cour∣tier) is the end hee aimeth at; hath without question no place in his desires, whilest he desireth to serue the Prince: all which is occasioned by the dependancie of Ends, amongst which, his owne profit is chiefest and su∣perior; the Princes seruice, the
lesser and inferior, whereupon of necessitie that must be gran∣ted, because howbeit this Socie∣tie be not fully a societie, for the disparity of termes, so also is there not assigned for the scope thereof a benefit and commo∣ditie equally common. Yet not∣withstanding since in the con∣tracting thereof, the election of the Prince interposeth it selfe aswell as that of the Courtier, it should in some sort make common the benefit thereof. For if you bound it within this terme, that the scope thereof be the Princes seruice, but yet so, as ioined in a sort to the Courti∣ers benefit, because it is abso∣lutely impossible to worke for an other, not hauing an intenti∣on for some proper benefit. And this being knowne (as is said) by the Prince, he contract∣eth
the societie with a band on his part also, that is, to benefit the seruant (as heereafter shall be declared) and is contented the Courtier serue him, intend∣ing his owne profit: wherefore the Prince desiring, that either without this, or contrary to this interest, the Courtier should serue, requireth a thing contra∣rie to all right: neither is the Courtier in any sort bound to serue him. And more particu∣larly to come to the propoun∣ded difficultie, I say, that nei∣ther the Prince can looke for it, nor the Courtier is bound to spend his life for his Lord, the reason why, is, because the life is farre more deere, then all that he can either hope for, or desire in seruice. Whereupon as he should be held for one vn∣aduised, who for a lesser good,
should chuse the losse of a grea∣ter benefit, so should that Courtier haue little discretion, who for the obtaining of the purpose of his seruice, which consisteth in profit, dignity and power, would aduenture the hazard & losse of his life, which by many degrees is more deere vnto him, then al these benefits; yea such as without the which the rest cannot be obteined: and if weresolue thus touching the life, much more ought we vn∣derstand the same in case of ho∣nor and reputation, according to the Ciuill opinion, which is far more precious then the life in the highest degree. Concerning Goods, the resolution is not so easie, since those who propound vnto themselues, the increase or winning of profit, it is neces∣sarie they consider what they
lose and what they hope to get, because it may bee aunswered in this sort: That it is fit to spend lesse of a mans abilitie in his Masters seruice, then that which he is in hope to get by the same: neither is it ment the Mercenary Courtier is bound to impouerish himselfe, and suffer detriment in his wealth, fully and competently to serue his Lord. But who so preferreth dignities, honor and power, re∣spects of much greater estima∣tion then riches, may secure∣ly for the obteining of them spend of his owne, as voluntari∣ly, not of dutie, if the contract either expresly or couertly binde him not thereunto. The which point of contracts is ve∣ry considerable, amongst the which are the vse and custome of the Courts, the which more
or lesse tie the Courtiers to like expences. As if the Prince in a∣ny Court vse to keepe table for his seruants, the Courtier know∣ing the same, and bound to ser∣uice, is to serue at his owne charge; which in other Courts he were not, where the custome is the Courtiers shall be found their diet. But of like matters, as things of small note, there needs no longer discourse. CHAP. VIII. Of the Princes bond or dutie to∣wards the Courtier. HAuing now resolued and made plaine the proposed difficulties, it is requisire be∣fore wee passe any farther, to shew, (and indeed the Courtier may in reason desire to be satis∣fied) what the Princes office or
dutie is towards him, hauing fully set downe the Courtiers dutie vnto the Prince; to the end he may know what to hope for by his seruice, and how farre to stretch the limits of his pre∣tentions, because hereof it may follow, that hee will neither in∣discreetly make offer of his ser∣uice, not knowing to what end he shal labour, nor happely shal vniustly complaine of his Lord, as nothing liberall or beneficial towards him: a thing which as it many times falles out, so is it with all possible care to be re∣mooued, since iars and conten∣tions doe stop the passage to fa∣uour, and for the most part breed disgusts and pikes of ill satisfaction & diffidence both on the one side and on the o∣ther. But because these things shall be more largely treated of
elsewhere, we will onely heere restraine our reasons to breui∣tie, and point at that which to our present matter seemeth ne∣cessarie. Wee saie then that though the society of the Prince with the Courtier (as before is noted) be not a perfect society whereby the end thereof is not as in others, wholly the com∣mon benefit, there is no doubt notwithstanding, but the Prince hath likewise on his part a cer∣taine bond, by vertue whereof he is tied not alone to desire, but withall to looke out and performe, some thing which may be beneficiall and commo∣dious for his seruant. And this is that which at this time wee purpose to manifest, that is, vn∣to what kinde of benefit, and vnto what termes he is bound: because as the Courtier (by what
hath beene said) is not bound to serue him, but in some things, and in those also by certaine li∣mits; it seemeth very reasona∣ble, that withall, neither the du∣ties of the Prince should ex∣tend to euery benefit, whereof the Courtier is capable, but vnto some onely, and in those, vnto some determinate end, so that the one bond may be answera∣ble vnto the other, and that be∣tweene them, there may be a due and iust proportion, that it may not seeme, this Societie is rashly or inconsiderately made. There is no doubt then, but moderating this dutie by the End, such should the action be, as the first purpose requireth, and since we haue said the finall end or scope of the Courtier to be his Proper interest, it is most cleere, that as hee is bound to
worke or indeuour to bring to passe that End, which mooued the Prince to conclude societie with him, which is his Proper seruice: in like sort the Prince is bound to worke for perform∣ance of that end which moued the Courtier to linke himselfe in bonds of seruitude with him. So as wee may say, that the Prince is bound to worke for the benefit of the Courtier, in those things that the Courtier propoundeth to obteine by ser∣uice, and those are Profit and Honour. But the greatest diffi∣cultie resteth, that is, how farre foorth, or in what measure And truly, if we consider that in cases of Societie, no man performeth his dutie if hee giue not satisfa∣ction to his companion, which if he doe, it will be iudged that hee hath performed the expe∣ctatation,
this satisfaction then riseth from the proportionate working to that end which his associate desireth. Endes, as hath beene said be∣fore, are in themselues infinite, that is, desired without measure: so as the Courtier desireth not an indifferent profit, or a meane degree or dignitie, but the grea∣test that may be obteined. I speake not indefinitely, but as from that Prince, because hee must not in his desires extend himselfe further then the Prin∣ces abilitie doth serue, that rule being well knowne, that no man is bound to an impossibilitie: it should bee an insatiable desire, which should so farre carry any man to request more of his lord then hee can doe, or grant or procure by his authoritie. It seemeth then hitherto, that the
Prince is bound to offer al those honors and profits vnto his Courtier, which immediately or mediately he can grant. Not∣withstanding we must note, that as the Courtier himselfe, is not bound to doe all that he can in seruice of his Prince, when the performance thereof shall bee preiudiciall to his proper inter∣est: so much lesse is the Prince bound to benefit the Courtier in such things as are damagea∣ble or offensiue to his seruice, & so much the more, by any acti∣on preiudiciall to more impor∣tant and desired benefits of his owne profits: hence may bee gathered, whether he be bound to benefit the Courtier in things which bring dishonor or special detriment to his owne affaires or fortunes, danger to his life, disage to his person, or dis∣pleasure
to his minde: by these principles also may be exami∣ned, if hee bee to benefit that Courtier, who of necessitie is to abandon his seruice, and many other commendable thinges woorthie the knowledge of the curious. But because to proceed further heerein were to exceed those termes wherein a metho∣dicall writer is to conteine this arte, they are differred and shall be (God willing) fully handled in that part of actiue Philosophy, which treateth of Oeconomicall prudence. CHAP. IX. Of two sorts of seruices con∣siderable. FOrasmuch as I suppose we haue sufficiently discoursed of the purposed scope or end of
the Courtier, and of his duty in generall: aswell the order of the treaty as their profit to whom we intend it, requireth, that we draw vnto the particulars so much as we may, to confirme and establish precepts & rules for the more prouident procee∣ding therein. You shall vnder∣stand therefore; that there are two kind of seruice which may be done vnto the Prince, the first is due and answereth to the particular charge or office which is held in court, either of Steward, Treasurer, Auditor, Se∣cretary, or such like. The se∣cond is not otherwise contei∣ned in duty, but offereth it selfe of a free-will and election be∣yond all duty, and the reason heereof is, that the fauour be∣ing answerable to the seruice that is done: who desireth
greater fauour, then that deser∣ued by this particular seruice and proper charge which hee holdeth in the Court, must like∣wise enlarge himselfe in seruice, and by that meanes merit a greater portion of fauour, by prefiguring vnto himselfe an obiect which in the amplitude thereof may be answerable to the whole cōpasse of the seruice hee may doe to the Prince, but so, that the parts respectiuely and in proportion correspond vnto the parts of his seruice, in such sort, that to the office of Secretary, of Auditor, and the like, there be allotted such mea∣sure of fauor, so restrained with∣in his limits, that it partake not with that of an other office. Wherefore it is necessary for the Courtier who hath in pur∣pose to be absolutely possessed
of al fauor not to content him∣selfe within the termes of his particular seruice, but wisely to endeuour the extention of his confines in a more ample sort. Yet with this condition, not rashly to discouer himselfe an vsurper or intruder vpon other mens offices or charges, bicause this would breede hatred a¦mongst the Courtiers, and a conceipt of presumption with the Prince. And therefore must rather choose to deale with those which priuatly belong not to any one, but are indiffe∣rent to all, and may therefore be exercised by any Courtier without the preiudice or dis∣pleasure of any one. This kind in what it consisteth shall be declared in his place, in the meane time we will call it, vo∣luntary
seruice, as the first seruice of duty. But there ariseth heere a doubt, which is this, if he may not haue the whole fauour, who taketh not vpon him the whole seruice, which cannot be done without the offence of others, and it may be the little satisfa∣ction of the Prince: it follow∣eth then that it is impossible euer to be full possessor of the entire fauour. Whereunto it is answered, that to intrude into an other mans charge, not cal∣led & without authority, doth breed bad effects as hath beene noted before; but either called or prouoked thereunto by the Prince, or put in trust therewith through confidence obteined with him, then he both may and must doe it, where you shall
vnderstand that the order to obtaine such fauour, is thus: by seruing diligently to the Princes liking in his speciall or appoin∣ted office, that part of grace or credit is thereby obteined cor∣respondent thereunto, offering of himselfe in voluntary serui∣ces that doe encrease credit and fauour, from which encrease, occasion is offered (as more di∣stinctly shall be set downe) to insinuate himselfe into the con∣fines of other mens offices: so that by well seruing, fauour is augmented, & by this increase groweth occasion to posses the entire seruice; whereunto after∣ward is answerable, the absolute embracement of the Princes loue and fauour; for the win∣ning wherof the Courtier chief∣ly laboreth as the only cause of his felicity.
Yet heere riseth a greater question, because it is very ma∣nifest to be vaine and superflu∣ous to encrease diuers essences & things without speciall neede or necessity: though it be not without cause, the institution of many officers in a Court, since one alone cannot suffici∣ently satisfie the Princes affairs: and if then it be so, he laboreth in vaine, whosoeuer hopeth (as hath beene said) alone to vn∣dertake the whole seruice, and by consequence, it shall be la∣bour lost, to aspire the winning of the whole fauour. To this it is easily answered, shewing first by example, that in the greatest administrations, one alone may sustaine the charge of all the seruice of a great Prince: as hath beene done by the antient Pre∣tors and Proconsuls: who were
sent into diuers Prouinces: and by the Viceroies and gouernors who are at this day destinated to the greatest charges, and who doubtlesse vndertake the whole seruice of the Prince in those gouernments, for that in him, that is in his authority, the whole multitude of inferiour officers are vnited. Wherefore I say, that one effectually or in act of execution is not capable of all the offices in the whole Court; some of them being so nice and troublesome, that they require a whole man, free from all other care: but in effect he may containe them all, being able by his authority to insti∣tute, ordaine, distribut, mode∣rate and moue all; so that the whole domesticall businesse of the Prince may be perfectly sa∣tisfied: for that how be it this
seemeth the office of the Ma∣ster and not of any seruant, we see notwithstanding for the most part, affaires to be so little pleasing vnto Princes, especial∣lie of housholde matters, that they had rather leaue the whole charge, to the wisedome and fidelity of some one thought worthy thereof; in which sort it is not impossible that it should bee vndertaken by one alone. Yet it resteth that we discourse more particularly of the two kinds of seruices propounded, and first of seruice due. CHAP. X. Of seruice by duetie or affe∣ctioned. IT is necessary that first we be∣ginne our deserts with some particular duetie, a thing which
ordinarily happeneth to all that will haue footing in Court, be∣cause for the most part there is some speciall title of seruice as∣signed them, in the which they must by all the possible meanes they can, giue satisfaction to the Prince. So that, as accor∣ding to the old sentence, ex ni∣hilo nihil fit, in like sort, it is im∣possible for him euer to obtein any fauour, who hath no porti∣on or place of seruice; but hee that possesseth any part, as ne∣cessarily euery Courtier doth, may make himselfe passage to speciall fauour. And certes hee deserueth the name of a wise Courtier, who in the beginning can giue such force and vigor to his seruice, or any part there∣of, wherein he shall be emploi∣ed, that hee grow fruitfull and fertile in his Princes fauour, euen
to the last and highest degree: for those in course are most commendable, who by their dexteritie and Courtly valour come neerest to this marke. To doe the same then, it seemeth very requisit to begin (as it hath beene said) from the woorthie and due performance of his proper charge and place, where∣of we may not heere giue pre∣cepts. Because if the Courtier be to be Master of the horse, let him haue recourse to Caualle∣rizzi and such as teach to ma∣nage them; if an Auditour, to those skilful in accounts, & such like: the which as euery man may see are not within the terms of this Arte. But howsoeuer, let him endeuour to be skilfull in his owne office, for thereby he shall obteine that fauour and grace correspondent thereunto;
it being a thing not questiona∣ble, that an excellent Diuine, a Secretary, or Auditour, manife∣sting themselues by their works, should prouoke and allure the loue and fauour of the Prince, by so much the more, as they are more rare and excellent. True it is that here we must call to minde that which before in another place hath beene spo∣ken, that is, that the fauour of the Court is not gotten by the opinion of vertue, but by the vse and exercise thereof to the Princes profit. Whereupon none of them that will deserue well, must content himselfe to bee singular and perfect in his pro∣fession alone, but how with greatest perfection and rarity in seruice to giue satisfaction and pleasure to his Prince. This chiefly consisteth in manifesting
an exact diligence with a desire to spare no paines fully to giue him satisfaction: for as benefits ioyned with loue and kinde de∣monstrations infinitly encrease respect and duetie, so likewise seruice done with an earnest af∣fection and a kind of partialitie towards the Prince, worketh maruellous effects; this being most certeine, that manie petie seruices, and almost vnworthie consideration, only accompa∣nied with an affectiue shew, haue beene the beginnings of speciall rewards and incredible fauours: and to say truth, there is no such price or meanes to compasse or win loue, as loue it selfe. But heerin we must stand well aduised to shunne a most dangerous rocke, that is, curious and open affectation, which may breed an opinion in the Prince
of want of iudgement, in know∣ing whats conuenient, or els that which is more perillous, a doubt or supect of dissimulati∣on, and by consequence an ef∣fect of hatred or scorne, not a∣lone with the Prince, but with the Courtiers also, who take no pleasure that any man should be ouer-diligent, or in appa∣rence too-too passionate in the Princes seruice. Next, not to giue matter of iest by beeing seene beyond all termes of mo∣destie or decorum to become like an inamoured louer in the seruice of his Lord. This affe∣ction which is an excesse, con∣sisteth in nothing else than in making the shew before named with greater ardencie and more earnestlie than is fit, either in the action, which requireth no such diligent affect, or at least,
not of him that doth it, but of persons more inwardlie con∣ioint, and of the Princes confi∣dents: or in respect of the place and time, as where the Masters eye is present, or els such per∣sons as necessarily or in all like∣lihood will giue him notice of the same, it should be coniectu∣red that therefore he doth ex∣ceed in shew thereof, the which by so much the more growes odious, by how much it is dis∣couered to be done for his own profit and commodity: and the more ridiculous, being knowen the effect of a weak iudgement, to obserue decorum in himselfe, or in his actions, place or time, & other circumstances, al which proceed from a plebean and a seruile mind. But on the other side, it seemeth such demon∣stration and shew is done with
reason and conueniency, when in the execution of that which to our proper charge belong∣eth, we do so much as is thought fit and necessarie, and besides that, perceiuing in the Prince a desire that the action be reitera∣ted, or that a greater diligence be vsed therein, we endeuour fully to satisfie him, shewing to do the same, not only without any grudge or murmuring, but with a willingnes and pleasure, though it may be inwardly it be grieuous and displeasing, and therefore we must not attend til by command the Prince disco∣uer his desire, but diuing (as it were) into his minde, make an incounter with his pleasure, preuenting the discouery; be∣cause the Prince by nature ear∣nestlie desiring his proper ser∣uice, which consisting in the
Courtiers diligence, of necessi∣tie taketh pleasure to see him, not liberall alone, but prodi∣gall (if we may say so) in an ear∣nest curiosity and desire to con∣sume himselfe, for his absolute and compleat satisfaction. And in this sort wee must thinke, the Courtier exactly doth per∣forme his duty in his particular charge, from whence there is hope offered him, when time shall serue, to propagate and enlarge his confines, within the which his office is restrained, it being verie likelie, that the Prince being satisfied of his abi∣litie and readinesse in his priuat office, will giue a passage and entrance vnto greater affaires, which shall be the fruit to haue performed his dutie, as was re∣quisit, by reason of the place he beareth in the Court.
CHAP. XI. Of voluntary or assistant seruice. BVt if notwithstanding all this diligent obseruation of the things aboue saide, the Prince shall affoord vnto the Courtier no more fauour then is iustly answerable to his parti∣cular seruice; it is fit hee seeke out other meanes for his pro∣motion, and to say trueth, who∣soeuer▪ will haue, a greater re∣ward then which of due belongs vnto him, it seemeth very requi∣site, that he doe also some thing more, then that which of right apperteines to him, wherefore hee must not onely endeuour himselfe diligently to satisfie his owne charge or place, but to imploy himselfe withall in some other things, whereby the Prince may make coniecture of
the Courtiers loue, and inces∣sant will to doe him seruice. Yet true it is, that heerein wee must be very circumspect, because to insinuate or thrust himselfe into other mens charges without or∣der from the Prince, should be a rashnesse and presumption; wherefore hee shall note that there are certeine endeuors to this purpose very fit, as those which not onely are not hate∣full, but very acceptable. Chiefly this assistance seemeth to be in places, where the being is both honorable and commo∣dious to the Prince, and these are in the forechamber or that of the Presence, where manie strangers meeting, either by oc∣casion of businesse, or other complement, it cannot but be very gratefull vnto the Prince, to see it well frequented with his
seruants, creatures & fauorites, by whom they are receaued, ho∣nored, enterteined, and in the end brought before him. In like sort when he feedeth, it cannot but be pleasing vnto him to bee incircled with manie atten∣dants; As also in his visitations, or if hee chance to goe abroad, to haue many about him, assu∣redly will be very acceptable, aswell for their readinesse vpon any occasion that may be of∣fred, as by the honorable re∣spect which he receaueth, not so much by the multitude, which is a sign of magnificence, as by their diligent seruice, which argueth a liberal and be∣neficiall minde in him; where∣fore the Courtier must not thinke it tedious or time lost to be present vpon such occasions, the which thing will make so
much the greater impression, if such be his office, as by vertue thereof he may well be excused, because by how much lesse hee is bound thereunto, the greater note is taken of his affection. This then is the benefit which is gotten by this attendance or assistance, which in summe, is the Princes satisfaction, but the fruit which it bringeth with it, is of much more importance by the occasions which are offered of infinite consequence in this arte: for that by this attendance, in place where he is often sub∣iect to the eie of the Prince, he winneth euery day a greater fa∣miliaritie, and accustoming his sight to the obiect of his per∣son, the Courtier doth stil keepe himself in a fresh remembrance: besides all this, manie times there falleth out occasion of
businesse in some matters, the execution wherof either in their own nature, or for want of time or other cause, is not commit∣ted to those to whom in Court it doth properly belong; but to such whom chance or choice made present; and although this belong not to their office, as hath beene said, yet yeelding satisfaction, by the dexterous performance thereof, it mooue∣eth in the Prince a thought and will, choicely or by name to command him at an other time, and in the end to possesse him wholy with that charge. I leaue to speak of the accidents which may fall out, by one whereof, or very few of them, the entire fa∣uour may bee obteined. It is most cleere, that Seianus by ma∣ny sleights made conquest of Tiberius loue: yet that accident
of falling of the grott or caue, whose ruins he held vp, defend∣ing the life of his Prince, with perill of his owne, did so farre aduance his fauour, that after∣wards euen at his pleasure they might dispose of him. But a∣mongst the rest of al these, there are two most important bene∣fits, by this diligent assistance or presence, the one is the knowledge of the nature & hu∣mour of the Prince: the other is occasions, which often fall out, to haue discourse or talke with him. The knowledge of the nature, customes, affections & humour of the Prince, is most necessary, for imitation and ac∣commodating your selfe vnto him. The occasion of discourse or talke with him, is of no lesse infinite consideration and pro∣fit; whereof it being so, that we
shall speake heereafter; we will in the meane time saie some∣thing of the meanes how to know the humor of the Prince, and of fitting your selfe there∣unto; and after we will treat of reasoning and discourse with him. CHAP. XII. Meanes how to know the na∣ture and affection of the Prince. IF it be necessarie euerie arti∣zan haue knowledge of the matter wherein he is to shew the essence and forme of his arte and occupation; as the Tailor of cloth; of iron the Smith; and the Mason of marble: If the Physitian can not put in pra∣ctise his facultie, without a pre∣cedent knowledge of the body,
curable, and to be short, of eue∣rie agent, presuppose the know∣ledge of the subiect wherein they are to worke: we may also say it is great reason, that the Courtier being by his labour and industrie to induce and gently wrest into the Princes minde a loue and liking of him, should by so much as is possible haue a full and perfect know∣ledge of him, to the end that by this foreknowledge, he may order, rule, and moderate al his actions: since it is out of questi∣on, that there is not one maner of proceeding with all men: for we may by some way obteine the fauour of one, which would procure the hatred of another: wherefore if the nature of euery one lay open and were mani∣fest, so that easily it might bee learned and perceiued, it were
an idle thing to giue precepts to obserue it, or to obteine the knowledge therof. But because, than it, there is nothing more close or secret to him that hath not prying eies alwaies open as∣well of body as minde, it shall not bee superfluous briefly to discourse of this matter. We say then that diuers are the meanes wherby the natures of men are knowen, amongst the which the art of Physiogno∣my doth helpe very much, by meanes wherof some haue been able to penetrate and search in∣to the inmost and most concea∣led affects of the minde of other men: And howbeit the arte seeme full of fallacies, yet when many signes concurre together signifying one and the same af∣fect, then wisemen will not that it bee vaine to giue credit, as
setled vpon naturall grounds. Galen on their side is of opini∣on, and hath largely discoursed thereupon, that Animi mores sequantur temperaturam corporis. And vnto him the whole Col∣ledge of the best Physitions do consent, that the temperature and composition of the body being knowen, it is most easie to gesse what are the affects, manners and naturall inclinati∣ons of the minde. The Rhetori∣tians, amongst whom Aristotle, as chief & Prince, teach this ex∣cellent rule, to consider the age and condition; as whether old or yong, or of a middle time, whether noble or ignoble, rich or poore, whether potent or of meane fortune, and such like, vnto which conditions he doth attribute their particular affects and manners, so that knowing
in which of them any man is found, presently are his affecti∣ons knowen: we may besides ioine vnto these the education and profession, apt also to qua∣lifie and giue a habit to their subiects. Likewise in the books by me set foorth of Eloquence it is declared, that from the phrase of speech and meta∣phors that are vsed, the nature of him that formeth them may be perceiued, and this also to haue beene the opinion of an∣tient sages, whereof as I suppose in that worke I haue giuen suf∣ficient reason. But because these & such like waies are too much grounded vpon Generals, & to the Cour∣tier by reason of the place he holdeth, there is a more secure passage offered, we say that the true meanes to attaine to the
knowledge of the Princes na∣ture and custome is by his acti∣ons: and yet not all, but those of choice, because these disco∣uer the inclination, as by the ef∣fect the cause is knowen; and although dissimulation, at first sight putting on a colourable habit, and occasion of the acti∣on, either different or contrary to the naturall propension and inclinement, it is yet notwith∣standing impossible to con∣ceale or hide the same, from a circumspect and wise Courti∣er, for that if watchfully he shall obserue actions, it will easily appeare whether he worke na∣turally and by a contracted ha∣bit, or else dissemblingly; be∣cause nature being euer the same, and habits being gotten by custome, the actions must needes be vniforme and alike
within themselues. But dissi∣mulation wherewith nature is not inuested, but ouer-shadow∣ed cannot be of that force, but that some beame or raie of the true and naturall inclination at one time or other will pierce and passe the same, and this is so true, that as yet there hath neuer beene seene, nor is it pos∣sible, euer to see so excellent a dissembler, who hath not beene discouered and vnmasked by him who familiarly shall deale with him and carefully consider his actions by due comparing them together. Because the arte of dissembling groweth of a forced and contrary habit vn∣to nature, it cannot be, but ma∣ny times of his proper force withdrawing it self from vnder so heauy a yoake it will worke actions quite contrary to those
of dissimulation. True it is that the cunning dissembler is caute∣lous and wary, and therefore doth not disrobe himselfe of his habit, but either by violence or confidence: by Violence, I meane forced by some mighty hand to say or worke the truth, a thing which cannot fall out betweene the Prince and the Courtier. But there is an other kinde of violence, very profita∣ble, and to be considered, that is, an excesse of the affections stirred vp or moued: the cause is, reason being sometimes trou∣bled induceth forgetfulnesse of that caution, openeth the se∣crets of the heart, and discoue∣reth that, which dissimulation kept most secret, besides the promptnes or difficulty it selfe of falling into these excesses lai∣eth open what is the true natu∣rall
habit, because from hence it groweth that he is more or lesse prone or apt to perturbations vpon such like motions. But the consideration of Confidence is of most speciall importance, the which particularly consi∣steth in places and persons, and in the persons is considered the beneuolence wherewith they are made firme, or the opinion of their incapacity to vnder∣stand and penetrate, as also to make manifest that which they know in the places, for that the chiefest end of dissimulation being to maske or shadow na∣turall instinct, when the places giue assurance, promising secre∣cie by their remotenesse from the knowledge of men they do easily entice the dissembler to giue the raines & liberty to the force of nature; and by the same
reason, to discouer himselfe to muddy persons of little vnder∣standing, and lesse accustomed to their caution: or rather be∣cause naturall actions, are done with more ease & pleasure, they put off, or at least ease them∣selues of that habit of dissimu∣lation: they doe this and much more with persons of whose loue they are very confident, and therfore it is reported that Seianus varijs artibus Tiberium deuinxit adeo, vt obseurum aduer∣sum alios, sibi vni incautum in∣tectúmque efficeret: By sundry sleights had so bewitched Tibe∣rius, that being secret to all o∣thers, to him alone he lay open and vncircumspect. The Courtier then who ear∣nestly desireth to sound his Princes minde must, mal-gree dissimulation, haue notice of
his actions in his most retired places, know what talke he hath with common persons, particu∣lar confidents, and with those that either by age or want of wit may make him more secu∣red, because by the collection of the actions and talke obser∣ued and compared together, and the conformity or disagree∣ment betweene them well con∣sidered, the way will be very plaine to know him aswel with∣in as without. Taking care not∣withstanding to doe this in such sort, that for a Courtier you be not taken as a spie, and withall remember, that tamnescire quae∣dam, quam scire oportet: It is as fit not to know some things as to know them: To conclude, all these actions must be tem∣pered and accompanied with dexterity, the which cannot be
taught, but must be naturall, though by experience in many things, it be much refined. CHAP. XIII. The manner how to accommo∣date himselfe to the Prin∣ces humor. NOw that the Courtier shall haue perfect knowledge what is the humor and inclina∣tion of his Prince, it resteth to consider in what sort hee is to conforme himselfe thereunto in his seruice; wherefore we say, that the nature of the Prince, ei∣ther is plaine and open, and as they say, absque fuco, & fallacia, or it is encombred and shadow∣ed with a skreene of dissimula∣tion. If it be open, the rule is easie therein to be obserued, be∣cause to what he is seene to in∣cline,
to the same without all question is the Courtier to en∣able and conforme himselfe, professing armes if the Prince be of nature martiall; learning & letters, if he delight in know∣ledge; in holinesse and religion, if he be deuout; neat and deli∣cate in apparell, entertainments and all other things, if he vrge this; diligent and quicke in ex∣ecution, if he in his actions be exquisite and by nature speedy. To conclude, he is to adapt and fit himselfe by all the meanes he may vnto his will, and make himselfe, if it bee possible, the very portract of his properties and fashions. Because selfe loue which is the roote of all other loues, chiefly extends it selfe vnto his like, and more towards those who conforme them∣selues in maners and naturall
inclination thereunto. Besides, if he make shew of imitation not by pronenesse of nature, but by wil & of choice purpose, this al∣so is very pleasing, & is as an ap∣probation of his actions, man∣ners, and choice; a thing of all men desired: or at least as in tearmes of obedience and con∣sent. It is by oddes a thing more difficult to fit himselfe to dis∣sembled humors: because fra∣ming himselfe to that which fainedly the Prince professeth, it is most cleare that such con∣formity doth not light vpon his naturall inclination, and there∣fore doth not search vnto the quicke, but resteth vpon a su∣perficiall affectation: On the other side, if he will make pro∣fession of the Princes fashions with a close dissimulation, it
cannot bee pleasing vnto him∣selfe without his own preiudice, knowing that no man praiseth or commendeth that in ano∣ther, which he doth truly hate in himselfe (I speake in matter of cariage or behauiour) and surely hee should feed himselfe with a vaine hope, that should thinke to be pleasing by intem∣perance, to him that maketh shew to be deuoted vnto conti∣nency: or by a desire of reuenge to him, who either openly or couertly declares himselfe easie to forget all iniuries. To con∣clude, the Prince dissembling, cannot openly bee delighted with any one, that shall make shew to haue a habit in that, which colourably he is faine to couer, without manifesting the truth of his inward meaning, and making the false appea∣rance
to be knowne. But on the contrary, he doth not truly con∣forme himselfe vnto the Prince who doth not wholly fit himself to his true and naturall inclina∣tion. Wherefore in these diffi∣culties, it seemes the indifferent way is not to discouer himselfe openly or by a professed habit to be contrary to the dissimula∣tion of the Prince; (for exam∣ple) shewing himselfe inconti∣nent, with one that professeth temperance. For that this might in reason seeme a despising of him, and to haue in slight e∣steeme the disgust or displeasure which he by these actions and contrary courses might giue to the Princes open and apparent disposition: or else might breed suspect of his knowledge of the disguise or counterfeiting; a thing, which questionles might
win him hatred. But the Cour∣tier must shew himselfe to bee naturally inclined thereunto, al∣though in reason hee repugne the same, and be same to force himselfe thereunto: because that which is truly naturall vnto the Prince, shall so much the more be iudged a naturall incli∣nation in him, though masked with a vaile o dimulation. Hence it is very likely would grow great good liking in the Prince, and the high way vnto confidence would be made ea∣sie: besides, since needs be must lie open vnto some, it is cleere, he will sooner discouer himselfe vnto one, to bee of like affect, and much more if happily the Courtier be able to serue him in that inclination; wherefore we say it is necessary in termes of o∣bedience and of dutifull regard
towards the Prince dissembling, to conforme himselfe in some part to the coloured affect and fashion. But to make passage vnto confidence, it is more pro∣fitable to giue apparent signes of a true, or a truly dissembled inclining in himselfe, the which inclining must bee like to that which he knowes truly to be na∣turall in the Prince, vnto whose humour in my opinion this is the next way to bee conform∣able. CHAP. XIIII. Whether it be fit to haue often speech or conference with the Prince. WE come now to speake of the conferences with the Prince, and first of all let vs consider, if it be profitable
to the Courtier to haue easie ac∣cesse vnto the Princes eares, be∣cause on the negatiue part, it seemeth there are these reasons, as doubtlesse that this manifest fauour breedeth him great en∣uie with the other Courtiers, and how pernitious a thing that is, is very plaine, whereof wee mind to speake at large in due place: besides many informati∣ons are made vnto the Prince, whose author not being known, it is attributed vnto those, who often haue conference with him, whereupon followeth the hatred, not alone of those offen∣ded but of others who haue rea∣son to feare the like, beside the note of a malignant detractor. Heereunto is added a waightie consideration, that in reasoning the Courtier vseth many or few words: if few, he doth not fit his
Lords intention, who many times giues him this accesse, for entertainment of the time which he desireth. In this case to walke too warily, besides that it makes a shew either of a seuere or a dissembled nature, it giues no pleasing gust, but breeds a diffidence: if many wordes, a prouident and wittie Prince, (such as we suppose the Prince worthie to bee serued by our Courtier instructed in this art) will easily see into his manners and affections, which happily with more profit might haue been concealed, nor can this be but very hardly holpen, because the Courtier being to make an∣swer to demands, and to persist in his discourse, so long as it shall please the Prince, it is almost impossible to go so couertly to worke, that truth it selfe glides
not, or glanceth out sometime. And surely as loue is a most sweet torture, which oftentimes vnlockes the cabinet of closeth secrets, wherupon they are wont to say that, il caldo del letto, dile∣gua souuente il ghiaccio della taci∣turnita: The heat of the bed oft∣times doth thaw the Ise of se∣crecie, which husbands should in many things conceale: So from a minde not well establi∣shed and made immoueable a∣gainst the windes of Courtly ambition, the pleasure of the masters conference steales ma∣ny things from the seruant, which to their greater profit should haue beene better kept. But for all this there are on the part affirmatiue, more liue∣ly reasons and of greater force, because for certainty amongst all the passages offered to the
Princes fauour, there is not one of them, that by a more plaine and easie way doth lead to our desired end than this, because it doth intrinsecate and make fa∣miliar, yet so far foorth as a mo∣dest seruant may bee with a re∣uerenced master: It giues fit oc∣casion & opportunity to beare his humors and affections, and to giue an earnest & taste of our owne proper vertue and valor: a thing not of small regard with those who consider how many are in Court who through want of that commoditie to make their talent known vnto their Prince, keepe the same buried in sterilitie. Besides the reputa∣tion which it brings is held ine∣stimable, not alone, because making profit of the Princes iudgement, hee cannot but bee commended also, who is
thought worthy his domesticke and familiar speech. But yet much more in this, that because the Courtiers reputation consi∣sting in the fauor of the Prince, which in respect of other fauors we may terme abilitie and power to pleasure others; it is most cleere that this is chiefly expe∣cted from those who haue li∣bertie of often conference, and by consequence fit times to pre∣sent the petitions and requests of other men. But aboue all the rest, more estimable, is the facilitie which groweth thereby, to diue and sound into the deepest thoghts & affections of his Lord, and to shew in himselfe a disposition and nature pliable and confor∣mable thereunto. To this pur∣pose I must not leaue to note; that for oftentimes in reasoning
and like conference, the quicke and liuely sharpnesse of the wit, or else the dulnesse and pouerty of spirit is discouered, it is a most necessarie obseruance, to marke and search of what kinde that of the Princes is heerein, because though it seeme verie reasonable, that by how much the more the officers are of spi∣rit, life and capable of euerie command, by so much they should bee more respected and held more deare: yet shall you finde some kind of Princes, that as they will flie the extremity of folly in followers, so are they better pleased with a mediocri∣ty & indifferency, then with this singularitie and superexcellen∣cy. Mark what Cornelius Tacitus speaketh of Poppaeus Sabinus: Is modicus originis prencipum amici∣tia consulatum ac triumphale de∣cus
adeptus, maximisque prouin∣cijs per quatuor & viginti annos impositus, nullam, ob eximiam ar∣tem, sed quod par negotijs, ne{que} su∣pra erat. He was but of meane parentage, yet through the fa∣uour of Princes, that is of Au∣gustus and Tiberius, he obtained the honour of Consulship, and triumphed, being gouernour of many great prouinces for foure and twentie yeares, not for any great skill that abounded in him, hauing so much as was on∣ly equall to his imploiments, and no more. And this grow∣eth either of feare, lest from these excellent wits some thing might be plotted against their gouernment, or of shame to be vnder them in vertue, ouer whom they are in fortune, or lest their actions should bee censured and their affections
knowen, though arteficially shadowed: Or suspecting to want rewards answerable to their deserts and which might satisfy their expectation, know∣ing that high spirits, aime not at base and vulgar marks; Or (in fine) for some other hard and impenetrable cause. It is therefore manifest, that it be∣houeth the Courtier to be well aduised, and with circumspecti∣on to proceed and present him∣selfe with such maner of speech vnto the Prince, as he percei∣ueth may please his humour; whereupon, confidence will easily succeed, by vertue and meanes whereof many imploi∣ments not belonging to his charge shall be conferred vpon him, and next by consequence, the chiefest secrets, according to the qualities which by little and
little the Prince shall discouer in him, and this is the way and meanes to enlarge the confines of his particular seruice in the Court: next vnto the which followeth in proportionable course the possession of that fa∣uour, which with so great la∣bour is procured. Therefore as this occasion is greatly to be desired, so is it ne∣cessary to teach the meanes to make vse therof, which we will diligently doe, when we shall by answer haue cleered the dif∣ficulties on the contrary part set downe in the beginning. To the first therfore we say, that of two euils it is good to auoide the worst; wherefore the appa∣rent fauour of a Princes confe∣rence may breed enuy, yet is this much better, then by such scruple or feare to lose the oc∣casion
of greatest efficacy (that is, to insinuate himselfe into the fauour of his lord) which a long and tedious course of seruitude can afford; besides that multa experiendo fiunt,Ann. 15. quae segnibus ar∣dua videantur: Many things by aduenture are brought to passe, which vnto the slothfull cow∣ards doe seeme hard. And who well obserueth the courses of principalities and courts shall finde that true which Tacitus saith;Ann. 4. Dommandi spes in arduo, vbi sis ingressus adesse studia & ministros, steps to soueraignety are hard, but once entred vpon, both fauourers, furtherers and followers are present, but espe∣cially & particularly vnto those who are not sorted onely with fortune and audacity, but gui∣ded & accompanied with iudg∣ment and wisedome. Thus
much we say when enuy cannot be conquered, vnto which pur∣pose wee will heereafter giue more necessary aduertizements. To that difficulty of hatred (of easie growth by the opinion of reports and bad offices) we say, that who will be friend to all, pleasing, and at least no appa∣rent pretendor, gentle and offi∣cious, shall easily finde remedy against this conceit; & particu∣larly if he shall in effect abstaine from so hatefull an action, whereof in his due place we will abundantly speake. Next fol∣loweth the danger he may incur with the Prince in case of being too brief or too large in speech, wherein he must take counsell of nature, who is scarce and sparing of words vnto some, & vnto others too abundant and plentifull, aduising to correct
natures defect by the helpe of art, giuing suppliment to want, & abatement to abundance, by a iudicious prescription, which in such like cases must bee the truest leuell, and wherewith he must be fully fraught, who pre∣tends to port himselfe in the chiefest harbour of his Princes fauour. But as touching the vn∣aduised manifesting his defects or discouering some thing else that might be dangerous, we an∣swer: this art is not set down to men of so slight a stuffe, that are not masters of their owne con∣ceipts, and who cannot shelter or defend themselues (if at least they cannot auoid and hide the same) in such sort, as with silence to ouerpasse that which for their profit must bee kept in se∣crecie. But vnto such as must be apt to sincke into the inmost
parts of his Prince, by meanes of things connext in one, or many speeches: forming vnto himselfe by vertue of them, cer∣taine conclusions, the which if not demonstratiuely and by ne∣cessitie, yet at least by conie∣cture, and other obseruations taught before, may giue notice, what are his inclinements, plea∣sures, and cogitations; so that he may as well wisely detect his closest designes, as shunne the danger to bee detected by the Prince, although it cannot bee denied, the Commander to haue the aduantage in this espi∣al and discouery, as he to whom it doth belong to interrogate, continue or to change discourse at pleasure: yet these things do not conclude, that to haue of∣ten accesse to speake with the Prince is not very profitable
and to bee desired by the Cour∣tier. CHAP. XV. How many and what be the kinds of speeches or discourses the Courtier is to haue with his Prince. SInce to speake generally in matters of action is not so profitable, as by so much as we may to come vnto particulars; it is necessarie that we treat in speciall of the kinds of speeches which the Courtier may haue with his Prince, and in euery of them giue those aduertisements which are fit profitably to passe them. But to do this, we must first see how many & what these kindes be, wherein not procee∣ding in a strict and philosophi∣call maner, but rather confor∣mable
to common capacity, the thing in my opinion will not be very hard. Wherefore without keeping so precisely the pre∣cepts of diuision (one of the har∣dest things in humane vnder∣standing) wee will say, that wee talke or reason with the Prince, either for his pleasure and de∣light, to ouerpasse that time of leasure for recreation from the toils of ordinary affaires belon∣ging to his state and calling, & these we call speeches of enter∣tainment; or else our talke with him is limited to some end ei∣ther of a thing done, or to bee done, and which belongeth to his honour, interest or state, and these we call conference of state: All others, if any such there be, are reduced vnder these two. Of the which, because those of State are most important, wee
will handle them in the first place, and those of Entertain∣ment afterwardes. CHAP. XVI. How to take opportunitie to in∣duce a conference of state. THe first consideration is concerning the maner how to induce or begin these confe∣rences, the which are either touching the Princes interest, or things which in some sort be∣long vnto the Courtiers charge, and will easily giue an entrance to insinuation. But because e∣uery Prince, who for the varia∣ble multitude of his actions (wil haue as reason requireth, some order) is vsed to diuide his time, appointing to certaine houres setled imploiments, this thing must bee most diligently obser∣ued,
for that doing otherwise, besides the molestation hee should giue the Prince in disor∣dering of his course he shall re∣ceiue many times but little sa∣tisfaction, and get the name of Busie-bodie. And if the businesse haue no determinate and set houre, it shall be good counsell to reserue it vnto some of those appointed for affaires, keeping entire, so much as is possible, the time of recreation, not onely deare to euerie man by nature, but specially necessarie vnto those that with many toiles are ouer-wearied. But if the affaire bee extraordinarie and of im∣port, hee may securely change the course, and alter the ap∣pointed houres, withall (so the matter bee not of such waight, that it is needfull of the Princes instant knowledge) wee must
giue due space to those occasi∣ons, which either for healths sake; or safety of the life are fit to bee done, as times of diet, sleep or physicke, to auoid infir∣mities as well of body as mind, wherein to negotiate is forbid∣den. CHAP. XVII. What is to bee obserued in the passing of this conference of state. THe conuenient and fit time with speciall consideration being taken, and the houre of negotiating being come, the circumspect seruant, must ei∣ther first, or in the very instant, or so soone as may be, by him∣selfe or by some other meanes discouer the moode & humor, that the Prince is in, for all are
not of Tiberius mind, of whom Tacitus saith,Ann. 4. Negotia pro solatijs accipiebat, that tooke dispatches for disports: and much lesse it may bee to finde him still in one minde, nor to haue the same motion to the same things. Wherefore discouering an indis∣position to the businesse, either by some affect of his minde or body, it is expedient to re∣straine the conference into as few termes as may bee, and to a∣bridge the time, from being troublesome; for the ill disposi∣tion of the subiect with whom wee are to treat, is no lesse con∣trary to the happie successe of the businesse, then is an vn∣timely houre. I vnderstand this of affaires which necessa∣rily must passe, and needs bee heard, because in others, whose scope and end are the be∣nefit
or profit of our friends, or else containe some desired fa∣uour, wee must of necessity a∣waight fandi molles aditus, easie entrances of speech, and there∣fore reserue them till there be a composed, quiet & setled mind willingly disposed to giue audi∣ence, a thing which very seldom falleth out with some, who are so austere and sterne, that it is al∣most impossible euer to find ei∣ther fit houre or humor to con∣ferre with them. Such are men giuen to their pleasures & passe∣times, besides the which they thinke on nothing else: and such are men cholerick by custom or by nature, in whom either age or practise in managing affaires hath not bred a gentler temper. But if the Prince bee well dispo∣sed, then must the Courtier en∣deuour himselfe that the busi∣nesse
whereof hee is to speake (for somuch as belongeth vnto him) bee aptly and commenda∣bly set downe and handled. For the knowledge whereof he shall vnderstand, that to negotiate with a Prince, may consist either in laying open or declaring some fact or seruice done, to the end he consider thereof as hee thinkes good; or manifesting some businesse, to the end to receiue order for the execution and performance. And heerein also is contained the fauours or recompences which either for himselfe or others are deman∣ded, and in the one or the other the opening or concealing his opinion; or finally in declaring the maner of execution and performance of some action, which is commonly called a Relation. Wherefore in the re∣lating
any thing whatsoeuer we must first and chiefly haue re∣gard to truth, aswell for the in∣tegrity, duty and faith due by euery honourable Courtier vn∣to his Prince, as because hee may make a more commenda∣ble resolution, knowing that from false principles in good consequence a true conclusion is neuer gathered: next there is requisite apparancy, to ease the vnderstanding of the Prince, and lighten the burthen of the businesse and breuity: Not to keepe him troubled ouerlong hauing otherwise many diuerti∣ons of importance. Next in re∣ceiuing directions for the exe∣cuting of any thing, either by himselfe or others, there is re∣quired not onely a diligent at∣tention of the mind, rightly and presently to take the same, with∣out
necessity of repetition, be∣cause this, besides the trouble, would breed an opinion in the Prince, of incapacity, and with∣all a want of memory and reten∣tion, to performe the same an∣swerable to the intent of the commandement. But of all the rest, there is none of more import, than the charge to giue aduice and shew his opinion vpon any thing:Lib. 1. hist. Nam suadere principi quod opor∣teat, multi laboris, saith Tacitus, it is a hard taske to perswade a Prince to doe that hee ought. Whereupon it is necessarie to note not to deale therein but by command, when the bond of your office doth not require it, and howsoeuer it is fit to vse modesty, not to seeme too wise, and by all meanes possible to auoid obstinacy in your owne
conceipts, especially against the opinion and iudgement of the Prince. There is heerein requi∣red wisdome as the mother of all good counsel, and a demon∣stratiue inclination of loue to∣wards him, to the end that with the more facility, he may re∣ceiue that which is propounded for your profit. Lastly, in declaring things al∣ready executed you must vse truth, plainenesse, & al that good Rhetoritians set downe to make a worthy ation. But to all these things there are two most important aduertizements yet to be added; the first is Secrecie, because without that, in vaine is the Princes confidence pro∣cured, whose thoughts and in∣tentions, by so much as is possi∣ble, must be kept concealed, as∣well for the inconueniences
which may grow thereby, as for your own reputation, which will be so much the greater, as these shall bee the more occult and secret. The other is, not to vse too great curiosity, in di∣uing deeper into the Princes thoughts, then is conuenient, or hee thinks fit to reueale, re∣membring that, abditos princi∣pis sensus, & si quid occultius parat, exquirere, illicitum anceps: To be busie in quest of Princes secret thoghts, or what vnlawful drifts they haue in hand, is both dan∣gerous and doubtfull. And for certaine many haue erred heer∣in, whereof haue followed con∣trary effects to their desires, because seeking by this meanes to lincke and inward them∣selues more strictly, they haue oftentimes as too nice and cu∣rious been excluded all waigh∣ty
affaires. And this is as much as I thinke fit to speake concer∣ning Conference of State; now followeth that of Entertaine∣ment. CHAP. XVIII. How to induce conference of Entertainement. BY how much these confe∣rences seem least necessary, by so much the skill and art to profit by them is the more la∣borious, the which notwithstan∣ding must bee exactly kept and put in practise for the benefit which followeth therof, because happily these open more the way to Confidence, than those of State. The reason is, because these being induced & brought in by choice and for pleasure, bring foorth many times by
their continuance, such delight and sweetnesse to the Prince, that willingly hee riterates the same, and by little and little, lai∣ing aside Princely seuerity, be∣gins by this familiarity to pro∣portionate the Courtiers condi∣tion neerer to that of his state, and in time breeds a disposition to participate and impart vnto him many things, and so succes∣siuely doth enable him to take knowledge of his most secret thoughts; either hid from o∣thers, or onely knowne by rea∣son of their offices, not by free election of good liking, and therefore it may be not so fully imparted. Wherefore occasion of such conference with the Prince may rise, either of his owne nature, who will daine the familiaritie of his seruants, respectiuely in
termes and degrees to the one and other conuenient, or by some incident occasion, as time and place affoordeth many, or by the Courtiers qualities. And surely if the Prince be of nature conuersable with his seruants, the way to discourse and talke with him will bee plaine and needs no art at all: since either himself by demanding, recoun∣ting or propounding will offer occasion of entertainment. In these accidentall conferences there can no rule be giuen; and that which in them is to bee ad∣uertized, shall be noted in spea∣king of the occasions which the quality of the Courtier may of∣fer, whereof wee will now begin to treat. Since then these speeches are brought in for the pleasure and entertainment of the Prince, it is
cleare, that willingly hee would passe them with ciuill and well speaking persons, full of nouel∣ties and pleasant deuices to am∣plifie and prolong a discourse. To be Iouial and conceited is a gift of nature, which receiueth little helpe by arte, howbeit ma∣ny haue attempted to giue pre∣cepts of vrbanity and merri∣ment. The disposition also and ability of speaking well, is brought likewise from the mo∣thers wombe, but heerein with∣out all doubt Art hath a speciall share, since that if by a glibbe tongue and a hot temperature of the braine well fraught with naturall conceits, there be ad∣ioyned a knowledge of many things: the arte of apt & proper speech ioined with that which more importeth and helpeth iudgement and discretion, with∣out
all difficultie he will prooue commendable and excellent in discourse. Nouelties are gotten by cu∣riositie, and though with a lear∣ned Prince, doctrine and rea∣ding be great helpers heerunto, he must not for all this, neglect the knowledge of such things as daily do occur, aswell within as without his dominions, so that the matter of these discour∣ses may bee sufficiently ready at hand; because the disburdened Prince, allured by such like qua∣lities will take occasion to dis∣course with him for the time he shall stand free from greater cares. But for that it is no lesse necessary to offer meat vnto the queasie and weake stomacks for natures sustenance, than to the hunger-starued mawe, and by deuice of artificiall smels and
exquisite delicacies, prouoke their appetites: the prouident Courtier, at houres most fit and time conuenient, be it either af∣ter meales, when not to hinder true concoction by withdraw∣ing the vitall spirits from the stomack, it is ouerruled by Phy∣sicke, that for a while our minds haue leaue to play, or at some other time when hee shall spie the Prince at leisure (to which purpose diligent attendance in the presence much importeth) hee must insinuate and mooue some of those things which hee shall find most apt to please his taste and giue delight, which if he once perceiue (by vacancy of greater thoughts) hee take well, then may he goe on safely and with dexterity glide from one thing to another as com∣monly is vsed in long talke. But
if there shall bee no disposition, as quickly a nimble eied Cour∣tier will perceiue, noting his a∣ctions, bowed downe with waighty thoughts, or silent not willing to answer, or vsing bre∣uity to whats proposed, or else (in sum) to chop off occasion, cut off multiplicity of words, then, husht, he must retire, and look for better opportunity, or more befitting humour in the Prince, or seeke some accident which oftentimes fals out, either by some flying newes, or chan∣ces happening in the city, court or other countries, which ei∣ther by their owne nature, or some interest which hee may haue in them may giue him tast or moue him lend an eare to vn∣derstand what is discoursed or variably thought abroad.
CHAP. XIX. The order that must be kept in conferences of enter∣tainment. IT followeth that howsoeuer there bee an induction of these conferences, to aduertise the Courtier what hee is to ob∣serue therein, to make profit by the same: wherefore we say, that the scope of these speeches is to please the Prince, the acti∣on is talke, hee must then by meanes of wordes and reaso∣ning endeuour to entertaine & delight his Prince: and to speak generally, it is notorious, that pleasantnesse and iesting com∣monly are delightsome, though it bee true, that in this course there be danger of slipping into scurrilitie spurd forward by that vnbrideled desire of ambition,
to see the Prince rest satisfied without delights; which perni∣cious blocke by al meanes must bee remoued, by those whose aime is honour and reputation, because the profession of a Ie∣ster brings with it too base and ignoble estimation; wherefore it is necessarie with great discre∣tion to limit bounds vnto this merriment. Besides the report of news and occurrences which neither molest the minde, nor breed any trouble for any in∣teressed affection, there are o∣ther subiects very delightsome in these discourses & conferen∣ces, whereof the pleasure which they yeeld giues testimonie: which is not alone out of histo∣ries, but out of Poets and well digested fictions, which we see hearkened vnto and read with greedinesse. But because the
condition of humane nature is such, that wee are not all of one relish, or at all times in one mood (as wee haue oftentimes said) it importeth very much to know the Princes inclination, and more particularly his hu∣mour then predominant, when wee are to speake with him: to the knowledge whereof the ac∣cidents of that day, the matters handled, or the reports made vnto him, help very much, be∣cause it will be very easie to ac∣commodate our talke vnto his taste, knowing that louers wil∣lingly talke of their loue (but this with a caution, that there bee no circumstance of diffi∣dence or distrust which may re∣moue his minde from entrance into like discourse) souldiers of warres, the learned of letters, and the wrathfull of reuenge &
iniurie, and so of the like natu∣rall or incidentall qualities and humors in the Prince, because that doing thus, (but so that the cunning bee couert) himselfe will minister matter of discourse and be delighted to enlarge the same: yet must you vnderstand that these obseruations are meet in cases of recreation and pleasure, because in those of griefe and sorrow (besides that these were seruiceable for intro∣duction) the minde afflicted would affoord more ease; for sorrow seemes to bee succoured by breathing foorth her woes. But you must herein deuise with iudgement and dexterous re∣gard, either how to diuert and turne these troubled thoughts of the Prince some other way, by application of things more pleasing, if at least you see him
not willing to persist therein, or else to giue him some shew that you condole & haue a feeling of his sufferance, or by continuing it, if you see the Prince bee so pleased, because the power and will to prosecute, cut off, or change a speech vpon euery subiect and in euery case, is pro∣perly the Princes due, the Cour∣tier being bound to second him and follow where his wil in con∣ference shall lead the way; for o∣therwise there would follow contrary effects to his desires, it being very well knowen, that the minde doth no lesse abhor to reason of these things wher∣unto the will doth not incline, than to worke or execute any thing forced and a∣gainst the will.
CHAP. XX. Of praise and flatterie. AMongst all the things that can be obserued to be ple∣sing vnto any man with whom we shall conferre, there is none of more efficacie or greater force than Commendation or Praise, whereof an excellent Greeke giues good testimonie, who being demaunded what communication of al other best pleased him, auerred with an as∣seueration, That which cōtained his commendations, whereof the Courtier must take notice to obserue the same euen till hee come to the confines of Flatte∣ry, framing to himselfe this ma∣xime & assured rule, that Com∣mendations, or in defect thereof as wanting matter praise-wor∣thy,
an easie flatterie is necessa∣rie to whomsoeuer serueth. And although in Tacitus,Lib. 15. Ann. Seneca saith, Non sibi promptum in adu∣lationes ingenium, idque nulli ma∣gis gnarum quàm Neroni, qui sae∣pius libertatem Senecae, quàm ser∣uitium expertus esset: He had no readie wit for flatterie, which no man better knew than Nero, who had had oftener triall of Senecaes libertie than of his ser∣uitude in speech, it is but the te∣stimonie of no good Courtier, neither in reason may we take it for authoritie, his end making it very manifest, that happily he had not so great knowledge in matters of philosophie, as he wanted skill in the Courtiers art. I meane not now that by an ab∣iect and base flatterie he should insinuate himselfe into the Prin∣ces fauor, since he must haue his
eie alwaies fixed on the marke he aimeth at, which is credit, and honourable reputation, which neuer ioyne in companie with flatterie,Lib. 1. hist. wherein faith Tacitus, turpe crimen seruitutis inest, there is the foule sinne of seruitude. But it is necessary to walke vpon such paths, as hardly will bee found by him who takes not for his guide before he enters in, a grounded iudgement to dis∣course on them. Wherefore I thinke it worth the while, and not superfluous to speake some thing of this matter for the full instructions of our Courtier; yet because we can discourse of no∣thing, nor giue rules, if first wee know not what our subiect is, we hold it fit to begin vpon this ground, saying, that Adulation generally is an honour, which ei∣ther deseruedly or vndeseruedly is
giuen by the inferior vnto the su∣perior, to the end to please him for his owne benefit or interest. And this for the present shall bee the definition, the which wee leaue to examine as not proper to this place, and only tie the conside∣ration to our purpose: wee say also that commendations or praise is an honour done with wordes, and vnder this kinde flatterie is con∣tained, whereof we must speake in this place, supposing it to be a false praise amplified, to the end aforesaid, the which because it is little to purpose in this our treatise, we will heere serue our turnes only with the first part, wherein the most inward and essentiall nature thereof is con∣tained, that is, that it is a Com∣mendation: then will wee exa∣mine the differences, which are false or amplified.
Insomuch then as it is Praise or Commendation, it is necessary that it fall vpon some good part in the Prince, since the obiect of praise is good parts. The good parts (because it is now no time to play the Phylosopher) wee say are of three sorts, of the minde, the body, and the exter∣nall. The good parts of the minde are vertue and the natu∣rall powers and faculties, be∣cause we doe not onely praise temperance, fortitude, liberalitie, &c. but a pregnant and quicke vnderstanding, a vigilant and prouident minde; and because these are sometimes the effici∣ent cause, or cause conseruant of the outward parts, it follow∣eth that praising the externall parts wee commend also the causes of them. But to conclude, the principall commendations
and most of all to be desired, is that of the vertues of the mind: true it is that these are not of all men alike prised and esteemed, there being many who had ra∣ther be commended for wealth, power and honour, than for wisedome, magnanimity and beneficence; nay there be some so blind of vnderstanding, that had rather be accompted faire, comely, agile and gallant of bo∣dy, than more or as learned as Aristotle, or eloquent as Cicero; and who doubteth but that it was more gratefull and plea∣sing to Nero the praise of his singing than whatsoeuer other commendation either of tem∣perance, modesty or iustice? And questionlesse if any man should take vpon him to adde vnto the female sex, all those commendations and applau∣ses,
that pleasing eloquence could figure or paint out, but would abate their beauty out of it, I thinke there is none but knowes, how welcome and how gratefull such honor should be to any woman. Wherefore though the true and reall com∣mendations is principally to be attributed to the aboue named good parts, it is notwithstan∣ding very necessary, if the cour∣tier will commend with profit & to be pleasing, that he praise that whereunto he sees the Prince most inclined and best to satisfie himselfe, vrging this as a thing of most speciall im∣portance, aiding himselfe, with the knowledge of his nature, custome and inclination. There is yet an other aduer∣tisement of great consequence, for the better vnderstanding
whereof we say thus, that it is cleere, praise and commenda∣tion is naturally desired of eue∣ry man, the reason is, because there is in all men an innated desire of perfection, the which not alone in it selfe is most ac∣ceptable and gratefull, but with a particular pleasure makes those things to bee receiued which giue testimony thereof, no otherwise, thā as we see, that the comming to passe of such things which we haue longing∣ly desired, not only to be plea∣sing vnto vs, but withall, euen the messenger of such newes is very acceptable, and oftentimes munificently rewarded for his tidings: and therefore by the same reason whosoeuer com∣mendeth vs, as a witnesse of our perfection, is beloued of vs. But as in all ratifications false testi∣monies
are by vs greatly hated, in like manner are vntrue com∣mendours, who once knowen for such, doe highly displease vs, because we seeme not to re∣ceiue commendations or te∣stimony of any perfection, which we know to be farre from vs, but rather an vpbraiding that wee are not such as they would make vs seeme to bee; besides the deformity of the falshood which is discouered in them, whereupon we gather the small confidence that wee may giue vnto them in any o∣ther thing, as false and menda∣cious, besides the disgrace they fall into, as base and vulgar persons. Of all this thus much may be gathered, that we must not only be considerate in cō∣mending, not to incur suspition of falshood, but withall that it
is not alwaies true that Galba is reported to say in Tacitus,Lib. 1. hist. that, adulatio erga Principem quem∣cumque sine affectu peragitur. Flattery or assentation to what Prince soeuer, is done without affect. Wherefore we say, that the commendations being to bee credited, it is necessary to ground the same vpon some vertue or good part really and in trueth existing in the Prince, or at least in opinion thought to be in him, and what com∣mendable parts are in the prince hee may easily know, who hath that notice of him, as we sup∣pose the Courtier should haue: but of which of them the Prince makes most esteeme, must by obseruance bee learned, no∣ting, that for the most part we thinke our selues best indued with those things whereof we
make profession; the musiti∣an, of singing well, the Philoso∣pher of the perfect knowledge of naturall causes, the Souldier of the arte of warre; wherein being praised we easily beleeue it, & willingly accept it. Those which are proper to a Prince, are, wisedome, iustice, magni∣ficence, riches, power, glory, and such like vertues, and qua∣lities belonging to a person of so high degree, from whence groweth an affect, which wee call veneration, which doth meet or encounter his perfecti∣on, and is as a testimony (as wee haue said of praise, and should say of all honour) of the good parts which we esteem to be in him; the which testimo∣ny by how much it is giuen in greatnesse, by so much is it thought his abilities and quali∣ties
doe exceed. Of this kinde is that of Seianus,Lib. 4. Ann. when he saith, Se ita insueuisse, vt spes, votaque sua non priùs ad Deos quàm ad principum aures conferret: The great signes and expectation of Tiberius, had framed such a custome in him, that he would not sooner offer vp his hopes and vowes to the gods, than vnto the eares of Princes, the which adulation could not with more cunning haue beene set downe, because hee doth not only compare, but preferres his Prince before the gods in a thing easily to be credited: and so shewing that which is too common in experience, that there bee some so affectionate & deuote in their Princes ser∣uice, that forgetting their due recourse to God, lay the whole burden of their hopes vpon
the fauour of their Lord. But because what hath beene said hitherto, consisteth in the credit and testimony that the person of the Prince and his vertues or good parts do yeeld, we must no lesse consider how to draw some beleefe and trust from the person of the Courti∣er: and surely there is faith gi∣uen to such whom wee take to bee of a free and open nature and who make shew of that in speech which is within the in∣closure of their heart. This o∣pinion is particularly gotten by reprehending, for whosoe∣euer falsely commendeth, doth it (as we haue said) for his owne profit; but who freely reproo∣ueth, sheweth he hath no minde of other respect or interest, nei∣ther will by curring fauour giue place a iot from his true mea∣ning.
Wherefore an ingenuous and free reprehension is alwaies accompanied with credit & au∣thority. Tis true that in this par∣ticular we must remember this maxime,Tac. lib. 4. hist. which saith, Quando pessimis Imperatoribus sire fine dominationem, ita quamu is egre∣gijs modum libertatis placere. As an euerlasting rule is plea∣sing euen to the woorst Empe∣rours, so doth a modest kind of liberty in reprehension please the greatest, because if the Courtier passe those bounds in reproouing, hee may easilie coniecture, what effects would follow a serious speech that biteth.Lib. 15. Ann. Si facetiae vbi multum ex vero traxere, acrem sui memo∣riam relinquunt: If iests when they cary much truth with them do leaue a bitter memory. Hee must therefore dispraise in a sup∣portable
maner, and that may seeme rather a kind of praise, than a iudicious censure: which thing woorthy of speciall obser∣uation is done, not in reprouing vices, but the excesse of some vertue, yet with this aduertize∣ment, not to expresse or name the excesse, by those extreames which otherwise indeed are vi∣ces, and preiudiciall to others, but by those termes only which are damageable to the agent, with the profit of others. As for example, it is a vertue to be ac∣cessible and willing to giue au∣dience, and not easily wearied in dispatches; if then one should say vnto the Prince, that throgh too vehement a desire to satisfie others, hee ouerchargeth him∣selfe both in mind and body to the preiudice of his health wher of he hath no due respect; hee
should reproue him with a kind of flattery. Sobriety and tem∣perate abstinence is commen∣dable; who now would shew that he offendeth in being too strict in dangering his health, should smoothingly admonish him, and worke two notable ef∣fects, one, that by the reproofe he gaineth credit, the other that he discouers an affection and interest in the Princes health: But these obseruations cannot bee put in practise but by a wit∣ty, prouident and wise Courti∣er, who if sometimes with an ex∣pression or shew of griefe, or a light anger he ioin these admo∣nishments it will greatly increase his credit, because such affecti∣ons of freedome and plainnesse would wholly remooue and ex∣tinguish all suspition of dissimu∣lation, whereunto also will adde
very much the auoiding of all affectation, and shunning this decorum and seeming-wise-gra∣uitie, in your reprehensions. But aboue all, the most assured way to settle and gaine credit, is al∣waies and in all your actions to shew your selfe such as you pre∣tend, that the Prince may haue this conceit of you, that you are an ingenuous, free, and plaine man. And this is so much as I hold may be obserued in praise and flatterie, adding this as a note, that true praise when there is matter and subiect for it, is to be preferred, and in defect or want therof, to haue immediate recourse to adulation or flatte∣rie, the which consisteth in a little amplifying or enlarging, and is not altogether disioyned from perfect commendations: But when there is no matter
at all to worke on, it is lawfull to helpe your selfe with that kinde which makes an attribute of some good parts where none are, yet with that caution and circumspection which wee be∣fore haue signified. CHAP. XXI. Of the soundings and trials which Princes sometimes vse with their Courtiers. SVch is the maner then to praise, and such the rule to temper your conference vnto the Princes taste, the which by often giuing occasion therof, o∣pens the passage to make a large progresse into his fauour, for that the speech being a speciall testimonie of our other ver∣tues and abilities, if happely he take a pleasure in talking with
his Courtier, and finde suffici∣encie and aptnesse in him of performance of such things which doe concerne him neere, it is not vnlikely but hee may imploy him in the same, where∣by he may obteine some extra∣ordinarie grace, because some time such seruices are commit∣ted, which cause a full possessi∣on of an entire confidence; and such particularly are the ex∣cesses or extreames of some af∣fections: As of ambition in pro∣curing some high degree of ho∣nour; or of couetousnesse, ga∣ping after gaine, or of wrath, thirsting for immoderate re∣uenge, or of loue, longing impa∣tiently for the fruition thereof: And these I note but for the present, as principall affections and passions, in the which who is imploied may without great
difficultie ouerrule & triumph in the fauour of his Prince. But this fals out most commonly in some amorous motion, that is, because this affection stray∣ing farther then any other, from the pathway of reason, of ne∣cessitie there riseth more exor∣bitant accidents, either because they are more potent in disturb∣ing, whereby with a greater ar∣dencie the obiect is desired: or because seldome it fals out, that the pleasure & possession of the partie beloued, can be obteined without some actions, which disrobing the Prince of decency and decorum, make him fashi∣on himselfe to the condition of the Courtier, in such sort that there followeth a familiaritie as betweene equals. And true it is, that these performances not fal∣ling vnder the bond of serui∣tude,
and there following ne∣cessarily an election or choice, they are not sleightly commit∣ted as the other seruices which are ordinarie and of dutie, but with a carefull regard & a pre∣cedent knowledge of the inten∣tion, which the Courtier hath to performe and execute the same: whereupon the circum∣spect Prince finding him an apt instrument for his desire, resol∣uing to lay the burden of the businesse on his confidence, will proue and feele by conference, if hee commanding shall finde him ready and obsequious: and this is done by some with more, by some with lesse aduisednesse, according to the iudgement & dexteritie of the agent, where∣upon it followeth, that hauing these emploiments, it is a most easie, and an assued entry into
the possession of desired grace: It is also very necessary iudici∣ously to enable your selfe to vn∣derstand his very signes and beckes (things which arte can∣not instruct without a naturall perceuerance) and those con∣ceaued, to make that profit of them that belongeth. But be∣cause Princes many times speak not that sincerely nor frō with∣in, which outwardly in talk they make a shew of, but rather to sound and vndermine the na∣ture and qualitie of their ser∣uants, make their triall by seue∣rall meanes; it is a thing of spe∣ciall note therefore, to be heere∣in well aduised, and able to per∣ceiue when the Prince reason∣eth sincerely, & when couertly, for the better knowledge wher∣of I hold the discourse follow∣ing not vnprofitable.
CHAP. XXII. Meanes how to distinguish and come to the knowledge of these trials. IF these assaies shall be made by Princes of small experi∣ence, it will bee no great labour for the Courtier to discouer them, but because wee haue presupposed he is to deale with a person circumspect and cau∣relous, we say, that the first dif∣ficultie is, to haue a feeling that he is felt, or rather to vnder∣stand and peize the full waight and meaning of euery word the Prince shall speake, it being cleere, that discourses to this end, will passe vailed vnder fi∣guratiue and ambiguous spee∣ches, not much vnlike to Ora∣cles, concluding with such ob∣scuritie
and clowdinesse, that the disciphering and conceit of them wil be very difficil to him whom nature hath not giuen a wit more pregnant, sharpe and prouident, than to the ordina∣rie. Wherefore this first point falls out within the compasse of our arte, because to be heedy & watchfull, is not a thing that precepts can affoord, if nature list not to be bountifull. But vn∣derstanding the force of the wordes, and perceiuing this treaty is but to tempt, Art here∣in may yeeld great help, in dis∣couery betweene a true and fai∣ned triall, that is, which of them the Prince doth to the end to vse the Courtiers helpe therein, if happily he accept the charge, and which of them, but for dis∣couerie of his inclinations and affections.
First therfore when the Prince purposeth but to feele or vn∣dermine, his desire is onely the knowledge of the Courtiers intentions, whereupon because he hath the greater interest, he doth it with the more regard and lesse feare, but hauing a minde actually to command and impose some charge from which the Courtier may per∣chance retire himselfe, hee tries him then more bashfully and more warily: heereof it follows that these Soundings are made with more circumspection and more obscuritie, so that not fin∣ding the foord pasable, it shall be in the Princes power to step backe without danger of disco∣uerie. The other Vnderminings which are vndertaken by disti∣mulation, & falsly, are only done to winne the knowledge of the
Courtiers nature, albeit they are no lesse by a wise Prince to be handled with great dexteritie & arte; yet because the impul∣siue cause bindes not so much, they are done somewhat more plainlie. This is then a proba∣ble signe how to distinguish of like soundings or trials. But who would doe it yet more exactly, it is necessary he consider foure things, that is, the nature and inclination of the Prince, the quality of the thing, whereof the taste is giuen, the present occasion in respect of the Prince, and the actions by him∣selfe committed in that Court. How to come to the Princes nature and inclination (vnlesse I be deceiued) hath sufficiently in his place beene declared be∣fore. To vnderstand the quali∣tie of the thing, cannot bee of
that difficulty, that there should neede many precepts, and lesse doth it belong to this arte to set them down, but thus much may be said, that the na∣ture and quality of the thing being perfectly knowen, wee must conferre the same with the propensity and inclination of the Prince, meditating whe∣ther any such disposition may in any likely-hood, ingender in him such a cogitation or de∣sire of the same or such like thing. For example, who knowing the nature of the Prince to bee sterne, seuere, temperatly giuen to his affairs, abhorring & detesting lasciui∣ous pleasures, should finde him make a triall in motion, of a∣morous thoughts and passions of loue; might well suspect this motion to bee false, for that
comparing the cause with the nature of the Prince, he should not finde that sympathie or correspondence that belongs. Howbeit to this consideration, it were fit to ioyne that of acci∣dents or occasions, because many times a naturall disposition by some euent or other chance, may be so changed, that who hath not speciall regard there∣unto shall often be deceiued: as if to a Prince of a quiet pleasing nature, forgetfull of wrongs, there were some no∣table iniury offered whereby hee should bee much ingaged or stained in reputation, if hee should not by his best inde∣uours procure reuenge, or were it for some other speciall cause he must put on reuenge; hee should bee mightily deceiued, who either not knowing, or
not aduertising such accidents should ground his iudgement only in cōparing of the thing, that is, reuenge, with the nature of the Prince: Wherefore the knowledge of occasions and of accidents which intercur, is very necessary for distinction of these feeling motions. And this may be obteined by a curi∣ous obseruation, the which (leauing as impertinent to search the secrets of his Prince) as a most profitable quality is highly to bee commended in the Courtier, for by knowing many things; he shall with the more facility take the better re∣solutions in many cases. And therefore we may not let slip in his fit place to set downe the meanes how with ease to come to the knowledge of all that is done and said in Court.
The consideration of the Courtiers proper actions, is also no lesse needfull in this distin∣ction, for that either they are such, as easily discouer his in∣ward affections and naturall in∣clinations, & are taken as open and free, or else such as giue a shew of dissimulation, and seeme not of themselues suffi∣cient to discouer his intentions. Who then hath shewed him∣selfe free and plaine, hath no reason to suspect that he is felt or vndermined, for his minde or dispositions sake already pre∣supposed to bee knowen by his actions; but rather to finde how he is inclined in the accep∣tance or refusall of the executi∣on of that charge which may be imposed vpon him. On the other side, who hath carried himselfe circumspectly, hath
more reason to beleeue that the Prince doth sound him, to finde the depth of his conceits and humour; yet heere we may not let to say, but that these plaine and open Courtiers may be ta∣sted too, either in things wher∣in they are already known as in∣clining and disposed, or in their contraries. In those then wher∣in their diisposition is already knowen, it is most true, these trials cannot be for their disco∣uery, but it may well fall out in that which is the contrary, be∣cause though it seeme very pro∣bable, that the contrary dispo∣sition takes away all confidence to receiue any benefit by their seruice, notwithstanding, who is in a longing desire, vseth by all circumstances to giue his hope an easie passage not to finde a contradiction; and to
conclude, in the selfe same things may false alarmes and trials be made. For our minde being so full of lurking corners, a man can neuer so well assure himselfe of anothers outward thoughts, that some scruple or ambiguitie will not still remain. But here we must make a distin∣ction, because things openly professed, are either commend∣able or wicked: if they be bad, tis plaine, that for such we must take the disposition of the cour∣tier that professeth them, as his actions shew for; for he should be too great an ignorant, who hauing a vertuous bent and dis∣position, would maske it with a shew of vice and wickednesse, neither doth ciuill custome suf∣fer it, as our Moralists report, who make it lawfull to the Ar∣tizans and Mechanists to doe
their worke by arte or without arte. But the Artificer of ma∣ners (if we may terme it so) must neuer chuse to doe any thing contrary to vertue; for other∣wise he should neuer commend∣ably be fashioned. Wherefore who openly makes shew to be enclined well, shall neuer falsly be attempted in his owne pro∣fession: yet those which do but giue a taste therof (as hath been sayd) may looke for triall now or then. CHAP: XXIII. What the Courtier is to do, know∣ing and perceiuing these soun∣dings or trials. AFter the warie Courtier shall haue conceiued that the Princes conference was on∣ly induced but to feele his pulse,
or bring him to the crucible of his triall; and next, whether this proofe be really made to make some vse of him, or but to see of what mettle he is made: it resteth to set downe how hee is to gouerne himselfe fruitful∣ly to make profit of such occasi∣on offered. Wee say then, that by what already hath bene said, it is well knowen to what acti∣ons the Courtiers dutie bindes him, what actions are not con∣teined within the same, & what are directly contrary vnto his duty. Wherfore ioyning heere∣unto another distinction, that is, of false or true trials, we may say, that if these trials be known for false, falling vpon things contrary vnto duty in that kind which may distaine his honour, there is no doubt but resolutely and without feare of offence he
may giue the repulse, denying that which with his honour hee can not grant vnto, and which hee knoweth not if seriouslie motioned or desired, or rather it should be much to the pur∣pose, to shew a mind abhorring all such thoughts. But this is when you know you are to deale with a Prince vertuously addicted: for if otherwise, you might put in practise the rule before set downe, of fitting your selfe vnto the Princes humour, shewing your selfe either artifi∣cially or truely to be like vnto him. And this may you doe in all things when these attempts shall be made for discouerie of your fashions onely; sith there growing no effect or action thereupon, there will be no danger of impeachment in ho∣nour: and besides, you shall
notably gaine the beneuolence and fauour of the Prince by this conformity of thoughts and in∣clination. But here riseth a dif∣ficultie, whereunto necessarilie consideration must be had, for discouering a disposition like vnto that of the Prince, euen in matters of small commendati∣ons, if it shall giue an occasion of hope, that the Prince resol∣uing to vse the helpe of the Courtier, hee might easily ob∣teine the same, a thing which following, in effect blotteth and staineth the authour of the worke, and denying it moues a disdaine in the Commander; and so much the greater, per∣ceiuing himselfe deceiued by the Courtiers false dissembling speech. On the other side, to shew himselfe farre from the humour of the Prince, is not
answerable to that discretion which hath beene said, must be vsed therein, for the better ob∣teining of his fauour: wherfore it seemeth best to keepe the middle path, neither to disco∣uer too great a woonder, or too great a nicenesse of those thoughts which we shall know in the Prince, either by naturall inclination or by accident; and no lesse altogether to seeme so pliable and conformable (parti∣cularly in those which are awai∣ted on with little credit) as to giue him hope to find the Cour∣tier at his pleasure, to be his in∣strument in them, although in some things which are repug∣nant to his proper benefit, or not comprized in the seruice belonging to a Courtier, hee must shew himselfe most ready, and more desirous of the Prin∣ces
satisfaction, than whatsoe∣uer profit of his owne. But if the feeling motion be sincerely made to vse the Courtier as a minister in some thing, wherein he is not compelled to discouer his own nature and inclination, but only his will and agreement to the command, hee must in this also distinguish the matter and the subiect; for if the com∣mand light on commendable actions, although they be not within the limits of his duetie, but meerely contrary vnto his profit, he must offer himselfe most prone and willing, remem∣bring that by how much his du∣dutie extends but vnto pettie things, by so much the more shall be oblige the Prince to be answerable in loue and affecti∣on, since bounden-duties passe but for paiment, but seruices
not due, haue place of benefit, of the which, all men know which is more acceptable. But all the difficulty consisteth in the resolution of that which ought to be done, when these soundings are in dishonorable things, or periudiciall to the marke or scope the Courtier chieflly aimeth at, in which case there is more lost by the perfor∣mance, than can be got by ho∣nest seruice of long time, and who pulles backe his aide and helpe heerein loseth the confi∣dence and fauour of the Prince, it being cleere,Lib. 14. Ann. 4. that grauiorum scelerum, non modò ministri, as Tacitus saith, sed etiam conscij, tanquam exprobrantes aspiciun∣tur: Not onely the actors of great wickednesses, but such as were but made acquainted therewithall, are looked on as
vpbraiders of the same, and that especially when they shall deny their helpe, in the execution whereof wee may say heerein, that if there be not an error in the election of the Prince at first, this difficulty will not hap∣pen, because seruing of a ver∣tuous lord there is no cause to feare commandements leaning to dishonesty. But yet when either by the foresaid error, or by other accident, you shall finde your selfe in so doubtfull a case of counsell; then must the honorable Courtier by force of the obstinate anchor of vertuous purposes, resist the blasts of his Princes bad perswa∣sions or commands, conside∣ring, that, by obeying him, his assured losse should far exceed the estimate of any gaine, which hee might looke for by his
grace: yet will I not leaue to giue aduertisment here, that in this iudgement of the actions which may seeme contrary to his purpose, or hurtfull, or of small reputation, the Courtier must not with too seuere a cen∣sure or a piercing eie examine or behold the same, since many things are permitted and suffe∣rable vnder the necessity of ser∣uice, so that they are not tainted with that turpitude or ill, being not performed by a free and willing choice, or at least, not with more then easily may bee washt away, by the greatnesse of the benefits, which by the Princes fauour are many times obtained: whereby it is cleere, these scrupulous & nice Cour∣tiers can neuer procure confi∣dence, sith he merits no fauor, that is so much friend to his
owne commodity, that he will not at least breake a little of the stocke, but after a most misera∣ble rate, will spend no more then meere necessity constrains him to. To conclude, I must say that all sinnes are not mor∣tall, and that to the dutie of ser∣uice so much is pardonable, as may for the pleasure and ser∣uice of his Prince bee done in some things, if not honorable, at least without such note of in∣famy, as in a person at full liber∣ty could not be born out with∣out passing censure or incur∣ring blame. Which these are, cannot particularly be pointed at, but the iudicious Courtier by himselfe may well conceiue them, and chiefly since the worthinesse and waight of all actions consisteth in the ver∣dict and opinion of men. So
that by what is commonly bla∣med in other which doe serue, either for denying with too great seuerity, or too too gently granting and assenting to the prince he may easily know what arts of seruice are truely to bee denied, and wherin securely he may please and giue satisfacti∣on to his Lord. But when they are vnbeseeming and vnfit to be put in practice, whosoeuer doth more esteeme his honour and reputation, (before the which (vertue excepted) there is nothing amongst men more estimable) than his Princes fa∣uour, ought, at least, if not stoutly and boldly, yet reser∣uing tearmes of modesty and regard due betweene parties of vnequality, deny to be actor or minister therein, annexing to this deniall notwithstand∣ding
all obsequious and hum∣ble duty that words can afford for iust excuse, to smooth and sweeten as much as may be, the bitternesse which commonly doth follow such repulses, re∣soluing firmly in his mind, that for what soeuer hope of bene∣fit, to stand immoueable in his commendable purpose, to doe or act nothing that may be pre∣iudiciall or staine to his reputa∣tion, hoping rather that this might finde such force in the Princes minde, of a well incli∣ned nature, a magnanimous & generous spirit, that euen ina∣moured with the approoued goodnesse of his Courtier, hee will fashion him vnto his loue, and that which should haue beene a cause of hate may bee the beginning of good will and fauour; a thing which though
rarely happening, yet is it pos∣sible, and sometimes comes to passe. Yet if this repulse take his true and vsuall course, so that the Prince indeede con∣ceiue a hatred against the cour∣tier, either because hee found him not resolute and prompt in that seruice, as he expected, or for knowing of it better then himselfe, & so by consequence more woorthy of his fortunes or his place, or else as hath been said before, because grauiorum facinorum non solùm ministri, sed etiam conscij quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur. Then, he perceiuing the Princes slight regard and little fauour, it should be fit to take such course for re∣medy, as we heereafter in such cases shall set downe.
CHAP. XXIIII. Of the subsidiary aids and meanes to obteine the Princes fauour. HItherto hath beene decla∣red, as I suppose, so much as a prouident, carefull & wise Courtier may worke of him∣selfe, to the end to obteine his Princes fauour. And surely, if he shall obserue these precepts, seasoned with that discretion which the effecting of an enter∣prise (for many respects) so dif∣ficult and laborious doth re∣quire, it should be much and very strange, if he procure not what he hath proposed, since this alone and none other see∣meth the beaten way, which most securely will leade vs to the possession of anothers fa∣uour, the which yet if it should
be thought impregnable and inuincible by our proper for∣ces, it is necessarie to call in aid vnto this assault, some volunta∣rie succours, seeking to procure that victorie by others meanes, which by our owne labor hard∣ly we could haue purchased, to the end we let slip no meanes, or leaue any thing vnattempted which may seeme profitable a∣ny wayes vnto our purpose. Who therefore by himselfe can not attaine his Princes fauour, let him procure it by some other aids: but it is requisit that these stand graced with the Prince. Wherefore there are three sorts of persons who seeme apt vnto this vse; the Princes kindred, his friends, his fauoured seruants. Of all these we must distinctlie speake apart, to the end the pro∣fit may be knowen, that may be
drawen from them, and what aduertisements are fit to be ob∣serued, that his labor may fruit∣fully be employed, and bring forth that effect which is desi∣red, it being notorious, that all things (saue vertue only) may be either well or ill vsed; wher∣fore it is needfull to be skilfull in the arte and vse of euery one, so that they may be vsed con∣formable to that our chiefest scope doth most require. It must not therfore be thought superfluous to entreat of these meanes or helps, because in the practise there do occurre many things worthy speciall conside∣ration, which being vnknowen, their aid should be to smal pro∣fit, or greater detriment of the Courtier which shall vse them: And because the instrument of greatest force and efficacie, in
all reason, is that of the kindred, as most neere vnto the Prince both by the law of God & Na∣ture; in the second place is that of friends, and in the last, the Courtiers or fauoured seruants: in the same ranke wee will treat of them, beginning with the kindred first. CHAP. XXV. Of the helpe which may be drawen from the Princes kindred for procurement of his fauour. IT is a work of nature not on∣ly to loue those vnto whom by neerenesse of bloud she hath conioned vs, but those with∣all who are by them beloued; wherefore if the Prince by this disposition bee not induced to entertaine the Courtier into his
seruice, at least the fauour of these kindred may giue occasi∣sion thereof, who vsing him in affaires which happely they haue in cōmon with the Prince, may by little and little insinuate and promote him into his ser∣uice, or finally they may prefer him by intercession and medi∣ation, which iustly may be held of so much efficacie as the con∣dition of the party requiring the same is thought of worth, wher∣by the Courtier oftentimes in verie short space attaines to that which by a long course of ser∣uice by himselfe he should hard∣ly procure: besides to bee shel∣tred vnder the fauor of the kin∣dred is a cause of his speciall re∣putation in the Court, through the abilitie hee may haue by meanes of them to hurt his ene∣mies, and helpe his friends and
confidents. This then is profit, which by the fauour of the Princes kindred, may with great likelihood bee expected. But because so it hath pleased God almost in all things to make an intermixture of the good with the badde, and of profit with his contrarie, that he might bee the more commendable, who with discretion can make a dif∣ference, or wisely make his choice, wee must heerein consi∣der some things, the which ei∣ther neglected or not aduerted may turne to the great preiu∣dice of the Courtier. Wee saie then that the Princes kindred are either men or women, and both the one and the other are either yoong or of competent age: As for the women if they be of tender and fresh yeeres, by familiarity with them first grow∣eth
suspition, which of it selfe were cause sufficient of the Courtiers ouerthrow, and chief∣ly by the occasion, which is offred to the enuious to misin∣terpret actions in so perillous a matter, and by suggestions still to giue greater cause of doubt. Besides this (howbeit, I presup∣pose the Courtier of honorable carriage, and friend to right, and therefore well resolued in him∣selfe) if wee must abstaine from other mens wiues or women, it is much more required towards those who are naturally conioi∣ned to the Prince in bloud; yet for all this, experience maketh it too plaine, that euen the most austerely minded, & most firme and strongly setled in their purposes, haue oftentimes gi∣uen place to the enticements of alluring occasions: and surely
he who knowes not how much the practises of a beautious Dame may entender and mol∣lifie the hardened minde of a man not yet surcharged with maturitie, giues signe of little knowledge in the worldes af∣faires, chiefly adding to natural inclination, a little spurre of am∣bitious vanitie, seeing also that a man may easily bee enticed by the occasion that fortune giues, so neerely to intrinsecate him∣selfe with persons so farre aboue the reach of his condition, to strengthen and vnite the hopes which happely by such like meanes they may conceaue; as we see in Seianus, who by the entrie and opportunitie which the familiaritie of Drusus wife gaue him, grew so confident to plot the death of the innocent husband, how to obteine her to
his wife, and to be successor in in the Empire of Rome, things which most easely, though most wickedly, fall in imagination, but most speciall where the woman may be the instrument, whose honour once obtained, all things else are easily entrea∣ted;Lib. 4. Ann. for Tacitus saith wel, Foemi∣na amissa pudicitia alia non abnu∣erit. But on the other side, al∣beit men should haue their mindes well fortified with con∣tinencie, so that in themselues, as of their proper motion there were no feare, (though they as armed with such weapons, may lawfully presume some thing of their valor) the occasions which by the women themselues are offered, and the necessity which many times they do impose are specially to be considered; the examples are infinite, but that
of Siluius in Tacitus, who was so farre beyond all bonds com∣peld by the vnbridled & head-strong lust of Messalina, that in the end he was enforced to take her to wife, almost vnder the nose of her husband Claudius the Emperor, may serue as ma∣nifest enough in my conceit for a sufficient document and war∣ning vnto others. But if through age there shall be such a ripe∣nesse, so that there be no cause of feare in that behalfe, their fa∣uour then in reason is much to be esteemed, considering how profitable vnto infinite the pro∣tection and authoritie of Liuia was, with Augustus and Tiberi∣us both. Now as concerning the men∣kinde; if they be of yong yeers, and subiect to the errors which the heat of youth and vnexpe∣riency
of manie things doth bring with it, it is not amisse to abstaine from conuersing with them, or at least not ouermuch; for if they performe any thing iudiciously and praise worthie, it is attributed to the good dispo∣sition of their nature, and eue∣ry one (a common accident to those of high degree, and For∣tunes fauourites) applaud and giue the praise alone to them: but if they chance to slip awrie or erre in any thing, stepping a∣side, as yoong men are accusto∣med, presently the blame is laid either on the badde example or corrupt counsell of such as were most neere to them in conuer∣sation and familiaritie: and this is the damage and the danger both. The profit on the other side is of no great consequence, because, through want of yeers
they neither haue knowledge, and lesse authoritie, to doe any fauour, or rather they dare not, especially in matters of any mo∣ment, naturally a kinde of bash∣fulnesse ouer-ruling youth, with a reuerence vnto their elders and to their betters, that in their presence scarsely they will moue their lips, or finde their tongue: and this wee see in practise a∣mongst yoong nephewes and yoonger brethren, but chiefly with the children themselues, and most of all, if the Prince their father be by nature seuere and sterne. Wherefore it followeth, that the grace of the male kindred of riper yeeres is truely profitable, because these by their loue (which is presupposed) ioyned with their age, know how; & by their authoritie can be benefici∣all
and fruitfull in their fauour to the Courtier: howbeit, enuy no lesse attending on their fa∣uor, than it awaiteth the Prin∣ces grace, it shalbe necessary to consider how this may either be eschewed, or els what armes the Courtier must put on to con∣front the same, that it proue not an impediment to his des∣seignes. But this heereafter in his fit place shall bee largelie handled. CHAP. XXVI. Of the helpe which may be drawen from the Princes friends. THe like profit and vse may bee hoped for and expe∣cted from the Princes friends, as from his kindred, the rea∣sons seruing almost both alike, though these in some things
may be thought to be prefer∣red in others, yet they come behind, for touching affection it is most cleere that those in fauour and beloued of the kin∣dred, especially neerest in blud, are more respected then the fa∣uourits of a friend, because they incline more, and desire the good rather of those then these. Wherefore to haue familiarity, to bee vsed kindely and held in trust and confidence with the kindred, doth much more easi∣ly lay open the entrance to the Princes fauor. But on the other side, the friends come neerer in equalitie, than the kindred doe, especially than those of vnderage, whereof it followeth, that they speake more confi∣dently, and with lesse securitie are their requests and fauours denied, the which is often done
without anie great difficulty vnto the kindred. Wherefore the friends in these performan∣ces are to bee preferred, as da∣ring more, and lesse vsed to de∣nials or repulse. Whereupon, their aid chiefely consists in in∣tercession to obtaine some fa∣uour, or to preferre into seruice. But in this particular you must obserue and beware, that these friends bee not the Princes e∣quals, or in any thing, (but principally in quality of state,) Concurrents or Competitors, because in this case such pro∣tection would cause the Cour∣tier to bee suspected and mi∣strusted of his Prince: the ex∣ample is at hand, that no man who by the mediation of a Car∣dinall is receiued into the ser∣uice of any other of them, and continueth the dependancie &
protection of his preferrer, shall euer bee in perfect confidence with his Lord. The reason heereof is grounded on the conformity or equality of their interests in the Papacy, which make them liue more heedily and full of ielousie, so that the seruice of any man, dependant vpon an other cannot satisfie them, nor but breed great sus∣pition; the like may be vnder∣stood of other Princes with whom the fauour done for their sake who are either their con∣currents or like in estate, will neuer bee profitable to the Courtier. Wherefore these friends must be of a degree in∣feriour, that is, subiects or ser∣uitors (but not domesticall or assigned of his family) because these haue authority by his friendship and depending on
him as on their superiour, are his confidents cleere of suspi∣tion. CHAP. XXVII. Of the helpe that may be drawen from the Prin∣ces seruants. THe testimonie that a belo∣ued seruant may make (for of such an one we speake) of the conueniency and aptnesse the Courtier hath in seruice, may bee of speciall helpe for his in∣duction, and thus much is com∣mon to him with the friends & kindred of the Prince. But a fauored seruant hath yet one commodity more, which is, that there being many things (as it is presupposed) belong∣ing to the Prince, committed to his charge, he may in some
of them substitute the Courti∣er, or vse his helpe in them, whō he purposeth to aduance, and so by little and little lift him vp and set him forwards in the degrees of the Court, and by insinuation bring him into fauour, so that by the relation of his ability in seruice, and by making him partaker in his owne office and charge, I say the seruant in grace may great∣ly aide the new Courtier. But to know how to com∣passe, deserue and obtaine the helpe and protection of these fauourits, there is vse of a most exact prouidence and great discretion: because their de∣sire to continue still in the first rancke breedeth in them a kind of ielousie and suspition, that for the most part they had ra∣ther doe contrary offices fea∣ring
lest others should sup∣plant and degrade them from their first honours, whereupon it commeth seldome to passe, that like succours are offered by any, but such as are well as∣sured to be firmely established in their Princes fauour: how∣beit euen these (who well con∣siders it) cannot so quietly re∣pose themselues, but there will still remaine a lurking corner for timidity. Wherefore they haue great reason to goe well aduised, & discreetly to worke in the preferment of any one, and our warinesse and skil must be no lesse how to auoid and ward this doubt, by assuring them, that in their fauouring vs, they need not feare any pre∣iudice to themselues; the which may be thus, first by all meanes possible to couer and keepe
close, the quicknesse and viua∣city of the minde and spirit, for a wise man principally hath re∣gard and feareth that, as being apt to take occasions, and by himselfe although but weakely helpt, may set vp a scaling lad∣der with his qualities to greater matters. Next, to make pro∣fession of eternal gratitude and dependancy on them, & by ef∣fects full of obsequious shewes openlie to testifie as much. Then not to shew so much cou∣rage as to dare aduenture fur∣ther then they shall lead you by the hand, or set your course by their prescription; vntill the time your fauour gotten with the Prince be such, as may assure you of your proper force, the which I wish you ponder well before you come vnto the proofe thereof: because if any
man before his time shall goe about to separate or withdraw himselfe from vnder safe pro∣tection, and like a bird not flush shall take his flight, his downe∣fall and his ruine will easily fol∣low, for the other perceiuing that he hath fostred a Corriual, happily by the authority which he yet reteineth with the Prince may frustrate all the hopes you haue of further aduancement in that seruice; wherefore it is necessary that this progresse be gnomon-shadow like, inuisible in his motion, and that the growth may then be seene, when it is fully growen, and of himselfe he may defend and vndershore the same, and so endeuour not to make his first experience, but as it were vpon occasion, by ioint commission with an other man, which oftentimes make
offer of themselues to those which wisely watch their times, knowing how easie a thing it is to fall into disgrace with Prin∣ces whom, you shall neuer so sincerely serue, but either by themselues, or by the malice of some other, you shall incurre displeasure or dislike in minde, which easily may be recouered, by him who knowes to take the benefit of opportunities. CHAP. XXVIII. How to keepe in fauour once obtained. HItherto (in my opinion) we haue sufficiently de∣clared vnto the Courtier the way and meanes how to com∣passe and obtaine the Princes fauour: whereof at length, supposing hee hath gotten full
possession, it resteth now to giue instructions, how he may preserue and keepe it, since he shall gaine no lesse commodity, and be asmuch commended for the well preseruing it, then hee was by the happy procuring thereof, the obtaining many times depending vpon accident and chance, but the mainte∣nance of it vpon iudgement and discretion, the which is so rarely found amongst men, that infinite is the number of those who hauing liued sometime in grace as fauorites and Priuados to their Prince, in the end come tumbling topsie turuy downe from so high a type of honour, whereof Seianus doth sufficient∣ly giue testimony, who for long time not minion, but master ouer Tiberius, at last closed vp the period of his seruice with a most
vnhappy end. Crispus Salustius a deereling also to Tiberius,Tac. ann. lib. 3. Aetate prouecta, speciem magis in amicitia principis quam vim tenu∣it; idque Moecenati acciderat: Growen in yeeres held rather a shew then any substance in the Princes fauour; the like hapned to Mecenas, who of all others was most deere to Augustus, whereof Tacitus rendring a rea∣son,Ann. 3. fato, inquit, potentiae raro sem∣piternae, saith it is by fate decree∣ed, that great fauors are seldom of long continuance, and heere∣of giues the cause. An satias ca∣pit, aut illos, cum omnia tribue∣runt; aut hos, cum nihil reliquum est quod cupiant; whether both as it were at a non-plus, either the Princes hauing giuen all they can, or the Courtiers, when there is nothing left, that they may beg.
Now heerein were manie things to be considered of: as first, if handling things which are within our choice, we should referre the cause thereof to fate; or granting that, if it were con∣uenient, to assigne a reason, as if from fate cause were giuen, and chiefly an electiue cause, depending vpon mans arbitre∣ment. But because these should be too far from the matter now in hand, it shall suffice to say, That the reasons by him set downe, seeme to be of no truth, or to be the least part of those which might be brought, that is, causes of the least part of those effects which commonly happen in this particular, as shall be declared, because first in my opinion, none would suf∣fer himselfe to be perswaded, that Princes vse to banish from
their fauour a fauoured seruant, because of the abundance of benefites bestowed on him, knowing, as the Moralists doe teach vs, that the benefactour loueth him most, to whom hee hath beene most bountifull, not recompensed by equalitie of loue; so that it is not only false, that there should grow a hatred in the giuer because of his great benefits bestowed, but the con∣trary is most true, that by this action there springeth an espe∣ciall beneuolence in the bene∣factor towards the fauourite, as his creature, and (as it were) worke of his hands, & as his te∣stimonie of the practise of a ver∣tuous action or deed. For if Na∣ture herselfe brought not forth the effect of this loue for the reason alleadged, election and free choice doubtlesse would
produce the same, because who doth not perceiue how simple he should be, who by many be∣nefits hauing obliged one vnto him, would voluntarily make choise to lose him? Wherefore it is not true, that Satias capiat Principem, quod omnia tribuerit: the Prince is at a stand, hauing giuen as much as he can. Neither is it true also, that the Courtier hauing receiued so many benefits of his Prince, that there is no more place of fur∣ther expectation, should bee a cause on the Courtiers part, to make, that potentiae sint raro sem∣piternae; great fauours should be seldome euerlasting.Lib. 4. Ann. For albe∣it Tacitus in another place saith. beneficia eous{que} gratae sunt dum videntur exolui posse, vbi mul∣tum anteuenêre, pro gratia odium redditur: good turnes are so far
acceptable, as there is possibi∣lity of requital; when they grow greater, in stead of thanks, ha∣tred is returned. Yet it proueth false in true nobilitie and grate∣full mindes, in whom loue and regard to benefactors groweth in true counterpoise with the grace and benefits receiued, or rather doth surpasse it: for hee who can not with effects be cor∣respondent to the fauour done, must yet at least deuise to make some shew of an inward gratui∣tie, and as wrath is not conten∣ted to manifest the wrong in that measure it receiueth it, but in desire of reuenge reteineth a farre greater scope; in like sort, that facultie wherein thankful∣nesse and gratitude reside, doth not desire by nature (which makes vs euer striue to be more than other men) onely to giue
equall recompense with the be∣nefit, but much more then what hath beene receiued, supplying want of outward meanes, with abundance of inward good wil: so that in loue he answereth not alone in iust proportion to his dutie, but by the foresaid rea∣son endeuours to outstrip the same. Thus much is sayd to shew the falshood of that rea∣son, the which though it should be granted, the cause would ea∣sily appeare; whereby seruants sometimes euen voluntarily de∣priue themselues of that fauour which they reteine with Prin∣ces. But there resteth yet a doubt, how it comes to passe, that so often times the fauorites fall in dsgrace with their Lords: and this is that which for the most part is common, whereof the examples of Seianus, of
Crispus Salustius, and Moecenas, set downe by Tacitus, giue eui∣dent testimonie. Whereupon it appeareth, that in reason we can not rest our selues vpon these causes, and that therefore it were necessary we see if there be any others yet more true and of greater consideration, which we will endeuour to discouer in the processe of our discourse, saying in the meane time, that the originall of the foresayd losse may grow either from the Prince or from the Courtiers, comprehending vnder the same name aswell the kindred as the Priences friends; the reasons, as it shall appeare, seruing all a∣like: and therefore we must ad∣uert both what must be obser∣ued with the Prince, and what likewise with the Courtiers, peaceably and without danger
to keepe that fauor, which with so great paines and industrie hath beene procured. CHAP. XXIX. What is to be obserued with the Prince for the continuing in his fauour. THere are three thinges which seeme necessarie to bee obserued with the Prince; the first is, that the fauor being obteined by diligence and satis∣faction giuen in seruice, he per∣seuere and goe forward in the same with the same termes. The which thing not onely by those of meane capacitie, but by great Courtiers many times to their greater detriment is neg∣lected. Tacitus saith of Seianus, that nimia fortuna socors factus est: ouer-great fortune had made
him negligent, a thing for two reasons very dangerous; first, the heat of your seruice relent∣ing, the Princes loue cannot but grow luke-warme; next because by this meanes you giue occasi∣on to some other more diligent and carefull to make his entry; wherefore it followeth necessa∣rily, in no case to leaue off anie vsuall obseruances, nor at anie time to make shew of lesse fer∣uencie in seruice: which is very requisite, because if the hope of fauour be the cause of a diligent and commendable seruice, by how much more ought the se∣cure possession of the same, cause the continuance therein? The second aduertisement is, no more to shew, then to be in deed, an vpright and honorable man, I meane for no priuate respect to bee inticed to abuse
the fauour of his lord, either by making sale thereof, by vniust oppressions, or offering vio∣lence to please the vnbridled appetites of other men and such like, to the damage and preiudice of any man, because such like actions can by no means be pleasing to the Prince, aswell for the discouerie of an euill qualitie in him that per∣formeth them, of whom it is to be coniectured he cannot in reason bee assured: as for the wound that by so bad a friend he receaueth in his reputation, whereof how much Princes make account, or at least ought to esteeme Tacitus teacheth say∣ing,Ann. l. 4. Caetera principibus statim adesse, vnum insatiabiliter paran∣dum prosperam sui memoriam: Princes are in possession of all other things at their will, but
one thing they must insatiablie seeke after (that is) to leaue a happie memorie behind them. And more plainely in an other place; Caeteris mortalibus in eo stare consilia, quid sibi conducere putent: Principum diuersam esse sortem, quibus praecipua rerum ad famam dirigenda: other mens consultations only tend to their profit, but it falleth out other∣wise with Princes, whose actions chiefly are to bee directed to fame and reputation. The third & last obseruation in this point is, not one iot to diminish the reuerence and duty towards the Prince, nor because of speciall confidence to presume to vse familiaritie. And for certeine, I haue bene aduertised by a most inward fauorite of a great Prince in Italy, that by this one obser∣uation hee profited much, and
that the same Prince vsed pub∣likely to say, that in so manie occasions of familiaritie, he see∣med still more fresh, & like one but newly entred into his ser∣uice: the reason heereof is, be∣cause obsequious reuerence is at all times pleasing, as witnes∣sing a superioritie in the person to whom it is vsed. And as af∣fectation is to be eschewed, so to arrogate or attribute too much, can by no meanes bee pleasing to the Prince; for as before vpon other occasion wee haue alledged:Tacit. hist. li. 4. Quemadmodum pessimis principibus sine fine domi∣natio, ita quamuis egregijs modus libertatis placet: As a continuall rule is pleasing euen to the woorst Emperours; so no lesse pleasing is a modest kinde of plainnesse, euen to the greatest men: wherefore the Courtier
must bound himselfe within the limits of his owne condition, which he shall easily doe if hee often call to minde, that the en∣trance into familiarity with his Prince is granted him as a fa∣uour, not as a due, and to the end he may vse it, not that hee should vse it; and that in manie things the apparance and repu∣tation to be able to doe or per∣forme them, is better, then wil∣lingly to come to the actuall execution of them. CHAP. XXX. What is to be obserued with other Courtiers, and the maner how to make them his friends. THat part which compre∣hendeth his office or carri∣age towards other courtiers, is
farre more hard; wherefore it is fit we discourse thereof more at large. First it is necessary, if it be possible, to make them our friends & confidents, or at least not to be our enemies; the rea∣son is, because either directly or indirectly they may doe some things, whereby our fauor with the Prince may be diminished, yea, & happely wholly diuerted aswell through the inconstancy of the minds of men, as because no man liues so void of errour, that may not in some thing giue disgust vnto his lord, who ma∣ny times with too great an im∣pression receiueth that which malitiously is suggested in an o∣thers disgrace. The obtaining them to friend, is wrought, ei∣ther through benefit or hope. The Courtiers may diuersly be pleasured by a fauored seruant,
as by the ascribing much vnto them, by the preferring them into seruice, by promotion, or by the procuremēt of some fa∣uor for them. The chiefest way of winning these mens loue, is to preferre them to be of the Princes housholde, because by this meanes he maketh them his Creatures and dependants, of whom he may make speciall vse in his occurrences as men great∣ly bound vnto him, of whom wee will treat in his place, shew∣ing what profit is drawen from such kinde of friends. But it is good to note, not to preferre men of too great parts, for these grounding their fortunes vpon their owne deserts easily forget that bond. And such are the perfect and true Noble men, the rich, and those excellent in any speciall science, arte or ho∣norable
quality. Wherefore he must preferre such as are of the meane, in birth, faculty and quality, because the falling into the other extreame is as vitious, the reason is, for that many times there are some persons fa∣uoured, who do small credit, or rather disgrace their preferrour: howbeit, there bee some that hold it for a good rule, to re∣ceiue into their seruice the most vnaptest people, as men neither of bounty nor valour, that by this touch, their owne woorthi∣nesse may be the better knowen, imitating in this point Augu∣stus of whom it is said:Tacit. li. 1. Ann. Tiberium ab eo non caritate, aut reipub. curâ successorem adscitum, sed quoni∣am arrogantiam saeuitiam{que} eius introspexisset, comparatione de∣terrima sibi gloriam acquaesiuisse: Tiberius was not chosen succes∣sor
to the state by him either for affection to him, or care of the Common-wealth, but percei∣uing in him arrogancie and cru∣eltie, he would by so bad and vnequal comparison, be thoght the more glorious afterward: but this is not befitting in the Princes seruice, and for the rea∣son alledged were dangerous. The same care must he haue in the promoting into any great charge, those who already are preferred into the houshold ei∣ther by others, or by himselfe, or by the Princes owne choice, and aboue all things, that hee beware of men that haue spirit and life in them; for these no lesse watchfull than ready may at one time or other by their di∣ligent obseruation watch their opportunitie so well, that they may degrade him from his first
honours: and doubtlesse of all the rest this qualitie is most to be feared, because it seemes not, that a Princes fauor by any bet∣ter meanes is obteined, than by this alacrity & liuelinesse, which are true signes of valor and abi∣litie to performe many things which to others would seeme impossible; whereupon it is iustly said of these, that excitan∣tur ad meliora magnitudine re∣rum: they are encouraged to greater matters by great im∣ploiments: whereas for the most part hebescunt alij, others grow blunt and dull. Wherefore the Courtier must haue speciall care to beware of such like rockes, that he may anchor free & void of danger in possession of the fauour alreadie obteined; ad∣uerting further, that in his ad∣uancement of others he be not
so prodigall in their commen∣dations, that it be preiudiciall to his owne commoditie. But hereof more at large hereafter. The last meanes how to be∣nefit the Courtiers, consisteth in obteining either for them or their friends some fauours or sutes, which he must often pro∣cure, that he may the more en∣tirely binde them vnto him: fi∣nally al these aduertisements do presuppose an abilitie in the Courtier to receaue these fauors and benefits of his Prince; in which case for that some are found (as hath bene said) some∣what hard and vntractable to∣wards their seruants, it is not vn∣necessary to consider how the Courtier may draw from the Prince, though vnwilling, those fauours hee desireth either for himselfe or his friends.
CHAP. XXXI. The meanes how to obteine of the Prince those fauours and grace, which are desired. THe procuring of fauours from the Prince is both profitable and honorable vnto the Courtier: profitable, by the be∣nefit which followeth either to himselfe or to those for whom he obteineth them, who by this meanes hee maketh much be∣holding vnto him. Honorable, because he is accounted a fauo∣rite, who hath his Princes wil at his dispose, and can compasse those fauours which hee please either for himselfe or his friends & dependents. Wherfore when the nature of the Prince is of that kinde which is found in some with great commendati∣ons,
though yet but seldome; that is, enclined to beneficence, he shall haue no great need ei∣ther of precepts or of arte, more then onely in shewing a mode∣stie in his requests, that in no sort hee doe manifest the least pretention of expectation, as of dutie from the Prince, as also not to bee too frequent in these offices, and not to desire things so impertinent, that woorthely they may receaue the repulse. But when the Prince is neere or hard in granting fauours, ei∣ther because he will not exceed the limits in doing good vnto his seruants, as doubting they should abandon him, or to keepe them in awe that they grow not ouer confident, or for the small esteeme hee makes of them, or finally for feare they should sell his fauours to some
other; in these cases arte is ne∣cessarie. Wherefore if the hand be closed, fearing to bee forsa∣ken, it shall helpe much to shew a retentiue memorie and grati∣tude for benefits, with a greater desire to bee seruiceable after a reward then before. And certes it seemeth iust and true, that in a minde well borne and of good education and qualitie, a pre∣sent reward worketh greater ef∣fects than a future hope. To conclude, to professe to runne one and the same fortune with his Prince, and to die in the ser∣uice of him & his house, seem∣eth to be a conuenient & pro∣portionate remedie against this euill. To the second, the same modestie continued from his first entrance, euen to that de∣gree wherein the Courtier shall be found, helpeth much, not
shewing any alteration at all, or diminution of dutie or reue∣rence, as before hath beene no∣ted. But if the Prince be strict and drie-fisted in his fauors, for the small respect which natu∣rally he hath of his seruants, the Courtier hath but a weak hope, where there is such an humour. Wherefore it is necessary either to endeuour that the Master change copie and stile in let∣ing him see qualities of woorth, at least for the affect and apt∣nesse to his seruice, woorthy to be regarded, or els, this not suc∣ceeding, to answer him propor∣tionally with the same termes of light esteeme or respect of him; yet so, if it be as doubting lest his fauours should be sold, you must obserue that rule a∣boue set downe, which (in fine) consisteth in setting the honour
and reputation of the Prince before your eies, and not to a∣buse the free libertie you haue obteined to dispose thereof. But that hardnesse which groweth by nature, not encli∣ned to liberalitie or benefi∣cence, is hardest of all the rest to be ouerruled: and truly it is euident, that there bee some from whom it is impossible di∣rectly to deriue any fauour; wherefore it is fit to vse arte, and wisely to insinuate occasions and reasons for the fauours he desireth, and to attend oppor∣tunities, which are easily found by him who continually or for the most part is in presence of his Prince, faining sometime when need shall be, to haue no affect, motion or desire of the contrary, and discreetly to vse himselfe in this sinistrous course,
chiefly when to this naturall niggardlinesse, there is any sus∣pition of the Courtiers fidelity adioyned. True it is, that heere∣of it comes to passe, that bene∣fits are not obtained from such Masters but by length of time, and pining expectation, that there is great patience required in the seruant, who in requitall heereof oweth him small duty, being more beholding to his owne artificiall cunning and dexterity, then to the good will of the Prince; howbeit, it is ne∣cessary so much as may be, to conceale this affect or motion, and to conclude all speeches with him, with a gratious conge and giuing thanks; hic est enim finis omnium, cum dominante ser∣monum,14. ann. saith Tacitus: for such must bee the conclusion of all speeches with Princes. Heereof
also it followeth that euen the Princes oftentimes receiue pro∣portionall acknowledgments; for nature herselfe wil not suffer that any man should serue, ei∣ther not allured by hope, or for∣ced by gratuities; and who be∣leeueth otherwise, must not mar∣uell if many times there be oc∣casions to complaine of ser∣uants, since without all doubt, the Master is the rule and pa∣terne of the quality of the ser∣uice to those that follow him: whereupon the measure falling out scarse and couetously-short on his side, vniustly should he pretend a large abundance or heaped vp liberality from his seruants. But all these difficul∣ties are supposed not in posses∣sion of fauor, but in sleight re∣gard, because if any one bee found interessed in his Princes
loue, he cannot fall into any of the foresaid conceits, but dispo∣seth of his fauours as it pleaseth him, yet regularly and with that modesty and wisdome, which is required of him who is to deale with a person of that quality as we presuppose the Prince to be. But heere wee must not leaue to shew, that the Courtier may also in many other things by an other way without being ouer combersome vnto the Prince, be a meanes for others of many fauours; and this consisteth in vsing the helpe of principall of∣ficers and ministers who are a∣ble in their charge or may easily finde the occasion to obtaine many fauours, or by themselues make many resolutions, where∣of the prouident Courtier may make some vse, either for his owne or his friends profit and
commoditie, for that these of∣ficers whereof we speake being for the most part none of the Princes family, or howsoeuer if they were thereof, being desi∣rous to haue any speciall pro∣tection from him, they will wil∣lingly endeuour to deserue the good will of him whom they know to bee most fauored and most deere; and this course of procuring fauour without trouble vnto the Prince, is verie commendable, being conueni∣ent to reserue his fauor & helpe for things of greater impor∣tance: Besides this going thus retiredly and vsing the meanes of others in their proper char∣ges, is not onely profitable, for the aboue alleaged reasons, but are as testimonie of modestie & reuerence towards his Prince: As though one could neuer ar∣rogate
so much in desert by ser∣uice, that confidently he might charge him with expectation of fauours or rewards. But on the other side, it is necessarie to flie the other extreame; for that those who fearing to be fastidi∣ous or troublesome vnto their Prince, neuer desire any fauour of him, incurre two great er∣rors; the first is, they lose the occasions to winne to them∣selues assured friends and de∣pendents; the other is, that by these meanes they neuer get the reputation which is incident to those Courtiers, who make themselues knowen to be beloued and fauored of the Prince whom they serue.
CHAP. XXXII. What must be obserued not to haue the Courtiers his enemies, and to auoid ill turnes and bad offices. ALthough many are by na∣ture so austere, that neither by benefits or other merits it is possible to make them tracta∣ble or beneuolent, yet are not all men of this disposition or quality; wherfore towards those which are of more ciuilitie and humanity, the Courtier is to ab∣stain and beware of two things, that is, to offend them or giue occasion of enuie. Let vs first speak of the offences, as the most efficient cause of hatred, and then secondly of enuie. Howbeit therefore that ma∣ny are the meanes whereby the
Courtier may giue offence, yet that of detraction and passing bad offices with the Prince to another mans detriment, seemes to bee most proper vnto him as a Courtier. This was a cun∣ning or arte much vsed by Seia∣nus, of whom Cornelius Tacitus hauing said,Ann. 4. lib. 4. that fuit audax, sui obtegens, he was bold & a con∣cealor of his owne desseignes: he ioineth therewithall, in alios criminator, a calumniator or finde-fault of others. And An∣tonius Primus purposed as much, and in effect performed no lesse against Mutianus, who notwithstanding with the same weapon, fortunately defended himself, insomuch that through the great and manifold good turnes which Antonius had de∣serued of Vespasian, hee easilie blotted out the memory there∣of.
And truely since it is so, that no more then one at once, can well possesse the chiefest place in the Princes fauour, it is ne∣cessarie so much as may bee, to keepe others a loofe off, from entring in, which chiefly is per∣formed by attenuating other mens merits, and prouoking ei∣ther the Princes neglect or ha∣tred against those in particular, who for the neerenesse they are in the Princes fauour, are more dangerously left in that degree, without some molestation. Howsoeuer, yet this seemeth very absurd, that any whose scope is honorable reputation, should take so crooked and sini∣strous a course, there being no so apparent a signe of any mans abiect basenesse, nor any thing that more distaineth ciuilitie it selfe, then Vnde alijs infamiam
pariat, inde gloriam quemquam si∣bi recipere: whence others get disgrace, thence any man to ground his glory or aduance∣ment, and that which more im∣porteth, seeming to conquer in this campe, in stead of vertue & commendable valor, he procu∣reth for his reward malice, ha∣tred, and enuie; besides, it is ve∣ry probable, that a wise and ge∣nerous Prince ought not to re∣ceiue into any degree of fauor, a Courtier who should be knowen to be apt and prone by nature and badde inclination to slan∣der or speake euill to an others preiudice, because, Si proditores, etiam ijs quos anteponunt inuist sunt; if once traytors, then are they hatefull euen to those who make vse of them; how much more should calumniators or slanderers be odious! frō whom
the Prince (as such kind of men) receaueth no seruice at all, but rather a cause of disgust or dis∣like towards those, by whom happely he might be better ser∣ued, then by these detractors; and giueth him occasion also to doubt, lest they should arme themselues in like terms against himselfe, with their malignant toongs, in offence of his honor and reputation. And certeinly though it be fit the Prince shuld omnia scire,Tac. in vit. Cor. Agri. and that also in his owne family; that he might the better gouerne the same, there is no doubt, but the informers therof are not very gratefull vn∣to him, and hatefull vnto all o∣thers of the Court, either for some offence receaued, or su∣specting or fearing to receaue some, as in all likelihood they may iustly feare of persons so
wickedly inclined. Wherefore this course is not onely not ho∣norable, but very dangerous, & exposed to many hurts, which grow many times to that pitch, that alone they degrade not the Courtier from the Princes grace, but irrecouerablie cause his vtter ruine, and that chiefly because if he begin but once to falter, his owne friends confor∣ming themselues to the rest, be∣come his persecutors, and then with his owne ouerthrow, hee shall know how true it is, that nihil rerum mortalium tam insta∣bile ac fluxum est,Tac. lib. 13. ann. quàm fama po∣tentiae, non sua vi nixae; there is no mortal thing so instable and fic∣kle as the same of greatnesse not supported by it owne force or strength; and that he ought to haue imprinted in his memorie that other saying, quanto quis
plus adeptus est, tante se magis in lubrico existimet; how much the more a man hath heaped vp, in so much the greater instabilitie and icey-footing let him sup∣pose himselfe. These in my o∣pinion may well be called bad offices: from the which the wise and honorable Courtier for the reasons aboue alleaged, ought wholly to absteine. CHAP. XXXIII. How the Courtier is to carrie himselfe with his enemies and persecutors. BVt because it is a naturall thing to defend our selues and to deuise how to preserue and mainetaine vs in that state of happinesse which with great labour wee haue procured, and that oftentimes it may fall out
that one may be maligned, or at least may haue some other acci∣dents so neere at hand, that dan∣ger shalbe imminent to him that with some arte or skill doth not defend himselfe; it shall be fit to discourse how the Courtier is to gouerne him, betweene these two so dangerous rockes, the one of slaunderous backebiting and persecution, the other of con∣currency and emulation. First of persecution, against the which hee must first make his defence with rewards and benefits, the which are apt not only to extinguish this maligni∣ty, and to surcease that dange∣rous prosecution, but to change and conuert the imagination of hurt and wrong, into a more beneuolent and friendly mind. This shall bee a most profitable gaine, and so much the more
commendable, the lesse it shalbe vsed, sauing to persons in whom vertue in his highest degree, hath wonne the regiment of a most perfect habit, it being na∣turally very absurd to bee bene∣ficiall to those who are knowen to be of a peruerse and ill affe∣cted minde: but because many times, such is the malignitie of men, that it cannot be appeased or ouercome by any benefit, it is necessary to take some other course, that is, with a resolute mind to make proofe who shall in the end preuaile, deuising how to extinguish or supplant his aduersary, not by death, but by expulsion, either out of Court or wholly out of fauour. And this will succeed very se∣curely, and without any great labour, to him who shall be in such fauour as we now presup∣pose
him, because he shall not only haue easie accesse vnto the Princes eare, whereby he may haue discourse at his pleasure, and take occasion to do bad of∣fices against his persecuters, but he shall possesse a great faction of friends amongst the Courti∣ers, who may serue his turne by giuing out, and sowing in the Court, yea and with the Prince himselfe, the like seed of report, whereby the traducers in the end shall reape the fruits answe∣rable to their deserts. But the Courtier for his owne part must endeuour to keepe himselfe in the good opinion of him against whom hee mindes to reuenge himselfe, not giuing the least occasion or signe of bad satisfa∣ction, and keepe himselfe the most wary and retired in his speech in all places and at all
times that may be. And in sted heereof he must haue his mini∣sters ready, by whose meanes he may compasse his desseigned purpose; as most easily he shall doe, if besides this, vpon occa∣sions with the Prince, either ex∣cusing or denying the accusati∣ons spread of his aduersarie, he shall so much the more confirm them, by how much he shal shew himselfe the lesse interessed or malicious against him. But here we must note, that if the perse∣cutions on the other side be o∣pen and manifest, and such as can not be concealed, and done as it were in disgrace; it is then necessary, openly, and not by close conueiance, to resist them, for the manifestation and no∣tice that thereof may be taken, both of his authoritie & power to defend himselfe and offend
others, when he is so resolued: whereby followeth both a feare and hope in others, which affects are the beginnings, though di∣uersly, of friendship and confi∣dence, because feare enforceth to confidence for the more as∣surance, & hope induceth friend∣ship to win profit and commo∣ditie thereby: yet howsoeuer, many had rather vse dissimula∣tion & close stratagems against their enemies, either for their reputation in making slight re∣gard of wrongs, or the com∣mendations which they procure in pardoning iniuries, or at least because by this meanes they make their enemie the lesse heedfull, wherby with the more ease they suppresse him; & quo incautior deciperetur,Lib. 1. hist. palam lau∣datum, saith Tacitus: and to the end he might more vnwarily be
deceiued, praised him openly. I know not to what purpose, but for certeine, this was the onely arte & sleight of Tiberius, which in particular he vsed against his nephew Germanicus, and against Seianus his fauorite, who liuing in the fauor of Tiberius, did also practise it to the ruine and ouer∣throw of many: and Mutianus by the selfe same oppressed his Concurrent Antonius Primus. These then are the two meanes to resist our enemies and perse∣cuters in the Court. But if one be but of little authoritie or fa∣uour with the Prince, and not∣withstanding maligned in the obteining thereof, there are two remedies; the first is, to hum∣ble himselfe to the detractours, seeking all the meanes to pro∣cure them to be his friends, and to make them beleeue hee pre∣tendeth
not any thing more than themselues. The other is, to be an adherent or dependent to the most potent of the court, vnder whose protection he may liue; or at least to be of the con∣trary faction to them, if there shall be any, as it is most vsuall and common among the Cour∣tiers. To conclude, to shun or take away the occasion, by insi∣nuating into their fauor, or by liuing vnder the shelter of some other, or els to resist them by the succor and force of the con∣trary faction. CHAP. XXXIIII. How he may keepe backe his Con∣currents and Corriuals. BVt if the danger of being remooued from possession of this fauour grow from ano∣thers
well deseruing, whereby the Concurrents indeuor them∣selues to be aduanced and pre∣ferred into the loue and grace of the Prince, it should bee then necessary to take another way. And truly, howbeit it falleth out very seldome, that any Ma∣ster who hath bound and found a seruant confident vnto him, can greatly loue any other, since one and the same kinde of loue can hardly be branched and se∣uered into diuers subiects: not∣withstanding because it may fal out, & often times it hath been seene come to passe, that Cour∣tiers who for a time were fauo∣rites and priuados, haue beene expulsed and lost their grace, it is necessary in such case to shew the meanes how to preserue the same. The first precept there∣fore
is, that he endeuour by di∣ligent seruice to out strip his Concurrents in good deserts, this being the most reall & ho∣nourable way, succeedeth also more securely, tending wholly and ending in the profit and commoditie of the Prince, from whom, as we haue often sayd, proportionable fauour must be attended, and expected accor∣ding to the actual seruice done. But when this course is not thought sufficient, it is necessary as much as is possible to thrust off, and keepe backe, such Con∣currents from the Princes ser∣uice: vsing meanes that either very seldome or neuer there be occasion giuen, for them to in∣sinuate, either by seruice or fa∣miliarity into the pleasure of his Lord or Prince: this will easily fall out, if at the first he be vigi∣lant
in not permitting any man to thrust himselfe too forwards, because out of this time, the re∣medy will bee both hard and dangerous. But to the perfor∣mance heereof since one alone cannot with effect supply all charges and offices, it is neces∣sary to bring in others depen∣dents on him, and qualified in such sort as before hath beene declared, so that the Prince be∣ing serued & satisfied by these, haue no cause to long after, or desire the seruice of the others, whose practice might happily breed matter both of feare and ielousie. But this not succee∣ding, I will not speake of badde offices: since these as inhu∣mane & not fitting any woorthy or honorable man, and also as not being very secure▪ ought to bee banished the very thoughts
of euery good and Christian Courtier. CHAP. XXXV. The meanes how to auoid enuy. LEt vs now come to that o∣ther part which is the cause that Princes fauorites are sel∣dome seene or looked on with a fauourable eie by the rest of the Courtiers: and that is, Enuy, the which, who shall well consi∣der things antiently past, shall finde it to haue beene the cause of the ruine of so many, that the testimony of examples to so manifest a knowledge were meere superfluous: and there∣fore with diuers sleights & arts by the wisest Courtiers, hath e∣uer beene auoided: the which we thinke fit in this place onely with breuity to point at.
First therefore with the En∣uious wee must hold the same course and rule, as with our per∣secutors, in endeuouring to ap∣pease them and make them our friends with benefits and re∣wards; since so being made our well willers, they will not greeue at an other mans profit, as at their owne damage, the good of one friend being common to all friends. Next, for that the cause of Enuy is an others good & profit in possession, it shall be wisedome to conceale it, or at least to make as slender esteeme thereof in apparence as may be, not shewing himselfe arrogant or proud therof by any meanes, but rather, as not caring for it, or desirous to leaue it, or to make it common to some other: Seianus, great Master in the Courtiers arte, considering how
preiudiciall vnto him the con∣course of the people, and cour∣ting of him, was resolued with himselfe,Tac. lib. . an. minuere sibi inuidiam, adempta salutantium turba, sub∣latisque inanibus; To diminish the enuy borne him, by aban∣doning the idle salutations of the multitude, and remoouing vaine shadowes. Words of great consideration, but little obser∣ued, vera potentia augere, to en∣crease true power and authority; and heerein consisteth the true essentiall iudgement and worth of the Courtier. True it is that afterwards he considering, assi∣duos in domum coetus arcendo, in∣fringere potentiam, that driuing away or neglecting the conti∣nuall concourse of multitudes that came vnto his house, hee should weaken his authority, no lesse then on the other side,
receptando, facultatem criminanti∣bus exhibere; enterteining them, he should minister matter vnto enuious find-faults: lastly, thus straightned in this difficult counsell; Huc flexit, vt Tiberi∣um ad vitam procul Romam a∣monis locis degendam impelleret; he thus resolued, that he would perswade Tiberius to lead his life in some pleasant places same from Rome. And truly as this is a most considerable point, so is it exceeding hard to finde the true square or roote thereof, be∣cause that either not respecting or refusing some apparances, he may greatly crase his credit and reputation, which indeed is no other then opinion; and this opi∣nion groweth of the apparence and shew, and not alone of be∣ing a fauorite, but of the know∣ledge that is taken thereof by
others: and on the other side, from these ostentations riseth enuie, whose follower manie times is the ruine of the Cour∣tier; wherefore it is necessarie to walke with infinite warinesse and discretion betweene these two extreames: with this par∣ticular aduertisement, not to grow too great or familiar with the Courtiers,Lib. 2. hist. since that, Insita mortalibus natura, saith Tacitus, it is naturall vnto euery man, re∣centem aliorum foelicitatem aegris oculis introspicere, modúm{que} for∣tunae ànullis magis exigere, quàm quos in aequo videre: to behold other mens fresh happines with enuious eies, and to wish an in∣different or meane fortune, to none so much, as to those whom they haue knowen their equals. Wherefore Seneca aduising him∣selfe, though all too late, how
much enuy encreased vpon him after the death of Burrhus;Lib. 14. nn. Ta∣citus reporting, that his enuious persecutors, Varijs cum crimi∣nantibus adorti sunt, tanquam in∣gentes, & priuatum modum eue∣ctas opes adhuc augeret, quodque, studia ciuium in severteret, hor∣torum quo{que} amoenitate, & villa∣rum magnificentia quasi Princi∣pem supergrediretur: vpbraided him with sundry calumniations, as that hee continually heaped vp wealth in excesse, & beyond the compasse of a priuate man, that he wonne the hearts of the people, and that for pleasant gardens and magnificent state∣ly buildings, hee almost excee∣ded the Prince; colours, onely for shadow and couerture of en∣uie: purposed to make a resig∣nation of all his fortunes and wealth, or the greater part vnto
Nero againe; but this imagina∣tion hauing no successe, Insti∣tuta prioris potentiae commutat, prohibet coetus salutantium, vitat comitantes, rarus per vrbem, quasi valetudine infensa, aut sapientiae studijs domi attineretur; Hee changed the course of his first greatnesse, forbidding the mul∣titudes which came to perform complements of curtesie, dis∣charged his followers, shewed himselfe seldome in the citie, as though he kept home, either fearing his health, or busie at his booke and studies. Besides all this, it serueth much to the purpose to make a shew that this fauour and grace is rather voluntarily graunted than ambitiously procured, v∣sing the same, as hath bene said, not onely without offence to o∣thers, but rather to the benefit
of others, and keeping the deco∣rum of his degree and place, not with a proud disdainefulnesse, but with a sweet and graue mo∣desty, some thing inclining to popularity. Finally, because Enuy swaieth amongst equals, or persons at least that so thinke themselues, if any man shall en∣deuour himselfe so much to ex∣ceed in vertue, or otherwise by long and honourable seruice, should take occasion to pretend equality; without all question enuy would either cease, or ra∣ther, to speake better, would ne∣uer begin. But when these obseruations shall not free or sufficiently de∣fend the Courtier from this contagion, whose companion for the most part is malitious de∣traction, if shee once shew her selfe so apparently that offences
doe grow, we must then vse the same arte against the Enuious, as against the maleuolent and wic∣ked slanderer; deuising; if it be possible, to remooue him from the Court, or wholly out of ser∣uice; and to performe the same with the more ease, he shall doe well to remember that which a little before hath beene said, that is, howbeit the Courtier be not by himselfe to performe a∣ny badde offices, hee may passe them notwithstanding by meanes of his adherents, in case necessity binde him to main∣taine his place; and therefore, not onely for this purpose, but for many other causes, it is ne∣cessary that he be well furnished of good store of friends & con∣fidents of all sorts, that is, to the end to be enformed of all that is done or said in the Court, and
that for diuers reasons. As first to vnderstand what opinion is held of him amongst the other Courtiers, and which of his acti∣ons are either praised or reproo∣ued, making vse of such aduice by the way of correction. Next to distinguish of faithfull from fained friends, because euerie man shewes himselfe louing and kinde to him whom they know fauoured of the Prince, though it may be, really & indeed, they are the contrary; a thing by meanes of these confidents easi∣ly discouered: since they are conuersant, he vnderstand and obserue all that passeth in the Court, chiefly entertaining some who shall carry small apparence of being inward with him; for that vnto such, as not esteemed of any great credit, or partialists to the fauoured Courtier, they
will easily vnmaske, and reueale the very inwards of their harts: or else themselues being dex∣trous & cunning in this kind as men of good vnderstāding, can by an inckling easily coniecture the rest. And lastly, to know what is done, yea or thought by these malitious enuiers euen in their priuate liuing, because none liueth without sinne, it will be easie to finde matter to reproue their bolde malitious slanders with the knowledge of their owne actions; and being willing to hurt them that shall goe about to offend or wrong him, hee may easilie by these meanes effect and bring it to passe.
CHAP. XXXVI. What the Courtier is to doe who shall finde himselfe slenderly respected of his Prince or Lord. THus much, in my opinion, may be said for the Courti∣ers good aduertisement: if any other imagin he can more aptly and with better method, and in conclusion with more com∣mendations handle this arte, he should do great wrong to ciuill societie, and to the duty which euery man oweth, (to labour what in him is for the common benefit) to defraud the world from participating of his so good thoughts and abilities. In the meane time, if any man happely guided by the rules & precepts here set downe, lanch∣ing foorth into the dangerous
maine & current of the Court, shall rather suffer shipwracke, than safely furdle vp his sailes in the desired hauen. Me thinks without sinistrously iudging of this doctrine learned by him, he should call to mind, that among arts, there are some which are called Coniecturall; and the rea∣son is, because albeit their teach∣ing or instructing part propo∣seth a certeine knowen end or scope, from the which there may demonstratiuely bee deduced certeine conclusions, the which wil make the context of the do∣ctrine both apparent and neces∣sary, so farre forth as the nature of things to be acted will giue leaue or suffer; wherein the wi∣sest are of opinion, that it is not possible to frame perfect de∣monstrations. Notwithstand∣ing, the actiue part doth neuer
of necessitie performe the pur∣posed end, although it perform all the actions so much as can be desired, proportionall and correspondent to the same. For so we see an excellent & famous Captain, who in euery part hath performed the dutie of his pro∣per charge, yet his hope of vi∣ctorie may faile him, and not sort as hee desired. So likewise without errour of arte, the most expert Mariner many times lo∣seth himselfe and the ship hee sailes in. Nor lesse vnluckie some times the Physitian mini∣streth his drugges to the sicke patient without hope of helpe. Nor many times can the aptest and most artificiall Rhetoritian remoue a setled minde from a purposed resolution. To leaue to speake of many such like arts, the which not by necessitie, but
contingently, and as it were by fortune or chance, obteine their desired ends, the Courtiers arte being amongst them, the pre∣cepts thereof may worke no lesse erroneously than those of other arts called Coniecturall. Wherefore, if after the obser∣uance of the aboue noted ad∣uertisements, that fauor or grace shall not bee obteined, or that which is much worse, if by any accident it shuld be lost so that assuredly there were discouered small satisfaction in the Prince; it resteth, that for the ful accom∣plishment & perfecting of this worke, we should set downe in this case what wee thinke consi∣derable and necessarie therein for the Courtiers benefit. And questionlesse there can∣not be a greater torment to the hart of him that serueth, then to
see himselfe slightly regarded or beloued of his Lord, and this accident particularly worketh greatest effects in those who haue not their mindes armed with naturall magnanimity, or vertuous education, but are ra∣ther of a disdainefull spirit, not able to endure the conforming of their affections, to the pre∣script rule or square of an other mans opinion, will or direction, especially in the maner of his li∣uing either in peaceable quiet∣nesse, or vnquiet businesse: whereupon it followeth many times, the resolutions of such men in these cases are verie strange and vnconsiderate. Wherefore in this so doubt∣full a passage to conduct him foorth by the guidance of wise and fruitfull counsell, we first say, that as in bodily sicknesses,
the cause knowen, remedies for the cure therof are easily appli∣ed: so must the Courtier, so much as in him is, diligently seeke out the occasion that mo∣ueth his Prince or Lord to bee angry or not well disposed to∣wards him, to the end either by himselfe, or by meanes of some other to moue him therein: yet so, that it fall not within the pre∣iudice of his principal designes, as before hath beene handled, because then it should be better to leaue the seruice, by crauing licence to depart. But because it is a saying. Che piaga, per allen∣tar d'arco non sana; That the vn∣bending of the bow is no hea∣ling of the wound: so is it not enough many times to remoue the cause of this displeasure, for the minde notwithstanding re∣maines still exulcerate and gree∣ued.
It is necessary therefore not onely to remooue the cause of this anger, but to proceed in the obseruance of those aduer∣tisements which the Rhetoriti∣ans teach for the lenefying and appeasing of minds once moo∣ued, as humiliation, acknowledg∣ing of the errour, accusing him∣selfe, crauing pardon, offring him∣selfe readie to all satisfaction: and continuing with all patience in these courses, hee may make it apparent how much he valueth the fauor & loue of his Prince, with the sorrow hee sustaineth for his displeasure: for this an∣ger growing of an offence, which conteineth a neglect by these foresaid demonstrations, such a counterpoise may bee made in opinion to be thought despised and disgraced, that in the end it may bring the Prince
to put on a more gentle and pacified minde towards the Courtier: so that this offence and cause of badde satisfaction, haue not taken such roote, that it prooue rather a hatred then a dislike; because that in such case as to a more greeuous ma∣ladie, a more potent medicine is necessarie; the which manie times the Courtier by no means of obsequious diligence shal be able to finde; whereupon hee must haue recourse to the helpe of intercession and mediation by some others, as the Princes kindred, his friends, and other Courtiers in greatest fauour. But if none of these courses can stay the wrath nor appease the same, so that the hope of re∣couerie of fauour be wholly ex∣tinct, the End and Scope of his seruice being taken away: it ne∣cessarily
followeth, that the so∣cietie also betweene the Prince and the Courtier should be dis∣solued by his abandoning and leauing of the seruice. This re∣solution must bee taken but vp∣on vrgent necessitie, for that otherwise it would come sel∣dome to passe, but that the Courtier should incur great de∣triment, either by opinion of some speciall want in him, and chiefly in those that haue liued in greatest fauour; or of some rash presumption, as supposing nothing can coequall his de∣serts; or of an inconstancie of nature which will neuer conti∣nue long in one course; or fi∣nally, by the losse of a Princes protection, besides his time, & it may be, the flower of his age vainely spent, and to small pur∣pose; things all of them of spe∣ciall
regard and estimation. But when the case is desperate, it shall bee better to bestow the remnant of his life, in some o∣ther seruice or imploiment, then vnfruitfully to serue, where he may sooner expect a sudden discharge, than hope to com∣passe any of those Ends, which whosoeuer serueth in Court doth aime at and propound. {inverted ⁂} FINIS.
