7748.5 33143297 28365
garland embellished with Tudor rose ¶ Prayers for the Parliament. GOd be merciful vnto vs and blesse vs:Psalm.  and shewe vs the light of his countenance, and be mercifull vn∣to vs. That thy way may be knowen vpon earth, thy sauing health a∣mong all Nations. Let ye people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee. O let the Nations reioyce and be glad, for thou shalt iudge the folke righteously: and gouerne the Nations vpon earth. Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. Then shal the earth bring forth her increase: and God, euen our owne God, shall giue vs his blessing. God shall blesse vs: and all the ends of the world shal feare him. After the Psalme, these Suffrages. THE Lord be with you. Answere. And with thy spirit. ¶ Let vs pray. Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
Christ haue mercie vpon vs. Lord haue mercie vpon vs. ¶ Our Father which art in heauen, &c. ❧ Then shall follow three Collects. The first for the Kings Maiestie. O Lord our heauenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the onely ruler of Prin∣ces, which doest from thy Throne behold all ye dwellers vpon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy fauor to behold our most graci∣ous Soueraign Lord King Iames, and so replenish him with ye grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may al∣way encline to thy will, and walke in thy way: endue him plenteously with heauenly giftes, graunt him in health and wealth long to liue, strengthen him, that hee may vanquish and ouercome all his enemies, and finally after this life he may attaine euerlasting ioy and felicitie, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The second Collect. ALmightie God, which by thy holy Prophet Dauid art most truly said to stand in ye congregation of Prin∣ces, and giuest iudgement in the middest of the mighty men of the world, and through whose autho∣ritie Princes doe reigne, Law ma∣kers do discerne iust things, Lords beare rule, and all Iudges of the earth execute iudgement, and for that commeth of thee all counsaile and equitie, all vnderstanding and strength: Grant vnto vs here gathered together in thy Name, that
Wisedome which is alwaies assistant to thy seat, to giue knowledge to our feeble and ignorant mindes. Send downe (we beseech thee) the same Wisedome out of thy holy heauens, and from the throne of thy Maiestie, that it may be now with vs, and labour with vs, whereby we surely knowing what is acceptable vnto thee, may be led through it to the debating, weighing, and finall determi∣ning of those matters, by the which thy blessed Name may be glorified, thy Catholique Church of England confirmed & increased, the Kings assurance established, the common tranquillitie of this Realme safely main∣tained, and last of all, all estates and people therof, in true obedience and charitie vnited and knit together. Grant this, O God, for thy onely Sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Thankesgiuing for peace and Victory. O Almightie God, which art a strong Tower of defence vnto thy seruants a∣gainst the face of their enemies: wee yeeld thee praise and Thanksgiuing for our deliuerance from those great and apparant dangers, wherwith we were compassed in this place: Wee acknow∣ledge it thy goodnes, yt we were not deliuered ouer as a prey vnto them: beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies towards vs, that all the world may know, that thou art our Sauiour and Mighty deliuerer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The third Collect. PReuent vs, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most Gracious fauour, and further vs with thy continuall helpe, that in all our works begunne, continued, and ended in thee,
we may glorifie thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtaine euerlasting life through Iesus Christ our Lord. Then shall follow the Benediction, as thus. 2. CORINTH. 13. THe Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with vs all euermore. Amen.
