8675.6 22456956 25558
❧ By the King. ❧ Orders decreed vpon for the furtherance of our seruice, aswell in writing, as riding in Poste; specially set downe, and commanded to be obserued, where our Posts are establi∣shed within our Countie of Kent. FOrasmuch as amongst the sundry consultations and prouident cares taken for the maintenance of the quiet peace of the State,The Motiue of these Orders. it hath not beene the least that our Predecessors heretofore, and the Counsel of this Realme haue had, to meete with the dangerous and secret intelligences of ill affected persons both at home and abroad, by the ouer-great liberty taken both in writing and riding in Poste, specially in and through our Countie of Kent, for the vsuall and frequent passage that way, falling out to and from all forraine parts beyond the Seas,Security to the State, by preuen∣ting Intelligence betweene the ill affected. the ground whereof still rising from disorders offered by certaine persons called Hackney-men, Tapsters, Hostlers and others in hiring out their horses, to the hinderance of publique seruice, danger to our State, and wrong to our standing and setled Postes in their seuerall Stages: Wee haue now thought it meete, with the aduise of our right trusty and welbeloued Cosins and Counsellers, Robert Earle of Salisbury, our high Trea∣surer of England, Henry Earle of Northampton our Lord Priuie Seale, and Lord Warden of our Cinque Ports, and of our trustie and right welbeloued Counseller, Iohn Lord Stanhope of Harrington, our Vice-Chamberlaine, and Master of our Postes, to set downe and establish certaine Orders aswell for the Pacquet as Thorough-Postes, the due execution whereof we likewise command and recommend to all Mayors, Portreeues, Bayliffes and other Head officers in the Cities, Townes and Ports of our said Countie of Kent,And his Maie∣sties speciall ser∣uice. where the Stages of our standing Postes are now established and appointed, and to the Iustices of our Peace next residing, as they or any of them doe tender our Seruice, the safety of our State, and will answere the neglect or contempt hereof at their perils. ❧ Orders for the Pacquet. FIrst, that no Pacquets or Letters shall be sent by Poste, or bind any Poste to ride therewith in poste, but such as shall be directed first for our speciall af∣faires, and subscribed by the Writers name or Sender thereof:What Packets shall run in Poste. From the Court. To the Court. neither shall it be holden for our affaires, but as the same shall be directed and subscribed by our High Treasurer, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Lord Admirall, Principall Secretary of State, Lord Lieutenant of the said County, or Master of our Postes writing from the Court, or otherwise to the Court, subscribed by any Admirall, or Vice-admirall from the narrow Seas, Lieutenant of Douer Castle, or Mayor or his Deputy of any Port Towne, Ambassadors, or Agents beyond the Seas for the time being, or Deputie Lieutenant of our said Coun∣tie, writing to any of these personages aforenamed, or to the body of our Priuie Counsell. 2 All Pacquets or Letters so directed shall be caried by the Postes in poste from Stage to Stage onely,The Postes to runne from Stage to Stage only. and not otherwise nor further, being dated first on the outside by the Sender or writer, and afterwards by the Postes themselues, as they come to their hands, with the houre and place of their deliuery, who shall runne therewith in Summer,In Summer af∣ter 7. miles the houre, and in Winter after the rate of fiue. viz. from the first of Aprill, to the last of September, after 7, miles the houre, and 5. miles the houre in Winter, which is the rest of the yeere, as the wayes and weather affoard. 3 And that it may appeare from time to time (as oft as shall be needfull) with what expedition the seruice is by our Postes performed, euery Poste shall keepe a faire paper booke to enter the Pacquets in, being so brought vnto him, with the day, moneth and houre they came to his hands, two leather bagges lined with cotten or bayes,The Postes to haue bookes of Entries, bagges and hornes. to cary the Pacquet in, and hornes to sound, as oft as he meets and sees company comming, or 4. times in euery mile. 4 And to the ende our Postes attending thus our speciall seruice, may performe their seuerall duties in that behalfe, our pleasure is, that they and euery of them shall brooke and enioy the benefit of all former fauours and immunities by our Predecessor allowed them: Namely that they and their seruants be holden free and exempted from all Summons,The Postes ex∣emption and free∣dome. Prests, and personall attendances at Assises. Sessions, Inquests, and Musters. ❧ Orders for the Thorough-Postes. The Postes to horse all riding with horne or guide. FIrst, as the seruice of the Pacquet, so the horsing of all Thorough-Postes, and persons riding in poste, with horne or guide, by Commission or other∣wise, shall be performed by our standing Postes in their seuerall Stages, who to that end shall keepe, and haue in a readinesse vnder their directions a suf∣ficient number of Poste-horses, with saddles, bridles and furniture conuenient: and if it shall fall out, that by the repaire of Ambassadors, or other accidents of seruice,To be assisted by Magistrates, if need require. men riding in poste, that is to say, with horne or guide, come so thicke, or in such numbers, that their ordinary prouision will not suffice, then the Constables of the places where they dwell, with the aide and assistance of the chiefe Magistrates there, and the Countreys adioyning, (being required in our name) shall take vp,No mans free∣dome being im∣peached. bring in and supply the Postes with horses and with cariages, where they may be had or hired. 2 And that it be not any way a let or impeachment to the liberty of any man riding on his owne or ordinary affaires, within the Realme at his or their pleasure:Who are to bee horsed by the Postes, and at what rate the mile. it is hereby meant that all Strangers, specially riding with horne or guide by themselues, or in company of our ordinary messengers or Postes for the Lowe Countreys, or France, all Ambassadours, riding or sending in their Princes affaires, and all other whatsoeuer, riding with horne or guide, shall take and change their horse onely of the Postes of that place, or with his consent and appointment, they taking for each horse after the rate of iij.d. the mile beside the guide groat. Abuses to stran∣gers not riding in poste, how preuen∣ted by comming to the Postes. 3 And to preuent all aduantages of vnconscionable dealing, by such as keepe horses to hire, in the horsing of strangers beyond the ordinary Stages, to the wronging of our Postes, and iniury of the beast, as the Rider: It is found expedient, and our will and pleasure is, that all Strangers borne, aswell going foorth of the Realme, as comming into the same, through our shire of Kent, although it be about their owne and priuate affaires, without horne or guide, shall likewise be horsed by our ordinary Postes from Stage to Stage,The rate by the mile. or with the Postes knowledge and consent, not taking for each horse aboue ij. d. ob. the mile. The hire to be first paid downe. 4 It shall not be lawfull for any so riding in poste, to take and ride away the horse or horses of any man, not hauing first and aforehand fully paid & sa∣tisfied the hire,The horse not to bee hired be∣yound the next Stage. nor ride them further then the next Stage, without the knowledge and consent of the Poste of that Stage, not charge any horse taken, to ride poste with any male or burden (besides the rider) that exceeds the weight of 30. pound. And if it shall happen, any to disobey these our commandements, and orders, to the manifest wrong of any our Postes, iniury of any owner, or hurt of his beast: the Officers or Magistrates of the place, vpon complaint thereof made,The Burden of 30. pounds besides the Rider. shall stay the party offending, till satisfaction bee made, or sufficient security giuen to repay the damage. But if it so fall out, that the obsti∣nacie of any heerein offending, require further punishment then the ordinary power of the Magistrate of the place can or may conueniently inflict: Then we require our said Master and Comptroller of the Postes,The contempt of these Orders to be punished by Magistrates, or the Lords of the Counsell. vpon notice thereof giuen him, to send for the partie or parties to answere their contempt before our Priuie Counsell. 5 This being in generall our Will and command, for the speedie, safe, and orderly expedition of our publique dispatches and occurrents, aswell in wri∣ting for our affaires, as riding in poste, whatsoeuer besides shall fall out more particularly to the behoofe of our said Posts, or ease of their horses, that in these kind of seruices are most subiect to abuses, our like care is to be specially respected:The Postes re∣liefe and care of their horses are specially recom∣mended in these Orders, for his Highnesse better Seruice. and to that end we doe hereby eftsoones recommend both the one and the other to the wisedome and protection of our saide Master of the Postes, and the aide of all Magistrates and others that loue the furtherance of our seruice, or regard our safetie or pleasure. Giuen at our Manour of Greenwich, the 15. day of May, in the seuenth yeere of our Raigne of great Britaine, France and Ireland. Signed by his Maiestie, and subscribed by Charles Stanhop Knight of the Bath, Lord Stanhop of Harrington, Master and Comptroller generall of his Highnesse Postes. God saue the King. ❧ Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. 1621.
