974 99836083 329
The liuely Portraiture of Mrs Mary Griffith.
HAEC HOMO WHEREIN the Excellency of the Creation of WOMAN is described, by way of an Essaie. London Printed for R: Mabb. 1637. By W. Aust:in Esquire
HAEC HOMO, WHEREIN THE EXCELLENCY of the Creation of WOMAN is described, By way of an Essay. By William Austin Esquire. LONDON, Printed by Richard Olton for RALPH MABB, and are to be sold by Charles Greene. 1637.
THOMAS WALKER LLD Doctors Commons London
To the truely vertuous Mistresse Mary Griffith: Lady, THe Authour of this Essay made you his Patern, which (being a Posthume) begs you the Patronesse: let its infancy pleade its ex∣cuse, if it deliver in bro∣ken words but halfe your worth  and if you please to take it into your pro∣tection, it may hereafter
come forth more know∣ing of your vertues; some incredulous people it is likely to meet with, who will deride it, as Apocry∣pha; their sinne is their punishment; they have not seene you: and whilst through their malice they condemne the Authour; by the truth of your ver∣tues, hee becomes a mar∣tyr: the Title of this Ma∣nuell is generall, the ex∣cellency of Womans creation, the intended ayme of the Author was particular, your praise:
that he might satisfie the doubtfull; your perfecti∣ons (though they are ad∣mirable) are not miracu∣lous, which if they were, your glory would be les∣sened, because they were not so fully your owne: and those of your Sexe, could not be so justly ac∣cused of enclining to the vices of the times, if it were not a declining from their naturall puritie: your beginnings being equall, makes their in∣fancy proportioned with your glory, but justice;
and this worke of his, and my dedication but a duty, whereby I am obliged to acknowledge my selfe, Vertuous Lady, Your most humble servant I. A.
To the Reader. IT is not to be expe∣cted that pieces though of never so exact and curious frame, com∣posed by the most excellent and evenest hand, should passe through the croud of the Criticall and Censorious multitude, without re∣ceiving the adust effects of their malignant humours. It cannot be looked for therefore, but that this Essay of this excellent Author, must be forced sometimes in its passae, though the dangerous sea of these quarrelling times, to strike sayle to those musters of malignant and envious judge∣ments
that inevitably will assault it: and it is infinitly beyond my weake ability to come in with such supplies as might rescue so wel-a∣deserving subject from suffering ship-wracke. But sure I need not, the Peece it selfe is strong enough to stand it out, even to a victory, though it may now and then seeme to sinke under the aboundant pressures of Assaylants. Yet give me leave (courteous Reader) at the least to shew my willingnesse to doe somewhat, especially seeing It (or rather the world) hath had the mis-fortune to lose the Author, a Gentleman highly approved for his Religion, learning and exqui∣site ingenuity: his former Ad∣venturings into the world, in that sublime expression of his Divine Meditations, have beene safely landed in the wisest and candidest
judgements with approbation and applause; and doubtlesse, This, cannot chuse but receive also a childs portion together with that his brother, and why not a greater? for It Zarah-like put his hand out first, and therefore was the elder, though upon his drawing backe, his brother came out before him: They are both like the fa∣ther, only that, of a more graver, this, of a more youthfull aspect: yet if the judicious Reader will be pleased to take an impartiall view of Its severall Lements, he can∣not chuse but see the true Idaea of a most grave and Divine spi∣rit, shining forth in even its ten∣der Non-age. I am sure I shall rather blemish then adorne the orke, by saying any thing, and ndeed, what need I? Vino vendi∣ili non opus est hedera: my
generall request to the Reader is, that he would be pleased to let It passe quietly, and if he be one that cannot find in his heart to com∣mend and approve it, let him leave it for those, that both can and will, out of a pure judgement and refined wit, give it its due merit and ho∣nour; and to such, I promise to re∣maine, Ready to doe my best service, RALPH MABB.
HAEC HOMO. CAP. I. THE Omnipotent in the begin∣ning, created all things for Man; and untill all things were made fit and convenient for him, he was not made: But, when they had received their Ornaments, then was brought forth this admirable creature, (the Image of his Creator,)
who was so excellently com∣posed, that his Maker had not onely given him [Os sublime,] a face upward: but [mentem in∣ternam,] a mind inward, to be∣hold the Heavens, and all un∣der them: Homo ad contem∣plandum Creatorem suum creatus est, saith Gregorie.Gregory. Certainly, one would think, that to the making of so Divine a crea∣ture, some extraordinary mat∣ter, collected out of the Quintessences of the celestiall spheares, ought to be prepa∣red. One would scarcely be∣leeve, (but that it is written, where is no falshood▪) that the base earth were his best ap∣parell; nay worse, not earth, but Dust, (the very contempti∣ble Dust,) which the least wind blowes away.
But, when we behold his dayly carriage, his pride and haughtinesse; with what dis∣daine, he not onely contemnes inferiour creatures; but such as were created equall with him; we may judge him, ei∣ther to be made of better stuffe then we have heard of: or, that he very much forgets his beginning. He was not made of Hea∣ven, nor in Heaven; but in earth, and of Dust, amongst (his fel∣low creatures) the beasts of the field: of the same mettle, in the same place, and in the same day with them. What should make him so proud, as to Despise, and, with so many sought-for words con∣temn Woman (his other self?) Doubtles, it proceeds from
his ignorance or forgetfulnesse: in that he knowes not, or will not remember his lowe begin∣ning, (even out of the Dust:) and, had need to heare this sentence again from Heaven, oftner then raine upon him, Nosce teipsum: otherwise, he would not esteem so unworthi∣ly of Woman, which is his o∣ther half, and part of his own bodily substance. It shewes, as if a man should love his head; and hate his braines: Is not she, he? Examine, and you will find small Difference. As, first; for name: though (for necessary distinction sake,) they were created male and female, and two bodies: yet all (in one Word) makes but [Hom] one Man.Cicero. Which ve∣ry Word Cicero, (the most
eloquent of his time,) thought no barbarisme, to be∣stow upon a Woman, and a ver∣tuous Ladie; when (remem∣bring his commendations to her, in an Epistle to her hus∣band,) he calls her Homo Sin∣gular is pudicitiae ac pietatis. In the sexe, is all the diffe∣rence; which is but onely in the body. For, she hath the same reasonable soule; and, in that, there is neither hees, nor shees; neither excellencie, nor superiority: she hath the same soule; the same mind; the same understanding; and tends to the same end of eternall salvation that he Doth. In which, there is no exception of sexe, persons, or nation: But (in the resurre∣ction) she shall, (without excep∣tion of sexe) obtaine like body
with him; according to the si∣militude of Angels: For, they were bought at the same price, and shall dwell in the same glory. She hath not onely the same name with him; but, they are both of one figure; made by one workman; of one substance; in one place; in one day; so that, there is no such generall diffe∣rence between them, that can give excuse to man to esteem basely and meanly of her, but that he must needs (therein) touch himself: since she was made so equall with him, and so like him. Notwithstanding, there may be observed some rice differences between them in their creation: but indeed, they are such, as rather much increase her praise, then detract
the least scruple from her worth and excellencie. As For example: First, though she were created with him, in the same and one day; yet, not at one time. Secondly, though in one ge∣nerall place, yet not in one parti∣cular place. Thirdly, though of one sub∣stance, yet not of one matter. Fourthly, though of one work∣man, yet not in one manner. Fiftly, though of one figure; yet not of one form. Sixtly, though of one gene∣rall name; yet not of one par∣ticular name. These things, (though they seem never so slight and trivi∣all,) make much for her excel∣lencie and honour. Therefore, to the end I may keep some
order in what I intend, I will First shew what I have obser∣ved upon these six former Differences; of Time, Place, Mat∣ter, Manner, Form and Name, (which I intend, shall be the principall heads of this my Dis∣course.) CAP. I. FIRST,1. Time. I will be∣gin with the time of her creation. It was not, untill all other creatures (both in Heaven and Earth) were finished, and provided for her: That when she came, she might find want of no∣thing. She had the fields to
refresh her; the trees to shade her; the rivers to bath her; the Heavens to light her; and a husband to cherish and love her: who was neither perfect nor happy, till he had her. A benefit which Adam wanted: For, he lacked and lived without a helper, till she was made: and he that wants help cannot be happy. Secondly, she was not made till GOD made Adam: so he had great need of her. For, after he had told him,Gen. 2. it was not good for him to be alone; he brought him all the creatures of the earth, to chuse him out a fellow; but he (with a small appetite) viewing them over, gave them apt names, accor∣ding to their dispositions: but for Adam found he not a fit
helpe. From whence, I ob∣serve, that she was not made by chance, (as a thing unneces∣sary, and not thought of; but by reason of the present occa∣sion:) or, as that she should never have been created, if a∣ny of the beasts could have ser∣ved the turne. (No beautifull thing is made by chance; but, by some ingenious and opera∣tive art:) But she was made by great deliberation, and pro∣found consideration. For, if there appeared a great coun∣saile and deliberation in GOD, (in these words let us make man,) before he made him; (and yet therein was she also contained:) so certainly, no lesse in her particular creation. For, though he had already determined what to do, when
he said;Gen. 2. I will make him a helper: Yet, that Adam might take knowledge how great a be∣nefit he was to receive, he first makes this search (in his presence) among all the living creatures of the earth, to let him see that none was fit for him, but such a one as he him∣self should specially create: and, that (without her) he were but a misery in a mans likenes. For, though he had both Hea∣ven and earth in his contem∣plation, yet he lacked that which they all could not sup∣ply. This helper therefore being found, he proceedeth to as large and more exact a decla∣ration of her creation, then of his: as we shall more large∣ly shew hereafter; which was
done while Adam slept. (For it was not fit that he should behold the creation of the ex∣cellent creature, that had not seen the making of the mea∣nest: and, peradventure, lest Man should after presume to have had a hand in her ma∣king; and so, make slight ac∣compt of her:) While he slept (I say,) without his cae, ad∣vice or counsaile was she cre∣ated. From whence, some gather, that the affections of men should sleep, when GOD chuseth and fitteth them Wives: And that neither beauty, riches or honour, &c. should sway them; but onely the first cause; [Commodum Auxilium,] and the immedi∣ate hand of GOD; who pro∣vides her and gives her.
She being thus made, is brought forth the last creature in time, as an epitome, conclu∣sion, period, and full perfecti∣on both of Heaven and earth. For GOD making all his workes of two sorts, [Incor∣ruptible and Corruptible,] began at the noblest of the one, and ended in the noblest of the o∣ther. For first, he made the In∣corruptible Angels, &c. Then (for corruptible things:) First, the Mineralls; then, Vegetables; then, Fishes; then, Birds; then, Beasts; then, Man in his own likenes, [the one, Male; the other, female:] but the Woman last. Every worke being still more perfect then other, still ending in the most perfect of all, he rested; as having fi∣nished
all in her, beyond whose perfection no creature more could be added, created, or ima∣gined. But, though she were last in time brought forth: Agrippa is of opinion, that GOD determined her creati∣on first of all; before he began the World. For Wisedome con∣siders to what good end and conclusion she will bring her worke, ere she begin; still fra∣ming the last before the first. And Woman, being the last creature, and perfect conclusion of all Gods workes, was (no doubt) first of all drawn forth in that faire proportion (we now see her,) by Gods eter∣nall wisedome, as the period of all; long ere the rest were began to be framed. Thus much then for the
time of her creation, which appeares not to be till all things were provided for her; not till Adam saw he had great need of her; while he flept; last, as the perfection of the rest: And, though last in crea∣ation; yet first in determinati∣on. CAP. II. SECONDLY, she is dignified in the Place2. Place. of her creation. And, that the place of birth, making, or education, makes much to the praise or dispraise, not onely of men, but of beasts, and sometimes of
sencelesse creatures; both the ancient Histories (profane and Divine,) for their estimation do record; not without the confirmation of common opi∣nion and experience: Which was the reason why Isaack was commanded, not to take a Wife out of Canaan;Gen 24. but in Me∣sopotamia: (the worthinesse of which place shall after appeare.) The like (for vituperation) is that of Nathanael:Iohn. 46. Can there a∣ny good thing come out of Naza∣reth? Still having a respect to the place. But the place of her creation was dignified, First, in the Name. Secondly, in the Situation. Thirdly, the Rich plenty. Fourthly, the vertuousnesse of the Plenty. And Fiftly, the company.
I will begin at the last, first, and (for once) set the cart be∣fore the horse. For the Company:The Com∣panie. it was an habitation of Angels; one of which afterwards kept the place with a fiery sword: And, it was also the walking-place of God, and is yet (unto this day) invironed with a flame, not farre from Babylon, (as some conjecture out of Plinie.)Pliny. Secondly, for the Plenty:The Plenty. it had in it all manner of things good for mans life, it wanted nothing, either of pleasure or necessity: The beasts were obe∣dient; the trees fruitfull; the fruit nourishing; the hearbs pleasant in sight; the flowres delicate in smell; the rivers, not onely watered the Gar∣den (and dividing themselves
into foure parts, made it both pleasant in forme, and fruitfull in effect;) but also, brought forth most fine gold for orna∣ment, and precious Gemmes (of more estimation and worth then gold,) for beautie and medicine. There was no evill thing in it: nay, the tree of good and e∣vill, (though the eating there∣of was a deadly poyson to Adam and his posterity,) was good in it self; and ill onely in respect of the commandment: Quid bonum? quod DEVS vult: Quid malum? quod DEVS ve∣tat. Thirdly,The vertue and effica∣city. besides all this fer∣tility and rich plenty; (with the like whereof GOD hath also in some measure inriched some other places.) There
was that most desired rich Jewell, and inestimable vertu∣cus treasure,Arbor vi∣tae. (the Tree of life;) no where else under Heaven to be found: whose fruit in∣creased strength, and lengthned the life of man. Not as other fruits; which also being ea∣ten, bring health and increase the vegetative part of man, for a time; and were made to drive away thirst and hunger: but (as venerable Beda writes,)Beda. it had Divinely received this vertue, that who so tasted of it, it should preserve his body in stable health and perpetuall soundnesse; so that it should not fall into worse estate, by any infirmity or weaknesse of age;) nor ever die (addes Zan∣chius.)Zanchi∣us. Which proves, how much in vertue and value, (as
well as in plenty and pleasure,) that place exceeded all o∣thers. Fourthly,The Situ∣ationo. for the Situation:Nil amoenum magac Fertie, Ipsa Me∣sopotamia. Ezech. 27. 23. it was in Heden, a place very fruitfull; and Heden was in Me∣sopotamia. That it was there placed appeares out of Ezekiel, where mention is made of the sonnes of Heden, which are joyned with Canneh and Haran: which place (being also the habita∣tion of Terah, and Abraham;) is now known to be a Region of Mesopotamia. As for the particular site of this garden, it was [in loco editissimo,] in the highest part of all the World, (saith A∣dricomius Delphius:)Adricom. Delphius. and nee∣rest lift up to Heaven, where is the height of all happinesse,
and happinesse beyond all height. Fiftly, for the names of this place:The Names of the pace. They are three. One of the Countrey [Mesopotamia:] the other, of the region [E∣den.] The third of the garden [Paradise.] The first signifies a place between two Rivers,Mesopo∣tamia. as that lies between Tigris and Eu∣phrates; which is the cause of the great fertility. Mesopota∣miam fetilem facit Euphrates, in quam quotannis, quasi novos agros invehit. For the name of the Regi∣on [Heden,]Heden. it is (in Hebrew) no more but Deliciae; a place of Delight, (saith Isidore:)Isidore. and it must needs be very fruitfull; since from thence runnes the river, that (sprea∣ding
into foure parts;) waters and makes fruitfull the most part of all Asia. As for the particular name [Paradise],. being a Greek word, it is correspondent to the former; and signifies, but an hortyard, or Garden of pleasure. But such a place indeed it was, and is, and so warily kept from man, since (for his dis∣obedience) he lost it; that where it is, or what it is at this day, the best Divines cannot resolve: which makes S. Am∣brose say,S. Am∣brose. If Paradise be such a thing, as that onely S. Paul, or scarce any like S. Paul could see in this life; (and that, whether in the bo∣dy, or out of the body he cannot tell:) how shall we resolve where it is placed, since we cannot see it? or, if we could, we are forbidden
to declare it. But, whatsoever it now is; into this place of Pa∣radise (which then so highly flourished in delight:) the LORD brought Adam from the company of the ruder beasts, before he would make Woman for him. Which shewes, that he had no birth∣right to the place; being not made there, but that as he recei∣ved the first, so shall he and his sonnes receive the second Paradise by grace and favour onely, and by no claime of me∣rit or birthright. But this place was the Womans native coun∣trey: For heere was she crea∣ted. But, that appeares not ful∣ly and expresly in the text, may some say. To that Zanchi∣usZanchius. answers.
The commandment was given un∣to Adam in Paradise before the Woman was created. Therefore unlesse GOD tooke Adam forth again of purpose, that must needs be the place of her creation. To which Agrippa addes,Agrip∣pa's con∣ceit. Mulier formata est in Pa∣radiso cum Angelis. No mervaile therefore, if Isaack were commanded to take a Wife in Mesopotamia;Gen. 24. since in that Countrey was the place where the first Woman was made by the hand of GOD: Which place (as you have heard,) is dignified in the name; the Plenty; the ver∣tuous riches of the Plenty; the Situation; and the Inhabitants. From all which particulars may be gathered these obser∣vations.
First,α that as the Name of the place signifies it to be of pleasure, delight, and beauty; so is the creature (there made) beautifull. For, the pleasure and delight of Man; (as it is confessed in the Booke of Ec∣clesiasticus.) The beauty of a Woman cherisheth the face,Ecclus. 36. 22. and a man lveth nothing better. And indeed well may her beauty be compared to a flower; and her self to a garden: For she be∣longeth but to one husband∣man; and ought, but by one alone to be ordered and disposed. So that, whosoever comes, ei∣ther by craft or force, to take any of the pleasures there, is but a thief. Pecas (saith Mar∣tiall,). nec tua furtaegis▪ (for so the Poets call adulterie. Therefore, to defend
place GOD hath set a red Che∣rubin, with a fierie blade in the entrance and face of this Garden: that, with the sodaine flash of crimosine blushes, beats back all presumptuous and unlawfull assaults of such as bouldly venture to violate the forbidden fruit. Secondly,. as the Place of her creation was elevated, and in the highest place of the World; so hath it given Women some remembrance thereof in their nature. For, most of them are not so giddy,Agrippa. in looking down from high places, neither are they so soon dimme of sight, or blinde in age as men are. Thirdly,. as the place was very pleasant and fruitfull; so was the Woman: whose chil∣dren
since have fil'd the whole World. And,. as the plenty was rich and precious; so is her fruit: Which not onely filleth the earth with Men; but, the Hea∣vens with Saints; who are as deere and precious in Gods sight as his eyes: Who (being the true Tree of life,) hath bowed himself from Heaven, as lowe as the crosse; that we might cat and live for ever. Lastly,. though she be (for a while) banished from the company of those Angells, that inhabit and keep the fie∣cry passage into the place of her creation; yet, in the end, not onely she, but her offspring, (the children of GOD,) shalbe with great joy received into the heavenly Paradise, by re∣dempti.
demption; there, to remaine, without danger, or feare, of falling for evermore. And so much concerning the obser∣vations of the place. CAP. III. THE third difference, is of matter. For, though (as I sayd) they were made both of one sub∣stance, (which was, originally, earth;) yet was her body made when it was more resined and . indeed: and comes out of the neier of  form; .
Adam was made of dust, (of red earth mingled with yellow, saith Iosephus;)Iosephus. which he holds to be the right colour of the true elemntarie earth: But Woman was made of a more noble substance, that cannot (of it self properly) be called earth; but onely in respect of whence it was taken. Earth is dead, and senselesse: but the matter of her creation was sensitive, and living. It was (saith Moses) a bone taken from Mans side:Gen. 2. 1▪ But bones (saith Magirus) are senselesse,Magirus. nullo sensu praedita. Therefore this was not a bare bone, but took with it a part of the adherent flesh, by the confession of A∣dam himself:Gen. 2. 23. This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. From hence it apeares, that
she was made both of the bone and flesh of Adam; but yet (it seems by the first description) of more bone then flesh. 1. First then, (that we may take hold of such considera∣tions, as do adde to her digni∣ty,) we know, she was made of bone. 2. Secondly, not without some flesh. 3. Thirdly, of more Bone then Flesh. 4. Fourthly, let us observe of what Bone. 5. Fiftly, why, but of one Bone? 6. And sixtly and lastly; from what place it was taken. First then, it was a bone. (The description of bones take thus,It was a Bone. Magirus. out of Magirus: Ossa sunt ani∣malis partes durissimae, ad totius
stabilitatem et fulcrum: Bones (saith he) are the hardest part of a living creature, for the e∣stablishing and upholding of the rest:) so that, the bones are, as the frame and substance of the body; and the flesh, but the plai∣ster, cover, or ornament. A man therefore seemes like a faire astle or fort, cu∣riously and politely built. For, nothing apeares outward, but faire flesh, being a well∣wrought plaister, taken out of the earth: But within, it is strongly fortified with a firm and solid frame, composed of substantiall bones, (like huge beames or Iron barres,) not onely to uphold and keep up∣right; but to strengthen and e∣stablish the whole building, as∣well for assaults, as defence; so
that they are of great and ne∣cessary use. For whereas Man▪ of all other creatures, hath (as I have said) Os sublime; it is long of his Ossa sublimia, that reare him upwards, and sustaine him: otherwise, he might grovell on the ground, like beastes of the field; or creepe upon his belly, like his enemie (the Serpent.) Moreover, as Man is called [Microcosmus,] a little World: so (to fit him to it;) his head is compared to the round Hea∣vens; his eyes to the Sunne and Moone; his haires to the trees and grasse; his flesh to the earth; his veines to the rivers: but his more solid bones are com∣pared to the precious gemmes, and hard metals, and minerals, which are the riches of the
earth: And, as these riches lie deep and hidden, and are not presently at hand: so these bones lie deep, and round, inclosed in the flesh; that they might su∣flein it; and it, clothe, and cherish them. Of this rich and necessa∣ry part of mans body, was Wo∣man composed. From whence may be ob∣served, that God made her not of what came next to hand, ei∣ther of skin or flesh onely; but pierced into the intralls, and very bones for her: that Man might acknowledge her to be very neere him indeed; and e∣steem her as his prop, and as ne∣cessary a help as his bones, (in the execution of his calling:) so that she might sustain him, and he cherish her. Secondly, she was not made
of bone onely,Not a Bone alone, but with some flesh. (which is but sencelese of it self;) but, of some of the adherent flesh also; which gave both life and sence to it. For, in the word (flesh) is comprehended, the Sinewes, Veines, Arteries, and Muskles, which convey the spirits of life and sence, quite through the body; of part of which she was made: not, of skin. For, he saith not, skin of my skin: but, bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. For, the skin is so stret∣ched over the bodie, for a cover; that it may without much paine, be separated and drawnoff from it; (in some places more easily; in some more hard∣ly:) but, the flesh is more sensi∣ble, and stickes more fast then so. It may seem therefore, that
the reason (why she was made of some flesh,) was; that it might give a neerenes, and a life, and (therein) an honour to the mat∣ter of her creation: and, to make good that saying, (they shalbe two in one flesh:) left man should object, she was but a bare bone; and of too hard a dispo∣sition and temper, for his hel∣per. Thirdly,And but of some flesh. why she was made but of some flesh, and more bone; may seem, that (because flesh is the weaker and frailer part of man; and (in the Scripture) for the most part, taken for the corrupt, sinfull, and unrege∣nerate part.) GOD would not chiefly make her therefore of that corruptible and contempti∣ble matter; left man should despise her: but, of the stronger,
nearer, and more firm part of his body; that she might prove the more able and fitter helper for him; and he account the more worthily of her. So that, here is an intermingling and conjunction of both, in that equall and sufficient pro∣portion, that GOD thought fittest, for the establishing of her worth, and the preventing of his objections. Fourthly,Of a Rib. we are to consider, which of his bones it was. A Ribbe (saith Moses,) which bone takes his name from the office, which it performs in the body:Costis, Costis, quasi Custos, a keeper. There are but three princi∣pall parts in the bodie: (the Heart; the Head; and the Liver.) One, for counsaile; the other,
for government: and the third for nourishment. And they are all in the custodie and keeping of bones: But, the two chiefest, (the Heart, and the Li∣ver,) are within the protecti∣on of the ribbes: which com∣passing and bending about them, doe seem to imbrace, and infould the bodie, after a more loving and kind manner, then any of the rest: and, doe not onely strengthen; but (by inclosing,) protect and defend it. And such indeed is the true nature and disposition of a Woman taken from hence; for, she doth not onely infould and inclose Man, (while she breeds him in her wombe,) and after, most tenderly hugges and nourishes him in her armes,
during his infancie;) but af∣terwards, (being joyned unto him in marriage,) imbraces him most lovingly and affectionat∣ly: yea; and (some time) so bouldly interposes her self in the office of a Ribbe, (for his defence,) that she hath much indangered, and (some times) suffered her life to be lost in the stead of his: which common and almost dayly experience proves true, too often. Moreover; a Ribbe, if it be gently handled, is the most easily and farthest bent (without brea∣king) of all other bones; (be∣ing, indeed, already natural∣ly made a little compassing and bowing of it self:) but, if it be violently strucke or crushed, it is soonest crackt. So Woman, (being naturally made gentle
and tractable, of her self,) is with gentlenesse bended every way easily: but, (if with rude∣nesse handled,) not onely her body, but her obedience; yea, and her very heart is broken. And as a Rbbe cannot be divided from the body of man, but by death; or by extreme violence: So cannot woman be divided from that sacred con∣junction, (in which she is made one body with her husband,) but by death, or adultery; which is the exream violation of the nuptiall bed. Fiftly, though she was made of a bone (or ribbe;Yet but of one Rib.) yet was she made of no more bones, or ribbes, but one: GOD took no more, but onely what would serve to make them bone of one bone, and flesh of one flesh.
From which I briefly ob∣serve (with Zanchius.Zanchius.) that she was but partly Adams, and, not all wholly of his substance; or totally taken out of him: to the end, that Man should not pre∣sume tyrannously to usurp more authority and command over her, then is fit; and (bragging she was wholly taken out of him, or his superfluous chipps,) should suppose himself abso∣lutely her Lord and Master; and claim her, as his own [Iure creatiois] by right; as directly proceeding from him; but, that he should remember, that she is one Ribbe of his, and no more; and, that the rest of her body (in the composition) was added and supplied by the Lord himself, whose (indeed) she is by right: and who hath onely lent
her unto him, as a fellow-helper; and not as a servant. Sixtly, and lastly; (for I la∣bour in all to be very brief:)This Rib was taken from His side.) I observe the place of this bone. It was the side [Latus:] so cal∣led led [à Latendo,] of lying secret or hidden. For, it is situated under the arme; which, both hides it, and defends it. Which gives a good admonition, (e∣ven in nature) to the unruli∣nesse of mens Tongues (in our age:) who would not so care∣lesly discover, and lewdly speak, or write against some delicts and trespasses in Women, (which, peradventure, they themselves have caused, and been guilty of;) if they did but consider, that she was ta∣ken from the secret side: which should rather be a place to
hide and cover them. And, from under the arm; that should ra∣ther be stretched forth and lift up to defend and protect them; then, either by their deeds or words, to oppugne, or detract them. From the side, (I say) she was taken. Latus, the very place of rest. For, no way sleep we so scundly, nor lie we so easily as on our side. They used not (in old time) to rest or sleep onely on their sides, but also, to lean at their tables or couches, at the ta∣king of their bodily sustenance. Which custome, many coun∣tries (in the East,) even at this day, do observe. The consideration of this, gives us occasion to observe, that no man sleepes more sound∣ly,
nor rests more securely, then he that leanes upon the faire bosome of a faithfull and loving wife; upon whose care and provident huswifery, he may safely rely, for the recei∣ving of his dayly diet and su∣stenance, both in due season, and in comely manner. Moreover, she was taken from his side; not onely to give ease and rest to him, but also, to give dignity and honour unto her: For (as it hath been observed,) as she was not made of his heaed, (to sit above, and Martial. lib. 8. Ep. 12. Inferior Matrona suo sit, Sex te, marito; Non aliter fiunt F∣mina virqe pares. rule him;) so, was she not made of his feet; (to be despised, and trodden under him:) but, from his side; (to be equall with him,) so that, though he be her head; she is not his feet: but may goe side by side with him.
For GOD saied not to Adam on ly [Dominato] rule thou; but, to them both [Dominamini,] rule yee They are bth (then) Legati à latere; and alike in com∣mission; as well, as in fashion. And, it must needs be so. For else, she could not be [Commo∣dum auxilium,] an equall help for her husband. Either they must be equall, and both alike; or else, could they never just∣ly be fit. It was said to Adam: earth thou art,Gen. 3. 19. and to earth thou shalt return; so, seeing the Woman was taken from the side; to the side let her return. Let the side (on Gods name) be the place for her againe; yea, and next the heart. For, if her hus∣band can say (as Adam could) Deus adduxit, the Lord brought
her to me: he shall not find his own ribbes truer unto him, then she. For, as Salomons Mother taught him, (and she knew what a Woman was;) the heart of her husband trusteth in her:Proverbs 31. 11, 12. she will do him good, and not evill, all the dayes of his life. And thus much for the matter of her creation. CAP. IIII. FOurthly,4.  though they were made both by one work∣man; yet, not in one manner. For it should seem (by the descrip∣tion of their creation,) that
the Man was (as it were) but a work of nature; and, the Wo∣man, rather a worke of mira∣cle. For, the Man was brought forth of the earth, (not onely the generall and naturall Mo∣ther of him; but, of all the beasts, and buit creatures of the earth besides.) From whence, as he took his beginnig; so al∣so he took his name, [Adam,] earth. Which also, (at the same time) with him, brought forth divers other creatures, of di∣vers forms and qualities; but indeed, devoid of reason. Which (of all creatures, made of the earth,) was given onely to Adam: who, therein especi∣ally differeth from them; or, otherwise, but very little. The earth (then) is his na∣turall and originall Mother:
which not onely, at the first, (by the very fiat, and word of GOD,) brought forth beasts, cattell, creeping things, and living creatures: but also, e∣ven at this day; it doth conti∣nue still (by the power of GOD given unto it; and, by an effe∣ctuall heat, and naturall ope∣ration, received from the go∣vernment and revolution of the heavens:) doth, (I say) naturally yet produce, and bring forth divers living, cree∣ping, and flying creatures, of it own accord. Which we may see by dayly experience. For, divers little creatures are procreated by the Sunnes heat, and the earths sliminesse. Which, (from earth, growing into living things:) first, stirre; then, creep; then, leap; then,
fli; (as wormes, serpents, frogges, and insects;) which have, as well the benefit of sence, mo∣tion, and generation, as Man. Which thing also, is as com∣mon in the Sea, and waters: which, not onely in the be∣ginning, (but still to this day) do naturally bring forth fish, and foule. As among other things,The Bar∣nacle. the Barnacle, for ex∣ample; (a creature not farre to be sought; but even in our own Land;) with divers o∣thers. All which, are (from the mixture of heat, and moisture, after a naturall manner com∣pounded, and brought forth of the earth or waters, by the hand of nature. Whereby, may seem to some, that Ma (having his body framed and
taken from the same sub∣stance, and elementary Commx∣ture, with the beasts) took also his corporeall beginning: But, the Woman will seem a more Divine worke, if the manner of her creation be, with his, compared. For, she was made not onely of such a matter; but in such a manner, as no other creature whatsoe∣ver. For first, (as I have said,) she excell'd Adam in matter, (being made of bne, and flesh; a more purified and noble sub∣stance:) That the manner was much more miraculous, is evi∣dent. For, she was made out of a living and sensible creature: as no creature under Heaven, but her self was. All other crea∣tures, (yea; and Adam himself)
were made, and produced, by the ministration and opera∣tion of naturall Elements, (ei∣ther out of the water or earth,) which are (of themselves) senseless; but she, from Adams owne sensible side; to whom, GOD had (before) not onely given a lively body, but a living soule. Had she been made but of the living flesh, of some gentle beast, it had yet been (in re∣spect of the lively and prepared matter,) somwhat more ho∣nourable, then that of his; whose substance of creation was base and senseles, till it was purified and enriched with a sule: but to be made of his refined, living, and sensible bo∣dy, and, after so miraculous a manner, must needs give great
commendation, and adde much respect unto her. GOD is sayd (according to Anselmus)Anselme. foure manner of wayes to produce Man into this World: two whereof, seem naturall; and two are mira∣culous 1. The first way; out of the naturall earth, (without Man or Woman:) as Adam was. 2. The second way; out of Man, without a Woman: as Eve out of Adam, without the cooperation of nature, (mi∣raculously.) 3. The third way, by Man and woman; as children are by com∣mon birth, naturally. 4. And the fourth way, by a Woman without a Man: as our Saviour Christ; by the blessed Virgin Mary, (miraculously.)
Thus you see the manner of her creation seemes more wonderfull and miraculous, then that of his, (shee being indeed made, only by God, with∣out influence cooperating from the Heavens, or the earth.) Out of which consideration, Agrippa is bold to set down his opinion,Cor. A∣gripp's opinion. thus plainely: Vir ita∣que Naturae opus; Mulier opi fici∣um Dei; Man is therefore the worke of Nature; and Women the workemanship of God. If we observe moreover, the Words which the Scripture and the Prophets, and Fathers use, in the description of the Cre∣ation, we shall find some things worthy the considera∣tion, that expresse the man∣ner of her creation, to bee as excellent, if not much above his.
The words which are most used in speaking of his making, are: feci; creavit; finxit; plasma∣vit; formavit. Fecit, he formed, creavit, he began, or first pro∣duced, finxit, (properly) hee made of earth: plasmavit, like a potters vessell; formavit, hee fashioned, like clay: Still inti∣mating his low beginning out of the earth, like a peece of Clay in the hands of the Potter. Two of which words [Creavit, and fecit] are as proper to the inferior beasts, as to man: But in the Description of her ma∣king (though some of these words, for variety sake some time also fall, into the Storie) yet those that doe most proper∣ly expresse it, are of more ele∣gance. And the very words of Moses are sometimes transla∣ted,
Struxit sometimes Exstru∣xit; and sometimes, Aedificavit. But of these three is the manner of her creation chiefly to bee discerned. We will therefore observe them all in order: for they all doe well expresse it. First then, StruxitStruxit. hee fra∣med; like a right skillfull and provident workeman, he first provided and prepared the matter, (and that was a Rib; which to this purpose, he had framed, and made ready) It is a word taken from carpenters; which first hew and square out their worke, to a fitnes, be∣fore they begin it. Which word [struere] saith Festus,Festus. a∣mong the ancients, signifies not onely to frame, but [au∣gere,] to augment, increase, or
multiplie, which therein God did. For taking but one rib from Adam, he added so much mat∣ter unto it of himself, as made up the Womans whole bodie: and not only so increased the rib; but the man who (being before but one and alone,) was now male and female; and two bodies; yet, but one flesh: After this [Extruxit]Extruxit. he ere∣cted it. For having first, (like a Skilfull Architector) made the frame; he now raises and sets it up.: For he gave not to man only Os sublime; but did also, in a most beautifull manner raise the Womans head, face and countenance, that she also might view heaven, with her eies, and touch heaven, with her praiers, as well as he. Lastly, [Aedificavit,]Aedifica∣vit. after he
had framed and erected, hee builded, finished, and establisht her: like a firme edifice, and beautious house: as having perfectly finished her, and (in er) both heaven and earth. It may be objected, that she was but an old house new re∣paired; or a broken rib of Adams set up-right againe: But this word [Aedificavit] barres that conceipt quite: for hee saith not [instauravit;] but aedifica∣vit:Isidore. which is (saith Isidore) nova Constructio a new building. This word [aedificavit,] is derived from [Aedes] a house; the building whereof is called [aedificatio.] The Woman therefore be∣ing [aedificata,] and builded af∣ter the manner of a house, must have and retain some qualities
of an house also. A house is thus Etymologiz'd by Sextus Pompeius:Sext. Pompei∣us. Aedes, est domicilium in edito loco posi∣tum, simplex, et unius aditus: et aedes vocata; quòd in eo aevum de∣gatu; Aedes (saith he) is a house built in a high and eminent place: (So was Woman, being made in Paradise, [loco editissimo], the highest place of all the earth.) It is (saith he) simplex, et unius aditus; but one house, and hath but one entrance: (so is a Wo∣man: For she must be but one; one wife, to one man:) who, being joyned, notwithstanding are but one still. And, there must be but one entrance unto her; and, that is, by the lawfull way of marriage. For whosoe∣ver comes other way, is but a thief, as I have said before.
Lastly, (he saith) it is called Aedes; quòd in eo aevum dgatur: because a Man liveth all his life in it; so, when GOD hath framed a wife for Man, he must dwell with her, even untill he die, or till this beautifull buil∣ding fall into the Lords hands before him. When, either he must marry again, or be coun∣ted no housekeeper, according to that of Agrippa:Cor. A∣grippa. he that hath no Wife, hath no house. One property more of a house I will adde, she is alwayes at home; and, as seldom from out the compasse of the foundation, as the whole frame is: or, if ne∣cessity, (like some violent wind,) force, or drive her forth; she goes (like the snaile) with her house on her head; the care of that is still in her brain;
continually urging and op∣pressing her, till she return, to guide it again. But this word Aedificatio, (from whence she is aedifici∣um,) signifies, not onely a pri∣vat house, but a Temple. Vltoris primâ Martis in aede sedet; saith Martial.Martial. Also SocratesSocrates. calls a faire and beautifull Woman, by the name of a Temple. And Templum (saith Festus)Festus. signifies aedificium Deo sacratum; a house consecrate to God. And, such indeed is a Woman, to whom GOD hath not one∣ly given his image; but, hath made her his house. No Man (saith Iohn) hath seen God at any time;1 Iohn. 4. 12. But if we love one another, God dwelleth in us: And that affection of love, is principally commended in
Women. And therefore they may bee called the Temples of God. It is true indeed (which Sa∣lomon saies:)1 Kings 8. 27. the Heaven, and the Heavens of Heavens, is unable to containe him; much lesse the house which I have built. Which Saint Stephen confirmes in the Actes:Acts 7. 48. The most high dwelleth not in Temples made with hands: But yet neither of them saith, that hee dwelleth not in Temples, made with his owne hands. For it is so plaine in Divinity, that Saint Paul wonders, the Corin∣thians could make a question of it: know yee not (saith he) that your bodie is the temple of the ho∣ly Ghost, As if hee should say; If you know not this, you know nothing. Nay it is not only the Temple (which is the house of
Praier, in which the spirit makes petition for us,Rom 8. with sighes and grones that cannot be expressed) but it is his private dwelling house, and supping roome: wherein Christ, both eates and is eaten. As he himselfe acknowledges in the Revelation.Revelt. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the doore, and knocke; If any will open, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me. Moreover the materiall Temple, (the place for Gods worship and honour) to which the Woman is compared, was, at the first, but a house of Stone and builded with hands: (to which she may bee compared for forme and outward beau∣tie:) but the spirituall Temple, (of which the former was but a figure,)Ephes▪ 4. Coloss. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5. is a lively habitation, compacted and knit together with
living stones: of which the prin∣cipall and head stone of the corner, is our Saviour himself; who was cut from the Mountain (in Dani∣el)Daniel. . 34. without hands. Which li∣ving Temple, and Church of GOD, is also (throughout the Canticles, and many other pla∣ces of Divine Scripture and fa∣thers,) compared to a woman; whom Christ cherisheth, com∣mendeth, and espouseth. So that she is his Temple, both Ty∣pically and corporally. And, not onely a house of repose, for Man: but a conclave of rest, for GOD. Who though he account men his living Temples; because he dwelieth in them spi∣ritually, as well as in women, (according to that of Salomon; his delight is, to be with the chil∣dren of men:) yet, did he never
dwell with any of them (cor∣porally, and in the flesh,) so mi∣raculously, as he did in the body of a woman, (the blessed Virgin Mary:) whose womb was his place of repose: and whose armes were his cradle of rest, during his infancy. Then is she (certainly) not onely aedificium; but, Templum Domini. Nay more, sapiens mu∣lier aedificat domum suam; a wise Woman (saith Salomon the wise man) buildeth her house: So that, she is both a building, and a builder too. You see now the manner of her making to be admirable, and rather miraculous, then his; after the order and disposition of a building: being therefore made a house for Man; and a Temple for GOD.
But besides all this, seeing she is made [auxilium] a helpe for man, She must not resem∣ble a fixed house for man to repaire unto only and repose in: but (seeing his vocations are divers and call him everie where,) to the end that shee may ubique auxiliari aid him wheresoever she is; yet com∣pared to another moveable building, (none of the least, nor meanest, for art and workman∣ship) which is like her own. And that most fitly; by one of her sex (a Queen, and Salomons Mother,) I care not much if I give you a touch of it (though Mr Wilkin∣son, in white Hall at the Ma∣riage of the L Hay, with Ho∣noria, daughter to the L. Denny. 1606. others have much more learnedly descanted on it, be∣fore:) but I will bee the brie∣fer. Similis est navibus Negotia∣toriis, (or Mercatoris:) She is like
(saith she) a Merchants ship,Prov. 31. where, in the same chapter, from the Tenth verse, to the end of the chapter, (nay; as if it were the best matter, to end withall,) she goes on through all the letters of the Hebrew alphabet,Ierem. in Threnis. (after the manner of Ieremiah,) in the praise of Women, even untill the end of the whole book. But, like (indeed) she is unto a Shippe; not onely in body; but in use. For (somewhat to fit her body, to it,) there is an o∣pinion of some, that the first Woman (being made of a ribbe,) was like it in shape and crooked∣nes: wherein, she aptly resem∣bled the compassing part of a Shippe. But, this old wifes fable is to be rejected: and, in∣stead of that, is to be observed
out of the old Anatomists, that the Spina or backbone of her body, (from which the ribbes, like rafters, arise in a bending manner,) was called Carina; from the likenes it hath to the kele and sides of the ribbes of a Shippe; the armes and legges ele∣vated, resembling the sterne and foreshippe. And (indeed) much more resemblance is there (to a Merchants shippe) in a woman; then in a man. For as a Merchants ship is of greater burden, and larger of receipt, then another: (because of her traffique and cariage.) So, the body of woman is of larger ca∣pacity, in the sides, and hath more roomes of stowrage, then that of Man. Moreover, a Merchants ship, although it be not so strong
as others: yet, in respect of the use and benefit, it brings to the commonwealth; it is more ho∣nourable: So, is the body of a woman, in respect of others; To whom men are commanded to give honour (by Saint Peter:)1 Pet. 3. 7. in which place also, she is called a vessell or Shippe. She is like al∣so in use and ornament: For, the Shippe is the storehouse of the Merchant, and the wife keepes the store of her hus∣band. According to the speech of Zorobabel, in Esdras:1 Esdras 4. 22. do you not labour and travell, and gve, and bring all to women? The Merchant trusts his cre∣dit to the safety of his Shippe: And, the husband his credit to the chastity of his Wife. A Merchants shippe, is a bark of traffique, not of warre: So, a
Woman, is a vessell of peace; and not of violence. A Merchants shippe, brings her food from frre: And, a wo∣man, her portion, (the substance of her husbands food) from farre; from another family, ano∣ther shire; nay, sometimes, ano∣ther nation. A Shippe, is a defence against the waters of trouble in the Sea: And a woman against the fires of temptation, in the earth. A good Shippe (the greatest of all creatures moveable in Sea or Land) is easily turned with a very small stern: And, a good woman, (not the least creature in the earth,) is as soon moved with a little word. A Shippe goeth with her guider, for his safety whither all winds blow him: And a
wife, with her husband for his comfort, whither all fortunes drive him. A shippe under saile, is the fairest sight in the Sea: And a woman modestly attired, is the delightfull est sight in the earth. Thus, you see; both for profit and pleasure, she is like in all these, (yea; and many more, too long to remember.) So that, it seemes, GOD having made Man, to live and exer∣cise his calling on Sea and Land, provided for him a wife, that should both resemble a shippe, and a house: an habitation for Man on earth; and, a Temple for GOD in Heaven. More hath been added by others; wherfore, I will end this with the Etymology, of a shippe,
out of Isidore Hispalensis:Isidor. Hispal. Na∣vim dictam (saith he) eo qu Gnavum rectorem quaerat, It is called a shippe, because it re∣quires a well tried Pilot, to guide it: that is (saith he) a skilfull, wise, and valiant guide, to direct and lead it safe through the dangers and chances of the Sea: so (cer∣tainly) a good woman doth consequently require a good and honest guide; a loving and carefull husband; whose provi∣dence, ought to provide for her; and, in her, for himself, a∣gainst all the storms and chan∣ces of this troublesome Se of the World: Which, n doubt, (if it might so ofte happen, as it is hoped for, an desired,) we should not hear so many, and lamentable com∣plaints,
of such, as for want of skill, have violently shipwracked both fame, credit, and substance, altogether. But of this e∣nough. Let us, now we have seen the Manner, inquire what Form and beauty, this aedifice, and glorious frame, carries. For Templum also hath not his name in vaine, it comes [ Tuendo,] from to behold; from whence, is derived [Contempla∣ri,] seriously to contemplate or advise. And certainly, this beau∣tious building carrieth such a grace and Majesty with it, that as the Epigram hath it, Spectator quicun{que} venit, decedit amator: Aut illum virtus, aut tua for∣ma capit:
Who comes to view; thy look, a lover makes him: Either thy vertue, or thy beau∣ty, takes him. Let us therefore examine, what form it carieth; and to what use, it is so built; that it may, in some sort, appeare, how it can justly claim so great praise and Commendation. CAP. V. FIRST (then) in generall,5. Form. for the form. It was gi∣ven of GOD; For∣ma, DEI manus (saith Ovid.) Therefore, it
must needs be excellent. In all other workes, the workman gives the form ad placitum: but here; ad imaginem: in this, the workman gave his own form to his own worke. So, she was made secundum Imagi∣nem DEI; according to the I∣mage of GOD. Which (al∣though by Saint Ambrose and some others, it be faintly denied, yet) Zanchius (fortified with the opinions of Iraeneus,Zanchi∣us. Iusti∣nus, Tertullian, and others) doth set down the creation of wo∣man, to be in the image of God, as well as mans; These Fathers (saith he) are of opinion, that the Sonne of GOD, (from the creation of the World,) was wont to take unto him the form of a humane body; and in that, to appeare and speak to
the Fathers; to wrestle with acob, &c. as it is plain in the Scriptures: and that, when he was to make Adam, he then first of all took that form, and made Man according to that bo∣dily shape, that he himself, then ware, &c. and that the Same CHRIST, in the same form (from a ribbe of Adams,) made also the woman. Besides, more plainly, in his Book of the Image of GOD; in the Thesis, that begins homo fuit totus factus, &c. he saith, when I say [Homo fuit,] that Man was wholly made in the I∣mage of GOD; I do not one∣ly comprehend man, but wo∣man also. And, afterwards he qualifies many objections, (together with that opinion of Saint Ambrose) shewing
wherein he was mistaken. We may see now, who gave the form; and, according to what module and patern she was made: namely; after Gods own image; which is most perfect. But, whether this building (for the Form) were square; like a castle, or cornerd like a triangle: or round; like a tower: or, like a Roman H. according to most of our modern aedifices, is partly questionable. To this, must be answered; that it is made in all the Geo∣metricall proportions, that are, or can be imagined: For, as all Numbers and proportions, for measure, (both of inches, spannes, digits, cubits, feet, &c.) are de∣rived from the members, and dimensions of the humane bo∣dy: so is also the body answera∣ble
to all proportions, buildings, and figures, that are. Not one∣ly answerable (I say) to the whole world, (of which it is an epitome) but, for the most part, to every particular figure, cha∣racter, building and fabrick, in the World. As for example (to give a light of some, instead of the rest:) if the armes be stretched forth-right, from each side, in manner of a Crucifix; the body standing up∣right;
and the feet together;Vitruvi∣us. lib. 1▪ cap. 1. it makes a perfect Square. For, it is just so much in length, from the one midle fingers end, crosse over the body, to the other, as it is in length, from the head, to the heele: Which is a just square, in Geometricall proportion. Which was the form of the Temple, and of the my∣sticall Church, in the Revla∣tion. Likewise, when the bo∣dy stands in that form, draw
a line from each hand, to the feet, and it makes a just Tri∣angle: which is a figure of the Trinitie. Againe, let the hands fall somewhat stradling a little with the legges; and then, the extreames of the fingers, head, and toes, make a just circle; the navell or bottome of the bel∣ly being center, which is a true figure of the Earth. Moreover, elevate the hands againe, so that the feet (stradling) may imitate a
Saint Andrews Crosse; and you may draw from this figure a true form of the twelve huses of the seven Planets in Heaven; All which discourse concer∣ning the severall proportions of the body, are very elegantly and briefly contracted, by the Mr. Spencer dyed a∣bove 30 yeares a∣gon. late dead Spencer, in his everli∣ving Fairy Queen; where, com∣ing to describe the house of Alma, (which, indeed, is no other but the body; the habitati∣on of the Soule,) he saith. The frame thereof seem'd partly circu∣lar,
and part triangular; (O worke Divine!) Those two, the first and last proportions are: the one imper∣fect, mortall, feminine; The other, immortall, perfect, mas∣culine; and twixt them both a Quadrat was the base; propor∣tioned equally by seaven & nine. Nine was the circle, set in Hea∣vens place; all which compa∣cted made a goodly Diapase. Besides these proportions, which in the Geometricall art signifie things both divine, and humane (as you have heard;) there is scarce a figure, or cha∣racter of a letter) in the whole Alphabet (which are the grounds and elements of all Arts, and Sciences, whatsoever) but may be aptly figured and expressed by some Station, me∣tion,
or action of the Body. All which were too long to par∣ticularize: but hee that will make an ingenious triall may soone see the truth of it. And all these forms are expressible in the body of Woman and man, equally. But among al the buildings of our time, a Roman H. seemes to bee in greatest accompt. Which letter notwithstanding (in most languages) is not a letter of weight, but only a note of as∣piration, or breathing: From whence a man (that would let no occasion escape, to warne him of his mortality) might easily observe, that all buildings, honors, and riches, (which the world seems most to imitate and rejoyce in) are but an H. a note or marke of
breathing; a signe and figure of frailty: which in the least stopping of the breath, passeth away, and falles againe into the earth, from whence it was taken. But of all letters, it is the hardest for the body of man or Woman, alone of it selfe to imitate an H. For it consists of two severall disjunct, parts of letters: that is to say of two II: both which are signes of the singular and first person; and are of themselves, both good formes of building too, but unles there come some-what, that (after a friendly manner) may joyne them together, they both still remaine singular and alone: and the building can never come into its desired and beautifull forme.
Wherefore, if either man or woman, (being alone and built according to the singular and first person I) doe desire to change for a better: There is no better way to establish and make them most firmely grow into this well approved forme, then (by the love of their hearts) to reach each other their hands in direct sinceritie, thus, I—I: And let the even and straight course of marriage, fully and firmely establish them in∣to one letter, H. Which not only by uniting of two bodies, makes them even: but by bringing them into the forme of this letter H, makes their eaven, Heaven: if they continue in the love, which first joyned them: which is, indeed Heaven upon earth.
We see now (by this, that hath bin said) that the forme of this building is not bound to any one particular figure, or fashion. And good reason is there: for if God hath given man such a wit and understanding, to build his earthly habitations and houses in so divers squares, rounds, angles, and corners; no doubt, but the house which hee himselfe would build for the ho∣nour of his name, should con∣taine them all; and as farre sur∣passe them, as the worke of God doth the worke of man. Seeing therefore, to circum∣scribe the forme to certaine limits, were but to disgrace the worke: wee will not com∣pare it in particular to any one thing, but speaking generally (as of a curious building) follow
the Allegory of a house. Which name, it naturally (without any crushing) deriveth from the word in Scripture,Isidor. [Aedifici∣um] a building. Omnia Aedificia (saith Isi∣dore) All buildings consist of three parts: Dispositio (id est, fundamentorum descriptio:) the foundation. Secondly, [Constructio, laterum & altitudinis] the erecting of the frame with the sides, and the knitting of the joynts, and the top-cover for the strength, and safeguard of all. And lastly; [venustas] the beauty and ornament: where∣by it is made, not only profi∣table for use, but pleasant and delightfull to the sight. Hitherto therefore, what I have said of the forme, may
as well be referred to the bo∣dy of man, as Woman; so as yet she is but Mulier homo; and all one with him. But in these three parts (last recited) growes the difference; which makes for her great com∣mendation. First then; wee will begin (like workemen) at Fundamen∣torum descriptio, the foundation: and afterwards discourse of framing the sides: and lastly, of the ornament. Fundamentum; The founda∣tion is the lowest part of any building, the use being to sustaine the rest. But in foundations there is much difference: For they are not alwayes, either of one matter, or of one forme: For sometimes the foundation is
of stone, when the building is of brick: and sometimes of brick, when the building is of Timber. For the forme, it is some∣time made Pyramidically (broad below, and narrow upwards) and sometimes of an equall breadth throughout. But of all foundations, that is the surest, that is of the same matter and substance, with the whole building; bee it stone or brick: (for wooden foundations, are not aedifices, but cottages.) And that forme is most firme and faire, (both by common opinion, experience, and rules of art) that standeth upon arches. In this building therefore, if wee will declare it to bee per∣fect; we must see if it bee all
of one substance, from the foundation: and whether the foundation stand after that forme, or no. First, to prove the founda∣tion of this divine building to bee all one with the rest, for substance and matter, from the top to the toe, were easie out of Genesis: but, even in na∣ture it is sufficiently showne. For if you observe, by that time the foundation riseth but knee height, it hath so great affinity with the head, that the eyes (as Bateman on Bartholo∣meus observes) are most incli∣ned and soonest weepe,Bateman, in Bar∣tholo∣maeum Angli∣cum. when the body is bowed and rests upon the bended knees: (so great a Sympathy is there be∣tweene them!) which affection (as he supposes) growes from
this: that because they lay neerest together in the wombe: therefore there is such love between them. But I sup∣pose it is because they are all of one matter: which comes next to be examined. The faithfull are compared by our Saviour,Mat. 7. to a house built upon a rock. As if that founda∣tion were surest that were built on a rocke. Stone (or rocke) is the hardest part of the earth, and is answer∣able to bones, (in Microcosmus, or the little earth of the humane body,) as I have shewed be∣fore. So that, as stone is prefer∣red before sand in the earth: so bone▪ is preferred before flsh in the body, as the firmest foundation.
Of great bones, are the thighes and legges (which are the foun∣dation) made: Nay, of the greatest bones (saith Magirus) which for forme,Magirus. (like two white pillars of Ivorie covered and interlaced with flesh and blewish veines, resembling the pretie rivers in purest Marble) doe support and beare up the whole body, with an equall distance. According to that in the Canticles,Cant. 5. Thy legs are like pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold. And againe, As golden pillars are upon Sockets of Silver; so are faire feet with a constant minde. Where, in the same booke, she her selfe is called a pillar to rest upon. These pillars (I say with a comely proportion,
beare up the whole body, like a curious arch: whose joynts are compared to jewells, the worke of the hand of a cunning workeman, by Solomon in the Canticles. But here is the difference; that these pillars are more large and faire in women, then those that support the bodies of men. And not only so in humane bodies; but almost generally in all brute beasts, and creatures of the earth: whose females (for the most part) are larger then the males. The reason (for the large∣nesse and firmenesse of this foundation, above that of mans) may be easily gathered from the observation of the Constructio, the frame or fabrick of the rest of her body: to
to which, by order we are come: For as the greater the house, and the weight there∣of is, the more firme and strong the foundation ought to bee: So womans body, (being a more large and spacious build∣ing) requires a more round and solid support, to uphold and beare it. For the female body hath in it not only all the roomes and divisions in the male body, but diverse others besides that he hath not: And it is made of purpose, so large and faire; not to bee a weight, trouble, or burden unto her; but that shee might with more ease con∣taine and cary that burden, which shall after grow into so faire an aedifice as her selfe. Shee is therefore so largely
made, with so many more roomes then the masculine building; because shee must containe another house within her, with an unruly ghest, and all provision necessarie for him. The particulars of which I leave to the Anatomists, who have not only attributed this faire smoothnesse, and large spatious∣nesse of body (which is both beautifull and commendable in all creatures) to Women a∣lone: but (as I have said) even to many females among beasts: but especially to all female fish) which for forme and beauty, farre surpasse the males. But besides all this, there is in the construction of this building another thing, that is to all buildings both a great
grace and commodity; and that is in the house of Almas thus described by Spencer: But all the liquor that was foule and waste; Not good nor serviceable, else for ought: They in an other great round vessell plast; Till by a conduit pipe, i thence was brought. And all the rst, that no you was and nought, By secret wayes (that non might it espye) Whas close conceiv'd, and the backe gate brought That cleped was Porte Esquline; whereby It was avoided quite, an throwne out privily.
From whence appeares, not only the excellency of the worke, but the care of the work∣man to adorne it, and preserve the modestie thereof, that it might be found more faire and beautifull, then the other. From the fabrick there∣fore of the foundation and bo∣dy, let us ascend to the head: to the which we must passe by the neck. Which rising in comely manner out of the bo∣dy of the building, is compa∣red (in the Canticles) to a tower.Cant. 4. 4. Thy neck is like the tower of Da∣vid: And (in the seventh chap∣ter, verse the fourth) they neck is like a tower of Ivory.7. 4. Upon the top whereof standes the head, like a faire turret, to cover all; and so it is called by Spen∣cer.
Up to a stately Turret she them brought, Ascending by tenne steps of A∣lablaster wrought: For so he cals the joynt bones in the necke. But for the descrip∣tion of the Turret it selfe, Spen∣cer (going on in the same place) shall save me a labor. The roofe thereof was arched over head, And deckt with flowers, and harbours daintily: Two goodly Beacons, set in wat∣ches stead, Therein gave light and flam'd continually. For they of living fire, most subtilly Were made, and set in silver sockets bright; Covered with lidds devis'd of Substance slie,
That readily they shut and o∣pen might; Oh who can tell the praises of that Makers might! Ne can I tell, ne can I stay to tell, This parts great workemanship and wondrous power, That all this earthly worlds worke doth excell, And likest is unto that heaven∣ly tower, That God hath built for his own blessed bower. &c. There is besides (not farre a∣bove) a description of the teeth: which he compares to so many watchmen in silver armour; which (for brevity) I omit; and onely remember this, that PliniePliny. observes them to be fewer
and lesser in women; to shew, that they are neither glutto∣nous, nor biting creatures. One thing more I wil adde viz▪ in this turret; the descrip∣tion of the cover; which (be∣ing composed of most delicate, and almost indistinguishable threeds) shew like a thatch of gold, to allure the eyes and the hearts of the behol∣ders: yea the king is tied in the rafters; saith Salomon. Which cover, is so ample, and so pro∣vidently made; that (at plea∣sure) it may be tucked up (to discover the whole frame,) and againe let downe, (to hide i and the modesty thereof from any lustful & too curious eye) which use is confirmed unto them,1 Cor. 11. 15. by S. Paul, who saith it is given them for a covering▪
Which speach give answere un∣to that madde conceit of Hila∣rius Drudus:Hilarius Drudus. who sayes Womens long haires were given unto them, to no other end, but that their hus∣bands might find somwhat to bind and hold them by, while they beat them. But S. Paul saies, it was for a covering. And thus much briefly for the Foundation, and the Con∣struction of the Womans body: which is (as Salomon saies) in stature like the Palme tree. I haste to the Venustas or or∣nament, Exitus acta probat, saith the proverbe: the end proves the worke: And CiceroCicero. compares a man that hath lived well, and is carelesse to dye well, to a negligent comoedian; that hath plaied well at the beginning; and is out at the latter end.
This imputation cannot be laid to the workman of this buil∣ding: For as hee began well (laying the foundation firme∣ly, and raising the sides large∣ly;) so hath he finished it with ornaments as beautifully; and such as are not to be found or equalled in men. All beauty (saith Agrippa)Agrippa. is of three sorts; either Corpo∣rall, Vocall, or spirituall. All which, if we search, we shall find to agree in one; to adde grace to this excellent buil∣ding. First then let us contem∣plate on that which first offers it selfe to our view; the beauty corporall:Corpo∣reall beauty. Having (as I said) made the frame more large, he gave unto it a more pure and amiable colour: And it
is not one of the slightest ob∣servations, to consider what colour the body of this buil∣ding carrieth. Seeing Pyhago∣rasPythagoras. was of opinion: that the diversitie of colours procee∣ded from the severall conditi∣ons and dispositions of the body. So that if the body bee inclined (by nature) to deeds of evill, it is sadly and dully colou∣red: if to bloudshed and wrong; it is ruddie & high coloured. So on the contrary: if to inno∣cency and vertue, it shines and appeares in the pure colour of the body. From whence PlatoPlato. held, that colour was nothing else, but a flame sent from the body, proportionable to the substance that owes it, and the eye that viewes it.
But the colour in her, is ex∣pressed by Propertius.Proper∣tius. Lilia non dominâ sunt magis alba meâ. The Lillies are not whiter then my love. Yet Solomon (one of the best men in all the world; whom the Queene of Saba came so far but to see) was not like one of them, in all his royalty. Which pure snowie colour (the very embleme and hieroglyphick of innocency and purity, is not (in them) artificiall. (For, Nudus amor,Propert. formae non amat artificem, Plaine love affects not beauty made by art:)
But it is naturall: as the for∣mer word [Alba] carries it. Album naturâ: Candidum, curâ fit. To this colour there is ad∣ded a generall smoothnesse over the whole building; both of them excelling men. So that, it seemes, the whole frame is no other, but a peece of polsht Ivory. Which only gave occasion to the Tale of Pygmalion,Pygmali∣on. and his Image in Ovid. From whence SabinusSabinus. picks this observation (upon the same place:) that a wife of so ex∣cellent a forme, must needs bee the guift of God. This faire smoothnes (which in all workes is an excellent and singular commendation) will show the fairer in Woman; if it
bee but compared with the rude shape of man: who (for the most part) is overgrowne and rough, (like the rude and hairy beasts of the field.) Neither hath he the rest of his dimensions, so round, soft, smooth, or ample: But in his joynts, muscles, and sinews, is more shrunke, hard, and dryed. So as her fabrick shewes ra∣ther as a new building; and his, like a thing decayed by the weather. And this for the generall beauty of the frame: but for the particular Symmetry of every severall part: I will not med∣dle any further, then only to speake of those parts (briefly and modestly) which they themselves lay open; namely, of the face, hands, and breasts.
First the very front or FaceThe beau∣ty of the face. of this building (that first meets with the eye) con∣founds it and will scarce suf∣fer it to looke any further. Certainly, God not only made her body an epitome of the Earth, for proportion; but her face also an epitome of Hea∣ven for beauty: which like some cleare glasse (or mirror) being turned upwards to∣wards heaven, presents it selfe wholly full of heavenly fi∣gures: The round forehead re∣sembling the bowing orbes; the eye browes, the rainebowes; the eyes, the starres and plants; the red and white of the cheekes, resemble the faire discoloured clouds; the frownes resemble stormes; and the smiles faire weather.
If heaven therefore be beau∣tifull, that face (which in so small a compasse containes it) must needs be faire indeed. And this proves beauty to be heavenly, and the daughter of the highest: For (as saith Anachar∣sis)Anachar∣sis. the greatest gift that God gave man, was beauty: For it delighteth the eye, contenteth the minde, and winneth good will and favour of all men. So that if there were no more but this; A beautifull coun∣tenance is a silent and sufficient commendation of it selfe. Beauty (saith Plato)Plato. is a Pri∣vilege and prerogative of na∣ture, which hapneth but to a few. It is therefore worth the having, seeing it is a privilege, and but a few have it. Amongst
whom, of all creatures, women seeme to bee the true owners of it. For though there be a cer∣taine generall beauty in all crea∣tures, (as they are made by God, and serve to adorne the whole universe:) Yet the chiefest and most delightfull to the heart of man, is that of Woman; which hath in it two qualities: For it not only de∣lights, and warmes, (like the Sunne:) but (sometimes) to the resisters, and violent con∣temners, it burnes and con∣sumes, (like lightning:) ac∣cording to that of Guevarra;Guevar∣ra. An honest woman (beautifull) killeth with her countenance. And justly are they so puni∣shed: seeing hee, which is a foe to beauty, is an enemie to
nature.The de∣finition of Beau∣ty of the Body. Beauty corporall is ge∣nerally, a good and proportionable agreeing coherence, and com∣pacture of all the severall parts of the body in one fairenesse; as it doth especially in woman. But in particular, it shineth no where so ample, as in the face and countenance:Amreas Lauren∣tius, wherein (as Laurentius saies) the beams of the divine Majesty so shine that all other creatures trem∣ble at it, especially in Wo∣men: for in them all men ad∣mire: and love it:Pliny. and all creatures else feare and trem∣ble at it (like as at fire from Heaven:) nay the Lyon (the most fierce amongst others) feares it and rages more a∣gainst men then Women: as giving more honour and re∣verence unto their counte∣nance.
For the glory is so great; that as the Sunne when it ariseth upon the high pla∣ces of the Lord, so is the beauty of a good Wife, the ornament of her house. And as the cleere light is upon the holy candlesticke;Eccle∣ast, so is the beautie of her face in a ripe age; The Symmetrie, and powerfull splendor whereof, hath not only a property, by opening the hearts of the beholders, to make them dis∣cover their owne secrets (as we have examples enow in Scripture, by Sampson &c.) but it is the discoverer of it selfe and the most secret affections, dispositions, and passions of it owne heart. Vultus est animi Imago; the countenance is the Image of the
mind saith Cicero:Cicero. And in ano∣ther place: Frons est animi Ia∣nua; the brow is the gate of the mind, so that the gate lets forth the Image; that you may soone see what the mind is. If therefore the Image of the mind, and the gate it stands in, be so faire; surely the mind it selfe in Women (which is the Spirituall beauty) must needs be faire and hea∣venly: yea though they should deny it to be so, with their owne tongues, or any detractor, for them,Seneca. Vultus loquitur quod∣cunque negas: the very beauty of the countenance it selfe would convince them, and declare it lowder. But as in the Heaven, the Sunne and Moone (the greatest lightes) beare greatest sway;
and make greatest show: so in the countenance, the Eyes sparkle forth greatest beauty, and declare most the effects of our mind. Oculos natura nobis dedit, &c.Cicero. Nature (saith Tully) hath given us eyes; (as she hath given eares to Horses, Lions &c.) that they may declare the motion of our mind. O∣culus, Luerna corporis: the eye is the light of the Body: and in∣deed not only the light wher∣by we see what is in others, but the light whereby others see what is in us. For (as Salomon saieth) a wise mans eyes are in his head; but the eyes of a foole are in the foure corners of the World; and rowling every way: So that (it seemes) Wisdome, fol∣ly, anger, pleasure, griefe, envy, mirth, sadnesse, chastity or whore∣dome,
appear not fromus, in any one part so apparantly, as in the eye, nay in Women(in whom indeed they are fairest and most powerfull) they do shew certaine signes of Barrennesse, and Fruitfulnesse, which (in that Sex) is greatly to be re∣spected, as AristotleAristotle. testifieth. But as they discover much in themselves; so have they a very great power in ruling the affections of others. For from their beames (saith Iohannes de Baptista porta)Io. Bapt. Porta. proceeds health or sicknesse, love or hate, life, or death to the object that they view, according as they earnestly behold it (either in love or hate:)Virgil. Nescio quisteneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos (saith Virgill:) And the same is con∣firmed by Plutarch:Plutarch. for (as he
saith) The eyes of faire and beau∣tifull Women, kindle fire (like the Sun) in the very hearts and soules of their lovers; though they looke not on them but a farre off. From whence grew (no doubt) the opinion of StratoStrato. (the Philosopher) who held that the commanding part of the Soule, remained betweene the Eyes: seeing that he saw so great power in them, and their affection. But if I should write of all the particular beauties in Wo∣mens faces, I should draw this part (which even already growes too long) much far∣ther then it ought. Wherefore to conclude this point; take the generall commendation of the face
(out of Laurentius) thus:And. Lauren∣tius. In the face onely is the particu∣lar seat of all the five Senses (because it is called the Image of the mind) For in the rowes, loftines; in the Cheekes, grace; in the Chin, majesty; in the Forehead, wisedome; in the Visage, beautie; and in the Cheekes and Chin, honesty dwelleth: in it is the diffe∣rence of Age and Sex, and the signes of life and death to be perceived, and it is this a∣lone, that allures and winnes the eyes of all men: Therfore it cannot chuse but be very beautifull. I will but even touch the hands and breasts, and then proceed to the beauty vo∣call. The instrument of instru∣ments (the Hand) as it is of
singular use in the body:The beauty of the hand. sode∣serves it in Women, as singular observation & commendati∣on. For nature delivering man nacked into the world; (neither armed with hoofe or tooth for his defence) gave him yet two things, wherein he is armed far more excellently, then any other creature; that is to say, the mind and the hand. The one to advise, the other to execute. And indeed, if we curious∣ly advise with the Palmisters, we shall finde the Minde writ∣ten in the Hand. For in the lines and circles thereof, (like our nativity in the Starres) is set downe, the manner of our dispositions (bee they good or bad.) Moreover, as the minde is written in the hand: so is it a
fit companion of the mind. For we may observe it to bee the chiefe agent, and best interpreter of our words and meaning: which with lively action it sets forth and expresses in such sort; that if the tongue were missing, it would most aptly supply the place. For with it we call unto us; we give leave to depart; wee command; wee intreat; wee threaten; wee promise; wee sa∣lute; wee strike; wee give; wee receive; wee make; wee destroy; wee defend; wee offend: so that it is (in the morall of a build∣ing) like the guard for defence; the Vsher for entertainment; the servant for imploment; the Cater for the provision; and the Cooke of the provisi∣on.
This excellent and necessa∣ry part, is in Women; much more delicate then in man: and hath qualities equall to all his, and some farre above them: For she doth not only such grosser workes and actions of meaner estimation, as well as he: but expresseth all musicke, with as swift motion and per∣formance (together with such arts and works of curicsity) by reason of the slender soft∣nesse and nimblenesse of her hand; as are too hote for his fingers. But one thing more I will observe (out of Agrippa)Agrippa. from the hand, for the greater com∣mendation of this creatures purenesse and innocency, (a gift given unto them inseparable, even in nature:) that let men
wash their hands never so often, they shall still foule and trouble the water: But let a Woman wash them (but once) cleane, and she shall after foule it no more. To conclude this point: the hand (among the Aegyptians) was a Hieroglyphick of fortitude. And therefore they that re∣quire [auxilium] helpe, tooke hold of the right hand; (not of the left) which was a figure and pledge of faith: to which may be alluded; that as Woman was made [auxilium commodum] a fit faithfull and right hand help, for man in all his voca∣tion: So it is even expressed in her by nature. For (as Plin and HippocratesPliny & Hippo∣crates. observe) though many men are often times wholly left-handed, wo∣men are very seldome so, or ne∣ver at all.
For the last (I meane) the breasts.The beauty of the breasts. As in medio consistit virtus; so between the head and hands of this building, remaines to bee spoken of the Breasts, the beautifull and vertuous springs and fountaines, that not only adde beauty, but utility to the whole aedifice. The best commendation of a house; is, that it stand in a good aire, and be well watered. The first of these is obser∣ved to bee in this building, out of the etymology of her name, (by Bartholdus)Barthol∣dus. Mulier quasi mollis aer propter puritatem; a sweet and pure aire. And the second is made good in the office of her brests: which are the springs and con∣duit heads, which are com∣mended in their forme;
their place; and their use. First for their forme: they are round: a figure most capable of all others; and fittest for them; seeing they must con∣taine (like fountaines) moy∣sture for nourishment. And they resemble in ma∣king two little hills, or mounts, pleasantly garnished with dis∣parted and streaming veines; on whose tops arise the con∣duit heads (in hew like Straw∣berries:) from whence pro∣ceed the streames so much commended, both for food and physick. This forme (imitating the world) is very beautifull. From the observation of which, the skilfull beholder shall not only distinguish the difference of Sex; but also of age
and health in women; as Lauren∣tius noteth. Secondly, for the place: they are not set in the lower parts of the body, (as in other crea∣tures) but (to preserve modesty, and for comelinesse sake) in the very breast nere the head, and right against the heart. For this cause (as PlutarchPlutarch. saith) that women (being most loving and tenderly affected to their children) might at their greater ease, in the earnestnesse of their love, both feed with their milke, imbrace with their armes, and kisse with their lips their children at one time to∣gether: which they could not doe were they placed else∣where. Lastly, for their use. First, they are to feed: and to that
end, they are indeed with milke, and such as no other creature hath. For there is no milke (whatsoever) so nou∣rishing, and cherishing in effect, nor so sweet and honied in taste, as that of a Woman. Which milke, it is possible for them to have without the help of man, (as Hippocrates affirmes.)Hippo∣crates. So that, seeing shee is com∣pared in Ecclesiasticus, to a pos∣session: and in the Proverbs, preferred before a possession; she may well be likened to that ho∣ly habitation and possession, (the land of Promise) which flowed with milke and hony: or, with honied milke, which was promised to those that feared God: For shee also (being so indued) is both the gift and promise of God: Whose breasts
have the properties of a Pos∣session also: First, to feed, (as I have said:) Secondly, to De∣fend; for with their round fleshinesse, they protect and preserve the Heart from out∣ward stormes, more safely then those in mn. Thirdly, they do adorne the habitation: And therein not only give delight, but satisfaction to man. So that as a man, content with his owne possession, which he hath obtained from the Lord; he neither can, or ought desire more. (Which is well advised by Solomon in the Pro∣verbs;) Rejoyce with the wife of thy youth, &c. Let her breasts satis∣fie thee at all times, and delight in her love continually. So that both delight, profit, and satisfaction, proceeds from
this forme others: as is decla∣red sufficiently in the descrip∣tion of the beauty of her face, hands, and breasts. And thus much for the beauty Corporall. For the beauty Vocall,Vocall beauty. which is in Women. It is such as makes them no whit inferiour (but rather supe∣riour) to men. And it is of good consequence for their commendation. First then (in generall) for the voyce: Though it have nei∣ther dimensions, proportion, or substance, (whereby it may be seen or felt:) yet is it like an∣other face and visage in man; and hath many of the same properties. For it not only (like the face) distinguishes man from beast: But man from man; and man from woman:
who (being not in sight) are as well knowne by their voice as countenance; and much sooner: (as Pliny testifies.)Pliny. Moreover, it is so singular an ornament to the body; that Zeno Cittieus was wont to say, Vocem esse formae florem: that the voyse was the very flower (or chiefest grace) of a good forme: For the eloquence of the voyce, commends the forme, as much as the forme commends eloquence: Nay, it not only sets forth the forme; but declares the disposition as well as the face: For a soft, gentle, and tender voyce, de∣clare a gentle, tender, and tractable Soule, and affection in the body that owes it: as that excellent Scholar (Michael Scot)Mich. Scot. hath well observed.
Wherefore, the voyce in women (being much more gentle, tender, and delicate, then in men) declares, that in the modesty, gentleness, and sweetnesse of affection, they far surpasse them. Which may be observed even in this: that men also (while they are in their child-hood and infancy, free from unbridled affections, full of tendernesse and pitie) are voiced like women; whom (in disposition) they resemble: But (being once growne to more hardnesse, and inclined to more unbridled immodesty) they change their voyce with their manners: Which is ob∣served not to happen to women: whose voice continues still in their first purenesse and inno∣cency.
Moreover, man hath no use of his voyce, that woman hath not, and as excellently: For, First, her eloquence is as sweet and plentifull. Secondly, her speach more pleasant, and fluent. And good reason: For seeing her tongue is her chiefest weapon of de∣fence: therefore she ought to handle it the readiest. Lastly, their skill in Musicke hath not beene meanely praised by divers: But their meanes of expressing their skill, (especiall, in voyce) so far excells above that of mans; that all they are said but to Faine, that seeke to imitate it. Wherefore Ovid,Ovid. (that well knew what gave an especiall ornament to a good corpo∣rall forme) above all things
advised women (who are so angel like voyced) to learne by musicks rules, to order it: Seeing, in his opinion, it gives them much grace: which hee ex∣presses in these verses: Res est blanda canor; discant cantare puellae: Pro facie, multies vox sua, Lae∣na fuit. To sing is good: learne that (in any case:) The voyce hath oft beene broaker to the face. Lastly,Beauty spiritual. I should (with like brevity) speake of the beauty spirituall, and inward. At the fairenesse whereof, you may ghesse by the Physiognomie of the face, and the rest: But be∣cause I intend to speake of
their vertues (which is the true beauty inward) by it selfe; I will referre you thither. And (to make this corporall and vocall beauty compleat with the forme) see if it hold good with the description of an absolute beauty, in Paulo La∣mazo,Paul Lamazo. (who was a cunning Painter, and could well judge of beauty.) Beauty (saith he) is com∣pleat in forme; motion, and action, of head, feet, and hands For the forme, you have al∣ready heard what it is: For the motion, I will only translate you a peece of Agrippa,Agrippa. (who joynes it to the forme, and stands wondring at it:) Adde to these (saith he) their modest pace and gate; their more comely behaviour; their more wor∣thy
carriage; together with the whole Symmetry; and order of their whole body, in figure and ha∣bit, every way most beautifull. Not any sight, in all the order of Creatures, being so miraculous; nor any miracle, so worthy the sight: so that any (but a blind man) may see how God himselfe hath gathe∣red together what beauty the whole world is capable of, and placed it in woman, that all creatures should stand amazed; and (for many causes) should love and honour her: insomuch that not onely men, but incorporate spirits have very often most earnestly affected, and doted on their beauties. Which is not a false opinion, but a truth confirmed by many ex∣periments. Thus far, Agrippa. If then, a large, spacious, and faire building, where no∣thing
is scanted, nor any un∣comelinesse seene; but all the pillars, nerves, joynts, and cover, have their full measure, smoothnesse, and roundnesse, in the amplest manner: the eyes, fuller; the cover, larger; the face, fairer; the gate and gesture, more modest, and comely: If (I say) all these may bee preferred before a narrow, rough, and scantie cot∣tage; then may her body bee preferred and commended before his; whose joynts, sinews, and muscles, are more shrunk; and whose bones and ribbes, (for want of soft flesh to cloath them) are more dis∣covered through the whole body, then hers. Which thing is well knowne to the best and most judicious
workemen: who (if they intend to draw a perfect figure indeed) take their dimensions from the womans body; and not from the mans. Which is (in truth) the fairest; and, though much more hard, to imitate; yet much more pleasant to be∣hold. And this for the beauty Corporall and Vocall. There remaines the use,The use of Beau∣ty. that redounds unto man for them both: Which is (as most things else that are for his sake) of two sorts, (Pleasure and Profit.) From the voyce; in the musicke thereof (to which no other is comparable) hee re∣ceives much pleasure. And though other creatures (as birds) are indued with musi∣call tunes and voices (in their
severall kinds) for his delight: yet he receives not the plea∣sure of communication, with sence and reason from any of them, but from woman onely: yea much profit. For from their voyce men learne to frame their owne, to be understood of others. For in our infancy, we learne our language from them. Which men (therein not in∣gratefull) have justly termed our Mother tongue: but for the Profits and Commodities that proceed from their Body (omit∣ting the pleasure that it gives in the beautious forme) they are so great, that PlinyPliny. is ama∣zed to write them, and holds them rather miracles, than effects of Nature: some few I will recite from him.
First for the roof (or cover) of this house (the haire) which (like PhilemonsPhile∣mon. thatch of gold) covers a Temple where the Gods abide, it is of much vertue: For though men lay the fault on woman, for being over familiar with the serpent in the begin∣ning, yet not only (at that time) was it promised, that her off-spring should break the serpents head for amends: But (at this day) the haire of her head, (be∣ing sacrificed in fire) the very smoake thereof drives away all Serpents from the place (saith Pliny.) Secondly, seeing many mis∣chances and wounds in this world happen unto miserable man (who will yet bee called and accompted womans head;)
there is a remedy even from her head appointed for him. The ashes of a womans haire cures the wounds in the head: Nay, it is so speciall a cure for man (as he describes it) that it heales even contraries for his sake. For it takes away the flesh of wartes, and excres∣cences in the body, and (con∣trariwise) adds and fills up with flesh hollow and eating ulcers. Moreover, from the milke of the Breasts, proceeds not only nourishment to children, but helpe and medicine, both to the eyes and body of man: Yea e∣ven to dumb and reasonlesse creatures: For if but a dog tast of it, he will never runne mad. I omit not only the generall benefit, by the most necessa∣ry
difference of Sex. But many other things to the Physitians: whom it better becomes to dispute thereof. Concluding this point still with the same Pliny,Pliny. who ob∣serves her body to be so natu∣rally inclined to do good to man; that if any thing do but touch her; it shall bee a medicine for him: For he affirmes, that if the head be but bound with a womans haire-lace, it present∣ly cureth, (or much abateth) the grievous paine of the head-ach. Thus have you heard in the description of the forme, what it is like, how beautifull, both Corporally and vocally: And lastly, how helpefull in use to man. Which Section, you must
pardon in the length; for this argument hath caused others to write whole volumes; and therefore a few leaves may well be forgiven me. CAP. VI. THE next (that comes in order to be handled) is the name.VI. Name. First then, that it may ap∣peare, that this observation of the Name, is no idle nor un∣necessary commendations to the Sex: I will (first) in generall de∣liver what the Civill law, and the Nations themselves (both
Iewes and Gentiles have thought of names, their force, and vertue. The Civill law hath a rule: Condemn ari nemo debet, antequam nomen ejus delatum sit: None ought to bee condemned, be∣fore his name bee knowne. And their reason is; quia no∣mina plerum{que} referunt mores il∣lorum, quibus induntur: because names (for the most part) doe expresse the condition of the person, on whom they be im∣posed. This reason (being by much experience) knowne true; hath made the wisest parents among the Nations, to have great care in giving of Names: and as great respect to names given. Among the Gentiles, the Ro∣manes, (the most Famous) gave
not the names (of Caesar, Cicero, Caligula, Scaevola &c. without sōe speciall outward, or inward ob∣servation of the quality, or ap∣pearance of the Person: And to names given, they had as great respect. For (as Pliny saith)Plinie. every fifth yeare, they sought out, with great care, persons (whose names were of good and happy signification) to pre∣sent their Sacrifices. More particularly: In gi∣ving of names, they observed time and number. First, for the time: They were wont (as PlutarchPlutareh. testi∣fies) to impose names sooner on women children, then on men: and their reason was, (as he seemes to affirme) be∣cause they came soonest to ipenesse and perfection. Which
seemes to bee granted by the Civill, and common Lawyers: For they make them capable of inheritance, marriage and dower, (with other benefits of Law) sooner, then men; as being sooner usefull in body and minde, then they: Which A∣grippaAgrippa. observes to be no small benefit in nature, (or commen∣dation) unto them. Secondly, for the Number, which they gave: They were unto men (for the most part) three: as Quintus, Fabius, Maxi∣mus: Quintus, Horat. Flaccus, &c. but women (ordinarily) had but two: as Claudia Aemyliana, (as the same Plutarch af∣firmes.)Plutarch. Peradventure, ob∣serving the rule of Pythagoras,Pythago∣ras. who held the odde number to bee Masculine; and the eaven,
Foeminine. From whence hee drew a good admonition for the women of his time; that, in all their actions, they should be eaven and square; according to the eaven and just number of their names. But (howsoever the Roman Gentiles did ordaine:) it is plaine, that the ancient Iewes, from the beginning, gave great respect to names, from the example of Adam him∣selfe. For, the first thing (wher∣in God would try the wisedome of the man, that hee had newly made) was in giving of names. For it is said: that the Lord brought all the creatures before the man,Gen. 2. 20. to see how he would call them: Who (giving them apt names, according to their natures) did therein first expresse (as S. Chry∣sostom
observes,)Chry∣sostome. the great wisedome and knowledge gi∣ven unto him by God, in his creation. Since whence, the discreet Parents of the Iewes, from the Spirit of prophesie, (or morall reason) have strove to give names unto their chil∣dren of such signification, as they knew they would be, or desired they should be in their life and manners. For example, some from their disposition as Esau (rough) Iacob (a supplanter:) Ierob∣am (resisting:) Iudith (prai∣sing.) Some from Office or Cal∣ling; as Aaron (a teacher:) Sa∣rah (a Lady:) Some of Colour: as Edome (red:) Naomi (beau∣tifull.) Some of accidents at birth: as Benoni (the Sonne of my sorrow:) Ichabad (no glo∣rie;
&c.) And many other, which the Scriptures, in di∣vers places take notice and make use of: As in Genesis: Was he not iustly called Iacob?Gen 7. 36. for he hath now deceived me these two times. And in Samuel,1 Sam. 25. 25. Nabal is his name; and folly is with him: Whereby may be perceived, that they had alwayes (both in the gift and the use) speciall respect to names, and their signi∣fications. And indeed, he that will observe the care was had for the giving of names in the old Law: yea, and from the beginning of the world, when men were most industri∣ous,) he shall easily (out of the very name almost of every particular man, or person) read his disposition, and the
whole story of his life; they are so full of prophetical mysteries. It seemes then (both by pro∣fane and divine observation) that names both dignifie the persons, and expresse the quali∣ties. Wherefore we must thinke, that woman (in the making of whom God expressed so much art) cannot also want a name of as great excellency, to a∣dorne her; and of as vertuous signification, to expresse her. Wherefore (in discoursing this ornament of name) I will observe but these three bran∣ches; and that which shall na∣turally spread it selfe from them. First, who gave the name.Who gave the Name. Secondly, when it was given. Thirdly, what it was.
All which though they seeme in particular to adorne and commend the first Woman only; upon whom they were bestowed personally and at the first: yet (as the oyntment, that was powred on Aarons head, went downe to the skirts of his garments:) And as the first names and natures, which were given to the first crea∣tures, of heaven and earth, (yea and to man) do still con∣tinue unto all their kind unto this day: So all those names, dispositions, offices and honours, (imposed on the first woman, in her Creation) doe still descend (as hereditary glories) unto all her daughters unto this day. First therfore to begin with the person, that gave the name.
It was not a woman, (who might, perchance, have favou∣red her owne Sex:) but it was Adam; the Man himselfe (that you may see, there was no par∣tiality to hinder the honour it gives her.) For had hee found any evill in her nature or espied the least fault, or in∣convenience, in her dispositi∣on; it is likely he would have left it in her name perpetually; & given her such a one, as should have expressed some such vices, as men doe (at this day) with singular delight, lay on all the Sex, (as derived from their first mother) and would (no doubt) have quickly found a time to cast it in her teeth. As may easily be gathe∣red from the after story: Wher, when hee knew not how to
excuse his own disobedience; hee could espy a mote in her eye, at the first dash, and cast all the blame on the poore wo∣man, (who if she offended her husband, did it (as some think) in kindnesse, (finding the fruit faire:) and not of malicious∣nesse (finding the evill:) For her eyes were not opened, till shee had eaten. But Adam, being at that time (when he married her) a man of the best wisedome and eavennesse, (as one into whom God himselfe had newly brea∣thed his spirit of understanding and judgement) imposed up∣on her a name: which out of the depth of his owne know∣ledge, he well perceived, shee both well deserved, and best fitted her disposition: as wee
shall see hereafter. So that the person (naming her) being of the contrary Sex; and one that would not spare her faults, even before God, but would have told him to his face; The woman that thou ga∣vest me, did it: It may seeme there was small favour: but that it was given even as the truth constrained. If Adam (after his fall) had likewise had the naming of himselfe; (as he had of his wife:) no doubt, but that he would have dealt better with himselfe, then to have beene called Adam, (Earth:) But God, to curb his pride, impo∣sed that name first on him; when there was none else to name him. That (thinking humbly of
himselfe) without despising of the rest, he might give due names, (and therein honours) unto others, according to their natures and dispositions, without partiality. Adam then (the first man) gave the name unto the first woman. But the reason why he (ra∣ther then the Lord that made her) should doe it, seemes (unto some) to be this; that the man, in naming her himselfe with a good and signi∣ficant name, (according as hee knew, shee deserved) should have the greater guilt and sinne; if that (at any time af∣ter) he should either miscall, or mis-intreat her. Albeit others thinke, that hee thereby expressed him∣selfe
to have greater authority over her. But by that rule, some wo∣men might claime authority over men: seeing it is evi∣dent in Scriptures, (and else∣where) that women have more oftner given names to men; then men to women: (as is plaine in Genesis, Iudges, and Ruth, &c.) And it is more then pro∣bable; that as the man named the first woman (that was made after him:) so the woman named the first man, that was borne after her: For the text saies,Caine. Gen. 4. 1. Shee bore Caine, (that is, a possession:) and said, I have obtained a man of the Lord. It should seeme then, by her interpreting of his name, that shee her selfe had given it un∣to him: (As may bee seene in
the examples of Leah and Ra∣chel; who named the twelve Patriarchs; and in the daugh∣ter of Ely; and in the mother of Samuel. All which (having the pri∣vilege of naming their sonnes) gave them names of significa∣tion, and expressed after∣wards the reasons that induced them so to doe: as Eva in like manner had done before them. If therefore, man may claime authority over woman, by naming the first that was made: Shee may claime also preheminence over man, by naming the first that was borne. So that here you see, first; who it was that gave the name, MAN. Secondly, that he was one
who understood what hee did. Thirdly, unpartiall on her ide. And fourthly, that by gi∣ving it, he bound himselfe to observe her. Secondly, I observe the time,When the name was gi∣ven. when he gave her name. It was not at once; but as her name was of two sorts, (the one, of the Genus [Isha. Woman:] the other of the Species [Eva:]) so hee gave it at two times, and upon severall occasions, after sufficient tryall and deliberati∣on. The first was the last name he gave to any thing before his fall: And the last was the first name, he gave to any thing after his fall. So that in his felicity his last care, and in his
misery, his first care was for the woman. Neither of her names was given by chance, or suddenly; but by good advice, and after good consideration: As A∣dam himselfe would have you know; when hee sets downe his reasons for them both: (as hee did not in naming any thing else before: To the first name, his reasons goe before; and to the second, they come after. For where he first calls her Woman, these words following [because she was taken out of man] are not the reason;Gen. 2. 23. but the explanation of the reason, which goes before: which are these words, [This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh:] For when God had brought
her to him; he first viewed her, and beheld her well; and when hee could finde no fault: but that (according to Gods pro∣mise before) she was Commo∣dum auxilium, in all things: the very consideration, that shee was also bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, grew to bee the reason of her name; which hee (after) explanes, in say∣ing: She was taken out of man. This reason therefore goes before the first name of her Sex: to shew, that Adam (be∣fore hee named her) had a great care to view and con∣sider her nature and dispositi∣on; ere hee could finde so apt a name, and so full of mysterie to adorne her. Which till hee had well advised, he gave not. For the second, (which was
her proper name) it was impo∣sed on her after the fall.Eva. And the reason for it, is rendred by Adam (after he had called her by it, and not before:) as if hee did acknowledge that name to bee made to his hand, and without his study. And therefore hee sets the reason after it. For, when God had given a promise of life, in the seed of the Woman: hee could easily conclude to call her, the Mother of the Chavah. Gen. 3. 20. living. So that both were given to dignifie her, in re∣spect of the time. For as to her first name, A∣dam, before his fall, in his in∣nocency, and greatest per∣fection, (when he enjoyed his owne free will) tooke great deliberation before hee gave
it: So for her second name, af∣ter his fall, (and in his weak∣nesse) God himselfe helped him with a reason; that it might bee as mysticall as the other. From these circumstances of the Time, I observe these three things. First, in that her two names were last, before the fall; and the first, after the fall, (which man tooke no care to bestow with such consideration upon any other creature,) there ap∣peares (as I have said) the care and love he had to his Wife, (both in his happinesse, as a Companion of his joy: and in his unhappinesse, as a comfort in his misery:) his minde being (first and last) on her. Wherein he shewed a good
precedent for all his children, (even to this day) of love and respect towards their wives. Which, if it were well ob∣served; no doubt, but the quiet and golden world of time, would againe returne unto us. Secondly,. in that he gave not her first Name, (when he him∣selfe was in perfection) with∣out good deliberation; and then such a one as much dignified her: hee may herein teach the rest of his Sonnes, (if they will ever strive to perfection) that they never miscall; or give o∣ther names unto women: (especially unto their wives) but such as shall dignifie and adorne them. Thirdly,γ and lastly; as hee presumed not to give the se∣cond
name unto her after his fall, (and in his sinne and weaknesse; when his under∣standing was more darkned) till he perceived good reason from God; (in that she was the Mother of life:) so would hee teach his children in these latter dayes, (so full of sinne and bould ignorance) not to presume in giving any Titles un∣to that Sex: but such as may (according to Gods first ordi∣nance) declare them to be, not only the ordinary givers, in our selves: but the continuers (of our life and name) in our children and posterity; till Adam and Eve rise againe to meet their off-spring. Lastly, (for the names them∣selves:) they were of two sorts, (as I said before,) Isha
and Eva: The one generall to her Sex:What the Name was. the other, proper to her Person: Yet both having relation to the posterity of her Sex; as well as Ish and Adam have, to the posterity of his Sex. In these two names, are con∣tained two mysteries: the one, of of this life: the other of the life to come. But (first) of the Etymology of these names;Isha; from Ish. and (after) of the mysteries. We will begin (first) with that which was given her first: and that was Isha, being a name (if wee respect but the bare Etymology) derived in the foeminine gender, from Ish, the name of man, according to the Hebrewes. Which names,Tremel∣lius, Tre∣mellius doth hardly expresse (in Latine) otherwise then by Vir
and Vira: And is faine to make an improper word, to shew their neerenesse in Hebrew. Wee in English, to expresse the force of it, may as proper∣ly say (Man, and Mannesse:) or indeed, Man and Mann's;) that is, belonging to man: For so it comes neerest. For it pro∣perly signifies, not a Woman alone: but the woman of the man, (or mans woman; or wife:) But the word which we trans∣late for it, is woman: being (as the other) the name of the Sex; and is significant enough of it selfe: As we shall see af∣ter. Notwithstanding the first originall name (in Hebrew) is most of all to bee considered: because it was the first and most significant: And
that was written, , Isha. In the giving of which, A∣dam strove to shew the singu∣lar neerenesse betweene man and woman: and (therein) suf∣ficiently shewed the force and strength of his wisedome. For he seriously considered, (ere he named her) from whence shee was taken; for what pur∣pose; for whom; and whither shee must returne. Shee was taken from his side; for a helper for him; and to his side she must re∣turne, [They shall be two in one flesh.] So that he must forsake father and mother for her. Therefore hee concluded, shee should bee Isha; joyning her unto his owne name, by adding but one letter; (as God had added and joyned her un∣to
his body, by taking but one Ribbe.) So that as her body was taken from, and joyned unto his, by God: so her name was taken from, and joyned unto his by himselfe. To shew, how well hee did approve of Gods goodnesse unto him in this blessing. Wherein (as I said) hee strove to shew how neerely, and how firmely, man and woman are conjoyned: which cannot sufficiently in one word be ren∣dred by any language, so well as the Hebrew. But among the rest, our language comes not farthest behind, in expressing it to the first sense. For as he is Ish, (of whose name Isha (the woman) is formed:)Woman or Wombe-man. So we say, shee is Isha (the woman; or Womb-man:)
out of whose wombe, man is formed: For that is our old orthography, as Verstegan wit∣nesses. To which I could adde (if it bee lawfull) a new ortho∣graphy for woman, in the plurall number; and write, not women; but wee-men, according to our pronuntiation. Seeing indeed we are the same, and all of one peece. And this will offend none, but such as will have them derived from woe, and call them wo-men: because they thinke it was long of them wee fell. In which they beleeve they have got a no∣table argument against them. But till I come to answere this, let them stay their sto∣macks with this old rime:
How ill did hee his Grammar skan, That call'd a Woman woe to man? For (contrary) who doth not know, Women from men receive their woe? Yet love men too: but what's their gaines? Poore Soules! but travaile for their paines: Then let them all (in this) agree: 'Tis woe from man; if woe it bee. It should seeme (then) the name is not so full of woe and despite, as they would make it: For the name of Woman hath been held so honourable and helpfull, (even in our
owne Nation) that the highest dignity, that can bee bestowed on that Sex (amongst us,) is expressed only in that name. For Queene (or Quena,Queen. I. woman, or wife. as Verstegan writes it) signifies but Isha, a Woman, or wife) and that is all. But (to proceed to the originall, Isha:) In it, man and woman are so neerely joyned, and made one; that it cannot bee to us a disgrace, (no more then for our father A∣dam) to call them wee-men; and all one with us, chiefly if wee consider of how great excellency the name is; and how great a mystery it containes:The My∣stery in Isha. For (besides all this before∣said; which may bee gathered out of the neerenesse, and very sound of the names;) Adam
had a further respect: For in this name hee contained a mystery. And such a mystery as containes many other mysteries within it. Amongst the which, the mystery of Christs love to his Church, is none of the least: which the Apostle calls, Mag∣num mysterium. And that is compared to a Marriage.Mariage. No marriage more perfect; nor no couple so justly kept it, as that; and those whom God himselfe personally made. And that was the first: which Adam (considering) did (in his wives name) comprehend all the Duties of marriage. To which the conjunction of Christ and his Church, is my∣stically compared. So that as her Body being
taken out of his, became a more excellent body then his: So her Name (being taken from his) became a more My∣sticall name then his: for from (Isha) may mystically be gathered: First,In which, five things observa∣ble. the Author of marri∣age. Secondly, the Persons. Thirdly, the duties: Fourthly, what may best con∣tinue it. And fifthly, what may dis∣solve and breake it. Of all these in particular, briefly,The au∣thor of mariage. and first of the Author. The Hebrew Cabalists have observed that (in the compo∣sition of Isha ) Adam took two essentiall letters of the great and divine name [JEHO∣VAH] that is to say  and:He, and lod.
and two other, out of his own name ( and :) and Shinhe. of which (mingled and put together) he framed and made a Name for his wife. In which (by this conjuncti∣on) he expressed both from whence she was taken, and who gave her unto him: ther∣by declaring her to be taken from Man and acknowledging JEHOVAH to bee the Au∣thor and sanctifier of this mar∣riage and conjunction be∣tweene him and his wife. For without the helpe of those two letters ( and ) Ish and Isha,He and lod. could not be joy∣ned into one name. So that in her name (thus framed) the Author of this, and all other marriages, is set downe to be the Lord JEHO∣VAH;
who ioyneth both to∣gether: without whom Isha cannot consist, nor any mar∣riage or conjunction bee law∣ful or blessed. Secondly, the Persons in marriage,The per∣sons joyned in marriage▪ Ish & Isha. are here expressed to bee Ish and Isha [man or woman] both knit in one name by Adam; as they were knit in marriage by JEHO∣VAH. But if we will know more particularly of what quality the persons in mariage ought to bee; wee must examine what the estates of the first two were,In whom 4 things are con∣siderable▪ wherein wee shall find. First their Freedome.Their free∣dome. Secondly their Perfection. Thirdly their Age. Fourthly their Condition.
First: Ish and Isha were free persons and uncontracted, before GOD joyned them. For man could not find a wife for himselfe, untill GOD made him one; who (though bone of his bone;) Yet none of his Wife, till GOD gave her. And therefore Free. So should also the condi∣tions of after-marriages bee: Man should seeke for his Ribb, (for his Flesh and Bone,) yet keepe himselfe free and uncon∣tracted, till GOD bring one (as free) to give him. Secondly, Ish and Isha were perfect Man and woman; perfecti∣on. both for Age, Stature, and health. For as S. Augustine holds,S. Aust. they were created in that health, strength, and stature of body, which wee attaine
unto at thirty (our best age.) From whence is taught the perfection of that state, as being a thing unfit for the sicke, weake, or Impotent. Thirdly, Ish and Isha were neere one age,Their Age. and hee but a little the older. Which tea∣cheth the Equality of age in marriage. Age and youth (in extreames) must not match; yet the man ought to bee somewhat the older; but not much. For the yong Woman, that is wedded to an aged man, is not a married wife; but a married widdow. So that the persons must not bee children under age; nor those that are twice children for age. Lastly,Their conditi∣on. Ish and Isha were na∣ked,
& were not ashamed. Both their minds were so free from Sinne, as their bodies were from imperfection or fault. Therefore they needed not blush at meeting. From whence wee my learne, in what naked truth and plaine simplicity, mariages ought to be made in the sight of GOD: neither of them see∣king (by dissimulation) to cloake or cover any cause or imperfection that should justly hinder, or barre that holy Conjunction. But as Ish and Isha were married in the same naked∣nesse they were made; so they may also be conjoyned in that naked innocency and modesty of mind and body, as they were borne. From whence also,
they may learne, how peace∣ably they ought to behave themselves in this holy estate; without fighting or unquiet striving; For Ish and Isha were naked. Man was made so, and men are borne so:Zanchi∣us. Nos nudi creati sumus ad nemnem laedendum, saith Zanhius: Wee were made naked, that we should hurt no body. They that meet and im∣brace naked, uncloathed, and unarmed, can intend no hurt, for they are (neither of them,) fit to strike or defend. Therefore when the mar∣ried remember their first pa∣rents were made so, married so, and themselves borne so; they should live in all love, and peaceable concord with
themselves: For GOD hath neither made nor given them meanes to hurt each other. For the mar∣ried are joyned by love. And though OvidOvid. say, Militat om∣nis amans: I rather thinke he meanes, Militat omnis amens: For PropertiusProperti∣us. held the truth. Pacis (Amor) deus est, pacem veneramur amantes. Love is a God of peace, and lovers love the peace: There∣fore all strife and contention, whereby peace may be broke or hindered, must be bani∣shed. Thirdly, in , the Du∣ties of marriageThe Du∣ties of marriage. are contained: Which duties are (generally & chiefly) two, Love & Propagaion of children: both exprest by Com∣modum auxilium. LoveLove. is first, and
seasons all the rest. And it is properly the marieds vertue; as Fortitude, is the Souldiers; Temperance the Magistrates; and Iustice the Princes. And this duty is expressed by Adam himselfe, when hee saith: that for her,Gen. 2. 2 Man shall leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife; and they shall be both one flesh: And therefore he clo∣sed them both in one name: to shew that their love (that drew them together into one conjunction, from all others) should never part: But that they should continue toge∣ther in one perpetuall bond and Society, as they were taught by their names; which are both tied and knit into one in the Name of JEHO∣VAH the Lord. God is love;
and the Nam of God hath made their names one. Which teach∣eth them, that there ought to be that love of God, (and godly love) between them, as should keep them alwayes in best af∣fection together. For the other duty of Pro∣creation,Procrea∣tion. injoyned them by the command of (increase and multiplie:) it is herein con∣tained and expressed. For as her name [Isha] (though it was taken out of his name Ish) containes his also: So her body (though it was taken out of his) containes his also by propagation of the same kind. For as the woman is of the man;1Cor. 11. 12. so is the man also by the woman, saith S. Paul. Which is well expressed in
our English Orthography, before named, of womb-man: not dis∣senting from that of the Pro∣phet;Ier. 31. 22. Mulier circundabit virum. Which (though it was speci∣ally meant of our Saviour and the B. Virgin; yet) is it literal∣ly true in nature. For all men are contained, bred, and propagated in wo∣men; which is expressed in this name; Isha: which (in like manner) comprehendeth his Name. Fourthly, in  is con∣tained, what may best conti∣nue marriage,What may best continue marriage in its per∣fection. in the most com∣mendable perfection: And that is unity. Of which they shall alwayes be remembred, if they doe but looke on the Womans name. For (as I said) Gods power made their bodies
one flesh by conjunction: and Gods name made their names, one name, by interposition. God is unity: And unity con∣joyned them: so that, if they doe but consider, that (in their conversation) God is in the midst of them, it shall alwayes bee a meanes for them, to walk as in his presence, without contention, in all concord and unity: Which is able to establish and confirme their holy conjunction, in all peaceable and happy conti∣nuance unto the end. Fifthly, and lastly; there may be gathered from this name,What may dis∣olve, & break off marriage. (if it bee well conside∣red) what may dissolve and unknit this holy knot of mar∣riage. And that is (the oppo∣site to unity,) Discord: Which
shall never overcome them, till God (which is unity,) withdraw himself from them. And this (I say) may bee gathered from the name of I∣sha, . For take from thence,  and  (the two essen∣tiall letters of the high JE∣HOVAH;Iod, an He. which makes her I∣sha, of Ish:) and there will re∣maine nothing but  (Ignis) fire:Esh, fire. so take from Isha (that is, from man and woman in marriage) the essentiall and ef∣fectuall blessing of JEHOVAH (the high GOD which pre∣serves them in love and unity) and there will remaine no∣thing, but fire and rage, dicord, and jealous contention; which will soone consume, dissolve, and disunite that holy band; and leave them (at the last)
in danger of fire eternall, to their everlasting condemna∣tion. And as this name [Isha] cannot be divided, (in taking Ish from Isha:) but that the man shall remaine alone; and the woman without a name: so cannot the firme knot (wherein they were tied when it was given) bee at any time (through discord, or adul∣tery) disolved; but the man shall remaine alone, and the Woman without a name; at least without a good one. Thus you see how mysticall this first name [Isha] is (the generall name of woman;) in that, thence may be gathe∣red the Author, Persons, and Du∣ties of marriage; what may
best continue it; and what dis∣solve it. A name impoed upon her by Adams natural and humane reason; and therefore (though excellent and significant, yet) it containes but a mystery of marriage: which is an estate but for this life: for in the life to come, they neither marrie, nor are given in marriage: as our Saviour saith. Wee will therefore speake but a word of the Second name, containing a mystery of the se∣cond life. Which name, though it was pronounced by man; yet was the reason gi∣ven by God, ere hee imposed it: And therefore more di∣vine. Her second and proper name was Eva:2. Heva, Chva, or Eve, Concer∣ning these E∣tymologies (which may seem ridicu∣lous to some) I desire the Reader to consi∣der what lerned M. Casa∣on hath said: Ex∣rcitat. 15 Num. 11. Mos fuit hi vete∣rum, sive Curiositas (saith he) ut in vocibus peregrinis, quarū non ignorarent Etymon, sagerent aliquid invenire, quod arum significationi accōmodarent Sic in dictionibus Hebraicis, Etyma Graca, aut etiam Latina, patres comminiscu ur: Non quòd veram orginem ignorent (sicu Muti  sibi per∣suadent,) sed ex merâ illâ, quam dxi, riositate. And this he shewes b instances of th words, Iesus, Pascha, Levites, &Baptisma. For which if we will
seeke Etymologies, wee shal finde enow, and their reasons. First, from our owne lan∣guage of English, (though it little concernes it) Verstegan will have it, Eva, quasi Consimi∣lis: [Even] the same as all one with her husband in office, and likenesse. Others (in Latine) Anagrammatize it from Eva, in∣to Vae: because (they say) she was the cause of our woe. ButPeter Martyr. Peter Martyr thinks, that they are not well in their wits that say so: Ineptiunt, qui dicunt, (saith he:) Rather lea∣ning to that of S. Bernard▪ Eva,
quasi Ave; all haile: or rather, A vae, from woe: Belike allu∣ding to that of the Angell Gabriel, who (when he brought the newes from heaven of the womans seed, that was comming to breake the Serpents head) began his salutation withAve, Rectus sribi Have, id est, Vi▪ uti monet lacobus Cujais, observa∣tionum lib. 1. cap. 15. Eiam Manutius testatur, , have, cum Aspi∣ratione, in probatis libris, ac lapidibus, inveniri. Hebr. Chajah, id est, vixit, viguit. Inde Eve, vel po∣tùs Heva, vel Hebraicè, Cauvah, ab Adam sic vo∣cta, quòd è Costá viventis facta, Mater omnium viven∣tium hominum futura it. Ave [or Eva;] to whom it was firt promised, and was now to bee performed, with an (Ave) all haile, all health: or an Avae, a cleare deliverance from all woe of inne and death. These conceits, derived from that tongue, let them that please, please themselves withall; for my part, seeing Adam spake no Latine, I can
hardly beleeve hee had any respect to this Etymology: but according to his owne tongue gave it, (as he interprets it:) because shee was the mother of all living. Shee is Eva then, quasi life, or living. Notwithstanding, (not to dissent wholly from the for∣mer) this name, and the force thereof, (in effect) is not im∣properly expressed in the for∣mer A' vae: For death (being the end, to which all woe and sorrow tends) hath (for its opposite) life: And Eva (being life) may well be turned into A' vae: because it resists, and expells woe; which is the cause of death. But to come to Adams Hebrew Eva, whose own interpretation
wee will take and follow: She is said by him to bee living; or the Mother of the living. In which we see, that this name Eva, hath no coherence with either of both his, (nei∣ther Ish nor Adam;) neither in sound, nor signification. Isha (her first name indeed) was taken from Ish, (his first name) which signifies lively heat, force, and vigour: But her second name [Eva;] was not taken from his second name [Adam] which signifies but clay or earth. Somewhat was the cause (then) why shee was not cal∣led Adama (of Adam) as well, as Isha (of Ish.) If wee will find the cause, wee must goe backe to the Time. For wee said, that Isha was given before
the fall, (when man knew of no life, but the Present; where∣in he should never have died.) And therefore (in a mysticall fashion) he framed a name for her, from the best of his; to ex∣presse their nere conjunction, and of fice, for that time; beyond which, (as then) he saw not: But afterwards, when his eies were opened; and that he per∣ceived two lives, and two deaths before him (the one temporall, the other eternall;) and no comfort of hope in either of their present names, (for Isha could not serve; shee was but a mystery of this life; and Adam was earth; and to earth must returne:) Being therefore at a Non plus, God tells him the Womans seed shall breake the Ser∣pents head. [Christ] shall over∣come
death, and give eternall life to his children. From whence, being inlight∣ned, he readily concludes, she shall be (not Adama, of the earth; but) Eva; the mother of the living. From hence then, growes this name: From a reason gi∣ven from God; and an appro∣ving voyce from man. Which is (indeed) a mix∣ture of Heven, and earth, (as it expresses it selfe:) For the name which man gave him∣selfe, was but of this life: but when God shewed him of a life to come, he comprehended both in Eva. So that Eva is both the mo∣ther of the living on earth; and of the life in Heaven.Ioh. 14 I am the life (saith Christ:) and Christ is
the seed of the woman. So here is Heaven and Earth met: the Sonne of God, and the seed of the woman; the life present, and the life to come. And this is the mystery which then was revealed, but as in a cloud: but since hath inlight∣ned the whole world. Isha seemes (now) to bee of no stead; seeing in Eva the present and future life is con∣tained. The present life of man shee maintaines in pro∣creation, and being the mther of the living: and the Future life, in being the mother of our Saviour (who is the life it selfe.) So that if we raise our selves into the contemplation of the life to come, (signified in this name, Eva) wee shall quite loose Isha. Mortality shall put
on immortality: Isha shall bee translated into Eva. Women shal lose their name of Isha; they shall put off the name of their Sex: But Eva (the name of life) they shall never lose. For in the life to come, they neither marrie, neither is there difference of Sex or Person;Luk. 20. 36. but men and women shall re∣ceive like bodies, in eternall glory, according to the simili∣tude of Angels. In which likenes and similitude, I leave them: And forbeare also to torment the Reader with any confutati∣on of unsavory objections, brought against that Sex, by the raylipotent Linderach (and others) who (it seemes) have forgotten that they were ever borne of their Mothers. FINIS.
