N82 R216399 99828130 32557
A LETTER from a Country Gentleman, to an Eminent but Easy Citizen, who was unhappily misguided in the fatal Election of Sir John Moore for Lord Mayor of London, at Mi∣chaelmas 1681. My Old Friend; I Shall never forget, and am confident that you cannot but re∣member, the serious Discourse wherewith you entertained me at your House, in the Evening of that Black Day, when a packt Jury butcher'd that well-deserving Citizen and Alderman, Mr. Cornish, within sight of Guildhall; you did then, with the high∣est Sorrow, lament that Gentleman's Fall, and manifested a deep Abhorrence of your own Error, in giving your Vote to advance Sir John Moore to the Chair; to whose unhappy Promotion you very feelingly and sensibly imputed the many Mischiefs which from that Day had befallen your Famous City, and in particular the shedding that Innocent Blood, which to this Day cries for Vengeance. Our long continued Friendship (dear Sir) will, I question not, justify me in presenting to your view at this time, some few of those Melancholy Observations which you then made; and I do it to the end, that, so far as in me lies, I may prevent your Relapsing into your former Error of misplacing your Vote, at the ensuing Election of a Lord Mayor. You remembred me (with a becoming Detestation of the Fact) of Sir John Moore's notorious and impudent Usurpation upon your Anci∣ent and Undoubted Rights, in ravishing from the City the Right of Electing Shariffs; this you aggravated, by noting that you were, with the dread of Pikes and Musquets, debarr'd and kept from your Right of Election; and that Sir John Moore, Sir William Prichard, Sir James Smith, with others of their Party, by their Warrant, brought a Body of Souldiers into the Hall; and commanded Lieutenant Colonel Quiney, who led them, to Affront, Assault, and Thrust, not only Commoners, but even Six of your Aldermen out of the Hall; who (as you named them) I remember were, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir John Lawrence, Sir Pa∣tient Ward, Sir Thomas Gold, Sir John Shorter, and Mr. Cornish. You went on, minding me how shamefully the Sheriffs, North and Rich, whom Sir John Moore in an Arbitrary and Hostile manner had imposed upon the City, packt Juries to destroy Men; and in particu∣lar the great and invaluable Lord Russel, the loss of whom you said could never be sufficiently lamented. You also observed, that from that fatal Day of Sir John Moore's taking the Chair, we were to date all the Calamities which befel the City, and Kingdom also, to the Day of the late King's Abdication. And amongst many others, you reckon'd, 1. The Dissolution of the Ancient and Well-establish'd Government of the City, by the bringing the Quo Warranto against your Charter. 2. The making it a Riot in the Livery-Men to appear at Guild-Hall to Elect Sheriffs; and then packing a Jury of implacable and imbitter'd Tories, who were themselves the only true Rioters, to find Mr. Pil∣kington and Mr. Shute, (then Sheriffs) Sir Thomas Player, (your Cham∣berlain) Mr. Bethel, Mr. Cornish, Mr. Deagle, and many other eminent Citizens, guilty of a Riot, in asserting their Right to chuse Sheriffs; and also the imprisoning the Sheriffs in the Tower for no other Crime. 3. The transcendent Exorbitancy of the wicked Juries then re∣turned; many Instances whereof you laid before me, and remembred me that (besides the Murders which they committed) their unrigh∣teous Verdicts drove Sir Patient Ward, Mr. Papillon, and many other Persons of great Desert, into Exile. You further added, that their mad Zeal for the Interest of their Darling Popish Successor, spared no Rank nor Order of Men; instancing their giving up that Reverend and highly Deserving Divine, Mr. Johnson, to be ignominiously and barba∣rously whipp'd, for his honest and seasonable Opposition to the Po∣pish Designs then on foot. Their finding that Grave and Pious Divine Mr. Baxter, guilty of a High Misdemeanour, (as they call'd it) for no other Offence, than writing against the Pope and his Bishops, which by an accursed Innuendo, they made to intend the Bishops of the Church of England. You moreover observed, how that they, upon every Oc∣casion where it was demanded, very prodigally gave 100000 l. Da∣mages against private Persons; insomuch that Sir Tho. Pilkington, Mr. Colt, Dr. Oates, Mr. Covert, and Mr. Culliford were made Debtors to the Duke of York, and his Prisoners in Execution, for 500000 l. for only asserting and averring, that the Duke was designing to subject us to Popery and Slavery, or for Discourses to that effect. 4. You did not forget to express your Detestation of the malicious Prosecution, and heavy Oppression of Sir Samuel Barnardiston and Mr. Wilmer, the Foremen of the two Grand Juries, which (as you well observed) for a time, and till Sir John Moore was most unhappi∣ly advanc'd to the Chair, stem'd the Villanous and Bloody Designs of those, who were about to Kidnap the good People of these three glori∣ous Kingdoms to Rome. And that by returning Ignoramus upon the In∣dictments against the Earl of Shaftsbury and Mr. Colledge, a Verdict which you said none but Men forsaken of common Sense and Honesty did complain of. These (Sir) with abundance of other foul Facts which have slip'd my Memory, you placed to Sir John Moore's Account, and did with no small regret acknowledg, that by him the Banks of our Security were broken down, and that you, with a sad Heart beheld the Tor∣rent of Popery and Arbitrary Power carrying all before it. Now as I am assured (my good Friend) that you will agree that I do not misremember your Discourse on that sad Occasion of Alderman Cornish's Murder; so I doubt not but you will bear with me, in dealing with you, in relation to your next Election of a Lord Mayor, with that wonted Freedom and Plainness wherewith you and I have long con∣vers'd. I must tell you, I plainly see that those Men who carried us to the very brink of Destruction, are not only remorsless, but make it their business to act the same thing over again: How else comes it to pass, that they lately assumed the Confidence to struggle for to make one of themselves Alderman in Aldersgate Ward? how else happens it, that they are now exerting themselves with more than ordinary Industry to bring Sir Jonathan Raymond, or Sir Peter Daniel to the Chair? It highly concerns you (Sir) I must tell you, to be watchful against the Men, who encouraged and triumph'd in the Murders of late com∣mitted amongst you; and who to this hour go on to palliate and ex∣cuse, if not to justify them; Against the Men who overturn'd the Foundations of your Government; Against the Men who were fond of Vassalage and Slavery to that degree, that they made Addresses of Thanks to King Charles II. for breaking two Parliaments in the com∣pass of three Months, and promised him to venture their Lives and Fortunes to maintain the Violation of the Constitution of the English Government; Against the Men who cry'd up a Popish Successor as the only means to preserve the Church of England. Now had I the honour of a Vote amongst you, fall as it would, I should be careful neither to place it upon any of these Men, nor where they place theirs, but going against them, should certainly conclude my self to be in the right; I should most surely vote for Men of undoubted Loyalty to the present Government, and who gave Demon∣stration thereof by a constant adherence to the Principles upon which it is founded, and by opposition to those wicked Designs upon our Religion, Laws and Liberties, from which his most Gracious Majesty came most generously and seasonably to save us. But to hold you no longer in Generals, I shall proceed to discourse you a little particularly about your ensuing Election, and shall observe this method in doing it. 1. I shall with an impartial regard to Truth, speak a few words of Sir Jonathan Raymond and Sir Peter Daniel, who are recommended to your Choice. 2. I shall observe who they are that stickle for their Election. And, 3. I shall consider the plausible Pretence, which, by your Letter you tell me, is made use of on their behalf, viz. Their being next the Chair. 1. To begin with Sir Jonathan (if that may recommend him to your Choice) I am at a certainty, that upon the day when my Lord Russell was tried, and after the murdering Jury had brought him in guilty, he came to the King's-head Tavern in Leaden-hall Street, and there rejoiced that his Lordship was convicted, and highly commended the Jury-men that found him guilty, and in his great Wisdom de∣clared them to be very honest Men. 2. The then Lord-Mayor, (Sir Patient Ward) the Aldermen and Common-Council of the City, having (after the astonishing Dissolution of the Oxford Parliament) upon the 13th of May 1681, drawn up a Petition and Address to the King, setting forth the imminent danger of Popery, and its Encouragement from the hopes of a Popish Successor, and praying that the King would call a Parliament to provide against the Mischiefs threatning the City and Kingdom. This Petition was carried to Windsor by my Lord Mayor, Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby the Recor∣der: but they were disgracefully rejected, and denied Access to the King, when at the same time Sir William Turner and Sir John Moore, who carried a TORY ADDRESS, thanking the King for his Declaration (lately emitted to disgrace and vilify the two last Parliaments) and promising to stand by him in the Violation of the Laws, with their Lives and Fortunes were received and highly caressed. The Petition of the Lord-Mayor, Aldermen and Common-Council, being afterwards upon the next Council-day (the 19th of May) carried to Hampton-Court, and there presented; Sir Jonathan Raymond, with Sir William Prichard, Sir George Jefferies, and others of the Commissioners of the Lieutenancy, came in Person, and in opposition to the City-Peti∣tion, presented a Petition setting forth, that they were infinitely satisfied with the King's Declaration [which in truth was a Libel upon the two last Parliaments] and that they were manimously resolved to venture their Lives and Fortunes for him in opposition to, and defiance of all Enemies and Opposers of what Sect or sort soever. [Now these Gentlemen appearing in direct opposition to, and defiance of the City-Petition, I leave it to the World to judg who are the Enemies and Opposers, to whom they here bid Defiance; and whether this very Petition which assured the King of the Sword of the City, was not an Invitation to the bringing the fatal Quo Warranto against the City Charter?] 3. 'Tis notoriously known what Endeavours were used in the Mayoralty of Sir William Prichard, to have Tories only in the Govern∣ment of the City; and it being found that in Bishopsgate-Ward, the Inhabitants had better sense than to choose Common-Council-Men of their stamp, it was projected to divide the Ward, and to have only four of the fourteen Common-Council-Men which that Ward sends, chosen without, and the rest within the Gate, where they knew that ex∣cluding the Inhabitants without the Gate, they had a Strength to carry it to their Minds; and in particular to bring in that splenetick bloody Tory Langham, one of Alderman Cornish's Jury, and Sir Jonathan Raymond's Deputy and Director. For the accomplishing this Design, Sir Jonathan being Alderman of that Ward, refused to go to an Election upon St. Thomas's Day, according to the Usage of the City, but adjourned the Ward-Mote for several days, and so kept that Ward without Representatives in the Common-Council, till an Act of Common-Council was passed to divide the Ward. 4. Sir Jonathan Raymond was for the Surrender of the Charter; and was found, according to the best of his Capacity and Understanding, to be an officious Witness against the Sheriffs and other Citizens who were indicted for the Riot which Sir John Moore made at the Election of Sheriffs in 1682. Whether he swore Truth or not, is best known to Sir Robert Clayton, whose Evidence be contradicted.
5. He being at Turbridg this time twelve Month, his  was put up to preach before the Nobility and Gentry there, who omitting to pray for King William and Queen Mary, and not so much as men∣tioning King and Queen; a Person in great Authority reprimanded Sir Jonathan for it: and I am assured that he tamely answer'd, he could not help it, his Wife said he was a good Man. 6. His Son Sir Jemmet Raymond keeps one Hart for his Chaplain in Barkshire, who is a non-swearing Parson, and abdicated a Living at or near Tatoe-Dean. This famous Sir Jemmet is also so ih consci'd, that he pays double to the Poll-Bill rather than come in, according to the Direction of the Act, and take the Oath of Fidelity to their Majesties. Sir Peter Daniel, as 'tis well known, was a pragnatical Spy upon the Court of Aldermen and the City, in the late Reigns, when the Court was carrying on the pernicious Designs, whereof you have since felt the sad Effects; and he, with that doughty Knight Sir William Dodson, were the constant Tell-Tales and Intelligencers to that famous Plot-Secre∣tary, Sir Leolie Jenkins. 2. King Charles II, having by the Aid of a pack of perjured Citizens overturn'd the ancient Government of the City, who but our Sir Peter must (as a well approved Instrument for carrying on the Tyrannical Designs of that Day) be the first Sheriff of the King's Ap∣pointment; and so he was, under a Commission to execute the Office during Pleasure, having just before, when Sheriff of Surry, approved himself a fit State-Tool, in packing a Jury which gave the 800 l. Damages to Bolsworth against Alderman Vilkington. 3. This our Sir Peter being one of the Governours of St. Thomas's Hospital in Southwark (together with others) promoted and presen∣ted an Address to the late King James, declaring for Liberty of Conscience to those of that King's Perswasion, without regard to any others. 4. He was one of the Sheriffs which pack'd the Jury for the Murder of Col. Sidney: he was for the Surrender of the City-Charters. He being a Member of King James's Parliament, voted the Militia useless, and to keep up a standing Army under the Command of Popish Officers. Lastly, being a sneaking Prostitute to King James, he promised him to comply in taking off the Tests and Penal Laws. Sir, having thus hinted what sort of Men you are invited to elect, I proceed to tell you who are the Sticklers that recommend them to you. You will not fail of a Rawlinson, a Langham, a Bedingfield, a Foster, a Midglty, a Gilburn, a Withers, a Floyer, a Feltham, a Coles, a Genew, a Kemp, a Carpenter, an Ainge, a murdering Jury-man, a Charter-Be∣trayer, in every Ward to promote this necessary Work. You will find a lying Doctor about Aldgate, running up and down, under pretence of a Circular Letter, and crying out, The Church, the Church; O the Church is betray'd into the hands of false Loons! But above, and which is more than all, you will have trusty Roger, with his Disciples, engaging might and main in this great Point, especially for good Sir Peter; for he was not a little proud of him when he was made Hangman to King Charles; for Proof whereof I must entreat you to turn to two Observators, the first, of May 20, 1682. Numb. 140, which in the Name of the the Tories speaks thus: If it should please God to send us SEASONABLE SHERIFFS, and fair play for our Money, there are set afoot so many Titles in Competition for the Gallows, that it would be a hard matter to settle their Claims, and say who should go first. Now what sort of Men in his Opinion would make these seasonable hanging Sheriffs, you will find in his Observator of May 27, 1684. where, speaking of the poor depressed Whigs, he saith, Prethee, wilt thou set their Cornish and Bethel, their Pilkington and Shute against Our NORTH and RICH, Our DANIEL and DASH∣WOOD?—You here see (my Friend) this great Man's Opinion of Sir Peter Tell-tale, and in what Interest he was; 'tis Le-Strange's North end Rich, Le-Strange's Daniel and Dashwood; these were his seasonable Sheriffs to hang Protestants; and you Citizens must at your Peril, vote to the pleasing this Testy Gentleman, lest he at one time or other bring Vengeance upon your Pates; for he told you in his Book called Le-Strange's Apology, p. 48. That a Citizen's Skull is but a thing to try the Temper of a Souldier's Sword upon. I come now to the great Point, They are next the Chair, 'tis their Right: What! deny Succession in the right Line; No, no, it may not be. To this I say, this Argument can weigh only with the Advocates for a Popish Successor; we well know how often, and how justifiably the direct Succession, even of the Crown, has been pass'd over with∣out regard: But to keep within the City, I shall give you a modern Instance or two, wherein these very Men I am talking of, have pass'd over the Alderman next the Chair. In the Year 1670, Sir Richard Ford was next the Chair, and according to the present pretence, ought to have taken it; but the City then pitch'd upon Sir Samuel Starling, a junior Alderman, and he was elected Mayor. And to come nearer home to these Men, who now stickle for this Succession; was not Sir Peter Daniel as near the Chair this time twelve Month as he now is? yes, he was, and Sir Samuel Dashwood was junior Alderman to him; nevertheless without regard to it, they then put up and voted for Sir Samuel, and yet you are now called upon to vote for Sir Peter, because he is next the Chair, tho the Charters of the City give you an undoubted Right and full Power to choose those into the Chair whom you think fittest for the Office. Now (my Good Friend) to draw to the Conclusion of a much lon∣ger Letter than I intended you: Let me tell you, these things which you and I formerly discoursed, and which I have now brought to your remembrance, ought to keep Men from running upon the same Shelves and Sands where formerly they were in danger to have perish'd; 'tis therefore to be hoped, that you and your fellow-Citizens will now ex∣ert your selves in this Election, as becomes Loyal Subjects and True Eng∣lish-men. Blessed be God, you have not now the Power of Whitehall a∣gainst you; there's now no Setary Jekins to tamper in your Electi∣ons: You will not now be withstood and awed in Guildhall any Mi∣litary Power: There's now no Thunderbolts of Excommunication from Doctors Commons; No Sir Tomas Pild; No Writs de Eo capiendo, to strike a Terror into  themselves: I will therefore hope that N and Impudence shall . 'Twas reported of Sir John M that he should declare that he would  and whether e said so or not, most sure I am that he verified the Saying: and should you be so stupid in the City at this buy, as to place Sir Jothan Ray∣mond in the Chair, I will  that he will be LANGHAM, and not Pilkington or Stamp. 'Tis well known that Sir Tas Pilkigto was found to be a worthy and well-deserving Magistrate, and that Sir Tho. Stamp is most deservedly intitled to the same Character; but he is to leave his Work to the Man that shall be after him, and who know whether he shall be a Wise Man or a Fool? We are made happy in the present Feign by an Act of Parliament, which hath declared, That it i  with t Saft a Wfare of this Protestant Kingdom to be by a Ph Pce , or a King or Queen marrying a Papist: And it is the , That e sin Person shall be EXCLƲDED, and i for . And is it not as inconsistent with the Safet and Welfare of your Loyal Protestant City, to be govern'd by a Jabit, or by any Man whose Wife is such? Let then your Vote e t  every  Per∣son; and may be be deemed uncapale of the Chair, how ar s ever he stands to it. I remember 'twa the Advice of Sir Roger L'Eange about ten Years since, to his admiring Hrd o Ts not to lay out a Penny with the Whigs: I shall not go al out to perswade  to turn this upon that bid seflss Crew. I see no Harm in buying a pair of Gloves of a Tory, no nor in drinking a Glass of Wine in a T Tavern; but I affirm that it is of the highest import, that you Vote not with those disloyal Men; your Lives,  and Estes, and which is more, your Religion, and the very Being and Support of the present Government is here concerned. And who knows what dismal Consequences it may bring with it, to lodg the great Trust we are talking of, in any one, merely because he is t t Chair, without considering whether he deserves it or not? Te Magistacy of London will be sure to fall into Good Hands, whe evy Man shall give his Vote for him he judges best and fittest for the place. I therefore entreat you upon this Occasion to consider, 1. Which of the Candidates has given earlier, larger, and opener Proofs of his Zeal to the Government now, and to the Priviledges of the City when they were invaded, and at last overturn'd some Years ago. 2. Consider their Wisdom and Ability fr so great a Trust; their Zeal for their Country shewed upon all Occas, and their firmness to the present Frame of Government sttled in Eland. 3. Consider which of the two is most in Favour with those that are dissatisfied with the Government, and to which of them it is they give their Votes, and let these Gentlement Votes determine yours: r Male-contents will not give their Votes to him they take for the greatest Friend of the two, to a Government they hate. That must cer∣tainly be the safest Side in this juncture of Time, where most of the Friends to the present Settlement rank themselves; and of all People in the World, I should be least inclinable to follow their Opinion in the choice of a Magistrate, that in their Hearts are Enemies to them that fill the Throne. Now to conclude, I know (my dear Friend) that your Temper and Moderation will incline you to censure me, for the seeming Harshness wherewith I have now and then expres'd my felt in this Letter, and for the frequent using the Name of Tory; and I am conscious that Names of Discrimination and Reproach are ossensive to the Ears of good Men: but the Men I have been talking of loried in calling them∣selves Tories, and under that Name they acted all their Villanies I have recounted to you, and therefore they ought to have it. How∣ever would they satisfy the World of their Ingnity and Repentance, their Crimes ought to be put into utter Olivin; but seeing they are attempting to play their old Game over again, and do full remain Impe∣nitent, they are to be lash'd, and are like to be told their own, when∣ever they give provocation to it, how unkindly soever they take it. I am (dear Sir) Your Affectionate Servant, Sept. 17. 92. W. N. The Citizen's Answer. My dear Friend, I Thank you most heartily for your seasonable Advice in your Letter of th 17th Instant; and being now constantly ta up in attendig the Busi of the Election of a Lord Mayor now at hand, I have only time to acknowled that you have truly remembred te Discourse that pass'd btween us upon the Day when Alderman Cornish was barbarously Mrdr'd; and I assure you that I shall not only with my utmost Industry atone for my Erro i Voting for Sir John Moore, but shall keep your Letter by me, as I hpe ery good Citize will (to which end I put it forth in print) till a btter History of the Villa∣nous Practices which you have recounted, doth appear in the World; or til the Repentance of the Criminals shall give ocasi to hve it, and to put t foul Facts into utter Oblivion. You shall have an early Acco of our Suc∣cess, from Sept. 22. 92. Your Obliged Servant, T. F.
