A174A P2707 11510483 47860
Numb. 1 An ACCOUNT From Scotland and London-derry Of the Proceedings against the Duke of Gordon, In the CASTLE of EDINBƲRGH, Friday June the 7th. Edinburgh May 20. THere was an Express from the North, That one Captain Young that Com∣manded a Party of the new Levied Forces, had Rancountred with a Par∣y of the M'clans, and several other Clans whom he Defeated, and put them all to Flight, and hath taken about 40 of them Prisoners: And this day it is confirmed by an Express that came to Duke Hamilton. We have an Account from the West of Scot∣land, That my Lord Balgany who Commands one of the new Regiments there, hath taken several Men and Horses that were comeing over from Ireland, and the Prisoners are ordered to be sent in here. At Milton some 10 Miles from Inverness, a Son of the Viscount of Tarbat was taken from thence, by General Major M'kay, whom he keeps in his own Custody, and will not let him go from him, he being a Papist, but are still Sur∣veying all the North, with all the Vigour that he can make against Clovers. On Tuesday the 21st. there were a great many Bombs thrown from the South Battery, seven of which fell into the Castle; one fell at the Guard hall, another on the Half-Moon, a third dismounted a Canon; all the rest fell within the Castle; but as yet we cannot give any account what loss they had by them. All this was done betwixt 10 and 12 at Night. The same Night the Castle hath shot very many Shots against the Batteries, and they against them. Wednesday 22. The Castle about three a Clock in the Morning, put out two Flaggs; and a little after that Fired three Canon, two of which were towards the South Battery; one of which broke through a House that is next to the Bat∣tery, and a Centinel that was standing near to that House had only his Hands a little hurt by the broken Glass that came from the Windows: The other was shot toward the North-East Bat∣tery, which did no harm. The same day in the Forenoon the Castle Fired many small Shot down to the Town, which only Killed one Woman, two Men, two Horses and a Dogg; upon which the Citizens were very much Irritat, and in the Night-time hey did make up a Battery of Wool-packs, Dung, and many other things necessary for that use, and it was from one side of the Street to the other, above a Man's sight in one Nights time, which being seen by the Duke next Mor∣ning, he caused two Parley's to be Beat; at the second the Lieutenant Colonel Mackay and one of the Magistrates went to know his meaning, which was, that they should remove that Bat∣tery that was made in the Street, and he would not shoot any more down upon the Town; so they asked him, Why he Shot Yester∣day? He Answered, that as he had got no Sleep this two Nights before, he being Sleepy went to Rest, and it was unknown, and with∣out Order of him that any Shot should have been sent down upon the Town. Upon which the Magistrate and the Colonel took his word of Honour, and so pull'd down the Battery. Yesterday there were several Bombs thrown against the Castle, five of which went into the Castle; one of them fell into the top of the big House, which sunk down through three Storys; another fell into their Well. If it had not been for the greatness of the Rains and Snow, I could have given you a greater account, for there can be no Canon placed near to the Batteries, by reason of the Sappiness of the Ground. This day we have Intelligence from Major General Mackay, that he intends to come to∣wards Edinburgh from the North, in respect that he hath got the Bonds of most part of the Clans there; that they oblige themselves to keep that Country in Peace so far as they are concerned. Thursday 23. At 12 a Clock at Night the South Battery went in agitation against the Castle, which was performed extraordinary well, to wit, the Battery sent in seven Bombs within the Wall, five of which fell upon the Principal House; some of them are asserted to have fallen into the Crown Chamber, the Fire being seen to come plainly out of the Windows; but what Damage at that time was more done, we cannot give an exact Account of. They continued playing Yester night till 12 a Clock, which mightily Allarms the Besieged; and it is confidently reported, That there has one made his Escape out of the Castle, who says since the first Night of their casting their Bombs, there are 15 or 16 Killed, and there are several of
their Houses Demolished; that they were for∣ced to retire to their Vaults. This day about Three a Clock in the Mor∣ning the Bombs fell a playing again, and after they had done some damage by breaking down their Balcony, with the Stance of the Centry, they gave over; and soon after that, the Great Guns that are upon the North Battery, fell a Playing upon the Castle, and the Castle back upon them, which continued for the space of four Hours, no hurt being all this time to the Battery, but they disabled several of the Guns in the Castle. Friday 24. the Convention Sat, where the King's Letter was read for turning them into a Parlia∣ment, and according to the Tenour of the said Letter, they Adjourned to the 5th. of June, then they fell upon the Answer of His Majesties Let∣ter, which they have agreed upon, and the Per∣sons that are ordered by the Convention to come up with the said Answer, if the King thinks fit, are, Duke Hamilton, Lord Ross, Sir Patrick Home of Polwart, and Mr. William Hamilton. The Names of the Privy-Council are as follow, viz. Duke Hamilton Marq. of Douglas Mar. of Athol E. of Dramlaning E. of Argyle E. of Crauford E. of Errol E. Marshal E. of Sutherland E. of Glencairn E. of Eglington E. of Castes E. of Lothian E. of Annandale E. of Levin E. of Dundonnald E. of Kintore Lord Ross L. Carmichael L. Rothvian Mast. of Forbes Mast. of Melvin Sr. Jo. Maitland Sr. Hugh Campbel of Calder Sr. Patrick Hume of Polwart L. of Grant Sr. Arch. Murray of Blackbarrendry Sr. Jo. Maxwell of Pologue Sr. Rob. Sinclare of Stevinson L. of Ormiston L. of Bodie M. G. Mackay The Provost of Edinburgh Argyle Melvil Staire. Skelmorly Sr. Jo. Dalrymple Yester. On Sunday 26. the Batteries play'd upon the Castle the whole day, and hath done a great deal of Damage by their Battering of the Walls, but more particularly by the Bombs, there being a great many shot, and many of them fell into the Principal House, and Dismounted several of their Guns, but they Fired little out of the Castle, which makes us believe that he hath spent most part of his Ammunition: There are several of his Men come out, and amongst them there are one Dumbar a pretended Gunner, and Mr. Charles Foster their Minister, who did as much Execution as any of them, and their re∣port is, that the most part of them left behind would be content to be out too, saving only some of the Duke's Friends and Servants, who waits upon him now, he being very Ill and in great Sickness, for he is forced to ly in Vaults, for the Principal House is sadly beat down on some parts with the Bombs and the Great Can∣on on the North Battery, which does Fire both Night and Day upon him. Just now since the Writing of the last Line, I was an Eye Witness within the Battery, where there was 14. Bombs cast in two Hours time four of which fell into the Principal House, and broke down the Flagg-staff; all the rest, excep∣ting one that fell short, were all within the Castle. The Execution must needs be great. The 28th. the Northern Post came in, who gives an Account, That Major General Mackay is still lying at Elgin and hath above 1500 Fight∣ing Men with him, and a great many Gentle∣men Joyn him daily with considerable Numbers of Men, that the Lord Dundee hath gathered toge∣ther a Body of 1500 Men, there being a great many of the Wild High-landers joyning him, who neither cares for King nor Country, but only for their own Private Ends, in Robbing and Pillaging the Country; but it is thought here, that neither he nor they can be able to keep the Field long, by reason of scarsity of Victuals both for Horses and Men. We have an Account from Ireland, that the Natives there are most partly Revolting from King James, by reason of his taking the Com∣missions from them, and giving them to French Officers, which has Irritat them very much against him. They add, that Inehekelly holds out against him, and that they had taken a great deal of Ammunition, Bombs and Mortarpieces, and Killed several of their Men, and taken a great many of them Prisoners, that were conveying this Ammunition to the Siege of Derry, which hold out bravely, and a great many goes into the Town daily; that they are grown so strong, that they are willing to fight the Enemy in the Field. May 29. This day a Souldier of General Mackay's wrote to his Wife; That the Athol Men rose upon them, and that the Contrary Party was forc'd to retire back from Dunkell to St. Johnston; and the Athol Men are of a great Body; and some say they will joyn with Dundee; and that they have Killed some belonging to Mackay. Ditto. The Duke of Gordon kept King Charles's Birth∣day and put out his Flagg, and Fired many of his Great Guns, and made a great Bonfire in the Castle, and they all seemed to be very Merry and Joyful, and they Solem∣nized the whole day very heartily, with great Acclamations and drinking of Healths. Ditto. There were one or two Bonfires made in the Streets here, where several Disaffected Persons gathered to∣gether, who had the Impudence to drink the Healths of King James, the Duke of Gordon, and the Viscount of Dundee, and wished them Prosperity in all their Actions; upon which the Magistrates ordered the Guards to disperse them, but a great Rabble getting together, they could not, till a greater Company come down, where were several of the Rabble taken and put in Prison, who continue there as yet, and it is thought, they will be severely punished, but they are not yet called in to give their Reasons why they did it. This day there was two Expresses read here, the first de∣claring, That those in London Derry had made another Sally out upon the Besiegers in which Action it is said there are 5000 of the Enemy Killed, and that they have taken their whole Ammunition, and Pillaged the Camp, and actually raised their Siege, and put them all to the Flight; But in this Action the Protestants have lost a great many Men; but however they are as is said Masters of the Field now. The second Express that is come in, bears the confirma∣tion of this Victory, and adds, that there is a great many of their Best Officers Kill'd; particularly Colonel Ransay and Colonel Vachop Wounded and taken Prisoners; and that they have likewise taken the Duke of Berwick, and they are Prisoners in Derry. There is another new Battery made on the North-side o the Castle, which by all appearance will do more hur than all the rest, it being the nighest, and as well Fortifie as any of them. May 30. The Batteries this Night hath play'd very har upon the Castle, and the Castle upon them; the loss of the Persons that are in the Battery is nothing, as none be∣ing Killed, but what is in the Castle we cannot give an Ac∣count. Lisenced according to Order. LONDON, Printed by George Groom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames-street. 1689.
