a306B 12953637 96016
AN ACCOUNT Of the late Barbarous Proceedings of the Earl of Tyrconnel And his Soldiers, against the poor PROTESTANTS in Ireland: With their Killing and Driving some Thousands out of Cork and Lymmerick Stark Naked in the Cold: Their Be∣sieging Bandon, Taking the Honourable Capt. Boyle, and their Bloody Association to destroy all the Protestants of that Kingdom. THE Lord Tyrconnel, the late King James's Deputy of the Kingdom of Ireland, since the said Kings Departure, and Abdication of the Kingdom of England, being as it seems resolved to keep the King∣dom is a reserve and refuge for his Master upon occasion, or by a Vi∣gorous seeming Preparation for War, to lay a seasonable and sure foundation for Tollerable and Advantagious Conditions for himself, behav'd himself with some sort of pretended Conscience and Mercy towards the p  down that Kingdom, until the News of the Prince of Oge  King, which so enraged him, that he publickly Swore, that he would g∣ed on all the Protestants in that Kingdom. And about the same time receiving both Arms and Ammunition from France, as also full assurance of the late King with a good supply of Men and Arms, would arrive there to his and the papists Assistance in that Kingdom, and then immediately threw of the Disguise of Ju∣stice, pretended in his late Proclamation, and, give publick Liberty and encou∣ragement to hls Souldiers and Officers, to plunder and destroy the Protestants, as they should think fit. Whereupon the Papists ins most of the great Towns in Munster assemble, and first striping Men, Women, and Children, they Drive them out of the Towns, and leave them to the Mercy of the rest about the Roads. In Cork, they gathered Three Thousand protestants, Men, Women, and Chil∣dren, and Robbing them of all their Effects in their Habitations, they without regard to Modesty, Charity, or Sex, strip them stark naked, and drive them out of the Town; the Soldiers Slapping and Beating them with Cudgels, and using most Barbarous and Undecent Actions to the Women. In Lymrick they have done the same, driving out, and abusing some Hundreds in the Cold, without one Rag about them. The Honouroble Captain Boyle, by Treachery of some abot him, they have Teken, and are in close pursuit after the Earl of Inchiqueen the greatest prote∣stant Champion in Munster: The strong Town of Bandon they have sent Eight Thousand Men to Besiege: and threaten most horribly to destroy, Man, Wo∣man and Child, unless they yield upon Summons; and it is remarkable, that one Cartie, an Officer in Bandon, desiting leave to go out of the Town, the protestants having Disarm'd his Company before, for fear of their Villany, they freely gave him leave, and the Villain had scarce got half a mile from the Town, when he meets with Two protestant English Children, a Boy and a Girl, and alighting, he Barbarously Murthered, cutting their Throats, and ripping them up. These are the first so Bloody Attempts, which so nearly resemble their Beginnings in their last so horrid Rebellion in Forty One, that unless speedy Succor be sent, (whibh God Almighty grant) we may quickly hear of the utter and Barbarous Extirpation of all the protestants, besides the hazard of not being able to recover that Kingdom, without the Expence and Trouble of a long and tedious war. London, Printed for W. Downing in Bartholomew-Close. 1689.
