a535 13682451 101311
Additional Prayers To be Used Together with those Appointed in the Service for the Fifth of No∣vember. ¶ The Collect for Morning Service, to be added unto the other. O God, whose Name is Excellent in all the Earth, and thy Glory above the Heavens; who, on this Day, didst mi∣xaculously preserve our Church and State from the secret Contrivance, and hellish Malice of Popish Couspi∣rators; and on this Day also didst be∣gin to give us a mighty Deliverance from the open Tyranny and Oppression of the same Cru∣el and Bloud-thirsty Enemies: We bless and adore thy glorious Majesty, as for the Former, so for this thy Late marvelous Loving kindness to our Church and Nation in the Preservation of our Religion and Liberties. And we humbly Pray, that the devant Sense of this thy re∣peated Mercy may renew and increase in us a Spirit of Love and Thankfulness to thee its only Author; a Sui∣rit of peaceable Subinission and Obedience to our Graci∣ous Sovereign, whom thou madest the blessed Iustrument of it; and a Spirit of servent zeal for our holy Religion,
which now again, thou hast so wonderfully Re and Established a Blessing to us, and our Posse  this we beg for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. ¶ After the Collect for the Day in the Litany. ACcept also, most Gracious God, of our unfeigned Thanks for filling our Hearts again with Ioy and Gladness, after the Time that thou hast efflicted us, and putting a New Song into our Mouths, by bringing His Majesty who now Reigns over us, upon this Day, for the Deliverance of our Church and Nation from Po∣pish Tyranny and Arbitrary Power. We Adore the Wisdom and Iustice of thy Providence, which so timely Interposed in our extreme Danger, and Disappointed all the Designs of our Enemies. We beseech thee give us such a lively and lasting Sense of what thou didst then, and hast, since that Time, done for us, that we may not grow secute and careless in our Obedience, by presuming upon thy great and undeserved Goodness; but that it may lead us to Repentance, and move us to be the more diligent and zealous in all the Duties of our Religion, which thou hast, in a marvelous manner preserved to us: Let Truth and Iustice, Brotherly kindness and Chari∣ty, Devotion and Piety, Concord and Vnity, with all other Virtues, so flourish among us, that they may be the Stability of our Times, and make this Church a Praise in the Earth. All which we humbly beg, together with thy continued Blessing upon all Orders and De∣grees of Men amongst us, and the perfect Deliverance of our Brethren in Ireland, that they may Rejoyce toge∣ther with us, and Triumph in thy Praise, for the sake of our Blessed Lord and Saviour Christ Iesus; To whom with thee, O Father of Mercies, and the Holy Ghost be eternal Praises. Amen. ¶ In the Communion Service instead of the Collect for the Day. ETernal God, and our most mighty Protector, we thy unworthy Servants do humbly present our selves before thy Majesty, acknowledging thy Power, Wisdom and Goodness in Preserving the King, and the Three
Estates of this Realm assembled in Parliament, from the Destruction this Day intended against them. Make us, we beseech thee, truly thankful for this, and for all other thy great Mercies towards us; particularly for making this Day again Memorable, by a fresh Iustance of thy Loving-kindness towards us. We bless thee for giving His Maiesty, that now is, a safe Arrival here, and for making all Opposition fall before him, till he became our King and Governour. Continue we beseech thee to Protect and Defend Him, the Queen, and all the Royal Family, from all Treasons and Conspiracies; Preserve them in thy Faith, Fear and Love; Prosper their Reign with long Happiness here on Earth, and Crown them with everlasting Glory hereafter, through Iesus Christ our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. ¶ The Gospel. St. Luke 9.51. ANd it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Ierusalem, And sent messengers before his face: and they went and entred into a village of the Samaritanes, to make ready for him. And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Ierusa∣lem. And when his disciples Iames and Iohn saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.
Whitehall, October 30. 1689. IT is His Majesty's Pleasure, That on the Fifth of November, in the Morning Prayer and in the Litany, these Two Additional Prayers be Used, together with those Appoint∣ed in the Service for that Day; And that instead of the Collect and the Gospel in the Communion Service, these here Appointed be Used. Shrewsbury. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queens most Excel∣lent Majesties. 1689.
