A647A R215659 99827459 31877
Advice to Freeholders, and others, concerning the Choice of Members to serve in Parliament, and the Qualifi∣cations that render a Gentleman worthy or undeserving so great a Trust: With a List of Non-Associators. I. AVoid all such as hold any Office of con∣siderable value during Pleasure, they being subject to be over-aw'd; for altho a Man wish well to his Country, and in the betraying thereof, knows that at the long run he mischiefs and enslaves his Posterity, if not himself; yet the narrowness of Mens Minds is such, as makes them more ten∣derly apprehend a small present Damage, than a far greater hereafter. Such Men must of necessity be under great Tempta∣tions and Distraction, when their Con∣sciences and Interest look different ways. For to say Truth, such an Office is but a softer word for a Pension, therefore since these Men know before hand the Inconveni∣ences that attend the trust of a Member of Parliament faithfully discharged, 'tis very suspicious and reflecting upon their Hones∣ty, if any such stand for it; and I think we are bound in Charity, nor can we do them a greater Curtisy than to answer their Petition in the Lord's Prayer. Not to lead them into Temptation. II. Suspect all these (especially if they are Men of ill Repute) who in their Profes∣sion, or near Relations, has dependence upon the Court, for altho to be the King's Ser∣vant is no bar from being a Parliament-Man, or from serving his Country honestly in that Station, and no doubt several of them have at diverse times well discharged the same, yet frequently such Persons (un∣worthily) guessing at their Prince by them∣selves, are apt to vote right or wrong, as they imagin will most please the Preroga∣tive Party and it is a hard matter for a Courtier to please that great (perhaps cor∣rupt) Minister who supports him, and those whom he represents at the same time. III. Meddle not with such as have been or are like to prove Pensioners, or receive Sa∣laries for secret Services. I know they would now brazen it out, that there were no such Men, no such Practices. But the contrary is notorious; did not the House of Commons last Westminster Parliament take the thing into Examination, nay did not Sir S.F. by his Memory (without the Books, which for some reasons were refused to be brought in) name about 30 of them, and the great respective Sums Yearly paid to each? And would not many more have been discovered, and the whole knot of them severely and exemplarily punished if that Parliament had a little longer continued? Now there is none more implacably your Enemy than that Person whose interest is to destroy you that must neither eat nor drink except you Starve; that must go in Rags except you go Naked, are taught to fleece you, that they may keep themselves warm. To prevent this, avoid not only all former Pensioners but such other as may be in dan∣ger to become so. Therefore meddle not with Men of necessitous Fortunes or much in Debt. The Representative of a Nati∣on ought to consist of the most Wise, Wealthy, Sober and Couragious of the People, not Men of mean Spirits and lit∣tle Figure, and sordid Passions, that would sell the Interest of the People that chuse them to advance their own, or be at the beck of some great Man in hopes of a Lift to a good Imploy. Those that have good
Estates have in a manner given Hostages to their Country, and must be Errant Fools before they can play the Knave with you. But what cares the needy Passenger if the Ship perish if he can save himself in the long Boat, or get some booty by the Wreck? What Protection do you expect from them who cannot shew their Faces with confi∣dence, without a Protection, either in or out of Parliaments? Who are no less appre∣hensive of a Bayliff them of the growing greatness of the French; and dread not Popery half so much as an Outlawry; will you secure them within the Wall of the House of Commons, who were better se∣cured within the Walls of a Common Goal; who can never pay their Debts contracted by their Prodigality, but out of your Pur∣ses, and must run you in to get themselves out of their Mortgages? These Mens Fears of being dissolved makes them submit to any thing rather then to be left to the un∣merciful Rage of their hungry Creditors, who have so long fasted for their Money. For all such Persons (tho some of them may be look'd upon as honest, fair condi∣tioned Gentlemen and good House-keeper) are in danger of being tempted to repair the decays of their own private Fortunes by the ruin of the Publick. Moreover the chusing of such broken Fortunes, decays Trade and ruins whole Families, in so much that I have known it drive away many Men (contrary to their own Inclinations) to wish never to see Parliaments more in Eng∣land. In a word, if Beggars ever come to be your Representatives, how can they judg what is expedient for the Nation to spare whose only care is to get a piece of Money to spend. Be not over-fond to receive Bribes and Gratifications from Persons that would fain make a prey of you, and by their Purses, lavish Treats, and Entertainments would allure you to prostitute your Voices for their Election; you may be sure they would never bid so high for your Suffrages, but that they know where to make their Mar∣ket. Choose the Worthy unwilling Person before the Complemental unworthy Man, whose extraordinary forwardness progno∣sticates he seeks not for your Good, but his own separate from the publick. Let us not play the Fools or Knaves, to neglect or be∣tray the common Interest of our Country, by a base Election: let neither Fear, Flat∣tery, nor Gain biass us. Consider with your selves what Loosers you will be, if to laugh and to be merry one day, the Person you chuse, should give you and your Children occasion to mourn for ever after. Say not, he is but a single Person, one Man cannot do much hurt. Silly Man! what if all other Places should be as bad as your selves, then all the House would be of a-piece; and be∣sides, don't you know that sometimes a single Man has carried a Vote, which perhaps was no less Mischievous than Irretrievable! Think how justly the Gallent Ancient Hea∣thens may upbraid this Baseness of us Chri∣stians, when as they sacrificed many of their Children, nay and oftentimes their own Lives for the good of their Country; so on the contrary we sacrifice, or at least hap-hazard, both our Religion, Lies, Children, and Country, for the Swinish Pleasure of a Day or two's Debauchery. Let not such Engagements put you upon dangerous Elections as you love the Liberties and the Freedom of your Posterity. But tell them in this Affair they must hold you excused, for that the weight of the Matter will well bear it, this is your Inheritance, all may depend upon it: 'Tis more modest Request, if they would desire you to give them that Freehold and Estate that qualifies you for an Elector, than to press you to be for a Man that in your Consciences you think not sit, or not so sit as his Competitor for so weighty a Trust: Men don't use to lend their Wives, or give their Children, to satisfy personal Kindnesses, nor ought you to make a swop of your Birthright (and that of your Posterity's too) for a Mess of Pot∣tage, a Feast, or a lusty drinking Bout: There can be no proportion here, and
therefore none must take it ill that you use your Freedom about that which in its Con∣stitution is the great Bulwark of all your An∣cient Liberties. Lastly, As for you Citizens, Burgesses and Freemen, of Cities and Corporations in par∣cicular, I shall only say, That whosoever is not sit to be chosen Knight of the Shire, is like∣wise unfit to be chosen a Burgess: Neither let the more specious Pretences of any Man that shall promise to build a Town Hall, and relieve your Poor with Money, or out of his adjacent Woods, or any such Good-Morrow's deceive you; for if so, wherein are you wiser than your Horses, whom you catch every day, and clap a Bridle into their Mouths, only by shewing them a few Oats which they are never like to eat? Even the very Mice are too wise to be taken by an old Bait, but will have the Trap new baited before they will meddle: And yet I have known a Corporation which has been taken TWICE with one Bait. But suppose these Men do really perform what they promise, what Compensation is that, if the same Men should lay a good swinging Tax upon your Estates without any real cause or should give up the very Power you have of taxing your selves for sending your Representa∣tives in Parliament (for one bad Parlia∣ment may ruin us) what good would the Money for your Poor do in such a Case, more then that when you are reduced to beggary you might perhaps your selves (the Gentry of the Country having no reason to relieve you) be found to come in for a small share of this your Hypocritical Charity an ex∣cellent Reward for Knavish Folly. Nei∣ther say, Oh! this is but one Man, and can have but one Vote, he will do our Town a great deal of good, and can do us but little hurt if he would. And 1st (as I told you before) one or two Voices have sometimes carried a Vote of great Importance. 2. You know not what mischief your bad Example may do in other Corporations and if all should do so what a miserable Case would you be in, since the Voices of the Boroughs make two thirds of the House; no Man can tell the Influence that one running Talkative ill Man may get over the rest of the House, especi∣ally over those that weigh words more then Sense, Reason, and the Interest of the Nation. I shall only offer one thing more to your Consideration, which is, that since His Majesty has in His most Gracious Speech wisely put so great a Stress on the signing of the Association, which so firmly united us for our mutual Defence against the com∣mon Enemies of our Country; it may not be amiss to refresh your Memory with a Copy of that Association, and a List of those Members of Parliament which refus'd to sign it: and you will by that guess what worthy Patriots they are like to prove, if you once more make them your Represen∣tatives. WHereas there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, formed and carried on by Papists, and other Wicked and Traiterous Persons, for Assassinating His Majesty's Royal Person, in order to incourage an Invasion from France, to subvert our Re∣ligion, Laws, and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do Heartily, Sincere∣ly and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare, That His Present Majesty, King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms. And we do mutually promise and engage to stand by and assist each other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defence of His Majesty's most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James and all his Adherents. And in case His Majesty come to any Violent or Ʋntimely Death (which God forbid) We do hereby further Freely and Ʋnanimously oblige our selves, to Ʋnite, Associate and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his Enemies, and their Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of the Crown, according to an Act made in the First Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, Intituled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and setling the Succession of the Crown.
This Association being agreed upon by the House, and ordered to be engrossed to be Signed by the Members, near 400 of that August Assembly, which consists of 513, have already (with great Alacrity) subscribed it. But some at present hesitate, some others refuse it, their Names you find underwritten: Berks. Sends 9 Members. WIlliam Jennyngs Simon Harcourt. Bucks. 14. Alexander Denton Mountague Drake Sir James Etheridge. Cornwall. 44. Henry Lord Hyde John Manley Daniel Eliot Henry Fleming Francis Buller John Tredenham Seymour Tredenham Sir William Coryton John Mountstevens Bernard Granvile Charles Lord Cheney Francis Gwyn. Cheshire. 4. Sir Thomas Grosvenor. Derbyshire. 4. Sir Gilbert Clarke. Devon. 26. Francis Courteney Sir Edward Seymour John Granville. Dorsetshire. 20. Thomas Strangways Thomas Freke Richard Fownes Chor. 30. Robert Byerly Sir Marmaduke Wivill Sir Michael Wentworth. Essex. 8. Sir Eliab Harvey. Glocester. 8. Robert Payne William Frye Richard How John How. Herefordshire. 8. Robert Price. Huntington. 4. Anthony Hammond. Kent. 18. Sir John Banks. Lancashire. 14. Leigh Banks Thomas Brotherton Sir Roger Bradshaw Peter Shakerley. Lincolnshire. 12. George Lord Castleton Sir John Bolles. Norfolk. 12. Sir John Wodehouse. Northampton. 9. Thomas Cartwright Gilbert Dolben. Northumberland. 8. William Foster. Oxford. 9. Mountague Lord Norris Sir Robert Jenkinson Heneage Finch Sir Edward Norris Thomas Rowney James Bertie Sir Robert Dashwood. Salop. 12. Edward Kynaston John Kynaston Andrew Newport George Weld. Somerset. 18. Sir John Trevillian Edward Berkley John Sandford Sir Charles Carterett Sir John Smith. Southampton. 26. Henry Holmes Thomas Done. Staffordshire. 10. Robert Burdet Sir John Leveson Gower John Grey Sir Henry Gough. Surrey. 14. John Parsons. Sussex. 28. Sir William Morley John Lewknor Sir Thomas Dyke William Stringer. Warwickshire. 6. William Bromley Andrew Archer George Bohun Lord Digby Francis Grevill. Westmoreland. 4. Sir William Twisden Sir Christopher Musgrave. Wiltshire. 34. Robert Bertie William Harvey Henry Pynnill Thomas Bennet William Daniel. Worcestershire. 9. Samuel Swist Henry Parker. Wales. 24. Edward Jones Jeffery Jefferies Sir Richard Middleton Edward Brereton Sir John Conway Thomas Mansel Sir William Williams.
have talked Negatives and di∣ed  are not fit to be chosen; Now we come pssitively to st before you, who are fit for such a Trust, especially in such a dangerous Juncture as we are fallen into. In order to which we must consider for what ends they serve, and they are principally two. The first is the Preservation of our Religion from Popery, and the other is to preserve inviolably our Liberty and Property, according to the known Laws of the Land, without any giving way unto or Intro∣duction of that Absolute and Arbitrary Rule practiced in Foreign Countries, which we are nei∣ther to imitate or regard. Therefore take care to chuse such as are well known to be Men of good Consciences fearing God, throughly principled in the Protestant Religion, and of High Resolution to maintain it with their Lives and For∣tunes. And amongst these, rather cast your favour upon Men of large Principles (I mean in Matters of meer opinion) such as will not sacrifice their Neighbours Pro∣perty & Civil Rights to the forwardness of their own Party in Religion. Narrow Souls that will own none but those that bear their own Image and Superscription, will soon∣er raise Persecution at home then secure us from Popery and Invasion from abroad. The great Interest of England at this day, is, to tole∣rate the tolerable, to bear with the weak, to en∣courage the Conscientious, and to restrain none but such as would restrain all besides themselves. 2. As we ought as near as we can possi∣bly judg, to Elect good Protestants towards God, and just towards Men. Yet since in this corrupt Age wherein we live, Men are not so spiritual as they ought to be, it is not a∣miss to seek for those, whose Spiritual In∣terest are seconded by a Tmporal one. For tho Men talk high and keep a great noise with Conscience and Love to their Country, yet when you understand Mankind aright (not as it should be, but as it is, and I fear ever will be) then you will find that pri∣vate Interest is the String in the Bears Nose, it is that governs the Beast. And therefore the surest Champions for our Religion (Cteris Paribus) Against the Papacy  our Abby Lnded-men, for notwithstand∣ing the register'd Dispensation to King Henry the 8th from the Pope, for the seizing of those Monistries and Lands, yet of late they pretend the Pope had not power to alien them from the Church; so that the present Possessors can never trust nor rely upon that, or any new Promises or actu Grants thereof, especially from him whose everlasting and declared Maxim it is — never to keep Faith with Hereticks. Undoubt∣edly to make easy his Assent into the Saddle he will proffer many Assurances and Grants, but if these Abby Land-men be not the most silly of all others, they will never believe him for when he is once firmly settled, then will he with his Cannon Law Distinction, like Fire under Quick-Silver, evaporate a∣way all his Promises, and violently resume the Lands, glorying in his own Bounty, if he require not the mean Profits ever since they have been Sacreligiously withheld from Holy Church. 3. Endeavour to chuse Men of Wisdom and Courage, who will not be he hectored out of their Duties by the Frowns and Scowles of Men: Never had you more need to pitch upon the old English Spirit that durst be faithful and just against all Temptations. What a degenerate Race have we known that could never yet resist Smile or Eon, but tamely sunk below their own Conuic∣tions and knew the evil they did yet durst not but commit it. 4. Make it your business to chuse such as are resolved to stand by and maintain the Power and Priviledges of Parliaments (for they are the Heart-Strings of the Common-wealth) together with the Power and Just Rights of the King, according to the Laws of the Kingdomso as the one may not entrench upon the other: And such as with a becoming true English Courage will prosecute all Traitors whether already impeach'd or to be impeach'd; and to se∣cure us from Popery hereafter, and to get removed all Corrupt and Arbitrary Ministers
of State and wicked Judges, and all Stiflers of the Discovery of the late accursed Conspiracy against His Majesties Life, and Sumers, and Vile Pamphleteers, that en∣deavour so industriously to clear the Papists and expose the Protestant Religion and poison the People. Lastly, Take particular notice of those who are Men of Industry and Improvement; for such as are Ingenious and Laborious to propagate the growth and advantage of their Country will be very tender of yield∣ing to any thing that will weaken or im∣poverish it. If you conduct your selves thus prudent∣ly, honestly and gallantly in your Choice, without putting the Gentleman whom you huse to serve you, to Charges: The Con∣sequence will be, that as you will be sure to have a good Parliament when ever His Majesty shall please to call one, and such as will be zealous for the Protestant Reli∣gion and Prosperity of the Nation, if they shall continue to sit and act; so on the o∣ther side, if they shall be dissolved and never so many new Parliaments call'd, yet you run no hazard for the same Canditates will be still ready to serve you: And so we shall conclude our discourse of Parliaments when I shall first have observed that anciently all Freemen of England (tho not Freeholders) had a Right to chuse their Representatives to the same, was alter'd and limited by the following Statute, for the Reasons therein mentioned. The Statute Anno 8 Hen. 6. Cap. 7. What sort of Men shall be Cqosers, and who shall be chosen Knights of the Parliament. Item. WHereas the Elections of Knights of Shires to come to the Parliament of our Lord the King in many Counties of the Realm of England, have now of late been made with very great outragious and excessive Num∣bers of People dwelling within the same Counties of the Realm of England, of the which most was of People of small Substance, and of no value, whereof every one of them pretend a Voice equivolent as to such Elections to be made with the most Worthy Knights and Esquires dwelling within the same Counties, whereby Manslaugh∣ters, Riots, Batteries and Division among the Gentlemen and other People of the same Coun∣ties shall very likely rise and be, unless convenient and due remedy be provided, in this behalf. 2. Our Lord the King con∣sidering the Premisses hath provided or∣dained and established by Authority of this present Parliament, that the Knights of the Shires to be chosen within the said Realm of England to come to the Parlia∣ment of our Lord the King hereafter to be chosen, shall be chosen in every County of of the Realm of England by People dwel∣ling and resident in the said Counties, where∣of every one of them shall have Land or Tenement to the value of 40 s. by the Year at the least above all Charges. 3. And that they which shall be so chosen shall be dwelling and resident within the same Counties. 4. And such as have the greatest number of them that may expend 40 s. by the Year, and above, as afore is said, shall be returned by the Sheriffs of every County, Knights for Parliament, by Indentures, sealed betwixt the said Sheriffs and the said Chusers to be made. 5. And every Sheriff of the Realm of England shall have power by the said Authority to examin upon the Evangelist every such Chuser, how much he may expend by the Year. 6. And if any Sheriff returned Knights to come to the Parliament, contrary to the said Ordi∣nance, the Judges of Assize in their Sessions of Assizes shall have power by the Authori∣ty aforesaid thereof to enquire. 7. And if any Inquest the same be found before the Justices, and the Sheriff thereof be duly attainted, that then the said Sheriff shall in∣cur
the Pain of 100 l. to be paid to our Lord the King, and also that he have Im∣prisonment by a Year, without being let to Main Prize or Bail. 8. And that the Knights of the Parliament returned contra∣ry to the said Ordinance shall loose their Wages. Provided always that he which cannot expend 40 s. by the Year, as aforesaid, shall in no wise be Chuser of Knights for the Parliament. 2. And that in every Writ that shall hereafter go forth to the Sheriffs to chuse Knights for the Parliament, men∣tion be made of the said Ordinance. Note, Tho this Statute make the Penal∣ty on the Sheriff but 100 l. for a false return, yet the House may further punish him by Imprisonment, &c. at their Pleasure, by the Law and Custom of Parliaments. Anno 4. Ed. 3. Cap. 14. A Parliament shall be holden once every Year. Item. It is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every Year once, and more often if need be. Anno 26. Ed. 3. Cap. 10. A Parliament shall be holden once in the Year. Item. For Maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of divers Mis∣chiefs and Grievances which yearly happen, a Parliament shall be holden every Year, as another time was ordered by Statute. BEfore the Conquest (as the Victory of Duke William of Normandy over Harold the Usurper, is commonly tho very impro∣perly called) Parliaments were to be held twice every Year, as appears by the Laws of King Edgar, Cap. 5. and the Testimony of the Mirror of Justices Cap. 1. Sect. 3. For the Estates of the Realm K. Alfred causes the Committees (some English Translations of that ancient Book read, Earls, but the word seems rather to signify Commissio∣ners, Trustees, or Representatives) to meet, and ordain a Perpetual Usage, that twice in the Year, or oftner, if need were, in time of Peace, they should assemble at London, to speak their Minds for the guid∣ing of the People of God, how they should keep themselves from Offences, live in quiet, and have right done them by certain Usages and sound Judgments. K. Edw. the First (says Cook, 4. Inst. fol. 97.) kept a Parlia∣ment once every two years for the most part. And now in this K. Edw. the Thirds time one of the most Wise and most Glo∣rious of all our Kings, it was thought fit to enact by these two several Statutes that a Parliament should be held once at least e∣very Year, which two Statutes are to this Day in full Force. For they are not re∣pealed, but rather confirmed by the Sta∣tute made in the 16th Year of our late Sove∣reign King Charles the Second Chap. 1. In∣tituled, An Act for the assembling and holding of Parliaments once in three Years at the least; the words of which are as follow. Because by the Ancient Laws and Sta∣tutes of this Realm, made in the Reign of King Edw. the Third, Parliaments are to be held very often, Your Majesties Hum∣ble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritu∣al and Temporal, and the Commons in the Present Parliament assembled, most humbly do beseech Your Majesty, that it may be declared and enasted by the Au∣thority
aforesaid, that hereafter, the sit∣ting and holding of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued above three Years at the most; but that within three Years from and after the determination of this present Parliament, so from time to time, within 3 Years after the determi∣nation of any other Parliament, or Parlia∣ments, or if there be occasion, more or oft∣ner, your Majesty, your Heirs and Succes∣sors, do issue out your Writs for calling, assembling and holding of another Parlia∣ment, to the end there may be a frequent calling, assembling and holding of Par∣liaments once in three Years at the least. By what has been said, you may percieve the work of an English Parliament is not (as some would have it) only to be Keys to unlock the Peoples Purses. That is but one part, and perhaps one of the least parts too, of their Office; they are to propose new Laws that are wanting for general Good, and to press the Abrogation of Laws in being, when the Execution of 'em is found prejudicial or dangerous to the pub∣lick, they are to provide for Religion, and the Safety and the Honour of the Nation, they have a Power (as you have heard from Sir Tho. Smith) to order the Right to the Crown (understand all this with the King's Consent) and they have very frequently un∣dertaken and actually limited the same, con∣trary to and different from the Common Line of Succession. Nay by the Statute of 13 Eliz. Cap. 13. It is expresly enacted, That if any Person shall in any wise hold and affirm, or maintain, that the Queen with and by the Parliament of England, is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient Force and Validity to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent, Linitation, Inheritance and Government thereof or any other Statute to be made by the Authority of the Parli∣ament of England, with the Royal Ascent for limiting the Crown, is not, are not, or shall not, or ought not to be for ever good and sufficient Force and Validity to bind, limit, rest rain and govern all Persons, their Rights and Titles, that in any wise may or might claim any Interest or possibility in or to the Crown of England in Possession, Remainder, Inheritance, Succession or otherwise howsoever; and all other Per∣sons whatsoever, every Person so holding, affirming or maintaining during the Life of the Queen, shall be adjudged an high Traytor, and suffer and forfeit as in Ca∣ses of high Treason is accustomed. And every Person so holding, affirming or maintaining, after the Decease of our said Soveraign Lady shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels. Which Clause and last mentioned Penal∣ty is to this Day in Force, and ought to be considered by any who shall now pretend that an Act of Parliament cannot dispose of the Succession. But nothing is more properly the work of a Parliament then to redress Grievances, to take notice of Monopolies and Oppres∣sions, to curb the Exorbitances of perni∣cious Favourites and ill Ministers of State, to punish mighty Delinquents as look upon themselves too big for the ordinary reach of Justice, to inspect the Conduct of such as are intrusted with Administration of the Laws, or dispose of the Publick Treasure of the Nation. All Crimes of these and and the like kinds are publick Nusances, common Mischiefs, and wound the whole Body Politick in a vital part, and can scarce at all times be found out or redressed (by reason of the Power and Influence of the Offenders) but in this great and awful Se∣nate, before whom the haughtiest Crimi∣nals tremble, and it has been observed that they scarce ever persecuted any tho never so great or highly in Favour at Court, but sooner or latter they hit him, and it proved his ruin. Take a few Examples, King Edw. II. dotes upon Piece Gravestone (a French Gentleman) he wasts the King's Trea∣sures, has undeserved Honour conferred on him, affronts the ancient Nobility; the Par∣liament in the beginning of the King's
Reign complain of him, he is banished into Ireland, the King afterwards calls him home, and marries him to the Earl of Glou∣cester's Sister. The Lords complain again so effectually that the King not only con∣sents to his second Banishment, but that if ever he returned or were found in the Kingdom he should be held and proceeded against as an Enemy to the State, yet back he comes and is receiv'd once more by the King as an Angel, who carries him with him into the North, and hearing the Lords were in Arms to bring the said Gravestone to Ju∣tice plants him for safety in Scarborrough-Castle, which being taken, his Head was chopt off. In K. Richard the 2d's time, most of the Judges of England to gratify certain Cor∣rupt and Pernicious Favourites about the King, being sent for to Nottingham, were by Perswasions and Menaces prevailed with to give false and illegal Resolutions to cer∣tain Questions proposed to them, declaring certain Matters to be Treason which in truth were not so; for which in the next Parliament they were called to account and attainted, and Sir Robert Tresilian, Lord Chief Justice of England was drawn from the Tower, through London, to Tyburn, and there hang'd; as likewise was Blake one of the King's Council, and Ʋske the Under∣sheriff of Middlesex, who was to pack a Jury to serve the present turn against cer∣tain innocent Lords and others whom they intended to have had taken off; and five more of the Judges were banished and their Goods forfeited. And the Arch-Bishop of York, the Duke of Ireland, and the Earl of Suffolk three of the King's evil Councillors were forced to fly, and die miserable Fuga∣tives in Foreign Parts. In the beginning of King Henry the 8th's Reign, Sir Richard Empsom, Kt. Edmond Dudley, one of the Barons of the Exche∣quer, having by colour of an Act of Par∣liament to try People for several Offences without Juries, committed great Oppres∣sions, were proceeded against in Parlia∣ment and lost their Heads. In the 19th Year of King James's Reign, at a Parliament holden at Westminster, there were shewn (saith Baker's Chron. Fol. 418.) two great Examples of Justice, which for future Terrour are not unfit to be here re∣lated; one upon Sir Giles Mompesson, a Gentleman otherwise of good parts; but for practising sundry Abuses in erecting and setting up new Inns and Ale-houses, and exacting great Sums of Money of Peo∣ple, by pretence of Letter Pattents grant∣ed to him for that purpose, was sentenced to be degraded from his Knight-hood, and disabled to bear any Office in the Common∣wealth; tho he avoided the Execution by flying the Land. But upon Sir Francis Mitchel, a Justice of Peace in Middlesex and one of the chiefest Agents, the Sentence of Degradation was executed, and he made to ride with his Face to the Horses Tail thro the City of London. The other Example was one Sir Fran. Bacon, Viscount St. Al∣bons, Lord Chancellour of England, who for Bribery was put from his place and commit∣to the Tower. In King Charles the First time, most of the Judges that had given Opinions contra∣ry to Law in the case of Ship-money were called to account and forced to fly for the same: And in the 19th Year of K. Charles the Second, the Earl of Clarenden, Lord Chancellour of England, being questioned in Parliament and retiring thereupon beyond the Seas, was by a special Act banished and disabled. In a word, it was well and wise∣ly said of that Excellent Statesman Sir William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, and High Treasurer of England, that he knew not what an Act of Parliament might not do: Which Apothegm was approved by King James and alledged (as I remember) in one of his published Speeches. I shall give a few Instances, besides those before mentioned, of what the House of Commons hath done in former Ages. 1. Anno. 20. Jacobi, Dr. Harris Mini∣ster of Beechingly, in Surry, for misbeha∣ving himself by Preaching, and otherwise about Election of Members of Parliament
upon complaint was called to the Bar of the House of Commons, and there as a De∣linquent on his Knees, had Judgment to confess his Fault there, and in the Coun∣try, in the Pulpit of his Parish-Church on Sunday before Sermon. 2. Anno. 21. Jacobi, Ingrey, Under-She∣riff of Cambridg-shire, refusing the Pole, up∣on the promise of Sir Tho. Steward to de∣fend him therein, kneeling at the Bar, re∣ceiv'd his Judgment to stand committed to the Serjeant at Arms, and to make Submission at the Bar, and acknowledg his Offence there, and to make a further Submission o∣penly at the Quarter Sessions and there also to acknowledg his Fault. 3. Anno 22. Jacobi, the Mayor of Arundel, for misbehaving himself in an Election by putting the Town to a great deal of charge, not giving a due and general warning, but packing a number of Electors, was sent for by Warrant, and after order'd to pay all the Charges, and the House appointed cer∣tain Persons to adjust the Charges. 4. Anno 3. Car. 1. Sir Williaw Wray, and others deputed Lieutenants of Cornwal, for assuming to themselves a Power to make whom they pleased Knights and defaming those Gentlemen that then stood to be chosen, sending up and down the Country Letters for the Trained-Bands to appear at the Day of Election, and Menacing the Country under the Title of his Majesties Pleasure, had Judgment given upon 'em, to be committed to the Tower. 2. To make Recognition of their Offence at the Bar of of the House upon their Knees, which was done. 3. To make a Recognition and Sub∣mission at the Assizes in Cornwal in a Form drawn by a Committee. 5. But most remarkable were the Pro∣ceedings in the same Parliament. Anno. 1628, against Dr. Manwaring, who being there charged with Preaching and Publish∣ing offensive Sermons, and the same being referred to a Committee, they brought in their Reports, which was delivered to the House with this Speech, as I find in Dr. Fuller's Church-History, L. 11. Fol. 129. Mr. Speaker, I am to deliver from the Sub-Commit∣tee a Charge against Mr. Manwaring, a Preacher and Dr. of Divinity, but a Man so Criminous that he hath turned his Ti∣tles into Accusations, for the better they are, the worse is he, that hath dishonour∣ed 'em, here is a great Charge that lies upon him, it is great in it its self, and great because it hath many great Charges in it: Serpens qui serpentem Dovorat fit Draco; his Charge having digested many Charges into it, is become a Monster of Charges. The main and great one, is this, a Plot and a Policy to alter and subvert the Frame and Fabrick of this State and Common-wealth. This is the great one, and it hath others in it, that gains it more Greatness. For to this end he labours to infuse into the Conscience of His Majesty the perswasion of a Pow∣er not bounding it self with Laws, which King James of Famous Memory calls in his Speech in Parliament, 1618. Tyran∣ny, yea Tyranny accompanied with Perjury. 2. He endeavours to perswade the Con∣sciences of the Subjects that they are bound to obey illegal Commands; yea, he damns them for not obeying 'em. 3. He robs the Subjects of the property of their Goods. 4. He brands 'em that will not loose their property with most scandalous and odious Titles, to make 'em hateful both to Prince People, so to set a division between Head and Members, and between the Members themselves. To this end (not much unlike Faux and his Fellows) he seeks to blow up Parliaments and Parliamentary Power. Therefore be∣ing duly viewed, will make up the main and great Charge a Mischievious Plot to al∣ter and subvert the Frame and Government of this State and Common-wealth. And now that you may besure that Mr. Man∣waring, tho he leave us no Property in our Goods, yet he hath an absolute Propriety in his Charge: Audite ipsam belluam, here Mr. Manwaring by his own words making up his own Charge.
Here he produced the Books particularly insisting on P. 19, 29, and 30. in the first Sermon. P. 35, 46, and 47. in the second Sermon. All which Passages he hightened with much Elequence and Acrimony; thus concluding his . I have shewed you an Evil Tree,  forth evil Fruit, and now it rests  you to determin whether the follo  shall follow, Cut it down and cast it into the Fire. Four Days after the Parliament proceeded to his Censure, consisting of eight particulars, it being or∣der'd by the House of Lords against him as followeth. 1. To be Imprisoned during the Pleasure of the House. 2. To be Fined a Thousand Pounds. 3. To make his Submission at the Bar of this House, and in the House of Commons at the Bar there, in verbis conceptis, a set Form of Words framed by a Committee of this House. 4. To be Suspended from his Ministerial Function three Years, and in the mean time a sufficient Preaching-Man to be provided out of the profits of his Living, and this to be left to be performed by the Ecclesiastical Court. 5. To be Disabled for ever hereafter from Preaching at Court. 6. To be for ever Disabled of having any Ecclesiastical Dignity in the Church of England. 7. To be uncapable of any Secular Of∣fice or Preferment. 8. That his Books are worthy to be burnt, and that His Majesty to be moved that it may be to in London, and both the Universities. And accordingly he made his humble Submission at both the Bars in Parliament, on the 23d of June following, and on his Knees before both Houses, submitted him∣self, with outward Expressions of Sorrow as followeth. I do here in all Sorrow of Heart and true Repentance acknowledg these many Errors and Indiscretions, which I have committed in Preaching and Publishing the two Sermons of mine, which I called Religi∣on and Allegiance, and my great Fault in falling upon this Theam again, and hand∣ling the same rashly, scandalously and un∣advisedly in my own Parish-Church, in St. Giles's in the Fields, the 4th of May last past. I humbly acknowledg these three Sermons to have been full of dangerous Passages and Inferences, and Scandalous Aspersions, in most part of them; and I do humbly acknowledg the just Proceed∣ings of this Honourable House against me, and the just Sentence and Judgment passed upon me for my great Offence: And I do from the bottom of my Heart crave Par∣don of God, the King, and this Honou∣rable House, and the Common-wealth in general, and those worthy Persons ad∣judged to be reflected on by me in parti∣cular, for these great Offences and Errors. It is therefore the indispensible Interest and Duty of all true English-men to main∣tain these Priviledges conveyed from their Ancestors through so many Generations inviolable, upon which all our Earthly (and in a great measure our Spiritual) Happiness, Safety, and Well-being de∣pends. Nor can any Man in his Senses but acknowledg that the only right way to at∣tain that End is to look well to the Means, and that is by taking due care what Per∣sons they chuse for their Representatives, with whom they must trust their Estates, Lives, and Liberties. Now the Government of a Prince by and with Parliaments, when ever the condition and necessities of the State require 'em, how∣ever according to its Primitive Institution it was the best of all others: Yet as well in that as in Christianity it self, there hath been sound out ways of Corruption, and that is when either they sit too long, or too seldom, or are too frequently dissolv∣ed: (Too frequent Dissolutions being no less dangerous to the Subject, than too long Sessions) nevertheless, it may be in the Electors Power to avoid the Inconve∣niences (of both, and that is) by making a good choice.
Whereas if the Country People will sell ll that they have for a little Boast Beef, a Glass of Sack, and a Pot of Ale, chosing him that will give them most drink to day, tho they know him to be a Person who will sell both their Religion, Liberties and For∣tunes to Morrow: Then frequent Dissolu∣tions we may expect, which are as dange∣rous to the Subject as too long Sessions, which will of necessity ruin us and utterly debauch this excellent Constitution: For the honest Country Gentleman designs no other private advantage but the true Ser∣vice of his King and Country; hath no reason nor is lie able once in half a year to spend 4 or 500 pounds, only to purchase a place full of Labour, Charge, Trouble and Danger, without any profit to himself, only to serve those who put him to such an unkind Expence. And when honest Loyal Gentlemen are thus discouraged, this sot∣tish Humour amongst the Electors continue, the Papists and their Faction, or necessitous Persons of prostituted Consciences will car∣ry their Votes; for they can afford to buy them at large Rates, being resolved to re∣pay themselves tho with the ruin of the Nation. This is not vain Surmise or idle Specula∣tion, but the very Truth of the Case; and the meanest Countryman that hath Eyes in his Head, and will use them, cannot but see it: For did you ever know a Coachman or Groom buy his Place, unless he design'd to rob his Masters Bin? Therefore, who∣ever you put to charge in your Elections blame him not if he makes Money again of what he bought, and lays out his Vote in the House not for your good, and that of the Publick, but that way as will best please the Ministers of State, that so he himself may get a good Place, or Preferment, or Title of Honour by the Bargain. I say, tho he himself be a base Wretch for so do∣ing, yet you cannot blame him, since you did not lend him your Trust, but sold it him; and what a Man hath purchased with his own Money he may lawfully sell again. Therefore that Man who does wilfully  endeavour to ruin both his Country and Himself, and his Posterity, and to be as bad or worse than the Person he chuses; and if the greater part of the  to be wiser or honester, it  to him, he did as much as he  it; and therefore for his  one else were concern'd with him,  matter if he were forthwith made a Slave, and his Children perpetual Vassels. The (before-mentioned) old Lord Trea∣surer Burleigh (who is thought to have been the greatest Statesman that ever this Nation bred) did frequently deliver as a Maxim, or rather a Prophesy, That England can hardly be ruined, unless by her own Parliament; undoubtedly foreseeing that other Oppres∣sions, as being wrought by Violence, might perhaps by violence be in time shaken off again: whereas when in a Parliamentary way we are undone by a Law that can ne∣ver be revers'd but by a down-right Rebel∣lion, because the Parties advantaged by that Law will never agree to the repealing of it. Such is the happy frame of your Govern∣ment, so prudently and so strong have your Ancestors secured Property and Liberty, (rescued by Inches out of the Hands of en∣croaching Violence) that you cannot be en∣slaved but with Chains of your own ma∣king; for as you are never undone, till you are undone by Law, so you can never be undone by a Law, till you chuse the undoing Legislators: and may not your Enemies add Scorn to their Cruelty, and pretend Justice for both, when they can plead they had ne∣ver trampled on your Heads, had not you laid them on the Ground? From what has been said, it evidently ap∣pears of what vast importance it is at all times (when ever his Majesty shall be plea∣sed to issue out his Writs for a Parliament) to chuse (as much as in us lies) a good House of Commons, as we tender our Religion, Liberties, Estates and Posterity: Upon our well or ill chusing depends our well or ill being: 'Tis here as in Marriage or War, there is no room for second Errors; one Act may ruin a Nation beyond retri FINIS.
