a945 09484182 43255
ALL THE NINE PROPHECIES OF THE Two Famous Prophets That are lately arrived at Tholouse in France: Wherein they Prophesie, That in the Year 1682. there shall be no Pope, and Rome shall have no Head. They Prophesie likewise, That the First day of the Year 1690. shall be the Last day of the World. And they Prophesie also, That in the Year 1687. all Africa shall Burn. Here is also, An Account of their Journey from Galadiam in Damas a City of Galilea, of their strange Habits, and of their eating Bread and drinking Water onely; and many other wonderful strange things. As it was sent in a Letter from a Gentleman at Tholouse, to his Cousin at Grays-Inn. LONDON, Printed for Leonard Lane in Pye-corner. 1680.
The LETTER. Dear Cousin, SInce my arrival here, there hath hapned something so very strange, that I thought good to give you an account of it, just as I find it printed here: I have taken the pains to translate it verbatim. Sir, By this you will see that I have made some progress in the French Tongue, that I am able in eight weeks to translate a Sheet of Paper, which in it self is so very strange, that I will leave you to consider of it, and make what judgment you please of it. And so I humbly take my leave, and shall ever remain, Dear Cousin, Your obedient Servant, T. T. Tholouse, Aug. 15. 1680. The Nine Prophecies of Two famous Prophets now at Tholouse. Prophecy I. That in the Year 1681. shall be Wars over all the World. Prophecy II. That in the Year 1682. there shall be no Pope, and Rome shall have no Head. Prophecy III. That in the Year 1683. they shall preach throughout the World. Prophecy IV. That in the Year 1684. Jesus Christ shall be know to all Mankind. Prophecy V. That in the Year 1685. a Great Man shall arise. Prophecy VI. That in the Year 1686. a great Earth quake shall happen. Prophecy VII. That in the Year 1687. all Africa shall burn. Prophecy VIII. That in the Year 1688. the Four Parts of the World shall be greatly astonished. Prophecy IX. That in the Year 1689. shall be the time when God shall judge the World.
Some days ago arrived here in the City of Tholousa Two Old Men, who called themselves Apostles, having the Spirit of Truth. None saw them come into the City: They are ap∣parelled after such a manner as the like was never seen. They walk the Streets, and preach to the People Repentance and forsaking of their evil Lives, for the Wrath of God is kindled against the Romans. They say this City is a second Sodom, that the Iniquity of the People is ascended to the Heavens, and that within Three months (if they do not repent) the City shall perish by Fire. They have continued now eight days preaching in the City, bare-headed, and bare-footed, with joyned Hands. The Magistracy have forbidden them to preach; but they returned this Answer, That they were sent from God to move the People to Repentance. They were put in Prison, where the Jesuits went to visit them, and disputed with them in the Latin, Hebrew, and Chaldaean Tongues. They know such as live a bad Life. Their Meat is Bread alone, and their Drink Water. They name the Day wherein the Lord shall come. Being asked how long it should be before the Day of Judgment? They answered, That the first day of the Year 1690. should be the last day of the World. They say, that they are a thousand Years of age. The Magistrates demanded of them whence they were? They answered, That they came from Galadiam in Damas a City of Galilea, and sent by God to preach Repentance to the World. The Jesuits have prevailed with the Magistrates to let them be conveyed to Rome, to the Pope. The said Apo∣stles say, that they knew very well what would become of them, and that it was not necessary that they should enchain them with such magnificence, and that they had a great desire to see Rome, and so broke the Chains all in pieces. The People were all astonished, and judged them Saints. FINIS.
